Mr. Reddy reports on the dilemmas of exchange rate management in India
Inaugural Address by the Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Y.V. Reddy, at the
XIth National Assembly Forex Association of India held in Goa on 15/8/97.
I  am  thankful  to  the  organisers  of  the  XIth  National  Assembly  of  the  Forex
Association of India for giving me an opportunity to share with you the dilemmas that we face in
foreign exchange management. The fifty years since independence have seen significant changes
in our exchange rate regime. The exchange rate policy has evolved from the rupee being pegged
to the pound sterling until 1975, pegged to an undisclosed currency basket until 1992 and after a
year's  experience  with  dual  exchange  rate  system  to  a  market-related  system  by  March  1993.
This has helped to bring about flexibility in exchange rate management. A couple of years ago,
my  predecessor,  distinguished  Dr.  S.  S.  Tarapore,  addressed  this  Assembly  on  some  of  the
burning issues of foreign exchange markets. Last year, my colleague, Mrs. Usha Thorat gave an
authentic and analytical account of the recent developments in forex markets and on the role of
authorised dealers (ADs) in forex markets. Today, I will address the dilemmas that we, as policy
makers, face in the conduct of exchange rate policy.
International Parity
2.  I  will  briefly,  as  a  backdrop,  revisit  the  four  parity  conditions,  that  you  are
familiar with. First, the Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) which links the spot exchange rate and
inflation.  Secondly,  the  International  Fisher  Relation  which  links  interest  rates  and  inflation.
Thirdly,  the  Foreign  Exchange  Expectations  which  link  forward  exchange  rates  and  expected
future spot exchange  rates.  Fourthly,  the  Interest  Rate  Parity,  which  links  spot  exchange  rates,
forward exchange rates and interest rates. The four parity relations could be combined in several
ways  to  throw  light  on  the  four  critical  variables  that  are  often  used  in  exchange  rate
management  policies,  viz.,  the  interest  rate  differential,  the  inflation  differential,  the  forward
discount/premium,  and  the  exchange  rate  movement.  The  theories  built  around  the  parity
relations  help  us  to  understand  the  foreign  exchange  markets  better,  but,  they  rarely  give  us
ready-made solutions to the problems that arise in day-to-day, say, minute-to-minute operations
in the exchange markets.
3.  What  could  be  the  explanation  for  such  a  phenomenon?  In  the  real  world,
expectations  cannot  be  easily  subjected  to  definitive  formulae;  goods  cannot  be  transferred
across countries simultaneously; shipping and  other  transactions  costs  can  turn  out  to  be  much
different  from  the  initial  conditions;  trade  and  other  restrictions  often  exist,  distorting  prices.
Even  in  the  most  efficient  markets,  ‘ideal’  conditions  do  not  exist,  and  forward  premia  as  a
result have  not  been  able  to  predict  future  spot  rates  accurately.  The  actual  exchange  rates  are
usually  overvalued  or  undervalued  in  terms  of  the  purchasing  power  parity.  Under  Indian
conditions,  however,  there  are  some  additional  questions.  For  instance,  which  is  the  correct
risk-free  interest  rate  to  be  compared  while  calculating  interest  rate  differentials?  Should  we
consider  the  91-day  T-bill  rate  or  some  other  short-term  rate?  The  theoretical  forward  premia
could  vary  depending  on  the  interest  rate  chosen.  In  the  quest  for  answers  to  some  questions,
dilemmas do arise.
Objectives and Purposes of Exchange Rate Management
4. The main objective of India's exchange rate policy is to ensure that  economic
fundamentals  are  reflected  in  the  external  value  of  the  rupee.  Subject  to  this  predominant
objective, the conduct of exchange rate policy is guided by three major purposes.
BIS Review   76/1997
- 2 -
First, to reduce excess volatility in exchange rates, while ensuring that the market
correction of overvalued or undervalued exchange rate is orderly and calibrated.
Second, to help maintain an adequate level of foreign exchange reserves.
Third, to help  eliminate  market  constraints  with  a  view  to  the  development  of  a
healthy foreign exchange market.
Let us relate the above approach to the current context.
Current Context
5. The elements of continuity, contextual response and  change  would  be  present
in  the  conduct  of  any  policy,  including  the  exchange  rate  policy.  In  this  address,  I  will  be
focusing on the contextual response. After all, exchange rate policy will form part of the overall
macroeconomic  policy  and  will,  therefore,  have  to  be  subservient  to  overall  macroeconomic
targets.  The  conduct  of  exchange  rate  policy  during  1996-97  was  primarily  guided  by  market
conditions resulting from the contraction in the current account deficit and resurgence of capital
inflows.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  (including  gold)  scaled  a  peak  of  US$  26.4  billion  by
end-March 1997, without sacrificing exchange rate stability. In regard to 1997-98, the exchange
rate policy needs to be seen in the context of the Monetary Policy Statement of April 15, 1997.
The  Statement  indicates,  given  the  real  GDP  growth  for  1997-98  of  6.0  -  7.0  per  cent,  the
expansion in M3 would be sought to be maintained in the range of 15.0 - 15.5 per cent to keep
the inflation rate at around 6.0 per cent. Monetary policy would, in other words, continue to be
directed towards maintaining a stable financial environment in relation to price, interest rate and
exchange rate.
6.  Against  these  broad  parameters,  we  have  to  look  at  the  variables  that  have  a
bearing  on  contemporary  exchange  rate  management.  Some  of  the  crucial  variables  at  this
juncture,  apart  from  price  stability  and  money  supply,  which  are  always  dominant,  are,  in  my
view, the revenue and expenditure position of the Government, the oil pool deficit, the buoyancy
in  industrial  activity,  the  progress  in  infrastructure  sector,  and  the  developments  in  trade  and
capital flows. Besides, leads and lags operate, affecting the market. Moreover, major players in
the market influence exchange rate movements and thereby the perceptions about policy. Let me
illustrate  this  point  with  reference  to  the  oil  pool  deficit.  The  IOC  has,  in  the  recent  past,
increasingly resorted  to  foreign  currency  borrowing  rather  than  domestic  borrowing  to  finance
the deficit, presumably in view of the lower cost and the perceived stability of the rupee. To the
extent  the  IOC  resorts  to  additional  overseas  borrowing  for  oil  purchases,  the  demand  in  the
forex  market  is  depressed,  leading  to  pressure  on  the  rupee  to  appreciate  even  further.  There
would  be  an  exactly  opposite  effect  when  the  IOC  starts  reducing  the  exposure  to  short  term
borrowing, simultaneously making the cash payment for current purchases, with implications for
exchange rate management.
External Value of the Rupee
7.  The  deceleration  in  export  growth  during  1996-97  has  emerged  as  an  area  of
policy  concern  and  exchange  rate  is  often  blamed  for  that.  The  slow  down  in  export  growth
during  1996-97  could  as  well  be  attributed  to  the  decline  in  world  trade  coupled  with
sluggishness  in  manufacturing  goods  prices  in  the  global  market,  variations  in  cross-currency
exchange  rates  and  deceleration  in  domestic  industrial  activities.  However,  we  should  accept
that,  beyond  a  point,  real  appreciation  of  a  currency  can  hurt  exports.  Given  the  disparate
BIS Review   76/1997
- 3 -
movements over time of the exchange rates of the domestic currency and the domestic inflation
rate relative to important trading partners, the Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) is reckoned
as one of the most important determinants of the country's external competitiveness.  Using  the
trade based REER (1985=100), the REER was 61.02 per cent in August 1993 and 65.78 per cent
in  August  1995,  i.e.  an  appreciation  of  7.8  per  cent.  In  August  1995,  the  volatility  in  the
exchange  rate  of  the  rupee  started  and  in  the  following  months,  the  rupee  depreciated  and
corrected for real appreciation by January 1996 when the REER was 59.32. For most of 1996,
the REER remained stable. However, with the sharp appreciation of the US dollar vis-à-vis other
major  currencies  since  the  last  quarter  of  1996,  the  rupee  also  appreciated  in  real  terms.  In
August 1996, the trade based REER (1985=100) was 62.26 which rose to 65.41 in April 1997,
i.e. an appreciation of around five per cent. Over January 1996, the appreciation in April 1997
was 10.3 per cent. There is considerable discussion as to whether the rupee is overvalued or not.
As  per  the  REER,  it  would  certainly  appear  so,  irrespective  of  the  base  chosen.  The
overvaluation  has  got  exacerbated  with  the  sharp  appreciation  of  the  US  dollar  against  other
major currencies, viz., the DM and the Yen. The relative “cheapening” of  imports may not have
resulted  in  increasing  imports  and  larger  current  account  deficits.  This  is  because  imports  are
relatively  less  responsive  to  exchange  rate  changes  and  are  more  sensitive  to  the  level  of
economic activity. There could be a potential larger current account deficit as industrial activity
rebounds - even at the present exchange rates and if oil demand picks up, a correction cannot be
ruled out.
The optimal size of the external current account deficit, of course, depends upon
the  degree  of  openness  of  the  economy.  In  the  Indian  context,  the  ratio  of  current  receipts  to
GDP of 15 per cent, as at present, could sustain a current account deficit of the order of two per
cent of GDP and would still enable a decline in the debt service ratio from the present level of
25 per cent. A current account deficit of two per cent of GDP in conjunction with the domestic
savings rate of 25-26 per cent could ensure an investment rate of around 28 per cent which, even
with  ICOR  of  around  4.0  should  be  able  to  sustain  a  real  GDP  growth  of  seven  per  cent  per
annum. Since 1991-92, however, the current account deficit  has  averaged  around  only  one  per
cent  of  GDP.  Thus,  enlargement  of  the  current  account  deficit  beyond  the  present  level  is
sustainable.
Volatility
8. The Reserve Bank has been intervening in both the spot and forward markets to
prevent  undue  fluctuations.  In  the  context  of  large  capital  flows  (inflows  as  well  as  outflows)
within a short period, it may not  be  possible  to  prevent  movements  in  the  exchange  rate  away
from the fundamentals. Hence, the management of rate fluctuations becomes passive, i.e., one of
preventing undue appreciation in the context of large inflows and providing a supply of dollars
in the market to prevent sharp depreciation. But, the correction, if any, has to be gradual and not
sudden.
Level of Reserves
9. Adequacy of reserves is, as I mentioned, an important consideration. The level
of  foreign exchange reserves rose to US$ 29.8 billion by August 1, 1997 - equivalent to seven
months  of  imports.  In  the  context  of  the  changing  interface  with  the  external  sector  and  the
importance  of  the  capital  account,  we  have  to  evaluate  reserve  adequacy  in  terms  of  both
conventional  indicators  and  non-conventional  norms.  The  present  level  of  foreign  exchange
reserves is equivalent to about 30 months of debt service payments and 5.7 months of payments
for  import  and  debt  service  taken  together.  In  the  context  of  mobile  capital  flows,  it  may  be
BIS Review   76/1997
- 4 -
useful  to  assess  the  level  of  reserves  in  terms  of  the  volume  of  short-term  debt  which  can  be
covered  by  reserves.  At  the  end  of  March  1997,  the  ratio  of  short-term  debt  to  the  level  of
reserves amounted to a little over 25 per cent,  compared to about 100 per cent for Indonesia, 50
per cent for Argentina, and 25 per cent for Malaysia. In fact,  the  level  of  reserves  exceeds  the
total stock of short-term debt and portfolio flows which, taken together, constitute little less than
75 per cent of the level of reserves. The present level of external reserves is a source of comfort
as  it  provides  a  measure  of  insulation  against  unforeseen  external  shocks  or  shocks  created  by
domestic  supply  shortages.  Besides,  it  helps  to  meet  the  precautionary  motive  and  satisfy  the
need for liquidity, which in itself instils confidence in the Indian economy among international
investors and financial markets. Such confidence has also a bearing on the extent and of course
cost of external borrowings.
As  the  economy  becomes  more  open,  external  shocks  need  a  cushion  which
reserves alone can provide. The volatility of some of the capital flows needs to be kept in mind.
It is true that reserves are not required to meet the transaction motive which is to be taken care of
by changes that will naturally occur in the market determined exchange rates. But, in a period of
transition,  when  structural  shifts  can  release  strong  excess  demand  or  throw  up  temporary
bottlenecks, reserves smoothen the process of change and mitigate pains of adjustment. So, some
addition to reserves, in my view, would give additional comfort.
Forex Markets
10. Developing exchange markets is another important consideration in exchange
rate management. Recently, several measures were initiated to further integrate the Indian forex
market with the global financial system.  Banks  were  permitted  to  fix  their  own  position  limits
and Aggregate Gap Limits (AGLs) in January 1996. Banks were permitted in October 1996  to
provide  foreign  currency  denominated  loans  to  their  customers  out  of  the  pool  of  FCNR  -  B
deposits.
In  order  to  achieve  greater  integration  between  domestic  and  overseas  money
markets, authorised dealers (ADs) were permitted in April 1997 to borrow  from  their  overseas
offices/correspondents as well as to invest funds in overseas money market instruments up to US
$10  million.  With  a  view  to  imparting  flexibility  to  corporates  and  improving  liquidity  in  the
forward markets for periods beyond six months, ADs were also permitted to book forward cover
for  exporters  and  importers  on  the  basis  of  a  declaration  of  exposure  supported  by  past
performance  and  business  projection,  provided  the  total  forward  contracts  outstanding  at  any
point of time did not exceed the average export/import turnover of the last two years. ADs were
also allowed to arrange forex-rupee swaps between corporates and run a swap-book within their
open positions/gap limits without prior approval of the Reserve Bank.
Now, as per the decision taken last week, FIIs are allowed to cover as a first step
their debt exposures in the forward market.
In order to further  facilitate  integration  between  domestic  and  overseas  markets,
banks with adequate capital strength may be encouraged to have higher limits for investments in
overseas markets. This will help in developing further the forward markets.
East Asian Experience: Relevance to India
11. Speaking of correction in external value and of volatility in forex markets, the
question  that  is  often  asked  is  “would  India  go  the  East  Asian  way?”  In  the  early  stages  of
BIS Review   76/1997
- 5 -
development, East Asian countries adopted a  conscious  policy  of  export-led  growth  stimulated
by  real  depreciation  of  their  currencies.  It  was  only  much  later,  when  capital  inflows  became
strong, after 1992, that their currencies appreciated in real terms.
The  currency  overvaluation,  declining  exports,  overheated  property  markets  and
the  fragile  banking  system  had  fuelled  intense  foreign  currency  speculation,  as  the  market
participants  felt  that  the  natural  course  of  the  currency  was  to  depreciate.  Given  the  huge
short-term  borrowings,  the  fund  managers  started  exiting  the  economy  with  the  first  sign  of
trouble, leading to a de facto devaluation of the Thai baht. An important point to be noted here is
that the currency crises in these countries was managed quite efficiently with the help of reserves
which most of these countries had to defend their currencies. Thailand, as also other East Asian
economies,  despite  a  large  current  account  deficit,  are  high-saving  economies  with  good
underlying growth rate and strong competitiveness.
What are the lessons for India?
12.  The  recent  experience  of  the  emerging  economies  shows  that  any  currency
could come under speculative attack if its exchange rate is out of alignment with fundamentals
for a prolonged period of time.
Second, once the speculative attack is launched on any currency, the neighbouring
currencies are also vulnerable, no matter how sound their policies may be.
Third, the overvaluation of a currency acts as a catalyst when there is a run on the
currency as all the market players base their action on the information that the currency is due
for correction.
Presently, compared to March 1993, the  appreciation  of  the  Indian  rupee  in  real
effective terms is around 14 per cent. The Indian economy does have certain favourable factors
in terms of a moderate CAD/GDP ratio, high foreign exchange reserves and a ratio of short-term
debt  to  reserves  much  lower  than  that  of  the  East  Asian  countries.  Our  inflation  rate  is  also
edging  downwards.  We  have  a  fairly  solid  banking  system  despite  the  NPAs;  the  number  of
NBFCs are not that large; and the financial sector is subject to reasonably effective regulation by
the  RBI.  Our  financial  sector  is,  therefore,  less  vulnerable  than  many  of  the  East  Asian
economies, notwithstanding the fact that there are corporates operating with unhedged positions.
It is unlikely that any turmoil in South East Asian economies would have a direct
impact  upon  the  Indian  rupee  as  India’s  trade  with  the  five  countries  of  the  South  East  Asian
region (Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines and Singapore) constituted only 7.8 per cent
in 1996-97. Also, the currencies of this region are more internationally traded, larger number of
hedging  products  are  available,  and  the  central  banks  of  several  South  East  Asian  economies
pool their resources to counter any attack on  their  currencies.  It  is  possible  that  the  sentiments
that  govern  the  interest  of  investors  in  these  countries  are  different  from  the  sentiments  of
investors coming to India.
In brief, the experience of these countries should provide some lessons for  us  in
terms  of  potential  risks.  Of  immediate  relevance  to  us  is  the  impact  of  their  devaluation  on
export competitiveness if the rupee continues to appreciate.
BIS Review   76/1997
Capital Inflow
- 6 -
13. Capital inflows constitute a major factor affecting the value of the rupee now.
With the resurgence in capital inflows, the net surplus on the capital account more than doubled
to about US$ 11,600 million during 1996-97, thereby exceeding the previous peak of US$ 9,695
million touched in 1993-94. Reflecting these developments, surplus conditions prevailed in  the
foreign exchange market throughout the year. In general, the policy response has taken the form
of  partial  sterilised  intervention  through  open  market  operations,  liberalisation  of  capital
outflows,  raising  of  reserve  requirements  and  deepening  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  by
routing  increased  volumes  of  transactions  through  the  market.  To  prevent  appreciation  of  the
rupee, and to protect international competitiveness, the Reserve Bank made substantial purchases
of US dollars in the market. During 1997, the RBI intervened in the spot and forward markets,
both  in  the  outright  and  swap  segments.  Outright  spot  and  forward  purchases  of  US  dollars
during  1996-97  amounted  to  $7.9  billion  and  $0.9  billion,  respectively.  Swap  purchases
amounted to $2.4 billion. While spot sale of US dollars was marginal,  forward  and  swap  sales
amounted to $0.3 billion and $3.1 billion, respectively. Thus, net purchases of US dollars during
1996-97 amounted to $7.8 billion.
The  influx  of  capital  continues  during  1997-98.  The  Reserve  Bank  has
accumulated  US$  3.9  billion  of  foreign  currency  assets  until  August  8,  during  the  current
financial  year.  Total  spot  and  forward  purchases  and  swap  sales  of  US  dollars  up  to  end-July
1997, totalled $4.3 billion, $1.1 billion and 0.9 billion, respectively. Thus, net purchases of US
dollars by the Reserve Bank of India up to end July, during the financial year 1997-98 amounted
to about $4.6 billion.
The  optimal  policy  response  to  capital  inflows  is  very  much  a  function  of  the
anticipated persistence of capital inflows. The design of policy depends upon the expectation of
whether the inflow of capital is temporary or is expected  to  continue.  A  temporary  increase  in
inflow, perceived as such by the public, which may lead to a temporary real appreciation of the
exchange  rate,  is  unlikely  to  have  major  effects.  Problems,  however,  arise  if  the  inflow  is
temporary, but the public expects  the  inflow  to  continue.  But,  in  real  life,  nobody  knows  with
confidence,  what  is  temporary,  how  temporary  it  is,  and  what  the  public  perception  is,  and
indeed how temporary the public perception is! So, let me straightaway go into the instruments.
Internationally,  a  number  of  instruments  have  been  used  to  sterilise  capital
inflows,  the  chief  among  them  being  the  sale  of  government  bonds  through  open  market
operations. This policy is useful temporarily and if used for long, leads to renewed inflows. We
in the Reserve Bank are, however, well equipped with physical stock of government securities.
We  have  been  active  in  the  repo  market  in  recent  months  to  manage  temporary  liquidity
conditions. The idea is to realise a fine balance in order to achieve the objectives of sterilisation
without putting pressure on yields.
Discount  policy,  which  implies  restricting  the  access  of  banks  to  central  bank
credit or raising the cost of refinance, has also been used by countries to sterilise capital inflows.
This instrument cannot, however, be used in the current context when there is plenty of liquidity
in the money market and there is no borrowing from the central bank. However, this instrument
may go against the long-term objectives of monetary and credit policy.
Varying  the  reserve  requirements  is  yet  another  policy  tool.  Mobilising
Government  deposits  has  served  as  a  variation  to  absorption  of  reserves  in  some  countries.
Variable  deposit  requirements  in  the  nature  of  interest-free  deposits  with  the  central  bank  is
BIS Review   76/1997
- 7 -
another form of discouraging capital inflows. This measure, while it reduces the need for costly
sterilisation through the sale of bonds, may  result  in  misallocation  of  resources  and  reduce  the
facility  to  borrowers  to  take  advantage  of  lower  international  interest  rates.  We  have  used  the
CRR successfully in the past to stem inflows. After the imposition of CRR on incremental NRI
deposits there has been some deceleration in the growth of foreign currency deposits during the
current financial year.
Entering into foreign currency swaps (spot sell - forward buy) is another way of
sterilising  capital  inflows.  The  foreign  currency  purchased  by  banks  may  be  used  to  finance
domestic activities or for investment abroad. Our experience shows that the market is fairly thin
and, in such a market, the use of foreign currency swaps for sterilisation only adds volatility to
the forward market unless there is a constant swap window.
Central  banks  can  employ  outright  forward  exchange  transaction,  i.e.,  buy
outright forward instead of spot. This will have the desired effect on the spot rate only if it is not
countered  by  very  large  spot  inflows  from  participants  like  FIIs  and  forward  supplies  by
exporters who wish to take advantage of the increase in premium.
Taxing  on  capital  inflows  is  yet  another  form  of  dissuading  flows.  For  foreign
investors, it effectively lowers the rate of return on local assets. This instrument also carries the
disadvantage of raising the cost of capital. This option was considered at one time, but deferred,
considering its disadvantages.
Conclusion
14. I have explained the dilemmas, mainly to show that we are committed to the
stated  objectives,  and  assert  that  we  are  equipped  to  handle  the  problems  -  equipped  with  the
requisite will  and  skill.  However,  some  believe  that  we  are  cautious  -  whether  in  allowing  the
rupee  to  appreciate  or  inducing  adequate  depreciation.  Perhaps  some  explanation  would  be  in
order.
First, we are going through a process of economic reform. In a democratic federal
set-up,  going  through  such  economic  reform,  we  require  a  general  mandate  on  essential
complementary policies.
Second, we are vulnerable to supply shocks, especially food stock and oil prices.
Third, the East Asian countries support each other. The G-10 countries coordinate
with each other. The Latin American countries are generally supported by North  America.  We
are  not  members  of  any  blocks.  We  have  gone  through  the  trauma  of  a  balance-of-payments
crisis  in  the  early  1990s  and  we  cannot  ignore  the  threat  to  economic  sovereignty  if  we  take
undue risks.
Fourth, and most important, price stability is critical to the economy as a whole,
to  both  the  poor  and  exporters.  In  fact,  as  our  Governor  at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,
Dr. C. Rangarajan,  mentioned  in  his  address  at  the  Annual  Presentation  Ceremony  of  the
Engineering  Export  Promotion  Council  earlier  this  month,  “containment  of  domestic  price
increase has the same beneficial effect as the depreciation of the nominal exchange  rate.  If  the
nominal exchange rate is stabilised at a certain level by letting the foreign exchange assets of the
central  bank  increase,  it  may  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the  exporters  through  price  increases
arising from more than the desired increase  in  money  supply.  There  can  therefore,  be  no  rigid
BIS Review   76/1997
- 8 -
formula  governing  exchange  rate  determination.  Monetary  authorities  need  continually  to
perform a balancing act between ensuring an exchange rate which will be supportive of exports
and the need to contain monetary expansion within reasonable limits.”
During the current financial year up to August 1, deposits have grown rapidly by
4.1 per cent (3.7 per cent in the corresponding period last year). M3 has grown by 4.4 per cent
up  to  July  18  (3.7  per  cent  last  year).  The  year-on-year  growth  in  M3  is  16.7  per  cent.  The
positive features during the current year are that interest rates have come down, both in the short
and long term, and so has the inflation rate. The area of concern relates to money supply. Any
further measures in terms of exchange rate should consider the money supply effect so that the
gains  already  made  on  the  interest  rate  and  inflation  fronts  are  not  eroded.  This  is  the  critical
aspect of the current exchange rate management stance.
Finally,  the  extent,  the  pace  and  the  manner  of  correction  of  the  exchange  rate
will have to be taken in conjunction with money supply, since price stability continues to be the
dominant  objective  of  monetary  policy.  We  in  the  Reserve  Bank  seek  your  assistance,  advice,
cooperation  and  understanding.  For  my  part,  I  am  happy  to  announce  that  henceforth  the
Reserve Bank will make available weekly data relating to its intervention in the forex market.
BIS Review   76/1997
