Mr.  Greenspan  presents  the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  on  some
broad  issues  associated  with  financial  modernization      Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan  Greenspan,  before  the  Subcommittee  on
Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Banking and Financial Services
of the US House of Representatives on 13/2/97.
Madam Chairwoman, members of the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and
Consumer  Credit,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  appear  here  today  to  present  the  views  of  the  Federal
Reserve Board  on  some  broad  issues  associated  with  financial  modernization.  The  unremitting
pressures  of  technology  and  the  market  are  drastically  changing  the  financial  landscape  and
eroding  traditional  positions  of  competitors,  inducing  new  competitive  strategies  and
participants, forcing new regulatory responses, and building pressures on the Congress to shape
developments in the public interest.
Madam Chairwoman, I know that you have been an active sponsor and supporter
of  legislation  to  modernize  the  financial  system.  The  Board  also  has  been  a  strong  proponent
both  of  expanded  financial  activities  for  banking  organizations  and  enhanced  opportunities  for
nonbank financial institutions to enter banking. We continue to support financial modernization
because  we  believe  it  would  provide  improved  financial  services  for  our  citizens.  Moreover,
both our experience and analysis suggest that the additional risks of new financial products are
modest  and  manageable.  Indeed,  technology  already  has  resulted  in  a  blurring  of  product  and
service-defining lines so dramatic as to make many financial products virtually indistinguishable
from each other and the old rules inapplicable. In the process, we have already seen the public
benefits, benefits that removal of old barriers could only enhance.
But,  as  we  proceed  down  the  path  of  reform,  reforms  both  desired  for  their
benefits to the public and required by global markets and new technologies, the Board urges that
any modifications be tested  against  certain  standards.  In  particular,  the  Board  believes  that  the
changes  we  adopt  should  be  consistent  with  (1)  continuing  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the
banking  system;  (2)  limiting  systemic  risks;  (3)  contributing  to  macroeconomic  stability;  and
(4) limiting the spread of both the moral hazard and the subsidy implicit in the safety net.
Thus,  if  my  comments  today  sound  cautious,  I  want  the  subcommittee  to
understand  that  my  observations  do  not  reflect  opposition  to  further  freeing  of  constraints  on
financial competition. To the contrary. We strongly urge an extensive increase  in  the  activities
permitted to banking organizations and other financial institutions, provided these activities are
financed  at  nonsubsidized  market  rates  and  do  not  pose  unacceptable  risks  to  our  financial
system. While a level playing field requires broader powers, it does not require subsidized ones.
Safety Net Implications
In  this  century  the  Congress  has  delegated  the  use  of  the  sovereign  credit  --  the
power to create money and borrow unlimited funds at the lowest possible rate -- to support the
banking system. It has done so indirectly as a consequence of deposit insurance, Federal Reserve
discount  window  access,  and  final  riskless  settlement  of  payment  system  transactions.  The
public policy purpose was to protect depositors, stem bank runs, and lower  the  level  of  risk  to
the  financial  system  from  the  insolvency  of  individual  institutions.  In  insuring  depositors,  the
government,  through  the  FDIC,  substituted  its  unsurpassable  credit  rating  for  those  of  banks.
Similarly, provisions of the Federal Reserve Act enabled banks to convert illiquid assets, such as
loans,  into  riskless  assets  (deposits  at  the  central  bank)  through  the  discount  window,  and  to
BIS Review   16/1997
- 2 -
complete  payments  using  Federal  Reserve  credits.  All  these  uses  of  the  sovereign  credit  have
dramatically improved the soundness of our banking system and the public’s confidence in it.
In  the  process,  it  has  profoundly  altered  the  risks  and  returns  in  banking.
Sovereign  credit  guarantees  have  significantly  reduced  the  amount  of  capital  that  banks  and
other  depositories  need  to  hold,  since  creditors  demand  less  of  a  buffer  to  protect  themselves
from  the  failure  of  institutions  that  are  the  beneficiaries  of  such  guarantees.  In  different
language, these entities have been able to operate with a much higher degree of leverage -- that
is, to obtain more of their funds from other than the owners of the organization -- than virtually
all other financial institutions. At the same time, depositories have been able to take greater risk
in their portfolios than would otherwise be the case, because private creditors -- depositors and
others -- are less affected by the illiquidity of, or losses on, the banks’ portfolios. The end result
has been a higher risk-adjusted rate of return on depository institution equity.
Moreover, the enhanced ability to take risk has contributed to economic growth,
while  the  discount  window  and  deposit  insurance  have  contributed  to  our  macroeconomic
stability. But all good things have their price. The use of the sovereign credit in banking -- even
its  potential  use  --  creates  a  moral  hazard  that  distorts  the  incentives  for  banks:  the  banks
determine the level of risk-taking and receive the gains therefrom, but do not bear the full costs
of  that  risk.  The  remainder  of  the  risk  is  transferred  to  the  government.  This  then  creates  the
necessity for the government to limit the degree of risk it absorbs by writing rules under which
banks  operate,  and  imposing  on  these  entities  supervision  by  its  agents  --  the  banking
regulators -- to assure adherence to these rules. The experience in the 1980s with many insured
thrift institutions showed just how dangerous lax enforcement of supervisory rules can be. In the
end, some hard lessons were learned, many of which were legislated into the FDIC Improvement
Act of 1991.
The  subsidy  to  the  banking  and  other  depositories  created  by  the  use  of  the
unsurpassable  sovereign  credit  rating  of  the  United  States  government  is  an  undesirable  but
unavoidable consequence of creating a safety net. Indeed, one measure of the effectiveness of a
safety  net  is  our  ability  to  minimize  the  subsidy  and  limit  its  incidence  outside  of  the  area  to
which it was  directed.  Some  of  the  value  of  the  subsidy  has  been  passed  to  depositors  of,  and
borrowers from, banks, for example, as well as to the original bank shareholders. But, the United
States government has been remarkably successful in containing the value of most of the subsidy
within  depository  institutions.  The  bank  holding  company  organizational  structure  has,  on
balance, provided an effective means of limiting the use of the sovereign credit subsidy by other
parts of the banking organization. To be sure, bank holding companies have indirectly benefited
from the subsidy because their major assets are subsidiary banks. The value of the subsidy given
to  the  subsidiary  banks  has  no  doubt  been  capitalized  in  part  into  the  share  prices  of  holding
companies  and  has  improved  their  debt  ratings,  lowering  their  cost  of  capital.  But,  holding
companies  also  own  nonsubsidized  entities  that  have  no  direct  access  to  the  safety  net.
Accordingly, both bank holding companies and their nonbank subsidiaries have a higher cost of
capital than banks.
This is clear in the debt ratings of bank subsidiaries of bank holding companies,
which  are  virtually  always  higher  than  those  of  their  parent  holding  companies.  Moreover,
existing law and regulation under Sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act require that
any  credit  extended  by  a  bank  to  its  parent  or  affiliate  not  only  be  totally  collateralized  and
subject to quantitative limits, but also be extended at arms-length and at market rates, making a
direct transfer of the safety net subsidy difficult.
BIS Review   16/1997
- 3 -
It is true that a bank could pay dividends from its earnings, earnings which have
been  enhanced  by  the  safety  net  subsidy,  to  fund  its  parent’s  nonbank  affiliates.  However,  the
evidence  appears  to  be  that  such  transfers  generally  do  not  occur.  Existing  holding  company
powers are limited and do not offer a broad spectrum of profitable opportunities. Accordingly, it
is  not  surprising  that  data  for  the  top  50  bank  holding  companies  indicate  that  transfers  from
bank  subsidiaries  to  their  parents  which,  like  dividends,  embody  the  subsidy,  appear  to  have
approximately equaled holding  company  net  transfers  to  their  own  shareholders  and  long-term
creditors.  This  indicates  that  few  subsidized  dollars  in  the  aggregate  found  their  way  into  the
equity accounts of holding company nonbank affiliates from the upstreaming of bank funds.
We must, I think, be continually on guard that the subsidy provided by the safety
net does not leak outside the institutions for which it was intended and provide a broad subsidy
to other kinds of activities. Put another way, we must remain especially vigilant in maintaining a
proper balance between a safety net that fosters economic and financial stabilization and one that
benefits  the  competitive  position  of  private  businesses  for  no  particular  public  purpose.  As  I
noted, safety net subsidies have costs in terms of distorted incentives and misallocated resources.
That is why the Congress must be cautious in how the sovereign credit is used.
It  has  been  suggested  that  the  bank  holding  company  structure  imposes
inefficiencies  on  banking  organizations,  and  that  these  organizations  should  thus  be  given  the
option of conducting expanded financial activities in a direct subsidiary of  the  bank.  The  bank
subsidiary may be a marginally more efficient way of delivering such services, but we believe it
cannot avoid being a funnel for transferring the sovereign credit subsidy directly from the bank
to  finance  the  new  powers,  thereby  imparting  a  subsidized  competitive  advantage  to  the
subsidiary of the bank. One can devise rules -- such as 23A and 23B -- to assure that loans from
the  bank  to  its  own  subsidiaries  are  limited  and  at  market  rates.  One  can  even  devise  rules  to
limit  the  aggregate  equity  investment  made  by  banks  in  their  subsidiaries.  But  one  cannot
eliminate  the  fact  that  the  equity  invested  in  subsidiaries  is  funded  by  the  sum  of  insured
deposits and other bank borrowings that directly benefit from the subsidy of the safety net. Thus,
inevitably,  a  bank  subsidiary  must  have  lower  costs  of  capital  than  an  independent  entity  and
even  a  subsidiary  of  the  bank’s  parent.  Indeed,  one  would  expect  that  a  rational  banking
organization  would,  as  much  as  possible,  shift  its  nonbank  activity  from  the  bank  holding
company  structure  to  the  bank  subsidiary  structure.  Such  a  shift  from  affiliates  to  bank
subsidiaries  would  increase  the  subsidy  and  the  competitive  advantage  of  the  entire  banking
organization relative to its nonbank competitors.
I am aware that these are often viewed as only highly technical issues, and hence
ones  that  are  in  the  end,  of  little  significance.  I  do  not  think  so.  The  issue  of  the  use  of  the
sovereign  credit  is  central  to  how  our  financial  system  will  allocate  credit,  and  hence  real
resources,  the  kinds  of  risk  it  takes,  and  the  degree  of  supervision  it  requires.  If  the  Congress
wants to extend the use of the sovereign credit further, to achieve a wider range over which the
benefits  of  doing  so  can  accrue,  it  ought  to  make  that  decision  explicitly,  and  accept  the
consequences of the subsidy on the financial system that come with it. But, it should not, in the
name of some technical change, or in search of some minor efficiency, inadvertently expand the
use of the sovereign credit. This issue would not be so important were we not in the process of
addressing  what  must  surely  be  a  watershed  in  the  revamping  of  our  regulatory  structure.  We
must avoid inadvertently extending the safety net and its associated subsidy without a thorough
understanding of the implications of such an extension to the competitive balance and systemic
risks of our financial system.
BIS Review   16/1997
- 4 -
Central to the Board’s choice of a financial structure is its desire for one that will
be  most  effective  in  fostering  both  a  viable  financial  system  and  a  vibrant  economy.  These
objectives,  in  our  view,  would  be  thwarted  if  the  safety  net  subsidy  directly  benefited  new
activities. With the safety net comes the moral hazard of which I spoke earlier, and its attendant
misallocation  of  resources,  and  uneven  competitive  playing  field.  If  the  government  subsidies
directed to banks were channeled to bank subsidiaries, in my judgement,  both  the  benefits  and
enumerated costs to the financial system and the public would occur.
If  banks  were  permitted  to  engage  in  new  activities  in  their  own  subsidiaries,
inevitably virtually all holding companies would shift those activities now conducted in holding
company affiliates to bank subsidiaries, eviscerating the holding company structure. Were such
shifts  to  happen  solely  as  the  result  of  operational  efficiencies,  no  one,  including  the  Board,
should  mourn  the  demise  of  the  holding  company.  But  if,  as  I  suspect,  such  shifts  occurred
because of the attraction of a government subsidy, we should be concerned because the insidious
effects of such subsidies would have spread. The evidence from flows between banks and their
parents,  relative  bond  ratings,  and  the  administration  of  Sections  23A  and  B  of  the  Federal
Reserve  Act,  all  strongly  suggest  that  the  holding  company  structure  is  far  more  capable  of
containing the sovereign credit subsidy whose purpose is support of the safety net, not providing
expanded competitive advantage.
As new activities hopefully expand for banking organizations, we believe that it is
essential  that  we  assure  they  are  financed  at  market  rates,  not  subsidized  ones.  This  will  not
always  be  easy.  Containment  of  subsidies  is  often  implemented  through  firewalls  and  other
devices which could also inhibit the very synergies which the expansion of activities is meant to
achieve.  But  we  have  dealt  with  these  trade-offs  before  and  should  be  able  to  in  the  future  as
well.
Umbrella Supervision
Whether  new  activities  are  authorized  in  bank  subsidiaries,  bank  holding
companies,  or  both,  Congress,  in  its  review  of  financial  modernization,  must  consider  legal
entity supervision versus umbrella supervision. The Board believes that umbrella supervision is
a  realistic  necessity  for  the  protection  of  our  financial  system  and  to  limit  any  misuse  of  the
sovereign credit.
The  bank  holding  company  organization  is  increasingly  being  managed  so  as  to
take advantage of the synergies between its component parts in order to deliver better products
to the market and higher returns to stockholders. Such synergies cannot occur if the model of the
holding  company  is  one  in  which  the  parent  is  just,  in  effect,  a  portfolio  investor  in  its
subsidiary. Indeed, virtually all of the large holding companies now operate as integrated units
and are managed as such.
As  bank  holding  companies  began  to  widen  their  activities,  and  as  new
technologies  permitted  not  only  the  development  of  new  products  but  also  the  systems  for
controlling  them,  the  banking  organization  was  impelled  to  develop  centralized  risk  control
techniques  that  crossed  legal  entities.  Today,  risk  management  for  the  entire  company  is
increasingly centralized not only at the larger and more sophisticated banking organizations, but
at other large financial services providers as well. This development reflects the demands of the
marketplace,  which  views  banks  and  their  affiliates  and  other  financial  businesses  and  their
affiliates  as  integrated  organizations  in  terms  of  financial  condition,  management,  and
reputation.
BIS Review   16/1997
- 5 -
To understand the risk controls of the bank, we have first  to  come  to  grips  with
the  fact  that  the  organization  is  interested  in  risk  and  its  control,  not  by  instrument  or  legal
entity,  but  for  the  entire  business.  This  type  of  control  is  being  adopted  by  more  and  more
organizations each year, and can only increase as more activities are authorized by the regulators
and  the  Congress.  Regulatory  policies  and  operating  procedures  have  had  to  respond  to  these
realities, to focus on the process of decisionmaking for the total organization. Thus, the Federal
Reserve -- the historical umbrella supervisor -- also has found it necessary to concentrate more
on the process that banking organizations use to manage market, credit, operating and exchange
rate risk, and less on the traditional after-the-fact evaluation of balance sheets that can and often
do  change  dramatically  the  day  after  they  have  been  reviewed  by  the  supervisors.  In  such  a
world,  process,  if  not  everything,  is  critical,  and  that  process  is  determined  increasingly  at  the
parent holding company for all of the units of the organization on a consolidated basis.
One  could  argue  --  as  several  witnesses  appearing  before  this  subcommittee  did
on Tuesday -- that regulators should only be interested in the entities they regulate and, hence,
review  the  risk  evaluation  process  only  as  it  relates  to  their  regulated  entity.  Presumably  each
regulator of each entity -- the bank regulators, the SEC, the state insurance and finance company
authorities -- would look only at how the risk management process affected their units. It is our
belief  that  this  simply  will  not  be  adequate.  Risks  managed  on  a  consolidated  basis  cannot  be
reviewed on an individual legal entity basis by different supervisors.
Indeed,  our  experience  has  been  that  a  problem  in  one  legal  entity  can  have  a
contagion  effect  in  other  entities.  If  a  bank  affiliate  begins  to  have  difficulty,  the  market
evaluates  the  problem  as  the  consolidated  entity’s  problem  and  can  bring  pressure  on  all  the
units. These pressures usually take the form of funding or liquidity difficulties, as creditors seek
to reduce their exposure to  all  units  of  an  organization  that  seems  to  be  having  trouble.  Better
safe  than  sorry.  Indeed,  it  is  in  the  cauldron  of  the  payments  and  settlement  system,  where
decisions involving large sums must be made in short periods, that this contagion effect might be
first  seen  as  participants  understandably  seek  to  protect  themselves  from  the  uncertainty  that
accompanies this contagion effect. And that is how crises often begin.
These  concerns  were  part  of  the  motivation  for  the  congressional  decision  just
five  years  ago  to  require  that  foreign  banks  could  enter  the  United  States  if,  and  only  if,  they
were  subject  to  consolidated  supervision.  This  decision,  which  is  consistent  with  the
international  standards  for  consolidated  supervision  of  banking  organizations,  was  a  good
decision  then.  It  is  a  good  decision  today,  especially  for  those  banking  organizations  whose
disruption  could  cause  major  financial  disturbances  in  United  States  and  foreign  markets.  For
foreign  and  for  U.S.  banking  organizations,  retreat  from  consolidated  supervision  would,  the
Board believes, be a significant step backward.
We have to be careful, however, that consolidated umbrella supervision does not
inadvertently so hamper the decisionmaking process of banking organizations as to render them
ineffectual. The Federal Reserve Board is accordingly in the process of reviewing its supervisory
structure and other procedures in order to reflect the aforementioned market-directed shift from
conventional  balance  sheet  auditing  to  evaluation  of  the  internal  risk  management  process.
Although  focused  on  the  key  risk  management  processes,  it  would  sharply  reduce  routine
supervisory  umbrella  presence  in  holding  companies.  As  the  committee  knows,  the  Board  has
recently  published  for  comment  proposals  to  expedite  the  applications  process,  and  the
legislation  Congress  enacted  last  year  eased  such  procedures  as  well.  Nonetheless,  the  Board
requests  even  greater  modification  to  its  existing  statutory  mandate  so  that  the  required
BIS Review   16/1997
- 6 -
applications  process  could  be  sharply  cut  back,  particularly  in  the  area  of  nonbank  financial
services.
We would hope that should  the  Congress  authorize  wider  activities  for  financial
services  holding  companies  that  it  recognize  that  a  bank  which  is  a  minor  part  of  such  an
organization  (and  its  associated  safety  net)  can  be  protected  through  adequate  bank  capital
requirements and the application of Sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. The case
is weak, in our judgment, for umbrella supervision of a holding company which, because it owns
only a small bank, does not have material access to the safety net.
As  I  noted  when  discussing  the  safety  net  and  bank  subsidiaries,  attached  to  all
uses  of  the  sovereign  credit  come  efforts  by  the  government  to  protect  the  taxpayer.  Those
entities interested in banks are really interested in access to the safety net, since it is far easier to
engage  in  the  nonsafety  net  activities  of  banks  without  acquiring  a  bank.  If  an  organization
chooses to deliver some of its services with the aid of the sovereign credit by acquiring a bank, it
should not be excused from efforts of the government to look out for the stability of the overall
financial  system.  For  bank  holding  companies  that  own  more  than  a  small  bank,  this  implies
umbrella supervision. Although that process will increasingly be designed to reduce supervisory
presence and be as nonintrusive as possible, umbrella supervision should not be eliminated, but
recognized for what it is: the cost of obtaining a subsidy.
Banking and Commerce
Finally,  let  me  turn  to  an  issue  that  has  bedeviled  supervisory  and  regulatory
discussions for years: the potential separation of commerce and banking.
As I indicated earlier, it is clear that rapidly changing technologies are altering the
nature of what constitutes finance. Indeed, just as the lines between banking and other financial
institutions are often already difficult to discern, the boundaries between finance and nonfinance
are  likely  to  become  increasingly  indistinct  as  we  move  into  the  21st  century.  For  example,
computer  and  software  firms  will  certainly  be  offering  ever  more  sophisticated  financial
products.  And  doubtless  financial  firms  will  be  offering  an  increasingly  sophisticated  array  of
nonfinancial services. In addition, some of the financial firms who mainly produce products and
services  that  many  observers  believe  should  be  permissible  to  banks  are  also  engaged  in,  or
affiliated with, nonfinancial businesses.
Newer  technologies  will  make  it  highly  unlikely  that  the  walling  off  of  any
ownership  of  financial  institutions  by  nonfinancial  businesses  and  vice-versa  can  be  continued
very  far  into  the  21st  century.  Nonetheless,  the  Board  has  concluded  that  it  would  be  wise  to
move with caution in addressing the removal of the current legal barriers between commerce and
banking. The free and open legal association of banking and commerce would be a profound and
surely  irreversible  structural  change  in  the  American  economy.  Hence,  we  must  be  careful  to
assure ourselves that whatever changes are made in our supervisory structure, that it not distort
our evolution to the most efficient financial structure as we move into the next century.
Were we fully confident of how the structure would evolve, we could presumably
construct today the regulations which would foster that evolution. But we cannot be certain. We
thus  run  the  risk  of  locking  in  a  set  of  inappropriate  regulations  that  could  adversely  alter  the
development  of  market  structures.  We  cannot  be  confident  we  know  what  the  true  synergies
between  finance  and  nonfinance  will  be  in  ten  or  even  five  years.  Our  ability  to  foresee
accurately  the  future  implications  of  technologies  and  market  developments  in  banking,  as  in
BIS Review   16/1997
- 7 -
other  industries,  has  not  been  particularly  impressive.  As  Professor  Rosenberg  of  Stanford
University  has  pointed  out,  ".  .  .  mistaken  forecasts  of  future  structure  litter  our  financial
landscape."  Consider  the  view  of  the  1960s  that  the  "cashless  society"  was  imminent.
Nonetheless, the public preference for  paper  has  declined  only  gradually.  Similarly,  just  a  few
years  ago  conventional  wisdom  argued  that  banks  were  dinosaurs  that  were  becoming  extinct.
The reality today is far from it. Even more recently, it was argued that banks and nonfinancial
firms  had  to  merge  in  order  to  save  the  capital-starved  banking  system.  Today,  as  you  know,
virtually all of our banks are very well capitalized.
All  these  examples  suggest  that  if  we  change  the  rules  now  about  banking  and
commerce  under  circumstances  of  uncertainty  about  future  synergies  between  finance  and
nonfinance,  we  might  end  up  doing  more  harm  than  good.  And,  as  with  all  rule  changes  by
government, we are likely to find it impossible to correct our errors promptly. Modifications of
such  a  fundamental  structural  rule  as  the  separation  of  banking  and  commerce  should
accordingly  proceed  at  a  deliberate  pace,  testing  the  response  of  markets  and  technological
innovation  to  the  altered  rules  in  the  years  ahead.  The  public  needs  to  have  confidence  in  the
regulatory structure, implying that we proceed slowly and cautiously.
Excessive  delay,  however,  would  doubtless  produce  some  inequities.  Expanded
financial  activities  for  banking  organizations  requires,  the  Board  believes,  that  those  firms
operating  in  markets  that  banks  can  enter  should,  in  turn,  be  authorized  to  engage  in  banking.
However,  some  of  these  nonbanking  financial  firms  already  own  --  or  are  owned  by  --
nonfinancial  entities.  A  complete  commerce  and  banking  prohibition  would  thus  require  the
divestiture of all nonfinancial activities by those organizations that wanted to acquire or establish
banks.  The  principle  of  caution  suggests  an  approach  which  may  prove  useful.  Perhaps  those
organizations that either have or establish well-capitalized  and  well-managed  bank  subsidiaries
should  be  permitted  a  small  basket  of  nonfinancial  assets  --  a  certain  percentage  of  either
consolidated  assets  or  capital.  A  small  permissible  basket  would  establish,  in  effect,  a  pilot
program  to  evaluate  the  efficacy  of  further  breaching  of  the  banking  and  commerce  wall.  We
found that such a slow and deliberate policy worked well with Section 20 affiliates.
Of  course,  some  nonbanking  firms  would  find  that  their  nonfinancial  activities
would exceed a small basket exemption. Such excess nonconforming assets might be addressed
on  a  case-by-case  basis  with  a  scheduled  longer-term  divestiture  to  avoid  the  worst  short-term
inequities. A basket clause plus case-by-case review of individual situations might also provide a
way to make available a common bank and thrift charter to those unitary thrifts that are affiliated
with nonfinancial businesses. The Board has no firm opinion on just exactly how such trade-offs
might be made, constrained only by the general concerns I summarized earlier.
BIS Review   16/1997
