Dr.  Reddy  assesses  the  new  directions  being  embarked  upon  in  India  with
respect  to  the  national  budget  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India      Address  by  the  Deputy
Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Y. V. Reddy, at the Administrative Staff College in
Hyderabad on 8/3/97.
1. It is a pleasure for me to be with you in the Administrative Staff College today.
I have my gurus here, and I also have many friends. I spent a year on a full-time basis about a
decade ago as Visiting Faculty here. I am thankful to the Principal for giving me an opportunity
to speak on an important subject of contemporary relevance.
2.  Mr.Chidambaram’s  budget  of  1997  has  been  widely  acclaimed  as  a  trail-
blazing  breaking  budget.  From  the  point  of  view  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  it  has  very
significant  implications.  The  budget  has  acknowledged  that  interest  tax  is  a  bad  tax  and  has
commenced  its  phasing  out.  It  has  removed  tax  deduction  at  source  on  Government  securities
which was an irritant in developing an active secondary market for Government securities. The
Government  has  accepted  RBI’s  proposal  to  launch  a  capital  indexed  bond.  In  the  external
sector,  the  policy  of  capital  outflows  has  been  liberalised,  acknowledging  that  globalisation  is
not a one-way street. Replacing the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act and designing a process of
capital account convertibility are two of  the  announcements  in  the  budget  which  are  very  dear
subjects to me, but I will not comment on them. A Working Group and a Committee in the RBI
are  working  on  them  and  I  cannot  pre-empt  their  conclusions.  There  is,  however,  one  subject
which has generated debate, sometimes based on misinformation if not misunderstanding. That
is the elimination of ad hoc Treasury bills Treasury bills and the introduction of a new system of
Ways  and  Means  Advances  (WMA).  My  predecessor,  Dr.  S.S.Tarapore,  who  played  a
significant  part  in  pursuing  this  idea,  has  described  this  change-over  as  a  watershed  in  Indian
monetary history.
The origin of ad hoc Treasury bills
3.  The  intellectual  origins  of  ad  hoc  Treasury  bills  in  their  present  form  can  be
traced to the First Five Year Plan. It said, “Judicious credit creation somewhat in anticipation of
the  increase  in  production  and  availability  of  genuine  savings  has  also  a  part  to  play”.  Thus,
deficit  financing,  which  in  our  context  meant  RBI  credit  to  the  Government,  was  assigned  a
place in the financing of the Plan though its volume was to be limited to the extent that it was
non-inflationary.
4.  The  ad  hoc  Treasury  bills  thus  emerged  as  a  mode  of  financing  the  Central
Government’s deficit in the mid-1950s. For the smooth conduct of Government business, it was
mutually agreed between the Central Government and the RBI that a minimum cash balance of
Rs.50 crore on Fridays and Rs.4 crore on other days would be held by the Central Government.
To  adhere  to  this  administrative  arrangement,  it  was  agreed  that  the  Reserve  Bank  would
replenish the Government’s cash balances by the creation of ad hoc Treasury bills in favour of
the  Reserve  Bank.  The  ad  hoc  Treasury  bills,  which  were  meant  to  be  temporary,  gained  a
permanent as well as a cumulative character. Indeed, it became an attractive source of financing
Government  expenditures  since  it  was  available  at  an  interest  rate  pegged  at  4.6  per  cent  per
annum since 1974, i.e. actually at a negative real interest rate.
The assault on ad hoc Treasury bills
5. The Committee to Review the Working of the Monetary System recommended
that the Reserve Bank adopt a system of monetary targeting with feedback. The target is  to  be
BIS Review   28/1997
- 2 -
fixed  taking  into  account  the  growth  of  the  real  sector  and  an  acceptable  order  of  increase  in
prices.  The  adherence  to  the  target  implied  a  limit  to  the  monetisation  of  the  Government’s
deficit.  After  all,  any  investment  in  Central  Government  securities  by  the  RBI  results  in  the
monetisation  of  Government’s  deficit,  as  the  RBI’s  credit  to  the  Government  is  a  source  of
reserve money generation.
6.  Dr.  Rangarajan,  our  Governor,  brought  out  the  ill-effects  of  the  automatic
monetisation of the Government deficit through ad hoc Treasury bills in his Presidential Address
at the Annual Conference of the Indian Economic Association in December, 1988. He has been
pursuing  this  subject  with  missionary  zeal  since  then.  Analysing  fiscal  and  monetary
interactions, he brought out the following issues.
First,  the  scale  of  Government  borrowing  was  maintained  at  a  high  level  and
surpluses on revenue account have given way to deficits.
Second, such borrowing has been at less than market rates.
Third,  even  the  growing  captive  investors  in  Government  securities  such  as
commercial banks were not willing to subscribe beyond their statutory obligations.
Fourth, the RBI as the manager of public debt became the residual subscriber.
Fifth, since the Government incurred deficits year after year, the question of  the
retirement of Treasury bills did not arise.
Sixth,  the  expansionary  impact  of  these  deficits,  after  taking  into  account  the
movements in net foreign exchange assets, had to be countered.
Seventh,  to  counter  the  impact,  open  market  operations  were  not  possible  given
the interest rate structure.
Eighth,  this  meant  that  the  cash  reserve  ratio  had  to  be  increased  to  absorb  the
excess liquidity.
Finally,  when  ad  hoc  Treasury  bills  were  created  automatically  to  finance  the
Central  Government’s  deficit  without  any  limit,  the  system  contributed  to  rapid  monetary
expansion when the budget deficit became very large.
Dr.Rangarajan concluded his analysis with a solution, i.e. an agreement between
the Government and the Reserve Bank of India setting a limit each year on the size of the fiscal
deficit and its monetisation. This agreement would provide greater manoeuvrability to the  RBI
to regulate the volume of money. Monetary targeting would then be meaningful. What we have
arrived at today in the budget of 1997 is exactly what was envisaged in 1988.
The process of elimination
7.  The  process  of  the  elimination  of  ad  hoc  Treasury  bills  has  been  designed  in
three stages :
First,  through  limits  on  the  creation  of  ad  hoc  Treasury  bills  which  operated
between 1994-95 and 1996-97.
BIS Review   28/1997
- 3 -
Second, through a transition period of  two  years  beginning  April  1,  1997,  when
ad  hoc  Treasury  bills  are  eliminated  and  the  new  system  of  Ways  and  Means  Advances  is
introduced; but, overdrafts above Ways and Means would be permissible beyond ten continuous
working days, though at a cost.
Third,  the  full-fledged  system  of  Ways  and  Means  Advances  operates  effective
April 1999.
We have completed the first phase, agreed on the second and third phases and are
commencing the transition period, viz., the second phase from April 1997. The second and third
phases would become operational through a fresh agreement between the Government of India
and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  Incidentally,  the  arrangements  for  WMA  to  state  governments
are also based on agreements between the Reserve Bank of India with state Governments.
The experience with the first phase
8.  In  September  1994,  it  was  mutually  agreed  between  the  Government  and  the
RBI  that  limits  will  be  placed  on  the  net  issue  of  ad  hoc  Treasury  bills  for  year-end  and  also
within  the  year.  The  year-end  limits  of  Rs.6,000  crore  for  1994-95  and  Rs.5,000  crore  for  the
next  two  years  were  fixed.  The  within-the-year  limit  during  this  period  was  kept  at  Rs.9,000
crore.
During 1994-95, the net issue of ad hoc Treasury bills during the greatest part of
the  year  was  negative  and  even  at  the  end  of  the  year  the  net  issue  was  only  Rs.1,750  crore,
much  lower  than  the  year-end  cap.  During  the  years  1995-96  and  1996-97,  though,  there  was
some difficulty in staying below the within-the-year limits; it may be noted that during 1996-97,
since  August  14,  1996,  net  issues  of  ad  hoc  Treasury  bills  remained  mostly  below  the  within-
the-year limit. The most significant part of this agreement was that the practice of issuing ad hoc
Treasury  bills  to  finance  the  Central  Government’s  deficit  would  be  totally  discontinued  by
1997-98.  In  last  year’s  budget,  the  Government  committed  itself  to  announcing  concrete
proposals for phasing out ad hoc Treasury bills. This year, the Finance Minister did exactly what
he promised - to comply with the agreement.
9.  A  question  that  is  often  asked  is  what  happens  to  the  ad  hoc  Treasury  bills
outstanding? The outstanding level of ad hoc Treasury bills as at end-March 1997 will have to
be funded into special securities at an interest rate of 4.6 per cent per annum. These securities, in
addition to the volume of funded securities of Rs.71,000 crore already in the books of the RBI,
will continue to be held by the Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank at a later stage may have to use
these securities for open market operations by converting them into marketable lots.
The New System
10. What will the proposed system be like?
First,  a  scheme  of  WMA  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  Government  of  India
(GOI)  has  been  evolved  to  accommodate  temporary  mismatches  in  Government  receipts  and
payments.
Second,  the  limit  for  WMA  and  the  rate  of  interest  on  WMA  will  be  mutually
agreed between the RBI and the Government from time to time.
BIS Review   28/1997
- 4 -
Third,  any  withdrawals  by  the  Government  from  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  in
excess of the limit of WMA would be permissible only for ten consecutive working days.
Fourth, when 75 per cent of WMA is utilised, the Reserve Bank would trigger a
fresh floatation of Government securities.
Fifth, consistent  with  the  discontinuance  of  ad  hoc  Treasury  bills,  the  system  of
91 days tap Treasury bills will also be discontinued with effect from April 1, 1997.
Sixth, with the discontinuance of ad hoc Treasury bills and tap Treasury bills and
the  introduction  of  WMA,  the  concept  of  the  conventional  budget  deficit  loses  its  relevance.
Therefore, it is proposed to discontinue the practice of showing the budgetary deficit; instead the
gross  fiscal  deficit  would  become  the  key  indicator  of  the  deficit.  As  a  transparent  way  of
reporting the monetised deficit, or net RBI Credit to the central Government, the likely extent of
RBI support in respect of dated securities and auction Treasury bills is shown separately as the
‘monetised deficit’ in the budget document.
Ad hoc Treasury bills and WMA: differences
11. There are significant differences between ad hoc Treasury bills and WMA.
First,  WMA  will  not  be  a  source  of  financing  the  budget  deficit.  It  is  only  a
mechanism  to  cover  day-to-day  mismatches  in  receipts  and  payments  of  the  Government.
Therefore,  the  use  of  WMA  will  have  to  be  periodically  suspended.  WMA  will  also  not  be
shown as a source of financing in the budget estimates.
Secondly,  limits  on  WMA  will  be  fixed  and  any  excess  withdrawal  by  the
Government beyond the limit will become permissible for no more than 10 consecutive working
days.
Thirdly, WMA will be charged at a market related interest rate.
The transition period
12. It is possible to argue that the period of agreement between 1994-97 itself was
a  transition  and  a  further  transition  now  is  not  necessary.  However,  the  introduction  of  a
fundamental change in a public system requires that functionaries in a variety of organisations in
Government change procedures and cash management practices. This simply cannot happen like
a dress rehearsal before the new system. In fact, some minor modifications may be needed as we
go along. To say that transition is meant to dilute implies a predisposition to suspect the motives.
After  all,  the  change-over  from  the  old  system  to  new  system  should  be  smooth.  The
Government  should  evolve  expenditure  control  mechanisms  and  improve  its  day-to-day  cash
management. It may be necessary for the Government to discuss with major ministries for this
purpose.  The  Reserve  Bank  would  also  attempt  to  streamline  its  debt  management  techniques.
The RBI will make efforts  to  develop  the  Treasury  bills  market  by  proactive  participation  and
issuing of Treasury bills of different maturities. Therefore, a transition period of two years has
been  proposed.  During  the  transition  period,  the  Government  would  be  allowed  to  exceed  the
limit of WMA for periods beyond 10 consecutive working days. But, additional interest will be
applied for such periods on the amount of overdraft.
The current debate
BIS Review   28/1997
- 5 -
13.  Following  the  announcement  of  the  new  system  and  the  presentation  of  the
budget  incorporating  the  new  system  there  has  been  a  debate  on  the  features  of  the  system  as
well as its functioning in 1997-98.
First, that it is only a new name for the old system.
Second, that without a statutory ceiling on debt, the system will serve no purpose.
Third, that the degree of autonomy for monetary policy is still limited.
Fourth,  that  the  budgeted  figures  show  that  the  new  system  will  involve  large
borrowings and more monetisation and, therefore, is inflationary. Let me analyse each one of the
issues.
14.  As  already  explained,  the  new  system  implies  the  repayment  of  advances
made and not their accumulation year after year. The limits are fixed and exceeding the limits is
simply not permitted beyond ten days once the system becomes fully functional. There is a cost
of  using  such  advances  which  is  market-related.  In  addition,  there  is  also  the  important
advantage of providing mechanisms for open market operations to take care of surges in inflows
of foreign capital. This is difficult under a system of ad hoc Treasury bills but is possible when
auction Treasury bills and dated securities take the place of ad hoc Treasury bills. Market-based
instruments are absolutely essential as we move along the path of capital account liberalisation.
Further,  the  system  is  far  more  binding  and  transparent  since  the  level  of  borrowings  and  the
pattern of financing, especially RBI’s contribution, are made part of budget documents. Finally,
the mixed bag that budget deficit represents is replaced by a more transparent method.
15. Perhaps it is necessary to clarify the three concepts viz. the budget deficit, the
monetised  deficit  or  the  net  RBI  credit  to  the  Government  and  the  RBI’s  support  in  primary
issues of central Government securities. The budget deficit is defined as the total of the net issue
of 91-day Treasury bills (at face value) - ad hoc Treasury bills Treasury bills, tap and auction -
net  of  increases  in  central  Government  balances  during  the  financial  year.  Therefore,
conceptually, the budget deficit is the short-term financing availed of by the central Government
both from the Reserve Bank and other entities which include banks, financial institutions, state
Governments, corporates and other parties. In  this  set-up,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  only  one  of  the
financing units of the budget deficit.
Net reserve bank credit to the central Government, on the other hand, includes not
only  the  Reserve  Bank’s  holdings  of  91-day  Treasury  bills  but  also  its  holdings  of  dated
securities and rupee coins net of the increase in the central Government’s cash balances. In other
words, the Reserve Bank’s holdings of 91-day Treasury bills that forms a part of budget deficit
is also a subset of the monetised deficit. However, it may be noted that while the constituents of
the budget deficit are measured at face value, those of the net Reserve Bank credit to the central
Government  are  measured  at  book  value.  This  valuation  difference  is,  however,  negligible
particularly for 91-day Treasury bills.
The  correlation  between  the  budget  deficit  and  the  monetised  deficit  grows
weaker at times of easy liquidity such as during the current financial year as absorption by the
market of Government securities including 91-day Treasury bills has gone up substantially. The
purchase  of  Government  securities  by  non-RBI  entities  reduces  the  monetised  deficit  in  two
ways : (i) directly by  reducing  the  devolvement  on  the  Reserve  Bank  of  91-day  Treasury  bills
and dated securities auctions as well as through the sale of dated securities including repos and
BIS Review   28/1997
- 6 -
ii)  indirectly,  as  the  market  off-take  of  tap  Treasury  bills  and  fresh  Government  securities
improves the central Government’s cash balances and reduces the central Government’s recourse
to ad hoc Treasury bills.
16. The RBI’s support to primary issues of central Government securities reflects
only  its  support  in  the  primary  offers,  and  net  RBI  credit  to  the  Government  could  be  very
different  due  to  other  factors.  Let  me  illustrate  this  with  some  figures.  In  1993-94,  the  RBI’s
support  to  Government  was  Rs.7,014  crore,  but  net  RBI  credit  was  only  Rs.260  crores.  In
1996-97,  till  February  14th,  RBI’s  support  was  Rs.12,099  crore,  but,  net  RBI  credit  was  only
Rs.7,837  crore.  The  monetised  deficit  is  one  source  of  the  money  supply  and  is  not  the  only
factor affecting the money supply.
17. It is sometimes argued that the real instrument for fiscal prudence should be a
statutory  ceiling  on  debt.  True,  our  constitution  enables  Parliamentary  legislation  relating  to  a
ceiling on debt. The Ministry of Finance is due to bring out a Discussion Paper on this. Let me
not  pre-empt  its  content.  But,  clearly  the  new  system  has  merits  of  its  own  and  will  co-exist
more effectively with a ceiling on debt. It has merits in itself since it seeks to limit the extent of
the RBI’s support. Technically, there is nothing to stop the Government from accessing all the
debt within the ceiling from the RBI if the new system did not exist. A ceiling on debt provides
a  constraint  on  the  broader  issue  of  debt  management  and  impinges  on  fiscal  policy  more
directly.  The  new  system  tackles  the  issue  of  fiscal/monetary  interface  which  is  a  critical
component of both fiscal and monetary policies.
18. It is sometimes argued that the degree of autonomy for monetary policy is still
limited.  To  the  extent  the  limits  on  WMA  interest  costs  and  the  RBI’s  support  to  the
Government are negotiable during the transition, there is room for the Government to influence
the  RBI.  The  main  difference  is  that  under  the  earlier  system  of  automatic  monetisation  the
Government  could  unilaterally  determine  the  limits,  while  after  the  new  system  becomes  fully
functional, the pattern similar to state Governments would be followed. The data in the budget
for 1997-98 are quoted to show that the RBI has not gained in autonomy. That leads me to an
analysis  of  these  figures  and  the  inflationary  potential  of  the  borrowing  programme  and  the
pattern of financing.
19.  In  the  current  debate,  some  have  presumed  that  as  per  budget  estimates,  the
increase in high-powered money for 1997-98 would consist of Rs. 16,000 crore (the monetised
deficit)  plus  Rs.7,000  crore  on  account  of  the  increase  in  the  average  level  of  WMA.  This
presumption is wrong for two reasons:
First, the budget estimates for monetised deficit at Rs.16,000 crore would consist
of  the  increase  in  RBI’s  holdings  of  Government  securities  including  dated  Government
securities and the RBI’s holdings of auctioned Treasury bills.
Second,  the  budget  estimates  for  1997-98  have  not  assumed  any  contribution  to
the budget from WMA. It may be mentioned that Rs.100,000 crore has been shown on both the
receipts  side  and  the  disbursements  side,  implying  that  whatever  WMA  were  taken  by  the
Government would be repaid before the end of the year.
20.  Some  others  have  argued  that  there  is  a  large  increase  in  net  borrowings  of
Government, of the order of 33 per cent, negating the intentions of the new system. Here again,
the comparison  between  the  net  market  borrowing  figures  of  Rs.25,498  crore  for  1996-97  and
Rs.33,820 crore for 1997-98 is misleading. The figure for  1996-97  excludes  financing  through
BIS Review   28/1997
- 7 -
the budget deficit i.e., mainly through the instrument of 91-day Treasury bills including ad hoc
Treasury  bills.  The  figures  of  1997-98  under  market  borrowings  would  include  borrowings
through 91-day (auction) Treasury bills. Therefore, the comparable figures would be Rs.32,398
crore for 1996-97 [(Rs.25,498 crore of net market borrowing plus Rs.6,900 crore of the budget
deficit  (RE)]  and  Rs.33,820  crore  for  1997-98  (total  net  market  borrowing),  implying  an
increase of only 4.4 per cent.
21. Some others have argued that, at 16 per cent, the growth in the money supply
would imply an inflation of 10 per cent if GDP grows at 6 per cent. The money supply growth
indicated  here  is  in  terms  of  broad  money  and  not  narrow  money.  The  income  elasticity  of
demand for broad money which has been proven to be reasonably stable and is in the range of
1.5 to 1.6 in India should be taken into account. Even accepting that growth in GDP will be no
more than 6 per cent, the implied inflation could be only between 7.0 per cent (16.0 - 9.0 ) and
6.4 per cent (16.0 - 9.6).
Outlook
new system.
22.  Let  me  conclude  with  the  outlook  for  the  successful  implementation  of  the
First, let us recognise that what we are doing is really adhering to what the First
Five Year Plan visualised, viz. judicious credit creation.
Second,  we  are  trying  to  operationalise  the  monetary  targeting  that  Prof.
Sukhamoy  Chakravarthy's  Committee  wanted  us  to.  No  doubt,  we  have  to  move  to  indirect
instruments of monetary policy, but we cannot escape some sort of effective monetary targeting.
Third,  a  process  of  thinking  initiated  by  Dr.  Rangarajan  in  1988,  further
elaborated  by  him  into  a  proposal  in  the  Kutty  Memorial  Lecture  on  “Autonomy  of  Central
Banks” in September 1993, and formalised through an agreement between him as Governor and
Prof. Manmohan Singh as Finance Minister has been honoured by our present Finance Minister
Shri P. Chidambaram. We therefore have reason to believe that there is a consensus on the new
system.
Fourthly,  the  critics  have  not  questioned  the  need  for  closer  fiscal  monetary
interaction or a more autonomous monetary policy. If at all, the  critics  want  to  make  sure  that
the new system works effectively towards its objectives.
Finally, what has been put in place is a  system  and  undoubtedly  a  better  system
than ad hoc Treasury bills and is certainly more suited to our times as well as our policies in the
external sector. How it operates depends on public opinion, economic compulsions and the good
faith with which this is implemented by the Government and the Reserve Bank of India.
BIS Review   28/1997
