Prof.  Tietmeyer  discusses  the  relationship  between  economic  convergence
and  EMU      Speech  by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Prof.  Hans  Tietmeyer,
delivered to the Boersen Executive Club in Copenhagen on 14/3/97.
I
The  Boersen  Executive  Club  has  asked  me  to  speak  about  “Economic
Convergence and EMU”. I shall be pleased to do so, especially as I can well imagine  that  you
here in Denmark are able to adopt a somewhat more relaxed and calmer approach to the subject
of “Convergence and EMU”.
There are two obvious reasons for that. Firstly, Denmark itself has made distinct
progress in economic convergence during the past few years. That progress was documented in
the European Monetary Institute’s recently published Convergence Report.
   The Danish krone has been stable internally for a good number of years.
It is unlikely that Denmark will have any problem with the exchange rate
criterion either. Happily, participation in the ERM - as in Germany - has
never been at issue here.
And there has been notable progress in consolidating public finance.
The  assessment  of  Denmark  in  the  European  Monetary  Institute’s  Convergence
Report was therefore decidedly more positive than that of Germany.
The second reason why you in Denmark can be rather more relaxed on the subject
of  “Convergence  and  EMU”  is,  of  course,  self-evident.  Denmark  has  announced  that,  for  the
time being, it is not going to participate in the third stage of monetary union.
Naturally,  we  in  Germany  respect  Denmark’s  sovereign  decision,  even  if  we  at
the Bundesbank are not unreservedly happy about that decision. That is because it is precisely in
the initial phase that we shall need stable partners in EMU. But the door is open. The terms of
entry are known on all sides. What has not happened yet can, of course, take place at some point
in the future. It goes without saying, however, that this is a matter for the Danes themselves to
decide. Whatever decision Denmark ultimately takes on participating  in  the  third  stage,  I  hope
that exchange rate stability is maintained as before.
It  is  likely  that  the  Danish  krone  will  belong  at  least  to  the  exchange  rate
mechanism of “EMS II” from the outset. That would, at any rate, imply the existence  of  close
bilateral links between the Danish krone and the euro. For the rest, it is precisely the economic
and  stability  record  of  countries  not  wishing  to  belong  from  the  outset  which  represents  a
challenge to and a commitment for the euro area. In this way, Denmark can play a part, at least
indirectly, in the anti-inflationary orientation of the euro, even if it does not join EMU at once.
Naturally enough, the setting-up of an “EMS II” will, at the same time, enhance
the responsibility  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  A  stable  euro  is  an  essential  precondition  for
the  operation  of  an  intra-European  exchange  rate  system.  I  am  convinced  that  the  European
Central Bank will be fully aware of precisely that international responsibility for the euro as the
anchor currency.
BIS Review   30/1997
- 2 -
Central Bank:
There will also be other links between the Danish central bank and the European
  The  Governor  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank  will  be  a  member  of  the
enlarged Governing Council of the ECB.
And the central banks of the countries with a derogation are also invited to
participate  in  TARGET,  the  planned  large-value  payment  system  for  the
euro.
In saying that, I would ask you to understand why there has to be a minimum of
divergence in the terms of  participation  in  TARGET.  Those  terms  have  to  take  account  of  the
differing commitments of the central banks inside and outside the euro area.
II
In  order  to  explain  the  relationship  between  economic  convergence  and  EMU,
there  is,  in  the  first  place,  a  fairly  simple  textbook  answer.  By  definition,  a  monetary  union
abolishes, once and for all, the instrument of exchange rate adjustment between the participating
economies. The countries taking part must be able to do without that instrument for ever - even
if structural changes occur. That calls for the ability on the part of  each  participant  to  keep  up
with the others in terms of economic and anti-inflationary performance, or - if it does fall behind
- the ability to remedy a worsening of its competitive position by its own domestic efforts.
These general requirements of a single currency area apply to the euro to a quite
special  degree.  There  are  three  reasons  for  this:  Firstly,  in  the  supranational  euro  area  -  in
contrast to the usual national environment of a currency - there will be hardly any fiscal policy
mechanisms  that  would  be  able  to  counterbalance  regional  disequilibria.  There  will  not  be  a
dominant  central  budget.  At  the  Community  level,  there  will  be  no  network  comparable  to  an
internal,  national  system  of  income  redistribution.  The  public  financial  systems  and  social
security will remain in the national domain.
Secondly, any regional disequilibria in the euro area would scarcely be mitigated
by  high  labour  mobility.  Linguistic  and  cultural  barriers  will  continue  to  exist.  Furthermore,
high  labour  mobility  within  Europe  might  even  provoke  opposition.  In  Germany,  we  have
witnessed something of that kind in the construction industry, owing to the fact that it depresses
wages.
And  thirdly,  the  increased  need  for  internal  flexibility  resulting  from  the
irrevocably  fixed  exchange  rates  must  be  seen  against  the  backdrop  of  current  economic
conditions in Europe. Most countries in Europe are faced with an enormous need for adjustment
anyway
  as a result of the fiercer competition in the single market and in a global
economy
and  as  a  result  of  a  number  of  domestic  problems  which  are  probably
home-grown: on the labour market, in public finance, in provision for old
age.
The setting prefigured for the next decade is therefore a highly dynamic one. That
will,  of  course,  not  make  it  easier  for  any  country  to  perform  the  task  of  holding  its  own
economically in a monetary union.
Bearing that in mind, it will  be  extremely  important  for  the  euro  area  to  restrict
entry to those countries which are ready in terms  of  their  economic  and  anti-inflation  policies.
BIS Review   30/1997
- 3 -
That  is  to  prevent  a  lack  of  anti-inflationary  convergence  from  being  transformed  into  real
economic divergence. Any split in real economic trends would, naturally,  exert  pressure  in  the
direction  of  a  transfer  and  social  union,  or  even  of  a  European  “super-state”,  which  you  in
Denmark - if I understand it correctly - do not want, and which we in Germany  -  I  can  assure
you - do not want either.
Adequate  and  lasting  convergence  is  in  the  individual  countries’  own  interests,
however.  That  is  because  a  country  which  is  unable  durably  to  pursue  the  same  course  as  the
others in the euro area will itself get into difficulties - all the more so if the other countries are
not  prepared  to  enter  into  a  permanent  burden-sharing  arrangement,  with  all  its  attendant
political implications.
III
Besides  that  textbook  answer  to  the  question  of  the  relationship  between
convergence  and  EMU,  there  is  another  aspect.  What  a  monetary  union  needs  is  not  just
convergence  in  terms  of  the  hard  economic  data.  It  also  needs  a  convergence  in  terms  of
thinking.  That  implies  convergence  in  objectives  and  in  how  we  interpret  and  explain  the
interaction  of  economic  forces.  Monetary  union  will  not  just  abolish  the  exchange  rate
instrument  domestically.  It  will  of  necessity  also  call  for  a  single  domestic  and  external
monetary policy, and thus a common stance in a key policy area.
For the euro area, however,  achieving  and  maintaining  a  common  stance  of  this
kind  will  undoubtedly  be  more  difficult  than  for  a  traditional  national  currency  area.  Whereas
the currency will be supranational, it will generally remain the individual governments that will
be taking the decisions on economic and social policy. That is all the more reason why the euro
needs  dominant  patterns  of  preference  which  are  common  to  all  participants.  That  likewise
implies the affirmation of major fundamental positions.
Firstly,  maintaining  the  value  of  money  is  the  best  contribution  that  monetary
policy can make to economic growth and employment. Price stability is the foundation on which
society  and  policy-makers  can  and  must  carry  out  the  necessary  adjustments.  Secondly,  in  the
event of conflict, internal price stability must have priority over external exchange rate stability.
Thirdly, experience has shown that a central bank which is independent of the vagaries of day-
to-day  politics,  and  committed  solely  to  the  goal  of  price  stability,  helps  to  safeguard  that
indispensable price stability. By the way, that might be even more important in a supranational
union than in a purely national context.
These  three  basic  convictions  are  essential  to  a  durably  stable  currency.  That  is
why they have rightly been enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty.
   Article  107  lays  down  the  European  Central  Bank’s  independence  of
instructions.
The  Statute  of  the  European  Central  Bank  requires  it  “to  maintain  price
stability” as its primary objective.
And  Article  109  (1)  and  (2)  require  the  EU  Council  to  pursue  external
exchange-rate  policy  without  prejudice  to  the  objective  of  maintaining
price stability.
Any calls for the political control  of  the  European  Central  Bank  or  for  different
objectives were thus firmly rejected five years ago, when the Treaty was signed.
BIS Review   30/1997
- 4 -
But it  is,  of  course,  not  only  the  legal  position  created  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty
which  argues  in  favour  of  the  primacy  of  price  stability  and  its  safeguarding  by  means  of
independent monetary policy. Past experience and economic reason argue in its favour, too. It is
important that this is perceived - and lastingly perceived - to be the case in all the participating
countries.  Otherwise,  political  conflicts  might  impose  a  heavy  burden  on  monetary  union  at  a
later date.
The task of preserving a durably stable currency is, however, one which has to be
faced in other policy areas, too. It cannot be a matter for the monetary policy of  the  European
Central Bank alone - particularly since the ECB still has to establish its reputation and credibility
in the first place. However great a contribution an independent central bank can make to a stable
currency,  monetary  policy  is  never  conducted  in  a  political  vacuum  or  under  laboratory
conditions. And, in the long run, a currency’s fate can never be divorced from the political and
economic trends in the area in which it is used. That is why there is yet another item on the list
of common features needed for a durably stable monetary union.
The Euro requires, fourthly, a sense of and a willingness for shared responsibility
for the currency in all the participating countries and in the various policy areas. That applies to
wage rate policy, for example. Above all, however, it applies to fiscal policy. It is the resolute
and lasting pursuit of sound policies that will be of crucial importance in that respect - and not
any one-off measures.
An  effective  stability  pact  is  extremely  important,  too,  for  the  same  reason  -  a
stability pact being, incidentally, precisely in the interests of the smaller countries. After all, any
undisciplined  behaviour  on  the  part  of  a  large  partner  country  of  substantial  economic  weight
could  have  a  severe  adverse  impact  on  interest  rates  and  on  confidence  in  long-term  stability,
thus hampering the economic growth of its partners. The pact on stability and growth agreed in
Dublin  is  an  important  reminder  and  assertion  of  the  need  for  that  shared  responsibility.  Its
details  are  to  be  set  down  in  legal  texts  during  the  next  few  weeks.  What  will  be  absolutely
crucial at this juncture is for the requirements laid down in Dublin to be spelled out  in  precise
terms. Failing this, there might easily be unnecessary conflict later on. And, of course, at a later
date  it  will  be  necessary  to  apply  those  provisions  consistently  if  excessive  budget  deficits  are
incurred.
IV
EMU being able to build on sufficient convergence in economic performance  as
well  as  on  sufficient  convergence  in  the  thinking  of  all  the  participating  countries,  would
undoubtedly open up major opportunities for Europe. The economic advantages are obvious:
  Exchange costs will cease to exist in trade within the euro area.
Exchange  rates  against  the  US  dollar  and  the  yen  could  become  more
stable.
The  financial  markets  could  expand  and  intensify,  to  the  benefit  of
creditors and debtors.
But,  above  all  -  and  this  is  the  key  factor  -  overall  competition  will  increase.  A
stable common currency will give the single market a new dimension. Admittedly, that does not
by any means imply that the euro will solve the structural problems besetting a large number of
European countries at present or in future. On the contrary, the pressure to adjust deriving from
the  single  market  and  from  globalisation  will,  if  anything,  tend  to  grow  stronger  rather  than
weaker.
BIS Review   30/1997
- 5 -
Incidentally,  the  increasing  competitive  pressure  by  no  means  implies  that  all
countries have to pursue the same economic and social policies. Under the conditions obtaining
now  and  in  the  future,  policy-makers  will,  in  fact,  have  different  options  available  to  them  to
satisfy their own preferences. But there is one precept that holds true for everyone, whether they
like it or not. Whatever policy a country may pursue, the economy must be viable, and compete,
in an international setting on a durable basis.
One gains the impression that, at the moment, the smaller countries in continental
Europe are having slightly less difficulty in adapting to changed competitive conditions. Perhaps
that is because it has always been more necessary for smaller countries to be flexible and prove
themselves in foreign markets. Obviously, it is a case of “small is beautiful”. At any rate, both
the Netherlands and Denmark appear to be already a little way ahead of the larger countries on
the  continent.  Hence  Germany  is  looking  here  towards  Denmark  with  growing  interest.  The
German press reports on the “job miracle in the north” - especially as the fall in unemployment
and  resilient  growth  is  being  accompanied  by  a  marked  course  of  consolidation  in  public
finance.
Last  autumn,  for  example,  the  present  Governor  of  the  Dutch  central  bank  and
future President of the European Monetary Institute, Wim Duisenberg, was in a position to say:
“I  do  not  believe  that  there  is  a  contradiction  between  fiscal
consolidation and creation of employment and economic growth.
Evidence  from  ...  Denmark  supports  my  view.  In  Denmark,  the
general government’s net borrowing will be reduced to almost a
balanced  budget  in  1997,  while  the  unemployment  rate  is
expected  to  decline  to  almost  9  %  of  the  working  population,
compared with the all-time high of more than 12 % in 1994.”
Admittedly,  public  finance  is  precisely  the  area  in  which  Denmark  has  to  be
ambitious. The provisional “no” to entry into the third stage of monetary union may be playing a
certain role in the international financial markets. At least, that was how the OECD saw it in its
1996 Economic Survey:
“...  the  increase  in  Danish  risk  premiums  seems  high  compared
with other ERM members. Since  the  main  feature  that  separates
Denmark from those countries is the discussion not to participate
in stage III of ERM.”
Denmark  can  now  point 
to  a  positive 
interrelationship  between  higher
employment and sound public finance. In that respect, Denmark is a model for us in Germany.
Our  country  is  at  present  in  the  process  of  rethinking,  and  facing  up  to  these
difficult  challenges.  That  is  not  a  simple  matter,  especially  as  the  structural  inflexibilities
existing  in  Germany  have  arisen  over  a  long  period.  Our  own  adjustments  are  all  the  more
important,  seeing  that  we  shall  have  to  cope  with  the  economic  implications  of  German
reunification for some considerable time to come.
It  is  my  hope  and  wish  that  we  shall  soon  be  able  to  make  the  progress  that  is
needed,  and  achieve  positive  results.  That  will  undoubtedly  be  the  case  if  we  follow  the  path
taken by our neighbours in the north and north-west. At all events, the Netherlands and Denmark
are setting important signposts, not only for us in Germany, but also for the road  to  EMU  and
beyond.
BIS Review   30/1997
