Mr  Matsushita  comments  on  recent  monetary  and  economic  conditions  in
Japan  Speech given by the Governor of the Bank of Japan, Mr Yasuo Matsushita, at the Keizai
Club in Tokio on 4/2/97.
I. Introduction
I  truly  appreciate  this  opportunity  to  address  this  distinguished  audience  at  the
invitation of the Keizai Club.
Over  the  past  several  years,  the  Japanese  economy  has  had  to  overcome  the
aftereffects  of  the  bursting  of  the  economic  “bubble”  while  facing  the  weighty  challenge  of
establishing an economic structure suitable for the new era. Although there were concerns about
a  deflationary  spiral  at  one  time,  the  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately  since  the
beginning  of  1996  partly  due  to  strong  monetary  and  fiscal  support.  Recently,  this  economic
recovery  has  gradually  firmed,  offering  signs  that  progress  has  been  made  toward  establishing
this suitable economic structure.
However, since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  stock  prices  have  fallen  significantly,
suggesting  that  market  participants  remain  cautious  about  the  economic  outlook.  With  this  in
mind, I would like to discuss the Bank of Japan’s thinking on the recent economic developments
and  monetary  policy  management,  together  with  the  Bank’s  views  on  the  uncertain  factors
regarding the economic outlook.
II. Domestic Economic Condition
With regard to the domestic economic condition, the Bank of Japan’s judgment is
that  a  moderate  economic  recovery  continues,  and  that  the  economic  recovery  is  gradually
becoming firmer.
When considering the strength of an economic recovery, the Bank pays attention
to  the  positive  interactions  between  production  and  private  demand.  Specifically,  attention  is
given  to  whether  the  increase  in  production  is  leading  to  an  expansion  of  business  fixed
investment  through  improved  corporate  profits,  and  whether  this  increased  production  is
followed by a recovery in personal consumption through increased income.
Looking back on the economic developments in Japan over the past year from a
viewpoint  of  determining  the  strength  of  the  recovery,  the  growth  of  aggregate  demand,
including public and housing investments, accelerated in the first half of 1996, and accordingly,
market expectations of an economic recovery strengthened and long- term interest rates showed
a temporary rise. However, no significant improvement was seen in production, as the increase
in final demand was partly offset by inventory adjustment and by an increase  in  imports.  As  a
result, a virtuous circle of demand, production, and income was not confirmed.
This  situation,  however,  appears  to  have  changed  somewhat  in  the  latter  half  of
1996.  Firstly,  the  decline  in  external  demand,  which  had  been  a  constraining  factor  of  the
economic recovery, halted in autumn 1996, mainly due to the increase in exports that followed a
depreciation  of  the  yen.  Recently,  there  has  been  an  upward  trend  in  external  demand.  In
addition, inventory adjustment in some raw materials and semiconductor industries was  almost
completed. As a result, production, which had remained sluggish in the first half of 1996, started
to grow at an accelerating pace, reflecting fully the increase in final demand.
BIS Review  35 /1997
- 2 -
fixed 
including  business 
Notably, the firm recovery in production is now generating a recovery in private
demand, 
investment  and  personal  consumption.  Reflecting
improvements  in  corporate  sales  and  profits,  the  recovery  in  business  fixed  investment  is
spreading to a wider range of industries and to smaller firms than previously observed. Indeed,
according to the results of the November 1996 “TANKAN -- Short-Term Economic Survey of
Enterprises in Japan,” business fixed investment for the smaller firms, which had been slow  to
improve,  is  expected  to  show  a  year-to-year  increase  in  fiscal  1996  for  the  first  time  in  five
years.
Growth of personal  consumption,  the  other  mainstay  of  private  demand,  leveled
off at one time in summer 1996, but resumed later in autumn, especially in consumer durables
such  as  automobiles.  The  contributing  factor  to  the  moderate  but  steady  recovery  in  personal
consumption  has  been  the  improved  income  reflecting  the  favorable  changes  in  employment
conditions and wages that followed the increase in production.
It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  increase  in  demand  ahead  of  the  rise  in  the
consumption tax rate scheduled for fiscal 1997 is contributing to the improvement in economic
indicators, as in housing investment,  and  therefore  these  improvements  need  to  be  seen  in  this
light. There has, however, recently been a notable change in economic developments compared
to the first half of 1996. Despite a gradual decrease in public-sector investment  from  the  latter
half  of  1996,  the  virtuous  circle  --  in  which  increased  production  leads  to  increased  private
demand  through  improved  corporate  profits  and  employment  income  --  has  clearly  begun  to
operate.
III. Uncertain Factors Regarding the Economic Outlook
A. Views of Financial Market Participants
Turning  from  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  views  on  the  current  domestic  economy,  the
issue  of  concern  now  is  the  future  development  of  the  economy.  Revitalization  of  economic
activity usually brings about increases in corporate profits and employment income, which lead
to improvements in business  fixed  investment  and  personal  consumption.  These  improvements
in turn lead to a further expansion in economic activity.
However, developments in financial markets, such as stock prices and long- term
interest  rates,  suggest  that  despite  the  increasing  strength  of  the  economic  recovery,  market
participants  remain  cautious  about  the  economic  outlook.  Various  causes  are  cited  for  the
significant  fall  in  stock  prices  since  the  beginning  of  the  year:  renewed  concern  about  the
nonperforming-loan  problem;  uncertainty  over  the  social  and  economic  systems  in  Japan  as  a
whole; and pressures to decrease the differential between domestic and international stock prices
in  terms  of  various  measures  of  evaluation,  such  as  the  price/earnings  ratio.  It  is  extremely
difficult to assess each factor and to specify the cause of the uncertainty. Still, the overall trend
in  the  financial  markets  over  the  past  several  months  clearly  indicates  that  market  participants
have a cautious outlook on the economy, as shown by the slowdown in growth or even a decline
in stock prices since autumn 1996, and by the concurrent decline in long-term interest rates.
Cautiousness on the part of the market participants reflects the fact that they  are
strongly aware of the following three issues: (1) effects of the anticipated fiscal tightening in the
next  fiscal  year;  (2)  structural  adjustment  pressures  facing  Japanese 
industry;  and
(3) balance-sheet  adjustment  of  firms  and  the  nonperforming-  loan  problem  of  financial
institutions, both of which are burdens created by the economic “bubble” and its burst.
BIS Review   35/1997
- 3 -
Before  explaining  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  views  on  these  issues,  I  would  like  to
emphasize that my talk today is not intended to draw specific conclusions or to assess the levels
of stock prices and interest rates. This requires careful analysis and is an issue on which a central
bank governor should refrain from comment. Rather, I would like to give you an idea of how the
Bank examines these issues.
B. Effects of Fiscal Tightening
The first issue that I would like to discuss is the influence of fiscal tightening --
such as reduction in public-sector investment, rise in the consumption tax rate, and termination
of special tax reduction -- on the economy for the next fiscal year.
Public-sector investment began to decline in autumn 1996, after having continued
to  expand  until  mid-1996  as  a  result  of  the  economic  measures  introduced  in  autumn  1995.
Although  there  may  be  a  slight  temporary  increase  in  public-sector  investment  reflecting  the
implementation  of  the  supplementary  budget  for  the  current  fiscal  year,  the  declining  trend  is
expected to continue for some time. In addition, an increase in the consumption tax rate and the
termination of the special tax reduction is scheduled for fiscal 1997.
It  is  important  to  mention  here  that  the  influence  of  fiscal  tightening  on  the
economy  may  vary  significantly  depending  on  the  prevailing  economic  conditions,  such  as
corporate  profits  and  employment  income  development,  as  well  as  on  the  confidence  that  the
corporate  and  household  sectors  have  in  the  economy.  Furthermore,  this  influence  can  differ
substantially  depending  on  how  the  public’s  expectations  of  the  future  economy  change  in
response to reduced fiscal expenditures and tax increases, and how market interest rates respond
to any reduction in the budget deficit.
The effects on the economy of a reduction of public-sector investment or a budget
deficit  have  been  debated  by  academics.  The  simplest  Keynesian  view  is  that  reduced
public-sector investment cumulatively acts to restrain private demand through multiplier effects.
Some argue that a decrease in the budget deficit will lower interest rates and the yen’s foreign
exchange  value,  thus  offsetting  the  negative  effects  on  the  economy.  Some  even  hold  that
because  the  public  behave  rationally  with  anticipation  of  future  tax  increases  or  reductions,
neither a decrease nor an increase in the budget deficit will have any effect on the economy.
The influence of a reduced budget deficit on the economy may thus be complex
and diverse, once the movement of market interest rates, foreign exchange rates, and the public’s
expectations are taken into account. It is natural to assume that in reality, the impact of reduced
fiscal expenditures on the economy cannot be denied, although the influence is unlikely to reach
the extent estimated by simply multiplying the nominal value of the reduction by a multiplier.
To underline the argument I just made, the economic  mechanism  does  not  work
on the basis of simple addition and subtraction, but rather involves dynamic interactions of many
factors which incorporates the public’s expectations. After all, the effects of fiscal tightening are
an empirical issue for which conclusions cannot be reached in advance, and therefore, it is very
difficult  to  accurately  predict  future  developments  at  this  stage.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  it  is
necessary to view carefully the effects of fiscal tightening on the economy as a whole.
BIS Review   35/1997
C. Progress in the Structural Adjustment of Industries
- 4 -
Let me now turn to the next issue of the structural adjustment of industries, which
is a medium- to long-term issue for the Japanese economy.
One of the changes in the environment surrounding the Japanese economy in the
past  several  years  has  been  that  a  wider  range  of  industries  have  come  to  face  severe
international  competition  due  to  the  increasing  supply  capacity  of  other  East  Asian  countries.
The weakening of international competitiveness made it difficult for some industries and firms
to  continue  domestic  production  of  some  of  their  conventional  products.  This  forced  them  to
relocate their production bases overseas while shifting their domestic production to new products
for which they have a comparative advantage.
This  is  not  the  first  time  that  the  Japanese  economy  has  faced  structural
adjustment pressures. In fact, it successfully confronted the challenge several times in the past.
However, the adjustment this time has inevitably involved greater pains than in the past, due to
the after-effects of the bursting of the economic “bubble.”
Furthermore,  as  relocation  overseas  took  place  prior  to  a  shift  to  new  products,
structural adjustment significantly constrained domestic production and, as a  result,  investment
and  employment  were  also  limited.  The  negative  impact  was  particularly  substantial  for  the
smaller firms, as many of them manufactured labor-intensive products and were subcontractors
to the large firms which relocated their production bases overseas.
The key factors we should keep in mind in projecting future developments in the
Japanese  economy  are  therefore  the  progress  in  the  structural  adjustment  of  industries,  that  is,
the emergence of new products or industries that will promote future economic growth.
A careful look at individual industries reveals some positive signs. In production,
for  example,  an  increasing  number  of  firms  and  industries  are  shifting  to  goods  with
international  competitiveness.  More  specifically,  the  production  of  producer  goods  and  capital
goods  that  are  capital-intensive  and  technology-intensive  has  been  increasing  while  the
production  of  labor-intensive  consumer  goods  has  been  declining.  These  changes  are  also
reflected  in  imports  and  exports  of  goods.  Recently,  exports  of  consumer  goods,  mainly
household electric appliances such as television sets and radios, have been decreasing while their
imports  have  been  increasing,  and  exports  of  capital  goods  and  parts  such  as  electronic
machinery and automobile parts have been increasing significantly.
Notable as these changes may be, one cannot simply add up these microeconomic
developments to obtain a comprehensive evaluation of how successfully the Japanese economy
as  a  whole  is  undergoing  the  structural  adjustment  of  industries.  Rather,  the  progress  in
structural adjustment should be reflected most evidently in the revitalization of forward-looking
business  activity.  If  this  were  the  case,  the  stance  taken  by  firms  toward  fixed  investment  and
employment should provide a measure of the progress in macroeconomic structural adjustment.
In this respect, business fixed investment by large firms began to recover in fiscal
1995 well ahead of small and medium-sized firms. Investment by smaller firms, which had been
more susceptible to structural adjustment pressures, has also finally  begun  to  show  a  recovery.
Although the recovery is extremely moderate, this resumption of investment by smaller firms, an
activity  that  lays  the  foundation  for  the  future,  may  be  considered  as  evidence  of  progress  in
BIS Review   35/1997
- 5 -
structural  adjustment  as  it  indicates  that  these  firms  are  starting  to  have  a  clear  idea  about  the
new direction of their business.
Progress  is  also  reflected  in  the  business  fixed  investment  of  various  industries.
Namely, investment has been increasing in capital- and production-goods related sectors, where
high  growth  in  production  has  been  recorded.  There  has  also  been  a  rapid  expansion  of
investment  in  a  new  industry  of  mobile  telecommunications.  Business  fixed  investment  for
development of new products and new businesses also seems to be increasing gradually.
With regard to employment, structural adjustment pressures are persistent in some
indicators such as the high unemployment rate. However, based on  the  most  recent  changes  in
employment  indicators  and  the  microeconomic  information  on  firms,  labor  market  conditions
are seen to be improving gradually, indicating steady progress in industrial restructuring.
For example, recent numbers of new job offers are significantly higher than those
in the previous year. Business surveys indicate that an increasing number of firms plan, for the
first time in many years, to increase the number of new graduates hired in the next fiscal year.
Results  of  the  November  TANKAN  also  indicate  that  more  than  half  of  the  smaller  firms
surveyed  feel  that  they  are  shorthanded.  Furthermore,  labor  market  conditions  in  each  sector
indicate that employment has decreased significantly in sectors where imports have been making
inroads  --  such  as  the  electrical  machinery  and  textiles  industries  --  while  employment  has
increased in new sectors such as telecommunications. These changes indicate a gradual shift of
labor between sectors.
In  sum,  although  pressures  for  the  structural  adjustment  of  industries  remain,  it
can  be  said  that  structural  adjustment  has  progressed  significantly  as  reflected  in  the  recent
recovery in business fixed investment and employment.
D. Balance-Sheet Adjustment
The third issue to be discussed is that of balance-sheet adjustment. There are two
aspects  to  this  issue:  the  improvement  of  the  financial  condition  of  firms  and  the  disposal  of
nonperforming loans of financial institutions.
With  regard  to  the  balance-sheet  adjustment  of  Japanese  firms,  there  have  been
serious  efforts  by  firms  to  reduce  their  liabilities  since  the  bursting  of  the  economic  “bubble.”
Despite these efforts, the mismatch between assets and liabilities expanded in many sectors until
1994 or 1995 due to the continued decline in real estate prices. While the decline in asset prices
has  slowed  since  1995,  liabilities  have  decreased  owing  to  the  recovery  in  corporate  profits
which followed firms’ restructuring efforts and lower interest rates.
Several indicators, such as the ratio of long-term debts to assets at market value,
reveal  that  balance-sheet  adjustment  pressures  are  persistent.  In  particular,  small  and
medium-sized firms still need to make substantial efforts to complete their adjustment. As I have
just mentioned, however, the improvement of firms’ balance sheets has doubtlessly been making
moderate  but  steady  progress  in  general,  and  thus,  constraints  imposed  by  the  adjustment
pressures on economic recovery should continue to be gradually alleviated.
Regarding  the  nonperforming-loan  problem  of  financial  institutions,  the  total
amount of nonperforming loans of the financial institutions was approximately 29 trillion yen as
of the end of September 1996, according to  the  data  published  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  Of
BIS Review   35/1997
- 6 -
this total, the estimated amount of problem loans to be disposed of, not including those already
covered by collateral and provisions, is estimated at approximately 7 trillion yen. Both of these
figures  have  decreased  by  approximately  10  trillion  yen  from  the  previous  year,  and  thus,  in
general, it can be said that steady progress has been made in solving this particular problem.
The  amount  of  nonperforming  loans  that  need  to  be  disposed  of,  however,
remains  large.  The  Bank  of  Japan  will  continue  to  strongly  encourage  financial  institutions  to
dispose  of  the  remaining  nonperforming  loans  expeditiously  and  to  exert  themselves  to  the
utmost to (1) restore their capital bases which have been impaired in the process of disposing of
nonperforming  loans;  (2)  strengthen  their  profitability  through  restructuring;  and  (3)  enhance
their internal risk management.
In  relation  to  the  economy,  an  issue  of  concern  is  whether  the  decline  in  the
intermediary  functions  of  those  financial  institutions  burdened  with  nonperforming  loans  is
constraining  economic  recovery.  While  it  may  certainly  be  true  that  financial  institutions  have
imposed  stricter  screening  criteria  for  lending  following  the  experiences  of  the  economic
“bubble” period, most financial institutions now maintain a policy of actively increasing loans of
reliable quality while, or rather for the purpose of, disposing of nonperforming loans. In fact, the
lending attitude of financial institutions, as seen from the point of view of the firms, has become
less severe and lending rates have stayed at a historically low level. It is, therefore, difficult to
assume that the severer lending attitude of the financial institutions is hampering the recovery in
business fixed investment.
IV. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Management
A. Economic Outlook
I  have  so  far  discussed  such  issues  as  the  effects  of  fiscal  tightening  and  the
current situation of structural adjustment, both considered to be the major factors contributing to
the  cautious  economic  outlook  in  financial  markets.  Among  these,  developments  of  structural
adjustment may be summarized as follows: (1) both the structural adjustment of industries  and
balance-sheet  adjustment  are  still  in  progress  and  therefore  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  is
likely to remain  moderate  for  some  time;  (2)  however,  as  industrial  restructuring  and  balance-
sheet  adjustment  are  making  steady  progress,  albeit  moderate,  its  constraining  effects  on
economic recovery are likely to gradually ease.
Therefore,  the  most  important  issue  in  considering  the  economic  outlook  is
whether  the  increase  in  private  demand  can  overcome  the  downward  pressures  from  fiscal
tightening  and  whether  it  is  possible,  as  a  result,  to  lead  the  economy  on  to  a  path  of  self-
sustained recovery.
As I mentioned earlier, economic recovery has been recently gaining strength. If
this recovery is analyzed in terms of the level of economic activity, namely the output gap, it can
be  noted  that  capacity  utilization  has  been  rising  steadily  reflecting  the  recent  recovery  in
production,  and  has  recovered  to  the  same  level  as  that  of  four  years  ago.  Furthermore,  the
results  of  the  November  TANKAN  indicated  that  the  excessive  production  capacity  and
employment perceived by surveyed firms have gradually fallen to the same level as in 1987, at
which  time  the  economy  was  recovering  from  the  recession  caused  by  the  appreciation  of  the
yen. While the profit-to-sales ratio of smaller firms has not yet recovered to the average level of
the past, the ratio of large firms has already reached a relatively  high  level.  Judging  overall,  it
BIS Review   35/1997
- 7 -
can  be  said  that  the  current  level  of  economic  activity  in  Japan  is  approaching  the  same  point
where the strength of the recovery began to firm in past business cycles.
This level of economic activity will provide a basis for the virtuous circle of the
economy, one that is led by expanded private demand, to gain further strength. In other words, if
the  recent  economic  recovery  continues  for  some  time,  increased  production  will  further
improve corporate profits and employment income, which in turn are likely to lead to increases
in  business  fixed  investment  and  personal  consumption.  If  this  virtuous  circle  gains  stronger
momentum, there  will  be  a  higher  possibility  of  the  strengthened  virtuous  circle  absorbing  the
downward pressures from prospective fiscal tightening.
A  temporary  slowdown  in  economic  recovery  seems  inevitable  as  downward
pressures  from  fiscal  tightening  will  be  strong  during  the  first  half  of  fiscal  1997  and  as  a
reaction to the increase in  demand  ahead  of  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate  scheduled  for
April 1997 is expected. However, the recovery trend of the economy is likely to be sustained on
account of the strengthening recovery in private demand.
I  indicated  earlier,  however,  that  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  effects  of  fiscal
tightening carefully. Business sentiment and consumer confidence are also becoming important
factors for a further increase in private demand. The corporate and household sectors will plan
their activities and put them into action in the form of production, investment, and consumption,
taking  into  account  the  fiscal  1997  budget  and  the  actual  placement  of  public  work  orders.
Therefore,  in  predicting  future  economic  developments,  it  is  important  to  closely  examine
various  macro-  and  micro-economic  data  and  not  only  the  economic  indicators  that  will  be
released in the future, but also firms’ business plans and signals sent by financial markets.
Meanwhile, it is expected that prices will cease to decline due firstly to the rise in
import prices reflecting the yen’s depreciation and higher crude oil prices,  and  secondly  to  the
improvement  in  domestic  supply  and  demand  conditions.  However,  when  considering  the  fact
that the improvement in supply and demand conditions is expected to be moderate for now and
that  the  pressures  of  global  competition  will  persist,  there  is  only  a  limited  possibility  that
domestic prices will follow a clear  upward  trend.  Yet,  as  foreign  exchange  rates  have  recently
shown  rather  rapid  movements,  it  is  necessary  to  cautiously  monitor  the  effects  of  such  a
development on the domestic economy.
While refraining from making any comments on the recent foreign exchange rate
levels and movements, the Bank’s fundamental thinking is that it is desirable for exchange rates
to  be  stable  and  determined  in  accordance  with  the  real  economic  conditions  of  each  country.
Based on this thinking, the Bank of Japan  will  continue  to  carefully  monitor  foreign  exchange
rate developments and their effects on the Japanese economy.
B. Monetary Policy Management
In the management of current monetary policy, the Bank of Japan will continue to
monitor  economic  developments  closely,  placing  emphasis  on  further  strengthening  the
foundation of an economic recovery.
In April 1997, the consumption tax rate will be raised from 3 percent to 5 percent.
Therefore, I would also like to discuss how the Bank of Japan views the possible effects of this
tax rate rise on prices, in the context of managing monetary policy. Specifically, the issue here is
BIS Review   35/1997
- 8 -
what monetary policy measures should be taken in light of the price hikes due to the rise in the
tax rate.
I  would  first  like  to  point  out  that  the  price  hikes  caused  by  the  rise  in  the
consumption  tax  rate  is  different  in  nature  from  the  ordinary  rise  in  prices,  that  is  inflation.
Generally,  inflation  is  generated  in  the  mechanism  of  economic  cycles  as  a  result  of,  for
example, tightening of supply and demand conditions for labor or products, or excessive supply
of money. In turn, inflation affects economic activity in various ways.
In contrast, price hikes due to a rise in the consumption tax rate are equivalent to
a  once  only  rewriting  of  all  the  old  price  tags  on  April  1.  There  are  no  relevant  changes  in
economic activity, such as a tightening of supply and demand conditions, an increase in wages,
or excessive money supply. Therefore, it would not be appropriate to formulate monetary policy
against such superficial changes in prices.
Although this represents the fundamental thinking of the Bank, it does not mean
that the central bank is indifferent to the rise in the consumption tax rate. If the rise triggers price
hikes taking advantage of the tax rate rise, or if overall inflationary expectations are heightened,
then the risk of a genuine inflation will arise. In particular, this risk cannot be disregarded when
the supply and demand conditions for products are fairly tight. Therefore, it is necessary to pay
attention  to  the  inflationary  expectations  and  possible  over-reactions  caused  by  the  rise  in  the
consumption tax rate rather than paying attention to the previously-mentioned superficial hikes
in prices.
In summary, in order to promote a smooth structural adjustment, to bring about a
strengthening  of  the  economic  recovery,  and  to  encourage  the  renewed  development  of  the
Japanese  economy,  the  implementation  of  a  drastic  structural  reform,  including  effective
deregulation,  is  indispensable.  In  this  respect,  I  hope  that  the  government  will  continue  to
exercise strong leadership and earnest efforts will continue to be made by various parties.
V. Financial System Reform and Revision of the Bank of Japan Law
A. Financial System Reform
I would like to use the remaining time to discuss financial system reform and the
revision of the Bank of Japan Law.
The  important  challenge  for  Japan  today  is  to  vigorously  promote  structural
reform as discussed above, and this also applies to the reform of the financial markets and of the
financial system.
Financial markets worldwide have experienced significant changes in recent years
amid  rapid  financial  and  economic  globalization  and  technological  innovation.  New  financial
instruments  such  as  derivatives  and  securitized  products  have  been  developed  in  succession  to
provide firms and households with diverse means of risk-hedging, investment, and financing. At
the same time, profit opportunities for financial institutions have expanded in various fields.
It seems that it is now time for the market participants to select the market, rather
than the markets selecting the participants. Countries are vying with each other to reform  their
financial  markets,  based  on  a  growing  worldwide  perception  that  the  financial  services  sector
BIS Review   35/1997
- 9 -
will  show  rapid  growth  and  create  numerous  employment  opportunities  into  the  twenty-first
century. Each country is thus striving to make their own markets attractive to participants.
Japan,  too,  has  engaged  in  the  review  of  regulations  and  systems  to  promote
financial deregulation. However, reform has been gradual and financial institutions have tended
to deal with it cautiously due to the severe challenge they have had to face after the bursting of
the economic “bubble.” As a result, the Tokyo market has fallen far behind the New York and
London  markets  in  terms  of  its  ability  to  develop  financial  instruments  that  incorporate  new
techniques.
In  recognition  of  this,  Prime  Minister  Hashimoto  proposed  the  “Big  Bang”
deregulation package for Japan. I understand that the purpose of this financial reform package is
to  revitalize  the  Tokyo  market  as  a  free  and  active  global  market.  The  Bank  believes  that  the
aims of this reform package are most appropriate and as a central bank, intends to contribute to
the achievement of its goals.
In carrying out the reform, it is especially important that the three basic principles
of freedom, fairness, and globalization are strictly followed, and  that  the  pace  of  the  reform  is
not relaxed. The “Big Bang” package aims to realize and complete all reforms by the year 2001,
immediately  implementing  any  measures  on  which  study  has  been  concluded.  However,  this
should not mean that the process of market reform become unduly gradual or slow, as this may
jeopardize  the  consistency  of  the  reform,  or  result  in  only  an  easier  part  of  the  reform  being
implemented.
For example, one deregulation measure included in the “Big Bang” package and
highly valued by the Bank is the fundamental revision of the Foreign Exchange Control Law. If
deregulation  in  other  areas  proceeds  too  slowly,  the  effects  of  the  new  Foreign  Exchange
Control Law might encourage financial transactions to shift to overseas markets and might then
lead to the hollowing-out of the Tokyo market. In order to avoid such a turn of events, it is most
important  to  bring  about  concrete  measures  within  the  shortest  possible  time  to  maintain  the
coherence of the deregulation as a whole.
B. Revision of the Bank of Japan Law
Lastly, I would like to discuss the revision of the Bank of Japan Law.
The revision of the Bank of Japan Law is now in the final stage of deliberation by
the  Financial  System  Research  Council,  an  advisory  committee  to  the  Minister  of  Finance,
following discussions last year by the Central Bank Study Group, an advisory panel to the Prime
Minister.
The Bank has made public its views on the Bank of Japan Law revision at a press
conference held at the end of 1996 and on  other  occasions.  To  summarize,  (1)  the  Bank  holds
that  the  basic  views  stated  by  the  Central  Bank  Study  Group  --  that  is,  ensuring  central  bank
independence  and  enhancing  transparency  --  should  be  clearly  stated  in  the  law;  and  (2)  the
Bank  believes  that  further  deliberations  should  be  conducted  on  several  issues  regarding  the
relationship  between  the  government  and  the  central  bank,  on  which  the  Central  Bank  Study
Group was unable to reach conclusions, so as to duly reflect the two concepts of independence
and transparency.
BIS Review   35/1997
- 10 -
Fortunately, the Bank’s views appear to be adequately shared by the members of
the Financial System Research Council. I would therefore like to discuss today the significance
of the revision of the Bank of Japan Law to the Japanese economy as a whole.
First, this revision of the central bank system is a response to the global trend of
changes,  including  financial  and  economic  globalization  and  marketization,  which  have  been
driven by progress in financial innovation.
On  various  occasions  in  the  past,  I  have  discussed  how  in  the  new  financial
environment, markets around the world respond instantaneously to various information and they
also  respond  to  changes  in  the  expectations  of  market  participants  as  the  participants  process
such information. The “Big Bang” package is likely to promote this tendency through increased
efficiency  and  globalization  of  the  markets.  Under  such  circumstances,  if  the  role  and
responsibility of the central bank in charge of monetary policy management are not made clear,
or  if  both  domestic  and  overseas  understanding  of  the  central  bank’s  monetary  policy
management  is  insufficient,  a  country’s  monetary  policy  intentions  may  not  permeate
sufficiently throughout the market. In addition, irrelevant information may disrupt the markets.
The idea of entrusting the responsibility of ensuring price stability with the central
bank, an establishment detached from short-term interests, is a wisdom acquired from the history
of  battles  against  inflation.  The  recent  strengthening  of  central  bank  independence  and  the
growing demand for transparency of monetary policy management around the world reflect the
stronger emphasis on the status and  responsibility  of  central  banks  to  meet  the  new  challenges
presented by the global changes in the financial markets.
Second, in order for the financial markets or the financial system of a country to
function  efficiently  and  stably,  appropriate  policy  and  operational  management  by  the  central
bank, which rests at the core of the financial system, is indispensable.
The  Japanese  financial  system  is  a  mechanism  for  intermediating  savings  and
investments by the efficient allocation of funds by means of a currency called the “yen.” In order
for  this  mechanism  to  function  properly,  (1)  the  value  of  money  --  in  other  words,  domestic
prices -- must be stable; (2) the mechanism for settling transactions by means of money must be
efficient and  convenient;  and  (3)  private  financial  institutions,  as  the  members  of  the  financial
system, as well as the central bank must be sound and reliable.
The  maintenance  of  these  three  conditions  --  that  is,  price  stability,  stable
operations of the payment and settlement systems,  and  the  resulting  soundness  of  the  financial
system -- is the important responsibility of the central bank, an institution which has a primary
role in the issuance and circulation of the “yen.” The central bank  system  is  thus  an  important
component of the financial system infrastructure of Japan.
Therefore,  in  order  to  win  domestic  and  overseas  confidence  in  the  Japanese
financial  markets  and  to  maintain  and  improve  the  international  competitiveness  of  these
markets,  it  is  essential  that  the  central  bank  system  is  able  to  win  domestic  and  overseas
confidence, and that the market environment is improved through such efforts as the “Big Bang”
reform package.
Third, many of the issues raised regarding the revision of the Bank of Japan Law
can also be applied to economic structural reform and to administrative reform in Japan.
BIS Review   35/1997
- 11 -
The  Bank  of  Japan  has  urged  that  (1)  its  organizational  objectives  and  roles  be
clarified; and (2) the management of policy and operations be founded on  a  mechanism  which
allows the market participants and other third parties to monitor ex post facto whether the Bank
is discharging its responsibility appropriately, rather  than  be  part  of  a  mechanism  that  attaches
importance to advance coordination with the government.
This  argument  applies  not  only  to  the  central  bank.  In  fact,  it  may  be  applied
generally to the question of what the economic and financial systems should be or what the role
of government administration should take to meet the challenges of a new era.
The  Japanese  economy  today  is  required  to  function  within  a  mechanism  under
which  any  institution  is  responsible  for  its  own  course  of  action  and  then  the  market  and  the
public examine and evaluate the actions taken, instead of within a system governed by advance
examination based on administrative supervision and regulations.
Such  reforms  will  fundamentally  change  the  economic  and  social  structures  of
Japan, making them more consistent with global standards. The old methodology of carrying out
reforms  within  the  conventional  framework  and  ways  of  thinking  must  be  changed.  It  is
necessary  to  consider  how  the  distinctive  systems  and  ways  of  thinking  in  Japan  could  be
changed from a perspective of global standards.
The issue of the revision of the Bank of Japan Law has drawn attention overseas
along with the “Big Bang” package of financial reforms. This is because the revision of the Law
is regarded as a test case of whether or not Japan can change itself.
To  repeat  my  earlier  point,  the  Bank  of  Japan  strongly  hopes  that  the  two
concepts  put  forward  by  the  Central  Bank  Study  Group  --  that  is,  ensuring  central  bank
independence  and  enhancing  transparency  --  will  be  clearly  reflected  in  the  revised  Bank  of
Japan Law. I wish to make clear that the revision of the Law is not an issue that solely concerns
the Bank of Japan, the monetary authorities, and the financial community, but is an issue closely
related to the future course of the Japanese economy as a whole.
It is very important for the Bank of Japan to prove its ability to reform itself and
to win domestic and overseas confidence through constant efforts toward appropriate policy and
operational  management.  As  part  of  such  efforts,  the  Bank  last  year  announced  plans  for  the
revision of policy and operational management, including the holding of regular meetings of the
Policy  Board  for  monetary  policy  decisions  and  the  disclosure  of  the  summary  of  those
meetings.  We  at  the  Bank  are  determined  to  further  promote  vigorously  institutional  and
operational reform.
I would like to conclude by asking for your continued understanding and support.
I am most grateful for the kind attention you have given me today.
BIS Review   35/1997
