Mr.  Rangarajan  examines  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  and  price
stability in relation to the economy of India   Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of
India,  Mr.  C.  Rangarajan,  at  the  Second  Conference  of  the  Econometric  Society’s  Regional
Chapter for India and South Asia in Delhi on 28/12/96.
1.
It gives me indeed very great pleasure to be in your midst this morning.  It
is  indeed  very  gratifying  to  note  that  the  Second  Conference  of  the  Econometric  Society’s
Regional Chapter for India and South East Asia is being held in Delhi.
2.
Econometrics  as  a  discipline  has  come  a  long  way.    Enriched  by  the
developments both in mathematical economics  and  statistical  methods,  econometrics  has  today
become an  indispensable  tool  to  all  practitioners.  Without  a  numerical  evaluation  of  economic
magnitudes,  economic  theory  would  have  been  of  little  use  in  economic  policy.    The  original
motto of Cowles Foundation was ‘Science is measurement’.  It used to be said that in economics
the  tendency  of  theory  to  lag  behind  observations  seemed  to  be  endemic.  We  have  definitely
moved away from that situation.  While alternative theories  to  explain  a  set  of  phenomena  are
not  necessarily  a  weakness  and  may  even  be  regarded  as  a  sign  of  vitality,  the  continued
co-existence  of  alternative  theories  over  a  substantial  period  of  time  without  being  able  to
discriminate among them can result in the loss of credibility in the discipline itself. This in part
is the present status of economics.  The future scope of econometrics is thus immense.
3.
I would like to take this opportunity given to me this morning to raise one
issue in monetary policy that still remains contentious despite overwhelming agreement among
policy makers in industrially advanced countries.  The issue relates to the objective of monetary
policy.    The  question  is:  What  should  be  the  objective  or  objectives  of  monetary  policy  and
whether in the Indian context, maintenance of price stability should be the dominant objective of
monetary policy?
4.
The  issue  of  objective  has  become  important  because  of  the  need  to
provide  clear  guidance  to  monetary  policy  makers.  Indeed  this  aspect  has  assumed  added
significance  in  the  context  of  the  increasing  stress  on  autonomy  of  central  banks.    While
autonomy  has  to  go  with  accountability,  accountability  itself  requires  a  clear  enunciation  of
goals.
5.
Monetary  policy  has  now  moved  to  the  centre  stage  of  economic
policy-making the world over. In the 1930s and in the first two decades after the Second World
War, monetary policy was relegated to the background.  The ascendancy of fiscal policy during
this  period  was  due  in  part  to  the  depression  of  the  1930s,  and  the  process  of  reconstruction
immediately after the Second World War and the acceptance of the Keynesian dictum that fiscal
action was necessary to prevent deficiency in the aggregate demand.  However,  the  1970s  saw
the emergence of a combination of high inflation and low growth - ‘stagnation’ as it came to be
called  -  and  the  standard  Keynesian  analysis  was  hard  put  to  explain  that  phenomenon.
Consequently, monetary policy re-emerged as an instrument of economic policy particularly in
the fight against inflation. Issues relating to the conduct of monetary policy came to the forefront
of  policy  debates  in  the  1980s.    The  relative  importance  of  growth  and  price  stability  as  the
objective of monetary  policy  as  well  as  the  appropriate  intermediate  target  of  monetary  policy
became the focus of attention. Over the years, a consensus has emerged among the industrially
advanced  countries  that  the  dominant  objective  of  monetary  policy  should  be  price  stability.
Incorporation of this objective in the Maastrischt Treaty is indeed a reflection of this consensus.
Differences  however,  exist  among  central  banks  even  in  industrially  advanced  countries  as
regards  the  appropriate  intermediate  target.    While  some  central  banks  consider  monetary
BIS Review   8/1997
- 2 -
aggregates  and  therefore  monetary  targeting  as  operationally  meaningful,  some  others  focus
exclusively  on  interest  rate  even  though  the  inter-relationship  between  the  two  targets  is  well
recognised.
6.
A  similar  trend  regarding  monetary  policy  is  discernible  in  developing
economies  as  well.  Much  of  the  early  literature  on  development  economics  focused  on  real
factors  such  as  savings,  investment  and  technology  as  main  springs  of  growth.  Very  little
attention was paid to the financial system as a contributory factor to economic growth.  In fact,
many  writers  felt  that  inflation  was  endemic  in  the  process  of  economic  growth  and  it  was
accordingly  treated  more  as  a  consequence  of  structural  imbalance  than  as  a  monetary
phenomenon.    However,  with  the  accumulated  evidence,  it  became    clear  that  any  process  of
economic  growth  in  which  monetary  expansion  was  disregarded  also  led  to  inflationary
pressures  with  a  consequent  impact  on  economic  growth.  Accordingly,  importance  of  price
stability and therefore the need to use monetary policy for that purpose also assumed importance
in developing economies. Nonetheless, the debate on the extent  to  which  price  stability  should
be deemed to be the over-riding objective of monetary policy in such economies continues.
7.
Monetary  policy  is  an  arm  of  economic  policy  and  in  that  sense,  the
objectives of monetary  policy  are  no  different  from  the  overall  objectives  of  economic  policy.
The broad objectives of monetary policy in India have been
a) 
b) 
to  regulate  monetary  expansion  so  as  to  maintain  a  reasonable  degree  of  price
stability; and
to ensure adequate expansion in credit to assist economic growth.
The  emphasis  between  the  two  objectives  has  changed  from  year  to  year
depending upon the conditions prevailing in that and the previous year.
8.
The  question  of  a  dominant  objective  arises  essentially  in  view  of  the
multiplicity  of  objectives  and  the  inherent  conflict  among  such  objectives.  Jan  Tinbergen  had
argued decades ago that it was necessary to have at least one instrument for each target.  In this
regard,  it  must  be  recognised  that  certain  objectives  are  better  suited  or  more  easily  achieved
with certain instruments than with others. This ‘assignment rule’ favours monetary policy as the
most appropriate instrument to achieve the objective of price stability.
9. 
The crucial question that arises is whether the pursuit of the objective  of
price  stability  by  monetary  authorities  undermines  the  ability  of  the  economy  to  attain  and
sustain higher growth. A great deal of research effort has been spent on the examination of the
trade-off between economic growth and price stability.
10.
The  well  known  Phillips  curve  showed  that  there  was  an  inverse
relationship  between  rate  of  change  in  wage  rate  and  unemployment  rate  suggesting  thereby  a
trade-off  between  inflation  and  unemployment.  The  original  article  of  Prof.  Phillips  was
published in 1958. The Phillips curve relationship has subsequently been challenged both from
theoretical and empirical standpoints.  The downward slope of the curve arises basically because
of the presence of money illusion and expected inflation deviating from actual inflation.
At  present  the  controversy  is  centred  around  the  possible  short-run  and
long-run ‘trade-off’ between inflation and unemployment.  This distinction primarily stems from
11.
BIS Review   8/1997
- 3 -
the  assumption  of  ‘error-learning’  process  in  the  determination  of  inflationary  expectations  -
workers  do  have  an  anticipation  on  the  inflation,  but  because  they  judge  the  inflation
performance  from  the  past  data,  the  adjustment  between  the  expected  and  actual  inflation  is
slow.  This  implies  that  in  the  short-run,  nominal  wage  rise  will  not  fully  absorb  the  actual
inflation, and as such, it is argued, there is scope for reducing unemployment through inflation.
As  people  adjust  their  expectations  of  inflation,  the  short-run  Phillips  curve  shifts  upward  and
the unemployment rate returns towards its ‘natural’ level.  As the expected inflation catches up
with actual inflation, the Phillips curve becomes vertical, denying thereby a ‘trade-off’ between
inflation and unemployment in the long run. The Phillips curve thus provides at best a temporary
trade-off  between  inflation  and  unemployment  when  the  economy  is  adjusting  to  shocks  to
aggregate demand and as long as expected inflation is lower than actual inflation. The long-run
Phillips curve becomes almost vertical at the natural rate of unemployment.
12.
Of  course,  there  is  a  possibility  of  lengthening  the  short-run  ‘trade-offs’
indefinitely, since inflation surprises in each period can elongate the long-run perpetually. But,
in that case the ‘trade-offs’ will become sharper in  each  successive  period.    In  other  words,  to
maintain the unemployment  below  the  ‘natural’  rate,  policy  authorities  will  have  to  inflate  the
economy at higher rates in each successive period.  This has a major policy implication even if
the  economy  does  not  operate  on  the  long-run  vertical  Phillips  curve.    Under  the  ‘rational
expectations  hypothesis’,  as  there  are  no  deviations  between  ‘actual’,  and  ‘expected’  inflation,
both in the short-run and long-run, Phillips curves are treated as being vertical with no trade-off
between inflation and unemployment.
13.
Another policy related question is the shape of the short-run Phillips curve
itself. In the real world wages and prices remain sticky, as employment contracts are fairly long
and there is also a cost in changing the individual prices too often, or renegotiating wages each
time after a price rise. As argued by Fischer (1994), the nature of stickiness in wages and prices
could be different in different economies and this could also be a function of the inflation history
of  the  country  concerned.    Countries  with  high  inflation  rates  tend  to  find  themselves  on  the
steeper portion of the short-run Phillips curve than low inflation countries which are more likely
to be on the flatter side. Therefore, ‘trade-off’ between price stability and employment or output
even  when  it  does  exist,  is  sharper  for  countries  with  relatively  high  inflation  rates  than  those
with low inflation rates.
14.
The case of price stability as the objective of monetary policy rests on the
fact that volatility in prices creates uncertainty in decision making. Rising prices affect savings
adversely  while  making  speculative  investments  more  attractive.  The  most 
important
contribution of the financial system to an economy is its ability to augment savings and allocate
resources more efficiently.  A regime of rising prices vitiates  the  atmosphere  for  promotion  of
savings and allocation of investment.  Apart from all of these, there is also a social dimension.
Inflation affects adversely those who have no hedges against inflation  and  that  includes  all  the
poorer sections of the community. Of course, a critical question in this context is at what level of
inflation the adverse consequences begin to set in.
15.
Inflation affects fiscal balance in several ways.  It adversely affects fiscal
deficit  when  elasticity  of  expenditure  to  inflation  is  higher  than  that  of  revenue.    A  more
significant  impact  of  inflation  arises  from  its  effect  on  interest  rate  and  the  dynamic
sustainability  of  the  fiscal  situation.    High  rates  of  inflation  signal  weak  resolve  to  control
inflation  and  imply  higher  expected  inflation  in  future.    This  gives  rise  to  upward  rigidity  in
nominal  interest  and  leads  to  high  debt  service  burden  on  the  budget,  thus  reducing  the
manoeuvrability of fiscal management.
BIS Review   8/1997
- 4 -
16.
It  is  well  recognised  that  adverse  implications  of  inflation  are  higher  at
high  rates  of  inflation,  while  a  moderate  inflation  rate  could  be  manageable  without  implying
severe  costs.    International  evidence  suggests  that  the  costs  of  uncertainty  tend  to  rise  in  a
non-linear  fashion  with  inflation  rate  exceeding  a  threshold.    One  important  caveat  in
interpreting the threshold of inflation rate beyond which costs exceed benefit is the provision of
inflation  protection  measures  available  in  the  economy,  which  tends  to  moderate  the  adverse
implications to some extent.  Countries with a moderate inflation rate but inadequate indexation
provision  may  show  a  higher  degree  of  sensitivity  to  inflation,  than  those  with  low  inflation.
Most of the industrialised countries in the recent years have moved into an inflation rate ranging
between  two  to  three  per  cent.    Among  the  developing  countries,  some  of  the  fast  growing
East-Asian  economies  have  in  recent  years  not  only  demonstrated  low  inflation  rates  ranging
between three to five per cent, but the growth rate at these inflation rates has been fairly high at
around eight per cent.
17.
Empirical  evidence  on  the  relationship  between  the  inflation  and  growth
in  cross-country  frameworks  is  somewhat  inconclusive  because  such  studies  include  countries
with inflation rate of as low as one to two per cent as well as countries with inflation rates going
beyond  200  and  300  per  cent.  While  a  number  of  studies  have  concluded  that  the  negative
impact of inflation on growth is high at high rates of inflation, there is no consensus about the
threshold  inflation  rate  beyond  which  the  negative  impact  becomes  pronounced.    A  study  by
Bruno indicated that growth rates declined steeply as the inflation rate went beyond 25 per cent.
Another  study  also  based  on  cross  section  of  countries  reported  that  the  negative  effect  of
inflation was very pronounced and powerful at inflation rates exceeding eight per cent. What the
appropriate inflation threshold beyond which costs tend to exceed benefits need to be estimated
for  each  country  separately.  Nevertheless,  people  worry  about  even  moderate  inflation  levels
because if not held in check, a little inflation can lead to higher inflation  and  eventually  affect
growth.
18.
A  macro-econometric  model  of  the  Indian  economy  shows  that  a  10  per
cent  sustained  increase  in  real  public  investment  in  non-agriculture  sector,  financed  by  money
creation leads to an annual inflation rate of about 2.3 per cent and additional GDP growth of one
percent, on an average, during the first two years, while in the span of 10 to 15 years, inflation
rate rises to about 17 per cent per annum and additional output growth slows down considerably
to  average  2.7  per  cent  during  this  period.    This  implies  that  in  the  long  run  a  sustained
improvement in the growth scenario through monetary financing of the  deficit  could  involve  a
severe  trade-off  in  terms  of  inflation  -  every  one  per  cent  additional  output  growth  implies
nearly 6 to 6.5 per cent rise in inflation rate in the long run.
19.
Obviously,  there  are  some  critics  of  price  stability  as  the  dominant
objective of monetary policy.  For example Prof. Paul Krugman writes
‘.....the belief that absolute price stability is a huge blessing, that it brings
large  benefits  with  few  if  any  costs,  rests  not  on  evidence  but  on  faith.    The  evidence
actually  points  the  other  way:  the  benefits  of  price  stability  are  elusive,  the  costs  of
getting there are large, and zero inflation may not be a good thing even in the long run.’
The  observations  of  Prof.  Krugman  as  they  stand  are  not  directed  against  price
stability as an objective but are aimed against a policy which seeks ‘absolute’ price stability and
attempts  to  bring  down  the  inflation  rate  from  around  two  per  cent  to  almost  zero.    This  is
evident from what he himself advocates:
BIS Review   8/1997
- 5 -
‘.....adopt as a long run target fairly low but not zero inflation, say three-
four  per  cent.    This  is  high  enough  to  accommodate  most  of  the  real  wage  cuts  that
markets impose, while the costs of the inflation itself will still be very small.
Interestingly, in India, the Chakravarty Committee (1985) treated an inflation rate
of four per cent as ‘the acceptable rise in prices’ purported to reflect ‘changes in relative prices
necessary to attract resources to growth sectors’.
20. We,  in  India,  need  to  have  an  appropriate  fix  on  the  acceptable  level  of
inflation rate.  In the 1970s, the average annual inflation rate as measured by the wholesale price
index was nine per cent.  In the 1980s, it was eight per cent.  However, in the period  between
1990 and 1995, the average inflation rate has remained around 10 per cent.  The objective of the
policy should be to keep the inflation rate around six per cent.  This itself is much higher than
what  the  industrial  countries  are  aiming  at  and  therefore  will  have  some  implications  for  the
exchange  rate  of  the  rupee.    Monetary  growth  should  be  so  moderated  that  while  meeting  the
objective of growth it does not push the inflation rate beyond six per cent.
21.
A question that arises in this context is whether monetary policy by itself
is able to contain inflationary pressures particularly in developing economies like ours.  It is true
that  developing  economies  like  India  are  subject  to  greater  supply  shocks  than  developed
economies.  Fluctuations in agricultural output have an important bearing on the price situation.
Nevertheless, continuous increase in prices which is what inflation is about cannot occur unless
it is sustained by a continuing increase in money supply. Control of the money supply has thus
to play an important role in any scheme aimed at controlling inflation.
21.
The controversy over the objective of monetary policy has reached such a
pitch that some have described central bankism as a religion with  hard  money  as  supreme  god
and inflation as devil.  Let me however say that the commitment to a reasonable degree of price
stability is not a dogma.  It is good economics.
BIS Review   8/1997
