Mr.  Matsushita  discusses  payment  and  settlement  systems  with  regard  to
current issues in Japan   Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Japan, Mr. Yasuo Matsushita,
held at the Japan Center for Economic Research on 28/2/97.
I. Introduction 
I  am  greatly  honored  to  have  been  invited  by  the  Japan  Center  for  Economic
Research to address this distinguished audience.  I wish to take this opportunity to  first  briefly
discuss  the  recent  monetary  and  economic  conditions,  and  then  address  the  current  issues
regarding the payment and settlement systems in Japan. 
There  have  not  been  many  opportunities  to  discuss  payment  and  settlement  on
occasions such as this, despite the fact that they are important  to  all  the  economic  activities  of
households  and  firms,  and  that  as  a  central  bank,  we  are  very  much  involved  in  the
developments in this area.  I have not addressed this area partly due to its technical nature, but
recently  several  developments  have  attracted  much  attention  to  the  payment  and  settlement
issues  in  Japan,  as  in  other  countries:  specifically,  pilot  projects  of  electronic  money  products
and  the  Bank’s  plans  to  abolish  the  designated-time  settlement  mode  to  make  real-time  gross
settlement  the  only  way  of  settlement  on  the  Bank  of  Japan  Financial  Network  System
(BOJ-NET). 
The role of the central bank in ensuring a smooth and stable operation of payment
and settlement systems has become clearly recognized through the deliberations on the revision
of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Law  that  have  been  taking  place  since  last  year.    The  “Report  on  the
Revision  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Law,”  released  recently  by  the  Financial  System  Research
Council,  an  advisory  committee  to  the  Minister  of  Finance,  states  one  of  the  objectives  of  the
Bank  of  Japan  to  be  “to  ensure  smooth  fund  settlement  among  financial  institutions,  thereby
contributing to the maintenance of an orderly financial system." 
I  wish  therefore  to  discuss  today  the  current  issues  regarding  the  payment  and
settlement  systems  in  Japan  and  also  refer  to  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  those  systems,
bearing in mind the domestic and overseas trend in these areas.
II. Domestic Monetary and Economic Conditions 
I would like to start by reviewing the recent economic condition and the thinking
behind the Bank’s current monetary policy management. 
With regard to the domestic economic condition, the Bank of Japan judges that a
moderate economic recovery continues and that the recovery is gradually becoming firmer.
 
A  notable  change  in  the  economic  condition  since  the  latter  half  of  1996  is  that
the  decline  in  external  demand,  which  had  been  a  factor  constraining  the  economic  recovery,
halted in autumn 1996 following the depreciation of the yen.  Recently there has been an upward
trend  in  external  demand.    In  addition,  inventory  adjustment  in  some  raw  materials  and
semiconductor  industries  had  almost  reached  completion  by  the  end  of  1996.    As  a  result,
production  has  started  to  grow  at  an  accelerating  pace,  reflecting  fully  the  increase  in  final
demand.    Personal  consumption  continues  to  grow  moderately  but  steadily,  supported  by  the
buoyant sales of passenger cars, and the recovery in business fixed investment is spreading to a
wider  range  of  industries  and  to  smaller  firms  than  previously  observed,  reflecting
improvements in corporate sales and profits. 
BIS Review   43/1997
- 2 -
It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  increase  in  demand  ahead  of  the  rise  in  the
consumption  tax  rate  scheduled  for  fiscal  1997  is  contributing  to  the  recent  improvement  in
economic indicators, as in housing investment, and these improvements need to be seen in this
light.    However,  despite  a  gradual  decrease  in  public-sector  investment  from  the  latter  half  of
1996, the virtuous  circle  -  in  which  increased  production  leads  to  a  recovery  in  business  fixed
investment  and  personal  consumption  through  improved  corporate  profits  and  employment
income - is gradually becoming more apparent.  This improvement is encouraging. 
In contrast to these recent improvements in economic indicators, the beginning of
the  year  saw  a  significant  fall  in  stock  prices  and  this,  together  with  the  decline  in  long-term
interest rates in the financial markets, indicates that the confidence of the market participants in
the economic outlook is still slow to improve. 
Various  causes  can  be  considered  for  the  market’s  uncertainty  as  to  future
developments  in  the  economy.    While  the  renewed  concern  over  the  nonperforming-loan
problem of financial institutions may be one important factor, the strong awareness of the effects
of the anticipated fiscal tightening in the next fiscal year is also significant. 
From  spring  to  summer  this  year,  a  temporary  slowdown  in  economic  recovery
seems inevitable due to a reaction to the boost in demand that is occurring ahead of the rise in
the  consumption  tax  rate.    However,  given  the  strengthening  of  the  virtuous  circle,  it  is  more
likely than before that the recovery trend of the economy will be sustained.  In addition,  stock
prices appear to have stabilized.  Therefore, in considering whether the economy can overcome
the effects of fiscal tightening to sustain the trend of recovery, it is important to examine macro-
and micro-economic data, including the economic indicators that will be released in the future,
signals from financial markets, and firms’ business plans for the next fiscal year. 
I will now turn to the environment surrounding domestic prices.  The depreciation
of the yen has continued since the beginning of the year, and a rise in the consumption tax rate is
planned for April.  The raising of the tax rate will be passed on to product prices, pushing up the
price index accordingly.  However, as long as the price hike does not surpass the increase caused
by  the  raising  of  the  consumption  tax  rate,  the  price  rise  will  only  reflect  a  single  price
adjustment,  and  will  not  indicate  any  fundamental  change  in  the  situation  underlying  prices.
Therefore it would not be appropriate to formulate monetary policy to counter such superficial
changes in price indexes. 
From  the  viewpoint  of  monetary  policy  management,  that  is,  the  viewpoint  of
ensuring  stable  economic  development  through  price  stability,  the  issue  of  concern  is  whether
the rise in the tax rate will trigger price hikes that take advantage of the increase or will lead to
inflationary  expectations,  which  in  turn  might  bring  about  price  rises  beyond  the  immediate
effects  of  the  tax  rate  increase.    Whether  such  a  general  price  increase  will  occur  depends  on
various factors, including the prevailing domestic supply and demand conditions and consumer
confidence.  It is thus necessary to pay attention to the inflationary expectations and the possible
negative  developments,  including  overreaction  by  consumers,  resulting  from  the  rise  in  the
consumption tax rate, rather than focusing attention on the superficial hikes in prices.
 
Although the decline in prices began to slow from the end of 1996, there is only a
limited possibility that domestic prices will take a clear upward path given that improvement in
the supply and demand conditions in the domestic economy is expected to remain moderate for
now.  However, in view of the accelerating rise in import prices reflecting the yen’s depreciation
and higher crude oil prices since the latter half of 1996, together  with  the  strengthening  of  the
BIS Review   43/1997
- 3 -
recovery in private demand, it remains necessary to pay careful attention to the developments in
domestic prices. 
In the management of current monetary policy, the Bank of Japan will continue to
monitor  economic  developments  closely,  placing  emphasis  on  further  strengthening  the
foundation of an economic recovery.
III.  Current Issues Regarding the Payment and Settlement Systems in Japan
A. Payment and Settlement Systems in Japan 
I would now like to move on to the main theme of today’s speech: payment and
settlement  systems.    The  expression  “payment  and  settlement  systems”  may  sound  somewhat
technical and may indeed be unfamiliar to you.  In a market economy, however, every economic
activity  conducted  by  firms  and  households  -  be  it  production  or  consumption  -  is  concluded
with  settlement.    Payment  and  settlement  systems,  or  mechanisms  for  clearing  and  settling
payments, are therefore used directly or indirectly by every economic entity.  People may not be
conscious of the functions of the systems when they operate smoothly and efficiently.  However,
once a problem arises, great difficulties are encountered. 
The  means  of  payment  used  by  firms  and  households  vary  from  cash  -  that  is,
banknotes  and  coins  -  to  checks  and  bills,  funds  transfers  between  bank  accounts,  and  credit
cards.    When  payment  is  made  by  cash,  settlement  is  final  there  and  then.    However,  when
payment is made by other means such as checks  or  bills,  the  mere  handing  over  of  the  checks
and  bills  will  not  complete  the  settlement  of  the  transaction.    When  a  check  is  drawn,  for
example, settlement is final only when the check is collected and the stated amount of money is
transferred from the deposit money in the bank account of the payer to the bank account of the
payee.  If such transfers are not effected between accounts for some reason, for example, there
are  insufficient  funds  in  the  payer’s  account,  the  transaction  will  remain  unsettled.    When  the
payer  and  the  payee  hold  accounts  at  different  banks,  interbank  settlement  is  needed,  and
settlement  will  be  completed  only  after  the  corresponding  debit  and  credit  entries  are  made  to
the current accounts held by each bank with the Bank of Japan. 
Although  various  means  of  payment  are  available  to  firms  and  households,
settlement is ultimately made either by a handing over of cash issued by the Bank of Japan or by
a transfer of funds between bank accounts using deposit money, which are liabilities of private
financial  institutions.    “Money”  in  a  modern  society  therefore  comprises  cash  and  deposit
money, and is reliant on the confidence  of  the  public  that  bank  deposits  can  be  converted  into
cash at any time. 
When  a  large  number  of  relatively  small-value  payments,  such  as  those  using
checks and bills, need to be settled between banks, they are not settled one at a time between the
accounts held by the banks at the Bank of Japan.  Rather, payment instruments such as  checks
and bills are collected and exchanged at clearing houses, where the credit and debit positions of
each bank are calculated, and then the net positions are settled between the BOJ accounts.  This
calculation process is called clearing, and is operated by private institutions.  Specifically, there
are three major private clearing systems in Japan: the bill and check-clearing system; the Zengin
Data  Telecommunications  System  (Zengin  System)  for  funds  transfers  between  bank  accounts
and for credit card payments; and the Foreign Exchange Yen Clearing System for yen payments
arising from foreign exchange and Euro-yen transactions. 
BIS Review   43/1997
- 4 -
BOJ accounts are used to  settle  the  net  positions  resulting  from  various  clearing
systems, as well as to directly settle large-value interbank funds transactions, such as call-money
transactions,  which  do  not  go  through  clearing  processes.    The  value  of  funds  transfers  at  the
Bank of Japan totals approximately ¥300 trillion per day, which is equivalent to approximately
60 percent of Japan’s annual GDP.
B. The Role of the Central Bank in Payment and Settlement Systems 
Bank of Japan thus plays an important role  in  both  the  settlement  made  by  cash
and  the  settlement  made  by  deposit  money.    The  duty  of  central  banks  is  to  issue  and  control
money - that is, to ensure the public’s confidence in the holding and the using of money. 
To  this  end,  two  conditions  must  be  satisfied:  (1)  the  value  of  money  must  be
stable  -  that  is,  price  stability  must  be  maintained;  and  (2)  the  circulation  of  money  and  the
functioning  of  payment  and  settlement  systems  must  be  stable  and  efficient.    If  it  were  not
possible  to  use  cash  and  deposits  as  desired  for  settlements,  people  would  not  be  able  to  hold
money with confidence.  The mission of central banks, therefore, is to make the currencies they
issue more convenient to use and to thereby enable firms and households to confidently engage
in  daily  transactions  and  funds  settlements.    Bank  of  Japan  thus  plays  a  vital  role  in  the
settlement process in Japan as a whole. 
Bank  of  Japan  serves  two  specific  functions  in  securing  the  stability  and
efficiency  of  the  country’s  payment  and  settlement  systems:  (1)  providing  the  means  of
settlement to the public; and (2) attending to the smooth execution of payments and settlements
in Japan. 
As a provider of the means of settlement, the Bank issues Bank of Japan notes and
ensures their smooth circulation.  As I mentioned earlier, cash payments immediately complete
the  settlement  of  a  transaction  by  delivering  a  means  of  payment  directly  to  the  counterparty.
This  on-the-spot  completion  of  settlement,  whereby  the  payee  is  able  to  secure  the  monetary
value received, is described as “settlement with finality.” 
In  order  to  maintain  the  finality  of  cash  payments,  it  is  essential  to  secure  the
confidence of the people in the soundness of the central bank’s assets, which underpins the value
of  the  banknotes.    The  Bank  thus  pays  close  attention  to  the  soundness  of  its  assets.
Furthermore,  any  circulation  of  counterfeit  notes  would  undermine  people’s  confidence  in
holding money.  To prevent such an occurrence, the Bank examines the authenticity of the large
volumes  of  banknotes  that  are  returned  to  the  Bank  of  Japan  every  day  from  financial
institutions.    Careful  attention  is  also  paid  to  the  cleanness  of  each  of  the  banknotes  in
circulation.  The Bank also exerts itself to the  utmost  to  improve  anti-counterfeiting  measures,
and has recently been engaged in joint research with overseas central banks on the prevention of
banknote  counterfeiting  using  color  copiers.    Through  such  efforts,  the  Bank  aims  to  preclude
the circulation of counterfeits. 
The  Bank  also  provides  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  as  another  means  of
settlement.    The  Bank  offers  accounts  to  private  financial  institutions,  and  the  funds  in  these
accounts,  or  deposit  money,  are  equivalent  to  banknotes  in  their  function  as  a  means  of
settlement with finality.  In order to improve the safety and efficiency of settlements using these
BOJ accounts, the Bank has made various efforts, including the introduction of the BOJ-NET -
the  Bank  of  Japan  Financial  Network  System,  which  is  an  on-line  system  for  funds  transfers
among the current accounts held by private financial institutions  with  the  Bank  of  Japan.    The
BIS Review   43/1997
- 5 -
Bank intends to further improve the system in cooperation with those concerned by making real-
time gross settlement the only settlement mode, which I shall discuss in detail later. 
The  second  function  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  with  regard  to  the  payment  and
settlement  systems  is  to  attend  to  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  payments  and  settlements    in
Japan, and to provide adequate liquidity when necessary.  As I mentioned earlier, the important
tasks  of  the  Bank  include  ensuring  a  smooth  supply  of  banknotes  throughout  the  country,  and
monitoring the stability of daily settlements across the BOJ accounts.
In  addition,  the  Bank,  in  coordination  with  the  operators  of  the  private  clearing
systems such as the bill and check clearing, plays an important role in preventing any troubles in
the  systems  or  participants  from  jeopardizing  the  entire  payment  and  settlement  systems  in
Japan.  In  any  settlement  system,  there  is  the  risk  that  a  failure  of  one  bank  to  meet  its
obligations will trigger a chain reaction of defaults, eventually paralyzing the entire system.  In
addition, both payment and settlement systems and individual banks constituting the systems are
supported by the market’s confidence.  As this confidence is in large part a psychological factor,
a failure of a single bank could lead to a run on deposits at other banks.  Such risk is referred to
as  systemic  risk.    Materialization  of  systemic  risk  will  disrupt  not  only  settlements  between
banks but also those between firms and households, having a profound impact on the economy
and on the society as a whole.  Such systemic risk inherent in the network of settlements is what
differentiates the banking sector from other industrial sectors. 
The role of the central bank is to constantly monitor the institutional  framework
and the operation of payment and settlement systems, working in coordination with  the  parties
concerned to  thereby  prevent  the  materialization  of  systemic  risk.    The  central  bank  must  also
ensure that the system can be provided the funds to break the chain reaction of defaults should
some emergency occur.  Another important task of the central bank is to attend to the soundness
of  the  private  financial  institutions,  which  are  the  participants  in  the  payment  and  settlement
systems  and  which  settle  the  payments  between  firms  and  households.    To  summarize  these
roles,  an  important  mission  of  the  central  bank  is  to  maintain  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  the
entire settlement process, a process which involves (1) private financial institutions which accept
the  deposits  of  firms  and  households;  (2)  private  clearing  organizations  processing  interbank
payments; and (3) the  central  bank  which  discharges  interbank  settlement  obligations  resulting
from private-sector clearing systems.
C. Measures to Improve the Safety of Payment and Settlement Systems
 
Payment  and  settlement  systems  have  not  necessarily  been  an  issue  of  public
interest reflecting the general perception that these systems are mechanical processing units for
discharging obligations by inputting transaction data.  The fact that there had been no financial
institution failures until recently and that payments have been settled safely may have supported
this  perception.    However,  financial  institutions  have  actually  failed  and  the  speed  at  which
systemic risk is transmitted within and beyond international borders has increased significantly
owing  to  technological  innovations  in  finance  and  telecommunications,  and  financial
globalization.    Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  inappropriate  to  view  payment  and  settlement
systems  as  merely  mechanical  processing  units.    These  systems  must  be  resilient  against
systemic risk, and the establishing of such systems is an extremely important challenge for both
the  private  financial  institutions  and  for  the  central  bank.    It  becomes  apparent  that  various
incidents and studies have raised the awareness of the need to improve the safety of payment and
settlement  systems  among  private  financial  institutions  and  central  banks  both  in  Japan  and
abroad. 
BIS Review   43/1997
- 6 -
In  various  countries,  new  safety  standards  have  been  applied  to  private  clearing
systems.    These  standards  include  limits  on  each  participant’s  net  debit  position  and  collateral
requirements to ensure the provision of adequate backup liquidity in the event of an inability to
settle  by  the  participant  having  the  largest  single  net-debit  position.    These  standards  were
devised by the central banks of the Group of Ten countries as minimum standards to be satisfied
by  cross-border  and  multi-currency  netting  schemes,  and  are  referred  to  as  the  Lamfalussy
standards, after  the  chairman  of  the  committee  on  this  study.    As  these  standards  can  apply  to
domestic  clearing  systems,  they  are  being  used  recently  in  many  countries  as  guidelines  for
improving the integrity of private clearing systems. 
In  Japan,  it  has  recently  been  decided  to  enhance  the  safety  measures  of  the
Foreign  Exchange  Yen  Clearing  System  so  as  to  satisfy  the  Lamfalussy  standards.    The  Bank
will  continue  to  actively  support  the  initiatives  to  improve  the  safety  of  the  payment  and
settlement systems.
D.
Improving  the  Safety  of  the  Central  Bank’s  Settlement  System  -
Real-Time Gross Settlement 
The need to improve safety applies not only to private clearing systems but also to
the settlement systems operated by central banks.  In this regard, an increasing number of central
banks  have  been  adopting  real-time  gross  settlement  for  current  account  settlements  at  the
central  bank.    Real-time  gross  settlement  -  called  RTGS  for  short  -  is  a  system  in  which  the
central bank processes and effects every payment instruction sent by private financial institutions
in real time and on an order-by-order basis. 
Most  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan,  have  typically  conducted
interbank  settlements  on  a  designated-time  basis  rather  than  by  RTGS.    In  the  conventional
designated-time  settlement,  payment  instructions  are  accumulated  until  designated  settlement
times instead of each one being settled immediately.  At the designated time - at present, 9 a.m.,
1 p.m., 3 p.m., and 5 p.m. in Japan - the net settlement position of each financial institution is
computed and its account is credited or debited simultaneously. 
In  designated-time  settlement,  financial  institutions  need  only 
the  funds
equivalent to their net debit positions at the time of settlement, and thus, it is an efficient system
from the viewpoint of fund management.  However, if a single financial institution in the system
were to fail to meet its obligations, all payments would inevitably be suspended, in order that all
the  payment  instructions  sent  or  received  by  that  financial  institution  could  be  revoked  to
recompute the settlement obligations of each financial institution.  In addition, such failure could
create a shortage of funds at the financial institutions which had planned to make payments with
the funds they had expected to receive from the failed financial institution.  This may lead to a
series of liquidity shortages or defaults - that is, the materialization of systemic risk.  The effects
of this risk could be grave, considering that the amount of funds handled by the central bank’s
settlement system is substantial. 
With RTGS, the smooth execution of settlements solely depends on the ability of
the parties concerned to meet their obligations, as every payment instruction is processed in real
time on an order-by-order basis.  Therefore, even if a bank were to suddenly become unable to
settle,  disruption  to  the  system  would  be  limited:  suspension  of  the  operation  of  the  entire
settlement  system,  which  can  occur  under  designated-time  settlement,  can  be  avoided.    The
BIS Review   43/1997
- 7 -
introduction of RTGS in many countries around the world, including some Asian countries, is a
result of the efforts of central banks to improve their settlement systems to contain systemic risk.
 
Against  this  background,  the  Bank  of  Japan  also  decided  at  the  end  of  1996  to
make RTGS the only mode of settlement via BOJ accounts.  Specifically, by the end of the year
2000, the Bank plans to abolish designated-time settlement and make all funds transfers on the
basis of RTGS.  This may require market participants to establish new transaction and settlement
practices.    To  ensure  the  smooth  operation  of  RTGS,  the  Bank  intends  to  directly  supply
intraday  liquidity,  which  is  indispensable  for  smooth  settlements,  to  cover  liquidity  shortages
that might arise in the system despite the efforts of participant financial institutions. 
Last  December,  the  Bank  announced  its  policy  to  realize  RTGS  as  the  only
settlement  mode  on  the  BOJ-NET  with  some  specific  proposals  for  design  features  and
requested  comments  from  the  public.    The  Bank  was  fortunate  to  receive  many  valuable
comments  and  recognized  the  increasing  awareness  of  settlement  risk  among  market
participants.    The  Bank  believes  that  it  has  been  able  to  gain  strong  support  from  the  private
financial institutions for RTGS, and plans to publish in the near future its policies along with the
comments received.  The Bank strongly hopes to receive constructive opinions and suggestions
in  deciding  the  details  of  the  design  of  the  system.    The  Bank  will  also  solicit  views  from  a
broad  range  of  market  participants  whenever  making  a  major  change  in  the  operation  of  the
Bank’s  settlement  system,  as  a  change  in  the  system  could  have  a  significant  impact  on  the
market practices and the daily business of the financial institutions participating in the system. 
It  should  be  noted  that  realization  of  RTGS  does  not  necessarily  mean  the
elimination of all the risks in payment and settlement systems.    Moreover,  RTGS  on  the  BOJ-
NET  will  produce  the  desired  effects  only  when  the  safety  of  the  private  clearing  systems
connected  to  the  Bank’s  system  is  ensured.    To  illustrate  this  point,  suppose  that  the  private
financial  institutions,  for  some  reason,  switched  from  direct  settlements  via  BOJ  accounts  to
indirect  settlements  using  private  clearing  systems  given  the  introduction  of  RTGS.    The  total
amount of risks in the payment and settlement systems  as  a  whole  would  not  decrease  if  there
were inadequate management of risks in the private systems.  In this respect, it is indispensable
for the private financial  institutions,  the  private  clearing  organizations,  and  the  central  bank  to
work  together  to  enhance  the  efficiency  and  safety  of  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  in
Japan. 
Such  efforts  of  the  private  sector  and  the  central  bank  to  improve  the
infrastructure  for  settlements  will  also  contribute  to  the  strengthening  of  the  global
competitiveness  of  Japan’s  financial  markets,  which  is  indeed  the  aim  of  the  Japanese  “Big
Bang” deregulation package proposed by Prime Minister Hashimoto.
E. Improvement in Securities Settlement Systems 
In  addition  to  the  safety  of  funds  settlements,  much  attention  has  been  paid
globally to the safety of settlements of securities such as government securities and stocks. 
Although  I  do  not  have  enough  time  today  to  discuss  this  issue  in  detail,  the
established guidelines for risk management in securities settlements are the recommendations set
out in 1989 by the Group of Thirty, an international group of experts in finance. 
In  accordance  with  the  recommendations,  significant  progress  has  been  made
recently in Japan toward improving the settlement systems for securities.  For the settlement of
BIS Review   43/1997
- 8 -
Japanese  government  securities  (JGS),  for  example,  an  on-line  network  and  delivery-versus-
payment  system  have  been  established.    Delivery  versus  payment,  known  as  DVP,  is  a
mechanism which links the delivery of JGS with the  corresponding  funds  transfer  so  that  both
are executed simultaneously.  In such a way, a failure to collect payments or receive securities
can  be  avoided.    In  addition,  rolling  settlement  was  introduced  in  October  1996.    Here,
settlements  are  made  on  every  business  day  for  the  contracts  that  were  agreed  on  a  specific
number of business days previous to that settlement date (currently seven days).  This replaces
the prior arrangement where contracts made over a certain period were accumulated before they
were  settled  on  one  of  the  six  designated  settlement  days  of  each  month  (the  5th,  10th,  15th,
20th, 25th, and the last day of the month).  The system will be improved further in April 1997 to
complete settlement on the third business day after the date of contract. 
Regarding settlement of corporate bonds, which may be familiar to many of you
here,  delivery  of  bonds  has  conventionally  been  made  by  a  document  called  registration
certificate and the corresponding payment has been settled separately through  clearing  of  bills.
At the end of 1997, however, on-line delivery of corporate bonds will be brought into effect.  A
delivery-versus-payment  service  is  also  envisioned  for  the  future  by  connecting  the  settlement
system for corporate bonds with the BOJ-NET. 
Various  efforts  are  thus  under  way  in  Japan  to  enhance  the  safety  of  securities
settlements.    However,  much  remains  to  be  improved.    A  large  volume  of  stocks  and  other
securities  continues  to  be  delivered  physically,  and  DVP  systems  are  yet  to  be  established  for
such securities.  Furthermore, the lag between the contract and the settlement, that is,  the  final
transfers of securities and funds, needs to be shortened for various securities.  In this respect, the
Bank intends to contribute actively and expects further efforts on the part of the private sector.
F. Developments in Electronic Money 
I would now like to briefly discuss the developments in electronic money, which
might become a popular means of settlement in the future. 
The  term  electronic  money  is  used  to  refer  to  payment  mechanisms  in  which
electronic  records  of  funds  are  stored  in  devices  such  as  IC  cards  -  with  microprocessor  chip
(integrated circuits) embedded - or in computer  networks  and  then  transferred  safely  from  one
customer to another.  Many pilot projects are under way in various countries, making use of the
recent technological innovations in IC cards and computer networks as well as in such security
features  as  encryption.    In  Japan  as  well,  financial  institutions  and  firms  have  begun  various
projects individually or jointly.  For example, some banks are individually using IC-card based
electronic  money  on  trial  within  certain  buildings  in  Tokyo.    A  joint  project  by  a  credit  card
company  and  several  banks  on  card-based  electronic  money  is  also  being  planned  for  summer
1998  in  a  certain  area  of  Tokyo.    It  is  said  to  be  of  the  largest  one  of  its  kind  in  the  world,
involving approximately 1,000 stores and 100,000 cards. 
When  electronic  money  products  become  prevalent,  they  may  be  used  as  new
means of settlement replacing cash and deposits.  People may settle various retail transactions by
transferring  the  electronic  values  between  IC  cards  or  on  networks  instead  of  banknotes  and
coins.  To prepare for this possibility, central banks are keenly interested in the soundness  and
the implications of electronic money developments.  From this  viewpoint,  the  central  banks  of
the  Group  of  Ten  countries  have  been  studying  various  aspects  of  electronic  money:  security
features  to  prevent  fraud  and  counterfeiting,  implications  for  the  effectiveness  of  the  central
bank’s monetary policy, and the stability of payment and settlement systems. 
BIS Review   43/1997
- 9 -
At  present,  however,  it  is  very  difficult  to  project  how  electronic  money
technology will develop, to what extent electronic money products will be used by the public as
a substitute for cash or deposit money, and at what pace these developments will proceed.  The
pace  of  the  developments  will  depend  on  how  the  reliability  of  electronic  money  products  is
secured and how conveniently these products are utilized.  Under these circumstances, it is not
easy  to  reach  a  verdict  on  the  various  relevant  issues,  nor  would  it  be  appropriate  to  jump  to
conclusions.  Developers and operators of electronic money schemes can be expected to exercise
ingenuity  on  such  aspects  as  security  and  legal  matters,  and  the  innovative  capabilities  of  the
private  sector  should  not  be  discouraged.    The  basic  stance  that  the  Bank  should  maintain  at
present is to be flexible to the various possibilities concerning the future course of development
in electronic money. 
Regarding the implications of the development of electronic money on monetary
policy, monetary policy will, in theory, continue to be effective, provided that the situation does
not become one where electronic money extensively substitutes not only for cash as a means of
retail  payment  but  also  for  deposit  money  for  large-value  transfers.    Although  the  spread  of
electronic  money  products  might  affect  the  stability  of  monetary  indicators,  this  will  be
adequately  managed  by  identifying  the  amount  outstanding  of  electronic  money  issued  and  by
devising monetary policy management.  Therefore, I wish to state that the Bank  of  Japan  does
not  intend  to  put  a  brake  on  the  development  and  introduction  of  electronic  money  in
consideration of its effects on monetary policy. 
Maintaining  this  stance,  the  Bank  intends  to  continue  research  on  electronic
money  while  observing  the  developments  in  the  private  sector  in  Japan  and  abroad.    It  will
release the results of the research, as it has done in the past, wishing to support the efforts of the
private sector.
G. The Necessity of Risk Management by Individual Financial Institutions 
I  have  so  far  discussed  the  developments  regarding  payment  and  settlement
systems to contain systemic risk.  It is obvious, however, that establishing an appropriate system
structure  alone  is  not  enough  to  secure  the  safety  of  the  systems.    It  is  also  important  for  the
system  participants,  or  individual  financial  institutions,  to  improve  risk  control  measures  by
establishing a system for identifying and managing settlement risk. 
In  a  modern  society,  monetary  systems,  as  mentioned  earlier,  are  based  on  the
public’s  confidence  in:  (1)  cash  issued  by  the  central  bank;  and  (2)  deposit  money  offered  by
private financial institutions.  In order for monetary systems to function smoothly, it is necessary
for  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  to  function  with  stability  and,  to  that  end,  financial
institutions  themselves  need  to  be  responsible  for  securing  sound  management,  including
management of settlement risk. 
It  is  evident  that  financial  institutions  should  manage  their  risks  rigorously.
Compared  to  credit  and  interest  rate  risks,  settlement  risk  tends  to  cause  greater  losses  and
disruptions  once  it  materializes,  and  yet  they  are  difficult  to  identify  and  manage.    In  fact,
settlement risk constantly fluctuates significantly, and thus identification and management of the
risk  require  comprehensive  understanding  of  technical  details  related  to  processing.    For
example, it is necessary to know how the payment and settlement systems of different currencies
work,  and  what  risks  arise  from  time  lags.    Such  information  and  skills  cannot  be  acquired
overnight.  However, in view of the impact settlement risk could have on financial institutions, it
BIS Review   43/1997
- 10 -
is indispensable to establish a system which makes possible the identification and measurement
of settlement risk and the immediate reduction of risk following decisions by the management. 
I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  a  financial  institution  equipped  with  an  efficient
risk  management  system  will  be  able  to  acquire  new  business  opportunities  in  the  area  of
payment  and  settlement  services.    In  fact,  many  European  and  U.S.  financial  institutions  are
creating  and  offering  new  business  out  of  settlement  operations.    They  are  putting  in  large
amounts  of  resources  to  establish  adequate  internal  risk  management,  and  are  developing  safe
and  efficient  settlement  services  to  provide  to  financial  institutions  and  other  customers.    The
fact that such operations are viable as business is an indication that European and U.S. financial
institutions and firms actively use new innovative payment and settlement services to realize safe
and efficient settlements.
IV. Conclusion 
In  summarizing  today’s  discussion  on  payment  and  settlement  systems,  I  would
like to address the basic issues from a somewhat different point of view. 
Firstly, payment  and  settlement  systems  play  an  extremely  important  role  in  the
economy  as  an  infrastructure  supporting  all  economic  activities,  although  this  is  rarely
acknowledged in our daily lives.  When firms purchase raw materials and sell products, or when
households receive wages and salaries, purchase goods, and remit money, all these activities are
based  on  the  assumption  that  payments  and  settlements  of  money  are  effected  smoothly  -  in  a
manner  that  people  would  not  even  be  conscious  of  it.    To  satisfy  this  requirement,  modern
society  has  developed  a  complex  and  precise  mechanism  comprising  the  central  bank  and  the
private  sector.    The  expressions  “financial  institutions”  and  “financial  system”  may  generally
bring to mind the function of intermediating savings and investment through the borrowing and
lending  of  money.    Providing  safe  and  efficient  settlement  services,  however,  is  an  equally
important function that the central bank and the private financial institutions serve. 
Secondly,  efforts  to  further  improve  the  utility  and  safety  of  the  settlement
systems  are  becoming  all  the  more  important  as  economic  transactions  become  increasingly
complex and globalized and as technological innovations in finance including the payment and
settlement systems progress.  The Lamfalussy standards, RTGS, and the recommendations of the
Group of Thirty are indeed part of such efforts. 
As  technology  continues  to  progress,  however,  there  is  no  final  goal  for  the
development  of  payment  and  settlement  systems.    In  addition,  financial  globalization  is
intensifying  cross-border  linkages,  with  settlement  troubles  in  one  country  affecting  the
settlement systems of other countries.  It is therefore important for the private sector and central
banks to work together to improve the payment and settlement systems by reviewing the safety
standards as necessary from a global perspective.    We  at  the  Bank  of  Japan  shall  continue  our
efforts to enhance the safety and efficiency of the BOJ-NET, and shall support the efforts of the
private sector to improve their systems. 
Thirdly,  it  is  important  to  ensure  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system  in  a
broader sense.  As I mentioned repeatedly, the functioning of modern monetary systems has its
foundations in the public’s confidence in the central bank and the private financial institutions.
In order for monetary systems to function properly, the entire financial system needs to operate
with stability.  Sound  management  founded  on  the  responsibility  of  the  financial  institutions  is
fundamental  in  establishing  the  confidence  in  private  financial  institutions.    It  is  necessary  for
BIS Review   43/1997
- 11 -
the central bank to function as the lender of last resort should a  trouble  which  emerged  in  one
part of the settlement system be anticipated to spread throughout the entire system - although it
is  important  to  contain  such  risks  in  advance,  sometimes  it  may  unfortunately  become
impossible  to  prevent  an  incident  from  having  impact  on  the  entire  system  -  so  that  people’s
everyday lives will not be seriously affected.  In order to prevent the materialization of systemic
risk, it is essential for the central bank to assess, through regular on-site examinations and daily
monitoring, whether the soundness of individual financial institutions is secured, whether there
is excessive concentration of risks in the financial system as a whole, and whether the series of
transactions between financial institutions is being settled smoothly. 
In  summary,  payment  and  settlement  systems  are  vital  to  every  economic  entity
including  the  firms  and  individuals  represented  here.    As  the  central  bank,  one  of  whose
missions is to secure the soundness of the financial system, the Bank of Japan will continue its
efforts to improve the safety and efficiency of Japan’s payment and settlement systems.  In this
regard, your suggestions and comments will be extremely valuable. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention.
This article is excerpted and translated from a speech given by Yasuo Matsushita, Governor of
the Bank of Japan, to the Japan Center for Economic Research in Tokyo on February 28, 1997.
BIS Review   43/1997
