Mr.  Thiessen  discusses  monetary  policy  and  the  Canadian  economy  in  a
changing world   Text of the Dr. Harold Walter Siebens Lecture delivered by the Governor of
the Bank of Canada, Mr. Gordon G. Thiessen, to the Fraser Institute in Vancouver on 6/3/97.
The  performance  of  the  Canadian  economy  is  a  popular  topic  these  days.
Canadians  wonder  why  our  economy  seems  to  have  been  struggling  recently,  turning  in  a
lacklustre performance that has left the unemployment rate high and a significant margin of our
production capacity unused.
When people focus on the recent record of the Canadian economy, they point in
particular to the contrast with the United States where the economy has been operating at close
to  full  capacity  over  the  past  couple  of  years.  The  United  States  is  by  far  our  most  important
trading  partner.  And  in  the  past,  economic  developments  in  Canada  have  tended  to  follow
reasonably closely those in the United States. Naturally, people want to know what is different
this time.
The  fact  that  the  Canadian  economy  has  not  been  expanding  at  a  strong  pace  is
also  worrying  to  governments  trying,  as  they  are,  to  address  budgetary  problems.  They  are
concerned that fiscal cutbacks may weaken the economy further.
Of  course  in  all  of  this,  questions  are  also  raised  about  the  role  of  monetary
policy. I would like to  take  this  opportunity  today  to  discuss  the  factors  that  have  affected  the
recent  performance  of  the  Canadian  economy,  to  explain  the  role  that  monetary  policy  has
played, and to conclude with some comments on our future economic prospects.
The Canadian economy in a changing world environment
The world economy has been going through profound changes.
Many  developing  countries  have  embraced  open  markets  and  international  trade
as  a  means  of  accelerating  their  economic  progress.  Deregulation  and  privatization  initiatives
have been undertaken by both developing and industrial countries, typically as part of structural
adjustment  programs  to  improve  economic  performance.  Technological  changes  have  reduced
the  cost  of  capital  relative  to  labour,  encouraging  businesses  to  use  more  physical  capital,  in
particular more computers and computer-based equipment. And there has been an accompanying
shift in the demand for labour away from unskilled workers.
These  technological  innovations,  along  with  reductions  in  transportation  and
communications costs, have also made possible a wider geographic dispersion of the production
process  --  not  just  nationally  but  internationally.  And  to  ensure  access  to  foreign  markets,
countries have been pursuing multilateral and regional trading arrangements.
As  a  result,  all  nations  have  been  adjusting  to  the  new  reality  of  heightened
international  competition  and  to  the  accompanying  substantial  shifts  in  the  location  of
production  of  many  goods.  Such  shifts  have  not  been  limited  merely  to  the  diversion  of  the
production  of  goods  requiring  unsophisticated  techniques  to  the  developing  countries.  Indeed,
some developing nations, particularly in Asia, are establishing themselves as important suppliers
of  a  wide  range  of  internationally  traded  products,  including  high-technology  manufactured
goods. At the same time, industrial economies are moving more towards the export of services,
as a result of improvements in communications and information technology.
BIS Review   29/1997
- 2 -
All in all, these changes are to the good, in that  they  should  result  in  expanding
international  trade,  more  rapid  increases  in  productivity  and,  hence,  improved  living  standards
everywhere, but especially in developing countries. However, these ongoing globalization trends
and adjustments to new technology do imply changes in the structure of national economies.
Canada and other industrial countries are having to cope with these changes. But
change  is  never  easy  and  is  often  stressful.  Even  in  the  large  U.S.  economy,  there  has  been
considerable concern over the uncertain job prospects, especially for unskilled workers, in light
of the changes in technology, production and trade trends that I  have  just  described.  However,
the  process  of  adjustment  in  the  United  States  to  these  developments  began  early,  and  their
economy has been operating successfully at full capacity.
Why is it that in Canada we seem to have had a more difficult time of it? There
are a number of reasons for this. But, in my view, one of the most important is the fact that in
Canada we started adjusting later and, as a result, we were further behind. Why was that?
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar in the mid-1980s, by easing the pressure
from  foreign  competition,  blunted  the  urgency  to  adopt  more  efficient  production  processes.
And through much of the second half of the 1980s, because many Canadians were still acting on
expectations  of  accelerating  inflation,  we  were  devoting  a  good  part  of  our  energies  and
resources  to  speculative  activities,  rather  than  investing  in  improvements  in  productivity  and
competitiveness.  Rising  government  deficits,  which  were  absorbing  increasing  amounts  of
domestic  savings,  were  not  helping  either.  Thus,  with  poor  productivity  growth,  rapidly  rising
wages and generally weak cost control, Canadian businesses and exporters found it increasingly
difficult to compete, especially at the end of the 1980s, when the Canadian dollar had reversed
its earlier depreciation.
For a nation that is highly dependent on foreign trade, Canada certainly was doing
all  the  wrong  things  to  get  ready  for  the  new  world  of  changing  technology  and  increasing
global competition. It was not until the early 1990s that many Canadian businesses realized that
they had to undertake major adjustments. They had to restructure, invest in new technology and
implement  tight  cost  control.  And  they  had  to  do  it  quickly  if  they  were  going  to  position
themselves  to  take  advantage  of  the  Free  Trade  Agreement  with  the  United  States,  the
subsequent  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement  and  then,  more  generally,  the  multilateral
agreement on trade liberalization.
Adjustments  of  this  magnitude  are  never  easy.  They  are  often  disruptive  and
stressful,  generating  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty  about  the  future  for  both  individuals  and
businesses. But because the adjustment process was delayed in Canada, it ended up being more
far-ranging and more intense than in the United  States.  For  many  businesses,  restructuring  has
meant downsizing.
But  the  business  sector  has  not  been  the  only  area  of  the  Canadian  economy  in
need of an overhaul. There has also been an urgent need for fiscal adjustment. Here again, that
adjustment  was  late  in  coming.  As  a  result,  the  cutbacks  and  downsizing  necessary  to  restore
fiscal health have been more sweeping and more disruptive than if action has been taken much
earlier.
Thus, we have had two major structural adjustments vital to our economy taking
place back to back. Indeed, over the past year, these adjustments have been overlapping, and that
may continue for some time. And while a good deal of the restructuring in the private sector has
BIS Review   29/1997
- 3 -
already occurred, the adjustment in the public sector still has some way to go. This restructuring
has affected  the  unemployment  rate  as  more  people  move  between  jobs,  taking  time  to  retrain
and upgrade  their  skills.  And  the  related  uncertainty  among  workers  has  been  reflected  in  low
consumer confidence and an unwillingness to spend. As a result,  the  recovery  of  the  Canadian
economy has been slower than it might otherwise have been.
However,  what  we  must  not  forget  is  that  restructuring  in  both  the  private  and
public  sectors  was  absolutely  necessary,  and  it  will  have  significant  payoffs  for  the  Canadian
economy in terms of productivity gains, competitiveness and an improved standard of living.
The role of monetary policy
What has been the role of monetary policy in all of these developments? Should
monetary policy have been following a different course to ease some of the difficulties that our
economy has encountered?
During  the  last  half  of  the  1980s,  monetary  policy  sought  to  prevent  excessive
demand  pressures  from  fuelling  an  accelerating  trend  of  inflation.  The  intention  was  to  put
inflation on a gradual downward trend once the demand pressures subsided.
In February 1991, the Bank of Canada and the federal government made a formal
commitment  to  price  stability  as  the  objective  of  monetary  policy.  To  make  the  path  to  price
stability  more  explicit,  the  Bank  and  the  government  agreed  on  specific  targets  for  inflation
control. The targets aimed at bringing inflation (as measured by the consumer price index) down
from about 5 per cent at the end of 1990 to 2 per cent by the end of 1995.
indeed  was  aiming 
Inflation decelerated sharply between 1991 and 1992 -- much more than the Bank
had  anticipated  or 
the
sharper-than-expected  downturn  of  the  Canadian  economy  in  1990-1991  and  the  subsequent
slow recovery. Our economy had to cope with both the economic distortions caused by past high
inflation  and  with  the  large  and  overdue  adjustment  needed  to  respond  to  the  changes  in
technology and the more open and competitive world markets that I have been describing.
for.  This  was  mainly 
result  of 
the 
When  I  reflect  on  the  view  expressed  by  the  Bank’s  critics  that  the  1990-1991
recession, the slow recovery and the sharp deterioration in our fiscal situation were all caused by
an excessively tight monetary policy in the late 1980s, I find it useful to  ask  what  would  have
happened if monetary policy had in fact been less anti-inflationary in the late 1980s.
I  believe  that  such  a  policy  would  have  led  to  even  greater  inflation-related
distortions  in  our  economy,  an  even  more  pronounced  recession  afterwards  and  still  greater
problems  for  businesses  trying  to  adjust  to  the  new  technology  and  the  more  competitive
international environment. Moreover, higher inflation would have led to higher interest rates and
more expensive debt-servicing costs for governments and other debtors. Indeed, with the benefit
of  hindsight,  if  there  is  a  lesson  in  this  experience,  it  is  that  the  Bank  should  have  pursued  a
tighter monetary policy earlier in the second half of the 1980s. A tighter monetary policy earlier
on  might  have  moderated  some  of  the  speculative  activity  and  debt  accumulation  that
subsequently weighed so heavily on our economy.
The  other  lesson  is  that  fiscal  policy,  too,  should  have  been  tighter  during  that
period. With a tighter fiscal policy, some of the buildup of public debt that governments are now
having to contend with would have been avoided. More fiscal restraint during the second half of
BIS Review   29/1997
- 4 -
the 1980s would also have moderated the excess spending demands on the economy, removing
some of the upward pressure on interest rates and the Canadian dollar at the time.
Since the sharp deceleration of inflation in 1992, the role of monetary policy has
been to keep inflation low. In doing so, monetary policy has provided Canadian businesses with
a  more  stable,  lower  interest  rate  environment  in  which  to  undertake  the  investments  and  cost
controls necessary to adjust to the new competitive reality I have described.
Looking to the future
So,  where  is  the  Canadian  economy  now,  and  what  are  the  prospects  for  the
future?
I believe that Canadian business has gone through a remarkable transformation in
the  last  few  years.  There  has  been  substantial  investment  in  machinery  and  equipment,
particularly  in  computer-based  technology,  to  improve  productivity.  And  strict  cost  control  is
now the norm. As a result,  Canadian  businesses  have  become  much  more  competitive,  both  at
home  and  internationally.  The  low  Canadian  dollar  has,  no  doubt,  also  been  helpful  in  this
respect. But businesses are using the low exchange rate to help them get into new world markets
and  expand  their  market  share  rather  than  needing  it  to  offset  uncontrolled  costs  and  poor
productivity.
The  benefits  from  this  restructuring  can  already  be  seen  in  the  success  that
Canadian  businesses  have  had  over  the  last  few  years  in  exporting  their  products  and  in
competing with imports within Canada. Indeed, exports are likely to remain the main locomotive
for economic expansion in the period ahead.
The restructuring process for the public sector is not that far advanced as yet. As I
noted  earlier,  most  governments  in  Canada  took  major  steps  last  year  to  reduce  their  fiscal
deficits.  However,  public  debt  levels  remain  high  in  relation  to  our  total  national  income.
Evidence  of  investor  concerns  about  these  debt  levels,  and  about  political  uncertainty,  can  be
seen in the persistence in Canada of medium and longer-term interest rates that are high relative
to  similar  rates  in  the  United  States.  These  high  interest  rates  have  the  potential  to  discourage
some  of  the  investments  that  will  be  needed  to  keep  the  Canadian  economy  productive  and
competitive  in  the  future.  In  order  to  reduce  these  interest  rates,  Canadian  governments  must
stay  the  course  of  fiscal  consolidation,  and  bring  down  the  levels  of  public  debt  in  relation  to
national income.
The largest part of economic activity in our country revolves around the spending
by Canadian households on consumer goods of all kinds and on housing. This has been the area
most affected by the stresses and uncertainty of the restructuring.
As I said before, a good deal of the restructuring in the private sector has already
occurred.  And  private  sector  jobs  have  been  increasing  --  by  3.5  per  cent  in  1994  and  1.5  per
cent  in  1995.  We  now  need  to  reduce  some  of  the  anxiety  associated  with  public  sector
restructuring by getting on as quickly as possible with the fundamental decisions needed to put
government programs and their funding on a sustainable basis.
As for monetary  policy,  our  good  inflation  performance  and  the  fiscal  measures
taken so far have given the Bank of Canada some room to ease monetary conditions in Canada. I
BIS Review   29/1997
- 5 -
believe there is now substantial monetary stimulus in the economy, which should help counteract
some of the concerns that affect the confidence of Canadians, as we work our way through this
crucial period of restructuring the Canadian economy.
BIS Review   29/1997
