Mr.  Lamfalussy  reflects  on  the  possibilities  and  constraints  of  monetary
policy against the background of price stability in Europe   Address by the President of the
European Monetary Institute, Baron Alexandre Lamfalussy, on the occasion of the change of the
presidency of the European Monetary Institute in Frankfurt am Main on 30/6/97.
The moment has come for me to say a heartfelt “thank you” to you all!
I should like to express my gratitude, first of all, to  the  governors  of  the  central
banks of the European Union, who, in the autumn of 1993, chose me as their candidate for the
presidency  of  the  European  Monetary  Institute,  thereby  setting  in  train  a  process  which  has
allowed  me  to  play  a  part  in  a  ground-breaking  enterprise  of  exceptional  scope  and
responsibility. I  should  like  to  thank  them,  secondly,  in  their  capacity  as  members  of  the  EMI
Council, for their cooperation in this undertaking and for their wisdom, prudence, willingness to
compromise  but  also  their  will  to  achieve  results.  They  have  invariably  acted  with  the  utmost
professionalism. I should like to add that we should not have been able to achieve what has been
done without the conviction - which each of us shares - that the first duty of a central bank is to
maintain price stability. This fundamental principle has never been a matter of dispute.
My  thanks  go  next  to  the  political  authorities.  First,  to  the  Heads  of  State  or  of
Government, who did me the honour of putting their faith in me in appointing me President of
the EMI. Second, to the Finance Ministers, who resigned themselves gracefully to the existence
of an institution which would be independent of the executive  and  who  played  their  part,  with
consummate political skill, in establishing the good working atmosphere  between  the  ECOFIN
and the EMI, in the  mutual  respect  of  our  respective  competencies.  I  hope  that  this  will  be  an
enduring legacy.
Thanks  go,  too,  to  the  European  Commission,  with  which  we  have  been  able  -
after a little trial and error, and with both sides demonstrating good will and a certain ability to
listen - to draw  up  the  rules  of  the  game  for  the  indispensable  cooperation  which  is  needed  to
enable the project of Economic and Monetary Union to go ahead.
The European Parliament - and several national parliaments - have given me the
opportunity to report on the work of the EMI, in an atmosphere of constructive dialogue. Their
questions  and  concerns,  as  well  as  those  of  the  media  and  of  the  large  number  of  associations
from both the banking and financial sphere as well as society at large, have given me valuable
insights into the expectations and concerns of our fellow citizens.
These  thanks  would  not  be  complete  without  expressing  publicly  what  I  have
already had the opportunity to say in private to the members of the management and staff of the
European Monetary Institute: without their personal commitment, their spirit of innovation, their
boundless ability to find the happy medium - and not  just  a  practical  compromise  between  the
concerns of our central banks - nothing would have been accomplished.
What  can  I  say  to  you  know  by  way  of  farewell?  There  is  little  point  in  giving
you  the  “final  score”  at  this  stage  -  the  match  is  not  over  yet  ...  Recommendations  on  how  to
cope with the challenges which are looming on the horizon? You will deal with them effectively,
I am convinced, without my advice. But perhaps you will accept some reflections on the ability -
and the limits - of monetary  policy  to  meet  the  expectations  of  our  fellow  citizens  who,  while
appreciating  the  confirmation  (or  renewal)  of  price  stability,  are  looking  for  stronger  growth
and,  above  all,  more  jobs.  I  share  their  concern  unreservedly.  The  current  level  of
unemployment  in  the  majority  of  our  countries  is  ethically  unacceptable;  it  is  leading  to  the
BIS Review   67/1997
- 2 -
erosion  of  the  social  fabric  and,  because  of  the  waste  it  represents,  it  is  a  clear  signal  that  the
economy  is  not  functioning  properly.  Reducing  unemployment  must  be  the  prime  objective  of
action by the authorities. But what should be the role of monetary policy? In view of the short
time  available  to  me  -  plus  the  fact  that  you  cannot  contradict  me  -  I  shall  be  brief.  You  may
perhaps  feel  that  I  am  being  dogmatic:  if  so,  please  bear  with  me.  I  should  like  to  make  four
observations.
1.  There is not doubt whatsoever that monetary policy can bring inflation under
control.  When  monetary  policy  is  not  flanked  by  the  appropriate  budgetary  policy,  and  when
labour markets - but also goods and services markets - are not flexible, bringing inflation under
control will take time. It will take time, and it can also entail costs - which could otherwise have
been avoided. But even so, these costs would still be less than the (very high long-term) cost of
not  dealing  with  inflation.  Let  us  not  forget  that  while  the  rich  and  the  powerful  can  protect
themselves  from  any  loss  of  purchasing  power  of  their  money  -  and  in  many  cases  can  even
benefit from such a loss - the weak and the not-so-rich will always be  the  losers.  Inflation  has
always  been  a  major  source  of  social  iniquity.  In  addition,  it  prevents  the  economy  from
functioning properly, by falsifying the signals which are given by prices. The speculative boom
in the real estate markets in some of our countries at the end of the 1980s caused serious damage
- and we are still paying the price.
2.  Once inflation has been brought under control, and once this control has been
confirmed,  monetary  policy  can  guide  short-term  interest  rates  to  a  level  which  contributes  to
balanced growth. Quite a number of EU countries are in such a situation already, with short-term
interest  rates  at  around  3%.  In  others,  where  inflation  has  been  brought  under  control  more
recently, rates have not yet reached this level but are approaching it gradually. The confirmation
that  inflation  has  been  brought  under  control  does,  unfortunately,  take  time.  Finally,  in  one
major country which has seen rapid growth for several years now and in which unemployment
has  fallen  remarkably,  short-term  interest  rates  have  been  raised  -  applying  the  principle  of
preventive medicine.
3.    Now,  what  can  we  say  about  long-term  interest  rates,  which  also  have  an
important  role  to  play  in  stimulating  growth  -  perhaps  an  even  more  important  one  than
short-term rates?
Monetary  policy  does  have  an  influence  on  the  level  of  these  rates,  but  its
influence  is  not  exclusive  and  we  cannot  even  predict  the  direction  of  its  influence  with
certainty.  At  this  particular  point  in  time,  in  the  first  group  of  countries  to  which  I  referred  a
moment ago, nominal long-term interest rates are at a historically low level - they are well below
6%  -  but  real  long-term  interest  rates  can  be  regarded,  perhaps,  as  still  being  too  high  to  put
continental Europe on the road to more vigorous growth.
I  am  doubtful  whether  a  further  easing  of  monetary  policy  in  this  group  of
countries would be able to help move the yield curve in the desired direction. It could actually
have the opposite effect - if investors perceived it as heralding a weak euro. In any event, given
the  current  level  of  short-term  interest  rates,  monetary  policy’s  margin  for  manoeuvre  is
extremely limited.
It  is  possible  that  the  level  of  real  long-term  interest  rates  in  Europe  reflects,
partially at least, that of real interest rates worldwide. Europe has no influence over that effect.
BIS Review   67/1997
- 3 -
Europe  can,  however,  have  an  influence  on  the  effect  which  comes  from  the
constant increase in public sector indebtedness in our countries. As a reminder, between the end
of 1991 and the end of 1996 the general government debt rose from around 56 to above 73% of
GDP  for  the  European  Union  as  a  whole.  This  development,  together  with  the  worry  that  it
might not yet have run its course, are not likely - to say the least - to lead to a fall in real interest
rates.  Nor  do  they  create  the  climate  of  confidence  necessary  for  consumers  and  investors  to
modify  their  current  prudent  behaviour.  On  the  other  hand,  the  certainty  that  governments  are
tackling  the  underlying  causes  of  the  public  deficits  which  are  responsible  for  the  constant
increase  in  the  debt  burden  could  well  bring  about  such  a  change  in  behaviour.  “Faceless”
markets are not the only ones looking beyond the immediate present to the  future  -  our  fellow
citizens  are,  too.  The  prospect  of  self-perpetuating,  ever-increasing  deficits  will  not  encourage
them to spend more.
4.  Stronger growth would certainly have a beneficial effect on employment. But
it would not eliminate the largest component of unemployment - the structural component. This
can be done by means of measures which remedy labour market rigidities and reduce the burden
of non-wage labour costs. It is this latter channel that links efforts to create jobs with the task of
bringing  public  expenditure  under  control.  I  observe,  too,  that  in  those  countries  where
unemployment has fallen substantially, jobs have been created not by existing enterprises - and
especially not by large enterprises - but by the setting-up of a large number of new enterprises,
which have necessarily been small to begin with.
To  conclude  -  allow  me,  if  you  will,  to  be  quite  blunt.  Yes,  once  inflation  has
been  brought  properly  under  control,  monetary  policy  can  and  must  contribute  to  supporting
balanced  growth,  but  balanced  growth  will  not  depend  on  monetary  policy  alone.  Both  the
acceleration  and  the  viability  of  growth  will  rely  on  the  contribution  to  be  made  by  other
policies. First, on that of a fiscal policy which does not crowd out private investment but, rather,
fosters a climate of confidence by implementing a credible process of reforms. Second, on that
of  a  policy  which  creates  a  favourable  fiscal,  financial  and  regulatory  environment  for  the
proliferation of new  enterprises.  And,  so  that  the  growth  fostered  in  this  way  can  create  many
jobs, structural policies will have to assume the principal role, while the role of monetary policy
will then dwindle and fade away - alas - to nothing.
BIS Review   67/1997
