Bank  of  Japan  presents  its  quarterly  economic  outlook  for  winter  1997
BANK OF JAPAN, QUARTERLY BULLETIN, February 1997 (advance summary).
1.
A  moderate  economic  recovery  continues  in  Japan  as  private  demand
shows increasing firmness.  Among final demand items, public-sector investment has  begun  to
decrease while net exports have started to rise.  Housing investment has remained at a high level
and  business  fixed  investment  is  also  increasing  steadily.    While  the  increase  in  personal
consumption has been moderate on the whole, passenger car  sales  have  recently  increased  at  a
faster pace.  Meanwhile, inventories are generally at appropriate levels.  In these circumstances,
industrial production is increasing and recently, in particular, the pace of growth has accelerated
to some extent.  Labor market conditions have continued to improve moderately.
Prices have stopped declining on the whole.  Domestic wholesale prices (adjusted
for  seasonal  electricity  rates)  have  almost  stopped  declining,  reflecting  the  depreciation  of  the
yen and the  rise  in  oil  prices  to  date  as  well  as  the  moderate  improvement  in  domestic  supply
and  demand  conditions,  particularly  in  construction  goods.    The  year-to-year  decline  in
corporate  service  prices  is  narrowing  gradually.    Consumer  prices  (nationwide,  excluding
perishables) are marginally above the previous year’s level.  Land prices continue to weaken on
the whole, but there are some signs of improvement in the supply and demand conditions.  On
the balance of payments, the real trade surplus has recently started to increase and the nominal
current account surplus is also rising moderately.
2.
In  the  financial  markets,  the  overnight  call  rate  (uncollateralized)  has
stayed  slightly  below  the  official  discount  rate,  and  the  3-month  CD  rate  has  remained  at
0.50 - 0.55  per  cent  since  autumn  1996.    The  long-term  government  bond  yield  has  been
declining since July 1996, and it marked a record low of 2.3  -  2.4  per  cent  in  early  December
and has recently remained at around 2.4 per cent.  Stock prices have declined substantially since
the end of 1996.  The yen has been depreciating since the end of 1996, particularly against the
U.S. dollar.
Meanwhile, growth in lending by private financial institutions has continued to be
slow, owing both to weak corporate demand for new funds and to an increase in capital market
financing.    Monetary  aggregates  in  terms  of  M2  +  CDs  average  outstanding,  however,  have
continued to grow at over 3.0 per cent.
3.
To  gauge  future  developments  of  Japan’s  economy  in  the  context  of
individual  components  of  final  demand,  public-sector  investment  is  expected  to  show  further
declines  in  the  coming  months.    Net  exports  are  likely  to  continue  to  increase  for  some  time
despite  the  increase  in  imports  caused  by  structural  factors,  as  the  effects  of  the  yen’s
depreciation since 1995 manifest themselves.
As for the growth  momentum  of  domestic  private  demand,  corporate  profits  are
increasing  reflecting such factors as the depreciation of the yen and the rise in production.  The
recovery  in  corporate  profits  is  gradually  spreading  to  the  whole  corporate  sector,  including
small firms.  Reflecting conditions conducive to business fixed investment, such as the increase
in corporate profits and progress in capital stock adjustments, business fixed investment on the
whole  is  expected  to  continue  a  steady  recovery  for  some  time  despite  the  influence  of  the
slowdown in the market expansion in the mobile telecommunications industry.  With respect to
the  household  sector,  housing  investment  is  unlikely  to  show  significant  declines  under  the
generally easy monetary conditions.  Personal consumption on average  is  expected  to  continue
its moderate recovery, reflecting the rise in household incomes and strong demand in areas such
BIS Review   10/1997
- 2 -
as passenger cars and information-related products, although the consumption tax rate hike will
exert some negative influences on consumption growth.
However,  growth  in  business  fixed  investment  is  still  checked  as  balance-sheet
adjustment  pressures  remain  strong.    Also,  the  gains  in  household  incomes  are  expected  to  be
restrained to some extent as many firms still judge their work force to be excessive.
4.
Turning to the outlook on prices, the deceleration in the declining tempo
is  expected  to  become  more  evident.    Factors  contributing  to  this  include  the  rise  in  import
prices to date owing to the effects of the yen’s depreciation and the rise in  crude  oil  prices,  as
well  as  an  improvement  in  domestic  supply  and  demand  conditions.    However,  prices  are
unlikely  to  follow  a  clear  upward  trend  for  some  time  because  of  the  modest  pace  of
improvements  in  supply  and  demand  conditions  and  the  intense  global  competition,  but  the
influence of the accelerated rise in import prices requires careful monitoring.
5.
In  sum,  recovery  in  private  demand  shows  increasing  firmness  with  a
strengthened  virtuous  cycle  that  involves  production  growth.    Net  exports,  which  had  been
exerting  a  downward  pressure  on  the  economy  until  the  middle  of  1996,  are  beginning  to
support income formation mainly reflecting the yen’s depreciation to date.  Considering that the
restraining effects from fiscal policy on the economy are likely to strengthen, and that a setback
in  demand  is  expected  following  the  surge  in  anticipation  of  the  consumption  tax  rate  hike,
Japan’s economic growth is expected to slow down temporarily in the first half of fiscal 1997.
Judging from the above developments, however, the economic recovery on the whole will most
likely continue in the future.
At  the  same  time,  there  remain  factors,  such  as  balance-sheet  adjustment
pressures, which tend to keep private demand from gaining strength.  Also, the influence of the
recent  plunge  in  stock  prices  on  corporate  sentiment  requires  careful  scrutiny.    In  these
circumstances,  it  is  essential  to  promote  necessary  adjustments  by  such  means  as  a  swift
implementation  of  effective  reforms  in  Japan  s  economic  structure.  This  is  an  important
ingredient in the efforts to strengthen the basis for medium-term growth in Japan’s economy.
BIS Review   10/1997
