Mr. Kelley describes the Federal Reserve System's efforts to address the Year 2000
computer  systems  problem      Testimony  by  Mr.  Edward  W.  Kelley,  Jr.  before  the  Subcommittee  on
Financial Services and Technology of the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs of the US
Senate in Washington DC on 30/7/97.
I am pleased to appear before the Subcommittee today to discuss the Federal Reserve’s
efforts to address the Year 2000 computer systems problem. I will discuss what action is being taken by
the  Federal  Reserve  System  to  address  internal  systems,  our  supervisory  efforts,  coordination  with  the
industry, and contingency planning.
Year 2000 Readiness
It  is  crucial  that  the  Federal  Reserve  maintain  reliable  services  to  the  nation’s  banking
system and financial markets. I want to assure you that the Federal Reserve is giving the Year 2000 its
highest  priority,  commensurate  with  our  goal  of  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  nation’s  financial
markets  and  payments  systems,  preserving  public  confidence,  and  supporting  reliable  government
operations.
The  Federal  Reserve  System  has  developed  and  is  executing  a  comprehensive  plan  to
ensure  its  own  Year  2000  readiness  and  the  bank  supervision  function  is  well  along  in  a  cooperative,
interagency effort, to promote early remediation and testing by the industry. The supervision function is
completing an assessment of the industry’s readiness, will examine every bank subject to our jurisdiction
by  mid-1998,  and  will  review  their  progress  as  part  of  all  examinations  conducted  throughout  the
remaining months before the millennium.
We are taking a comprehensive approach to preparedness which includes assessments of
readiness,  remediation,  testing,  and  updating  proven  plans  and  techniques  used  during  other  times  of
operational stress in order to be prepared to address potential century data change difficulties. All Federal
Reserve computer program changes, as well as system and user-acceptance testing, are scheduled to be
completed  by  year-end  1998.  Further,  critical  financial  services  systems  that  interface  with  customers
will be Year 2000 ready by mid-1998, permitting approximately 18 months for customer testing.
Many  top  personnel  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System  are  working  hard  to  manage  this
initiative.  Our  staff  is  putting  in  many  extra  hours  to  prepare  for  testing  with  customers,  planning  for
business continuity in the event of any unanticipated internal systems problem, and enhancing our ability
to respond to possible operating failures of depository institutions. While there are challenges before us, I
can report that we expect to be fully prepared for the century date change.
Federal Reserve Readiness
The  Federal  Reserve  recognized  the  potential  problem  with  two-digit  date  fields  more
than  five  years  ago  when  we  began  consolidating  our  mainframe  data  processing  operations.  Our  new
centralized  mission-critical  applications,  such  as  Fedwire  funds  transfer,  book-entry  securities,  and
Automated  Clearing  House,  were  designed  from  inception  with  Year  2000  compliance  in  mind.  The
mainframe consolidation effort also necessitated extensive application standardization, which required us
to complete a comprehensive inventory of our mainframe applications, a necessary first step to effective
remediation. Like our counterparts in the private sector, the Federal Reserve System still faces substantial
challenges  in  achieving  Year  2000  readiness.  These  challenges  include  managing  a  highly  complex
project involving multiple interfaces with others, ensuring the readiness of vendor components, ensuring
the readiness of applications, testing, and establishing contingency plans.  We  are  also  faced  with  labor
market pressures that call for creative measures to retain staff who are critical to the success of our Year
2000 activities.
BIS Review74 /1997
- 2 -
According  to  industry  experts,  one  quarter  of  an  organization’s  Year  2000  compliance
efforts  are  devoted  to  project  management.  Managing  preparations  for  the  century  date  change  is
particularly  resource-intensive  given  the  number  of  automated  systems  to  be  addressed,  systems
interrelationships and interdependencies, interfaces with external data sources and customers, and testing
requirements.  In  addition,  Year  2000  preparations  must  address  computerized  environmental  systems
such  as  power,  heating  and  cooling,  voice  communications,  elevators,  and  vaults.  In  the  case  of  the
Federal Reserve,  management  of  this  project  is  particularly  challenging  in  that  it  requires  coordination
among  Reserve  Banks,  the  Board  of  Governors,  government  agencies,  numerous  vendors  and  service
providers, and approximately 13,000 customers.
In  late  1995,  a  Federal  Reserve  System-wide  project  was  initiated,  referred  to  as  the
Century  Date  Change  (CDC)  project,  to  coordinate  the  efforts  of  the  Reserve  Banks,  Federal  Reserve
Automation  Services  (FRAS)  --  the  Reserve  Banks’  centralized  mainframe  data  processing  and  data
communications  services  organization  --  and  the  Board  of  Governors.  Our  project  team  is  taking  a
three-part approach to achieve its objectives, focusing on planning, readiness, and communication.  Our
planning began with a careful inventory of all applications and  establishment  of  schedules  and  support
mechanisms to ensure that readiness objectives are met. The readiness process involves performing risk
assessments,  modifying  automated  systems,  and  testing  internally  and  with  depository  institutions,
service  providers,  and  government  agencies.  Finally,  we  are  stressing  effective,  consistent,  and  timely
communication,  both  internal  and  external,  to  promote  awareness  and  commitment  at  all  levels  of  our
own organization and the financial services industry, more generally. Some of our most senior executives
are leading the project and the Board is now receiving formal status reports at least every 60 days. Any
significant compliance issues will be reported to the Board immediately.
A significant challenge in meeting our Year 2000 readiness objectives is our reliance on
commercial  hardware  and  software  products  and  services.  Much  of  our  information  processing  and
communications infrastructure is comprised of hardware and software products from third-party vendors.
Additionally,  the  Federal  Reserve  utilizes  commercial  application  software  products  and  services  for
certain  administrative  functions  and  other  operations.  As  a  result,  we  must  coordinate  with  numerous
vendors and manufacturers to ensure that all of our hardware, software, and services are Year 2000 ready.
In many cases, compliance will require upgrading, or even replacing, equipment and software. We have
completed an initial inventory of vendor components used in our mainframe and distributed computing
environments, and vendor coordination and system change are progressing well.
As we continue to assess our systems for Year 2000 readiness, we are preparing a central
environment  for  testing  our  payment  system  applications.  We  are  establishing  isolated  mainframe  data
processing environments to be used for internal testing of all system components as well as  for  testing
with depository institutions and other government agencies. These environments will enable testing for
high-risk  dates  such  as  year-end  1999,  beginning  of  year  2000,  and  February  29,  2000  (leap  year).
Testing  will  be  conducted  through  a  combination  of  future-dating  our  computer  systems  to  verify  the
readiness of our infrastructure, and testing critical future dates within interfaces to other institutions. Our
test environments will be available to our customers for testing on a twenty-four hour basis, six days a
week.  Network  communications  components  will  also  be  tested  and  certified  in  a  special  test  lab
environment at FRAS.
The testing effort for Year 2000 readiness within the Federal Reserve will be  extensive
and complex. Industry experts estimate that testing for readiness will consume about half  of  total  Year
2000 project resources. To leverage existing  resources  and  processes,  we  are  modelling  our  Year  2000
testing, both internally  and  with  depository  institutions,  on  proven  testing  methods  and  processes.  Our
customers  are  already  familiar  with  these  processes  and  testing  environment.  We  will  finalize  and
distribute  our  testing  strategy  to  depository  institutions  by  the  end  of  September  this  year  and  begin
coordinating test schedules January 1998. As I noted earlier, the Reserve Banks are targeting June 1998
to  commence  testing  with  their  customers,  which  allows  an  18-month  time  period  for  depository
institutions to test their systems with the Federal Reserve.
- 3 -
The next challenge I would like to discuss regards retaining staff critical to the success of
the project. As I mentioned earlier, we have placed a high priority on our CDC project, and as such have
allocated many of the best managers and technical  staff  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System  to  work  on  the
project.  The  information  technology  industry  is  already  experiencing  market  pressures  due  to  the
increased demand for technical talent. As the millennium draws closer,  the  global  market  requirements
for  qualified  personnel  will  intensify  even  further.  We  are  responding  as  necessary  to  these
market-induced  pressures  by  offering  incentives  to  retain  staff  members  in  critical,  high-demand
positions.
Our  focus  at  the  Board  goes  beyond  the  immediate  need  to  prepare  our  systems  and
ensure  reliable  operation  of  the  payments  infrastructure.  We  are  also  working  hard  to  address  the
supervisory issues raised by Year 2000 and are developing contingency plans which I will discuss later.
Supervision Program
Banks  rely  heavily  on  their  automated  information  processing  and  telecommunications
systems to participate in  the  global  payments  system,  to  exchange  information  with  counterparties  and
regulatory agencies, and to manage their internal control systems and sophisticated computer equipment.
As a bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve has worked actively with the other banking agencies to advise
the industry of our concerns, and to develop a thorough understanding of the industry’s readiness. In this
regard,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  closely  monitoring  Year  2000  preparations  and  compliance  of  the
institutions we supervise so that we can act aggressively to identify and resolve problems that arise.
Early  this  year,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  regulatory  agencies  developed  a
uniform Year 2000 assessment questionnaire to collect and aggregate information on a national basis. We
have received over 1000 responses from financial organizations and service providers supervised by the
Federal  Reserve.  Based  on  these  responses  and  other  information,  we  believe  the  banking  industry’s
awareness  level  has  improved  substantially  during  1997  and  is  reflected  in  the  intensified  project
management, planning, budgeting, and renovation efforts that have been initiated.
Generally  speaking,  the  nation’s  largest  banking  organizations  have  done  much  to
address  the  issues  and  have  devoted  significant  financial  and  human  resources  to  preparing  for  the
century  date  change.  Many  larger  banks  are  already  renovating  their  operating  systems  and  have
commenced testing of their critical applications. Large organizations appear capable of renovating their
critical operating systems by year-end 1998, and will have their testing well underway by then. Some of
these organizations have recently come to realize that their initial resource and cost estimates to address
this project need to be raised, given the magnitude of the tasks to be performed and the growing scarcity
of available programming staff with the skills necessary to renovate older systems.
Smaller banks, including the US offices of foreign banks and those dependent on a third
party  to  provide  their  computer  services,  are  generally  aware  of  the  issues  and  are  working  on  the
problem; however, their progress is less visible and will be carefully monitored as part of our supervision
program. Many of these organizations appear to have underestimated the efforts necessary to ensure that
their  systems  will  be  compliant.  Accordingly,  we  will  direct  significant  attention  to  ensure  that  these
banks  intensify  their  efforts  to  prepare  for  the  Year  2000.  We  intend  to  update  our  assessment
periodically in order to maintain a current awareness of the industry’s readiness.
Our  focus  on  the  industry’s  readiness  began  last  year,  when  the  Federal  Reserve
commenced examining banks’ plans and initiatives for the century date change. Through mid-year 1998
we  will  continue  this  program  and  conduct  a  thorough  Year  2000  preparedness  examination  of  every
bank,  US  branch  and  agency  of  a  foreign  bank,  data  processing  center,  and  service  provider  that  we
supervise. Our examination program includes an extensive review of each institution’s Year 2000 project
management  plans  in  order  to  evaluate  their  sufficiency,  to  ensure  the  direct  involvement  of  senior
management and the board of directors, and to monitor their progress against the plan. Our examiners are
actively engaged in ensuring that the board of directors and senior management are addressing the issues
- 4 -
and  assembling  the  necessary  resources.  Based  on  the  examination  results  and  the  findings  collected
during  the  current  assessment  program,  we  are  identifying  those  institutions  that  require  intensified
supervisory attention and establish our priorities for subsequent examinations.
Public Awareness
We are mindful that extensive communication with the industry and the public is crucial
to  the  success  of  our  efforts.  Our  public  awareness  program  includes  communications  related  to  our
testing  efforts  and  our  overall  concerns  about  the  industry’s  readiness.  We  continue  to  advise  our
customers of the Federal Reserve’s plans and time frames for making our software Year 2000 ready. We
have  inaugurated  a  Year  2000  newsletter  and  have  just  published  our  first  bulletin  addressing  specific
technical  issues.  We  have  also  established  an  Internet  Web  site  to  provide  depository  institutions  with
information  regarding  the  Federal  Reserve  System’s  CDC  project.  This  site  can  be  accessed  at  the
following Internet address: http://www.frbsf.org/fiservices/cdc.
the 
level, 
To  heighten 
industry’s  awareness 
the  Federal  Financial  Institutions
Examination  Council  (FFIEC),  issued  a  policy  statement  on  May  5th  entitled  “Year  2000  Project
Management  Awareness,”  which  updates  the  supervisory  guidance  first  issued  in  1996.  The  statement
emphasizes  the  regulators’  concerns  that  inability  to  provide  a  compliant  hardware  and  software
environment to support the upcoming century date change would expose a bank to inordinate operational,
financial, and legal risks. A set of uniform examination procedures accompanying the statement provides
guidance for  examiners  as  well  as  bank  management,  stressing  the  need  for  sponsorship  at  the  highest
levels of the organization to effectively manage the remediation process and address any deficiencies that
may surface.
Bank management must not only be aware  of  the  many  Year  2000  problems,  but  must
also  be  sensitive  to  the  magnitude  of  the  efforts  needed  to  achieve  compliance  and  the  consequent
budgetary implications. Industry experts maintain that costs to perform Year 2000 renovation tasks will
increase  as  the  demand  for  skilled  information  technology  professionals  grows.  Accordingly,  the
interagency  policy  statement  emphasizes  the  need  for  bank  management  to  be  aggressive  in  securing
sufficient human and computer resources. The statement also encourages banks to be largely completed
with  their  renovation  and  well  into  testing  of  their  major  applications  by  year-end  1998  so  that  any
substantive problems can be addressed in 1999.
The  statement  also  calls  upon  banks  to  consider  the  Year  2000  risks  posed  by  their
borrowers and customers, as  banks  could  be  adversely  affected  by  borrowers  who  are  not  prepared  for
Year 2000 processing. Corporate customers who have not considered Year 2000 issues may experience a
disruption  in  business,  resulting  in  financial  difficulties  that  could  negatively  influence  their
creditworthiness.  Examiners  now  verify  that  a  bank  incorporates  a  borrower’s  Year  2000  preparedness
into its underwriting standards, and that loan officers assess the extent of Year 2000 computer problems
that may influence a borrower’s ability to repay its loans on a timely basis.
On  behalf  of  the  FFIEC,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  developed  a  Year  2000  information
distribution system, including an Internet web site and a toll free Fax Back service (888-882- 0982). The
web site provides easy access to policy statements, guidance to examiners, and paths to other Year 2000
web sites available from numerous other sources. The site has been used heavily since its introduction in
early May of this year. The FFIEC Year 2000 web site can be accessed at the following Internet address:
http://www.ffiec.gov/y2k.
The Federal Reserve has also produced a ten-minute video entitled “Year 2000 Executive
Awareness”  intended  for  viewing  by  a  bank’s  board  of  directors  and  senior  management.  The  video
presents  a  summary  of  the  Year  2000  five-phase  project  management  plan  outlined  in  the  interagency
policy  statement.  In  my  introductory  remarks  on  the  video,  I  note  that  senior  bank  officials  should  be
directly  involved  in  managing  the  Year  2000  project  to  ensure  that  it  is  given  the  appropriate  level  of
- 5 -
attention  and  sufficient  resources  to  address  the  issue  on  a  timely  basis.  The  video  has  already  been
distributed to banks and their service providers, and can be ordered through the Board’s Web site.
We  are  also  taking  steps  to  provide  this  information  to  foreign  bank  supervisors.  With
regard to the international aspects of the Year 2000 issue, US offices of foreign banks pose a unique set
of challenges. Based on our assessments, we are concerned that some offices may not have an adequate
appreciation  of  the  magnitude  and  ramifications  of  the  problem,  and  may  not  have  committed  the
resources necessary to address the issues effectively. This is a particular concern for foreign bank offices
that are dependent on their foreign parent bank for information processing systems.
Therefore,  we  are  working  through  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements’  (BIS)
committee  of  bank  supervisors  composed  of  many  of  the  international  agencies  responsible  for  the
foreign banks that operate in the US Through several presentations and the distribution of the interagency
statement and the Year 2000 video to the BIS Supervisors Committee, we have sought to elevate foreign
bank supervisors’ awareness of the risks posed by the century date change and to solicit their assistance
in monitoring the state of overall preparedness of foreign bank parents to ensure that  they  consider  the
needs of their US offices.
We are also participating in the BIS Group of Computer Experts’ meeting of G-10  and
non-G-10  central  banks  in  September  which  provides  a  forum  to  share  views  on  and  approaches  to
dealing  with  Year  2000  issues  and  have  been  active  in  various  private  sector  forums.  The  participants
will  discuss  their  involvement  with  raising  bank  industry  awareness,  remediation  of  payment  systems,
and  the  readiness  of  the  central  banks’  internal  systems.  Information  garnered  from  this  meeting  will
assist  the  BIS  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems,  as  well  as  the  Federal  Reserve,  in
understanding the current state of preparedness of payment systems on a global level.
Contingency Planning
Because  smooth  and  uninterrupted  financial  flows  are  obviously  of  utmost  importance,
our main focus is our preparedness and the avoidance of problems. But  we  know  from  experience  that
upon  occasion,  things  can  go  wrong.  Given  our  unique  role  as  the  nation’s  central  bank,  the  Federal
Reserve  has  always  stressed  contingency  planning  --  for  both  systemic  risks  as  well  as  operational
failures.
In  this  regard,  we  regularly  conduct  exhaustive  business  resumption  tests  of  our  major
payment  systems  that  include  depository  institutions.  Moreover,  as  a  result  of  our  experience  in
responding  to  problems  arising  from  such  diverse  events  as  earthquakes,  fires,  storms,  and  power
outages,  as  well  as  liquidity  problems  in  institutions,  we  expect  to  be  well  positioned  to  deal  with
problems  in  the  financial  sector  that  might  arise  as  a  result  of  CDC.  We  are,  of  course,  developing
specific  CDC  contingency  plans  to  address  various  operational  scenarios.  Our  existing  business
resumption plans will be updated to address date-related difficulties that may face the financial industry.
We already  have  arrangements  in  place  to  assist  financial  institutions  in  the  event  they
are unable to access their own systems. For example, we are able to provide  financial  institutions  with
access  to  Federal  Reserve  computer  terminals  on  a  limited  bases  for  the  processing  of  critical  funds
transfers.  This  contingency  arrangement  has  proven  highly  effective  when  used  from  time  to  time  by
depository  institutions  experiencing  major  hardware/software  outages  or  that  have  had  their  operations
disrupted due to natural disasters such as the Los Angeles earthquake, hurricane Hugo in the Carolinas,
and hurricane Andrew in south Florida.  In  these  cases  we  worked  closely  with  financial  institutions  to
ensure  that  adequate  supplies  of  cash  were  available  to  the  community  and  also  arranged  for  our
operations to function virtually without interruptions for 24 hours a day during the crisis period. We feel
the experience gained from such crises will prove very helpful in the event of similar problems triggered
by century date change. We are also beginning to formulate responses for augmenting certain functions,
such as computer help desk services and off-line funds transfers, to respond to short-term needs for these
services.
- 6 -
Although  operational  contingency  is  something  that  the  Federal  Reserve  is  confronted
with on a  daily  basis,  preparation  for  contingencies  in  the  century  date  change  environment  does  offer
some  new  and  significant  challenges.  For  example,  in  the  software  application  arena,  the  normal
contingency of falling back to a prior release of the software is not a viable option. This underscores the
importance of the rigorous assessment and testing to which all applications must be subjected.
Beyond reliance on a sound plan and effective execution of the plan, the Federal Reserve
is  not  totally  dependent  upon  any  single  system  for  executing  payment  orders.  While  we  have  very
sophisticated automated systems in place, such as Fedwire and our Automated Clearing House systems,
we also operate paper-based payment systems that offer a set of alternatives in the event of a disruption
in a segment of the electronic payment system.
Clearly, the Federal Reserve and other bank supervisors expect depository institutions to
work  diligently  and  effectively  to  ensure  that  automation  issues  associated  with  the  Year  2000  are
resolved fully and in  a  timely  fashion.  However,  we  anticipate  that  at  least  a  few  financial  institutions
will  experience  difficulty  in  completing  their  Year  2000  preparations  in  a  timely  manner,  and  we  are
developing  plans  to  address  such  cases.  The  Federal  Reserve  will  identify  and  monitor  these
organizations closely  and  work  to  ensure  that  senior  management  and  boards  of  directors  are  aware  of
their  Year  2000  issues,  cost  implications,  and  possible  consequences.  A  bank’s  need  for  adequate
preparation for the Year 2000 is regarded as a safety and soundness issue. Where progress is deemed to
be  substantively  less  than  satisfactory,  resulting  in  excessive  risk  and  a  possibly  unsafe  or  unsound
condition, we will address the issue in a manner consistent with our long-standing supervisory approach
to dealing with other safety and soundness issues. The full range of our supervisory tools and remedies
are  available,  including  intensified  monitoring,  progressively  more  detailed  reporting  requirements,
presentations to the board of directors, insistence on bank commitments to initiate corrective action, and,
ultimately, possible use of enforcement actions as appropriate.
We  recognize,  nonetheless,  that  despite  their  best  efforts,  some  depository  institutions
may experience operating difficulties, either as a result of their own computer problems or those of their
customers, counterparties, or others. These problems could be manifested in a number of ways and would
not  necessarily  involve  funding  shortfalls.  Nevertheless,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  always  prepared  to
provide information to depository  institutions  on  the  balances  in  their  accounts  with  us  throughout  the
day,  so  that  they  can  identify  shortfalls  and  seek  funding  in  the  market.  The  Federal  Reserve  will  be
prepared to lend in appropriate circumstances and with adequate collateral to depository institutions when
market sources of funding are not reasonably available. The terms and conditions  of  such  lending  may
depend upon the circumstances giving rise to the liquidity shortfall.
Discussions are also underway with the other federal banking agencies to ensure that we
are jointly prepared to address the challenge resulting from serious operating problems. If such operating
problems  were  not  correctable  within  a  reasonable  time  frame,  it  could  necessitate  a  federal  resolution
comparable to that used for a bank that has become capital insolvent.
Our  preparations  for  possible  liquidity  difficulties  also  extend  to  the  foreign  bank
branches and agencies in the US that may be adversely affected directly by their own computer systems
or through difficulties caused by the linkage and dependence  on  their  parent  bank.  Such  circumstances
would  necessitate  coordination  with  the  home  country  supervisor.  Moreover,  consistent  with  current
policy,  foreign  central  banks  will  be  expected  to  provide  liquidity  support  to  any  foreign  banking
organizations that experience a funding shortfall.
Closing Remarks
As I indicated at the outset, the Federal Reserve views  its  Year  2000  preparations  with
great seriousness.  As  such,  we  have  placed  a  high  priority  on  the  remediation  of  date  problems  in  our
systems and the development of action plans that will ensure business continuity for the critical financial
- 7 -
systems  we  operate.  While  we  have  made  significant  progress  in  validating  our  internal  systems  and
planning for testing with depository institutions and others using Federal Reserve services, we must work
to  ensure  that  our  efforts  remain  on  schedule  and  that  problems  are  addressed  in  a  timely  fashion.  In
particular,  we  will  be  paying  special  attention  to  the  testing  needs  of  depository  institutions  and  the
financial industry and are prepared to adjust our support for them as required by experience. We believe
that we are well-positioned to meet our objectives and will remain vigilant throughout the process.
As  a  bank  supervisor,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  address  the  industry’s
preparedness, monitor progress, and target for special supervisory attention those organizations that are
most  in  need  of  assistance.  Lastly,  we  will  continue  to  participate  in  international  forums  with  the
expectation that these efforts will help foster an international awareness of Year 2000 issues and provide
for the sharing of experiences, ideas, and best practices.
