Dr. Duisenberg responds to being made European Banker of the Year   Brief
speech by the President of the Netherlands Bank and of the Bank for International Settlements,
Dr. W.F. Duisenberg,  on  receiving  the  European  Banker  of  the  Year  award  in  Frankfurt  on
3/3/97.
First of all I would like to thank you for presenting me with the European Banker
of the Year award. I must confess that apart from feeling highly honoured at having such a prize
bestowed on me, I feel slightly surprised as well. It is not until 1st July of this year that I will be
taking over the leadership of the EMI to become a veritable European Banker.
There is something symbolic about this prize being presented in Frankfurt, which
is not just the vibrant financial heart of Germany, but also the city where the monetary policy of
the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  will  be  made.  And  it  is  about  EMU  that  I  wish  to  speak
today.
With  the  moment  of  deciding  which  Member  States  meet  the  criteria  for
accession  to  EMU  creeping  up  on  us,  the  discussion  on  EMU  is  increasingly  centring  on  the
question  of  how  EMU  is  to  be  achieved  rather  than  on  whether  EMU  will  be  achieved.  And
rightly  so,  because  the  completion  of  EMU  became  a  certainty  when  it  was  laid  down  in  the
Maastricht Treaty in 1992. EMU is to start  off  on  1st  January  1999.  In  the  spring  of  1998  the
Heads of Government of the European Union will decide which Member States meet the criteria
for entry. By signing and ratifying the Treaty, Member States opted to join EMU as soon as they
fulfil  the  criteria.  Only  the  United  Kingdom  and  Denmark  insisted  on  an  opt-out  clause,
releasing  them  from  the  obligation  to  introduce  the  euro  upon  qualifying  for  EMU.  The
completion of EMU is irreversible, the introduction of the euro definitive.
When  EMU  takes  off,  all  Member  States  participating  in  the  euro  area  will  be
confronted  with  a  fundamental  change  of  environment.  A  proper  start  is  of  the  utmost
importance, with the euro being just as hard as the guilder or, if you will, the Deutsche mark. I
need not explain to you the importance of low inflation, and hence of a strong currency. If we
want  the  euro  to  be  strong,  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  comply  strictly  with  the  convergence
criteria.  A  weak  euro  and  the  attending  high  interest  rate  level  would  be  of  no  benefit  to
anybody,  and  that  includes  the  potential  derogation  countries.  Please  keep  in  mind  that  a
monetary union with ill-converging Member States would be incapable of absorbing  economic
shocks.  Ultimately  the  tensions  attending  a  malfunctioning  EMU  would  jeopardise  the
achievements of the Single Market. In my view, potential derogation countries should not even
wish to take part in an EMU which allows insufficiently converged Member States to join.
That  brings  me  to  the  position  of  Member  States  with  a  derogation.  At  present
many  Member  States  are  making  desperate  attempts  to  meet  the  convergence  criteria  for
introduction  of  the  euro.  Nevertheless  we  must  make  allowance  for  the  fact  that  a  number  of
them will not  be  able  to  participate  when  EMU  takes  off  on  1st  January  1999.  We  should  not
make  too  much  of  their  predicament.  After  all,  a  Member  State  with  a  derogation  is  not
excommunicated,  but  will  be  allowed  to  join  at  a  later  date.  If  they  succeed  in  meeting  the
convergence criteria within the near future, some of these countries will be able to join the core
group when the euro banknotes and coins are introduced in 2002.
Moreover, an exchange rate mechanism is presently being  designed  which  seeks
to  ensure  that  the  derogation  countries  retain  close  links  with  the  core  group.  The  mechanism
will  support  their  exchange  rate  policies.  It  aims  to  prevent  unduly  large  exchange  rate
movements within the European Union which might impede the workings of the Single Market.
At the same time, efforts will have to be made to reinforce convergence between  the  so-called
BIS Review   27/1997
- 2 -
ins and outs in Stage Three in order to promote the accession of the derogation countries. Here
the pact for stability and growth can make a major contribution. Under the pact, the EU Member
States,  whether  in  or  outside  the  euro  area,  commit  themselves  to  strive  for  a  near-balanced
budget or even a  budget  surplus.  In  fact,  the  pact  would  bring  about  a  return  to  the  budgetary
discipline adhered to before the deficits of many countries began to get out of hand in the 1970s
and 1980s.
A  strong  monetary  union  creates  the  right  climate  for  low  inflation.  Low
inflation, i.e. price stability, is the overriding  objective  of  the  ECB.  Internal  stability,  meaning
stable prices, is the principal aim. External stability, though not a primary objective, may ensue.
There is after all a clear connection between a strong EMU with low inflation and the external
value of the euro; it is in fact a precondition for a strong and stable euro. When the three large
trade blocks, the US, Japan and Europe all pursue policies aiming for internal stability, they will
not  only  reap  the  fruits  domestically,  but  they  will  also  contribute  to  a  global  climate  of
exchange  rate  stability.  One  of  the  main  reasons  for  exchange  rate  disturbances,  viz.  an
inconsistent and insufficiently confidence-inspiring policy, would thus be removed.
The importance of reasonably stable exchange rates all over the world brings me
to  the  international  position  of  the  euro.  Let  me  conclude  with  a  few  remarks  on  that  score.
Obviously  an  economy  stands  to  benefit  materially  when  its  currency  evolves  into  an
international key currency.  A  country  whose  currency  figures  in  large  numbers  of  transactions
elsewhere faces far fewer exchange rate risks, while its financial sector is given a major boost. A
currency  circulating  within  private  sectors  outside  its  own  country  brings  in  income  for  its
issuer,  the  so-called  seigniorage.  The  euro  is  well  placed  to  play  an  important  role  as  an
international currency. Such a position is, however, not acquired overnight, but will have to be
won  gradually.  However,  several  major  conditions  for  such  a  position  in  the  longer  term  are
already  fulfilled.  The  European  single  market,  encompassing  350  million  inhabitants,  offers  a
solid  foundation  for  the  euro.  Another  condition  is  the  existence  of  sophisticated  financial
markets.  Building  up  on  the  position  attained  by  the  Deutsche  mark,  the  euro’s  prospects  are
good in this respect. And last but not least, the euro will have to be a strong and stable currency.
Only a hard currency will make it in the international financial markets. With the euro’s future
role  as  an  international  currency  in  mind,  let  us  make  sure  that  EMU  starts  off  with  really
converged  economies,  so  that  the  ECB  will  be  able  to  realise  its  objective  of  price  stability
without having to resort to overly painful policy measures. That will enable the euro to become a
prominent international currency.
BIS Review   27/1997
