Bank  of  Japan’s  May  review  of  monetary  and  economic  trends  in  Japan
BANK OF JAPAN, MONTHLY ECONOMIC REVIEW, 20/5/97.
Japan’s  economy  continues  on  a  moderate  recovery  trend  despite  some
fluctuations  caused  by  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate,  with  private  demand  showing
underlying firmness.  With respect to final demand, public-sector investment has decreased, and
housing  investment  has  declined,  reflecting  the  reversal  in  the  stepped-up  demand  which  took
place ahead of the rise in the consumption tax rate.  However, net exports have continued to rise
and  business  fixed  investment  is  increasing  steadily.  Despite  the  reversal  in  the  stepped-up
demand caused by the consumption tax rate hike, the recovery in personal consumption has not
been  hindered,  given  the  moderate  but  firm  recovery  in  labor  market  conditions  and  income
formation.  In  these  circumstances,  industrial  production  has  been  firm  to  recover  the  level  of
inventories  which  declined  owing  to  the  temporary  surge  in  demand  ahead  of  the  rise  in  the
consumption  tax  rate.    Meanwhile,  prices  have  stopped  declining,  and  growth  in  monetary
aggregates has continued at around 3.0 per cent.
With  regard  to  personal  consumption,  outlays  for  travel  have  continued  to
increase  moderately.    With  respect  to  goods,  sales  particularly  in  expensive  goods  surged  in
March 1997 ahead of the rise in the consumption tax rate, followed by a decline in April as its
reaction.    Passenger-car  sales  recorded  buoyant  two-digit  growth  year-to-year  for  six
consecutive  months  between  October  1996  and  March  1997,  but  showed  a  two-digit  decline
year-to-year  in  April.    Although  sales  of  electrical  appliances,  as  well  as  sales  at  department
stores and supermarkets, rose significantly in March 1997, April figures available for department
stores in Tokyo are significantly below the previous year’s level.  However, the recovery trend
in personal consumption do not seem to have been hindered, as labor market conditions as well
as household income formation are improving steadily, albeit moderately.
Among  leading  indicators  of  business  fixed  investment,  machinery  orders  have
increased steadily.  Construction floor area has also continued to recover moderately.
With 
respect 
the
seasonally-adjusted  annual  rate  reached  a  significantly  high  level  in  the  fourth  quarter  1996,
partly  reflecting  the  stepped-up  demand  ahead  of  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate.    Later,
they declined as the surge in demand reversed.
investment,  housing  starts 
to  housing 
terms  of 
in 
Regarding  public-sector  investment,  the  amount  of  public  works  contracted  has
quite recently picked up somewhat, reflecting  orders  included  in  the  supplementary  budget  for
fiscal 1996.  However, public-sector investment has been on a declining trend since spring 1996
when orders from the large economic stimulus package peaked out.
Real  exports  are  increasing,  reflecting  the  moderate  expansion  of  overseas
economies and the  effects  of  the  yen’s  depreciation  between  mid-1995  and  April  1997  .    Real
imports have also continued to increase, reflecting such elements as the rise in domestic demand.
However, growth has been moderate compared to that in exports against the background of the
narrowing  price  differentials  between  home  and  abroad  caused  by  the  yen’s  depreciation.
Reflecting  these  developments  in  exports  and  imports,  the  real  trade  surplus  has  been  rising
since  the  second  half  of  1996.    The  nominal  current-account  surplus  is  also  increasing,  but  its
increase  has  been  more  moderate  owing  to  rising  crude  oil  prices  until  early  1997  and
fluctuations in the income account.
Industrial production increased at a significant pace in the fourth quarter 1996 and
the  first  quarter  1997.    Industrial  production  in  April  and  May  is  expected  to  remain  virtually
BIS Review   54/1997
- 2 -
unchanged at the level recorded in the first quarter 1997 despite the reversal in the surge in final
demand.  This has partly been supported by the recovery in inventories from the low level at the
end  of  March  1997  created  by  the  temporary  surge  in  demand  ahead  of  the  consumption  tax
hike.
Labor  market  conditions  have  continued  to  improve  moderately  on  the  whole.
Although  the  unemployment  rate  remains  at  a  high  level  and  employment  growth  has  been
moderate, growth in nominal wages has been accelerating  somewhat,  reflecting  the  increase  in
production  and  corporate  profits.    The  ratio  of  job  offers  to  job  applications  has  continued  to
improve.
Prices have stopped declining.  Domestic wholesale prices (adjusted for seasonal
electricity rates) rose by almost 2 per cent in April 1997, as the rise in the consumption tax rate
was almost fully passed on to prices.  Downward pressures remain strong, including those from
technological  innovation,  such  as  in  electrical  machinery,  but  domestic  wholesale  prices  have
remained unchanged or have  risen  marginally.    This  reflects  the  yen’s  depreciation  and  higher
oil  prices  to  date,  as  well  as  the  moderate  improvement  in  domestic  supply  and  demand
conditions.  The year-to-year declines in corporate service prices are narrowing steadily, mainly
owing to the improvement in supply and demand conditions, although leasing charges continue
to decline.  In consumer prices (nationwide, excluding perishables), overall consumer prices are
marginally  above  the  previous  year’s  level  mainly  because  the  year-to-year  declines  in  goods
prices have slowed.
Growth  in  monetary  aggregates,  measured  in  terms  of  the  year-to-year  growth
rate of M2 + CDs average outstanding, has slowed somewhat compared to that in summer 1996,
reflecting  the  shift  of  assets  to  those  outside  M2  +  CDs.    Recently,  M2  +  CDs  average
outstanding grew at around 3 per cent on the whole.
Regarding  money  market  rates,  the  overnight  call  rate  (uncollateralized)  has
moved at a level slightly below  the  official  discount  rate.    The  3-month  CD  rate  has  stayed  at
around  0.55  per  cent.    Meanwhile,  the  long-term  government  bond  yield  declined  to  a  record
low of below 2.1 per cent in early April 1997.  However, it recently rose to around 2.5 per cent
as  market  uncertainties  about  the  economic  outlook  and  about  Japanese  financial  institutions
have gradually subsided in line with developments in the stock market.
With  respect  to  bank  lending  rates,  the  short-term  prime  lending  rate  has
remained at a record low level of 1.625 per  cent  since  September  1995.    The  long-term  prime
lending rate had been moving at the record low of 2.5 per cent since December 1996.  Reflecting
movements in long-term interest rates, however, it was raised by 0.6 percentage points to 3.1 per
cent in May 1997.
On  the  stock  exchange,  the  Nikkei  225  stock  average  has  been  rising  since  the
second  half  of  April  1997,  reflecting  the  fact  that  market  uncertainties  about  the  economic
outlook  and  about  Japanese  financial  institutions  have  gradually  subsided,  and  the  strong  U.S.
stock prices.  In early May, it recovered to  above  ¥20,000  for  the  first  time  in  four  and  a  half
months, and has recently continued to move at around ¥20,000.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen depreciated between April and early May
to  around  ¥126  -  127  to  the  U.S.  dollar.    However,  the  yen’s  depreciation  was  later  reversed
rapidly, as concerns about the appreciation of the U.S. dollar strengthened, and as the differential
in interest rates between Japan and the United States narrowed somewhat.  The yen has recently
BIS Review   54/1997
- 3 -
moved at around ¥116 - 117 to the U.S. dollar.  Meanwhile, the yen has appreciated against the
deutsche mark and recently has moved at around ¥68.
BIS Review   54/1997
