Mr. Thompson discusses the many faces of risk in banking in Australia   Talk
by the Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr. G.J. Thompson, to the Australian
Institute of Banking and Finance in Canberra on 12/6/97.
Introduction
I would like to talk today about various aspects  of  risk  in  banking.  One  modern
notion is that banking  essentially  consists  of  processing  information  and  managing  risk.  While
the  average  person  in  the  street  probably  has  a  more  prosaic  -  not  to  say  jaundiced  -  view  of
banks, risk management is indeed very much a core activity for bankers.
And  it  is  of  fundamental  concern  to  bank  supervisors,  such  as  the  RBA,  that
banks are doing this job reasonably well - that all the big risks are identified clearly, measured
accurately, monitored continuously and kept within prudent bounds. Bank supervision in recent
years has focused much more intensively on the quality of the systems which banks use for these
tasks.
It  seems  that  banks  and  their  supervisors  are  having  to  contend  with  a  steadily
growing array of risks.
Derivatives  risk,  operational  risk  and  environmental  risk  have  all  come  to
prominence in the past decade or so. And public relations risk is a major ongoing challenge for
banks!
One  even  hears  occasionally  of  “regulation  risk”  -  which  seems  to  relate  to  the
capricious demands of regulatory agencies. Needless to say,  this  one  has  not  been  high  on  our
list of concerns for the Australian banking system!
I propose to touch on only three areas of banking risk:
 old-fashioned credit risk;
interbank settlement risk; and
the Year 2000 problem - a kind of operational risk visited upon the world
by the approach of the new millenium, and the short-sightedness of 1970s
computer programmers with a penchant for abbreviation!
Credit risk
All  of  the  major  periods  of  stress  in  Australian  banking  have  been  caused  by
credit  losses.  In  the  most  recent  episode  -  in  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s  -  banks  wrote  off
over $25 billion in loan losses.
There  have  been  recent  comments  from  some  bankers  and  others  that  lending
standards are slackening once again, perhaps threatening another such round.
One reaction would be that these comments are rather alarmist. After all, on most
indicators, banks’ asset quality position is very sound. Impaired loans are less than one per cent
of  their  total  assets,  the  lowest  point  since  we  started  collecting  statistics  seven  years  ago.
Furthermore, the rate at which assets are becoming impaired has been stable for some time, and
shows  no  signs  of  an  upturn.  “Past  due”  loans  kicked  up  in  1995  and  early  1996  but  have
stabilised recently, still at relatively low levels.
BIS Review   71/1997
- 2 -
The broader environment also has fewer worrying features than in the 1980s:
   aggregate bank credit is expanding much less rapidly than then (although
inflation rates are also down quite a bit);
the financial position of business borrowers is generally quite healthy with
debt to equity ratios lower,  and  interest  coverage  higher,  than  in  the  late
1980s; and
while asset prices are rising, there is no sign of the bubbles we saw in the
1980s;  commercial  property  prices  are  up  only  modestly  from  their  low
points of 1993.
We  also  have  the  general  impression  that  banks  have  a  better  handle  on  their
credit  risks  than  they  did  ten  years  ago.  With  more  centralised  credit  management,  banks  can
now  aggregate  exposures  to  clients  and  industries,  a  basic  capability  which  was  sadly  lacking
then. Some of the bigger banks have specialised units to monitor their property exposures. I also
suspect  that  the  corporate  structures  which  contributed  to  problems  in  the  late  1980s  are  less
likely to be tolerated by lenders today.
This is all reassuring, but it is certainly no reason for complacency. There is little
doubt that current lending standards are less stringent than they were a couple of years ago. Our
observations during visits to banks support the market anecdotes on this.
There has been a clear narrowing in interest margins for big corporate borrowers
and some relaxation in the loan covenants which apply. It’s only a slight exaggeration to say that
high quality corporate borrowers can virtually write their own  terms  and  conditions;  and  some
lenders are prepared to lend for very long terms at low margins. For lesser quality clients there
appears to have been some drift back toward negative pledge and interest-only lending.
The  main  reason  for  this  is  more  intense  competition  among  all  banks  as  they
strive to keep or build market share in an environment where it is also becoming easier for major
corporates to tap debt markets directly.
At  the  smaller  end  of  the  market  the  signs  of  looser  lending  standards  are  less
clear. We have, however, seen more facilities where requirements for personal guarantees have
been  relaxed.  It’s  also  possible  that  some  of  the  regional  banks  might,  in  their  eagerness  to
diversify loan portfolios, be lending to clients that major banks are turning away.
It  is,  of  course,  not  possible  to  interpret  all  these  trends  unequivocally  as
indicators of unsound banking. And it would be unrealistic to expect impaired assets to stay as
low as they are now. Credit quality necessarily ebbs and flows with the fortunes of the economy
and particular sectors. What is important is that any deterioration is manageable against banks’
capital, and that they recognise early the need for additional provisions.
On  balance,  we  believe  that  some  current  lending  practices  do  risk  sowing  the
seeds  of  future  credit  quality  problems  for  banks.  Chief  executives  and  boards  should  be
considering  carefully  whether  the  additional  point  of  market  share  that  might  be  won  now  by
lending to marginal propositions is worth the pain of future losses, the resources needed for loan
workouts, and so on. They should also be alert to the possibility that the household sector might
feature more strongly in the next upswing of losses. Household debt has increased a good deal
more quickly than incomes in recent years.
BIS Review   71/1997
- 3 -
The  RBA  recently  organised  a  Credit  Conference  to  review  trends  in  credit  risk
management,  with  participants  including  a  number  of  leading  bankers  and  accountants.  A
volume of readings and a summary of discussion will be published soon.
The  main  theme  from  the  Conference  was  how  credit  risk  assessment  and
management  are  becoming  more  objective,  more  scientific.  One  speaker  described  this  as
moving from an “experience-centric” approach to “data-centric” models.
With  standard  products  such  as  mortgages,  consumer  loans,  credit  cards  and  (to
some  extent)  small  business  loans,  quite  sophisticated  statistical  methods  are  beginning  to  be
applied to estimating default risk. The aim is to see, from an analysis of history, which data are
most helpful in predicting the probability of default. Such analysis produces “scorecards” for use
in processing loan requests.
Increasingly, consumer loans are being managed on a portfolio basis, with banks
calculating  expected  losses  for  various  broad  product  categories.  Some  are  tracking  the
migration of loans through various stages of delinquency to help determine the proportion which
will ultimately incur a loss. By updating the amounts at each stage, and adjusting migration rates
in  the  light  of  current  information,  banks  aim  to  measure  more  accurately  the  current  risks  in
their portfolios.
At  the  “bigger”  end  of  the  loan  market,  a  lot  of  attention  is  being  given  to  the
accuracy and  timeliness  of  risk-grading  systems.  To  grade  loans,  the  more  sophisticated  banks
are now using complex statistical models based on financial information about borrowers or on
equity prices. These feed into decisions about pricing, provisioning and portfolio balance.
Securitisation,  the  development  of  secondary  markets  and  the  use  of  credit
derivatives are other facets of the more scientific management of credit risk.
These trends are, of course, to be encouraged. The new tools should not, however,
be regarded as guarantees against unexpected credit problems.
For one thing, their usefulness depends critically on the quality and relevance of
the historical information which goes into them. Most banks have detailed asset quality data for
no  more  than  a  few  years,  covering  not  even  one  full  credit  cycle.  Even  where  good  data  are
available, it is uncertain how closely past relationships will hold for the future.
There would be dangers,  therefore,  if  automated  systems  were  used  uncritically,
without  an  understanding  of  their  limitations.  Even  when  these  models  have  been  extensively
road tested and their predictions assessed carefully, it is unlikely that they will do away with the
need  for  overriding  judgments  about  economic  prospects  and  the  outlook  for  particular
industries and sectors.
On  the  other  hand,  the  new  techniques  do  provide  an  objective  framework  for
decisions about pricing and capital allocation. While it would be foolish to rely blindly on them,
it would be as dangerous if they were too easily overridden by competitive pressures. As another
participant at our Conference asked: will banks be willing to forego business that is apparently
priced in line with the prevailing market just because a risk-based model indicates that it would
dilute shareholder value? There is no doubt that such questions should be resolved at the highest
levels in banks. They should not be left to business-driven relationship managers.
BIS Review   71/1997
- 4 -
Needless  to  say,  we  will  be  keen  observers  of  banks’  lending  practices  over  the
next couple of years.
Interbank settlement risk and RTGS
Naturally  we  in  the  RBA,  like  almost  everyone  else,  would  prefer  not  to
contemplate the failure of a bank. But bank failures have happened from  time  to  time  in  other
countries - despite the best endeavours of managers and regulators. And it would be  foolish  to
turn a blind eye to this possibility in Australia, because a bank failure is not only very damaging
for  the  depositors  immediately  affected,  but  it  can  create  a  wave  of  problems  flowing  well
beyond  that  particular  institution.  This  flow-on  damage  can  occur  in  various  ways,  including
through effects on depositor confidence, but perhaps the most important channel is the payments
system.  If  a  bank  in  difficulty  has  large  unsettled  payment  obligations  to  other  banks,  those
banks will inevitably share some of the pain. There could then be further effects which cannot be
predicted with any precision.
In the past Australian banks have not paid much attention to interbank settlement
risk; indeed, they have had no way of monitoring their exposures to each other during the day.
They  operated  on  the  presumption  that,  as  long  as  they  exchanged  payments  only  with
supervised banks, the central bank would “sort out” a settlement problem in the unlikely event
that one arose. This is hardly a sound basis on which to proceed - from either a commercial or a
public  policy  viewpoint.  It  leaves  individual  banks  potentially  exposed  to  large  losses  which,
because of the broader ramifications, tax payers might end up having to cover.
To  achieve  a  more  satisfactory  position,  Australia  is  now  travelling  the  path  of
many  other  countries  in  introducing  a  real-time  gross  settlement  -  that  is,  RTGS  -  system  for
interbank payments.
Under  RTGS,  high-value  payments  will  be  settled  continuously  across  banks’
accounts with the RBA - rather than being accumulated, left hanging overnight and settled up in
one  hit  the  following  morning.  On  an  average  day  payments  exchanged  among  banks  but  not
settled  until  the  next  day  come  to  over  $90  billion.  RTGS  will,  at  the  outset,  eliminate  about
two-thirds of that overnight exposure. It will also give Australia a fully-fledged delivery-versus-
payment system for transactions in debt securities.
With  banks  and  other  payments  providers,  the  RBA  began  building  the  RTGS
system in 1995. This has been a major undertaking - with a development cost across the industry
of around $120 million. The project is technically complex, but its biggest challenges have been
reaching  agreement  on  the  architecture  and  rules  for  a  system  which  all  high-value  payments
providers will use on an equal and open basis.
Progress has not been rapid, or without occasional friction, but it has been steady.
The key components of the system are now falling into place:
  last  month,  the  RBA’s  central  site  -  where  interbank  payments  will  be
processed in real time - became available for testing by the industry;
by early next month, this central site will be fully operational;
by  August,  the  industry’s  system  for  delivering  payments  to  the  central
site using SWIFT messages should be tested and ready to use;
BIS Review   71/1997
- 5 -
 over  subsequent  months,  high-value  interbank  payments  will  be  moved
progressively onto the new system, although ultimate settlement will, for
the time being, still be the following morning.
Full  implementation  of  RTGS  is  scheduled  for  April  next  year.  Whether  this  is
achieved now depends largely on the commitment of the industry, especially the major banks.
As  we  get  closer  to  RTGS  “going  live”,  more  thought  is  being  given  to  its
practical implications for banks and their customers. Perhaps the most important of these is the
daily management of liquidity.
With payments able to flow across banks’ settlement accounts at the RBA only if
the  paying  bank  has  sufficient  funds,  liquidity  will  clearly  become  more  of  an  issue  than  it  is
now  -  when  a  bank  needs  only  enough  funds  to  extinguish  any  net  obligation  to  others  each
morning. Under RTGS, banks will need to manage their liquidity more carefully or run the risk
of being unable to send an important payment at the required time.
Banks  are  starting  to  give  attention  to  this  task  -  studying  the  patterns  in  their
payment  flows  and  upgrading  their  systems  so  they  can  monitor  and  manage  flows  on  an
aggregate basis across their business.
There  will  inevitably  be  implications  for  corporates  in  this.  RTGS  will  cause
banks  to  focus  more  sharply  on  the  amount  of  credit  extended  to  customers  during  the  day.
Because they will have to manage their own liquidity more closely on a  real-time  basis,  banks
will  (understandably)  want  to  control  their  customer  exposures,  and  the  demands  which  these
place  on  liquidity,  more  tightly  than  before.  Payment  requests  will  have  priorities  attached.
Corporates may need to negotiate facilities to ensure that time-critical payments will flow when
they are expected by suppliers and counterparties. As a result, some will no doubt choose to plan
their payments and receipts more actively than in the past.
Our impression from recent discussions with corporate treasurers is that very few,
if any, banks have yet done much talking to their customers about these issues.
More careful management  of  liquidity  by  banks  and  their  customers  will  reduce
the  likelihood  of  payments  “gridlock”  under  RTGS.  For  its  part,  the  RBA  has  taken  various
decisions aimed at ensuring adequate liquidity will be available, at a reasonable cost, across the
system  as  a  whole.  We  will  enter  into  securities  repurchase  agreements  with  banks  to  provide
them with intra-day funds at virtually no cost. We will allow banks to dip into their PAR assets
for  such  transactions.  The  range  of  assets  eligible  for  repos  with  the  RBA  has  also  just  been
expanded.  Finally,  as  banker  to  the  Commonwealth,  we  will  use  our  control  over  government
payments to inject funds early in the day.
It remains to be seen whether other devices will be needed to lubricate the system.
In  some  places,  such  as  the  United  Kingdom  and  Hong  Kong,  banks  are  required  to  send  a
minimum proportion of their payments early in the day to provide liquidity for the market. We
will monitor flows to assess whether such “affirmative action” is necessary in Australia.
It will, of course, be essential that most high-value payments are settled real-time
when the new system is available. Anything less would defeat the purpose for which it is being
built.  There  have  been  suggestions  that  some  banks  might  by-pass  RTGS  by  using  lower  cost
(but higher risk) channels, such as the Direct Entry system which is designed for high volumes
BIS Review   71/1997
- 6 -
of small payments and settles on a net deferred basis. If this were to happen, we would have to
consider  what  incentives  or  sanctions  were  needed  to  ensure  that  high-value  payments  travel
along the RTGS path.
RTGS  will  not,  of  itself,  remove  the  risks  that  banks  incur  in  international
payments - in particular, the risks arising from non-synchronisation of payments and receipts in
foreign exchange transactions. Having RTGS for domestic transactions is, however, a necessary
step toward tackling this.
We’re  currently  investigating  the  extent  of  Australian  banks’  settlement  risks  in
their foreign exchange business. This is the next major frontier for risk reduction in banking.
Operational risk and Year 2000
As  their  business  becomes  more  complex  and  diverse,  banks  are  increasingly
reliant  on  computers  for  information-processing  and  control.  As  a  result,  they  are  exposed  to
various kinds of operational risk.
For  a  bank  active  in  derivatives  trading,  a  breakdown  in  computer  systems  for
even  a  relatively  short  time  could  be  disastrous  -  preventing  it  from  monitoring  its  changing
market  positions  and  disrupting  its  capacity  to  trade  and  to  settle  outstanding  transactions.  I
recently  heard  a  keen  observer  predict  that  the  next  big  banking  disaster  would  come  from  a
(hypothetical) major international bank losing track of its derivatives positions for 24 hours.
To  protect  against  such  events,  banks  invest  heavily  in  the  integrity  of  their
computer systems, as well as in back-up and disaster recovery facilities. The RBA is, of course,
providing such back-up for the core of the RTGS system.
The Year 2000 problem poses a rather novel sort of operational risk because it is
the  result  of  past  programming  decisions  which  have  produced  the  classic  “unintended
consequence”.  Basically,  the  risk  is  computer  confusion  and  malfunction  when  the  year
identified in programming as “99” clicks over to “00”.
The  upshot  for  Australian  banks  is  the  need  to  spend  big  sums  on  replacing  or
reprogramming their date-dependent computer systems. For the four majors alone, the total cost
could be well over $350 million.
As the calendar moves forward, the need to get on with addressing this problem
becomes more urgent. In the United States, Federal regulators have recommended that financial
institutions complete all necessary reprogramming by the end of 1998 to allow time for thorough
testing before January 2000. This will be needed because, in changing a lot of banking software,
new  bugs  could  be  introduced  along  the  way.  More  aggressive  targets  have  been  set  for  large
banks where computer problems could do broad damage to the working of the financial system.
The RBA is currently seeking assurance that Australian banks are giving the Year
2000 problem the high priority it warrants. We  recently  sent  them  a  questionnaire  asking  each
about  progress  in  identifying  the  size  of  the  problem  for  its  operations,  in  drawing  up  a
management  program  to  fix  it  and  in  assigning  the  necessary  resources.  They  should  also  be
finding out what their major customers are doing about it.
BIS Review   71/1997
- 7 -
Fixing the Year 2000 problem is not a glamorous task - but it is no less important
for that.
In this respect, it is much like the challenge of managing banking risks generally.
BIS Review   71/1997
