Mr.  Duisenberg  assesses  what  we  have  learned  from  the  Marshall  Plan
Dinner speech held by the President of the Netherlands Bank and of the Bank for International
Settlements,  Dr.  W.F.  Duisenberg,  at  the  occasion  of  the  Marshall  Plan  celebration  in
Washington on 15/5/97.
On 5th June this year it will be exactly 50 years ago since George C. Marshall, in
a speech at Harvard University, set out his plans for the economic recovery of Europe. Although
I fear that I will not succeed in making as momentous a speech as Marshall did, I am honoured
to speak to you here today and commemorate this historic occasion, which I believe marks the
starting point of Europe’s post-war economic miracle.
Anniversaries  such  as  this  present  a  useful  opportunity  to  reflect  on  our  past
successes and  to  draw  lessons  from  them.  This  is  the  challenging  task  which  the  organisers  of
this  conference  have  set  out  before  me  today  and  I  will  endeavour  not  to  disappoint  them.  In
doing  so,  I  would  like  to  start  out  by  pondering  for  a  moment  on  what  it  was  exactly  that  the
Marshall  Plan  contributed  to  post-war  economic  recovery.  Although  the  importance  of  the
Marshall Plan is relatively undisputed, the channels through which it boosted economic growth
have been the subject of lively debate. Only if the role of the Marshall Plan is put into the proper
perspective, can we hope to fruitfully draw on our past experiences. Subsequently, I will attempt
to  apply  what  we  have  learned  to  the  current  transformation  process  in  Central  and  Eastern
Europe, which shows some interesting similarities with post-war reconstruction. As I will argue,
however,  the  transformation  process  in  transition  economies  is,  in  other  respects,  uniquely
different. In my view this precludes using the Marshall Plan as a blueprint for aid to transition
economies, although it harbours some important lessons.
Finally, a word of caution is in order. I am a central banker. As such, I will focus
on  the  economic  aspects  of  the  Marshall  Plan,  not  the  political  ones.  Such  a  discussion  is
necessarily incomplete; but I will leave it to others to comment on the political and diplomatic
context in which Marshall aid took place.
The contribution of the Marshall Plan – distinguishing fact from fiction
Marshall  aid  was  a  lifeline  from  the  United  States  to  Europe  at  a  time  when,
economically,  Europe  had  been  brought  down  to  its  knees.  Between  1948–1951  the  program
annually  transferred  roughly  1%  of  American  GDP,  or  around  $ 13 billion  in  aid,  to  some  16
European countries. In net present value terms this amounts to roughly $ 80 billion. By 1951, six
years after the war and the effective end of the Marshall Plan, national incomes per capita were
more  than  10  percent  above  pre-war  levels,  while  the  economic  growth  rate  in  the  next  two
decades reached levels which were twice as high as for any comparable period before or since.
This  temporal  coincidence  between  the  extension  of  Marshall  aid  and  the
“miraculous” recovery of Europe has induced the inferral of a causal relationship. It  should  be
noted,  however,  that,  even  after  extensive  academic  research,  the  roots  of  Europe’s  economic
miracle are not yet adequately understood. Thus, it is difficult to isolate the contribution of the
Marshall Plan. Economically, the strong post-war growth performance is in large part explained
by  the  so-called  Solow  residual  –  that  is,  not  by  traditional  factors  such  as  capital  and  labour.
This is an economist’s way of saying we do not fully understand what is going on.
A first observation in this regard is that the reconstruction of Europe did not start
in 1948 – the year in which the first Marshall aid was disbursed – but in 1945. At that time the
US was already channelling large amounts of aid to Europe through  the  United  Nations  Relief
BIS Review   54/1997
- 2 -
and Recovery Administration and other programs. This aid, which was in the order of $ 4 billion
annually in the first two post-World War  II  years,  was  –  in  flow  terms  –  in  the  same  order  of
magnitude as the Marshall aid.
A second observation is that, given the unprecedented magnitude of aid from the
perspective of the donor community, the Marshall Plan in a quantitative sense played a smaller
role  than  one  would  expect  in  accelerating  the  replacement  and  expansion  of  the  European
capital  stock.  Marshall  aid  accounted  for  less  than  2.5%  of  the  combined  national  incomes  of
recipient countries between 1948 and 1951. While this is indeed a significant sum, this resulted
in at most a 1% increase in investment, at a time when domestic investment was running at 15%
of GNP. In other words, this does not explain growth rates several percentage points above their
historic trend levels. It should be noted, however, that growth may have been stimulated through
other channels, for instance, by providing much-needed hard currency reserves which could be
used for financing industrial raw materials. Over a third of Marshall aid was used in this way.
A  third  observation  is  that  the  Marshall  Plan  also  did  not  play  a  large  role  in
financing  the  reconstruction  of  devastated  infrastructure  as  this  had  been  largely  accomplished
before  the  program  got  underway.  In  fact,  countries  that  were  major  aid  recipients  saw  the
government spending share of national income fall relative to other nations, the opposite of what
one would expect if there had in fact been a shortage of public investment capital.
So  how  did  Marshall  aid  matter?  Recently,  there  has  been  a  shift  among
academics to what might be termed as a “revisionist” analysis of the contribution of the Marshall
Plan to European recovery. According to this view, the Plan’s main contribution was to alter the
environment  in  which  economic  policy  was  made,  tilting  the  balance  in  a  qualitative  manner
rather than quantitatively.
As you will recall, in 1947, two years after the war, Europe was still characterised
by macroeconomic instability, inflation and an increasingly tight balance of payments constraint.
The initial response by governments had been to counter inflation by retaining controls, thereby
prompting  the  growth  of  black  markets  and  discouraging  transactions  at  official  prices.  By
distorting the allocative mechanism of the  market,  saving  and  initiative  were  discouraged.  The
appropriate response as prescribed by economic theory would  have  been  to  decontrol  prices  to
induce  producers  to  bring  their  goods  to  market.  In  addition,  fiscal  discipline  and  monetary
restraint was necessary, in order to reduce inflationary pressures. Such policies, however, require
political  compromise  and  sacrifice  by  everyone  which  at  that  time,  when  the  needs  of  Europe
were greatest, were not necessarily forthcoming. The Marshall Plan may have played  a  critical
role by easing decisions over the distribution of scarce resources. Of course, the extended aid did
not obviate the need for sacrifice but it increased the size of the distributional pie available to the
various interest groups.
In my opinion, however, the most important channel through which the Marshall
Plan contributed is through its conditionality, with which the US was able to exercise significant
influence over the economic policies of Marshall aid recipients. Although over the years the Plan
has become synonymous with the substantial aid flows transferred from the US to Europe, it is
useful to recall that before receiving that aid each recipient country had to sign a bilateral pact
with  the  US.  In  that  pact,  countries  agreed  to  balance  their  budgets,  restore  financial  stability,
stabilise  the  exchange  rate  at  realistic  levels  and  enhance  mutual  cooperation.  Along  with  the
carrot, thus came the stick. In many ways this is similar to the approach followed in later years
by the International Monetary Fund in its macroeconomic adjustment programs.
BIS Review   54/1997
- 3 -
Not only could the Marshall aid itself not  be  spent  freely  –  it  could  be  spent  on
external  goods  only  with  the  approval  of  the  US  government  –  but  the  recipient  was  also
required to place a matching amount of domestic currency in a counterpart fund to be used only
for purposes approved by the Marshall Plan administration. As such, for each dollar of Marshall
aid, the US had control over 2 dollars of real resources. In some instances the US insisted that
the funds be used to buttress financial stability. Britain used the bulk of its counterpart funds to
retire public debt. In the case of France, the US used the counterpart funds as a tool to pressure
the  new  government  into  reaffirming  its  willingness  to  continue  policies  leading  to  a  balanced
budget.  West  Germany  found  the  release  of  counterpart  funds  delayed  until  the  nationalised
railway had reduced expenditures to match revenues.
Nations undergoing high inflation  could  not  draw  on  counterpart  funds  until  the
Marshall  Plan  administration  was  satisfied  that  they  had  achieved  a  workable  stabilisation
program. As a condition for receiving Marshall Plan aid, each country was required to develop a
program for removing trade controls in order to promote intra-European trade. The multilateral
manner in which this was achieved – through the OECD in which all Marshall recipients were
united  –  contributed  significantly  to  the  European  integration  process.  The  most  important
institutional innovation in this regard was the establishment of the European Payments Union in
1950, a product of the Marshall Plan. The Marshall Plan should thus be thought of as a large and
highly successful structural adjustment program.
At this stage, I believe it is useful to draw two preliminary lessons:
– The first lesson to be drawn from the Marshall Plan is that the central element
in post-war Europe’s economic success was sound economic policy.
– The  second  lesson  is  that  even  aid  flows  in  the  order  of  magnitude  as  those
under the Marshall Plan are likely to be small compared to resources generated
domestically.  Nevertheless  such  aid  flows  are  likely  to  facilitate  the  adoption
of otherwise painful economic policies.
A new Marshall Plan for Eastern Europe?
An interesting question is to what extent we can apply these lessons to the current
transformation  process  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  to  which  I  will  refer  as  Eastern  Europe
from now on? To some extent, of course, this question is rendered out of date by the fact that the
transition process in a number of countries has been underway for over seven years now.
The International Monetary Fund has more or less adopted a role similar to that of
the Marshall Plan. Through its macroeconomic adjustment programs credits are extended on the
basis  of  countries  meeting  economic  performance  criteria.  As  such,  IMF  macroeconomic
stabilisation programs form a crucial first step in the transformation process, without which the
longer lasting structural reforms cannot take hold. Of the early reformers – Hungary, Poland, the
Czech  Republic,  Slovakia,  the  Baltics,  Croatia  and  Slovenia  –  only  Hungary  still  has  an  IMF
program,  but  it  is  of  a  precautionary  nature;  no  purchases  are  made.  In  fact,  since  1995  these
countries  have  been  making  net  payments  to  the  Fund  and  some  have  obtained  access  to
international  financial  markets.  Others,  however,  are  less  advanced  and  still  in  need  of  the
required reforms.
The  transition  process,  so  far,  seems  to  mirror  the  circumstances  leading  to  the
adoption  of  the  Marshall  Plan  in  two  important  regards.  First,  financial  instability  which  was
BIS Review   54/1997
- 4 -
pervasive  in  the  early  years  of  post-World  War  II  Europe  is  also  present  in  several  transition
economies. As for Europe 50 years ago, an important precondition for growth to take off is the
stabilisation  of  prices  and,  after  an  initial  adjustment,  the  exchange  rate.  This  has  been  the
purview  of  the  IMF  in  its  adjustment  programs,  which  through  the  extension  of  credits  has
somewhat facilitated the adoption of painful economic policies.
Second,  both  Europe  in  1948  and  Eastern  Europe  at  present  have  experienced  a
period of intensive government intervention, albeit for different reasons. This has created a habit
of control and regulation along with a certain unease with the workings of the market, similar to
the  mistrust  of  the  market  in  post-war  Europe  following  the  failure  of  market  mechanisms
during the Great Depression. In  both  periods,  the  myriad  of  restrictions  needs  to  be  abolished,
and structural reform needs to take hold.
But  there  are  also  important  differences  between  the  transformation  process  and
post-war  recovery.  The  Marshall  Plan  was  effective  at  least  in  part  because  Europe  had
experience with markets. It possessed the institutions needed for their operation. Property rights,
bankruptcy  codes,  court  systems  to  enforce  market  contracts  –  not  to  mention  entrepreneurial
skills – all were in place. This institutional basis has been lacking in Eastern Europe. Moreover,
the physical allocation mechanism and absence of meaningful prices  were  much  more  extreme
than under wartime rationing.
Second, the scale on which enterprises in Eastern Europe need to be restructured
finds  no  comparison  in  post-war  Europe.  On  the  issue,  for  instance,  how  fast  to  close  certain
factories given the absence of an adequate social safety net, the experience of post-war Europe is
of little help simply because there was little to close down. In addition, the post-war experience
does  not  teach  us  how  to  implement  mass  privatisation,  nor  how  to  put  a  huge  sector  of  large
state enterprises on a commercial basis, all simultaneously.
Third, transition economies have to liberalise their economies in an already highly
liberalised  international  environment  and  of  highly  developed  international  capital  markets.  In
such  a  context,  policy  mistakes  or  a  lack  of  market  confidence  can  easily  lead  to  a  large  and
rapid  outflow  of  capital,  thus  draining  away  much-needed  savings.  These  problems  are
exacerbated  by  weak  financial  systems  where  experience  and  expertise  in,  for  instance,  credit
allocation is lacking.
So what does Eastern Europe need?
This leads me to believe that the needs of Eastern Europe are different from those
of  post-war  Europe  under  the  Marshall  Plan.  At  a  conference  several  years  ago,  the  reform
process  in  Eastern  Europe  was  compared  first  with  post-war  reconstruction  and  then  with  the
reconversion of regions or industries in decline.1 Of the latter, we have plenty of examples, for
instance,  the  shipbuilding  industry  in  Europe  or  the  coal,  steel  and  textile  sectors.  Generally
speaking, the transformation of these industries is a slow and painful process, usually at a high
cost.  Whereas  post-war  reconstruction  was  a  process  of  building  upon  what  existed,
reconversion, by its nature, implies changing and perhaps destroying the existing structure, not
building  upon  it.  This  is  much  harder  to  achieve.  Which  experience  is  the  more  relevant  for
Eastern Europe? In my opinion: reconversion. The discussion in Eastern Europe is not so much
                                               
1
Blanchard O. “Panel discussion: Lessons for Eastern Europe today”,  Postwar Economic Reconstruction
and Lessons for the East Today, MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1993.
BIS Review   54/1997
- 5 -
about rebuilding existing structures, but rather about replacing them by new ones; similar to the
replacement of declining West European industries by new ones.
The  question  is  whether  we  can  aid  this  reconversion  process  by  transferring
comparable amounts of money towards Eastern Europe as under the Marshall Plan. Transferring
the equivalent of 2.5% of national incomes of the recipient countries, has been estimated to cost
roughly  $ 20  billion  a  year.  The  Bretton  Woods  institutions  have  of  course  been  extending
credits  but  on  a  smaller  scale.  By  comparison,  the  annual  flow  of  total  official  financing  to
Eastern Europe has been around $ 15 billion, some 25% below that which was transferred under
the Marshall Plan. Total flows, however, including private financing, reached some $ 36 billion
in  1996.  From  the  recipient’s  perspective,  therefore,  the  amount  of  financing  transferred  to
Eastern Europe is quite significant. From a donor’s perspective,  on  the  other  hand,  the  present
effort  still  pales  somewhat  compared  to  the  tremendous  display  of  solidarity  by  the  US  after
World War II. In this regard, we should remember that the US financed the entire Marshall Plan
by itself. If industrial countries were to make a  similar  effort  and  transfer  1%  of  their  GDP  to
Eastern Europe, aid flows to this region would amount to more than $ 170 billion a year, much
more than the current $ 15  billion.  This  again  illustrates  the  unique  nature  of  the  post-war  US
contribution. It is uncertain whether increasing the amount of official financing to Marshall aid
standards  would  yield  significant  additional  benefits.  It  could  further  facilitate  support  for
required reforms, but to measure the marginal benefit of extra aid in these political terms is very
difficult. In any case, it is critical that whatever programs are adopted, aid should be provided on
the basis of actions taken rather than need.
The achievements of the Marshall Plan suggest that the transformation process in
Eastern Europe would be significantly enhanced by intensifying mutual cooperation in the area.
Cooperation in  the  fields  of  trade,  financial  and  monetary  matters  could  become  the  engine  of
economic  growth  just  as  it  was  during  the  post-war  boom.  Between  1948–1952  trade  among
European countries increased more than 5 times as fast as European trade with other continents.
One of the lessons of the post-war era is that trade can be the engine in a process of economic
restructuring.  At  the  same  time,  the  post-war  experience  evinced  the  importance  of  foreign
demand  in  underpinning  a  supply-side  response.  In  other  words,  access  for  the  East  European
countries  to  the  markets  of  the  European  Community.  The  European  Union  has  concluded
“Europe Agreements” with ten Eastern European countries. These are important steps and they
can be built upon further. Constructive mutual cooperation will be most conducive to a positive
perception of the region’s stability, thereby helping attract investment.
Cooperation  could  gain  an  added  dimension  in  the  future.  Several  Eastern
European countries have already joined the OECD as members and are knocking on the door of
the  European  Union.  Although  eventual  EU  membership  is  a  process  that  will  require  some
time, it is a realistic perspective. The European Union is in the process of completing a process
of  deepening  cooperation,  which  will  find  its  preliminary  climax  in  the  establishment  of  the
euro. Subsequent to the creation of full monetary union we may expect the EU to turn its sights
eastwards, leading to an ever more integrated Europe.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that the Marshall Plan  was  an  important  part  of
the foundation for post-war European recovery. At the same time, Marshall aid was more than
the transfer of money alone. The economic policy conditions attached to this aid constituted an
essential element in the realisation of the reconstruction process. Like the US after World War
II,  the  IMF  has  stepped  into  the  transformation  process  of  transition  economies,  albeit  on  a
smaller  scale  in  financial  terms.  In  part,  this  may  reflect  the  lower  importance  attached  to  the
role of finance per se, and, in part, simply the lack of adequate donor funds forthcoming. Despite
BIS Review   54/1997
- 6 -
this, however, Eastern Europe is on the right track. And although EU membership is still some
way off, the prospect of such membership and the economic cooperation and integration being
pursued  to  achieve  that  membership,  inspires  confidence  that  the  lessons  of  the  Marshall  Plan
have indeed been taken to heart.
BIS Review   54/1997
