Ms. Phillips discusses the restrictions imposed on bank holding companies by
the US Ferderal Reserve Board  Testimony of Governor Susan M. Phillips, a member of the
Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Subcommittee on  Financial
Institutions and Regulatory Relief of the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs of
the United States on 20/3/97.
I am pleased to be here today to discuss the Board’s section 20 firewalls -- that is,
the restrictions the Board has imposed on bank holding companies engaged in underwriting and
dealing in securities. As the name suggests, the purpose of firewalls is to insulate a bank and its
customers from the potential hazards of combining commercial and investment banking.
Since last year the Board has been engaged in a comprehensive review of the 28
firewalls it erected in the late 1980s, and the Board has recently proposed to eliminate a majority
of  those  restrictions.  This  oversight  hearing  provides  a  constructive  opportunity  for  comment
and  analysis  of  the  Board’s  proposal.  Furthermore,  if  financial  modernization  is  to  move
forward, the issue of firewalls will have to be confronted again. I hope that the Board’s review
and the public comment process can inform the legislative process as well.
Today, I would like to explain why the Board proposed changes to the firewalls. I
will also discuss the  final  changes  the  Board  made  last  year  to  the  revenue  test  that  the  Board
uses  to  determine  compliance  with  section  20  of  the  Glass-Steagall  Act,  and  to  firewalls
regarding  cross-marketing  between  a  bank  and  a  securities  affiliate,  and  officer,  director  and
employee interlocks between two such companies.
The Firewalls in Context: Independent Protections for Banks and Consumers
Before I begin this discussion, I think it is important to place the firewalls in their
historical and regulatory context. Although the firewalls have served an important role, they are
not the only protection against the hazards of affiliation of commercial and investment banks.
One  important  protection  is  the  placement  of  securities  activities  in  a  separate
subsidiary  of  the  bank  holding  company,  rather  than  in  the  bank  itself  or  a  subsidiary  of  the
bank. Because non-bank subsidiaries of a bank holding company operating under section 20 of
the Glass-Steagall Act are affiliates of a bank, they are not under the bank’s control, do not have
their  profits  or  losses  consolidated  with  the  bank’s,  and  are  less  liable  to  have  their  creditors
recover against the bank. A bank therefore has less incentive to risk its own reputation or expose
itself  or  its  customers  to  loss  in  order  to  assist  a  troubled  section  20  affiliate  or  a  failed
underwriting by that affiliate.
Also, because securities activities are conducted in an affiliate, banks are limited
in  their  ability  to  fund  those  activities  by  sections  23A  and  23B  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act.
These restrictions  are  vitally  important.  Section  23A  limits  the  total  value  of  transactions  with
any one affiliate to 10 percent of the bank’s capital and limits transactions with all affiliates to
20 percent of capital. It  also  requires  that  substantial  collateral  be  pledged  to  the  bank  for  any
extension of credit. Section 23B requires that inter-affiliate transactions be at arm’s length  and
on market terms, and imposes other restrictions designed to limit conflicts of interest.
Thus,  affiliate  status  prevents  the  bank  from  passing  along  the  federal  subsidy
inherent in the federal safety net to its section 20 affiliate by extending credit. Regulators could
conceivably limit a bank’s ability to use credit to subsidize a direct securities subsidiary of the
bank  as  well,  by  applying  sections  23A  and  23B.  But  the  equity  investment  in  the  subsidiary
BIS Review   34/1997
- 2 -
would  still  be  funded  from  subsidized  resources  backed  by  the  federal  safety  net.  Even  if  the
investment  were  deducted  from  the  capital  of  the  bank,  the  subsidy  inherent  in  the  transfer
would remain.
A second  protection  is  examination  of  the  bank  holding  company,  including  the
effect of securities activities on insured depository institution subsidiaries. The Federal Reserve
as holding company regulator monitors compliance with sections 23A and 23B and other aspects
of the relationship between a bank and its section 20 affiliate. In its supervision of bank holding
companies, the Board increasingly pays attention to risk management systems and policies that
are  centralized  at  the  holding  company  level  and  govern  both  the  bank  and  its  section  20
affiliate.
A  final  series  of  protections  is  the  regulatory  regime  that  applies  to  all
broker-dealers, including section 20 subsidiaries. The Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities
Exchange  Act  of  1934  impose  registration,  capital  and  disclosure  requirements,  anti-fraud
protections,  and  other  investor-protection  measures.  These  laws,  and  their  enforcement  by  the
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  address  many  of  the  safety  and  soundness  and
conflict-of-interest concerns about affiliation of commercial and investment banks.
I  note  that  most  of  these  important  protections  were  not  in  place  when  the
Glass-Steagall Act passed in 1933. Thus, although  proponents  of  high  firewalls  frequently  cite
the  subtle  hazards  of  affiliation  discussed  in  the  legislative  history  of  that  Act,  the  regulatory
environment  was  far  different  then.  I  believe  that  the  drafters  of  the  Glass-Steagall  Act  would
have had a very different discussion -- and passed a very different Act -- had today’s statutory
and regulatory protections been present in 1933.
Not  only  were  these  protections  largely  absent  in  1933,  some  were  not  even
present in 1987  when  the  Board  first  erected  its  firewalls.  Section  23B  of  the  Federal  Reserve
Act had not been adopted at the time of the Board’s first section 20 order in 1987. As a result,
many  of  the  firewalls  overlap  the  restrictions  of  section  23B,  which  as  I  noted  requires  inter-
affiliate transactions to be at arm’s length and on market terms, but also prohibits a section  20
affiliate from representing that an affiliated bank is responsible for its obligations, and prohibits
a bank from purchasing certain products from a section 20 affiliate. Similarly, risk-based capital
standards did not exist in 1987, and those standards now require a bank to hold capital against
many of the  on-  and  off-balance-sheet  exposures  it  maintains  in  conjunction  with  a  section  20
affiliate. Finally, the Interagency Statement on Retail Sales of Nondeposit Investment Products
was  not  adopted  until  1994.  The  Interagency  Statement  includes  disclosure  and  other
requirements  that  are  now  the  primary  means  by  which  the  federal  banking  agencies  seek  to
ensure  that  retail  customers  are  not  misled  about  the  nature  of  non-deposit  products  they  are
purchasing on bank premises.
The Board’s Review
Thus,  when  the  Board  last  year  decided  to  reexamine  the  firewalls,  we  felt  it
important to do so with a fresh eye, benefitting from our ten years of experience supervising the
section 20 affiliates, acknowledging regulatory and legal developments since 1987, and focusing
on  the  relevance  of  the  firewalls  in  today’s  financial  markets.  As  we  began  to  look  at  the
concerns the firewalls were designed to address, we asked two questions. Does the affiliation of
a commercial and an investment bank cause safety and soundness or other concerns not present
with  any  other  commercial  bank  affiliation  --  concerns  not  addressed  by  general  bank  holding
company  regulation?  Does  operation  of  a  broker-dealer  within  a  bank  holding  company  cause
BIS Review   34/1997
- 3 -
concerns  that  independent  operation  does  not  --  concerns  not  addressed  by  broker-dealer
regulation? In some areas -- most notably, consumer  protection  --  we  believed  that  the  answer
was "yes." In most other areas, however, the Board believed, at least pending public comment,
that the answer was "no."
The  answers  to  these  questions  are  important  because  the  firewalls  are  far  from
costless. They  impose  operational  inefficiencies  on  bank  holding  companies  that  increase  their
costs  and  reduce  their  competitiveness,  and  they  limit  a  bank  holding  company’s  ability  to
market its products in a way that is both most profitable and desired by its customers. As such,
the  firewalls  have  served  as  a  significant  barrier  to  entry  for  small  and  mid-size  bank  holding
companies  because  those  companies  cannot  realize  sufficient  synergies  or  achieve  adequate
operating  revenues  to  justify  establishing  a  section  20  subsidiary.  The  loss  is  not  just  to  these
companies but also to their customers and market competition.
Let  me  now  discuss  the  most  important  of  the  firewalls  to  which  the  Board  has
proposed  changes.  The  comment  period  closed  on  this  proposal  last  week,  and  the  comments
were overwhelmingly favorable. I will not discuss all 28 firewalls but have attached a summary
list and their proposed disposition.
Restrictions on Funding
The  Board  proposed  to  eliminate  a  series  of  firewalls  that  constitute  a  blanket
prohibition on a bank’s funding its section 20 affiliate, and to rely instead on the protections of
sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. The firewalls in question prohibit a bank from
extending  credit  to  a  section  20  affiliate,  purchasing  corporate  and  other  non-governmental
securities  being  underwritten  by  the  section  20  affiliate,  or  purchasing  from  the  section  20
affiliate such securities in which the affiliate makes a market. These firewalls were intended to
prevent  a  bank  from  assisting  a  troubled  affiliate  by  lending  to  it  on  preferential  terms  or  by
bailing out a failed underwriting by purchasing securities that cannot otherwise be sold.
Except  for  the  prohibition  on  purchasing  securities  during  the  underwriting
period, none of these funding firewalls was applied under the Board’s original 1987 order,  but
were  added  in  1989  when  the  range  of  permissible  securities  activities  was  expanded.  Bank
subsidiaries of the fourteen companies operating under the 1987 order have therefore been free
to,  and  have  in  fact,  funded  their  section  20  affiliates  subject  to  sections  23A  and  23B.  The
Board has not encountered problems arising from such funding.
If the Board were to eliminate  the  funding  restrictions  for  the  remaining  section
20  subsidiaries,  sections  23A  and  23B  would  continue  to  impose  quantitative  and  qualitative
restrictions  on  inter-affiliate  transactions.  In  addition  to  requiring  that  the  transaction  be  on
market terms, section 23B specifically prohibits a bank from purchasing any security for which a
section 20 affiliate is a principal underwriter during the existence of the underwriting or selling
syndicate,  unless  such  a  purchase  has  been  approved  by  a  majority  of  the  bank’s  board  of
directors  who  are  not  officers  of  any  bank  or  any  affiliate.  If  the  purchase  is  as  fiduciary,  the
purchase must be permitted by the instrument creating the fiduciary relationship, court order, or
state  law.  We  believe  these  are  substantial  protections,  and  have  proposed  to  rely  on  them  in
place of a firewall.
BIS Review   34/1997
- 4 -
Prohibitions on a Bank Extending or  Enhancing  Credit  in  Support  of  Underwriting  or  Dealing
by a Section 20 Affiliate
Three of the Board’s firewalls restrict the ability of a bank to assist a section 20
affiliate  indirectly,  by  enhancing  the  marketability  of  its  products  or  lending  to  its  customers.
These firewalls prohibit a bank from extending credit or offering credit enhancements in support
of corporate and other non-governmental securities being underwritten by its section 20 affiliate
or in which the section 20 affiliate makes  a  market;  extending  credit  to  issuers  of  securities  to
repay  principal  or  interest  on  securities  previously  underwritten  by  a  section  20  affiliate;  or
extending credit to customers to purchase securities currently being underwritten by a section 20
affiliate. The firewalls share a common purpose: to prevent a bank from imprudently exposing
itself to loss in order to benefit the underwriting or dealing activities of its affiliate.
However, as financial intermediation has evolved, corporate customers frequently
seek  to  obtain  a  variety  of  funding  mechanisms  from  one  source.  By  prohibiting  banks  from
providing  routine  credit  or  credit  enhancements  in  tandem  with  a  section  20  affiliate,  these
firewalls hamper the ability of bank holding companies to serve as full-service financial services
providers.  The  firewall  thereby  reduces  options  for  their  customers.  For  example,  existing
corporate customers of a bank may wish to issue commercial paper or issue debt in some other
form. Although the bank may refer the customer to its section 20 affiliate, the bank is prohibited
from  providing  credit  enhancements  even  though  it  is  the  institution  best  suited  to  perform  a
credit analysis -- and, with smaller customers, perhaps the only institution willing to do so. As
another example, the restriction on lending for repayment of securities causes a bank compliance
problems  when  renewing  a  company’s  revolving  line  of  credit  if  a  section  20  affiliate  has
underwritten  an  offering  by  that  company  since  the  credit  was  first  extended.  The  bank  must
either recruit other lenders to participate in the renewal or  amend  the  line  of  credit  in  order  to
specify  that  its  purpose  does  not  include  repayment  of  interest  or  principal  on  the  newly
underwritten securities.
Notably, even if these firewalls were lifted, a bank would still be required to hold
capital  against  all  credit  enhancements  and  credit  extended  to  customers  of  its  section  20
affiliate.  Section  23B  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  would  require  that  such  credit  and  credit
enhancements  be  on  an  arm’s-length  basis.  Similarly,  the  federal  anti-tying  statute  would
prohibit  a  bank  from  offering  discounted  credit  enhancements  on  the  condition  that  an  issuer
obtain investment banking services from a section 20 affiliate. Thus, for example, a bank could
not offer such credit enhancements below market prices, or to customers who were poor credit
risks, in order to generate underwriting business for a section 20 affiliate.
The  firewall  prohibiting  lending  to  retail  customers  for  securities  purchases
during  the  underwriting  period  addresses  one  of  the  most  important  potential  conflicts  of
interests arising from the affiliation of commercial and investment banking: the possibility that a
bank  would  extend  credit  at  below-market  rates  in  order  to  induce  consumers  to  purchase
securities  underwritten  by  its  section  20  affiliate.  The  concern  here  is  not  only  safety  and
soundness but customer protection.
The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 already prohibits a broker-dealer (including
a  section  20  affiliate)  from  extending  or  arranging  for  credit  to  its  customers  during  the
underwriting  period.  Still,  we  recognize  the  Act  would  not  apply  in  the  absence  of  arranging
and,  unlike  the  firewall,  would  not  cover  loans  to  purchase  a  security  in  which  a  section  20
affiliate  makes  a  market.  Section  23B  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act,  and  to  some  extent  section
BIS Review   34/1997
- 5 -
23A, would address some of these remaining concerns, but  perhaps  not  all.  The  Board  will  be
reviewing the comments on this firewall carefully.
Capital Requirements
The next group of firewalls I will discuss imposes capital requirements on a bank
holding company and its section 20 subsidiary. These firewalls require a bank holding company
to  deduct  from  its  capital  any  investment  in  a  section  20  subsidiary  and  most  unsecured
extensions of credit to a section 20 subsidiary engaged in debt and equity underwriting; they also
require  the  section  20  subsidiary  to  maintain  its  own  capital  in  keeping  with  industry  norms.
These  requirements  apply  only  to  section  20  subsidiaries  and  not  to  any  other  nonbank
subsidiary of a bank holding company.
The  Board  proposed  to  eliminate  the  capital  deductions  for  investments  in,  or
credit extended to, a section 20 subsidiary. The original purpose of the deduction was to ensure
that  the  holding  company  maintained  sufficient  resources  to  support  its  federally  insured
depository  institutions.  In  practice,  however,  the  deductions  have  created  regulatory  burden
without strengthening the capital levels of the insured institutions.
The  deduction  is  inconsistent  with  Generally  Accepted  Accounting  Practices,
which require consolidation of subsidiaries for accounting purposes. The deduction therefore has
created confusion and imposed costs by requiring bank holding companies to prepare statements
on two bases. The deduction does not strengthen the capital of either the bank or its section 20
affiliate, and elimination of the deduction would not create or expose any incentive  for  a  bank
holding  company  to  divert  necessary  capital  from  a  depository  institution  to  a  section  20
subsidiary. One of the purposes of the system of prompt corrective action adopted in 1992 is to
ensure that a bank holding company maintains the capital of its subsidiary banks.
The  Board  also  sought  comment  on  whether  it  should  continue  to  impose  a
special capital requirement on section 20 subsidiaries in addition to the SEC’s net capital rules.
The  purpose  of  this  requirement  was  to  prevent  a  section  20  subsidiary  from  being  able  to
leverage itself more than, and gain a competitive advantage over, its independent competitors by
trading on the reputation of its affiliated bank. Although the SEC imposes capital requirements
on all broker-dealers, these are minimum levels that are far below the industry norm.
This capital firewall has proven confusing and controversial, as "industry norms"
are  difficult  to  determine.  Federal  Reserve  examiners  have  expected  section  20  subsidiaries  to
maintain  capital  to  cover  risk  exposure  in  an  amount  approximately  twice  what  the  SEC
requires,  but  some  section  20  subsidiaries  have  complained  that  this  is  more  than  their
competitors maintain. They also argue that whereas SEC capital requirements allow all capital to
be  concentrated  in  the  broker-dealer  and  dedicated  to  meeting  capital  requirements,  a  bank
holding  company  must  meet  capital  requirements  at  the  bank  and  holding  company  levels  as
well.
Indeed,  bank  holding  company  capital  is  measured  on  a  consolidated  basis,  and
thus includes the capital and assets of the section 20 subsidiary. Therefore, the Board believes it
may  be  unnecessary  to  impose  a  separate  capital  requirement  on  the  bank  holding  company’s
section 20 subsidiary.
BIS Review   34/1997
Remaining Restrictions
- 6 -
Before  leaving  the  Board’s  proposal,  I  should  also  note  which  restrictions  the
Board proposed to retain. The Board proposed to reserve its authority to reimpose the funding,
credit  extension,  and  credit  enhancement  firewalls  in  the  event  that  an  affiliated  bank  or  thrift
becomes less than well capitalized and the bank holding company does not promptly restore it to
the well-capitalized level. The Board considered proposing to reimpose the firewalls on less than
well capitalized banks automatically -- as some recent bills introduced in the Congress would --
but decided against it because a decline in a bank’s capital ratios may be wholly unrelated to the
bank’s dealings with its section 20 affiliate. Thus, for example, forcing a bank suffering serious
losses on real estate lending to desist from credit enhancements may be unproductive or -- if the
business is profitable -- counterproductive.
The  Board  also  proposed  to  retain  existing  firewalls  requiring  adequate  internal
controls  and  documentation,  including  a  requirement  that  a  bank  exercise  independent  and
thorough credit judgment in any transaction involving an affiliate. Although we expect banking
organizations to have such internal controls and look for them during examinations, we believe
that  they  are  sufficiently  important  to  warrant  reinforcement  through  the  operating  standards.
They are especially important in the section 20 context because of the likelihood that a bank and
its section 20 affiliate may be selling similar products to the same customer.
Because of the potential for customer confusion as to which products are federally
insured,  the  Board  proposed  to  require  a  section  20  affiliate  to  make  disclosures  to  customers
similar to those that the Interagency Statement requires of a bank selling nondeposit products on
bank premises. The proposal would also continue to prohibit an affiliated bank from knowingly
advising  a  customer  to  purchase  securities  underwritten  or  dealt  in  by  a  section  20  affiliate
unless  it  notifies  the  customer  of  its  affiliate’s  role.  The  proposal  also  continues  to  prohibit  a
bank  and  its  section  20  affiliate  from  sharing  any  nonpublic  customer  information  without  the
customer’s consent.
Earlier Board Action on Other Firewalls and the Revenue Limit
In  addition  to  describing  the  Board’s  recent  proposal,  you  also  asked  me  to
discuss other changes the Board finalized last year: increasing the section 20 revenue limit from
10  percent  to  25  percent;  allowing  cross-marketing  between  a  bank  and  a  section  20  affiliate;
permitting  employee  interlocks  between  a  bank  and  a  section  20  affiliate;  and  scaling  back  a
restriction on officer and director interlocks.
The review that led to changes to the cross-marketing and interlocks firewalls was
akin  to  what  the  Board  recently  went  through  for  all  the  firewalls.  The  Board  acted  on  these
firewalls before the rest because it had previously sought comment on them some years ago and
because they  were  identified  by  commenters  as  among  the  most  unduly  burdensome  of  all  the
firewalls.  After  reviewing  its  experience  administering  these  firewalls,  the  Board  decided  that
they caused inefficiencies that could not be justified by any benefit to safety and soundness, and
commenters  agreed  overwhelmingly.  Repeal  of  the  interlocks  and  cross-marketing  restrictions
allows  increased  synergies  in  the  operation  of  a  section  20  subsidiary  and  its  bank  affiliates.
Persons may be employed by both companies, and the trend toward coordinated management of
like  business  functions  can  accelerate,  with  reporting  lines  running  between  companies.
Companies  need  not  fund  dual  back  offices  or  trading  floors,  for  example.  To  the  extent  that
senior  bank  managers  may  now  oversee  related  operations  at  a  section  20  affiliate,  risk
management and safety and soundness may be improved.
BIS Review   34/1997
- 7 -
Moreover,  existing  disclosure  requirements  adequately  address  concerns  about
customer  confusion  arising  from  increased  cross-marketing  and  employee  interlocks.  Most
notably, the Interagency  Statement  on  Retail  Sales  of  Nondeposit  Products  states  that,  prior  to
the initial sale of a non-deposit product by a bank employee or on bank premises, the customer
must  receive  and  acknowledge  a  written  statement  that  the  product  being  sold  is  not  federally
insured, is not  a  deposit  or  other  obligation  of  the  bank,  is  not  guaranteed  by  the  bank,  and  is
subject to investment risks including loss of principal.
Finally,  with  regard  to  the  revenue  limit,  section  20  of  the  Glass-Steagall  Act
prohibits a bank from being affiliated with any company "engaged principally" in underwriting
and  dealing,  and  the  Board  was  obliged  to  make  a  narrow,  legal  determination  of  the  level  of
revenue at which a company becomes "engaged principally." The Board interpreted the statute to
allow 25 percent of total revenue to be derived from underwriting and dealing in bank-ineligible
securities. In reviewing the revenue limit, the Board was not deciding what level of underwriting
and dealing was consistent with safety and soundness or public policy. If it were, the Board may
well  have  raised  the  limit  to  100  percent,  which  would  have  been  consistent  with  the  Board’s
support of repeal of section 20.
I am pleased to report that early indications of the effects of these changes  have
been  favorable.  The  Board  currently  has  pending  three  applications  to  establish  a  section  20
subsidiary. As  we  had  anticipated,  two  of  these  are  small  to  mid-size  bank  holding  companies
which may previously have either found  it  too  expensive  to  fund  the  dual  staffing  required  by
the  interlocks  restrictions  or  too  difficult  to  generate  sufficient  eligible  revenue  to  maintain
compliance with a ten percent revenue limit. Furthermore, existing section 20 subsidiaries have
indicated  that  they  have  been  able  to  rationalize  their  organization  and  expand  their  activities
given the added flexibility with respect to both staffing and revenue.
BIS Review   34/1997
