Mr.  Thiessen  elucidates  why  he  is  optimistic  about  the  prospects  for  a
stronger  Canadian  economy    Notes  for  remarks  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,
Mr. Gordon  Thiessen,  to  the  Canadian  Association  for  Business  Economics  and  the  Ottawa
Economics Association in Ottawa on 21/3/97.
Anyone  who  has  read  our  last  Monetary  Policy  Report,  the  winter  issue  of  the
Bank  of  Canada  Review,  or  our  just-released  Annual  Report  knows  that  the  Bank  has  been
positive about Canada’s  economic  outlook.  Basically,  we  are  looking  for  a  solid  pickup  in  the
pace  of  economic  expansion  in  coming  months,  with  inflation  remaining  low.  And,  with
improvements in the basic foundation of our economy, we see the potential for sustained good
economic performance over the medium term.
Not everyone is as upbeat as we are. Some analysts are rather sceptical, especially
of  the  fairly  strong  recovery  that  we  foresee  in  household  spending.  They  see  Canadian
households  carrying  too  much  debt,  a  personal  savings  rate  that  is  already  too  low,  and  an
unemployment rate that is too high to sustain much of an increase in spending.
Others  seem  to  have  difficulty  reconciling  an  optimistic  outlook  on  the  rate  of
economic expansion  with  a  scenario  of  continued  low  inflation.  In  this  group,  some  are  afraid
that  the  Bank  will  react  too  quickly  to  an  acceleration  of  inflation,  frustrating  the  economic
recovery. Another camp is worried that the  Bank  will  let  inflation  get  away,  with  all  the  costs
that that would entail.
Today,  I  would  like  to  use  this  opportunity  to  address  some  of  these  issues.  I
believe that I can offer good reasons -- and monetary policy is one of them -- why we in Canada
should be upbeat about our economic future.
Why is the Bank optimistic about an expanding economy?
The  Canadian  economy  has  been  undergoing  extensive  transformation.  And
clearly  we  are  not  out  of  the  restructuring  woods  yet.  This  restructuring  has  been  spawned  by
rapid technological advancements, increasingly open and competitive world markets, the decline
of inflation in Canada from the high levels of the past, and the need to reverse an unsustainable
trend of debt accumulation, particularly by Canadian governments.
But over the last few years, Canada has made great strides in dealing with  these
issues.  As  a  result,  I  believe  that  we  now  have  a  much  more  efficient  and  competitive  private
sector. We  also  have  a  fundamentally  improved  macroeconomic  policy  situation.  Fiscal  policy
has  been  successful  in  reducing  deficits,  and  governments  have  been  moving  towards  less
vulnerable  debt  positions.  Inflation 
the  Bank’s
inflation-control target range.
low  and  relatively  stable  within 
is 
Together,  these  improvements  in  our  basic  economic  circumstances  have
facilitated the major decline that we have seen in domestic interest rates over the past year or so.
Many interest rates in Canada are now at their lowest levels since the 1960s. And for maturities
of up to 10 years, they are also below comparable U.S. rates by the widest margins we have seen
in many years.
Some  of  the  gloom  about  the  economy  during  the  past  year  had  to  do  with  the
perception that the stimulus to economic activity from the decline in interest rates was taking a
long  time  to  have  its  effects  on  spending  and  employment.  There  are,  of  course,  lags  in  the
BIS Review   34/1997
- 2 -
impact of monetary policy actions on the economy that are widely believed to be of the order of
12 to 18 months. However, what may not have been widely appreciated was that the reductions
in short-term rates that began in the spring of 1995 initially just reversed the runup in rates that
occurred after the Mexican currency crisis and before the 1995 federal budget. The real easing in
monetary conditions relative to 1994 effectively started only in late 1995, following the Quebec
referendum, and continued for one year to late 1996. Therefore, it is not surprising that signs of
the response to that easing have only been apparent quite recently.
Because of the lags involved, the contribution of the easier monetary conditions to
a stronger expansion in output and employment should continue for some time. Thus, we expect
the  economy  to  expand  at  rates  in  excess  of  the  growth  in  potential  output  through  1997  and
1998.  In  other  words,  we  anticipate  that  the  margin  of  unused  capacity  in  our  economy  will
shrink substantially over the next couple of years.
As I noted, there are those who view this outlook with scepticism. For them, it is
not a question of lags. They argue that the current very low interest rates will not do enough to
encourage  additional  household  spending,  given  high  debt  levels,  a  low  savings  rate,  and  high
unemployment.
I  will  not  tell  you  that  these  factors  cannot  temper  the  response  to  low  interest
rates. Of course they can. But I do not believe they are sufficiently important to offset it. Let me
take the arguments in turn.
First,  household  debt  levels.  Yes,  they  are  high  relative  to  personal  disposable
income -- over 90 per cent. But the burden of servicing this debt represents only 8 per  cent  of
disposable income -- well down from the peak in 1990 -- and is expected to continue to fall as
debt is rolled over, or new debt taken on, at lower interest rates. In addition, over three-quarters
of  household  debt  is  in  mortgages,  which  have  financed  the  purchase  of  houses.  Households
have also been accumulating financial investments. In fact, the net worth of the household sector
has  been  rising,  although,  of  course,  the  assets  and  debts  are  not  equally  distributed  across
households.  The  important  point  I  want  to  make  is  that,  if  you  take  the  household  sector  as  a
whole,  it  is  not  buried  under  a  mountain  of  debt,  with  high  servicing  costs,  no  assets,  and  no
spending power.
Second,  the  personal  savings  rate.  In  this  case,  there  are  valid  concerns  that  we
have  been  underestimating  savings  by  ignoring  capital  gains,  particularly  on  investments  in
stocks,  given  the  rise  in  the  stock  market.  If  we  look  at  the  conventional  measure  of  personal
savings, the savings rate of 3¼ per cent in the fourth quarter of 1996 is indeed low. But this does
not  mean  that  it  could  not  remain  low  for  a  time  (or  even  go  lower  temporarily)  while  the
economy is recovering. This is, in fact, what we would expect to happen if significant numbers
of households decided to cash in some of their accumulated financial assets in order to spend.
Third, the high unemployment rate. This argument sounds like a "Catch 22": the
high  unemployment  rate  discourages  people  from  spending,  which  keeps  unemployment  high,
which  discourages  spending  still  more.  I  believe  that  this  grim  picture  overstates  the  problem,
given that over 90 per cent of the workforce is employed. And yes, there are still cutbacks and
layoffs,  especially  in  the  public  sector.  However,  private  sector  employment  continues  to
expand. Since the beginning of 1996, the private sector generated  some  210,000  net  new  jobs,
six times as many as were lost in the public sector. Undoubtedly, employment concerns remain,
but  the  quickening  of  output  growth  that  began  in  the  second  half  of  last  year  should  lead  to
BIS Review   34/1997
- 3 -
sustained  growth  in  private  sector  employment  over  the  course  of  1997,  and  to  improved
consumer confidence.
You  can  see  that  I  did  not  find  the  arguments  against  a  strong  comeback  in
consumer spending persuasive. Moreover, these negative influences must be weighed against the
size of the easing in interest rates that has taken place since late 1995. Short-term rates are down
by about 3 percentage points, medium-term rates  by  2  percentage  points  and  longer-term  rates
by 1½ percentage points. Another indicator of the extent of easing in monetary conditions is the
growth  of  the  narrowly-defined  monetary  aggregate,  M1.  This  aggregate,  which  provides
advance information on the near-term expansion of the real economy, has recently accelerated to
a year-over-year growth rate of over 15 per cent.
But,  of  course,  in  the  end,  it  is  the  recent  evidence  from  the  interest-sensitive
sectors of the economy that is the most  telling.  As  the  economic  results  for  the  second  half  of
1996  show,  and  the  more  recent  monthly  indicators  confirm,  there  have  been  substantial
increases  in  spending  on  housing,  motor  vehicles  and  other  consumer  durables.  Sales  in  these
sectors have picked up in response to the lower interest rates, just as expected.
All things considered, I believe there are good reasons to  expect  solid  economic
expansion in coming months.
What are the risks that inflation will accelerate?
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  inflation  implications  of  this  scenario.  If  the  economy
grows at the above-potential rates that the Bank foresees, won’t inflation accelerate? As I noted,
this question seems to lead to two, quite opposite, concerns.  One  group  of  commentators  fears
that  the  Bank  will  respond,  either  too  quickly  or  unnecessarily,  to  an  acceleration  of  inflation
and cut off the economic expansion. Another group worries that the Bank will let inflation get
away, resulting in another cycle of boom and bust.
There seems to be a certain confusion around this issue. Some people apparently
assume that it is the speed at which the economy is growing that determines whether inflationary
pressures  will  increase  or  decrease.  While  the  rate  of  growth  is  not  irrelevant,  what  really
matters is the level of economic activity relative to the production capacity of the economy -- in
other words, the margin of slack or the output gap in the economy. The size of the output gap,
interacting  with  inflation  expectations,  is  the  principal  force  behind  increased  or  decreased
inflationary pressure.
Thus, one would expect inflation to start accelerating only after a period in which
the level of aggregate demand had exceeded the economy’s capacity to produce on a sustained
basis. That is by no means the situation we face in Canada today. In fact, we have a fairly large
margin  of  spare  capacity.  Even  with  the  more  rapid  pace  of  expansion  we  experienced  in  the
second half of 1996, we  estimate  that  the  level  of  real  GDP  was  still,  on  average,  about  3  per
cent below the level of potential output.
This  means  that  the  Canadian  economy  should  have  room  for  strong,
above-potential  rates  of  growth  in  output  and  employment  in  coming  quarters,  without  a
resurgence of inflation.
But  what  about  the  current  rapid  rates  of  money  growth?  Are  they  not
inflationary?
BIS Review   34/1997
- 4 -
The  15  per  cent  year-over-year  growth  of  the  M1  aggregate  that  I  mentioned  a
moment ago is certainly high, and if it persisted for very long, it would not  be  consistent  with
preserving  low  inflation.  But  there  are  currently  some  special  factors  in  the  picture  which
suggest  that  a  temporary  period  of  rapid  M1  growth  would  not  be  inflationary.  These  are  the
recent changes in the nature of business chequing accounts and the need for an adjustment in the
stock of money held for transactions purposes, in response to the low levels of interest rates and
the move of the economy towards full capacity.  Moreover,  the  recent  evolution  of  the  broader
monetary aggregates continues to point to low inflation.
The important role of inflation-control targets
I  believe  that  the  role  of  inflation-control  targets  in  the  Bank’s  conduct  of
monetary  policy  provides  additional  credibility  to  this  scenario  of  non-inflationary  economic
expansion.
First  of  all,  with  the  success  we  have  had  in  meeting  these  targets  and  their
growing credibility, inflation expectations appear to have diminished. That makes our job easier
these  days.  In  the  past,  when  inflation  was  high,  any  signs  of  demand  or  price  shocks  would
worsen inflation expectations and add to upward pressures on inflation.
Inflation-control targets are also important in dealing with possible changes in the
growth  potential  of  the  economy.  Such  changes  can  result,  for  example,  from  additions  to  the
capital  stock  and  increases  in  productivity.  Potential  output  growth  in  Canada  is  expected  to
increase  over  the  next  few  years,  with  the  cyclical  rebound  in  productivity  and  with
improvements from ongoing restructuring and investments in technology. There is also a debate
going on, particularly in the United States, as to  whether  there  has  been  a  structural  change  in
the way an economy operates. Have more open and competitive international markets effectively
increased the capacity of the economy to expand without generating inflation pressures?
The Bank tries to take all these considerations into account when forming a view
about the inflation outlook. But estimates of potential output are difficult to make, and they have
a  wide  margin  of  error  around  them.  A  monetary  policy  focused  on  inflation-control  targets
ensures that the Bank will not inadvertently make systematic misjudgments over time about how
fast the economy can grow. How does that work? An unforeseen improvement in potential will
tend  to  put  unexpected  downward  pressure  on  inflation.  That  will  encourage  the  Bank  to  ease
monetary  conditions  to  support  a  faster  expansion  in  output  and  employment  and  to  prevent
inflation  from  falling  below  the  bottom  of  the  target  range.  The  reverse  would  be  the  case  if
potential was growing more slowly than we realized and inflation was tending to rise.
Moreover, by responding to the trend of inflation relative to the target range, as I
have described, monetary policy will also act as an important stabilizer for the economy over the
medium  term  in  the  face  of  cyclical  fluctuations.  The  targets  effectively  call  for  the  Bank  to
tighten  monetary  conditions  when  demand  in  the  economy  approaches  unsustainable  levels,
pressing  against  capacity.  But  they  also  call  for  easier  monetary  conditions  when  demand  is
weak, leaving slack in the economy.
Monetary  policy  targets  focused  on  inflation  were  initially  developed  to  help
reduce persistent high inflation in an orderly manner. But I believe that such targets continue to
provide the best framework for the conduct of monetary policy, even at low rates of inflation.
BIS Review   34/1997
Concluding comments
- 5 -
In recent years, Canada has made significant progress in restoring the credibility
of its macroeconomic policies and making the adjustments necessary to lay the foundation for a
more efficient, prosperous economy in the future. We are now beginning to see the payoffs from
this economic transformation.
The best  contribution  the  Bank  of  Canada  can  make  to  sustaining  these  positive
trends  is  to  foster  a  monetary  environment  of  confidence  and  stability.  And  that  is  what  we
intend to deliver with our commitment to targets for inflation control.
BIS Review   34/1997
