Mr. Greenspan highlights some key aspects of the current economic situation
in  the  United  States  Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve
System,  Mr.  Alan  Greenspan,  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee  of  the  United  States
Congress on 20/3/97.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear here today.
Last  month,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  submitted  its  semiannual  report  on  monetary  policy  to
the Congress. That report and my accompanying testimony covered in detail our assessment of
the  outlook  for  the  U.S.  economy.  This  morning,  I  would  like  to  highlight  some  of  the  key
aspects of the current economic situation.
As I told the Congress last month, the performance of the U.S. economy remains
quite  favorable.  Real  GDP  growth  picked  up  to  more  than  3  percent  over  the  four  quarters  of
1996. Moreover, recently released data suggest that activity has retained a great deal of vigor in
early 1997. In addition, nominal hourly wages and salaries have risen faster than prices over the
past  several  quarters,  meaning  that  workers  have  reaped  some  of  the  benefits  of  rising
productivity and thus gained ground in real terms. Outside the food and energy sectors, increases
in  consumer  prices  have  actually  continued  to  edge  lower,  with  core  CPI  inflation  of  only  2½
percent over the past twelve months.
The  low  inflation  of  the  past  year  is  both  a  symptom  and  a  cause  of  the  good
economy. It is symptomatic of the balance and solidity of the expansion and the evident absence
of major strains on resources. At the same time, continued low levels of inflation and inflation
expectations have been  a  key  support  for  healthy  economic  performance.  They  have  helped  to
create  a  financial  and  economic  environment  conducive  to  strong  capital  spending  and
longer-range planning generally, and so to sustained economic expansion. These types of results
are  why  we  stressed  in  our  monetary  policy  testimony  the  importance  of  acting  promptly  --
ideally pre-emptively -- to  keep  inflation  low  over  the  intermediate  term  and  to  promote  price
stability over time.
For  some,  the  benign  inflation  outcome  of  the  past  year  might  be  considered
surprising, as resource utilization rates -- particularly of labor -- have been in the neighborhood
of  those  that  historically  have  been  associated  with  building  inflation  pressures.  To  be  sure,
nominal hourly labor compensation, especially its wage component, accelerated in 1996. But the
rate  of  pay  increase  still  was  markedly  less  than  historical  relationships  with  labor  market
conditions would have predicted.
Atypical  restraint  on  compensation  increases  has  been  evident  for  a  few  years
now. Almost certainly, it reflects a number of factors, including the sharp deceleration in health
care  costs  and  the  heightened  pressure  on  firms  and  workers  in  industries  that  compete
internationally.  Domestic  deregulation  has  also  intensified  the  competitive  forces  in  some
industries. But, as I outlined in some detail in testimony last month, I believe that job insecurity
has played the dominant role. For example, in 1991, at the bottom of the recession, a survey of
workers  at  large  firms  by  International  Survey  Research  Corporation  indicated  that  25  percent
feared being laid off. In 1996, despite the sharply lower unemployment rate and the tighter labor
market, the same survey organization found that 46 percent were fearful of a job layoff.
Whatever  the  reasons  for  its  persistence,  job  insecurity  cannot  suppress  wage
growth indefinitely. Clearly, there is a limit to how long workers will remain willing to accept
smaller increases in living standards in exchange for additional job security. Even if real wages
were  to  remain  permanently  on  a  lower  upward  track  than  otherwise  as  a  result  of  the  greater
BIS Review   34/1997
- 2 -
sense  of  insecurity,  the  rate  of  change  of  wages  would  revert  at  some  point  to  a  normal
relationship with price inflation. The unknown is when a more normal pattern will resume.
Indeed,  the  labor  markets  bear  especially  careful  watching  for  signs  that  such  a
process  is  under  way.  So  far  this  year,  the  demand  for  labor  has  stayed  strong.  Payroll
employment grew briskly in January and February, and the unemployment rate remained around
5¼  percent  --  roughly  matching  the  low  of  the  last  cyclical  upswing,  in  the  late  1980s.  Also,
initial claims for unemployment insurance remained low into March. In addition, the percentage
of  households  telling  the  Conference  Board  that  jobs  are  plentiful  has  risen  sharply  of  late,
which  suggests  that  workers  may  be  growing  more  confident  about  the  job  situation.  Finally,
wages rose faster in 1996 than in 1995 by most measures -- in  fact,  the  acceleration  was  quite
sizable  by  some  measures.  This,  too,  raises  questions  about  whether  the  transitional  period  of
unusually slow wage gains may be drawing to  a  close.  In  any  event,  further  increases  in  labor
utilization  rates  would  heighten  the  risk  of  additional  upward  pressure  on  wage  costs,  and
ultimately prices.
To be sure, the pickup in wage gains to date has not shown through to underlying
price inflation. Increases in the core CPI, as well as  in  several  other  broad  measures  of  prices,
have stayed subdued or even edged off  further  of  late.  As  best  I  can  judge,  faster  productivity
growth  last  year  offset  the  pressure  from  rising  compensation  gains  on  labor  costs  per  unit  of
output.  And  non-labor  costs,  which  are  roughly  a  quarter  of  total  consolidated  costs  of  the
nonfinancial corporate sector, were little changed in 1996.
Owing in part to this subdued behavior of unit costs, profits and rates of return on
capital  have  risen  to  high  levels.  As  a  consequence,  a  substantial  number  of  businesses
apparently  believe  that,  were  they  to  raise  prices  to  boost  profits  further,  competitors  with
already  ample  profit  margins  would  not  follow  suit;  instead,  they  would  use  the  occasion  to
capture a greater market share. This interplay is doubtless a significant factor in the evident loss
of pricing power in American business. Intensifying global competition may also be limiting the
ability of domestic firms to hike prices as well as wages.
Competitive  pressures  here  and  abroad  should  continue  to  act  as  a  restraint  on
inflation  in  the  months  ahead.  In  addition,  crude  oil  prices  have  largely  retraced  last  year’s
run-up,  and,  with  the  worldwide  supply  of  oil  having  moved  up  relative  to  demand,  futures
markets project stable prices over  the  near  term.  Food  prices  should  also  rise  less  rapidly  than
they  did  in  1996  as  some  of  last  year’s  supply  limitations  ease.  Nonetheless,  the  trends  in  the
core CPI and in broader price measures are likely to come under pressure from a continued tight
labor  market,  whose  influence  on  costs  will  be  augmented  by  the  scheduled  increase  in  the
minimum wage later in the year. And, with considerable health-care savings already having been
realized, larger increases in fringe benefits could put upward pressure on overall compensation.
Moreover, although non-oil import prices should remain subdued in 1997 as the sharp rise in the
dollar over the past year-and-a-half continues to feed through to domestic prices, their damping
effects on U.S. inflation probably will not be as great as in 1996.
The  lagged  effects  of  the  increase  in  the  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  will  also
likely  restrain  real  U.S.  net  exports  this  year.  In  addition,  declines  in  real  federal  government
purchases  should  exert  a  modest  degree  of  restraint  on  overall  demand,  and  residential
construction will probably not repeat the gains of 1996. On the other hand, financial conditions
overall remain supportive to the real economy, and creditworthy borrowers are finding funding
to be readily available from intermediaries and  in  the  securities  markets.  Moreover,  we  do  not
BIS Review   34/1997
- 3 -
see  evidence  of  widespread  imbalances  either  in  business  inventories  or  in  stocks  of  capital
equipment and consumer durables that would lead to a substantial cutback in spending.
The  trends  in  consumer  spending  on  items  other  than  durables  also  look  solid.
Retail  sales  posted  robust  gains  in  January  and  February,  and,  according  to  various  surveys,
sentiment is decidedly upbeat. Moreover, consumers have enjoyed healthy increases in their real
incomes over the past couple of years, along with the extraordinary stock-market driven rise in
their financial wealth.
Should  the  higher  wealth  be  sustained,  it  could  provide  important  support  to
consumption in 1997. But, looking at the data through 1996, the surging stock market does not
seem to have imparted as big a boost to spending as past relationships would have predicted. The
lack  of  a  more  substantial  wealth  effect  is  especially  surprising  because  we  have  also  seen  a
noticeable widening in the ownership of stocks over the past several years. Indeed, the Federal
Reserve’s recently released Survey of Consumer Finances suggests that of the total value of all
families’  holdings  of  publicly  traded  stocks  and  mutual  funds,  the  share  held  by  those  with
incomes below $100,000 (in 1995 dollars) rose from 32 percent in 1989 to 46 percent in 1995.
It is possible, however, that the wealth effect is being  offset  by  other  factors.  In
particular, families may be reluctant to spend their added wealth because they see a greater need
to  keep  it  to  support  spending  in  retirement.  Many  have  expressed  heightened  concern  about
their financial security in old age, in part because of  growing  skepticism  about  the  viability  of
the Social Security system. This concern has reportedly led to stepped-up saving for retirement.
The  sharp  increase  in  debt  burdens  in  recent  years  may  also  be  constraining
spending by some families. Indeed, although our consumer survey showed that debt usage rose
between 1992 and 1995 for almost all income groups, changes in financial conditions were not
uniform across families. Notably, the median ratio of debt payments to income for families with
debt -- a useful measure of the typical debt burden -- held steady or declined for families with
incomes of at least $50,000, but it rose for those with incomes below $50,000. We don’t know
whether these latter families took on the additional debt because they perceived brighter future
income  prospects,  or  simply  to  accelerate  purchases  they  would  have  made  later.  Nonetheless,
these  families  are  probably  the  most  vulnerable  to  disruptions  in  income,  and  the  rise  in  their
debt  burdens  is  likely  to  make  both  borrowers  and  lenders  a  bit  more  cautious  as  we  move
forward.
Both household and business balance sheets have expanded at a pace considerably
faster than income and product flows over the past decade. Accordingly, any percentage change
in  assets  or  liabilities  has  a  greater  effect  on  economic  growth  than  it  used  to.  However,
identifying such influences in the aggregate data is not always easy. At present, the difficulty is
compounded  by  concern  that  the  currently  published  national  statistics  may  not  provide  an
accurate reading of the trends in recent years, especially for productivity.
In  any  event,  other  data  suggest  that  wealth  and  debt  effects  may  be  exerting  a
measurable  influence  on  the  consumption  and  saving  decisions  of  different  segments  of  the
population. According to the Consumer Expenditure Survey conducted by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics,  saving  out  of  current  income  by  families  in  the  upper-income  quintile  evidently  has
declined  in  recent  years.  At  the  same  time,  Federal  Reserve  estimates  suggest  that  the  use  of
credit  for  purchases  has  leveled  off  after  a  sharp  run-up  from  1993  to  1996,  perhaps  because
some families are becoming debt constrained and, as a result, are curtailing their spending.
BIS Review   34/1997
- 4 -
The Federal Reserve, of course, will be weighing these and other influences as it
makes future policy decisions. Demand has been growing quite strongly  in  recent  months,  and
the FOMC, at its meeting next week, will have to judge whether that pace of expansion will be
maintained,  and,  if  so,  whether  it  will  continue  to  be  met  by  solid  productivity  growth,  as  it
apparently  has  been  --  official  figures  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.  Alternatively,  if  strong
demand  is  expected  to  persist,  and  does  not  seem  likely  to  be  matched  by  productivity
improvement,  the  FOMC  will  have  to  decide  whether  increased  pressures  on  supply  will
eventually  produce  the  types  of  inflationary  imbalances  that,  if  not  addressed  early,  will
undermine the long expansion.
Should we choose to alter monetary policy, we  know  from  past  experience  that,
although  the  financial  markets  may  respond  immediately,  the  main  effects  on  inflationary
pressures  may  not  be  felt  until  late  this  year  and  in  1998.  Because  forecasts  that  far  out  are
highly uncertain, we rarely think in terms of a single outlook. Rather, we endeavor to assess the
likely consequences of our decisions in terms of a reasonable range of possible outcomes. Part of
our evaluation is to judge not only the benefits that are likely to result from appropriate policy,
but also the costs should we be wrong. In any action -- including leaving policy unchanged -- we
seek to assure ourselves that the expected benefits are large enough to risk the cost of a mistake.
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  note  that  the  current  economic  expansion  is  now
entering its seventh year. That makes it already a long upswing by historical standards. And yet,
looking ahead, the prospects for sustaining the expansion are quite favorable. The flexibility of
our market system and the vibrancy of our private sector remain examples for the whole world
to emulate. We will endeavor to do our part by continuing to foster a monetary framework under
which our citizens can prosper to the fullest possible extent.
BIS Review   34/1997
