Bank  of  Japan  presents  its  quarterly  economic  outlook  for  spring  1997
BANK OF JAPAN, QUARTERLY BULLETIN, May 1997 (advance summary).
1.
Japan’s economy continues on a recovery trend despite some fluctuations
caused  by  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate,  with  private  demand  showing  underlying
firmness.    Among  final  demand  items,  public-sector  investment  has  decreased,  and  housing
investment has declined reflecting the reversal in the stepped-up demand which took place ahead
of the rise in the consumption tax rate.  However, net exports have continued on an increasing
trend,  and  business  fixed  investment  has  been  rising  steadily.    Personal  consumption  is  on  a
moderate recovery trend.  Meanwhile, inventories are  generally  at  appropriate  levels.    In  these
circumstances, industrial production has been strengthening since autumn  1996.    Labor  market
conditions have been improving moderately on the whole.
Prices have stopped declining.  Domestic  wholesale  prices  (adjusted  for  seasonal
electricity  rates)  increased  in  early  April  1997  reflecting  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate.
However,  the downward pressures remain strong on those such as electrical machinery.  Despite
these  pressures,  domestic  wholesale  prices  have  remained  unchanged  or  have  increased
marginally.  This reflects the yen’s depreciation and the higher oil prices to date, as well as the
moderate improvement in domestic supply and demand conditions.  The year-to-year declines in
corporate service prices are narrowing, and consumer prices (nationwide, excluding perishables)
are marginally above the previous year’s level.  With respect to commercial land prices, prices
of  large  and  well-located  land  suited  for  major  developments  have  stopped  declining,  while
those of land less suited for use have continued to decline.  As for residential land, prices have
gradually stopped declining.  On the balance of payments, the real trade surplus has been on an
increasing  trend,  and  the  nominal  current-account  surplus  has  also  increased,  albeit  very
moderately.
2.
In  the  financial  markets,  the  overnight  call  rate  (uncollateralized)  rose
temporarily  around  the  fiscal  year-end,  but  has  since  declined  to  the  level  slightly  below  the
official discount rate of 0.5 per cent.  The 3-month CD rate has continued at around 0.50 - 0.55
per  cent  except  for  the  fiscal  year-end.    The  long-term  government  bond  yield  has  been
declining since summer 1996, and has recently moved at a low level of 2.1 - 2.2 per cent.  Stock
prices plummeted between the end of 1996 and the beginning of 1997, and have recently stayed
at  somewhat  over    ¥18,000.    On  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  has  been  depreciating
against the U.S. dollar since mid-1995, and has recently moved at around  ¥125 - 126.
Lending by private financial institutions has continued to  be  lackluster.    Growth
in monetary aggregates has continued at around 3.0 - 4.0 per cent, but it has declined somewhat
compared to summer 1996.
3.
Looking  at  individual  components  of  final  demand,  public-sector
investment  is  expected  to  follow  a  declining  trend,  although  it  may  be  supported  for  the  time
being by implementation of the government’s supplementary budget for fiscal 1996.  While both
exports  and  imports  will  expand  reflecting  the  progress  in  international  division  of  labor,  net
exports  are  expected  to  continue  increasing  owing  partly  to  the  yen’s  depreciation  since  mid-
1995.
With respect to the growth of domestic private demand, corporate profits of large
manufacturing  firms  are  improving  steadily,  helped  partly  by  the  positive  effects  on  export
prices  and  export  volume  stimulated  by  the  yen’s  depreciation.    Recovery  in  corporate  profits
has spread to nonmanufacturing firms which are closely related to business activities, as well as
BIS Review   47/1997
- 2 -
to small manufacturing firms.  Business fixed investment is thus expected to increase steadily in
months  ahead,  mainly  reflecting  1)  this  improvement  in  corporate  profits,  2)  the  progress  in
capital stock adjustments, and 3) the rise in information-related investment.  However, the pace
of  growth  in  business  fixed  investment  is  unlikely  to  accelerate  significantly  as  balance-sheet
adjustment pressures, for one, remain strong.
With respect to  the  household  sector,  growth  in  compensation  of  employees  has
been  accelerating,  mainly  in  bonus  payments  and  overtime  payments.    Although  the  negative
impact  of  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate  is  yet  uncertain,  consumer  confidence  will
strengthen  if  growth  continues  to  spread  from  the  corporate  sector  to  the  household  sector.
Personal  consumption  will  thus  continue  to  recover,  despite  the  reversal  in  the  stepped-up
demand  that  occurred  prior  to  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate.    Meanwhile,  any  drastic
decline  in  housing  investment  is  unlikely  given  present  low  interest  rates,  albeit  with  some
reversal of the demand that peaked before the rise in the consumption tax rate.
4.
Turning  to  the  outlook  on  prices,  there  is  potential  upward  pressure  on
prices  reflecting  the  yen’s  depreciation,  but  they  are  expected  to  remain  stable  for  some  time.
This is because, 1) crude oil prices have  begun  to  weaken,  2)  the  recovery  in  domestic  supply
and demand conditions has been moderate, and 3) there remains a strong downward pressure on
prices owing to technological innovations, particularly in electrical machinery.  However, price
differentials between home and abroad have narrowed, and the general sense of weak supply and
demand conditions for products has receded.  Thus, the Bank will monitor more closely future
developments in domestic and overseas supply and demand conditions, as well as in the foreign
exchange market.
5.
In  sum,  private  demand  has  firmed  in  a  virtuous  cycle  as  growth  in
production  is  accompanied  by  growth  in  incomes,  supported  partly  by  the  yen’s  depreciation
which augmented corporate profits and net exports.  Thus, although economic growth will slow
down  temporarily  in  the  first  half  of  fiscal  1997  with  the  reversal  in  the  stepped-up  demand
ahead  of  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax,  chances  are  improving  that  economic  recovery  turns
out  to  be  sustainable.    However,  the  extent  of  the  negative  effects  caused  by  the  rise  in  the
consumption tax rate, including the reversal in the stepped-up demand, has yet to be confirmed.
Also,  balance-sheet  adjustment  pressures  may  continue  to  restrain  the  economic  recovery.    In
these circumstances, promoting effective reforms of Japan’s economic structure is an important
ingredient  in  the  efforts  to  strengthen  the  basis  for  recovery  in  private  demand  as  well  as  the
basis for a medium to long-term growth in Japan’s economy.
BIS Review   47/1997
