Dr.  Hämäläinen  reviews  developments  in  the  Finnish  economy  in  1996
Review by the Governor of the Bank of Finland, Dr. Sirkka Hämäläinen, in connection with the
Bank of Finland’s Annual Accounts.  PRESS RELEASE, 10/1/97.
Coherent  economic  policies  and  a  stable  international  environment  provided  the
appropriate conditions for steady growth and balanced performance of the  Finnish  economy  in
1996.  The  rise  in  the  price  level  was  moderate  and  exchange  rates  remained  fairly  stable.  For
these reasons, it was possible to lower the instrumental interest rates of monetary policy to levels
that  were  low  by  both  historical  and  international  standards.  Long-term  market  rates  followed
the  downward  trend  in  short-term  rates.  Positive  outcomes  included  a  reduction  in  the  central
government  deficit,  the  end  of  the  banks'  protracted  series  of  financial  losses  and  a  noticeable
improvement in the economy's external indebtedness. High unemployment continued  to  pose  a
serious problem.
The consumer price index rose by about 1 per cent in 1996, and the indicator of
underlying  inflation,  which  serves  as  a  basis  for  monetary  policy,  was  even  more  subdued.
During the summer and autumn months, a lively public discussion ensued on the possibility of
deflation.  There  were  however  no  signs  of  a  general  decline  in  the  price  level,  and  the  entire
configuration of asset prices, for example trended upward.
Exports and investment provided less-than-expected stimulus to economic growth
in 1996, but owing to a healthy rise in private consumption expenditure, total output is estimated
to have grown by nearly 3 per cent. The market outlook for exports improved in the latter part of
the  year.  Investment  expenditure  was  buoyed  mainly  by  previously  started  large-scale
investment  projects  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  but  construction  activity  picked  up  sharply  in
the  latter  part  of  the  year.  Because  of  a  recovery  in  the  service  and  construction  sectors,  the
employment  situation  improved  slightly,  which  had  a  salutary  effect  on  expectations  and
demand in the household and corporate sectors.
The  growth  in  domestic  demand  helped  to  constrain  the  general  government
deficit,  i.e.  the  combined  deficit  of  central  and  local  governments  and  social  security  funds.
Nonetheless, the central government deficit remained large  by  both  historical  and  international
standards. The indebtedness of households and firms again eased considerably and the external
indebtedness of the total economy continued to improve.
The Bank of Finland continued to relax monetary policy in 1996. In the course of
the year, the tender rate was lowered from 4.25 per cent to 3.0 per cent and the financial markets
remained  calm.  The  external  value  of  the  markka  fluctuated  to  some  extent  but  on  the  whole
remained  relatively  stable.  As  the  year  progressed,  the  long-term  interest  rate  moved
considerably  closer  to  the  comparable  German  rate,  and  by  the  final  months  of  the  year  the
differential had stabilized at about ½ percentage point.
One  significant  development  in  1996  was  the  continued  strengthening  of  the
banks  and  the  termination  of  a  period  of  several  years  of  negative  financial  results.  The
aggregate  result  turned  positive  largely  because  of  reduced  loan  losses  and  lower  cost  levels.
Nonetheless, domestic banks' profitability and capital adequacy have still not reached levels that
can be considered good by international standards.
Improved  economic  balance  and  steady  economic  policy  enabled  the  Bank  of
Finland to make a proposal in October to the Government concerning the joining of the markka
to  the  EU's  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  (ERM).  The  proposal  was  approved  and  negotiations
BIS Review   2/1997
- 2 -
with  other  EU  countries  led  to  an  agreed  ECU  central  rate  for  the  markka  of  FIM  5.80661,
corresponding  to  a  central  rate  against  the  Deutschemark  of  FIM  3.04.  The  agreed  markka
exchange rate configuration vis-à-vis major ERM currencies corresponds to the average level of
recent years.  After  Italy  joined  the  ERM  in  November,  the  markka's  ECU  central  rate  became
FIM 5.85424. Bilateral central rates against other ERM currencies were not affected.
Finland's purpose in joining the ERM was to ensure its eligibility to be among the
first  group  of  countries  to  move  into  Stage  Three  of  EMU.  According  to  the  text  of  the
Maastricht  Treaty,  the  exchange  rate  convergence  criterion  requires  exchange  rate  stability  for
two years prior to the examination and participation in  the  ERM.  It  now  appears  that  the  final
decision on eligibility for Stage Three of EMU is slated for spring 1998.
As  the  Bank  of  Finland  reaffirmed  in  connection  with  the  ERM  linkup,  the
monetary policy objective remains that of keeping the  inflation  rate  at  about  2 per  cent,  which
accords  with  the  major  EU  countries.  Although  the  inflation  objective  is  consistent  with  the
stable  exchange  rate  objective,  in  the  event  of  a  disturbance,  ERM  participation  would  imply
precedence of the exchange rate objective. The ERM's wide (± 15 per cent) fluctuation margins
provide  a  good  buffer  against  speculative  activity,  but  clearly  the  need  to  meet  the  EMU
exchange  rate  criterion  and  to  maintain  economic  balance  requires  a  much  more  stable  course
for  exchange  rates.  Continuing  progress  in  balancing  central  government  finances  and
maintenance of the moderate cost trend are key factors as regards exchange rate stability.
It  is  apparent  that  the  easing  of  monetary  policy  and  confidence  in  improving
economic prospects will provide support for domestic demand over the future. With exports also
picking up again, the growth of total output could reach 4 per cent in 1997. It appears that  the
rise  in  the  price  level  will  stay  near  the  targeted  level.  The  decline  in  unemployment  should
continue  but  again  at  a  very  sluggish  pace.  In  order  to  accelerate  the  decline  in  the
unemployment  rate,  the  tax  wedge  should  be  narrowed  further  and  the  social  security  and  tax
systems should be made more work-friendly.
It appears that Finland will be able to meet all the economic convergence criteria
for EMU,  i.e.  those  pertaining  to  inflation,  exchange  rates,  the  long-term  interest  rate,  and  the
public sector deficit and debt. The decision on which countries are to participate in Stage Three
of EMU is to made in spring 1998, only a little over a year from now, and before that time the
Act on the Bank of Finland should be amended so that the EMU requirement regarding central
bank independence can be fulfilled.
Practical  preparations  within  the  EU  for  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  have
progressed according to plans. The Bank of Finland has participated in the work of creating the
European System of Central Banks, in both the European Monetary Institute (EMI) and the EU's
Monetary Committee. The preparatory work involves inter alia strategy and instruments for the
conduct  of  a  single  monetary  policy  as  well  as  detailed  planning  of  the  payment  system.
Progress has also been made in specifying the legal status of the single currency - the euro - as
well  as  in  the  design  of  euro  notes  and  coins.  Much  work  has  also  been  required  in  the
development of an exchange rate system covering both EMU participants and other EU states.
The Bank of Finland's own preparations for Stage Three of EMU have intensified.
The adoption of a single currency requires broad changes in the payment systems of the banks
and the Bank of Finland. One major change will be the fusion of national payment systems into
an EU-wide payment system. The Bank of Finland supports efficient and secure solutions, which
will at the same time provide the best possible environment for  Finnish  banking  and  securities
BIS Review   2/1997
- 3 -
markets. Cooperative efforts between the banks and the Bank of Finland have intensified in all
areas  of  concern,  and  the  Bank  of  Finland  is  participating  in  the  national  EMU  project  of  the
Ministry of Finance.
   The Bank of Finland's financial result for 1996 marked a significant improvement
over the last several years, which had resulted in an erosion of the Bank's capital position. The
primary  reason  for  the  improvement  was  the  sale  to  the  state  of  the  Sponda  group,  which  had
fallen  to  the  Bank  in  the  wake  of  the  banking  crisis.  In  this  connection,  the  Bank  received
repayment  of  a  loan  to  Sponda  and  partial  compensation  for  forgone  interest  income.  Final
losses in connection with the takeover of Skopbank were included in the Bank's balance sheet in
1996: the loss of equity capital amounted to about FIM 5 billion.
The  Bank  of  Finland's  result  for  1996  after  capitalization  of  prior  years'  losses  not
previously recorded in the balance sheet was FIM 3 754 million, which was added to the reserve
fund in the balance sheet, thus strengthening the Bank's capital position.
BIS Review   2/1997
