Bank  of  Japan  presents  summaries  of  articles  published  in  the  August
edition of its Quarterly Bulletin   BANK OF JAPAN, COMMUNICATION, 29/8/97.
Revision of Japan’s Flow of Funds Accounts
Introduction
Bank of Japan compiled the first flow of funds accounts in  1958,  covering  datafor  the  years  from  1954  to  1957.  Since  then,  the  flow  of  funds  accounts  have  been  used
extensively, for example, as a source for producing the capital finance account of  the  national
accounts, and as the only statistical material that provides an overall picture of Japan’s financial
structure. However, the present flow of funds accounts require improvement in many respects.
For example, although the framework of the flow of funds accounts basically conforms to that
of the System of National Accounts established in 1968 by the United Nations (hereafter, 1968
SNA),  various  inconsistencies  remain  between  the  two  due  to  inadequate  availability  of  data.
This results in various limitations when one tries to obtain a combined picture of real economic
activity  and  financial  activity  using  the  flow  of  funds  accounts  and  the  national  accounts.  It
should also be noted that the 1968 SNA itself does not fully reflect the changes in economic and
financial structures that have occurred in the years since it was established. In 1993, therefore,
the  Statistical  Commission  under  the  Economic  and  Social  Council  of  the  United  Nations
(hereafter,  ECOSOC  Statistical  Commission)  adopted  a  draft  amendment  to  the  SNA  (1993
SNA) with a view to creating a framework that better reflects the recent economic and financial
environment.  Further,  in  response  to  increasing  demand  for  internationally  standardized
financial  statistics,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  at  the  behest  of  the  ECOSOC
Statistical Commission, is preparing a Manual on Monetary and Financial Statistics (hereafter,
the IMF Manual) to supplement the 1993 SNA. A number of countries have initiated reviews of
their flow of funds accounts in accordance with these developments.
Statistics  that  provide  a  highly  reliable  overview  of  financial  activities  are
indispensable  for  tracing  changes  in  the  financial  structure,  for  examining  the  roles  of  each
economic  sector,  and  for  considering  the  implications  of  these  factors  for  the  real  economy.
Such  statistics  are  also  useful  in  considering  various  issues  concerning  financial  systems.  If
these  statistics  are  compiled  in  accordance  with  international  standards,  international
comparability of these statistics will be improved.
BIS Review   78/1997
It is for these reasons that the Bank is revising Japan’s flow of funds accounts. In
doing  so,  the  Bank  has  decided  to  make  public  its  basic  thinking  underlying  the  revision,
together  with  the  outline  of  the  revision,  to  thereby  seek  the  users’  opinions,  which  the  Bank
- 2 -
The Framework for Restructuring the BOJ-NET Funds Transfer System
Introduction
In  December  1996,  the  Bank  of  Japan  published  a  consultation  paper  that
outlined  its  plans  to  restructure  the  funds  transfer  system  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Financial
Network System (BOJ-NET). The Bank plans to abolish designated-time settlement  and  make
real-time gross settlement (RTGS) the only settlement mode by the end of the year 2000. The
paper  also  drafted  the  main  features  of  RTGS  after  the  restructuring,  and  the  Bank  requested
comments and suggestions from current account holders with the Bank of Japan (BOJ account
holders),  the  operators  of  private  clearing  systems,  and  other  interested  parties.  Overall,  the
Bank’s  proposal  was  strongly  supported,  and  the  Bank  received  a  number  of  constructive
comments and suggestions on its proposal.
On  the  basis  of  its  December  proposal  and  the  comments  and  suggestions
received,  the  Bank  released  on  April  1,  1997  a  framework  for  abolishing  designated-time
settlement and making RTGS the only settlement mode in the BOJ-NET funds transfer system.
BIS Review   78/1997
