Mr.  Davies  reviews  current  debates  on  regulatory  structures  governing  the
financial  system      Speech  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mr.  Howard
Davies, held on 22/2/97 at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Financial Markets Conference
entitled ‘Market and Regulatory Structures in a Global Environment’.
It is conventional, and polite to say, at the beginning of a speech of this kind, that
one is thrilled to have been asked to speak on the subject of the structure of financial regulation
and  that  the  topic  is,  of  all  the  many  preoccupations  of  human  kind  through  the  centuries,  the
one which generates the most enthusiasm and excitement in one’s breast.
But I cannot bring myself to do it.  You may think me ill-brought up to say this -
if  so  blame  my  parents  -  but  I  find  the  question  of  the  structure  of  regulation  to  be  quite
resistible.  I know that there are those who like nothing better than to draw new organigrams and
to explore the manifold interfaces between regulatory agencies.  (There are also people who find
self-fulfilment  collecting  airline  sick  bags,  or  watching  synchronised  swimming.    That  is  a
matter for them.)
But my lack of enthusiasm for the topic of regulatory structure is, I hope, not an
emotional  response.    It  is  rationally  based  on  two  prior  beliefs.    First,  that  the  relationship
between structure and effectiveness is loose.  I know of little evidence that structural reforms are
quickly followed by an enhancement of the effectiveness of the activity in which those agencies
are engaged.  Secondly, my prejudice is to believe that regulatory structure should follow market
structure,  rather  than  the  other  way  round.    Regulators  should  seek  to  respond  to  changing
markets  which,  in  turn,  respond  to  changing  customer  demand  and  new  product  availability,
rather than seeking to dictate either.  So we should always ask ourselves whether the regulatory
framework we adopt makes sense to market participants, rather than requiring them to structure
their  business  to  fit  in  with  some  governmentally  imposed  view  of  the  way  product  delivery
should be organised.
But  I  recognise  that,  in  practice,  we  cannot  avoid  constant  attention  to  the
maintenance  of  the  regulatory  framework.    Firstly,  because  while  good  structure  will  not
necessarily generate  effectiveness,  a  faulty,  out  of  date  framework  will  certainly  make  it  very
hard  for  regulators  to  do  their  jobs  well.    And,  of  course,  the  market  is  not  in  an  ‘original
condition’.  The financial markets  we  have  now  are  heavily  conditioned  by  the  legislative  and
regulatory framework within which they have grown up.  That is particularly true in the United
States.    It  is  hard  to  imagine  that,  absent  Glass-Steagall,  regulation  Q  and  all  the  rest,  the
financial landscape in North America would look as it does today.
So  I  conclude  that  the  debate  on  regulatory  structure  should  be  a  constant
dialogue between the markets and the regulators, but with a  prejudice  in  favour  of  the  former.
Our ultimate task as regulators is to ensure that markets work efficiently, and in the interests of
consumers.
Against that  background,  how  is  this  dialogue  proceeding  in  the  UK  at  present?
For we too are addressing the questions which preoccupy you in the United States, in our quaint,
olde worlde British fashion.
But before I review the current debate on regulatory structure in the UK, I should
say a little about the way we define the objectives of financial regulation.  We think of five:  to
BIS Review   21/1997
- 2 -
protect  the  economy  against  systemic  risk;  to  protect  individual  depositors,  investors  and
insurance policy holders against loss from the failure of their intermediary; to protect customers
against business misconduct; to assist society at large in the fight against crime (for instance by
making sure firms have in place systems  to  detect  and  report  laundered  drug  money  and  other
proceeds of organised crime); and, last but not least, to create and sustain fair markets.
Described  bluntly,  these  objectives  make  the  job  of  regulators  look  impossibly
daunting.    But  of  course  they  are  not  absolute  aims.    Regulators  cannot,  and  should  not,  offer
blanket assurances to investors and depositors.  They cannot, because the tools and resources to
do so are simply not available.  And they should not, because it would be quite wrong to remove
from investors and firms the responsibility for assessing, taking and monitoring financial risks.
This is a very important point, which Alan Greenspan has helpfully underlined on a number of
occasions recently.
UK regulatory structure and proposals for change
Across the world we see a lively debate on how the regulatory cake should be cut.
There  has  been  change  in  France.    The  Australian  Government  has  set  up  the  Wallis
Commission  to  look  at  the  institutional  arrangements  there.    Their  first  report  has  just  been
published.  Reforms are in progress in Japan.  In the US the new legislative season is about to
open,  with  a  number  of  runners  and  riders  already  saddled  up  in  the  financial  regulation
steeplechase.    Similarly,  in  the  UK,  a  variety  of  think  tanks,  and  the  opposition  Labour  Party,
have  produced  proposals  to  amend,  or  in  some  cases  fundamentally  reorder,  our  regulatory
structure.    But,  before  describing  these  exciting  proposals,  perhaps  a  brief  description  of  the
British system would be in order.
Responsibility  for  financial  regulation  in  the  UK  is  divided  between  two
Government Departments.
Department of 
Trade and Industry
Insurance
Companies
Act 1982
HM Treasury
STRUCTURE OF UK 
FINANCIAL REGULATION
Banking
Act 1987
Financial
Services
Act 1986
Bank of England
Securities and 
Investments Board
Personal Investment Authority
Retail Regulator
Investment Management 
Regulatory Organisation
Securities And Futures 
Authority
Insurance 
Companies
Banks
Financial
Advisers
Securities 
Houses
Fund 
Managers
BIS Review   21/1997
- 3 -
Most  falls  to  the  Treasury,  but  prudential  supervision  of  insurance  companies  is
the  responsibility  of  the  Department  of  Trade  and  Industry  (DTI).    The  DTI  carries  out  its
supervisory responsibilities using its own staff; the Treasury, on the other hand, while setting the
legal  framework  and  policy  directions  for  regulation,  leaves  most  of  the  detailed  regulatory
functions  to  others.    Under  one  piece  of  legislation  -  the  1987  Banking  Act  -  the  Bank  of
England carries out prudential supervision of banks.  Under another, the 1986 Financial Services
Act,  the  Treasury  delegates  its  powers  to  the  Securities  and  Investments  Board,  which  in  turn
recognises a number of front-line regulators.  These front-line regulators cover different sections
of  the  market.    One,  the  Securities  and  Futures  Authority  (SFA),  is  responsible  for  securities
houses;  another,  the  Investment  Management  Regulatory  Organisation  (IMRO),  for  fund
managers.  These two regulators undertake both prudential supervision and conduct of business
regulation.    The  third,  the  Personal  Investments  Authority  (PIA),  is  responsible  for  the  retail
sector,  and  has  principally  a  conduct  of  business  remit  although  it  is  responsible  for  the
prudential supervision of independent financial advisers (IFAs).  So, in effect, there is a layered
approach  to  the  regulation  of  financial  services  in  the  UK,  with  different  powers  held  at  each
level.
(To complete the picture, the Building Societies Commission supervises building
societies  (Savings  and  Loans)  -  though  the  largest  of  them  are  now  converting  to  bank  status.
And the Department of Social Security is responsible for the supervision of occupational pension
schemes.)
This brief description of the legislative framework might lead one to suppose that
the  UK  system  is  primarily  statutory  -  yet  the  securities  side  is  often  described,  at  least  by
comparison  with  the  US  system,  as  one  of  self-regulation.    Indeed,  some  argue  that  it  is
excessively self-regulating and, therefore, unreasonably lax.
We  would  reject  that  last  charge.    And,  in  practice,  the  distinction  between
statutory  and  self-regulation  is  not  black  and  white.    The  UK  system  has  elements  of  both.
Prudential supervision of insurance firms is carried out directly by a government ministry, which
is  unambiguously  Government  regulation.    Banking  supervision  is  carried  out  by  the  Bank  of
England.  Constitutionally, this is not ‘Government’ regulation, but rather regulation by a public
body which is authorised by specific Act of Parliament.  Certainly no one describes what we do
as self-regulation, even though the Bank of England is a bank.
On  the  investment  side,  the  picture  is  more  complicated.    The  Government  has
delegated  its  powers  to  the  Securities  and  Investments  Board.    The  SIB’s  governing  board
includes people who are active in financial services, but they are appointed by the Treasury and
the  Bank  of  England  (indeed  I  am  one  of  them)  and  are  required  to  act  in  the  public  interest.
Again,  this  does  not  look  like  self-regulation.    However,  the  various  front-line  regulators  are
called,  in  the  Act  itself,  ‘self  regulating  organisations’  (SROs).    Their  boards  include  a  high
proportion of active practitioners, elected by the industry to represent its views.  Practitioners are
also  heavily  involved  in  policy  discussions,  rule-making  and  enforcement  functions.    But,  like
the  SIB,  the  SROs  operate  indirectly  under  statute,  and  have  a  duty  to  regulate  in  the  public
interest.
We  therefore  have  no  self-regulation  in  the  strict  sense,  rather  a  variety  of
statutory  and  statute-backed  bodies  with  practitioner  involvement,  each  with  different
relationships with the industry and with Government.  Effective regulation needs the input of all
BIS Review   21/1997
- 4 -
participants  in  the  market  if  it  is  to  offer  appropriate  protection  without  stifling  innovation.
Regulators  can  benefit  greatly  from  effective  practitioner  input  but  to  retain  the  confidence  of
the investing public they must persuade them that regulation puts their interests, and not those of
the firms and their shareholders, first.
The  system  we  now  have  is  undoubtedly  capable  of  achieving  an  appropriate
balance between market sensitivity and consumer confidence; it has, in  many  respects,  worked
well.    But  it  has  been  stress-tested  in  a  number  of  difficult  episodes:    the  Maxwell  affair,  the
private  pension  mis-selling  saga,  the  collapse  of  BCCI,  Barings  Bank  and  Sumitomo.    These
episodes have taught us something about the strengths and weaknesses of our system, just as the
S&L  crisis  and  the  Daiwa  New York  problem  have  done  in  the  US.    Furthermore,  markets
themselves have moved on.  The financial landscape of today is almost unrecognisable from the
one  which  informed  legislators’  views  in  the  early  1980s,  before  the  Banking  and  Financial
Services Acts were put on the statute book.  It is therefore not surprising that over there, as well
as  over  here,  there  is  criticism  of  the  existing  structure,  and  pressure  for  change.    Our  own
system,  with  its  monopolistic  approach  to  the  origination  of  legislation,  does  not  generate
competing draft bills.  But the marketplace for ideas on regulatory reform is, I can assure you,
just as well contested.
Critics of the existing British system object on three counts:
1
2
3
that  the  failures  of  the  last  decade  demonstrate  its  inability  to  cope  with
strains and crises;
that  it  is  unnecessarily  complex,  with  overlapping  and  sometimes  even
conflicting responsibilities; and
that  it  has  failed  to  keep  pace  with  changes  in  institutional  and  market
structures;  the  distinctions  on  which  it  was  based  no  longer  effectively
apply.
It is not my aim today to give a comprehensive assessment of the  validity  of  all
these arguments.  And, in any event, just as in the US, there is a heavy political dimension to this
debate.  But I would make a few observations on the arguments advanced for change.
The  UK  system  is  complex,  although  it  is  no  more  complicated  than  the
equivalent arrangements in some other countries with similarly sophisticated financial markets.
(Indeed, were I not a guest  here,  I  might  say  that  the  US  system  was  rather  more  labyrinthine
than  ours.)    Those  who  argue  for  simplification  point  to  duplication  of  function  and  cost,
especially  between  the  SIB  and  the  front-line  financial  services  regulators.      There  is
undoubtedly a case to answer in that  area,  as  both  the  SIB  and  the  SROs  would  acknowledge.
But the legislation we have explicitly dictates a two-tier structure.
It  is  also  true  that  institutions  now  tend  to  be  involved  in  a  variety  of  different
businesses.  Banks own securities houses, fund managers, and insurance companies.  Insurance
companies are diversifying into banking, and so on.  So that even though there should always be
a lead regulator, looking at the overall position of the business, institutions still face the costs of
complying with the requirements of several regulators.
BIS Review   21/1997
- 5 -
But  the  question  underlying  these  arguments  about  complexity  and  overlap  is
more fundamental.  Should regulation be based around institutions (it is institutions which fail,
after  all)  or  around  functions  or  types  of  business  which  call  for  specialist  regulatory
knowledge?
The  UK  system  is  organised  neither  along  wholly  functional  nor  wholly
institutional lines.  In today’s markets, where firms are a mass of subsidiaries and business units,
no major market participant deals with a single regulator across all its businesses.  Similarly, no
regulator has unique responsibility for regulating one function of each business.  The insurance
operation  of  a  firm,  for  example,  is  covered  by  separate  prudential  and  conduct  of  business
regulators.
Most people involved in financial regulation would  recognise  this  description  of
the problem.  But determining how to resolve it is not straightforward, as evidenced by the wide
variety of proposals for change which have been advanced.
Some  proponents  of  reorganisation  would  like  to  begin  by  making  all  financial
regulation the responsibility of a single Government Department - the Treasury.  They  suggest
that  this  would  clear  up  accountability  for  the  legislative  framework,  and  for  the  powers  and
sanctions in the regulatory regime and create consistency of regulatory approach across sectors.
Straightforward administrative tidiness may also be a factor.  While there may be merit in both
these arguments, such machinery of Government questions are for the Government to determine,
and I happily leave such matters to them.
Most of the discussion about regulatory structure in the UK has  concentrated  on
the area covered by the SIB and the front-line financial services regulators.  It is in this part of
the  system  that  the  arguments  about  duplication  of  function,  unnecessary  cost  and  poor
communication are most often heard.  The various alternative models all feature some degree of
consolidation, and some would go as far as to fold all the main financial services regulators into
a  single  body.    Others  propose  two  bodies,  each  reporting  directly  to  the  Treasury,  with  one
covering  wholesale  business  and  one  covering  retail,  acknowledging  the  different  regulatory
imperatives, especially in the conduct of business field, of the two sectors.  The aim would be to
reduce  the  number  of  domestic  regulators  large  institutions  would  have  to  deal  with,  and  to
improve the match of regulation to function.
Even more radical changes have been  proposed,  encompassing  not  only  the  SIB
area,  but  the  prudential  supervision  of  banks  and  insurance  companies  as  well.    One  model,
colloquially  known  as  ‘Twin  Peaks’,  would  replace  the  whole  of  the  present  system  with  two
Commissions:  a  Financial  Stability  Commission,  with  responsibility  for  systemic  risk,  the
prudential supervision of all major institutions, and conduct of business regulation of wholesale
activities,  and  a  Consumer  Protection  Commission,  which  would  be  in  charge  of  conduct  of
business  regulation  in  retail  markets,  as  well  as  detecting  market  manipulation  and  insider
dealing.  It would also carry out prudential supervision of those stock brokers and fund managers
who deal with private clients, and of independent intermediaries.
The advocates of this model argue that it would better match regulation with both
institutions and functions, in particular on the wholesale side.  The underlying contention is that
the  traditional  separation  between  banking,  securities  and  insurance  is  breaking  down,  so  that
there is now a less meaningful difference between institutions and functions.
BIS Review   21/1997
- 6 -
I am not persuaded of the merits of this case.  Although the activities of banks and
securities firms do overlap at the margin, this is not true of the core activities.
Banks in particular continue to have a number of distinctive characteristics.  First,
there  are  the  risks  associated  with  the  maturity  transformation  seen  in  their  balance  sheets.
Banks experiencing a drain in their liquidity, perhaps because of a classic ‘run’, could be driven
into  insolvency  through  the  forced  realisation  of  illiquid  assets  at  ‘fire-sale’  prices.    Second,
there is the risk of contagion - problems at one bank can spread to others - not just through direct
financial  linkages  but  also  because,  in  the  absence  of  timely,  transparent  information  on  bank
assets, depositors become concerned about other banks which they see as similar.  Finally, banks
play a central role in payments systems, including payment flows generated by FX trading.
The conclusion I draw is that there is enough that is special about banks for their
prudential supervision to be retained as a separate activity in any new regulatory structure, and
that this argument at present outweighs the case for change.
Whether prudential supervision of banks should be a function of the central bank
is  a  separate  question.    Some  argue  that  other  central  banking  responsibilities  (such  as  the
conduct of monetary policy) make for conflicts of interest and therefore that supervision should
not be carried out by the central bank.
I am not persuaded by these arguments either.  Nor am I aware of many examples
where  the  suggested  conflicts  between  a  supervisory  role  for  the  central  bank  and  its  other
responsibilities  have  arisen  in  practice.  Indeed,  there  are  important  synergies  between  the
supervisory  function  and  other  central  bank  responsibilities.    It  makes  sense  for  the  ‘micro’
supervision of individual banks in the system to be carried out by the same body that carries out
the  ‘macro’  function  of  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  stability
which is essential if monetary policy is to be executed effectively and efficiently.
It is no accident that in all major countries the central bank has a significant role
in  the  supervision  of  banks,  even  if  in  some  cases  others  have  been  given  the  legal  powers  to
carry  out  the  front-line  tasks.    Having  as  supervisors  tried  their  best  to  limit  the  likelihood  of
failure,  when  faced  with  it  central  bankers  are  uniquely  well  placed  to  provide  assistance,
whether to the institution in trouble, to the market at large, or both.  Those who wish to separate
banking  supervision  from  central  banking  must  acknowledge  that  there  are  certain  things  that
only  the  central  bank  can  do,  and  that  therefore  there  needs  to  be  a  strong  link  between  the
central  bank  and  any  new  regulator.    In  Germany,  for  instance,  the  Bundesaufsichtsamt  is  the
supervisor of  commercial  banks.    But  the  Bundesbank  has  an  important  role  in  the  day-to-day
job of collecting prudential returns, and must be consulted on liquidity and capital requirements,
which bear most directly on its role in an emergency.
The logic of these arguments might point instead to a ‘Holy Trinity’, rather than a
‘Twin  Peaks’  model,  based  on  three  agencies,  focused  respectively  on  financial  services,
banking  and  insurance.    That  might  allow  the  most  sensible  match  -  albeit  not  complete  -  of
regulation  to  function  and  institution.    It  would  also  have  the  advantage  of  evolving  fairly
readily out of the present structure.
BIS Review   21/1997
- 7 -
HM Treasury
Insurance 
Supervisor
Insurance 
Companies
Consolidated Securities
and Investments 
Supervisor(s)
Bank of England
Investment Firms, Markets
Banks
and Exchanges
This  last  is  not  a  trivial  point,  since  the  cost  and  disruption  caused  by
reorganisation  would  be  considerable,  and  higher  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  change.    The
process  would  inevitably  generate  uncertainty  among  firms  and  the  public,  and  make  the
regulatory  system  more  difficult  to  manage  in  the  meantime.    This  argues  for  building  on  the
present  arrangements,  if  at  all  possible,  rather  than  beginning  again  with  an  entirely  new
structure that could take years to settle down.
Furthermore,  what  matters  to  the  financial  system,  and  to  the  public,  is  that
regulators  are  effective. 
  Effectiveness  necessitates  good  communication,  consolidated
supervision and close co-operation to maintain protection  across  the  piece.    Whether  structural
change  (including  bringing  functions 
improve
communication and co-operation and so increase effectiveness, is a key question, and the answer
is far from clear.
together  under  one  umbrella)  would 
We  have  been  making  considerable  efforts  recently  to  enhance  communication
between  different  supervisors  in  the  UK.    That  has  involved,  as  you  would  expect,  the  usual
paraphernalia  of  Memoranda  of  Understanding.    But,  in  addition,  we  have  sought  to  achieve
cross-membership of some of our most important institutions.  For example, Sir Andrew Large,
the  Chairman  of  the  Securities  and  Investments  Board,  has  become  a  member  of  the  Bank  of
England’s  Board  of  Banking  Supervision  and,  reciprocally,  I  have  joined  the  SIB.    Of  course
one should not exaggerate the importance of individual appointments of this kind.  But they do
help  to  create  a  climate  of  co-operation,  and  give  a  signal  to  the  respective  staffs  of  the  two
institutions  that  they  are  expected  to  work  together  as  closely  as  possible,  and  a  signal  to  the
outside that they can expect this to happen.
The Approach to Regulation in the UK
The discussion of regulatory approaches is often phrased in terms of rules versus
judgement or, as academics tend to put it, rules versus discretion.  Should supervisors simply set
BIS Review   21/1997
- 8 -
the  rules,  and  shoot  those  who  break  them?    Or  does  that  create  too  rigid  a  framework,  one
which stifles initiative and imagination?
There is no simple answer.  The Bank of England imposes an increasing number
of rules: it has, for example, implemented detailed regimes  for  capital  adequacy  introduced  by
the Basle Committee and the European Union.  We set capital  requirements  to  cover  the  more
readily  quantifiable  risks;  we  enforce  limits  on  banks’  large  exposures  to  individual
counterparties; we have rules on banks’ liquidity; and we seek to ensure that banks have robust
systems  and  controls,  as  well  as  management  with  the  skill  and  integrity  to  ensure,  in  that
delightful US phrase, that the bank is ‘safe and sound’.
But  our  judgmental  approach  -  allowing  supervisors  the  discretion  to  exercise
informed  judgement  within  approved  guidelines  -  still  contrasts  with  that  of  many  other
regulators.  This flexibility allows us to be tough where appropriate, but to avoid inappropriate
requirements  -  tailoring  the  requirements  to  the  nature  of  the  bank’s  activities.    Most
fundamentally,  perhaps,  we  can  ask  questions,  and  attempt  to  take  advantage  of  all  the
information at our disposal to form a judgement of the risks facing depositors and investors, as
well as of the quality of a bank’s management.  So in addition to enforcing rules and looking for
problems, we can help management.  We can spread knowledge of best  practice:  asking  banks
about the full range of risks they face (including those  -  like  reputational  and  settlement  risk  -
that  they  would  often  rather  ignore);  and  pointing  out  to  complex  groups  the  extent  to  which
their managerial and organisational systems have moved away from their legal structure.
It is true that, in addition to being less rule-bound than most other supervisors, the
Bank is commonly viewed as doing relatively little on-site supervision.  Of course, this depends
on how you define the term.  Accountants are well aware that the Bank does, for example, make
extensive use of reports prepared by auditors - who, of course, operate on-site - in order to assess
the  adequacy  of  internal  controls.    In  particular,  the  Bank  regularly  instructs  banks  to  appoint
reporting  accountants  to  report  on  systems  and  controls  and  on  the  accuracy  of  prudential
returns.
The  Bank’s  supervisors  also  spend  a  growing  amount  of  time  on-site.    Since
1986, Review Teams have carried out focused visits to banks to evaluate the level of risk in an
institution  as  well  as  the  risk  management  systems  in  place  to  identify,  monitor,  and  control
these  risks.    And  in  1995  we  introduced  a  Traded  Markets  Team  to  focus  on  banks’
pre-processing models which can be recognised under the CAD (Capital Adequacy Directive) as
well as sophisticated risk modelling techniques used by the banks to manage treasury activities.
These teams spend on average about three days on banks’ premises, which may seem short, but
the  visits  are  highly  focused,  reflecting  a  great  deal  of  work  carried  out  in  advance,  not  just
between  team  members  and  the  line  supervisors  of  the  bank  in  question  but  also  by  the  bank
itself in providing detailed answers to a series of questions.
At the same time, the Bank has recognised the need to be more systematic in its
approach to risk assessment and has announced its intention to introduce a more formal approach
based  on  a  common  approach,  known  as  the  RATE  model,  to  identify  -  using  a  series  of
qualitative and quantitative measures - the risks faced by the bank.  RATE is an acronym for the
three stages of the process: Risk Assessment, Tools of supervision and Evaluation.
BIS Review   21/1997
- 9 -
In  the  future,  by  performing  periodic  risk  assessments,  we  aim  to  gain  a  better
understanding of the quality of management, the characteristics of the business and the risks the
banks face.  The greater degree of consistency across banks embodied in the new approach will
allow the Bank to be more focused in performing its supervision.  The tools of supervision, such
as Review Team Visits and Reporting Accountants Reports on internal controls, will be targeted
at the areas of greater risk and concern in individual banks.  We shall very shortly be issuing a
consultation paper setting out how we plan to implement the model in practice.  That paper will
show that we have tried to model parts of our approach on best practice in the US.  The City of
London may not always  have  been  a  preferred  habitat  for  camels,  but  you  may  well  see  some
genetically modified examples on the streets there quite soon.
A better understanding of the risk profile of each supervised institution will assist
the Bank in setting risk asset ratios.  As you all know, Basle sets a minimum capital ratio of 8
percent of risk weighted assets.  The 8 percent ratio is sometimes interpreted as a ‘one-size-fits-
all’ standard.  The Bank, however, sets the trigger capital ratio  for  each  authorised  bank  at,  or
above, the 8 percent floor and considers  an adjustment  to  that  trigger  ratio  whenever  we  see  a
substantial change in that bank’s risk profile.
Where  does  this  all  leave  us  in  comparison  with  other  regulators?    I  suggested
earlier that our flexible, judgmental approach is somewhat distinctive.  But we are no longer, if
indeed  we  ever  were,  outliers  on  the  supervisory  spectrum.    While  the  Bank  has  decided  to
implement a more systematic approach to risk assessment, other supervisors - who traditionally
operate  a  rule  book  -  are  (in  a  fast  moving  marketplace  characterised  by  rapid  product
innovation) moving towards a regime that gives more scope for supervisory judgement.
But the fact that regulators internationally are converging in their approach does
not necessarily mean that they are right.  They may all be converging on an inappropriate model.
Indeed some would argue that regulators do as much to create problems as to solve them:   that
regulators  create  perverse  incentives  -  even  as  we  speak  bankers  may  be  designing  products
whose whole rationale is to exploit anomalies in our rules.  Perhaps we would all be far better
employed  elsewhere,  leaving  the  market  to  regulate  itself.    Why  should  we  not  facilitate  that
process by concentrating on rules of disclosure, obliging banks to publish accurate information
on their capital adequacy and risk profiles, and leaving the rest up to the market - perhaps with
some  safety  net  for  small  depositors  and  investors?    As  you  know,  the  New  Zealanders  have
made an interesting move in this direction in the last couple of years.
Should we then get out of the business and leave it all to the markets?  To answer
that  question,  it  may  be  helpful  to  go  back  to  first  principles.    Back  in  1958,  Modigliani  and
Miller demonstrated that in a frictionless world a firm’s capital structure cannot affect its value.
In the real world, however, departures from the M&M assumptions - such as taxes, bankruptcy
costs and agency costs - may influence the capital decision of any firm; capital may after all be
costly.  But banks differ substantially from most other firms because their soundness and safety
is crucial to maintaining systemic stability;  without  capital  requirements  some  will  exploit  this
fact by taking large risks with little of their money, in the hope that the taxpayer will bail them
out.  In other words, some may believe that they are (partially) insulated from potential market
discipline.   From  a  regulatory  perspective,  banks  must  therefore  be  required  to  have  capital  to
absorb the possible losses that result from risk-taking and still remain solvent.
BIS Review   21/1997
- 10 -
What  is  our  position  in  this  debate?    It  is  tempting  to  conclude  that  the  only
problem is a perception of a government-funded safety net for large banks; remove that and our
problems will be solved.  But systemic risk cannot be wished away as easily as that, even though
we in the UK have demonstrated by our actions that we do not rescue every bank which gets into
problems.    So,  while  we  try  to  stay  clear  from  ever  more  detailed  rules,  we  do  not  believe
everything can be left to the market; certain minimum ‘regulatory’ capital standards are in  our
view necessary.  Of course, we must aim for a credible and comprehensible regime which does
not  require  constant  updating  and  elaboration,  is  not  immensely  costly,  and  is  reasonably
consistent.  The value-at-risk approach is an attempt in that direction.  It recognises that there is
a crucial role for judgement in supervision, and that one size really will not fit all.  It does not
prescribe the key qualitative factors in legalistic detail.  But it does set out the parameters so as
to ensure that there is a framework in place which will deliver broad consistency and also some
degree of prudence.
Some  have  argued  that  regulators  should  go  further  than  the  value-at-risk
approach:    rather  than  defining  the  key  parameters  and  endorsing  particular  model  types,  why
not leave it to the banks, and give them an incentive to improve their internal models as much as
possible?    Under  this  pre-commitment  approach  a  bank  would  specify  the  maximum  portfolio
loss  on  its  trading  activities  and  this  would  become  the  institution’s  market  risk  capital
requirement.    Banks  exceeding  their  pre-committed  maximum  loss  (that  is  breaching  their
capital  commitment)  would  be  penalised  in  one  way  or  another.    Such  penalties  could  be
financial, or could entail corrective supervisory action.
In some ways pre-commitment can be seen as an extension of the model-approval
approach we already adopt.  The aim, which we endorse, is to ensure that supervisors work with
the  grain  of  the  business,  and  monitor  ratios  which  are  seen  as  meaningful  by  those  who  run
banks  themselves.    To  that  extent,  we  support  it.    But  there  are  potential  drawbacks.    It  could
amplify  the  moral  hazard  problem:    if  the  bank  wins,  its  shareholders  -  as  well  as  its  traders
under  their  bonus  packages  -  pocket  the  profit,  and  if  it  loses,  the  regulator/tax-payer  ends  up
with  the  bill.    A  penalty  would  not  act  as  a  deterrent  to  a  bank  prepared  to  gamble  its  capital
because  that  bank  would  not  be  affected  by  such  a  penalty  when  it  was  ‘down  and  out’.
Furthermore,  regulators  could  over  time  become  less  familiar  with  banks’  risk  management
systems,  which  might  make  them  less  effective  in  a  crisis.    Early  supervisory  intervention  is
more  difficult  if  supervisors  only  become  aware  of  problems  ex-post,  after  the  limit  has  been
breached.
It may be possible to devise an approach to pre-commitment which avoids these
potential handicaps.  But for the time being our attitude remains somewhat hesitant.
Finally, a discussion about rules is not complete without touching on the question
of a ‘level playing field’; an odd analogy, I think, since in field sports there is no such thing.  If
there were, why would teams change ends at half time?  (In American football, of course, teams
change ends three times - and in baseball they resolve the problem by running round in circles.)
When banks and securities houses do similar business it seems only fair to apply
similar capital rules.  But while this is true at the margin, when we look at the total business of
banks  and  securities  houses,  the  picture  is  still  vastly  different.    A  major  part  of  a  bank’s
regulatory capital is  held  against  credit  risk.    By  contrast,  securities  houses  invest  primarily  in
liquid,  marketable  assets  which  can  be  readily  sold,  with  illiquid  assets  typically  a  small
BIS Review   21/1997
- 11 -
proportion of the total, generally 2% or so, and the bulk of a securities firm’s regulatory capital
tends to be maintained for market risk purposes.  It is therefore not obvious that we need to set
the same detailed rules for banks and securities houses.  That is not to say that we should entirely
ignore differences in supervisory regimes, but rather that we should focus on areas where those
differences are on a scale which seriously distorts competition.  In other words, we should spend
rather less of our time discussing risk weights, and rather more discussing risks.
Globalisation and the Regulatory Response
How far do these general principles, which I have discussed so far in relation to
the UK, apply to regulatory structures in a global environment?
One issue for supervisors is increasing globalisation.  The biggest institutions now
span 50 or more countries and may have 300 or more entities within the group.  This is not new;
globalisation  in  this  sense  has  been  a  feature  of  banking  certainly  since  the  1970s.    What  is
rather  newer  is  the  way  in  which  the  firms  are  centralising  the  controls  for  all  these  far  flung
entities.    With  the  recognition  that  similar  risks  are  being  run  in  different  subsidiaries  (for
example a Japanese bank might have exposure to US interest rate risk from its activities both in
London  and  New  York),  there  has  been  a  move  to  consolidate  these  homogeneous  risks  and
manage them centrally  within  a  group.    This  means  control  lines  which  transcend  or  cross  the
entity structures and a matrix management structure.  It means that the head office can exercise
much stronger control over the volume of a particular type  of  risk  being  run  across  the  group.
For example, for some UK banks, the management of their global foreign exchange book will be
managed  in  London  during  London  office  hours,  then  it  will  switch  to  the  US  operation  but
under strict limits set by London; after the US close it will move again, to the Far East, but still
under the control of limits set by London.
The  increasing  development  of  whole  book  value  at  risk  models  has  also
encouraged  this  centralisation  of  control.    In  the  foreign  exchange  example,  the  value  at  risk
model used by the group will be  maintained  and  run  in  London.    So  the  riskiness  of  positions
across the world wide group will be assessed according to the London model.
But  centralisation  of  controls  goes  even  further.    Oversight  of  credit  and  key
credit risk decisions may well also be centralised.   Oversight of FX settlement risk is sometimes
centralised  in  London  as  well  as  control  of  the  position  risk.    Likewise  various  aspects  of  the
internal audit function may well be centralised.
So  for  global  groups,  the  control  of  the  activities  in  the  various  legal  entities
scattered across the planet will hinge on the adequacy of controls located not in those particular
countries but centrally.  In a way it is simply an extension of the vulnerability of banking entities
to problems arising elsewhere in the group.  But in this case solvency of the individual entities
will  depend  on  the  adequacy  of  systems  and  controls  located  in  another  part  of  the  group.
Massive intra-group transactions to move risk between entities will also affect the position of the
various subsidiaries.
One obvious question is why firms do not dispense with such a plethora of legal
entities and operate a simpler branch structure.  The answer seems to be that differences in tax
structures  and  even  regulatory  requirements  in  some  countries  still  encourage  the  use  of  legal
entities  in  different  jurisdictions.    In  that  case  should  regulators  try  to  lean  against  this
BIS Review   21/1997
- 12 -
centralisation?  Here I think the answer must be that the regulators should not try to discourage
greater central control of risk.  Where a firm is running one type of risk in different locations it
must make sense for the total risk to be controlled centrally.  But this does create a problem for
supervisors because supervision has to be structured along legal entity lines (given that it is legal
entities which fail).  Responsibility for legal entities cannot be transferred between supervisors.
Each supervisor must therefore take a view about the soundness of the entity in its jurisdiction,
even where this hinges on controls located elsewhere.
How  have  regulators  responded  to  these  trends?    In  summary,  they  have
increasingly  sought  ways  of  increasing  co-operation  amongst  themselves,  including  agreeing
their  respective  responsibilities  and  setting  up  arrangements  for  information  sharing.    In  the
banking sector, at least, they have also supplemented solo supervision of individual entities with
consolidated supervision of groups as a whole.
When  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  was  established  by  the
central bank governors of the G10 countries at the end of 1974, its initial focus was to define the
role  and  responsibilities  of  home  and  host  supervisors  of  internationally  active  banks.    These
were set out in the 1975 Concordat which established how supervisory responsibility for banks’
foreign  branches  and  subsidiaries  should  be  shared  between  host  and  parent  supervisors,  and
which has been updated on a number of occasions since.
Securities  supervisors  too  have  a  long  tradition  of  international  co-operation,
including  arrangements  for  information  sharing  and  mutual  assistance  in  enforcement,  with
IOSCO playing a key role in facilitating such co-operation internationally.  There is also a long
history of discussion between Basle and IOSCO.
Individual supervisors in both the banking and securities industries have chosen to
reinforce  co-operation  arrangements  with  formal  bilateral  agreements  with  their  overseas
counterparts.    Partly  as  a  consequence,  there  have  been  an  increasing  number  of  informal
meetings between line supervisors with operational responsibility for different parts of financial
groups.
The 
importance  of 
international  regulatory  co-operation 
is  now  widely
acknowledged and is on the agenda of inter-governmental meetings.  At last June’s G7 summit
in Lyon, the heads of state called for maximum progress preceding the Denver summit in June
1997  on  “enhancing  co-operation  among  the  authorities  responsible  for  supervision  of
internationally  active  institutions,  importantly  by  clarifying  their  roles  and  responsibilities.”
Ahead of the Lyon Summit, Basle and IOSCO had announced a joint initiative to strengthen co-
operation  in  this  area,  referring  to  the  work  of  the  Joint  Forum  of  banking,  securities  and
insurance  supervisors,  which  was  set  up  to  promote  information  exchange  on  international
financial conglomerates, and consider establishing for each a lead regulator.
The  need  for  the  international  regulatory  community  to  address  successfully  the
challenge of supervising multi-functional global financial conglomerates is an issue of particular
significance  to  the  UK.    This  is  because  of  the  international  nature  of  the  London  markets  -
uniquely  so  amongst  the  world’s  major  financial  centres.    The  failure  of  one  or  more  major
overseas firms may cause systemic problems in London where at the end of last year, overseas
banks  accounted  for  57%  of  the  total  assets  of  the  UK  monetary  sector,  with  US  banks
contributing 8%.  Furthermore, almost three quarters of the 478 banks which take deposits in the
BIS Review   21/1997
- 13 -
UK are branches or subsidiaries of overseas financial institutions, including 37 from the US.  US
firms  have,  of  course,  particular  importance  in  certain  markets.    Our  April  1995  derivatives
survey showed US firms (including securities houses) accounting for around 40% of turnover in
both foreign exchange and interest rate derivatives.
We  therefore  attach  particular  importance  to  international  regulatory  co-
operation;  and  as  the  trend  towards  globalisation  and  multi-functionality  continues  it  is
becoming increasingly necessary.  The Barings and Daiwa cases have highlighted the difficulty
that banks can experience in controlling operations which are far from their head offices.
Barings,  in  particular,  demonstrated  that  losses  in  a  subsidiary  in  a  remote
location, in a unit which was not thought to be assuming any significant market risk, can be big
enough  to  bring  about  the  failure  of  the  parent.    So  home  and  host  supervisors  have  a  mutual
interest in the health of the subsidiaries.  Regulators will rightly be blamed if any reluctance on
their part to work together either exacerbates a crisis or fails to prevent one that could otherwise
have been avoided.
It is possible to argue that an individual regulator can successfully meet his own
objectives, by seeking to build firewalls between his entity and the rest of the group to which it
belongs.  These might include restrictions or even prohibitions on both financial exposures and
operational interlinkages.  In addition capital adequacy and other requirements might be set at a
more onerous level than if the potential for parental support was taken into account.
Such  measures  may  be  the  best  that  can  be  achieved  at  present;    they  certainly
provide host supervisors with a measure of comfort.  But they are, and always will be, a second
best.  There will always, for example, be a risk of reputational contagion.  Counterparties might
refuse to deal with a member of a failed group because they are unwilling to take the risk that
the firewalls may be flawed, or that cultural or control weaknesses which led to the failure are
repeated in that entity also.  This, of course, is a hypothetical risk but one which does concern
supervisors.  Secondly, as the firm will incur additional costs in order to comply with these ring-
fencing arrangements, while possibly at the same time being denied the risk reducing benefits of
group wide controls, it is unlikely to provide the  most  efficient  solution.    Concern  about  these
deficiencies  has  heightened  as  we  have  learned  more  about  the  way  in  which  many  global
financial groups are managed.  The lack of overlap between legal entities and the management
of  business  lines  means  that  the  amount  of  true  ring-fencing  which  is  possible  for  a  globally
managed institution is open to debate.
The  creation  of  ring-fenced  islands  of  activity  seems  to  me  contrary  both  to  the
trend  in  markets  and  second-best  in  terms  of  regulatory  efficiency.    The  Bank  of  England  has
always  believed  that  effective  supervision  of  financial  groups  must  involve  consolidated
supervision.    As  Alan  Greenspan  said  last  week  in  his  testimony  to  the  Congressional  Sub-
Committee  on  Financial  Institutions  and  Consumer  Credit,  “Risks  managed  on  a  consolidated
basis cannot be reviewed on an individual legal entity basis by different supervisors”.
It  is  important  to  define  the  term  “consolidated  supervision”.    The  underlying
philosophy is that for, say, a bank operating in a large financial group, it is necessary to look not
only at the soundness of the bank itself but also of the group as a whole.  This will require both a
quantitative  and  a  qualitative  assessment.    The  quantitative  element  involves  examining  the
financial strength of the whole group.  The basic measures here are capital adequacy and large
BIS Review   21/1997
- 14 -
exposures.  In the Bank of England, we look at these against the minimum standards set out in
the EU Directives and against the more stringent criteria which we have developed ourselves and
apply to individual banking groups in ways that take account of their  particular  circumstances.
It is worth noting that both the EU Directives and the Basle Capital Accord set these minimum
standards on a consolidated basis only.
The  qualitative  element  involves  assessing  factors  such  as  the  group’s  risk
management  process,  internal  systems  and  controls,  capability  of  key  personnel,  culture  and
business  strategy.    Any  supervisor  will  hardly  need  reminding  that,  in  the  Barings  case,
weaknesses in a subsidiary in just these areas brought about the collapse of the parent.
As the need for consolidated  supervision  is  written  into  the  Basle  Concordat  we
can  be  confident  that  all  regulators  of  internationally  active  commercial  banks,  including  of
course those in the US, subscribe to its principles.
Consolidated supervision is a relatively widely understood concept involving the
range of activities set out above.  Alan Greenspan last week talked of “umbrella supervision”,
which  he  described  as  a  “realistic  necessity  for  the  protection  of  our  financial  system”.    (Of
course we are not experts on umbrellas:  it rarely rains in London, as you know.)
But I also referred earlier to a “lead regulator” - though the term ‘co-ordinating
supervisor’ is gaining currency in some quarters.  As noted, one of the tasks of the Joint Forum
is to define the role of such a person.  So far there have been extensive discussions of the role.
Among the possibilities suggested have been:
 Carrying  out  a  quantitative  and  qualitative  assessment  of 
the
group as a whole.  (This is the consolidated supervisor’s role and, where there is already
a consolidated supervisor, the lead 
regulator would normally be the same body);
b)
c)
Taking a primary role in managing emergencies should they arise;
Acting  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  information  between  the
relevant regulators in a group;
d)
(In the longer term) considering ways in which supervisors’ efforts
could be better co-ordinated when looking at (e.g.) controls.
It should be stressed that the existence of either a lead regulator or a consolidated
supervisor  in  no  way  affects  the  legal  responsibilities  of  the  individual  regulatory  authorities
which are responsible for regulating the different entities within the group.  The objective is not
to  shift  the  balance  of  supervisory  responsibility  from  host  to  home  supervisors.    Rather,  the
intention  is  that  each  host  authority  should  be  able  to  carry  out  these  responsibilities  more
effectively by relying to some extent on the work of others.  It cannot possibly make sense for,
say,  30  different  supervisors  to  crawl  over  the  controls  centralised  and  concentrated  in  one
location?
We  are  keen  to  examine  the  practicability  of  allowing  one  co-ordinator  to  carry
out the role defined above.  Enthusiasm from the US has been more muted, although commercial
BIS Review   21/1997
- 15 -
banks  are,  of  course,  already  subjected  to  consolidated  supervision.    Here  I  know  there  are
political issues at stake too, and any foreigner is well advised to tread carefully.  I would hope,
nevertheless, that these important issues can be considered carefully.
More  problematic  is  the  position  of  the  US  investment  banking  groups  who,
uniquely  amongst  the  banking  and  securities  industries  in  major  countries,  are  not  subject  to
legislation  requiring  consolidated  supervision.    Some  have  banking  subsidiaries  in  the  UK,
owned  by  companies  established  under  Article  XII  of  the  New  York  State  Banking  Act.
Accordingly these companies and their UK subsidiaries are subject to  consolidated  supervision
by the New York State Banking Department.  The involvement of a home country supervisor in
this way gives us a degree of comfort which allows the ring-fencing to be less stringent than it
would otherwise be.  However this clearly falls a long way short of comprehensive consolidated
supervision of the entire investment banking group.
There  is  a  lively  debate  in  the  US  at  the  moment  about  the  most  appropriate
regulatory  structure  for  all  financial  institutions,  and  particularly  for  investment  banks.    This
tends  to  be  regarded  in  the  US  largely  as  an  internal  matter.    But  the  fact  that  the  large  US
financial institutions have a global reach inevitably makes that debate a matter of great interest
and  concern  to  the  international  financial  community.    We  are  optimistic  that  legislation  will
soon be enacted to address these concerns.  It would certainly be disappointing if it is not.
Conclusions
Though I have attempted this morning to identify some features of regulation on
which  we  might  well  agree,  I  doubt  whether  there  is  such  a  thing  as  an  ‘optimal’  regulatory
structure.    Each  country  has  its  own  legacy  of  supervisory  structures  and  approaches.    But  an
appropriate  international  structure  is  one  which  works  as  seamlessly  as  possible  and  has  clear
lines  of  responsibility  (at  least,  that  is  what  we  expect  from  international  banking  groups’
controls).    One  co-ordinating  regulator  for  each  institution  could  play  a  crucial  role  in  such  a
structure.  The question of the number of regulators is, in my view, less important; no one has
yet suggested we set up one body world-wide to carry out all supervision, so whatever our own
vision of an optimal regulatory structure, it will have at its centre a requirement for supervisors
from  different  disciplines  and  in  different  countries  to  communicate  effectively  with  one
another.  This weekend’s conference is a good opportunity to do that.
BIS Review   21/1997
