Mr.  Thiessen  looks  at  the  recent  economic  record  in  Canada  and  the
challenges ahead for monetary policy   Notes for remarks by Mr. Gordon Thiessen, Governor
of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  New  England-Canadian  Business  Council  in  Boston,  USA,  on
16/9/97.
It has been a little over two years since my last public speech to an audience in the
United States. During this time, a lot has  happened  in  terms  of  economic  developments  in  our
two countries.
One thing that continues to impress me is the remarkable performance of the U.S.
economy,  which  has  achieved  six  years  of  steady  economic  expansion,  with  high  rates  of  job
creation and low inflation.
As  a  neighbour  and  major  trading  partner,  Canada  has  certainly  benefited  from
the strong U.S. economy.
But  I  think  that  what  is  happening  in  the  United  States  is  relevant  to  Canada  in
other ways. First, it offers a yardstick that we Canadians often use to judge the performance of
our  own  economy.  Second,  as  the  unused  capacity  in  the  Canadian  economy  is  gradually
absorbed, monetary policy in Canada will be facing challenges similar to those that the Federal
Reserve  has  had  to  confront  in  trying  to  steer  the  U.S.  economy  on  a  path  of  durable,
non-inflationary  expansion.  The  recent  U.S.  experience  in  this  area  is,  therefore,  particularly
interesting for us.
Today,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  recent  economic  record  in  Canada  and  the
challenges  ahead  for  monetary  policy.  In  doing  so,  I  will  emphasize  the  Bank  of  Canada’s
continued  commitment  to  explicit  targets  for  keeping  inflation  low.  Along  with  their  other
benefits, these targets help anchor market expectations about future movements in the exchange
rate. The role of the exchange rate in the operation of Canadian monetary policy is another topic
I will discuss today.
The recent economic record in Canada
Let us first take a quick look at how the Canadian economy has performed in the
recent past, in comparative terms.
In terms of economic growth and job creation, there is no doubt that Canada has
not done as well as the United States in the 1990s. And even though, in my view, there are good
explanations for this, the fact remains that Canada has some catching up to do in this regard.
Why has the growth in output and employment been more modest in Canada than
in the United States in recent years?
I  believe  that  the  reasons  lie  in  the  major  transformation  that  the  Canadian
economy  has  been  going  through  since  the  beginning  of  this  decade.  This  transformation  has
been in response both to the universal forces of globalization and technological change, and to
the need to unwind the domestic excesses and imbalances that had built up in the 1970s and the
1980s. Let me remind you that, through that period, high actual and expected inflation had led to
escalating production costs, speculative activity, and the accumulation of debt by households, by
businesses, and by Canadian governments. Our foreign indebtedness was also rising rapidly, as
BIS Review   84/1997
- 2 -
were the risk premiums in our interest rates, leaving us in a very vulnerable position indeed. By
the late 1980s, the situation had become untenable. Canada had to adjust.
Of course, the United States also had to cope with many  of  these  changes.  Why
has  the  restructuring  been  more  intense  and  disruptive  in  Canada?  In  my  view,  the  most
important reasons are that the distortions arising from high inflation were more severe in Canada
and that the  adjustments  to  globalization  and  technological  change  were  slow  in  coming.  As  a
result, Canada had to do more and do it faster.
The  short-run  disruptions  associated  with  the  economic  restructuring  have  been
significant.  Plant  closings,  cutbacks  in  major  government  programs,  and  layoffs  in  both  the
private and public sectors caused a great deal of uncertainty among Canadian households. And it
did not help that interest rates rose sharply in 1994 and early 1995 as investor nervousness about
Canada’s  fiscal  and  political  situation  increased  in  the  wake  of  turbulence  in  global  financial
markets. All of this left Canadians anxious about the future and cautious about spending, which
acted as a drag on output and employment.
But  there  have  also  been  some  particularly  encouraging  results  from  the
restructuring. Canada has made rather dramatic economic adjustments in recent years, and as a
result has emerged with a much sounder economic foundation. Inflation has averaged just under
2 per cent during the past five and a half years -- well below that in the United States. With the
benefit of low inflation and low interest rates, Canadian businesses have been investing in new
technology  and  streamlining  their  operations  to  become  more  efficient,  productive,  and
internationally competitive. Canadian governments have taken steps to reduce their deficits and
to  move  towards  less  vulnerable  debt  positions.  And,  with  our  success  in  exporting  and  these
improved fiscal positions, the persistent large shortfall in the current account of our international
balance of payments has narrowed markedly.
These  improvements  in  Canada’s  economic  fundamentals  have  not  been  lost  on
financial markets. They are the reason why risk premiums demanded by investors on Canadian
dollar  assets  have  declined  sharply  over  the  past  two  years.  They  are  also  the  reason  why  the
markets  today  see  a  potential  for  upward  movement  in  the  Canadian  dollar  over  time,  thus
allowing interest rates on maturities up to 30 years to remain below comparable U.S. rates. This
is a view of the Canadian dollar that we at the Bank of Canada share.
These  low  Canadian  interest  rates  represent  a  substantial  stimulus  to  domestic
spending.  Because  of  the  lags  involved,  it  has  taken  households  and  businesses  some  time  to
respond. But now we have  strong  evidence,  particularly  from  the  interest-rate-sensitive  sectors
of  the  economy,  that  the  consumer  is  back.  And  businesses  continue  to  increase  their  capital
spending. Moreover, the latest surveys of consumer and business confidence point to continued
expansion in domestic spending in coming months. What is particularly heartening is that total
employment  growth  has  picked  up  recently,  despite  the  cutbacks  in  the  public  sector,  and  that
the number of full-time jobs has increased significantly.
Altogether, it seems to me that the Canadian economy has the potential for a long
period  of  sustained  growth  in  output  and  employment,  with  rising  productivity  and  improving
living standards.
The challenge ahead
What does monetary policy need to do to help realize this potential?
BIS Review   84/1997
- 3 -
With the economy gathering momentum, the challenge for monetary policy in the
period  ahead  will  be  to  encourage  monetary  conditions  that  preserve  Canada’s  good  inflation
performance, because low inflation is a prerequisite for a durable economic expansion.
Experience  has  taught  us  that  monetary  stimulus  which  pushes  too  hard  on  the
economy’s capacity limits for too long inevitably leads to rising inflation and painful boom and
bust economic cycles of the kind we suffered in Canada from the 1970s to the early 1990s.
Concern  about  inflation  risks  at  this  stage  may  seem  misplaced.  But  monetary
policy actions have their full effects on the economy with relatively long lags. So what we must
be concerned with is not the  current  rate  of  inflation  but  rather  what  may  happen  in  1998  and
beyond.
To  maintain  a  low  and  stable  rate  of  inflation  in  the  period  ahead,  we  must
conduct monetary policy in a forward-looking, pre-emptive manner. This means that we should
be ready to take action early to ensure that, as slack is absorbed, the pace of economic activity
converges smoothly with the path implied by potential output -- that is, the economy’s capacity
to produce on a sustained basis.
It  is  our  view  that  the  Canadian  economy  should  indeed  absorb  the  existing
unused capacity over the course of the next couple of years. Thus, there will be a need to move
to  less-stimulative  monetary  conditions  in  the  period  ahead.  Taking  timely,  measured  steps  in
that  direction  is  the  recipe  for  avoiding  the  more  substantial,  and  potentially  more  disruptive,
tightening that would be required later if monetary policy actions were unduly delayed.
As the Canadian economy approaches full capacity, we will have to contend with
the  considerable  uncertainty  that  surrounds  the  estimation  of  potential  output.  The  recent
experience in the United States, where despite a high level of resource utilization there has been
no  sign  yet  of  generalized  inflationary  pressures,  raises  the  possibility  that  past  relationships
have been altered by structural changes at both the national and international levels. It is possible
that  technological  innovations  have  increased  the  flexibility  and  efficiency  of  production
processes.  Heightened  global  competition  and  low  inflation  worldwide  may  have  led  to  a
reduction of inflation expectations and to a change in price- and wage-setting behaviour.
Monetary  policy  must  somehow  find  a  way  to  take  all  of  these  factors  into
consideration  in  order  to  avoid  systematic  misjudgements  on  potential  output  and  the  risk  of
inflation.  I  believe  that  Canada’s  inflation-control  target  provides  a  useful  framework  within
which to do that. Let me explain.
Our  target,  set  jointly  with  the  Government  of  Canada,  calls  for  inflation  to  be
held within a range of 1 to 3 per cent. One attraction of an explicit inflation-control target is that
it  allows  a  ready  assessment  of  macroeconomic  performance  by  looking  at  the  trend  of  the
inflation  rate  relative  to  the  target  range.  If  it  looks  as  though  the  trend  of  inflation  will  push
through  the  top  of  the  target  range,  this  implies  that  demand  in  the  economy  has  been
unsustainably strong. Conversely, if it appears that the trend of inflation is about to fall through
the bottom of the range, this suggests weak demand and a persistent margin of unused capacity.
Moreover,  if  we  somehow  continually  misjudge  the  economy’s  capacity  to
produce, we will in all likelihood witness an unexpected trend in the inflation rate. For example,
if the rate is persistently lower than would have been expected in the past at the current levels of
aggregate demand, and it is tending to press the bottom of the target range, chances are that the
BIS Review   84/1997
- 4 -
economy has more room to absorb higher levels of demand than previously thought. Thus, the
targets provide a check on systematic errors in estimating potential output.
However, if monetary policy is going to take account of such signals, the central
bank  had  better  make  sure  that  its  inflation-control  strategy  is  a  credible  one.  Why?  Because
only  if  it  is  widely  accepted  that  the  central  bank  will  keep  inflation  under  control,  will
businesses  and  individuals  not  respond  immediately  to  signs  of  strong  demand  pressures  by
seeking  to  raise  prices  and  wages.  The  recent  U.S.  experience  attests  to  this.  Indeed,  strong
credibility has been a key factor that has enabled the Fed to take account of the possible changes
in  economic  structure  that  I  mentioned  earlier  and  to  steer  the  U.S.  economy  successfully
towards levels of aggregate demand and employment that in the past would have been thought
incompatible with maintaining low inflation.
It is by conducting monetary policy prudently during the economic upswing that
we at the Bank of Canada will have the credibility needed when our economy begins to operate
at levels that test its potential to produce.
The role of the exchange rate
I  would  now  like  to  take  a  moment  to  underscore  the  important  role  that  the
exchange  rate  plays  in  the  conduct  of  Canadian  monetary  policy  and  to  explain  what  I  meant
earlier when I used the term “monetary conditions”.
In  a  medium-sized,  open  economy,  like  Canada’s,  a  good  deal  of  the  impact  of
monetary policy actions is channelled through the exchange rate. But because financial markets
do not always respond to events in completely predictable ways,  we  do  not  know  exactly  how
interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate  will  move  and  interact.  That  is  why  we  at  the  Bank  have
found  it  useful  to  construct  an  index  of  monetary  conditions  to  help  us  keep  track  of  the
combined effect of these two variables on aggregate demand in Canada.
To  understand  how  we  use  monetary  conditions  in  practice,  let  us  look  at  the
recent  situation  where  cyclical  differences  have  meant  that  the  Canadian  economy  has  been
weaker than the U.S.  economy.  In  these  circumstances,  the  need  for  accommodative  monetary
conditions in Canada required the Bank of Canada to take action to lower interest rates. But the
magnitude and timing of those interest rate reductions depended, to an important degree, on the
exchange  rate  response.  With  the  Canadian  dollar  roughly  stable  between  late  1995  and  late
1996, the easing in monetary conditions could take place through measured declines in interest
rates. The strengthening Canadian dollar through the latter part of 1996 accelerated the decline
in interest rates, as the Bank of Canada sought to maintain the degree of monetary ease achieved
in the autumn of 1996. With the economy gathering momentum since then, persistent weakness
in the Canadian dollar through June 1997 prompted a small increase in interest rates in order to
offset an undesired further easing in monetary conditions.
I might add that, since cyclical differences have required interest rates in Canada
to  be  below  those  in  the  United  States,  there  has  been  --  rightly  --  a  strong  market  perception
that the relative weakness of the Canadian dollar is temporary and that a future appreciation will
compensate investors for the lower yields on Canadian dollar assets. But experience has taught
us  that  this  process  of  exchange  rate/interest  rate  interaction  works  well  only  if  there  are  no
concerns in the markets about Canadian economic policies. As we found out in 1994-95, when
there  were  concerns  about  fiscal  policy,  a  decline  in  the  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar  can
BIS Review   84/1997
- 5 -
generate  a  loss  of  confidence  and  expectations  of  further  depreciation  of  the  currency,  not  of
subsequent appreciation.
The upshot of all this is that, with a floating currency, market participants need a
consistent  and  credible  policy  framework  to  help  anchor  their  expectations  about  future
movements in the exchange rate.  Such  a  framework  rests,  above  all,  on  a  firm  undertaking  by
the  authorities  to  preserve  the  domestic  purchasing  value  of  the  currency.  I  believe  that  our
inflation-control  targets,  by  giving  a  clear,  precise  view  of  this  commitment,  provide  a  strong
underpinning for the external value of the Canadian dollar.
What is my main message to you today?
Canada  is  in  better  shape  now  than  it  has  been  for  many  years  to  face  the
economic  challenges  of  the  future  and  to  reap  the  benefits  of  changing  technology  and  an
increasingly  integrated  world  economy.  But,  for  this  scenario  to  unfold,  there  will  have  to  be
continued  commitment  by  the  authorities  to  prudent,  credible  economic  policies.  As  far  as
monetary  policy  goes,  this  means  a  pledge  to  maintain  Canada’s  good  inflation  performance.
That is a pledge I can give without reservation.
BIS Review   84/1997
