Mr.  Bäckström  explains  why  price  stability  ought  to  be  a  central  bank’s
principle  monetary  policy  objective      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sweden,
Mr. Urban Bäckström, at Handelsbanken seminar in London on 28/1/97.
For  most  central  banks  today  the  primary  monetary  policy  objective  is  price
stability. The situation is  thus  very  different  from  that  which  prevailed  in  the  earlier  period  of
high inflation.
The reorientation of monetary policy stems from people’s growing awareness of
an inflationary economy’s harmful effects. The central banks, which are ultimately accountable
to  their  countries’  citizens  and  the  latter’s  representatives,  would  otherwise  not  have  been
mandated to focus policy on price stability.
In Sweden, for example, 60 per cent of the population see 2 per cent inflation as
an appropriate monetary policy objective and only 12 per cent are against this. In my country a
low inflation policy therefore has broad political support.
I  shall  be  talking  today  about  why  price  stability  ought  to  be  a  central  bank’s
principal monetary policy objective and what this means for economic growth, employment and
unemployment.  From  there  I  shall  consider  development  in  Sweden,  the  framework  of  our
monetary policy and the current situation.
Why price stability?
Why should price stability be singled out as a central bank’s overriding objective?
Why  not  attach  equal  importance  to  targets  for  growth,  employment  and  unemployment,
particularly as these factors have high priority for economic policy in general?
The answer to these questions calls for an understanding of what monetary policy
can  and  cannot  do.  In  the  long  run  monetary  policy  is  only  capable  of  influencing  inflation;  a
systematically higher rate of inflation, however, would not lead to higher long-term growth. The
level of long-term growth is determined instead by real economic factors such as  demographic
changes,  technology,  education  and  the  efficiency  of  markets.  In  so  far  as  a  long-term
relationship  between  inflation  and  growth  does  exist,  most  of  the  evidence  suggests  that,  if
anything,  higher  inflation  impairs  the  workings  of  the  economy  and  thereby  weakens  output.
Today there is widespread - though not yet complete - agreement on this.
What  monetary  policy  can  do,  on  the  other  hand,  is  influence  the  economy’s
fluctuations around the long-term trend, albeit without any lasting effects on growth. This means
that if resource utilisation is low or high, monetary policy can  be  used  to  stimulate  or  dampen
activity  temporarily,  but  not  to  fine-tune  the  economy.  With  an  inflation  target  which  applies
downwards  as  well  as  upwards,  so  that  deflation  as  well  as  inflation  are  avoided,  monetary
policy can then exercise a stabilising influence and help to smooth economic fluctuations around
the long-term trend.
Problems  arise  if  resource  utilisation  becomes  so  high  that  inflation  starts  to
accelerate and the central bank has not intervened. People may then begin to count on inflation
remaining high in the longer run. A higher level of inflation may  then  be  established,  whereas
the  effects  on  production  and  employment  will  be  only  temporary.  This  is  a  reason  why  the
central bank should act with foresight and be alert to the development of inflation expectations.
BIS Review   8/1997
- 2 -
The potential for influencing fluctuations in activity around the trend is dependent
on people’s appraisal of the central bank’s determination and ability to maintain price stability.
Central  bankers  talk  of  the  importance  of  credibility,  by  which  is  meant  the  extent  to  which
people  expect  inflation  to  be  in  line  with  its  targeted  rate.  The  degree  of  credibility  is
conditioned by, for example, the historical record of inflation and the existence of  government
financial deficits. Weak credibility calls for caution in monetary policy, just as higher credibility
confers more room in which to manoeuvre.
Experience has  shown,  moreover,  that  even  in  the  shorter  run,  the  possibility  of
influencing  employment  and  unemployment  via  monetary  policy  is  very  limited.  Limited
fluctuations  around  the  growth  trend  are  by  no  means  sufficient  condition  for  a  smooth
development  of  employment  and  low  unemployment.  Comparisons  between  countries  and
regions  reveal  that  a  similar  growth  pattern,  even  over  a  considerable  period,  can  involve
markedly divergent effects on employment and  unemployment.  This  highlights  the  function  of
the  labour  market.  It  is  there  that  measures  must  be  taken  in  order  to  tackle  problems  with
employment and unemployment.
I  want  to  underscore  some  conclusions  from  this  discussion.  Monetary  policy
cannot have growth as the primary objective because it is not capable of influencing growth in
the longer run. At the same time, monetary policy can be used to smooth fluctuations in activity
around the  growth  trend.  But  I  should  emphasise  that  this  presupposes  that  the  central  bank  is
committed  to  price  stability  and  that  its  policy  is  perceived  as  credible.  With  low  inflation,
moreover, the economy will function more efficiently.
It  is  important,  I  believe,  to  realise  that  price  stability’s  status  as  the  monetary
policy  objective  does  not  imply  a  lower  priority  for  growth  and  employment  as  economic
policy’s  overall  objectives.  Rather  than  being  an  impediment,  low  inflation  creates  good
conditions  for  growth.  In  order  for  this  to  be  combined  with  low  unemployment,  the  labour
market must also function properly.
Monetary policy with an explicit inflation target
Since  the  move  to  a  flexible  exchange  rate  in  the  autumn  of  1992,  monetary
policy in Sweden has been conducted with an explicit inflation target. The Swedish target for the
rate  of  inflation,  which  is  appraised  in  an  annual  perspective  and  expressed  in  terms  of  the
consumer price index, is 2 per cent. The target is surrounded by a band of – 1 percentage point,
which serves among other things as a buffer for temporary effects on inflation. I should like to
mention some factors which illustrate how the Riksbank works on the construction of monetary
policy with an inflation target.
As monetary policy is characterised by long and variable lags, the policy needs to
be forward-looking and based on an inflation forecast. In order to clarify our deliberations in the
assessment  of  future  inflation,  the  Riksbank  presents  an  inflation  report  four  times  a  year.  A
number  of  indicators  are  reviewed  in  these  reports,  together  with  an  assessment  of  future
tendencies and a discussion of risks and opportunities in the field of inflation.
Simplifying somewhat, an inflation forecast can be said to rest on two factors in
particular: one is the relationship between supply and demand and the other is expected inflation.
The difference between the actual level of demand and the potential level of production that can
be combined with an unchanged rate of inflation is commonly referred to as the output gap. As
BIS Review   8/1997
- 3 -
this gap is a notional variable, it is difficult to calculate  exactly.  We  therefore  use  a  variety  of
indicators to check for consistency of the assessments.
The  inflation  target  is  symmetrical;  that  is,  preventing  inflation  from  falling
below  the  target  is  as  important  for  the  Riksbank  as  stopping  it  from  rising  above  the  target.
Over time, the economy will then expand at its potential rate. The inflation targeting  approach
accordingly  has  a  built-in  control  mechanism.  If  the  monetary  stance  is  unduly  tight,  bringing
economic activity below the potential level, inflation will decrease and sooner or later fall short
of  the  target;  and  vice  versa.  This  calls  for  a  calibration  of  the  output  gap,  a  new  inflation
forecast and an adjustment of monetary policy.
Factors  that  generate  changes  in  ongoing  rate  of  inflation  must  be  distinguished
from temporary effects on inflation due to once-and-for-all shifts in the price level. It is mainly
variations in the output gap and in expected inflation which have an impact on the ongoing rate
of inflation. Monetary policy accordingly focuses on these factors.
Temporary effects on inflation may come, for example, from changes in indirect
taxes  and  subsidies  or  from  shifts  in  terms  of  trade.  Monetary  policy  measures  as  such  may
likewise  have  temporary  effects  on  inflation  via  changes  in  house  mortgage  costs,  which  are
included in the measurement of consumer prices. This was the case in 1996, when the average
rate of inflation fell below the lower band limit of 1 per cent mainly as a temporary consequence
of the Riksbank’s reduction of its instrumental rate. Clearly, monetary policy should not respond
to temporary effects on inflation from upward or downward movements in the instrumental rate;
to do so would be to make interest rate policy procyclical and thereby destabilising.
The  monetary  policy  reaction  to  other  temporary  effects  depends  essentially  on
how these affect inflation expectations. If a temporary increase in the rate of inflation is taken,
for  example,  to  indicate  a  more  lasting  upward  shift,  so  that  people  adjust  their  inflation
expectations,  monetary  policy  would  have  to  respond  in  order  to  prevent  the  ongoing  rate  of
inflation  from  increasing.  If  expectations  are  unaffected,  on  the  other  hand,  temporary  effects
may be of secondary importance for monetary policy.
Where, then, does the exchange rate come in? Apart from its short-run effects via
import prices, the exchange rate features in our inflation assessments in two respects. One is that
exchange  rate  movements  affect  demand  in  the  internationally  oriented  sector  and  thereby  in
time  the  development  of  the  output  gap  and  ultimately  inflation,  too.  The  other  is  the
information  which  the  exchange  rate  may  provide  about  the  development  of  inflation
expectations. While temporary exchange rate fluctuations hardly affect forecasts of inflation one
to two years ahead, more lasting tendencies have an overall impact on demand  and  thereby  on
the output gap and consequently on the inflation forecast.
Adjustment after the inflation era
Sweden  is  one  example  of  the  numerous  countries  that  in  the  1970s  and  1980s
systematically aimed for higher growth and employment with the aid of expansionary economic
policies,  with  less  regard  for  the  effects  on  long-term  price  stability.  The  outcome  was  very
different from what had been intended. Compared with countries more devoted to stability, for
example  the  Netherlands,  Austria  and  Germany,  macroeconomic  development  in  Sweden  was
poorer in many respects.
BIS Review   8/1997
- 4 -
Inflation  in  Sweden  moved  up  substantially  from  the  late  1960s  onwards,  trend
growth weakened and the period ended in the early 1990s with a dramatic fall in production, a
sharp increase in unemployment and a serious crisis in the financial system.
The tendencies in the latter part of the 1980s were not sustainable. The levels of
growth, employment and prices for real and financial assets could not be maintained. Partly for
these reasons, Sweden experienced a profound crisis. Had the adjustment been made earlier and
resulted in stability, perhaps the crisis would have been less painful.
In recent  years,  however,  the  process  of  adjustment  in  Sweden  has  come  a  long
way. The economy is in the process of adjusting to the conditions that apply in a low inflation
regime. This is being accompanied by an appreciable improvement in government finance, not
least  as  a  result  of  the  extensive  consolidation  programme.  From  a  two-digit  level  just  a  few
years ago, for 1996 it seems that the government deficit has been reduced to between 3 and 3.5
per cent of GDP. Moreover, the improvement is expected to continue.
That the consolidation of government finance proceeds successfully to the goal of
balance  in  1998  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  that  this  lays  a  foundation  for  balanced,
sustainable growth. With the new, globalised capital market, the need for discipline in economic
policy soon makes itself felt, particularly for a country that has had a difficult period of deficits
and  has  therefore  become  more  dependent  on  domestic  and  foreign  creditors.  After  all  the
experiences earlier in the 1990s, this is widely understood in Sweden.
The  resolution  with  which  the  consolidation  is  being  achieved  has  been
questioned from time to time. However, the six-monthly control stations that are an integral part
of  the  Swedish  consolidation  programme  have  made  -  and  continue  to  make  -  it  possible  for
observers to monitor  the  political  system’s  determination  in  this  respect  to  achieve  the  goal  of
balance in 1998.
The current situation
At the beginning of 1996, favourable prospects for inflation prompted a monetary
policy  realignment.  Continuously  falling  inflation  expectations,  accompanied  by  subdued
demand,  improved  the  outlook  for  inflation  in  1996  and  1997.  At  the  end  of  1996  underlying
rate of inflation was about 1.5 per cent. The twelve-month rate of headline inflation, which was
actually negative for some months in the latter part of 1996, was affected by temporary factors,
above all as a result of the Riksbank’s interest rate cuts.
The  better  prospects  for  inflation  paved  the  way  for  a  notable  reduction  of  the
repo rate during 1996, from 8.91 to 4.10 per cent, the latter being the lowest instrumental rate in
Sweden  for  at  least  thirty  years.  Together  with  the  impact  of  the  exchange  rate,  the  overall
monetary conditions are accordingly contributing to a continued recovery in the real economy.
A shift in the composition of demand began in the course of 1996. But although
the contribution to GDP growth from net exports decreased, the effect of foreign trade remains
positive.  Private  consumption  is  continuing  to  rise  at  a  subdued  but  stable  rate  and  its
composition  seems  to  be  shifting  in  favour  of  durable  goods,  cars  in  particular.  There  are  no
signs  that  in  the  coming  two  years  the  economy  will  exceed  the  level  of  potential  output  at
which inflation is liable to pick up.  The  level  of  inflation  expectations  is  also  compatible  with
the inflation target.
BIS Review   8/1997
- 5 -
The exchange rate has been weaker than assumed in the latest inflation report and
the  current  level  of  the  effective  exchange  rate  does  not  mirror  fundamental  trends  in  the
economy.  This  points  to  some  future  appreciation.  Meanwhile,  GDP  growth  in  1996  seems  to
have  been  somewhat  lower  than  the  Riksbank  counted  on,  which  implies  a  somewhat  larger
output gap.
All in all, the picture of future inflation does not appear to have changed from the
assessment in the December inflation report. The conclusion in that report - that monetary policy
is relatively well balanced - therefore holds good. The Riksbank is continuing to evaluate effects
of the interest rate cuts that were implemented during 1996, together with new information about
real economic activity, inflation expectations and the exchange rate. This in turn will determine
the future course of monetary policy, that is, whether the repo rate should be kept at its present
level or whether there is any limited room for manoeuvre.
BIS Review   8/1997
