Mr.  Matsushita  comments  on  recent  monetary  and  economic  conditions  in  Japan
and  the  reform  of  the  financial  markets      Speech  given  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,
Mr. Yasuo Matsushita, at the Kisaragi-kai Meeting in Tokyo on 14/4/97.
I. Introduction
I am greatly honored to have been invited today to address this distinguished audience. I
would like to take this opportunity to first discuss recent monetary and economic conditions in Japan and
issues regarding the financial system. I would then like to discuss the Bank of Japan’s views on financial
market reform in Japan, the subject of heated discussion since Prime Minister Hashimoto proposed the
“Big Bang” deregulation package for Japan on November 11, 1996. 
The  financial  markets  constitute  the  infrastructure  supporting  a  nation’s  economy,  and
thus their efficient and stable functioning is essential to the promotion of unhindered economic growth in
the long term. Accordingly, market reform has become an urgent issue in Japan, as the financial markets
seem to be losing international competitiveness. However, various arguments are being heard on the pace
and  the  potential  side  effects  of  the  reform.  Bearing  these  arguments  in  mind,  I  wish  to  return  to  the
basics of market reform and discuss why a reform is currently needed in Japan and  the  approach  to  be
taken in promoting the reform.
II. Recent Monetary and Economic Conditions in Japan
A. The Strength of Economic Recovery 
I would like to start by examining the strength of  the  self-sustained  economic  recovery
over the past several years. 
According  to  the  Economic  Planning  Agency,  the  current  economic  recovery  began  in
October 1993, and has continued for about three and a half years. The recovery, however, has not been
constant,  and  therefore,  many  people  may  not  have  been  able  to  appreciate  the  true  strength  of  the
recovery.
In  fact,  the  growth  rate  of  the  economy  remained  low  at  around  1  percent  even  after
1993,  and  there  were  concerns  about  the  occurrence  of  a  deflationary  spiral  at  one  time  in  1995.  This
extremely  slow  pace  of  economic  recovery  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Japanese  economy  had  to
overcome various structural adjustment pressures - that is, pressures to reduce the burdens created by the
bursting of the economic “bubble” and pressures to adapt to a new global economic environment. 
Since 1996, however, the recovery in real economic activity has finally become evident. 
Looking at  GDP growth in 1996, the contribution of fiscal expenditures, which had been
large  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  gradually  decreased.  At  the  same  time,  the  pace  of  decline  in  net
exports  (exports  in  excess  of  imports)  slowed,  and  domestic  private  demand,  such  as  business  fixed
investment and personal consumption, showed steady growth. Owing mostly to the increase in domestic
private  demand,  GDP  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1996  grew  by  2.9  percent  over  the  same  period  of  the
previous year, despite the negative contribution by public works. 
The key to the realization of a self-sustained economic  recovery  is  the  sustainability  of
recovery  in  domestic  private  demand.  In  this  respect,  there  have  been  concerns  that  the  recovery  in
business  fixed  investment  might  be  due  in  large  part  to  the  temporary  increase  in  investment  in  the
telecommunications industry. Equally, there have been concerns that growth in housing investment and
personal consumption might have been caused mainly by  the  boost  in  demand  ahead  of  the  rise  in  the
consumption tax rate in fiscal 1997. 
BIS Review   61/1997
- 2 -
These issues must be examined from various points of view when judging the economic
outlook  for  the  current  fiscal  year.  I  would,  however,  like  to  emphasize  here  that  a  virtuous  circle  of
demand, production, and income has gradually come into operation from the latter half of 1996. 
During  the  first  half  of  1996,  increase  in  demand  did  not  bring  about  significant
improvement in production, as the increase was offset by growth in imports and inventory adjustment. In
the latter half of the year, however, the decline in external demand halted due to the depreciation of the
yen,  and,  in  addition,  inventory  adjustment  progressed.  As  a  result,  the  increase  in  final  demand  was
reflected fully in production growth. In fact, the year-to-year growth  rate  of  production  improved  from
less than 1 percent in the first half of 1996 to 4.4 percent in the latter half of 1996, a level consistent with
the  growth  in  demand.  The  increase  in  production  appears  to  have  led  to  a  recovery  in  business  fixed
investment and employment in the latter half of 1996, through increased corporate profits. This virtuous
circle of demand, production,  and  income  brightens  the  prospects  for  a  sustained  recovery  in  domestic
private demand.
The strength of recovery, however, is different in each economic sector. According to the
results  of  the  March  1997  “Tankan  -  Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan,”  while
increased corporate profits have been stimulating increases in business fixed investment, they have not to
the  same  extent  led  to  increased  consumption  through  improved  employment  and  wage  conditions.  In
addition, while business fixed investment by large firms continues to increase, recovery in the levels of
investment by smaller firms has not yet gained strength.
While  several  factors  remain  uncertain,  the  Bank  of  Japan  judges  that  the  economic
recovery  has  gradually  been  firming  since  autumn  1996,  on  the  basis  of  the  developments  in  the
economic growth rate and its determining factors, and the strengthening of the virtuous circle.
B. Future Economic and Price Developments, and Monetary Policy Management 
The  Bank  will  pay  close  attention  to  whether  the  self-sustained  recovery  of  private
demand from fiscal 1996 will further strengthen, leading to a firm recovery of the economy despite the
downward pressures of fiscal tightening. 
The developments in the financial markets  indicate  considerable  concern  on  the  part  of
market  participants  as  to  the  firmness  of  economic  recovery.  Long-term  interest  rates  continued  to
decline from autumn 1996 and have recently been at a historic low of 2.1 to 2.2 percent. Stock prices fell
sharply at the beginning of the year with no significant improvement thereafter. The results of the March
1997  Tankan  also  indicated  that  while  firms  were  confident  about  their  business  outlook  in  terms  of
expected  sales  and  profits,  they  had  little  expectation  of  an  improvement  in  business  conditions  in  the
second quarter.
The  low  level  of  confidence  in  the  economic  outlook  may  be  attributed  to  a  variety  of
causes.  The  renewed  concern  over  the  nonperforming-loan  problem  of  financial  institutions  and  its
effects  on  the  economy  may  be  one  factor.  With  regard  to  economic  developments  in  the  short-term,
however, the most significant factors are likely to be the concerns over the downward pressures of fiscal
tightening. 
The Bank has not yet detected any clear signs of such downward pressures, and intends
to continue examining the possible effects of fiscal tightening. There appear to be, however, several good
reasons not to be too pessimistic.
Regarding fiscal tightening, public works are not to be  cut  drastically  in  the  new  fiscal
year, but rather, have already been reduced gradually from the latter half of 1996. Despite the decline in
public works, domestic private demand has continued to expand, supported in part by the improvement
in external demand. 
BIS Review   61/1997
- 3 -
With regard to the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate,  it  may  have  two  different  types  of
impact: (1) in the short term, the rise may induce an increase in demand ahead of its implementation and
a  subsequent  reaction  after  the  rate  change;  and  (2)  in  the  longer  term,  it  may  fundamentally  affect
consumer behavior. 
As to the short-term influence,  this  may  have  made  a  certain  contribution  to  the  recent
improvement in economic indicators such as increased automobile sales and department store sales. From
April, therefore, it is likely that there will be some reaction against the increase. From the viewpoint of
achieving  a  self-sustained  economic  recovery,  however,  what  matters  is  how  the  increase  in  the
consumption tax rate will fundamentally change consumer behavior through a decline in the purchasing
power of households. The degree of the change will depend largely  on  consumer  confidence  and  wage
conditions. In this respect, the recent improvement in employment and wage conditions, though modest,
is encouraging.
Nevertheless, a temporary slowdown in economic recovery is likely as the various effects
of fiscal tightening will be seen most strongly between now and summer. The Bank, however, is also of
the view that the current trend of recovery is likely to be maintained owing to the recent strengthening of
the virtuous circle in the economy. In this respect, the Bank will continue to monitor closely economic
developments, especially consumer behavior. 
Turning to recent price developments, it has become increasingly clear  that  prices  have
stopped declining since the end of 1996, following an improvement in the domestic supply and demand
conditions and a rise in import prices. While the decline in crude oil prices makes it unlikely that import
prices will rise further, putting additional upward pressures on domestic prices, the Bank will continue to
monitor price developments closely, including the effects of the depreciation of the yen. 
If I should mention one point about the recent foreign exchange developments, it is that
the  Bank’s  thinking  is  based  on  the  Group  of  Seven  agreement  that  exchange  rates  should  reflect
economic fundamentals and that excess volatility is undesirable. While refraining from commenting on
specific  exchange  rate  levels,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  carefully  watch  foreign  exchange  rate
developments, which have recently shown rather rapid movements. 
Returning to the subject of prices, the raising of the consumption tax rate in April will be
reflected  in  product  prices,  pushing  up  the  price  index  accordingly.  It  would  not  be  appropriate  to
formulate monetary policy against such a one-time, superficial price adjustment. The issue of concern is
whether  the  rise  in  the  tax  rate  will  trigger  price  hikes  taking  advantage  of  the  rise  or  will  lead  to
inflationary expectations, which in turn might bring about price rises beyond the immediate effects of the
tax  rate  increase.  The  Bank  will  also  continue  to  monitor  price  developments  carefully  from  this
viewpoint, with particular attention given to the underlying domestic supply and demand conditions and
consumer confidence. 
In  the  management  of  current  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  of  Japan  will  continue  to
monitor  economic  developments  closely,  placing  emphasis  on  further  strengthening  the  foundation  for
economic recovery.
III. Issues Regarding the Financial System 
I would now like to move on to the issues regarding the financial system. From the end
of fiscal 1996 to the beginning of fiscal 1997, a number of banks announced their intention to front-load
their  schedule  of  writing  off  nonperforming  loans  and  to  revise  their  business  results  for  fiscal  1996
downward  accordingly.  On  April  1,  Nippon  Credit  Bank  announced  a  comprehensive  restructuring
package, and Hokkaido Takushoku Bank and Hokkaido Bank announced their plan to merge in pursuit of
more  efficient  management.  These  developments  indicate  the  determination  of  Japanese  financial
institutions  to  adapt  to  the  far-reaching  reform  of  Japan’s  financial  system,  which  I  will  discuss  later,
while continuing to strive to promptly resolve their nonperforming loans. 
BIS Review   61/1997
- 4 -
I  would  therefore  like  to  discuss  the  implications  that  the  decisions  of  Nippon  Credit
Bank  and  Hokkaido  Takushoku  Bank  may  have  for  Japan’s  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  for  the
nonperforming-loan problem with which the system is burdened. 
Let me first explain the circumstances which led these banks to take such drastic actions.
In  recent  years,  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  the  disposal  of  nonperforming  loans  by  major
financial institutions including city banks, long-term credit banks, and trust banks. As a result of active
provisioning and write-offs, in fact, most banks already have a clear prospect of completing the disposal
within a year or two. 
Nippon Credit Bank and Hokkaido Takushoku Bank, however, have tended to fall behind
others  due  to  the  large  amount  of  nonperforming  loans  they  hold  relative  to  their  financial  strength.
Needless to say, it has been believed that both banks could dispose of the nonperforming loans over an
extended period of time. However, with the financial markets about to undergo a drastic change, financial
institutions that will require time to solve their nonperforming loan problem will unavoidably be placed
under  serious  constraints  as  they  try  to  survive  the  reform.  With  this  in  mind,  domestic  and  overseas
market  participants  have  begun  to  scrutinize  the  financial  conditions  of  Japanese  financial  institutions
with increasing severity since the beginning of the year. In this context, the two banks were urged to set
forth  restructuring  plans  which  are  comprehensive  enough  to  remove  the  sources  of  uncertainty  in  the
market. 
Nippon  Credit  Bank  announced  a  plan  which  includes  thorough  restructuring,
comprehensive disposal of nonperforming loans, and reinforcement of the capital base. Private financial
institutions  which  have  direct  capital  or  business  interest  in  Nippon  Credit  Bank  have  been  asked  to
participate  in  the  capital  subscription  to  the  bank.  The  capital  which  cannot  be  obtained  from  private
financial  institutions  will  be  supplemented  by  the  New  Financial  Stabilization  Fund  through  the
underwriting of preferred shares. This will be carried out using the outstanding amount which has been
contributed  to  the  Fund  by  the  Bank  of  Japan.  In  this  respect,  the  restructuring  plan  of  Nippon  Credit
Bank involves public support. We at the Bank believe that Nippon Credit Bank is by no means insolvent,
and that it is fully capable of reconstructing its financial position. We have at the same time determined
that  the  entire  financial  system  might  be  adversely  influenced  should  the  implementation  of  the
comprehensive measures to solve the financial problems of Nippon Credit Bank be delayed, and should
market confidence in the bank not be maintained or restored. Based on this judgment and in light of the
objective  of  the  Fund  -  which  is  to  “enhance  the  stability  of  and  global  confidence  in  our  country’s
financial  system”  -  the  Bank  deemed  it  appropriate  to  utilize  the  New  Financial  Stabilization  Fund  to
reinforce the capital base of Nippon Credit Bank. 
Meanwhile, Hokkaido Takushoku Bank announced a plan to merge with Hokkaido Bank,
also based in the Hokkaido region, with a view to becoming a so-called super-regional bank with a stable
customer base in the Hokkaido region and with operations in a geographically larger area in the rest of
Japan. As part of the planned merger, they announced a management strategy to strengthen the financial
base, improve customer services, and thus contribute to invigorating the regional economy. 
Although the cases of Nippon Credit Bank and Hokkaido Takushoku Bank are different,
one involving public support and the other a commercial solution, the approaches taken by the two banks
in coping with their problems have points in common. 
First, both banks are to implement far-reaching restructuring measures in terms of  their
operation,  personnel,  and  branches,  which  are  unprecedented  for  major  Japanese  banks.  The  plans
adopted  by  the  two  banks  would  be  comparable  to  the  drastic  restructuring  measures  adopted  by  U.S.
commercial  banks  in  the  latter  half  of  the  1980s  and  in  the  early  1990s  to  solve  their  management
problems. 
Second,  both  banks  plan  to  withdraw  from  overseas  operations.  Nippon  Credit  Bank
subsequently announced an agreement on business collaboration with Bankers Trust of the United States.
BIS Review   61/1997
- 5 -
We at the Bank are strongly encouraged by these initiatives because they indicate a significant shift from
the conventional strategy pursued to date by major Japanese banks,  and  will  contribute  significantly  to
the smooth implementation of the two banks’ restructuring packages. 
The common aspects of the two cases  illustrate  the  determination  of  Japanese  financial
institutions to renovate themselves in order to adapt positively to the changing financial environment. As
I shall discuss later, the Japanese financial system is undergoing a drastic change in preparation for the
21st  century.  These  two  cases  reflect  the  fact  that  managements  are  seriously  reconsidering  their
strategies,  freeing  themselves  from  their  traditional  way  of  thinking,  through  identifying  areas  of
comparative advantage and improving customer services.
The measures taken by the two banks represent significant steps toward the resolution of
nonperforming  loans.  The  disposal  of  nonperforming  loans  by  Nippon  Credit  Bank  will  reach  a  level
comparable to  other  major  banks.  In  addition,  Hokkaido  Takushoku  Bank  and  Hokkaido  Bank  will  be
able to complete the disposal of their nonperforming loans much faster than they would have separately,
for the merger will greatly enhance efficiency through such measures as reorganization and consolidation
of branch network and elimination of redundant investment.
The decisions of the two banks are thus expected to contribute significantly to removing
uncertainties from, and ensuring domestic and international confidence in the Japanese financial system.
At the same time, the Bank believes that the proposed measures are of great significance in the sense that
they represent voluntary action taken by financial institutions in preparation for the fundamental reform
of the Japanese financial system.
IV. Financial Market Reform
A. The Necessity for Market Reform 
I would now like to move on to the other theme of my speech, financial market reform in
Japan. Specific measures of the Big Bang deregulation package for Japan are currently under deliberation
in the relevant councils. I would therefore  like  to  discuss  the  fundamental  points  of  this  issue,  such  as
why a reform of the financial markets and the financial system is currently needed, and the approach to
be taken in promoting the reform. 
Today,  financial  innovations  are  in  progress  around  the  world,  and  new  financial
instruments  and  transactions  are  being  developed  one  after  another.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the
Japanese financial markets seem to be losing international competitiveness. This is the main reason the
markets need to be reformed. Failure to heighten competitiveness would  result  in  the  hollowing  out  of
the Japanese financial markets, eventually threatening the sound development of the Japanese economy. 
Since  the  1980s,  Japan  has  gradually  deregulated  the  financial  sector.  Interest  rates  on
deposits have been liberalized, and banks and securities companies have been permitted to enter into each
other’s fields of business through subsidiaries. During this period, however, the Tokyo market has fallen
far behind the New York and London markets in its ability to develop diverse financial instruments and
services. This is partly because Japanese financial institutions had to divert much of their energy to the
disposal of nonperforming loans, a burden created by the bursting of  the  economic  “bubble.”  It  is  also
attributable to the conventional frameworks of the Japanese financial markets and the financial  system,
which have been left unchanged despite the rapidly changing financial environment, making it difficult to
develop and introduce new financial instruments and services. 
Globally, the most conspicuous change in the financial markets in recent years has been
the rapid progress in financial innovations, reflecting the development of computer and communications
technology.  New  financial  instruments  such  as  derivatives  and  securitization  have  made  it  possible  to
unbundle  risks  -  namely,  credit  risk,  interest  rate  risk,  and  foreign  exchange  risk  -  of  conventional
BIS Review   61/1997
- 6 -
financial  instruments  such  as  loans  and  bonds,  and  trade  these  risks  individually  or  as  various
combinations of risks. The risks traded through the new financial instruments are no different from those
originally  incorporated  in  the  conventional  financial  products.  However,  the  range  of  services  that
financial institutions can provide has expanded significantly as it has become possible to trade only the
risks without paying for or delivering the underlying asset.
Conventional  financial  services,  for  example,  focused  on  the  flow  of  funds,  that  is,
investment and financing, of firms and households. In comparison, recent financial services place greater
emphasis on analyzing the overall risks of the assets and liabilities of firms to hedge those risks or to take
new risks. The services can thus be elaborately tailored to the specific financial conditions of individual
customers. In other words, it has  become  possible  for  firms  and  households  to  manage  their  portfolios
efficiently  and  more  flexibly  by  utilizing  custom-made  services  based  on  advice  from  financial
institutions. The words derivatives and securitization may sound irrelevant to households, but they have
in  fact  increased  opportunities  for  households  to  efficiently  manage  their  assets  and  liabilities,  by
expanding  the  range  of  assets  in  which  pension  trusts  and  investment  trusts  can  be  invested  indirectly
through institutional investors, and by increasing the range of instruments which can be accessed directly
by households. 
in  financial 
Along  with 
the  progress 
in  computer  and
communications technology are further promoting financial globalization. Today, firms and institutional
investors  around  the  world  are  not  only  transferring  funds  frequently  across  borders,  but  are  also
accessing financial  markets  worldwide  on  a  daily  basis  in  pursuit  of  the  best  means  to  control  risk.  In
terms of technical capability at least, by utilizing computer networks, even firms that are small in scale
can solicit funds directly from overseas investors and individuals can deal directly with overseas financial
institutions. 
innovations,  advances 
Availability  of  diverse  financial  services  to  meet  the  potential  needs  of  firms  and
households provides the basis for revitalizing the financial sector as a growth industry. Countries around
the world have recognized the financial sector as a high growth industry, and for this reason they have
been vying with each other in the reform of their domestic financial markets. The Big Bang implemented
in the United Kingdom in the mid-1980s was in fact aimed  at  strengthening  the  financial  sector  as  the
leading industry of the country’s economy by attracting back to  London  financial  transactions  that  had
shifted to the United States. 
The development and introduction of diverse financial services is becoming increasingly
important  in  Japan  as  well,  given  the  changes  in  the  flow  of  capital  in  Japan  and  abroad.  With  the
accumulation  of  personal  assets  and  the  need  to  prepare  for  the  aging  of  society,  there  is  a  growing
demand  in  the  household  sector  for  diversification  of  assets  and  risks,  while  the  corporate  sector  is
waiting for the emergence of venture businesses to lead growth industries and the establishment of new
channels to facilitate the supply of capital to such businesses. 
There  is  concern,  however,  as  to  whether  the  Japanese  financial  markets  have  the
capacity to create financial services and instruments which can satisfy the various needs of the corporate
and household sectors. 
The conventional framework of the Japanese financial system has divided the industry by
type  of  business,  entrusted  each  type  of  business  to  specialized  financial  institutions,  and  prohibited
institutions  from  entering  into  other  types  of  business.  The  majority  opinion  is  that  this  institutional
segmentation of financial businesses was effective in supplying capital to  priority  industries  during  the
postwar reconstruction period and the era of high economic growth. With the rapidly expanding scope of
financial services and the diversifying needs of users, however, the appropriateness of such segmentation
has come into question. It must indeed be thoroughly examined whether it is impeding the provision of
efficient financial services and the introduction of new financial technology, and whether it is restricting
market competition.
BIS Review   61/1997
- 7 -
It  is  also  important  to  review  the  institutional  frameworks  of  the  legal,  tax,  and
accounting systems to make them suitable for the financial services of the new era. 
If  the  institutional  frameworks  are  not  improved,  even  transactions  between  residents
may shift to overseas markets due to the exercise of choice by market participants. This may be  called
“transactions  flight”  rather  than  “capital  flight.”  As  the  financial  markets  constitute  the  infrastructure
supporting the economic activity of a country, hollowing out of the markets must be prevented.
B. The Basic Approach to Market Reform 
As  I  have  explained,  market  reform  should  not  be  conducted  as  a  mere  deregulation
process.  Rather,  it  should  be  promoted  from  the  viewpoint  of  creating  an  internationally  competitive
market and making the market attractive to domestic and overseas participants. In doing so, it  must  be
remembered  that  countries  around  the  world  are  also  striving  to  attract  domestic  and  cross-border
financial transactions to their own markets  by  enhancing  their  international  competitiveness.  That  is  to
say,  while  the  systems  of  various  countries  differ  significantly,  each  country  is  reviewing  its  existing
system  on  a  continuous  basis  in  pursuit  of  improved  efficiency.  Therefore,  if  we  simply  consider  the
present  New  York  and  London  markets  as  our  goal,  we  might  find  ourselves  trailing  behind  those
markets by the time reform in Japan is realized. In other words, it is most important to try to be one or
two steps ahead of the times as we rebuild Japan’s financial markets. 
The  frame  of  reference  in  these  efforts  is  to  fully  utilize  the  creativity  of  the  private
sector, or in other words, to maximize the functioning of the market mechanism. In fact, the driving force
for the development of the New York and London markets has been the innovative strength of the market
mechanism.  It  is  therefore  important  that  existing  regulations  be  reviewed  and  abolished  as  much  as
possible  while  placing  stronger  emphasis  on  market  participants’  self-responsibility  and  on  honoring
market discipline. It is essential that a framework be built in which diverse financial services are made
available to the public, enabling them to choose the most efficient products or products that sufficiently
meet  their  various  needs.  Such  a  framework  will  not  only  promote  greater  efficiency  of  the  entire
financial system by drawing out innovative ideas through competition, but should also contribute to the
stability of the financial system by putting to work the check mechanism inherent in markets. 
When we look back at the Japanese financial markets from this perspective, we see that
every attempt to introduce a new financial product, such as commercial paper or securitized instruments,
required  a  lengthy  process  before  the  product  could  actually  be  launched.  This  was  because  there  was
always heated debate about whether the new product could be construed as a negotiable security  under
the Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1948,  in  order  to  determine  which  type  of  financial  institution,  that  is,
securities companies or banks, would handle the product. 
Another feature of the Japanese financial markets has been the restrictions or conditions
imposed to limit the risk carried by securities traded on the capital market, that is, those imposed on the
investment  instruments  of  institutional  investors  and  on  the  corporate  issuers  of  negotiable  securities.
Examples  are  the  restrictions  on  equity  investment  by  investment  trusts  and  pension  funds  and  the
qualification  criteria  for  corporate  bond  issues,  which  were  abolished  at  the  end  of  1995.  This  feature,
however, seems to have constrained the basic function of the capital market which is to realize efficient
transfers  of  business  risks  based  on  the  price  mechanism  and  has  consequently  restricted  access  to  the
capital market. 
Such  features  of  the  Japanese  financial  markets  had  the  aim  of  protecting  investors,
which  was  realized  by  making  specific  institutions  responsible  for  specific  financial  instruments,  and
then regulating  and  supervising  the  institutions  responsible  for  handling  the  financial  products.  Should
this remain unchanged, however, new financial instruments may not be introduced expeditiously and the
functions  of  the  capital  market  may  not  be  fully  utilized,  further  weakening  the  international
competitiveness  of  the  Japanese  markets.  In  addition,  if  regulations  continue  to  severely  restrict  the
activities  of  the  institutions  offering  financial  products,  this  may  leave  little  room  for  the  financial
BIS Review   61/1997
- 8 -
institutions to exercise creativity and, in the end, even discourage  them  from  doing  so.  In  practice,  the
regulations were applied with a certain degree of flexibility to avoid impairment of market functions. In
order  to  strengthen  the  competitiveness  of  the  Japanese  markets,  however,  it  is  essential  to  resolutely
relax or remove existing regulations to allow the private sector to fully exercise its creativity. 
It  then  becomes  important  that  market  participants  be  held  responsible  for  their  own
actions and market discipline be respected, and also that comprehensive rules be made that are applied to
the entire market to ensure the adequate functioning of the market mechanism. Such market rules can be
summarized conceptually in the following two categories. 
The first type is rules that financial businesses in general - for example, banks, securities
companies,  insurance  companies,  and  investment  trusts  -  must  observe  in  their  transactions  with
customers.  These  include  rules  that  provide  for  adequate  explanation  of  the  risks  involved  in  a  certain
product in accordance with the customer’s level of knowledge and experience, or for a strict separation of
the customers’ assets from the institution’s assets. The second type is rules pertaining to disclosure and
those that prohibit unfair trades. The basis of investor protection is to disclose information that enables
investors  to  make  rational  decisions  about  investment.  With  such  disclosure,  all  responsibility  for  the
investment decisions will lie with the investors. It is thus necessary to enhance public disclosure, while
considering for which instruments investor protection should be provided. 
Besides these two types of rules, prudential regulations will need to be imposed on banks
which  participate  in  the  settlement  system.  This  is  because  failure  of  one  bank  might  trigger  the
materialization  of  systemic  risk,  disrupting  the  entire  financial  system.  However,  if  the  prudential
regulations are applied too rigorously, banks may be put at a major disadvantage vis-à-vis other financial
institutions. Therefore, banking regulations are now being reviewed so that they encourage further efforts
by banks themselves. 
These  rules  and  regulations  should  not  control  the  details  of  the  actions  of  financial
institutions. Instead, their aim is to guarantee free and self-reliant behavior of financial institutions within
the  minimum  necessary  framework.  Relaxation  or  removal  of  all  unnecessary  regulations  within  that
framework should promote competition among financial institutions, improving the quality of financial
services available to users in Japan and abroad.
C. The Future of the Japanese Financial Markets 
Before concluding, I would also like to discuss the Bank’s views regarding the future of
Japan’s markets, about which questions are often raised. 
First  of  all,  in  light  of  the  experience  of  the  Big  Bang  in  the  United  Kingdom,  some
anticipate  that  when  the  market  reform  is  accomplished,  Japanese  financial  institutions  might  end  up
being acquired by foreign interests. It is extremely difficult to forecast whether this will happen in Japan
and to what extent it will occur. However, whoever will be the providers  of  financial  services,  what  is
most important is to establish financial markets which efficiently supply diverse financial services to the
people  and  which  thereby  provide  the  foundation  for  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy.
Even if attempts are made to protect domestic financial institutions by means of market regulation, the
cost of that protection will have to be borne by the people, if the financial institutions lack international
competitiveness. This would reduce the international competitiveness of Japanese firms and, in the end,
might only shackle the economic development of Japan. 
Following the Big Bang in the United Kingdom, the London market grew once again and
consolidated its status as a global market. It is true that in the process, capital of various origins found its
way  into  British  financial  institutions.  This,  however,  occurred  because  the  London  market  had  the
capacity to create new financial techniques, and obviously the subsequent revitalization of the market has
contributed to the development of the British economy. 
BIS Review   61/1997
- 9 -
In the end, financial institutions seem to have  no  choice  but  to  reinforce  their  financial
strength and enhance their competitiveness to survive tough competition. I strongly expect that financial
institutions in Japan will further strengthen their competitiveness  through  efforts  to  reform  themselves,
and I am convinced that they remain full of determination in this respect. 
Another  concern  in  Japan  has  been  that  if  deregulation  proceeds  further,  many  of  the
small  and  medium-sized  financial  institutions  will  find  their  business  base  taken  over  by  the  larger
institutions.  Looking  at  the  situation  in  Europe  and  the  United  States,  however,  I  feel  that  there  is  a
tendency for financial institutions to become specialized in the present financial environment. While it is
true that some financial institutions might seek to provide comprehensive financial services, they will not
be able to survive the severe competition by merely expanding the scale and  scope  of  their  operations.
Those institutions will also have to develop areas or niches in which they can be competitive to secure
the  base  for  their  existence.  It  is  thus  strongly  expected  that  each  financial  institution  will  advance  its
know-how  and  expertise  in  its  particular  areas  of  strength  so  as  to  provide  quality  financial  services.
While market reform in Japan will thus intensify competition  among  financial  institutions,  I  am  of  the
view that it will not directly cause the small and medium-sized financial institutions to lose their business
bases.
V. Conclusion
The  reform  of  the  financial  markets  involves  numerous  issues  besides  relaxation  and
removal  of  existing  regulations  and  improvement  of  the  institutional  framework  of  the  legal,  tax,  and
accounting systems. Review of public financing  and  adequate  regulation  and  supervision,  for  example,
are important considerations. The revision of the Bank of Japan Law should also be perceived as part of
the process of reform of the Japanese financial markets and the financial system. 
With regard to the revision of the Bank of Japan Law, a bill to amend the entire Law was
submitted  to  the  Diet  in  March  following  intense  deliberations  by  the  Central  Bank  Study  Group,  an
advisory  panel  to  the  Prime  Minister,  and  by  the  Financial  System  Research  Council,  an  advisory
committee to the Minister of Finance. The bill aims at establishing a new central bank system founded on
the  two  basic  principles  of  independence  and  transparency.  Underlying  the  amendment  proposal  is  the
perception  that  in  order  to  improve  the  efficacy  and  flexibility  of  monetary  policy  amid  the  changes
occurring in the global environment surrounding the Japanese financial markets, which I have discussed
today, the legislation based on which the Bank of Japan operates must be appropriate for a central bank
in the new age. 
I strongly hope that the bill will have a smooth passage following Diet deliberations. At
the same time, we at the Bank of Japan are determined to strengthen our efforts to reform the  Bank  to
ensure appropriate policy and operational management. 
In closing, I would like to ask for your continued understanding and cooperation.
BIS Review   61/1997
