Mr. Matsushita reports on a new framework  of  monetary  policy  under  the
new  Bank  of  Japan  Law      Speech  given  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  Mr.  Yasuo
Matsushita, to the Yomiuri International Economic Society in Tokyo on 27/6/97.
I.  Introduction
As  you  are  all  aware,  the  Diet  passed  the  new  Bank  of  Japan  Law  on  June  11,
which will come into effect on April 1, 1998.
It has been the perennial wish of the Bank of Japan to revise the current Bank of
Japan Law, which was legislated during World War II, to accommodate the significant changes
that  have  occurred  in  the  economic  and  financial  environment  and  to  make  the  Law  able  to
withstand  future  changes  in  the  environment.    Revision  of  the  Law  was  also  indispensable  for
rebuilding  the  entire  Japanese  financial  system  so  as  to  meet  global  standards.    This  revision
built  on  the  two  principles  of  independence  and  transparency  is  thus  a  notable  step  in  the  115
years of the Bank’s history and also for reforming the financial system of Japan.
The  Bank  of  Japan  Law  holds  great  significance  as  one  of  the  basic  laws
governing Japan’s economic and financial activities.  Looking back, this important revision was
achieved  in  approximately  one  year  from  the  start  of  discussions  in  spring  1996  owing  to  the
support  and  efforts  of  many  people,  including  Prime  Minister  Hashimoto,  Finance  Minister
Mitsuzuka,  and  other  government  officials,  members  of  parliament,  and  members  of  the
Advisory Group on the Central Bank (an advisory panel to the Prime Minister) and the Financial
System Research Council (an advisory committee to the Minister of Finance).  Many words of
encouragement  as  well  as  criticism  were  heard  from  the  financial  and  business  circles  and  the
general  public,  including  perhaps  some  of  you  who  are  here  today.    I  would  like  to  take  this
opportunity to express, on behalf of the Bank, our heartfelt gratitude to all.
Naturally,  the  reform  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  is  not  consummated  merely  by  the
revision of the Law.  We at the Bank of Japan believe it essential that we continue our efforts to
conduct  appropriate  policy  and  operational  management,  cognizant  of  the  responsibilities
entrusted to us by the people.  We are determined to promote, in line with the aim of the revision
of  the  Law,  wide-ranging  reforms  to  further  improve  the  transparency  of  policy  management
and the efficiency of the Bank’s operational management.
Today, I would first like to discuss recent monetary and economic conditions and
the  Bank’s  current  monetary  policy  management.    I  will  then  explain  the  new  framework  of
monetary policy under the new Law and how the Bank intends to manage monetary policy.
II.
Recent Monetary and Economic Conditions and Monetary Policy Management
A.        Recent economic and price developments and monetary policy management
I would like to start with the recent domestic economic condition.
Japan’s  economy  is  currently  at  a  phase  in  which  the  downward  pressures  of
fiscal tightening appear strongest, with personal consumption and housing investment declining
in reaction to the stepped-up demand before the consumption tax rate was raised.  However, in
view  of  the  firm  developments  in  production  and  improvements  in  corporate  profits  and
household income, the Bank judges that the economy continues to follow  a  moderate  recovery
BIS Review   82/1997
- 2 -
trend.    The  results  of  the  June  Tankan—Short-term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan,
which were released two days ago, for the most part confirmed this view.
The  question  is  whether  the  virtuous  circle  of  demand,  production,  and  income,
which  has  been  developing  steadily,  will  keep  its  momentum  and  whether,  as  a  result,  the
economy  will  gain  further  momentum  for  a  self-sustained  recovery  despite  the  downward
pressures of fiscal tightening.  The key to this will be developments in business fixed investment
and personal consumption, which, according to the Tankan results and other indicators,  can  be
analyzed as follows.
Firms’  projections  of  revenues  and  profits  and  their  plans  for  fixed  investment
indicate that recovery in business conditions will remain moderate for smaller firms, especially
for those in the non-manufacturing sector.  However, for firms as a whole, revenues and profits
continue to be on an upward trend, especially for major firms, supported by increasing exports
and buoyant demand for information technology-related goods and services.   Fixed  investment
plans are also being revised upward.  If this trend continues, the recovery in business conditions
can be expected to spread to smaller firms.
Employment  and  income  are  showing  moderate  but  steady  improvement,  and
bonus payments in summer 1997 are likely to enjoy a sizable rise.  While personal consumption
will inevitably be affected by the rise in the consumption tax rate and by the discontinuation of
the special tax reduction, it is unlikely that the trend of recovery will be hampered considering
the improvements in the income environment.
Thus,  the  virtuous  circle,  generated  by  a  recovery  in  private  demand,  is  still  at
work.    The  Bank  is,  therefore,  of  the  view  that  the  current  slowdown  in  demand  will  only  be
temporary  and  that  it  is  likely  that  the  economic  recovery  will  continue.    It  is,  however,
necessary to continue to monitor closely consumer behavior and business activity.
Prices remained virtually unchanged in April and May after the immediate effects
of the rise in the consumption tax rate are discounted.  The Bank will continue to monitor price
developments  closely,  but  expects  prices  to  remain  stable  for  some  time,  reflecting  the  recent
appreciation of the yen and stabilized crude oil prices.
In the management of current monetary policy, the Bank will continue to monitor
economic  developments  closely,  placing  emphasis  on  further  strengthening  the  foundations  of
the economic recovery.
B.  The thinking behind the Bank’s easy stance of monetary policy
I  have  heard  various  questions  and  criticisms  with  regard  to  the  easy  stance  of
monetary policy, which the Bank has continued with a view to strengthening the foundations of
the economic recovery.  Therefore, I would next like to share with you the thinking behind the
current stance of monetary policy.
First,  there  is  the  question  of  why  the  Bank  has  not  changed  its  policy  stance
since 1995, when it lowered the official discount rate to 0.5 percent, despite a gradual recovery
of the economy.
Indeed, compared to 1995, concern  about  a  deflationary  spiral  has  subsided  and
economic  activity  has  improved  significantly.    The  purpose  of  the  drastic  monetary  easing
BIS Review   82/1997
- 3 -
measures was to prevent an occurrence of a deflationary spiral, to strengthen the confidence of
firms and households in the economic outlook, and to thereby place the Japanese economy on a
path of self-sustained recovery.
As you are aware, the Japanese economy is faced with the medium to long-term
challenges  of  overcoming  the  after-effects  of  the  bursting  of  the  economic  “bubble”  and
reforming its industrial structure.  The economy has therefore  had  to  achieve  a  recovery  while
addressing these weighty challenges.  Further, since the latter half of 1996, measures for fiscal
consolidation  have  been  implemented,  including  a  reducing  of  public-sector  investment  and  a
raising  of  the  consumption  tax  rate.    In  order  for  the  economy  to  attain  noninflationary,
sustainable growth under such circumstances, the forces of the self-sustained recovery achieved
in the private sector need to be further strengthened.  It is therefore the Bank’s judgment that, at
this point, it is necessary to monitor economic developments carefully bearing this in mind.
Second, there has been criticism that, from the viewpoint of income distribution,
the current low interest rates are putting the general public at a disadvantage.  The Bank is fully
aware  of  the  difficult  situation  faced  by  those  households  which  depend  heavily  on  interest
income.    However,  various  types  of  income,  whether  it  be  wages,  interest,  or  pensions,  are
distributed from the total output produced by economic activity.  Therefore, without growth of
the total output, sources of such income will not be generated.  If the policy interest rate is raised
before  economic  activity  is  sufficiently  revitalized  and,  as  a  result,  the  economy  is  adversely
affected, long-term interest rates may actually decline.  It will then  be  difficult  to  say  how  the
average  level  of  short  and  long-term  deposit  interest  rates  will  be  affected.    What  I  wish  to
emphasize is that in order for the overall level of interest rates to rise, there must have been the
requisite improvement in the economic activity.
Third, there have been concerns that low interest rates may encourage an outflow
of domestic funds.  In discussing this point, it must be remembered that the relationship between
cross-border interest rate differentials and capital flows under the present floating exchange rate
system differs from that under the fixed exchange rate system.
Under the latter, there is no foreign exchange risk.  Therefore, funds tend to flow
to  economies  with  higher  interest  rates.    This  is  precisely  why,  under  that  system,  strict
regulation of capital flows was necessary.
Under  the  floating  exchange  rate  system,  however,  such  capital  flows  do  not
necessarily  occur.    Even  if  one  attempts  to  profit  from  a  differential  between  domestic  and
overseas  interest  rates,  the  profit  can  be  wiped  out  instantly  with  even  a  slight  shift  in  the
exchange rate.  For example, if  overseas  interest  rates  rise,  widening  interest  rate  differentials,
capital outflows may initially occur, causing the foreign currency to appreciate and the domestic
currency to depreciate.  After some time, however, expectations will emerge that the value of the
foreign  currency  will  start  to  decline.    At  that  point,  the  benefits  of  investing  in  the  foreign
currency  will  have  decreased  significantly.    Thus,  when  foreign  exchange  risk  is  taken  into
consideration, a situation in which the expected rate of return on foreign currency investment is
substantially higher than that on domestic investment cannot be sustained.
Under  the  floating  exchange  rate  system,  therefore,  exchange  rate  fluctuations
will  apply  the  brakes  to  any  one-sided  capital  flow.    The  long-term  interest  rate  differential
between  Japan  and  the  United  States  has  been  around  2  to  4  percent  in  recent  years,  and  has
widened in this time.  It is true that during this time investment in foreign bonds has increased.
BIS Review   82/1997
- 4 -
Yet  this  has  not  depleted  funds  in  Japan  or  caused  domestic  interest  rates  to  remain  at  a  high
level.
With  global  capital  flows  as  active  as  they  are  today,  the  mechanism  of  the
floating exchange rate system will function only more expeditiously.  In other words, the speed
of market adjustments has accelerated.  What is critical in these circumstances is the occurrence
of  a  capital  flight,  which  may  be  triggered  by  a  loss  of  market  confidence  in  a  country’s
economic policy management resulting from an inflation or recession in that country.  In order
to prevent this from occurring in Japan today, it is essential to strengthen the foundations of the
economic recovery and to achieve noninflationary, sustainable growth.
In  this  connection,  some  argue  that  the  revision  of  the  Foreign  Exchange  and
Foreign Trade Control Law, together with the low interest rates, may accelerate capital outflow.
The Bank intends to monitor carefully the effects of the revision on the markets.  However, as I
have  just  explained,  the  Bank  believes  that  there  is  little  possibility  of  a  disruptive  capital
outflow occurring simply as a result of the interest rate differentials between Japan and abroad.
Rather,  a  more  serious  problem  to  consider  would  be  the  emergence  of  a  “transaction  flight.”
Should market participants decide for certain reasons that overseas markets are  more  attractive
and beneficial to the conducting of transactions, even financial and capital transactions between
residents,  which  have  conventionally  been  conducted  in  Japan—for  example,  securities
transactions  between  domestic  firms  and  households—may  shift  overseas.    Although  this  will
not  induce  an  outflow  of  capital,  transactions  will  be  carried  out  abroad  and  the  subsequent
business opportunities will be transferred overseas.  Should this trend continue, it might lead to a
hollowing out of Japan’s financial markets.  This is why the “Big  Bang”  deregulation  package
must  be  implemented  apace  with  the  revision  of  the  Foreign  Exchange  and  Foreign  Trade
Control Law, to enhance the attractiveness of domestic financial markets and services.
III.  The New Framework of Monetary Policy under the New Bank of Japan Law
To summarize what I have said so far, the Bank of Japan is managing monetary
policy  with  a  view  to  placing  the  Japanese  economy  on  a  path  of  noninflationary,  sustainable
growth.
While  this  has  always  been  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  under  the  current
Bank of Japan Law, it is stipulated more explicitly by the new Law, which will come into effect
on April 1, 1998.  Various revisions have also been incorporated in the new Law to ensure the
achievement  of  this  objective.    I  would,  therefore,  like  to  discuss  the  new  framework  of
monetary policy under the new Bank of Japan Law and how we intend to make use of the new
framework,  firstly  with  regard  to  the  objectives,  secondly  the  instruments,  and  finally  the
management of monetary policy, including the decision-making procedures.
A.  Monetary Policy Objectives
1.  Price stability
I would first like to discuss the objectives of monetary policy.
The new Bank of Japan Law stipulates that the objective of monetary policy is “to
contribute  to  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy  through  the  pursuit  of  price
stability.”    The  sound  development  of  the  national  economy  is  a  common  objective  of  all
economic policies.  As the objective of monetary policy  is  to  contribute  to  the  achievement  of
BIS Review   82/1997
- 5 -
this ultimate objective through price stability, its direct objective will be to ensure price stability.
Price stability, together with the stability of the financial system, is a precondition for money to
smoothly perform its intrinsic functions.  As the issuer and controller of money, maintenance of
price stability is an inherent role of the central bank.
It is, however, not easy to define price stability.  There are diverse types of price
indicators:  for  example,  the  Consumer  Price  Index,  Wholesale  Price  Indexes,  and  the  GDP
deflator.    Each  of  these  has  its  limitation,  such  as  the  range  of  items  covered  or  the  timing  of
release.  Further, many studies have been conducted more recently on the possibility that these
indicators  offer  a  substantially  biased  measurement  of  prices.    Even  with  a  perfectly  reliable
price  indicator,  there  will  still  be  disparate  views  regarding  what  specific  percentage  of  price
increases would be acceptable.
Thus, it is difficult to define specifically what is meant by price stability.  We at
the  Bank  will  continue  to  study  this  issue,  including  the  interpretation  of  price  indices.    It
becomes clearer, however, if the matter is considered from the viewpoint of the implications of
price stability for economic activity.
“Prices”, sometimes referred to as “prices in general”, are the average level of the
prices of individual goods and services, and serve as a tool to measure the relative rise or fall in
the  price  of  individual  goods  and  services.    Therefore,  if  prices  in  general  were  to  fluctuate
significantly,  firms  and  households  would  not  be  able  to  conduct  efficient  investment  and
consumption activity.
For  example,  in  an  inflationary  economy,  even  if  the  price  of  a  firm’s  product
rises, the firm will not be able to judge whether this will bring about increased earnings in the
future, or whether it merely reflects a rise in prices in general with the price increase being offset
by an increase in wages and cost of raw materials.  In such an economy, firms will, in the long
term, inevitably become cautious with their investments.  Furthermore, when there are concerns
about inflation, people will tend to curtail their spending.  The same situation may arise in  the
case  of  a  deflationary  economy.    One  possible  example  was  the  Japanese  economy  in  1995,
when there were concerns about a deflationary spiral.
This  line  of  thinking  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  ensuring  price  stability  means
maintaining a situation in which firms and households need not be concerned about a continuing
rise or fall in prices in the future when planning their investment and consumption.
2.  The relationship between price stability and the economy
Having defined price stability, there may still be questions about the relationship
between  price  stability  and  other  important  policy  objectives  or  economic  variables.    For
example, should we not care about the economy and economic growth as long as prices remain
stable?  What is the relationship between prices and foreign exchange rates or asset prices?
First,  with  regard  to  the  relationship  between  prices  and  the  economy,  it  is  true
that in the short term, it seems as if higher economic growth could be realized if a certain level
of  price  increase  were  allowed.    However,  it  has  recently  been  proved  both  theoretically  and
empirically that this effect will only be temporary.
If  such  a  process  is  repeated,  the  economy  may  well  fall  into  an  intractable
situation  of  stagflation,  in  which  the  economy  falls  back  into  a  recession  but  high  inflation
BIS Review   82/1997
- 6 -
remains.  This was the economic disease that plagued the industrialized countries of Europe and
the United States from the mid-1970s to the early 1980s.  In the light of that experience, there is
a  common  understanding  today  that  price  stability  is  a  precondition  for  sustainable  economic
growth.
Second, how are foreign exchange  rates  and  asset  prices  to  be  considered  in  the
context of monetary policy management?  They are important factors that require due attention.
However,  if  their  stability  is  made  a  direct  objective  of  monetary  policy,  the  stability  of  the
domestic economy and of prices in general may be undermined.  This is because land prices and
exchange  rates  reflect  certain  factors  which  prices  in  general  do  not.    Specifically,  land  prices
incorporate  changes  in  the  productivity  of  land  and  in  the  expected  rate  of  return.    Exchange
rates,  in  the  long  term,  are  adjusted  by  the  market  mechanism  in  accordance  with  the
differentials  between  domestic  and  overseas  inflation  rates,  or  in  other  words,  changes  in  the
purchasing power parities.  Any attempt to control such factors forcibly through macroeconomic
policies will most likely cause distortions in other sectors of the economy.
Needless  to  say,  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates  and  asset  prices  will  affect  the
economy in various ways.  It has been a valuable lesson of the bubble economy that significant
fluctuations in asset prices may be a sign of some irregularities in economic activity or excessive
expectations of economic entities.  Therefore, while it would not be appropriate to attempt any
rigid control of asset prices and exchange rates, the Bank will pay due attention to developments
in them in managing monetary policy aimed at achieving the objective of price stability.
B.  Monetary policy instruments
Let  me  next  discuss  the  instruments  of  monetary  policy  under  the  new  Bank  of
Japan Law.
Economic textbooks often refer to (1) the official discount rate, (2) open market
operations, and (3) reserve requirements as the three major monetary policy instruments.  These
are in fact the means with which the Bank of Japan implements monetary policy, and this will
remain unchanged under the new Law.  The revised Law, however, incorporates the following
changes.
First, the new Law explicitly stipulates that “guidelines for money market control
through various measures such as buying and selling of bills or bonds”—that is, the Bank’s basic
policy for open market operations, or in other words, the Bank’s policy for the guiding of money
market rates—are to be decided by the Bank of Japan’s Policy Board, while in the current Law,
there is no explicit stipulation concerning such policy.
Second,  while  the  current  Law  stipulates  that  determination  and  altering  of
reserve requirements must be approved by the Minister of Finance, the new Law abolishes this
approval system.
With these changes, all three instruments of monetary policy—including official
discount rate policy, which is already stipulated by the current Law as a matter for decision by
the Policy Board——will be spelt out explicitly as matters to be decided by the Policy Board.
Reserve  requirements  have  been  altered  less  frequently  as  the  means  of  open
market  operations  developed.    I  would  therefore  like  to  discuss  in  detail  the  historical
background and the Bank’s view of official discount rate changes and of the guiding of money
BIS Review   82/1997
- 7 -
market  rates,  with  emphasis  on  how  the  Bank  will  utilize  these  two  means  of  implementing
monetary policy.
1.  Relationship between official discount rate changes and the guiding of money market rates
For  many  years,  monetary  policy  was  in  most  cases  implemented  in  Japan  by
changing the official discount rate.  This was because the financial markets were not sufficiently
developed and, under these circumstances, deposit interest rates and lending rates were linked to
the official discount rate.
The situation changed gradually from the 1980s.  The financial markets began to
grow  both  in  quality  and  quantity,  with  massive  issuance  of  government  securities  and
introduction of new financial instruments such as certificates of deposit (CDs) and commercial
paper  (CP).    As  a  result,  interest  rates  started  to  fluctuate  freely  reflecting  the  supply  and
demand  conditions  for  funds,  and  accordingly,  an  environment  was  established  in  which  the
effects of monetary policy would permeate via market interest rates.
In  response  to  such  changes  in  the  financial  markets,  the  Bank  has  devised
various changes to its monetary policy management.  For example, in the buying and selling of
bills and bonds, the Bank abolished the system of conducting operations at the rate quoted by the
Bank, and adopted a more transparent bidding system.  The Bank also improved the efficiency
of its market operations by shortening the lag between the announcement of operations and the
settlement of funds.  In 1991, the Bank abolished window guidance, a method in which the Bank
gave direct guidance to financial institutions regarding the amount by which they increased their
lendings, and provided for an environment in which the functions of interest rates could be used
to influence the behavior of financial institutions.
In addition, in 1994,  deregulation  of  deposit  interest  rates  was  completed.    This
meant that the official discount rate no longer performed the role of directly bringing changes to
deposit  interest  rates  and  lending  rates,  and  instead,  the  significance  of  the  guiding  of  money
market rates increased.
Consequently,  on  March  31,  1995,  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  system  to  utilize
the  guiding  of  money  market  rates  as  a  means  of  monetary  policy  which  is,  by  itself,  as
significant as the official discount rate.  This is a system whereby the Bank publicly announces
its policy for market operations after it has been approved by the Policy  Board.    The  policy  is
stated with regard  to  the  guiding  level  of  overnight  call  money  rates,  the  Bank’s  target  rate  in
market operations.  For example, the Bank might state that it “expects that the call money rate
will remain on average slightly below the official discount rate.”
While this method of monetary policy implementation  had  already  taken  root  in
the United States, it was the first attempt for Japan back in March 1995.  At the time of this first
attempt, it so happened that Germany had lowered its official discount rate a day earlier, and it
cannot  be  denied  that  the  market  could  not  quite  understand  and  assimilate  the  Bank’s  policy
intention.  The Bank’s use of the guiding of money market rates, however, has gradually gained
understanding and has taken root in Japan as well.  In fact, when the Bank encouraged a decline
in  the  market  rates  on  July  7,  1995,  the  policy  intent  permeated  smoothly  through  the  market
without causing any confusion.
BIS Review   82/1997
- 8 -
The  provision  of  the  new  Law  stating  that  the  policy  for  the  guiding  of  money
market  rates  be  determined  by  the  Policy  Board  reinforces  the  recent  emphasis  placed  by  the
Bank on the market mechanism.
What  significance,  then,  will  the  official  discount  rate  have  in  this  age  of
marketization?  Central banks overseas hold various views as to the relationship between official
discount  rate  changes  and  the  guiding  of  money  market  rates,  and  it  is  difficult  to  arrive  at  a
single conclusion.
However, examples overseas suggest that official discount rate changes continue
to play an important role even in this age of economic and financial marketization and interest
rate  liberalization.    Their  function  is  to  communicate  plainly  to  everybody  the  changes  in
monetary  policy.    In  order  to  maintain  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy  amid  the  progress  of
marketization, it becomes even more necessary to win public understanding of and confidence in
the central bank’s economic outlook and the thinking behind its monetary  policy  management.
In  this  regard,  the  easy-to-understand  announcement  effects  of  the  official  discount  rate  are
valuable for monetary policy management based on the functioning of the market mechanism.
I am sometimes asked which of the two would be employed first, the guiding of
money market rates or official discount rate change.  However, there is no fixed rule as to which
should  be  implemented  first.    In  some  cases,  the  Bank  may  change  the  level  it  has  set  for  the
guiding of money  market  rates  several  times  before  changing  the  official  discount  rate,  and  in
other  cases,  the  Bank  may  first  strongly  indicate  its  policy  intention  by  changing  the  official
discount rate, and then guide the money market rates accordingly.
For  the  reasons  I  have  just  explained,  the  Bank  believes  it  necessary  to  make
effective use of both official discount rate changes and the guiding of money market rates.
C.  Monetary policy management
1.  Strengthening of the functions of the Policy Board
I  would  now  like  to  discuss  monetary  policy  management,  focusing  on  the
decision-making process of monetary policy.
The new Bank of Japan Law incorporates major revisions aimed at strengthening
the functions of the Policy Board, the Bank of Japan’s highest decision-making body.
First,  the  composition  of  the  Board  is  altered  significantly.    The  current  Policy
Board consists of seven members: the Governor of the Bank of Japan, four appointed members,
and  two  government  members  without  voting  rights,  representing  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and
the Economic Planning Agency.  The new Policy Board, however, will consist of nine members:
the Governor and the two Deputy Governors of the Bank of Japan and six deliberative members.
The  main  features  of  the  changes  are  that,  first,  there  will  be  no  government
members  on  the  Board.    Second,  while  the  current  appointed  members  must  be  selected  from
each  of  the  four  fields  of  city  banking,  regional  banking,  commerce  and  industry,  and
agriculture,  the  new  deliberative  members  can  be  selected  from  among  a  much  broader
population,  without  any  restriction  on  the  fields  they  represent,  so  long  as  they  are  experts,
including  those  on  economy  or  finance.    Third,  in  order  to  ensure  interactive  linkage  between
monetary  policy  decision-making  and  the  Bank’s  business  operations,  the  number  of  members
BIS Review   82/1997
- 9 -
from  the  management  of  the  Bank  is  increased  from  one  to  three.    A  balance  is  to  be  struck,
however,  by  appointing  six  deliberative  members  so  that  the  three  members  from  the
management will not constitute the majority.
Also,  the  powers  of  the  Policy  Board,  which  remained  somewhat  ambiguous
under  the  current  Law,  are  clarified.    One  example  is  the  explicit  stipulation  of  the  three
instruments of monetary policy as matters for decision by the  Policy  Board,  which  I  discussed
earlier.
In addition to these revisions, we at the Bank will do our best to ensure that  the
Policy Board can fully function.
For  example,  meetings  of  the  executive  are  currently  organized  at  the  Bank  of
Japan pursuant to the Bank’s by-laws.  The meetings are attended by the Governor, the Deputy
Governor, and the Executive Directors, and, as the executive body of the Bank, meets to discuss
important matters related to the Bank’s daily business operations and to deliberate on matters on
which  it  needs  to  consult  with  the  Policy  Board.    The  meetings  thus  by  no  means  represent
decision-making opportunities.  However, the holding of the meetings has invited criticism that
the  Bank  perhaps  has  two  decision-making  processes.    Under  the  new  Law,  therefore,  the
meetings  will  be  abolished  to  prevent  any  misunderstanding  regarding  the  procedures  of
monetary policy decision-making.
As  a  result,  meetings  of  the  executive  will  not  deliberate  on  monetary  control
issues before they are discussed by the Policy Board.  The entire procedure related to monetary
policy, from judging  the  economic  and  financial  conditions  to  policy  decision-making,  will  be
concentrated at the Policy Board.
2.  Holding of regular Policy Board meetings on monetary control matters
With the  powers  of  the  Policy  Board  strengthened  in  this  manner,  the  new  Law
provides  for  regular  meetings  of  the  Policy  Board  on  monetary  control  matters  as  well  as
disclosure  of  summaries  of  discussions  and  transcripts  (detailed  records  of  discussions)  of  the
meetings.
The  main  aim  of  holding  regular  Policy  Board  meetings  on  monetary  control
matters is to ensure the stability of the financial markets.
Currently,  the  Policy  Board  meets  every  Tuesday  and  Friday.    However,  the
holding of ad hoc meetings means that there is the possibility that policy changes might be made
at  any  time.    That  being  the  case,  the  markets  inevitably  become  overly  sensitive  to  various
kinds of information, such as daily movements in economic indicators and individual statements
by  relevant  people.    In  fact,  on  quite  a  few  occasions,  one  piece  of  information  has  triggered
speculation over monetary policy changes, leading to market disruption.
It  is  indeed  an  intrinsic  function  of  the  financial  markets  to  assimilate  various
kinds  of  information  and  to  reflect  them  in  the  formation  of  interest  rates.    In  order  for  this
function to be played out in the most stable and efficient manner, however, it is important that
undue speculation and market disruption be avoided.  This will also be conducive to improving
the efficacy of monetary policy.
BIS Review   82/1997
- 10 -
The new system of holding regular Board meetings on monetary control matters
and  of  announcing  the  schedule  of  such  meetings  in  advance  has  been  devised  based  on  such
considerations.
In  determining  the  frequency  of  these  regular  meetings,  due  thought  must  be
given  to  ensuring  the  timeliness  of  policy  implementation  as  well  as  market  stabilization.
Although  there  is  no  need  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  ad  hoc  meetings,  monetary  policy
decisions should in principle be made at the regular meetings in keeping with the purpose of the
new  system.    If  we  look  at  the  practices  of  other  countries,  the  U.S.  Federal  Open  Market
Committee  meets  the  least  often  at  eight  times  a  year,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the
Bank of England once a month, and the Central Bank Council of the German Bundesbank twice
a month.  The Bank will continue to study how best to run the Board meetings by considering
such examples overseas and the aim of the new system.
If I may add a word here, Policy Board meetings other than the regular meetings
on monetary control matters will be held as necessary.  Apart from  determination  of  monetary
policy,  the  Policy  Board  will  also  discuss  and  decide  on  a  number  of  matters,  such  as  issues
related  to  the  financial  and  payments  systems  as  well  as  those  related  to  the  operational  and
organizational management of the Bank.  The Policy Board currently meets twice weekly, and it
is  likely  to  meet  frequently  under  the  new  Law  as  well.    What  is  of  special  note  in  the  new
system  is  that,  while  Policy  Board  meetings  will  be  held  frequently,  the  opportunities  to  hold
intensive discussions and decide on monetary control matters are specified.
3.  Disclosure of summaries of discussions and transcripts of Policy Board meetings
I  would  now  like  to  explain  the  new  disclosure  system  of  summaries  of
discussions and transcripts of the regular Policy Board meetings on monetary control matters.
One of the main principles underlying the  revision  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Law  is
improvement of the transparency of monetary policy.  To this end, the new Law provides for the
disclosure  of  the  summaries  of  discussions  and  the  transcripts  of  the  regular  Policy  Board
meetings on monetary control matters.
Disclosure  of  the  summaries  of  discussions  is  aimed  at  gaining  more  fully  the
understanding and confidence of the market and the public regarding the Bank’s basic thinking
underlying its monetary policy.  The Bank, therefore, intends to prepare accurate and clear-cut
summaries  of  the  Board’s  discussions  on  monetary  and  economic  conditions  and  on  monetary
policy.
The  difficult  issue  is  the  timing  of  disclosure.    Considering  the  purpose  of  the
disclosure, it is desirable that the summaries of discussions be disclosed at the earliest possible
moment.    Yet,  it  would  only  be  counterproductive  should  the  disclosure  invite  market
speculation or disruption.  For example, let us assume that at a meeting held at the beginning of
a month, heated discussions are held on the projected movement of an indicator which is to be
released at the end of the month.  If the summary of such discussions were disclosed before the
release of the indicator, it might heighten speculation over future policy management.  However,
the  summary  should  not  be  made  ambiguous  with  the  intention  of  avoiding  such  speculation.
Therefore, the Bank will have to consider the earliest disclosure that will not undermine market
stability.  In the United States, the summary of discussions is disclosed approximately one to one
and  a  half  months  after  the  meeting,  and  in  the  United  Kingdom,  within  six  weeks.    These
BIS Review   82/1997
- 11 -
timings  probably  reflect  the  central  banks’  desire  to  avoid  undue  speculation  over  discussions
and policy decisions at future meetings.
The transcripts of discussions at the meetings will have a somewhat different role
from the summaries, although both are meant to enhance  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy.
While  the  summaries  of  discussions  seek  to  promote  better  understanding  of  current  policy
management, the transcripts are a tool to enable a detailed review at a later date, as necessary, of
the Policy Board’s policy management at a certain point in time.  On the one hand, due attention
must be given to ensuring that the disclosure of the transcripts does not hamper free and frank
discussions at Policy  Board  meetings.    On  the  other  hand,  however,  if  the  disclosure  is  overly
delayed, the significance of the disclosure may be greatly reduced.  With these points in mind,
the  Bank  intends  to  establish  an  effective  disclosure  system  that  makes  the  Bank  sufficiently
accountable to the public.
The  Bank  has,  to  date,  endeavored  to  explain  as  clearly  as  possible  the  basic
thinking behind its monetary policy management at regular press conferences, before the Diet, in
publications, in speeches,  and  at  various  other  opportunities.    Disclosure  of  the  transcripts  and
the  summaries  of  discussions  of  the  Policy  Board  are  added  to  these  measures  under  the  new
Law, and this will equip the Bank of Japan with means that go beyond global standards to ensure
the  transparency  of  monetary  policy.    We  at  the  Bank  intend  to  make  effective  use  of  these
means  to  win  even  greater  public  understanding  of  and  confidence  in  the  Bank’s  policy
management.
4.  Relationship between the central bank and the Government
Lastly, I would like to discuss the relationship between the Bank of Japan and the
Government.  The new Law allows Government representatives to attend Policy Board meetings
on  monetary  control  matters  and  to  express  their  views  when  necessary.    It  also  grants  the
Government  representatives  the  right  to  make  policy  proposals  regarding  monetary  control
matters,  including  requests  to  postpone  the  Board’s  vote  on  policies.    Some  suggest  that  these
provisions will constrain the independence of the central bank.  We at the Bank, however, do not
take that view.
First of all, the monetary policy of the Bank of Japan is designed to contribute to
the sound development of the national economy in conjunction with the economic policy of the
Government.    The  Bank  therefore  needs  to  ensure  adequate  communication  with  the
Government in managing monetary policy, although the policy must be decided by the Bank on
its own responsibility and judgment.
What is important is that the relationship between the Bank and the Government
in  the  determination  of  monetary  policy  be  clear  and  transparent,  and  therefore  under  the  new
system, the Government’s views and the discussions and votes on Government proposals will be
disclosed in the summaries of discussions.  In addition, although the Government representatives
have  the  right  to  “request”  a  postponement  of  the  Board’s  vote,  they  do  not  have  the  right  to
“instruct.”  Whether to postpone the vote on policies as requested will be determined by a vote
by the Policy Board.
This  new  system  is  designed  carefully  from  the  viewpoint  of  ensuring  the
autonomy  of  the  central  bank  in  monetary  policy  management  while  also  ensuring  adequate
communication  between  the  Bank  and  the  Government.    We  at  the  Bank  intend  to  establish  a
clear, transparent, and constructive relationship with the Government to serve the purpose of the
BIS Review   82/1997
- 12 -
new  system,  believing  that  such  a  relationship  will  not  interfere  with  the  central  bank’s
autonomy.
IV.  Conclusion
I  hope  that  I  have  been  able  to  make  clear  how  specifically  the  two  main
principles of the new Bank of Japan Law, independence and transparency, will be embedded in
the new central bank system.
As I stated at the outset, the Bank intends to implement all possible measures as
part of the Bank’s self-reform even before the new Law is effected, to accommodate the aims of
the new Law.  The Bank is currently studying a concrete mechanism for holding regular Policy
Board meetings on monetary control matters and for disclosing the summaries of discussions at
those meetings, which will be implemented as soon as preparations are completed.
I wish to conclude by asking for your continued understanding and support.
BIS Review   82/1997
