Mr.  George  looks  at  the  question  as  to  whether  banks  are  still  special
Speech  given  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mr.  E.A.J.  George,  at  the  IMF  7th
Central  Banking  Seminar  entitled  Banking  Soundness  and  Monetary  Policy  in  a  World  of
Capital Markets and held in Washington on 29/1/97.
Mr.  Chairman,  I  am  delighted  to  take  part  in  this  well-directed  and  well-timed
seminar.  I am particularly pleased to be able to share with you my thoughts on the question you
put  to  me  “Are  banks  still  special?”    That  question  is  partly  a  matter  of  institutional  fact;  but
beyond  that  lies  the  question  of  whether  the  institutional  characteristics  of  banks  still  justify
central  banks’  special  concern  for  the  stability  of  the  banking  system  reflected  in  both  macro-
and micro-prudential oversight and in their role as lender of last resort.  So the answers to those
questions could have far-reaching implications for the role of central banks themselves.
In offering my answers I will ask, first, why banks have been regarded as special?
Then I will ask whether banks have changed, or whether other financial institutions have become
more bank-like?  I will save my conclusions until the end!  I am conscious, in this international
forum, that I speak from a British perspective -  in  terms  of  the  institutional  and  legal  contexts
and their evolution in relation to banks.  But I would hope that, while some of the detail may be
specific to the UK, the broad substance will not be.
In what ways have banks been regarded as special?
Let  me  begin  then  by  discussing  why,  and  in  what  senses,  banks  have  been
regarded as special.
The term bank, historically and more than ever today, covers a multitude of sins.
In  practice  it  refers  to  a  range  of  very  different  institutions  which  may,  and  do,  within  legal
restraints,  engage  in  a  variety  of  different  financial  -  and  even  some  non-financial  -  activities
whether on their own account or in an agency or advisory capacity.  But banks have some key
distinguishing  characteristics  in  common.    In  particular  they  take  unsecured  deposits  from  the
public at large.
The particular characteristics of bank deposits are that they are capital certain and
(more  or  less)  immediately  accessible  to  the  depositor,  so  that  they  came  to  be  used  as  the
principal  means  of  making  payments.    In  short,  because  of  their  convenience,  bank  deposits
became the predominant repository for the immediately  liquid  asset  holdings  of  the  rest  of  the
economy, and the predominant form of  money.
The  attraction  of  these  deposit  and  payments  services  depends  upon  depositors
generally having a high degree of confidence that their funds will in fact be available on demand
and it depends upon the cost of the services.  In providing the services, therefore, the banks need
to strike a balance between deploying their deposits in low-yielding, high quality, liquid assets to
meet cash withdrawals, and riskier investments to generate a higher return.  In this latter context
banks  have  traditionally  played  a  key  role  in  financing  the  corporate  and  household  sectors,
earning  their  return  by  gathering  information  about,  and  assessing  and  monitoring,  the
creditworthiness  of  private  sector  borrowers,  especially  those  who  do  not  or  cannot
cost-effectively provide the comprehensive, public, information that would allow them to access
the capital markets.  Much of the banks’ lending, while nominally at short-term, for example in
the  form  of  callable  overdrafts,  is  in  practice  illiquid  and  non-marketable.    So  a  further
BIS Review   13/1997
- 2 -
distinctive characteristic of banks is that they typically function with a mismatch between their
highly liquid liabilities and their less liquid, non-marketable, assets.
There is no need, I think, to labour the importance to the economy as a whole of
these distinctive banking functions, or the damage that would be caused if  the  banks’  role  -  as
the  repository  of  liquidity,  as  the  core  payments  mechanism,  and  as  the  principal  source  of
finance to at least a large part of the economy - were seriously interrupted.  That in itself helps to
explain  the  public  interest  in  the  effective  functioning  of  the  banking  system,  or  why  banks
collectively have been regarded as  special.
But  beyond  that,  the  distinctive  banking  characteristics  that  I  have  described,  of
liquid liabilities and less liquid assets, give rise to special needs.
Given  the  banks’  role  in  the  payments  system  they  may  need  late  access  to
liquidity to square their positions vis-à-vis  each  other  after  executing  payments  instructions  on
behalf  of  their  customers.    This  explains  why,  in  their  routine  monetary  operations  to  relieve
shortages  in  the  money-market,  central  banks  in  many  countries  tend  to  confine  their  (late)
lending  to  banks  even  when  they  accept  a  wider  range  of  counterparties  in  providing  liquidity
through open market operations.
The same distinctive characteristics make banks especially dependent upon public
confidence.    Bank  depositors  are  not  generally  in  a  position  to  monitor  or  assess  the  financial
condition of their bank, so that any suggestion that a particular bank may not be in a position to
meet its liabilities is likely to lead to the panic withdrawal of its deposits.  This can precipitate
the suspension of payments as a result of lack of liquidity even when a bank is solvent as a going
concern;    and  the  forced  realisation  of  illiquid  assets  may  in  itself  result  in  insolvency.
Moreover,  any  suggestion  that  one  bank  is  in  trouble  may  be  taken  -  perhaps  wholly
unjustifiably - as evidence that other banks are likely to  be  facing  similar  problems,  especially
when they are engaged in similar activities.  Bank runs can for this reason become contagious.
And the risk of contagion is increased by inter-bank exposures, including those arising from the
banks’ role in the payments system.  So the  special  nature of banks has reflected not just their
distinctive functions, and the importance of those functions to the wider economy, but also their
peculiar  vulnerability  to  liquidity  pressures.    Central  banks  evolved  in  response  to  this
vulnerability, which gave rise to a readiness to act as lender of last resort to the banking system
in situations in which substantial systemic disturbance could otherwise occur and to an on-going
concern for the macro-prudential characteristics of the banking system.  And while this concern
relates to the banking system as a whole, last resort assistance, when it is judged to be necessary,
is extended to individual banks because problems of course arise in the first instance at the level
of the individual bank.
Now, the fact that central banks (in conjunction as  necessary  with  governments)
are  prepared,  in  certain  circumstances,  to  extend  support  in  this  way  encourages  bank
intermediation;    it  represents  in  effect  a  form  of  subsidy,  implicitly  justified  as  being  in  the
wider interest of the economy.  It helps to preserve public confidence;  and it enables the banks
to  take  on  more  maturity  transformation  or  risk  than  they  could  otherwise,  so  lowering  the
effective  cost  of  their  intermediation.    But  it  has  long  been  recognised  that  if  central  bank
support is made available too liberally - in situations where there is no genuine systemic risk, so
that it comes to be relied upon as a matter of course, then that would give rise to  moral hazard.
The extent of bank intermediation would be unjustifiably expanded.  On the one hand, the banks
themselves may be encouraged to take on excessive risks;  while, on the other, depositors may
be  encouraged  to  ignore  risk  and  to  become  literally  care-less  as  to  where  they  place  their
BIS Review   13/1997
- 3 -
deposits.    So,  both  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking  system,  and  its  competitive
efficiency, and that of the financial system more generally, may be undermined.
Central banks’ macro-prudential concerns for the stability of the banking system
have  necessarily  meant  that  they  have  taken  a  close  interest  in  the  risk  characteristics  of
individual banks as the component parts of the system.  But more recently (at least in the UK -
with  the  coming  into  force  of  the  first  Banking  Act  in  1979)  individual  banks  were  brought
under  formal  banking  supervision  for  the  first  time,  and  non-bank  depositors  provided  with
limited deposit insurance.  Such micro-prudential supervision of each individual bank, of course,
also  helps  to  reduce  the  risk  of  instability  in  the  system  as  a  whole,  and  even  limited  deposit
protection  may  reduce  the  risk  of  bank  runs,  at  least  in  the  form  of  the  sudden  withdrawal  of
retail deposits.  This, too, of course, can give rise to moral hazard problems if it is perceived as
tantamount  to  a  guarantee.    But  micro-prudential  supervision  and  deposit  insurance  were
introduced  in  the  UK  at  least  (though  not  in  the  US)  with  the  distinct,  social,  purpose  of
providing  individual,  small,  depositors  with  a  degree  of  protection  against  the  sudden  loss  of
their principal liquid asset holdings.  This made banks, and bank deposits, special in a different
sense insofar as similar formal supervision and asset protection were not (at that time) extended
to other financial intermediaries or their liabilities.
These then are the respects in which banks have hitherto been regarded as special.
Let me now move on to consider whether, or to what extent, the banks have kept their distinctive
characteristics,  or 
institutions  have  developed  similar
characteristics so that banks are no longer special in that sense.
to  what  extent  other  financial 
To what extent have banks changed?
It  is  certainly  true,  as  I  noted  earlier,  that  banks  engage  in  a  range  of  financial
activities besides those which I have described as distinctively  banking  activities.  Major banks
everywhere  have  increasingly  diversified  the  products  and  services  they  offer,  built  up
investment  banking  businesses  and  trading  activities,  extended  into  life  insurance,  and  so  on,
sometimes  on  a  single  balance  sheet  or  sometimes  in  separate  non-banking  entities.    In  the
present  context,  however,  the  question  is  whether  these  developments  have  fundamentally
altered the characteristics of the  banking  part of their balance sheets.  It seems to me that the
answer, generally speaking, is that they have not.
On  the  liabilities  side,  while  there  may  have  been  (indeed  in  some  countries,
where  close  substitutes  for  money,  such  as  money-market  mutual  funds  have  taken  off,  there
certainly  has  been)  some  erosion  of  the  banks’  market  share  as  a  repository  for  liquid  asset
holdings,  that  erosion  has  generally  been  very  gradual.    In  the  UK,  for  example,  bank  (and
building society) deposits still account for 42% of personal sector liquid asset  holdings  against
50%  a  decade  ago;    the  proportion  would  be  very  much  higher  if  liquid  assets  included  only
those that are capital certain.  And the vast bulk of the banks’ liabilities remain in the  form  of
unsecured, short-term, deposits.  Despite the rapid development of (secured) repo markets, only
some  3%  of  the  major  UK  banks’  funding  (in  sterling  and  foreign  currency  together)  was
secured  (from  information  provided  last  Autumn)  through  repo;    and  the  figure  for  all  UK
banks, including the business conducted in branches and  subsidiaries  of  overseas  banks,  which
have less direct access to deposits, was only around 8½%.  The proportion of secured funding is
below 5% for other major internationally active banks that we have looked at, with the exception
of JP Morgan and Bankers Trust - both somewhat special cases - where  the  proportion  is  very
BIS Review   13/1997
- 4 -
much higher (25-35%).  And even in those special cases it is still well below that for the major
US securities firms (typically 55-80%).
Banks  remain,  too,  at  the  heart  of  payments  systems.    Payments  may  be  made
directly across bank accounts through instructions, for example, in the form of cheque or debit
card;  or they may be made indirectly, through, for example, the use of credit cards, the balances
on which are subsequently settled using a bank account.  Even where disintermediation creates
new  chequing  facilities,  as  for  example,  in  the  case  of  money-market  mutuals,  these  are  still
cleared through settlement banks.  It is true that new forms of money transmission - e-money -
are  being  developed,  sometimes  outside  the  conventional  banking  system.    But  I  suspect  that
they,  too,  will  typically  depend  upon  clearing  through  the  banking  system.    To  the  extent  that
they  come  to  involve  the  creation  of  what  are  effectively  direct  deposits,  they  will  represent
banking  in a different form and become special, and logically subject to regulation, in much the
same  way  as  conventional  bank  deposits.    In  the  payments  system  context,  too,  important
progress  is  being  made  to  reduce  inter-bank  exposures  (through  the  introduction  of  real  time
gross  settlements  systems  in  many  countries,  for  example,  and  through  the  netting  of  foreign
exchange  settlements)  but  those  exposures,  as  well  as  inter-bank  exposures  incurred  in  direct
inter-bank  transactions  -  the  large  bulk  of  all  of  which  are  unsecured  -  remain  extraordinarily
large.    Individual  inter-bank  limits  can  substantially  exceed  25%  of  capital  (the  normal
supervisory limit for large exposures), and as an example of aggregate inter-bank exposures the
major UK retail banks currently place some £115 billion, or 16% of their total assets, with each
other or with other UK banks.
Turning to the assets side, there is some evidence of a gradual erosion of the role
of  banks  in  financial  intermediation.    One  measure  in  the  UK  is  a  decline  in  the  banks’  (and
building societies’) share in the assets of the whole financial sector  (including  securities  firms,
collective investment vehicles, and life assurance and pension funds’ investments etc) which has
fallen fairly steadily over the past 10 years, from close to 70% to some 55%.  I believe that in
the  US,  where  financial  innovation  has  probably  been  even  greater,  comparable  figures  also
show this decline, from around 45% in the mid-1970s to about one third now.
In the UK, bank lending to the corporate sector has fallen, erratically, from some
27%  of  total  corporate  borrowing  outstanding  (including  all  forms  of  debt  as  well  as  equity
issuance) in 1985 to less than 17%.  This mainly reflects the increased access of larger corporate
borrowers to the domestic and international capital markets for short and longer-term corporate
paper, where they often have a better credit rating than banks.  Smaller corporates, on the other
hand, remain very heavily dependent upon bank finance - for well over half their overall needs.
Meanwhile the banks’ share of net external finance of the personal sector has not changed much
at all over the past decade, at around 80%.
Trends in the liquidity of bank assets are difficult to assess because liquidity itself
is so hard to judge simply from balance sheet categories.  The  advent  of  securitisation  and  the
direct sale of loans ought to have helped.  But except in the US, securitisation has in fact so far
made  only  limited  progress,  and  debt  sales  have  been  focused  mainly  on  impaired  developing
country  or  corporate  debt.    One  reason  why  prime  corporate  loans  are  not  so  far  traded  is  the
importance that both banks and borrowers still attach to their mutual relationships.  My guess is
that the liquidity of bank assets by these means will gradually increase;  and that process may be
helped by the development of techniques such as credit derivatives.  But for the time being - and
indeed some time to come - bank loans are, for the most part, likely to remain illiquid in most
countries.
BIS Review   13/1997
- 5 -
We can nevertheless look at the crude balance sheet data, and, for what they are
worth,  we  have  looked  at  the  share  of  loans  to  non-banks  in  total  assets  as  a  measure  of  the
liquidity of the asset portfolio for a range of different types of institution.  These data show that:
 for  some  representative  small,  domestic,  UK  banks  the  loan  ratio  is  still
some 70-80% of the total, apparently with no particular trend;
 for large UK, internationally-active, banks the share of loans is currently
around  50%,  having  fallen  quite  sharply  from  some  65-70%  some  five  years  ago,  perhaps
reflecting the expansion of their investment banking activity;
 for large continental banks the share of loans is either side of 50%, having
fallen more gradually.
Again JP Morgan and Bankers Trust are outliers.  Their loan ratio to total assets is
down to around 12% from around 50% in 1985 and 30% only 5 years ago.  That is still much
higher than the illiquid asset ratio for the large US securities firms which has fairly consistently
been around 2%.
The conclusion that I draw from all of this is that while there certainly have been
important  changes  affecting  the  banks,  and  the  environment  in  which  they  operate,  they  have
not,  yet  at  least,  been  such  as  to  affect  fundamentally  their  relevant  key  functions  or  the
importance  of  those  functions  to  the  economy;    nor  have  they  altered  fundamentally  the
distinctive characteristics of either the banks’ liabilities or their assets.
To what extent have other financial institutions become more like banks?
So,  then,  to  what  extent  have  other  financial  institutions  developed  similar
characteristics to the distinctive characteristics of the banks as I have described them?
The  question,  let  me  be  quite  clear,  is  not  whether  other  financial  institutions
perform economically or socially important functions - clearly they do - and those functions may
equally be  special  in their own distinctive ways.
It  is  also  obviously  true  that,  with  the  upsurge  in  financial  innovation  and
globalisation that we have seen in the past 10-20 years, there has been substantial blurring of the
boundaries  between  different  types  of  financial  institution  and  the  increasing  emergence  of
multifunctional,  multinational,  financial  groups,  so  that  non-bank  institutions  have  taken  over
banks  or  offered  banking  services  just  as  banks  have  entered  substantially  into  non-banking
financial  activities.    But  that  is  not  the  issue  either.    The  question  is  whether  the  distinction
between  banking  and  non-banking  financial  functions  has  been  eroded,  again  whether  those
functions are carried out in separate entities or on the same balance sheet.  I do not think it has.
Take, for example, long-term savings institutions - life insurance companies and
pension funds.  They clearly perform a vital economic and social function, and they are subject
to separate functional regulation because of their  special  importance as homes for the long-term
savings  of  the  personal  sector  and  as  providers  of  long-term  capital.    But  their  liabilities  are
totally unlike the very liquid liabilities of banks, and the  liquidity  of  their  assets  and  liabilities
are much more closely matched - indeed their marketable assets tend to be more liquid than their
liabilities.    The  distinction  remains  even  where  these  activities  are  carried  out  in  a  banking
BIS Review   13/1997
- 6 -
group, though in this case the different businesses have to be conducted on ring-fenced balance
sheets  and  subject  to  different  prudential  tests,  reflecting  the  quite  different  nature  of  the
contracts  and  the  different  risks  involved.    That  is  not  to  deny  that  there  may  well  be  risks
running  from  one  part  of  the  group  to  another  -  for  example  reputational  risks  or  operational
risks arising from shared systems or personnel and so on.  It is not to deny either that there can
be large cross-functional financial exposures.  That, of course, is why the respective supervisors
need to take an interest in all parts of a financial group and in intra-group exposures.  But none
of this, it seems  to  me,  means  that  long-term  savings  institutions  have  taken  on  the  distinctive
special characteristics of banks.
So far, I would hope, so good in the sense that perhaps most of you would agree
that  this  particular  distinction  remains.  But  have  I  chosen  this  extreme  example  as  an  Aunt
Sally?
Well perhaps to a degree I have.  So let me take some less obvious cases.
What about money-market mutual funds, for example?  Surely they at least have
some  of  the  characteristics  of  banks?    They,  too,  act  as  a  repository  for  liquidity  and  it  is
possible to make payments from some of them, which looks very like a  banking  arrangement?
And so it does.  But in fact I think this appearance is deceptive, for three reasons:
-  first,  investments  in  money  market  mutuals  are  not,  as  I  understand  it,  in
principle capital certain (though in practice they may be supported by the fund’s sponsor);  nor
are  they  covered  by  deposit  insurance  (though  this  may  not  always  be  understood  by  the
investor);
-  secondly,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  money-market  mutuals  are  not  themselves  at
the heart of the payments mechanism, but in effect piggy-back on the banks which are;
- and, thirdly, money market mutuals do not undertake maturity transformation by
making illiquid loans;  like all collective investment schemes they put their investors’ funds into
marketable instruments in accordance with the rules of the fund.
Whereas money-market mutuals have something of the character of banks on the
liabilities side of their balance sheets, but not on the assets side, the converse is true of non-bank
finance  companies.    They  do  make  illiquid  loans,  much  as  banks  do.    But  they  typically  fund
themselves  in  capital  markets  or  from  the  banking  system,  and  do  not  offer  capital-certain,
immediately available, liabilities to the public at large which are in any way comparable to bank
deposits.  Nor do they typically offer payments services.
But  what  about  the  free-standing  securities  houses  -  and  in  particular  those  of
American  and  Japanese  parentage  that  have,  up  to  now,  been  separated  from  commercial
banking  activity  by  the  Glass-Steagall  Act  and  by  Article  65?    They,  surely,  have  both  liquid
liabilities and engage in maturity transformation; and, of course, they do actually operate partly
through banking entities outside their home jurisdictions.
Again,  however,  I  think  appearances  may  deceive.    The  liabilities  of  the  houses
are not in fact a bit like bank deposits.  While it is true that the houses have increased the extent
of their unsecured funding, for example through public issues, the bulk of their liquid liabilities
are still secured - with, as I said, some 55-80% of the total funding of the US houses we  have
looked at typically in the form of repos.  Nor do the houses hold themselves out to take deposits
BIS Review   13/1997
- 7 -
from the public at large.  Nor, finally, are their liabilities directly usable as a payments medium.
In all these respects the houses’ liabilities are non-monetary - even if they can rapidly be turned
into money.
On  the  assets  side  of  the  balance  sheet,  the  securities  houses  continue  to  invest
primarily in liquid, marketable assets which can readily be sold.  This is partly a reflection of the
nature  of  investment  banking  business,  in  particular  trading,  underwriting  and  so  on,  and  of
regulatory requirements, but also of funding uncertainty:  the securities house protects itself by
being  able,  if  necessary,  to  contract  the  size  of  its  balance  sheet  very  rapidly.    Illiquid  assets
continue  to  be  a  small  proportion  of  the  total,  generally  of  the  order  of  2%,  and  the  houses
mitigate  the  maturity  transformation  risk  in  holding  these,  and  marketable  assets  of  more
doubtful  liquidity  (such  as  some  emerging  market  instruments),  by  matching  with  long-term
borrowings.
What is certainly true is that the  securities  houses  have  expanded  their  activities
enormously - with balance sheets extending to $100-200 billion, which puts them in this respect
on a par with large international banks.  And, given their focus on trading activity - in money,
capital  and  foreign  exchange  markets  -  they  are,  of  course,  huge  counterparties  of  the  banks,
with very large exposures both among themselves and between them and the banks, but with the
important distinction that exposures between, or to, securities houses are more typically secured.
Size in any event does not in itself mean that the securities houses now have the
special,  distinguishing,  characteristics  of  banks  -  any  more  than  the  long-term  savings
institutions or the money  funds  or  indeed  large  non-financial  corporates,  which  may  also  have
huge balance sheets and which may also have large Treasury operations in-house to manage the
funds for own account.
Systemic risk
So  it  seems  to  me  that  banks  are  indeed  still  special  insofar  as  they  continue  to
perform  distinctive  economic  functions  and  insofar  as  their  liabilities  and  assets  still  have
distinctive characteristics.  This means that there is still a distinct public interest in the activities
of  institutions  that  are  engaged  in  banking  -  as  defined  -  whether  as  free-standing  entities  or
within a broader group structure.  That interest includes  a  micro-prudential  concern  to  provide
some  measure  at  least  of  protection  to  public  depositors,  reflected  in  the  supervision  of
individual  banking  institutions  and  in  deposit  protection  schemes.    But  it  includes  also  a
macro-prudential  concern  with  the  stability  of  the  banking  system  as  a  whole,  because  of  its
peculiar  vulnerability  to  contagious  -  systemic  -  disturbance,  reflected  in  central  banks’
preparedness to provide liquidity to the system where that is judged to be necessary.
Other  forms  of  financial  activity  also  perform  distinctive  functions,  and  have
distinctive  characteristics  which  make  them  special  in  their  own  different  ways.    And  these
special  features  equally  may  -  and  often  do  -  give  rise  to  special  public  interests.    The  public
interest in these other financial activities may be driven by a social concern to protect consumers
(for example the prospective beneficiaries of pension funds or life insurance policy holders,  or
investors, whether in collective funds or individually, through different kinds of intermediary, in
capital markets), which is similar to the social concern relating to depositor protection.  And it
may extend to other aspects of the particular  activity,  including  aspects  of  business  conduct  as
well  as  the  financial  integrity  of  the  institutions  involved.    In  fact  the  public  interest  in
non-banking financial activity has certainly increased in this sense - both in terms of the range of
BIS Review   13/1997
- 8 -
activities  covered  and  the  standards  of  protection  demanded  -  as  is  reflected  in  the  spread  of
financial regulation over the past 10-20 years as the activities themselves have expanded.   Our
own  Financial  Services  Act,  for  example,  which  provides  for  formal  regulation  of  investment
business  dates  only  from  1986.    A  corollary  of  this  broadening  public  interest  is  that
multifunctional  financial  services  providers  are  bound  to  be  subject  to  a  broadening  range  of
functional regulation - however such regulation is structured.
What I think is less clear is the extent and nature of the public macro-prudential
interest  in  non-banking  financial  activities.    I  have  argued  that  other,  non-banking,  financial
activities  are  not  -  because  of  the  different  characteristics  of  the  related  liabilities  and  assets  -
subject to runs in the same way as banks, and that they are not therefore subject to contagious -
systemic  -  disturbance  in  the  same  sense  as  banks.    But  that  does  not  mean  that  non-bank
financial institutions cannot face liquidity pressures.  It does not mean either that the failure of a
non-bank  financial  institution  could  not  -  through  its  direct  credit  or  settlements  exposures  to
other financial institutions (bank or non-bank) - have damaging knock-on effects.  Conceivably,
too, such a failure could have such serious consequences for the liquidity of - or price level in -
some  particular  sector  of  the  financial  markets,  that  concerns  would  arise  for  the  liquidity,  or
solvency,  of  other  bank  or  non-bank  institutions  that  were  known,  or  believed,  to  be  heavily
exposed  to  that  market.    In  this  sense  size  does  matter  -  and,  whether  or  not  one  chooses  to
describe  the  risk  of  this  happening  as  systemic,  there  is  no  doubt  that  a  sufficiently  large
disturbance originating in the non-banking activity of one financial institution could  put  others
in difficulty.  This possibility must be of concern to financial regulators, including central banks,
concerned with the stability of the financial system as a whole.  It certainly in my view provides
macro-prudential  justification  for  regulatory  oversight  of  the  activity  of  (large)  non-bank
financial  institutions,  and  of  the  non-banking  activities  of  banks  -  quite  apart  from
micro-prudential regulation in the interests of consumer protection.  It provides justification, too,
for some form of consolidated prudential oversight  of  multifunctional  financial  groups  and  for
monitoring large exposures, both intra-group and to outside counterparties.  Where a problem of
this sort does arise, it may well justify technical central bank intervention to help contain it - for
example by facilitating payments and settlements to minimise market disturbance.  But, I would
be  very  cautious  about  extending  last  resort  liquidity  provision  to  financial  institutions  not
engaged  in    banking    activity,  and  where  the  particular  justification  for  it,  based  upon  banks’
distinctive functions and the distinctive characteristics of banks’ balance sheets, did not clearly
apply.    While  I  do  not  think  such  intervention  can,  realistically,  be  excluded  altogether,  I  am
concerned  that  an  unduly  liberal  interpretation  of  systemic  risk  would  increase  the  scope  for
moral hazard and ultimately weaken the safety and soundness of the financial system as a whole.
Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, my answer to your question  Are banks still special?  is essentially
that  while  in  some  respects  they  may  be  less  special  than  they  were,  they  remain  special
nonetheless.    They  remain  special  in  terms  of  the  particular  functions  they  perform  -  as  the
repository of the economy’s immediately available liquidity, as  the  core  payments  mechanism,
and  as  the  principal  source  of  non-market  finance  to  a  large  part  of  the  economy.    And  they
remain  special  in  terms  of  the  particular  characteristics  of  their  balance  sheets,  which  are
necessary to perform those functions - including the mismatch between their assets and liabilities
which makes banks peculiarly  vulnerable  to  systemic  risk  in  the  traditional  sense  of  that  term.
Perhaps the day will come - and I do not at all exclude the possibility that other financial activity
will continue increasingly to be carried on alongside banking activity, even on the same balance
sheet,  indeed  I  expect  that  to  happen.    That,  in  my  view,  does  not  reduce  the  special  public
BIS Review   13/1997
- 9 -
interest  in  banking  activity;    although  it  may  well  affect  the  appropriate  substance  of  banking
supervision;    and  it  certainly  extends  to  banks’  other,  different,  functional  public  interests,
including different regulatory interests.  On the other hand I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  special
public interest in banking activity extends to non-banking financial institutions, though different
functional  public  interests  in  many  cases  clearly  do.    What  is  absolutely  clear,  in  a  world  of
increasing  financial  integration,  is  that  neither  the  financial  regulators  nor  the  central  bankers
among you can expect an easy life!
BIS Review   13/1997
