Mr.  Dai  assesses  the  outlook  for  Hong  Kong  as  Asia’s  financial  centre
Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  Mr.  Dai  Xianglong,  at  the  luncheon
hosted by the  Hong Kong Financial Secretary in Washington on 30/9/96.
The  1997  World  Bank/IMF  Annual  Meetings  will  be  held  in  Hong  Kong  next
year. Mr Liu Zhongli, the  Minister  of  Finance  and  myself  will  be  there  welcoming  you  as  the
host  of  the  occasion.  I  foresee  that  the  Annual  Meetings  to  be  held  next  year  will  be  a
magnificent  event  which  commands  far-reaching  historical  significance.  This  is  because  the
Annual  Meetings  of  the  two  important  international  financial  organisations  are  to  be  held  in
Hong Kong just a few months after China resumes the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong.
Representatives from various countries will have the opportunity to witness the realisation of the
principle of “one country, two systems” in Hong Kong. I believe that nobody will wish to miss
such an opportunity.
Mr Tsang has just expressed his views on the economy of Hong Kong before and
after 1997. I would like to say a few words from the perspective of the People’s Bank of China
(PBOC).  I  have  stated  on  many  occasions  that  we  are  confident  that  after  China  resumes  the
exercise  of  sovereignty  over  Hong  Kong,  the  territory  will  not  only  remain  prosperous  and
stable, but its status as an international financial centre will also be further enhanced.
And I have good reasons for this confidence.
First,  there  are  the  strong  economic  fundamentals  of  Hong  Kong  and  the
entrepreneurial  and  management  skills  of  the  people  of  Hong  Kong.  These  form  the  basis  for
Hong Kong’s continued prosperity and stability and  for  maintaining  Hong  Kong’s  status  as  an
international financial centre.
As  you  all  know,  Hong  Kong  is  an  international  trade,  transport,  financial  and
information  centre.  With  the  rapid  economic  developments  taking  place  in  the  Asia-Pacific
region, Hong Kong’s role as an international financial centre will not be weakened; instead, its
importance will certainly increase. According to the “Joint Declaration of the Government of the
United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland  and  the  Government  of  the  People’s
Republic  of  China  on  the  Question  of  Hong  Kong”  and  “The  Basic  Law  of  the  Hong  Kong
Special Administrative Region of the People’s  Republic  of  China”,  Hong  Kong  will  become  a
Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China from 1 July 1997. It will enjoy
a high degree of autonomy with Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong. Hong Kong will become
an independent tariff and trade region and an international financial centre in China but with its
own currency. In order to maintain its status as an international financial centre, Hong Kong will
inevitably  face  various  challenges.  However,  Hong  Kong  will  continue  to  have  a  sound  legal
system,  advanced  communication  facilities  and  infrastructures,  professional  and  management
expertise, and strong foreign reserves. Currently, Hong Kong’s foreign reserves rank seventh in
the world while China’s rank second. With the backing of such strong economic strength, we are
confident  that  Hong  Kong’s  status  as  an  international  financial  centre  will  be  maintained  and
further enhanced.
Secondly,  from  the  legal  angle,  the  Basic  Law  assures  the  continuation  and
enhancement of Hong Kong’s status as an international financial centre.
Articles  109  to  113  of  the  Basic  Law  lay  down  specific  provisions  relating  to
Hong Kong’s status as an international financial centre, its monetary and financial policies, the
status of the Hong Kong dollar and the issuing arrangements, capital movements and the role of
BIS Review   12/1997
- 2 -
the  Exchange  Fund.  These  principles  establish  the  basic  monetary  relationship  between  China
and Hong Kong under the principle of “one country, two systems”, and this can conveniently be
summarised  as  “one  country,  two  currencies,  two  monetary  systems  and  two  monetary
authorities”  within  a  sovereign  state.  It  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  co-existence  of  two
currencies,  that  is,  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  and  the  renminbi,  is  a  clear  demonstration  of  the
differences between the economies of Hong Kong and the mainland. It is therefore essential that
the  two  monetary  systems  should  be  mutually  independent.  The  renminbi  will  not  replace  the
Hong  Kong  dollar.  We  are  of  the  view  that  the  co-existence  of  two  monetary  systems  is
significant to the economic reform of China.
It follows from the two mutually independent monetary systems of the mainland
and Hong Kong that the two monetary authorities will also be mutually independent and one is
not  superior  to  the  other.  The  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  will  be  accountable
solely  to  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative  Region  Government  from  1  July  1997.  The
PBOC will not take the place of the HKMA and will not set up any branch office in Hong Kong.
I  am  glad  that  international  organisations  and  other  central  banks  also
acknowledge the mutually independent relationship between the PBOC and the HKMA.
Both  the  PBOC  and  the  HKMA  were  offered  membership  in  the  Bank  for
International  Settlements  in  early  September  this  year.  This  shows  that  the  work  done  by  the
PBOC  and  the  HKMA  are  widely  accepted  and  appreciated  by  the  central  banking  fraternity.
This also shows that the international financial community fully supports the  principle  of  “one
country, two systems” laid down by the Basic Law.
The  Basic  Law  also  states  that  the  Exchange  Fund  shall  be  managed  and
controlled  by  the  Hong  Kong  government.  It  also  states  that  the  revenues  of  the  Hong  Kong
Special  Administrative  Region  shall  be  used  exclusively  for  its  own  purposes.  In  addition,  the
Basic  Law  stipulates  that  the  Chinese  Government  will  not  levy  taxes  in  Hong  Kong.  These
three-fold  safeguards  are  evidence  that  China  will  not  interfere  with  Hong  Kong’s  financial
matters. We have reiterated time and again that under no circumstances will China draw  on  or
resort  to  Hong  Kong’s  Exchange  Fund  or  other  assets  in  any  way  or  for  any  reason.  On  the
contrary,  the  PBOC  will  support  the  currency  stability  of  Hong  Kong.  The  PBOC  and  the
HKMA  entered  into  a  bilateral  agreement  on  repurchase  of  US  treasury  paper  early  this  year.
We also stand ready to provide funds to support the Hong Kong dollar, if necessary.
Thirdly,  the  economic  development  of  the  mainland  has  created  excellent
conditions for the continuity and further strengthening of Hong Kong’s prosperity and stability.
Economic  development  in  the  mainland  provides  a  strong  support  to  Hong  Kong’s  economic
development. China is confident in Hong Kong’s maintaining prosperity and stability after 1997
because we have full confidence in the economic development in China.
China  is  firmly  committed  to  continuing  with  its  economic  reform  and  our
achievements are widely recognised. Currently, the macro-economic situation in mainland China
is steady. The various macro-economic indicators do meet our targets laid down early this year
and some even out-perform our expectations. It is anticipated that this year’s economic growth
will be around 9%. The retail price is expected to rise  by  about  7%  and  is  expected  to  remain
steady  over  the  next  two  years  or  may  even  ease  further.  At  present,  our  foreign  reserves  are
over US$ 90 billion and are expected to exceed US$ 95 billion by the end of this year. Since the
beginning of the second quarter this year, external trade has posted some steady growth. There is
a significant inflow of capital and our balance of payments is in a healthy position. Therefore the
BIS Review   12/1997
- 3 -
exchange  rate  of  the  renminbi,  which  is  determined  by  the  market,  will  remain  stable.  The
renminbi, for all intents and purposes has become fully convertible  in  the  current  account.  We
are in advance of our schedule in satisfying the requirement stipulated in Article VIII of the IMF
Articles of Agreement.
In  the  next  five  years,  China  will  continue  to  adopt  an  appropriately  tight
monetary policy. The adoption of this policy means firstly, we will have an appropriately tight
monetary stance to keep inflation at a level lower than the rate of economic growth. Secondly,
money supply should grow at an appropriate level. In the next five years, the annual growth rate
of M1 will be kept at around 18% and M2 at 21% to 23%. Thirdly, reforms and improvements
will continuously be made to the approach in making macro-economic adjustment. That is, we
will  move  from  reliance  on  direct  control  of  the  volume  of  credit  towards  regulating  money
supply  by  means  of  indirect  monetary  policy  instruments  such  as  reserve  requirements,  open
market operations and interest rate policy. Appropriately tight monetary policy is not limited to
the  control  of  total  credit  but  also  adjustment  of  the  credit  structure,  deepening  of  monetary
reforms,  and  timely  adjustments  to  the  different  aspects  of  the  monetary  system.  An
appropriately tight monetary policy is conducive to the healthy, stable and sustained growth of
the  national  economy.  It  also  helps  to  create  favourable  conditions  for  the  resumption  of
sovereignty and the continued prosperity of Hong Kong.
Stability in China is the very basis for Hong Kong’s stability while Hong Kong’s
stability will certainly enhance economic reform and developments in China. Foreign investors
in Hong Kong will, at the same time, benefit from the stability of China and Hong Kong.
Those sceptics who have doubted China’s commitment to the open door policy no
longer can have such doubts after witnessing the implementation of our economic reforms  and
its achievements. I hope you will recognise that China is firmly committed to implementing the
principle  of  “one  country,  two  systems”  and  maintaining  the  prosperity  and  stability  of  Hong
Kong,  just  as  we  have  been  firmly  committed  to  the  implementation  of  economic  reform  in
China.  The  principle  of  “one  country,  two  systems”  is  the  realisation  of  the  spirit  of  our
constitution  and  has  become  a  long-term  irreversible  national  policy.  As  China  continues  to
pursue its economic reform, Hong Kong’s role as the international financial centre in China will
become more and more important. We will do our best to help maintain the existing economic
system of Hong Kong and keep up its economic dynamism. We also hope that the international
financial community will join us in our efforts to maintain Hong Kong’s prosperity and stability.
Ladies and gentlemen, when you come to next year’s Annual Meetings in Hong Kong, you will
all  see  for  yourselves  the  realisation  of  the  principle  of  “one  country,  two  systems”  in  Hong
Kong.  In  addition,  I  believe  that  the  1997  World  Bank/IMF  Annual  Meetings  will  be  an
impressive event as a result.
BIS Review   12/1997
