Mr. Tosovsky gives the Czech Republic’s perspective of transition in Central
and  Eastern  Europe      Text  of  eighth  Gerhard  de  Kock  Memorial  Lecture  given  by  the
Governor of the Czech National Bank, Mr. Josef Tosovsky, to an audience at the South African
Reserve Bank in Pretoria on 17/2/97.
It is a great honour and pleasure for me to be invited to give the eighth Gerhard
de  Kock  Memorial  Lecture,  especially  as  this  is  probably  (if  I  am  not  mistaken)  the  first  time
that a governor from the reforming countries of Central and Eastern Europe  has  been  afforded
this privilege. The region of Central and Eastern Europe has undergone a profound re-shaping.
More  than  100  million  people  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  got  involved  in  a  far-reaching
process  of  political,  economic  and  social  change.  Because  of  its  unprecedented  character  and
size  the  impact  of  this  multidimensional  transformation  has  been  in  continent-wide  Europe.
Indeed,  the  political  and  economic  map  of  the  whole  of  Europe  is  nowadays  rather  different
from what it used to be throughout the postwar period till the 1990s.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  share  with  you  some  experience  we  have
acquired. At the beginning of my lecture I cannot avoid briefly mentioning options for economic
and political reforms as opened up for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe in the 1990s
as  well  as  the  starting  position  of  the  former  Czechoslovakia  on  the  eve  of  the  “velvet
revolution” which in November 1989 enabled us to start a process of radical economic reforms.
Initial conditions for economic reforms
The  task  which  confronted  the  countries  after  the  fall  of  the  communist  regime
was  enormous.  It  involved  radical  change  of  the  whole  political,  institutional,  and  economic
system.  Along  with  the  rejection  of  the  communist  one-party  rule,  the  principles  of  the  past
economic system, i.e. state ownership of the means of production and the central planning and
management  of  the  entire  field  of  economic  activity,  being  entirely  discredited,  were  rejected
too. The issue was thus substitution of the previous system and not its reform. The  goal  was  a
transition toward a democratic society - and toward a functioning market economy, based on the
dominance of private ownership.
The  respective  move  from  the  Communist  centrally  planned  economy  back
towards  a  capitalist  market  economy  implies  a  qualitative  change  in  the  entire  economic  and
social regime. As such it is a unique process in modern economic development. The challenge is
not  only  to  stabilise,  deregulate  and  liberalise  the  economy,  as  was  the  case  in  countries  with
extensive interventions such as Spain or  Chile  several  years  ago.  The  transition  in  Central  and
Eastern  Europe  required  basic  institutional,  systemic  as  well  as  socio-political  changes  at  the
same  time;  it  is  inevitably  a  multidimensional  process.  It  follows  that,  while  stabilisation
programmes  and  reforms  in  the  other  parts  of  the  world  economy  may  provide  useful  lessons
from their experience, there are substantial differences implied both in the initial conditions and
in  the  substance  of  the  process.  The  implications  of  that  fact  should  be  remembered  when
assessing the course of changes in the previously centrally planned economies. The transition in
Central and Eastern Europe  is  inevitably  a  much  more  complex  and  longer-term  phenomenon,
for which no generalised theory could be available to apply.
Such  radical  transformation  requires  a  feasible  strategy  implemented  with  wide
political  support  of  the  population.  Transformation  requires  some  minimum  speed,  and  must
start  with  some  “critical  mass”  of  change  to  secure  sufficient  impact  on  the  behaviour  of
economic agents. In individual Central European post-communist countries, the sequence, speed,
BIS Review   25/1997
- 2 -
and  forms  of  individual  steps  necessarily  differed;  they  had  different  starting  conditions,
different  degrees  of  political  support  of  the  new  governments,  and  they  also  applied  different
strategies.
The Czechoslovak case
At  the  start  of  transformation  in  1990,  Czechoslovakia  had  some  economic
advantages  over 
the  other  Central  and  East  European  post-communist  countries.  In
Czechoslovakia, during the preceding decade, state budgets were mostly balanced, foreign debt
was  low,  and  the  balance  of  payments  showed  no  big  deficits  or  surpluses.  Inflation  was
relatively  low.  Even  if  there  was  an  inflationary  potential  (reflected  not  only  in  open  inflation
but  also  in  the  forms  of  hidden  and  repressed  inflation)  and  the  monetary  overhang  was
increasing  in  the  1980s,  its  dimensions  continued  to  be  considerably  lower  than  in  the  other
countries  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe.  Czechoslovakia,  especially  the  Czech  Republic,  also
had the advantage of a long industrial history, and of well-educated and skilled labour.
On  the  other  hand,  there  were  some  disadvantages,  especially  if  compared  with
Poland or Hungary. The system of a command economy was very pervasive in Czechoslovakia.
There  was  practically  no  private  sector;  prices  were  centrally  controlled;  enterprise  managers
were operating within the limits of a rigid system of central planning, having little autonomy in
decision-making.  Market  institutions  were  mostly  lacking,  particularly  in  the  case  of  money,
capital  and  labour  markets.  Czechoslovakia  distinguished  itself  also  as  a  country  with  an
unfavourably  biased  size  pattern  of  enterprises:  big  units,  mostly  administratively  created,
prevailed,  while  small  enterprises  were  almost  lacking.  External  economic  ties  were  biased  as
well,  being  monopolised  by  the  state:  exports  were  predominantly  aimed  at  Soviet  and  other
communist  countries’  markets.  Especially  high  was  the  share  of  foreign  trade  with  the  Soviet
Union  (more  than  40%).  Connected  with  this  was  the  fact  that  Czechoslovakia  maintained  a
rather large proportion of heavy industries, an extensive but mostly obsolete stock of productive
capital,  along  with  underdeveloped  services,  neglected 
inadequate
environmental protection.
infrastructure  and 
In coping with the challenge of a system substitution the contraints and even the
counterproductiveness of the partial reform approach seemed to be recognised and accounted for
in the Czechoslovak case. This was perhaps a lesson learned from the failures of reform attempts
in the past.
There appeared to be a widely shared consensus that a system replacement could
hardly be achieved without a sufficient initial “shock”. Accordingly, the strategy followed aimed
at  a  simultaneous  implementation  of  the  package  of  interrelated  measures  in  order  to  secure
sufficient impact on the behaviour of economic agents.
Given  the  above  general  consensus,  there  were,  however,  widely  differentiated
stances as regards the contents of the respective “minimum packages”, their sequencing and the
speed of their implementation.
In previous discussions two alternative options - “fast” and “slow” movers - used
to be identified as a shock therapy approach against a step-by-step, gradualistic or evolutionary
type of approach.
BIS Review   25/1997
- 3 -
The Czechoslovak scenario opted for a transition path which was implemented as
quickly  as  feasible,  implying  some  parallel  features  with  the  shock  therapy  approach,  in
particular  with  reference  to  one  stroke,  simultaneous  liberalisation  of  domestic  prices,  foreign
trade and foreign  exchange,  and  the  introduction  of  limited  currency  convertibility  (on  current
account for registered domestic businesses) at the very beginning of the transition process.
The shock therapy approach was developed for the stabilisation programmes and
followed in some countries of Latin America as well as in Poland and former Yugoslavia, where
the  dominant  target  of  the  economic  policy  was  to  cope  with  hyperinflation,  to  stabilise  the
economy as much and as fast as possible. The initial conditions in the CSFR differed, however,
from those of the countries mentioned.
Strategy of systemic and structural reforms
The  programme  of  political  and  economic  transformation  was  formed  during
1990,  started  in  January  1991,  and  continued  in  the  Czech  Republic  after  the  split  of
Czechoslovakia. From the start, the program included five main parts:
- Macroeconomic stabilisation policies: a restrictive fiscal and monetary policy to
remove the monetary overhang and to reintroduce macroeconomic equilibrium.
- Liberalisation of prices: after 40 years of central price fixing, the bulk of prices
were freed.
-  Liberalisation  of  external  trade  -  and  introduction  of  partial  convertibility  (for
resident  firms’  current  account  transactions).  That  required  initial  devaluation  toward  an
exchange rate seen as viable from the point of view of the balance of payments.
- Massive and rapid privatisation, including the use of the voucher scheme.
-  Social  safety  net  to  protect  people  whose  standard  of  living  dropped  below
poverty  line.  These  adverse  impacts  of  economic  transformation  were  to  be  contained  within
tolerable limits.
The  programme  aimed  at  re-establishing  the  role  of  prices  and  markets  for  an
efficient allocation of resources. For the start, rationalisation of price relations implied a rise of
the price level, owing to a monetary overhang, and to low downward price elasticity. In a small
open economy, it made no sense to free internal prices without opening the economy to external
competition  and  to  world  price  relations.  And,  there  could  be  no  meaningful  liberalisation  of
imports and exports without current account convertibility, introduced at least for resident firms.
The short Polish and Hungarian experience showed, however, that free trade and
partial convertibility should not be attempted without a preceding macroeconomic stabilisation.
The first year of transformation - 1990 - was practically devoted to the stabilisation goal; further
transformation steps taken in 1991 were accompanied by continuing stabilising policy. Measures
seeking external stability were an indispensable  part  of  the  programme.  It  was  understood  that
the exchange rate would have to be undervalued in relation to purchasing power parity to sustain
the liberalised trade and a partly convertible currency and to function as a stabilisation anchor.
Compared  to  steps  such  as  freeing  of  prices,  freeing  of  external  trade,  and
introduction  of  partial  convertibility,  it  was  clear  that  privatisation  would  be  a  gradual,  more
time-consuming  process.  First,  steps  were  taken  to  stop  state  subsidies  to  firms  (as  well  as  to
prices),  and  to  let  the  firms  face  a  hard  budget  constraint;  that  included  also  a  stricter  credit
policy by commercial banks. A shift of property rights to private hands was the only way how to
BIS Review   25/1997
- 4 -
change fundamentally the behaviour of firms, expose  them  to  the  pressures  of  the  market,  and
initiate productivity increase and structural change.
In 1989 the private sector was almost non-existent in the former Czechoslovakia,
accounting  just  for  3  per  cent  of  GDP.  Domestic  capital  base  was  weak  and  institutions  of
market economy such as stack exchange and developed financial sector were lacking. Therefore,
a  combination  of  standard  privatisation  methods  (that  means  sales,  including  sales  to  foreign
investors) with non-standard ones was used to speed up the process. So called small privatisation
(small  factories,  real  estate,  retail  stores,  restaurants,  hotels,  repair  shops  etc.)  was  proceeding
swiftly  since  early  1991  and  was  more  or  less  accomplished  by  the  end  of  1992.  It  went  by
auctions, but also restitution of property to its former owners played a very important part and
contributed to the success of the programme.
In large privatisation (large state-owned enterprises), one part of the property was
sold,  another  part  was  distributed  free  of  charge  to  the  entire  population,  through  so-called
investment  vouchers.  Standard  methods  such  as  direct  sale,  auctions,  public  tenders,  and
transfers  of  property  to  municipalities  were  used  along  with  the  voucher  scheme.  Foreign
investors  were,  and  are,  welcome;  in  fact,  the  program  of  rapid  and  mass  privatisation  in  the
Czech Republic offered foreign investors an opportunity which will not be repeated in future.
Privatisation  of  an  almost  fully  state-owned  economy  is  a  task  which  requires
years rather than months. Now the bulk of privatisation has been accomplished, and it is starting
to  influence  positively  the  performance  of  the  economy.  Within  the  last  six  years  the  share  of
private sector jumped from 3 to 75 per cent. But the problem of behaviour of the new owners,
and  of  effective  corporate  governance,  is  still  rather  acute  in  the  Czech  Republic.  Special
problems are posed by the large ownership of equity by investment funds which emerged during
the  voucher  privatisation,  as  well  as  by  large  banks  which  themselves  are  still  partly  in  state
hands. Thus, one cannot say that privatisation has been as yet accomplished fully. What remains,
however,  is  a  more  standard  situation,  posing  similar  problems  as  privatisation  of  state-owned
companies  in  the  advanced  market  economies.  As  to  the  future  prevailing  model  of  corporate
governance, the Czech Republic can be expected to converge toward the practice which will be
most widely observed within the European Union countries.
Macroeconomic stabilisation
The transformation strategy required a constant effort to achieve macroeconomic
stabilisation.  Tight  fiscal  policy,  based  on  a  balanced  or  surplus  state  budget,  and  prudent
monetary  policy,  were  mutually  supporting  each  other.  These  were  supplemented  by  wage
controls  and  overall  income  policy  within  the  so-called  heterodox  concept  of  macroeconomic
stabilisation.
During  transformation,  Czech  monetary  policy  used  two  basic  tools  to  fight
inflation: targeting monetary aggregates, and the nominal anchor of a fixed exchange rate. The
Czech experience with curbing inflation during a transformation period is successful, compared
to other transforming economies of Central Europe. When, in January 1991, the bulk of prices in
the  Czech  economy  were  freed  after  40  years  of  central  price  fixing,  the  result  was  a  yearly
increase of the price level  by  almost  58%.  However,  no  inflationary  spiral  evolved,  and,  since
1992, inflation showed a falling long-term trend towards a single digit rate in 1995-1996.
BIS Review   25/1997
- 5 -
The  initial  jump  of  prices  in  1991  was  not  accompanied  by  a  similarly  steep
increase  of  nominal  wages.  Instead,  real  wages  fell.  That  created  some  room  for  subsequent
increases in real wages without serious inflationary consequences. In 1995 and 1996, however,
the growth of real wages, which - if aggregated over all sectors - was faster than the increase in
productivity, became one of the potential inflationary dangers.
The  nominal  anchor  of  the  fixed  exchange  rate  played  an  important  role  in  the
relatively good Czech results in fighting inflation. Instead of repeated smaller devaluations as in
Poland or Hungary, the Czech Republic used a combination of a large initial devaluation and a
subsequently fixed nominal exchange rate. In 1990 - before the  start  of  the  full  transformation
programme  -  the  currency  was  devalued  by  more  than  50%.  That  subsequently  enabled  us  to
keep  the  nominal  exchange  rate  stable  for  five  years.  After  the  introduction  of  a  wider  7.5%
fluctuation band in 1996, the exchange rate is within the band.
Transformation involved so much fundamental change that its start inevitably led
to an initial fall of output and GDP. However, part of the former higher output level was simply
feeding the enormous waste which went  on  throughout  the  command  economy.  In  1993,  GDP
stagnated  partly  due  to  the  split-up  of  Czechoslovakia.  Economic  growth  was  resumed  in  the
Czech Republic in 1994 and continued in 1995 and 1996 as a fast growth period.
Unemployment has been kept low during the whole transformation period, thanks
mainly  to  the  rapid  emergence  of  new  private  firms,  and  a  large  shift  of  labour  into  the
previously  underdeveloped  service  sector.  Even  with  microeconomic  restructuring  going  on,
unemployment is not expected to exceed a 4 % level in the near future.
Monetary policy tools
In  a  command  type  economy,  monetary  policy  reflected  state  plans  expressed
mainly in physical  terms.  Planned  direct  credit  allocation  was  linked  to  the  planned  growth  of
national  income.  Credits  to  enterprises  were  directly  allocated,  with  little  attention  paid  to  the
creditworthiness  of  the  borrowing  enterprise.  Risk  was  socialised  due  to  the  existence  of
a unitary banking system.
The introduction of a new Central Bank Act and a new banking law in late 1989
marked the beginning of the development of a market-oriented banking system. The Act laid the
basis for establishing a two-tier banking system through the separation of  the  central  bank  and
commercial  banking  functions  and  provided  the  central  bank  with  the  means  for  conducting
monetary policy and with regulatory authority over banks. The latter established the legal basis
for a universal banking system. The separation of central banking from commercial banking was
put into effect on January 1, 1990.
The dissolution of the Czechoslovak Federation into two independent republics on
January 1, 1993, meant the creation of the Czech National Bank (CNB). According to the Act,
the  CNB  is  independent  of  any  instructions  given  by  the  government.  The  CNB  is  obliged  to
submit  to  the  Parliament  a  report  on  monetary  development  at  least  two  times  a  year  and  to
inform the general public on monetary development at least once every three months.
Further, under this Act the CNB has at its disposal practically all the tools known
to advanced market economies.
BIS Review   25/1997
- 6 -
At the beginning of the transformation process, the main tools of monetary policy
were,  quite  naturally,  direct  ones.  Credit  limits,  interest  rate  ceilings  expressed  as  maximum
deviations  from  the  discount  rate  and  refinancing  loans  (in  1991  represented  for  small,  new
banks  on  the  average  60  per  cent  of  total  sources  but  for  big  banks  5-10  per  cent  only)  were
used.
Credit and interest rate ceilings were abolished in 1992 which can be regarded as
a transition year towards indirect control of monetary developments. After credit ceilings on the
minor  banks  were  removed  in  April  1992  and  on  the  major  banks  in  October,  central  bank
control  of  monetary  developments  was  effected  through  discount  rates,  minimum  reserve
requirements, auction refinancing credits and central bank bills.
My  predecessors  behind  this  chair,  the  governors  of  the  central  banks  from
Germany and Switzerland, underlined the role of money supply targets in the kit of tools. In this
respect the Czechoslovak and the Czech practice can enrich the experience.
Since 1990 the intermediate targets have been set in the form of planned changes
in credits or money. For 1990 the target was “to keep the development of credits in total within
the scope of -2 per cent to +1 per cent related to the level at the end of 1989”. In the following
years the starting point for the monetary programme was the expected development of both real
GDP and the inflation rate with the corrections for the envisaged changes in income velocity of
money  (in  the  Czech  terminology  the  relevant  aggregate  M2  consists  of  currency  and  demand
deposits, time and savings deposits and deposits in foreign currency). To be up-to-date, in 1997
we are targeting the increase of money supply by 8-12 per cent.
The  philosophy  behind  money  supply  targeting  is  well  known.  Without  a  deep
reflection upon this theme I recall the message of famous equation of exchange: Total monetary
expenditures have to increase proportionally, if the velocity is constant, to nominally expressed
GDP. Nothing more and nothing less is required from monetary policy. Monetary policy should
serve one goal only: to repress high inflation and provide for a stable currency.
As  a  rule  of  thumb  this  reasoning  is  both  understandable  and  acceptable  but  a
more profound discussion must draw our attention to several points:
Neglecting at this moment the different versions of the equation of exchange what
can we understand under the heading “total physical volume of transactions” on the right side of
this  equation?  For  the  economies  in  transition  the  difference  between  the  total  volume  of
transactions and transactions counted in national income accounting is important. A part of the
transactions  is  used  for  intermediate-good  or  inter-business  expenditures  and  is  not  counted  in
the  GDP  accounts.  Some  transactions  are  not  registered  at  all,  for  example,  those  in  the
underground economy, some imports and so forth.
The decomposition of nominal GDP into a change in real output and a change in
the  price  level  is  not  a  trivial  exercise  even  in  advanced  market  economies.  But  in  these
countries, e.g. in Germany or USA, the prediction of real GDP rests on more solid grounds - one
knows  approximately  what  is  the  “potential  output”  as  the  starting  point  for  some  guessing  as
concerns  the  development  in  the  medium  term.  In  transition  economies,  in  the  period  of  deep
structural changes, the estimate of both real GDP and potential output is much more difficult.
BIS Review   25/1997
- 7 -
The traditional unidirectional link from money to income is blurred in  advanced
market economies by the existence of many forms of financial assets  with  different  degrees  of
liquidity.
In  transforming  economies,  the  scope  for  reserve  assets  (Treasury  bills)  and
investment  assets  (bonds,  shares)  is  still  limited  but  is  widening  step  by  step,  thus  weakening
also  the  links  between  the  money  stock  and  expenditure  flows.  What  is  probably  even  more
important, at least in the Czech  Republic,  is  the  financing  of  receivables  and  current  liabilities
through  quasi-commercial  credits  (inter-enterprise  indebtedness).  There  is  a  scope,  created  by
enterprises  themselves,  for  offsetting  the  potential  effects  of  monetary  stringency  on  spending
plans.  A  version  of  the  equation  of  exchange  suitable  for  transforming  economies  should
therefore take into account on the left side not only money in the narrow and broader sense but
also estimates of different kinds of quasi-credit.
Textbook  knowledge  says  that  the  constancy,  or  at  least  the  predictability  of
velocity either in income or in transaction terms, turns the equation of exchange into the quantity
theory of money. At this point, last year’s speaker, Dr Tietmeyer, had again a more favourable
position,  because  he  could  rely  on  the  predictable  and  the  longer-term  change  in  the  income
velocity of the German mark. In the Czech Republic the velocity is neither constant nor reliably
predictable yet. In the first stage of economic transformation the income velocity declined in line
with  the  increasing  transaction  demand  for  money.  Only  later  on  did  velocity  start  to  stabilise
and recently we have observed some increase in velocity.
Last but not least, one must point out that, even in the quantity theory applied in
advanced market economies, there is a certain “black box” connecting the quantity of money on
the one hand and its effect on prices and quantities on the other. Between a change in monetary
aggregates and offsetting changes in other variables, there is a transmission mechanism, with its
specific features determined by the institutional framework in which it operates.
On the top of it some prices, like housing rents and energy  price,  are  still  under
the  control  of  the  government  and  the  process  of  deregulation  cannot  be  perfectly  anticipated
due to the political implications.
To specify the transmission mechanism and to open the “black box” means both
to describe and analyse the ways in which money is created and how it influences real variables.
These ways change through the evolution of new institutions in transforming economies.
Besides money supply targeting, operative targets have been used.
As the operative target the monetary base (currency plus minimum reserves plus
free  reserves)  was  replaced  in  the  second  half  of  1994  by  bank  reserves  and  a  system  was
implemented for the daily prediction of liquidity management on the money market. Since then
the monetary base has been used as an indicator.
In order to reduce the fluctuation of free reserves in the banking system  and  the
volatility of interbank deposit market interest rates, the CNB shortened their maintenance cycle
to 14 days commencing March 1st, 1994. Since then refinancing credits have been provided only
when fully covered by securities (repo operations). This CNB shift to daily operational monetary
policy management based on repo operations and the gradual strengthening of the role of these
operations in the sterilisation of foreign capital inflows, particularly in the second half of 1995,
led to the repo market’s gradual development.
BIS Review   25/1997
- 8 -
As from the beginning  of  1996  a  one-week  PRIBOR  interest  rate  replaced  bank
reserves  management  as  the  operative  target.  The  quantitative  target  has  been  replaced  by  an
interest rate target with the aim to efficiently affect, on a daily basis, the interest rate level at the
short end of the yield curve. This  major  change  was  facilitated  by  the  gradual  development  of
the  money  market  and  its  cultivation  by  the  CNB.  The  one-week  PRIBOR  rate  is  affected
through sales of securities with a date specified in advance of their repurchase (repos) with one
and two week maturities, for which a limited repo rate is announced.
New challenge: monetary aggregates in a small open economy
The  monetary  survey  of  the  CNB  indicates  the  structure  of  the  money  supply
(M2) on the liabilities side (corresponding to the demand side) and its sources on the assets side
(corresponding  to  the  supply  side).  By  comparing  the  assets  and  liabilities,  one  can  reveal  the
different sources of the money supply.
The  main  sources  of  money  supply  growth  are  particularly  dependent  on  the
specific  conditions  of  each  economy,  reflecting  mainly  the  proportion  of  the  influence  of
domestic and foreign sources of growth.
In general, the main sources of money supply growth include money issued in the
form of  credits  granted  by  banks  to  both  households  and  enterprises  in  domestic  currency,  the
conversion of foreign exchange inflows into domestic currency (net foreign assets), net credit to
the government and the net position of the National Property Fund and the residual called “other
items net” (mainly own capital and bank reserves).
Developments in the period 1993-1996 reveal some interesting features:
Credits  to  enterprises  and  households  in  domestic  currency,  which  are  quite
naturally the main source of money supply, exhibited a relatively slower growth up to the end of
1995,  followed  by  a  relatively  quicker  growth  in  1996  when  these  credits  became  the  main
impetus of money supply growth.
The  most  remarkable  feature  was  the  growing  share  of  net  foreign  assets  up  to
December 1995 which resulted especially in 1993-1995 in the deviations of the dynamics of M2
out of the corridor laid down by monetary policy and which gave rise to the sterilisation efforts
of the CNB.
The influence of net credit to the government plus the net position of the National
Property  Fund  was  negligible  in  the  period  under  analysis,  and  in  some  periods  it  even
dampened money supply growth. This fact is probably unique in the  transforming  countries  of
Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and  reflects  the  prudent  fiscal  stance  of  Czech  macroeconomic
policy.
A  more  detailed  answer  to  the  causes  of  changes  in  the  degree  of  impact  of
individual  factors  on  money  supply  growth  can  be  found  when  studying  their  development  in
different periods of the transformation.
In  Czechoslovakia,  during  the  first  transformation  years  (1990-1992)  money
supply  growth  was  based  primarily  on  the  relatively  quickly  increasing  volume  of  credits
granted to enterprises due to growing credit demand, which was very closely connected with the
BIS Review   25/1997
- 9 -
liberalisation of entrepreneurial activities in a newly created market environment (an increasing
number of businesses in need of initial capital).
Gradually, foreign money creation also expanded, affected by the development of
an improving balance of payments, particularly the current account.
The  gradual  stabilisation  of  the  macroeconomic  and  political  environment
(apparent mainly after the dissolution of the Czechoslovak Federation in January, 1993, and the
relatively rapid calming of price developments  following  the  introduction  of  a  new  tax  system
based on value added tax), the commencement of the activities of capital market institutions and
the  stability  of  the  exchange  rate  which  significantly  decreased  the  risks  for  foreign  investors,
led  in  the  second  half  of  1993  to  a  significant  strengthening  of  the  influence  of  the  inflow  of
foreign funds into the Czech Republic on money supply growth.
The strong foreign capital inflows continued to influence money supply growth in
1994 and 1995 when capital inflows reached 18 per cent of GDP. This growth was particularly
generated by increasing foreign direct investments, portfolio investments and relatively cheaper
foreign credits drawn by domestic enterprises.
Because  the  increasing  inflow  of  foreign  money  was  accompanied  by  a
continuous  demand  for  credits  on  the  part  of  enterprises  (financed  partially  also  from  foreign
resources), this situation called for the sterilisation of excess funds, taking into account the goals
of monetary policy.
Paradoxically,  due  to  the  government’s  sound  fiscal  policy,  we  were  confronted
with  an  insufficient  amount  of  government  securities,  and  therefore  the  CNB  had  to  issue  its
own  bills  and  sold  them  to  commercial  banks  to  weaken  the  impact  on  the  volume  of  money
stock.
A  certain  turnaround  has  occurred  since  the  end  of  1995.  Contrary  to  previous
years, the foreign sector helped to weaken money supply growth due to an increasing balance of
trade deficit and the slower growth of foreign capital inflows into the country.
Exchange rate policy
The  above-mentioned  development  of 
the  composition  of 
the  monetary
aggregates has influenced attitudes vis-à-vis exchange rate policy.
At the beginning of the transformation we were faced with the difficult choice of
setting an appropriate exchange rate.
On  the  eve  of  the  programme  of  price  and  trade  liberalisation  the  government
took the decision to use the exchange rate as a nominal anchor because in a small, open economy
the domestic price level is heavily affected by the exchange rate.
Having taken into account various considerations in December 1990, we fixed the
new exchange rate at 28 Czechoslovak crowns per US dollar, which then was about the middle
ground between  the  parallel  black  market  rate  and  the  calculated  cost  of  earning  one  dollar  of
foreign exchange.
BIS Review   25/1997
- 10 -
Since then the Czech crown has been pegged firstly to a basket of the currencies
of five major trading partners and since 1993, with a view to  the  development  of  the  currency
breakdown of  foreign  payments,  to  a  two-currency  basket  (65  per  cent  Deutsche  Mark  and  35
per cent US dollar).
The  improvement  in  macroeconomic  stability  and  relatively  high  foreign
exchange  reserves  created  good  starting  conditions  for  the  gradual  extension  of  the  Czech
crown’s convertibility.
Some  additional  measures  were  taken  in  1994  by  means  of  an  amendment  in
August 1994 to the Foreign Exchange Act. This amendment made it possible to export securities
denominated  in  Czech  currency;  foreign  exchange  permits  for  direct  investment  outside  the
Czech  Republic  were  provided  to  virtually  all  applicants  and  permit  procedures  for  obtaining
foreign exchange credits from abroad and for equity participation abroad were simplified.
Effective October 1, 1995 the Czech currency became convertible in accordance
with Article VIII of the IMF Articles of Agreement, and  the  country  became  a  member  of  the
OECD.  Under  the  new  Foreign  Exchange  Act  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments
was  liberalised  and  the  regulation  of  the  capital  account  was  substantially  reduced.  Only  the
establishment of  accounts  abroad  by  residents,  the  outright  purchase  of  securities  by  residents,
the  provision  of  financial  credits  to  non-residents  and  real  estate  purchases  by  non-residents
continue to be subject to regulation.
Textbook  analysis  (the  Mundell-Fleming  model  for  an  open  economy)
demonstrates  that  a  nation  under  a  fixed  nominal  exchange  rate  system  cannot  pursue  an
independent monetary policy. Developments in the Czech Republic in 1993-1995 confirms this
statement.  The  rapid  increase  in  net  foreign  assets  mentioned  above  had  to  be  dampened  by  a
smaller increase of domestic credits and in February 1996 gave rise to an important decision of
the CNB’s Board.
The Bank’s Board widened the band for the fluctuations of the crown’s exchange
rate from 0.5 per cent to 7.5 per cent, including the maintenance of a 0.25 per cent spread, i.e.
the  difference  between  the  buying  and  selling  rate  used  in  transactions  between  the  CNB  and
commercial banks at the foreign exchange fixing.
The CNB is prepared to intervene only in such a way that the exchange rate does
not deviate from the announced fluctuation  band.  In  January  1997  we  witnessed  an  interesting
and  rather  suprising  development.  In  spite  of  the  factors  working  in  the  medium  run  in  the
direction of depreciation (the higher inflation rate in the Czech Republic than in the countries of
our major trading partners and the increasing trade deficit) the exchange rate as hovering around
4  per  cent  in  the  revaluation  band!  The  explanation  is  given  by  the  theory  of  asset  demand  -
there is still a high demand for Czech crowns by foreign entities.
Inflation and monetary policy
Instead  of  using  money  supply  target  as  an  intermediary  target,  some  countries
(New  Zealand,  the  United  Kingdom  and  others)  aim  directly  at  inflation  goals  because  no
sufficiently reliable relation exists between any conceivable intermediate target and inflation.
BIS Review   25/1997
- 11 -
This practice has not been adopted in the Czech Republic because in transforming
economies the link between the money supply and the price level has some specific features.
Everybody  agrees  with  Friedman  that  inflation  is  always  and  everywhere  a
monetary phenomenon. It means that over the longer term, a general rise in prices is not possible
without an undue expansion of the money stock.
One  of  my  predecessors  in  this  series  of  lectures,  the  former  President  of  the
Swiss  National  Bank,  Dr.  Markus  Lusser,  declared  in  his  memorial  lecture  in  1994  that  in
Switzerland  the  time  lapse  between  the  introduction  of  monetary  policy  measures  and  their
impact on prices is two to three years.
BIS Review   25/1997
