Mr.  Desario  looks  at  the  financial  system  and  the  non-profit  sector  with
respect to ethics and solidarity in finance      Address  by  the  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of
Italy,  Dott. Vincenzo  Desario,  before  the  conference  on  “Italian  society  at  the  turn  of  the
millennium: opportunities and prospects of the non-profit and voluntary sector” held in Milan on
17/3/97.
The importance of the non-profit and voluntary sector is now appreciable not only
ethically  and  culturally,  as  a  tendency  whose  expansion  bears  witness  to  the  human  and  civic
development of Italian society, but also on the economic plane.
Everywhere,  substantial  budget  deficits  are  forcing  a  retrenchment  of  public
spending and more generally an attenuation of direct government involvement in the economy.
It follows that non-profit and voluntary organizations may play an ever-larger  role  in  reducing
social disparities, devising modes of intervention appropriate to the continually changing forms
in which inequality arises.
In  Italy  the  need  for  a  larger  and  stronger  non-profit  and  voluntary  sector  is
especially great, owing to the necessity of fiscal adjustment and the inefficiency afflicting public
services.
My  remarks 
the
relationships between ethics, solidarity and finance. I shall follow this with a description of the
non-profit  sector  and  some  observations  on  banking  foundations.  Finally  I  shall  examine  the
funding of the non-profit sector and its relations with the banking system.
today  begin  with  some  preliminary  considerations  on 
1. Ethics, solidarity and finance
The  changes  in  Italy’s  credit  and  financial  system  in  recent  years  reflect  the
concern of law-makers and supervisors to foster market values and competition. The principles
of transparency and fairness in relations between banks and customers not only are embedded in
rules  of  conduct  but  have  now  been  given  the  status  of  purposes  of  supervisory  activity  by
Legislative Decree 415 of 23 July 1996 transposing the EU Investment Services Directive  into
Italian law.
Reference to these principles is not merely ritual. It bids us to recognize that the
operating  environment  has  been  radically  transformed  and  now,  even  more  than  in  the  past,
demands the firm commitment of intermediaries to comply with the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the
rules of good faith and fairness.
These  values  are  inextricably  bound  up  with  the  relationship  between  bank  and
customer,  which  is  based  on  trust.  They  make  it  easier  to  face  the  challenges  of  competition.
They promote customer loyalty and enhance the bank’s reputation in the market.
Trust  is  essential  to  the  operation  and  growth  of  the  economy.  As  the  Nobel
Laureate Kenneth Arrow has observed “Virtually every commercial transaction has within itself
an element of trust, certainly any transaction conducted over a period of time. It can be plausibly
argued that  much  of  the  economic  backwardness  in  the  world  can  be  explained  by  the  lack  of
mutual confidence.” 1
                                                  
1
K.J. Arrow, "Gifts and Exchanges", Philosophy and Public Affairs ( 1972).
BIS Review   51/1997
- 2 -
The risk of a self-serving breach of trust by economic agents is one of  the  main
sources  of  transaction  costs,  in  that  it  necessitates  performance  bonds  and  monitoring  the
counterparty’s behaviour.
The most effective way of reducing transaction costs is for market participants to
adhere to the  precept  that  it  is  one’s  moral  duty  to  respect  others  and  not  to  betray  their  trust.
Widely shared ethical precepts and moral conduct strengthen agents’ credibility and reliability,
make  it  easier  to  reach  new  business  agreements  and  ultimately  increase  the  likelihood  of
success.
In  a  market  economy  the  credit  system  has  the  important  function  of  selecting
creditworthy  projects,  economic  initiatives  that  can  produce  new  benefits  and  increase  overall
social  welfare.  It  is  essential  for  every  bank  to  screen  borrowers  by  strictly  professional
standards based on technical assessment of projects’ risks and returns.
Inefficient assessment of creditworthiness results in significant losses. In markets
where  there  is  little  competition,  poor  asset  quality  is  reflected  in  higher  interest  rates,  with
adverse  repercussions  on  the  economy  as  a  whole.  In  more  competitive  markets,  with  their
narrower spreads, loan losses can lead to bank failures. And this affects other outstanding loans,
causes jobs to be lost and wipes out uninsured depositors’ savings, with the risk that the failure
may spread.
Customer confidence is the banking enterprise’s most valuable intangible asset. It
is  the  prerequisite  for  building  stronger  and  more  durable  customer  relations  that  can  be
broadened from simple loan disbursement to the entire range of firms’ financial needs.
With  trust,  there  is  a  better  likelihood  that  the  relationship  between  bank  and
customer  will  be  consolidated  as  a  “repeated  game”  in  which,  as  game  theory  teaches,  the
problems of opportunistic behaviour are overcome.2
This approach can be successful if the bank does not act in conflict of interest; if,
that is, it safeguards the interests of the customer together with its own, recommending financing
plans and instruments that are compatible with the customer’s projects, the state of the firm and
the prospects of its market.
In finance, solidarity can be expressed by paying more attention to the customer’s
needs, viewed comprehensively, and assisting the customer in making financial choices that best
serve the realization of corporate goals. Any short-term earnings loss will be offset by the future
income the bank will obtain as a result of the continuity of the relationship and from additional
corporate financial services.
The  principle  of  overcoming  conflict  of  interest  also  informs  proper  and
transparent relations with savers who entrust the bank with making an investment or managing
their financial assets. The intermediary that reconciles its own interest with the customer’s, that
makes customer assistance a conscious value of its corporate  culture,  perceiving  it  as  a  tool  of
competition, has a better chance of success in the financial markets.
                                                  
2
See,  for  example,  K.G.  Binmore,  Game  Theory  and  the  Social  Contract,  II  Just  Playing  (Cambridge,
Mass., 1994).
BIS Review   51/1997
- 3 -
The rule that one who acts on behalf of another must protect the latter’s interest
and  not  make  undisclosed  profits  from  this  management  activity  is  clearly  ethical  in  origin.  It
was first stated, as regards the law of trusts, in the Middle Ages in sentences handed down by the
Chancellor  of  the  King  of  England;  that  is,  by  a  judge,  ordinarily  also  a  bishop,  who  decided
lawsuits mainly on the basis of ethical and religious canons.
Effective,  correct  customer  assistance  is  premised  upon  thorough  knowledge  of
the customer. The “know your customer” rule has been reaffirmed recently by Italian financial
legislation.  Law  1/1991,  as  well  as  the  more  recent  legislative  decree  transposing  the  EU
Investment Services Directive, lays down that in carrying on securities activities the investment
firm must “acquire prior information about the financial situation of customers that is relevant to
the conduct of the activity.”
This  principle  was  made  applicable  to  the  entire  banking  and  financial  industry
with the publication of the Bank  of  Italy’s  anti-money-laundering  “Decalogue”,  which  stresses
that familiarity with the customer is essential not only for detecting suspect transactions but also
for maintaining stable customer relations.
Intermediaries  have  increasingly  recognized  the  importance  and  the  positive
implications of this rule. Appreciable steps towards self-regulation have been taken, such as the
code  of  conduct  for  banks,  adopted  in  1996,  which  sets  standards  of  fairness  in  dealings  with
customers. When they enjoy real consensus, such initiatives are an especially effective tool for
reinforcing  and  extending  the  rules  of  professional  ethics,  because  they  are  not  imposed  from
above but reflect the shared feelings of those involved.
In the public interest and in conformity with the law, the supervisory authorities
lay down prudential standards and rules of conduct covering all intermediaries. The authorities
are careful not to impose costs that  are  not  justified  by  greater  benefits  to  the  community  as  a
whole. They are guided by the best practices of the market. They check that intermediaries act
consistently with the principle of sound and prudent management.
Management  that  is  sound  -  i.e.  in  accordance  with  the  rules  derived  from
experience  and  the  theory  of  enterprise  (profitability),  not  subject  to  improper  influences
(independence) and based on correct business relations - and prudent - i.e. sensitive to risk - will
have  beneficial  results  in  terms  of  the  orderly  and  efficient  operation  of  the  economic  and
financial system.
Sound  and  prudent  management  is  an  overarching  criterion  for  supervisory
activity.  It  sums  up  the  values  of  stability,  efficiency,  integrity  and  proper  functioning  of  the
financial system. It is where systemic objectives and microeconomic goals meet. As a norm, it
requires  that  intermediaries’  dealings  with  firms  and  households  be  constantly  inspired  by  the
canons  of  business  and  professional  ethics,  transparency,  legality,  fair  competition.  Sound  and
prudent management is at once a technical rule and an ethical canon.
Safeguarding  competition  also  carries  a  deep  ethical  significance.  Abuse  of  a
dominant  position,  price  fixing,  or  collusive  agreement  on  practices  to  the  detriment  of
consumers allows intermediaries to reap unjustified profits and excludes those  who  cannot  pay
the  fixed  prices  from  enjoying  the  relevant  services.  Such  practices  generate  both  inefficiency
and inequity.
BIS Review   51/1997
2. The non-profit and voluntary sector
- 4 -
An abiding school of thought embracing analysts of differing backgrounds holds
that  a  democratic  political  system,  if  it  is  to  be  deeply  rooted  in  the  social  fabric,  must  be
articulated  in  a  tightknit  web  of  organizations  positioned  between  the  individual  and  the  state:
collective actors that enable citizens themselves to “become the state” by directly administering
and providing socially useful services.
As the French sociologist Emile Durkheim stressed, a nation can be said to exist
only if between the state and private citizens there is a whole series of  secondary  groups  close
enough to individuals to draw them forcefully into their field of action and so involve them in
the mainstream of social life.3
The  grass-roots  presence  of  associations,  mutual  societies,  communities  and
clubs,  networks  of  civic  commitment,  is  seen  by  some  scholars  as  a  decisive  factor  in
establishing  a  climate  of  reciprocal  confidence  and  social  cooperation,  which  is  necessary  to
launch a virtuous circle of economic development.4
The  non-profit  sector  is  defined  essentially  by  two  traits:  private  ownership  and
control and a ban on distributing profits. The latter feature does not imply that a non-profit body
cannot ever generate profits; what counts is that any net profits must be reinvested in the pursuit
and expansion of the organization’s activity, to finance its mandated purposes.
It  may  seem  surprising  that  in  a  market  economy  one  finds  associations,  clubs,
mutual societies, leagues and private cooperatives providing services without distributing profits
and  almost  always  operating  alongside  other  institutions,  such  as  the  family,  the  state,  and
business corporations. Yet historical experience teaches that the state-market dichotomy does not
exhaust all the ramifications of a modern  economic  and  social  system.  In  economic  theory  the
most  widely  accepted  explanations  for  the  existence  of  non-profit  enterprises  bear  on  market
“failures”,  which  are  generally  related  to  information  asymmetries,  i.e.  cases  in  which  the
independent  contracting  power  of  agents  does  not  ensure  sufficient 
transparency  or
comparability of services and products.
Especially where service quality is difficult to ascertain, there is room for the rise
and growth of non-profit enterprises. For the consumer, the ban on distributing profits is a signal
that the provider will not raise the price of the service without just cause or  reduce  its  quality.
Similar  assurance  is  offered  to  those  who  wish  to  make  donations  to  non-profit  agencies  that
assist the weak and the needy.
The ban on distributing profits fosters and strengthens the bonds of trust between
users, private donors and the service organization. It is a deterrent to the involvement of workers
and managers who would be inclined to pursue their own individual interests, those who are less
socially committed.
                                                  
3
E. Durkheim, The Division of Labour in Society (1893).
4
R.D.  Putnam,  Making  Democracy  Work:  Civic  Traditions  in  Modern  Italy  (Princeton,  N.J.,  Princeton
University Press, 1993).
BIS Review   51/1997
- 5 -
The  private  non-profit  organization  has  comparative  advantages  not  only  as
against  business  corporations  but  also  with  respect  to  public  provision  of  goods  and  services,
especially  those  earmarked  for  particular  segments  of  society.  By  virtue  of  more  efficient
collection and processing of “local” information, i.e. within circumscribed territories, non-profit
agencies cater more effectively to the particular needs of specific social groups or sectors.
These  are  services  that  require  more  of  a  grass-roots  presence  and  a  greater
capacity to target action to non-standardized needs. The state retains a comparative advantage in
the  provision  of  undifferentiated  public  services,  such  as  compulsory  schooling,  basic  health
care, and social security.
The non-profit and voluntary sector can play a major role in supplementing public
programmes  and  in  broadening  the  area  of  social  protection.  It  must  become  a  mechanism  for
soliciting and raising additional private resources, over and above government appropriations for
these purposes, in order to meet those needs that state action is inefficient in facing.
Italy’s unbalanced  economic  development  has  been  accompanied  by  phenomena
of social distress and has not succeeded, to date, in narrowing regional disparities.  The  growth
and  spread  of  social  solidarity,  volunteer  service  and  the  entire  non-profit  sector  is  highly
desirable  to  reinforce  the  pact  of  mutual  support  binding  the  national  community  at  the
institutional level and to make for fruitful, complementary relations between private and public
social welfare activities.
Delay in the development of the non-profit sector and excessive reduction of the
social role of the state, albeit for  budgetary  reasons,  could  place  the  whole  burden  of  assisting
society’s most vulnerable members on the family. Owing to the changes in society, the family is
no  longer  capable,  unaided,  of  dealing  with  the  complicated  problems  posed  by  the  modern
world.
3. The fight against usury: a case of complementarity between government and voluntary action
Solidarity means disinterested assistance to those in need. The traditional  ethical
condemnation of lending at interest, found in the Old Testament and in Aristotle, can be traced
back  to  the  ethical  principle  of  solidarity  whereby  one  must  help  the  needy  person,  not  take
advantage of his need. Leviticus reads: “And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay
with thee; then thou shalt relieve him; yea, though he be a stranger, or a sojourner; that he may
live  with  thee.  Take  thou  no  usury  of  him,  or  increase....  Thou  shalt  not  give  him  thy  money
upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase.”5
The  passage  from  condemnation  of  charging  of  interest  to  the  needy  to  the
outright condemnation of interest as such, found in other books of the Old Testament,6 is logical
in the historical context of a static, agrarian economy in which recourse to credit is not a normal
event  for  anyone  engaging  in  economic  activity  but  the  last  resort  of  victims  of  exceptional
adversity.
Even  today,  the  exploitation  of  the  weakness  of  those  in  need  is  an  element  in
                                                  
5
Leviticus 25, 35-37. See also Exodus 22, 25.
6
For example, Ezekiel 18, 13.
BIS Review   51/1997
- 6 -
usury,  an  odious  and  socially  destructive  practice  that  has  taken  on  alarming  dimensions  in
recent years.
The problem is delicate, complicated, and because of its emotional impact proper
analysis  of  the  issue  requires  an  effort  of  intellectual  lucidity  to  avoid  the  sort  of  crude
judgments that surface from time to time in the discussion.
The alleged inflexibility of legal intermediaries in granting loans is often cited as
a contributing cause of usury. But banks operate with the funds of their depositors, which  it  is
their duty to safeguard; accordingly they lend to those customers who are in a position to honour
their  obligations.  By  using  the  savings  it  has  collected  in  the  most  efficient  manner  and
protecting their value through sound and prudent management, the banking enterprise performs
its important economic function, combining private profit-seeking with the general interest.
It may be that some high-risk borrowers, at the margins of the credit market, find
it  hard  to  obtain  “legal”  credit.  These  borrowers,  who  tend  to  be  small  businesses  even  more
commonly  than  households,  may  fall  prey  to  usurers,  through  no  fault  of  the  legitimate
intermediaries subject to supervision.
Italy’s 1996 anti-usury law accords official recognition to the role played by the
voluntary sector in sparing enterprises and households the risk of having to turn to usurers. The
main  instrument  for  combating  usury  is  government  grants  to  non-profit  foundations  and
associations  that  already  administer  resources  deriving  from  private  donations,  to  be  used  as
security for bank loans at moderate rates of interest to persons in financial difficulty.
Italy  counts  a  good  number  of  associations  engaged  in  the  battle  against  usury.
There are eight officially recognized foundations active in prevention and assistance to victims.
Six  operate  in  the  central  and  southern  regions,  where  usury  is  most  widespread  and  perilous,
owing to its links with organized crime.
4. The banking foundations
As  I  mentioned,  non-profit  enterprises  develop  in  sectors  where  pronounced
informational  asymmetries  between  customers  and  service  providers  lead  the  public  to  prefer
services supplied by undertakings that do not distribute profits.
Informational  asymmetries  are  a  distinguishing  feature  of  the  banking  and
financial sector.
These two points may help to shed light on the creation of banks in the form  of
associations or foundations (savings banks first and foremost), which reached its peak during the
nineteenth century. These institutions served to counter usury and  to  overcome  the  aversion  of
“first-generation” savers towards the banking system.
The  great  banking  crises  of  the  thirties  fortified  the  role  of  the  public  banks,
which served to restore savers’ confidence in the banking system and allowed an orderly flow of
financing to the economy.
The  development  of  the  Italian  economy  and  decades  of  financial  stability
safeguarded  by  an  effective  system  of  public  supervision  brought  a  considerable  part  of  the
population into contact with the banking system. The evolution of markets and their increasing
BIS Review   51/1997
- 7 -
openness  brought  the  public  banks’  entrepreneurial  features  increasingly  to  the  fore,  with  a
corresponding de-emphasis of their original social functions.
The  reform  of  the  public  banks  that  Parliament  enacted  at  the  beginning  of  the
nineties  in  response  to  these  tendencies  sanctioned  the  passing  of  the  public  law  model  of
banking; the law separated the institutions’ original social-welfare and charitable purposes from
banking activity, assigning the former to the foundations and the latter to companies limited by
shares
The  most  compelling  reason  for  the  reform,  at  the  urging  of  the  supervisory
authorities, was to allow the introduction of organizational and operational models able to ensure
higher  standards  of  competitiveness  and  efficiency.  An  important  factor  was  the  central  role
assigned to banks’ capital by the supervisory system then being forged at Community level; the
limited scope for Italian public banks to raise funds directly in the equity market hindered their
growth and ability to compete.
The legislative solution adopted - the  original  institutions  to  remain  in  existence
after transferring their banking activity to companies limited by shares  -  also  sought  to  exploit
the valuable social and civic function that most of the public credit institutions had historically
performed.
Initially,  the  reform  legislation  was  basically  neutral  concerning  the  practical
options for the banking foundations; it defined the spectrum of activities open  to  them,  clearly
drew  the  border  between  banks  and  foundations,  and  laid  down  what  the  latter  could  not  do,
namely manage banks.
The  remodeled  foundations’  sizable  endowments  fueled  expectations  that  they
might  satisfy  the  growing  financial  needs  of  the  voluntary  and  non-profit  sector.  The  banking
foundations, it was felt, could fill the gap left by the shrinking of the welfare state; but in order
to occupy a central position in the nonprofit sector, it was argued, they had  to  dispose  of  their
equity interests in banks at once.
However, realizing the full potential of the banking foundations requires that they
cease being regarded as a pool  of  resources  to  be  dipped  into  indiscriminately  or  as  a  body  of
assets whose composition can be altered in order to pursue the most diverse purposes.
The  foundations  are  non-profit  operators  themselves  and  can  actively  contribute
to  the  non-profit  sector’s  development  by  identifying  areas  for  intervention  and  nurturing
socially useful initiatives. In deciding how to go about pursuing their objectives, the foundations
can  adopt  a  directly  operational  setup  and  manage  one  or  more  socially  useful  activities
themselves, under arrangements already adopted elsewhere and not new to Italy.
If they should decide instead to continue in the role of grant-making institutions,
in  order  to  make  a  truly  effective  contribution  they  must  develop  sufficient  skills  in  selecting
initiatives, monitoring the use of funds and assessing results.
Grant-making  plainly  entails  a  degree  of  specialization,  not  only  geographic  but
also  by  sector  of  socially  useful  activity.  In  effect,  the  data  assembled  by  the  Association  of
Italian  Savings  Banks  (ACRI)  via  reclassification  of  the  banking  foundations’  annual  accounts
and  a  survey  of  the  grants  made  by  the  81  ex-savings  bank  foundations  offers  evidence  of
growing  specialization.  Sorting  the  foundations  by  sectoral  concentration  of  grants  shows  that
BIS Review   51/1997
- 8 -
60.5 per cent allocated over half of their funding to a single sector or more than sixth tenths to
just two sectors in 1995.
There  is  some  tendency  away  from  small  grants,  although  these  are  still  very
common  among  the  smaller  foundations,  and  considerable  growth  in  multi-year  grants,  whose
share in total disbursements rose from 7.7 per cent in 1994 to 11.6 per cent in 1995. According
to the ACRI report, disbursements amounted to 211 billion lire in 1995, equal to a little less than
one third of the foundations’ net operating results and 7.8 per cent up on the 1994 figure of 196
billion.
The  banking  foundations’  activities  are  hampered  by  their  low  return  on  assets.
ACRI  calculates  that  the  ex-saving  bank  foundations’  overall  ratio  of  net  operating  results  to
assets  was  2  per  cent  in  the  1994-95  financial  year.  This  poor  performance,  though  an
improvement  on  1.43  per  cent  in  the  previous  financial  year,  reflects  the  modest  return  on
holdings of bank shares, dividends from which account for 80 per cent of the result.  Thus,  the
ability  of  the  foundations  to  fulfil  their  institutional  purposes  depends  largely  on  cyclical
conditions in the banking industry.
It  is  incumbent  on  the  foundations  to  seek  an  optimal  return  on  their  capital,  in
order  to  preserve  its  real  value  and  ensure  the  continuity  of  their  activities.  This  will  require
greater asset diversification, a necessary condition for the foundations’ assuming a more fertile,
autonomous role in the social sphere.
Fostering such a role is the basic objective of the provisions for the revision of the
civil-law and tax treatment of the banking foundations in the Government’s recent enabling bill,
which  are  meant  to  encourage  them  to  dispose  of  their  bank  shares.  The  proposed  legislation
would  provide  tax  incentives  for  the  operations  connected  with  privatization;  unlike  earlier
proposals, it sets no deadline for the sale of bank shares.
The decision to encourage rather than order such disposals and to allow them  to
be spread out over time appears appropriate. It is compatible with the objective of respecting the
decision-making autonomy of the parties involved and improving the profitability of banks so as
to enhance the attractiveness of their shares. And it creates scope for the stock market to be able
to  absorb  the  shares  of  the  banks,  without  excess  supply  depressing  the  placement  price.  The
foundations  will  have  a  better  chance  to  dispose  of  their  bank  equity  with  the  necessary
gradualness.  The  incentives  for  the  sale  of  bank  shares  will  facilitate  the  reorganization  of  the
banking system and foster an increase in bank size, especially if the sales bring in authentic fresh
capital.
However, the  breadth  of  the  delegation  of  powers  contemplated  by  the  enabling
bill  and,  above  all,  the  diversity  of  its  objectives  are  such  that  a  well-defined  legislative
framework is not yet discernible. The parliamentary debate will have to fill in gaps and resolve
uncertainties.  The  proposed  establishment  of  a  regulatory  authority  for  non-profit  institutions,
including the banking foundations. deserves some comment. This authority would be assigned to
oversee  the  legitimacy  of  the  actions  of  the  foundations’  governing  bodies,  their  sound  and
prudent management, the return on assets, and their effective pursuit of the aims specified in the
bylaws. Its powers would also include authorizing transformations and combinations, passing on
amendments to bylaws, removing the governing bodies and dissolving foundations in the event
of  repeated  management  irregularities,  setting  a  minimum  proportion  of  income  (not  less  than
one  half)  that  must  be  allocated  to  institutional  purposes,  and  acting  in  lieu  of  the  governing
bodies for individual acts.
BIS Review   51/1997
- 9 -
Beyond  a  certain  point,  it  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  the  intensity  of  the  planned
administrative controls with the degree of autonomy that recognition of the institutions’ private
nature would imply. Nonetheless, the experience of foreign jurisdictions with longer traditions in
this  field  shows  that  some  form  of  supervision  on  the  foundations  and  non-profit  sector  in
general  remains  appropriate,  especially  as  regards  entitlement  to  favourable  tax  treatment.
However, supervision should be calibrated so as to avoid stifling the initiative of the non-profit
institutions, draining their capacity to act and ultimately reducing the benefits to civil society.
5. Financing the non-profit and voluntary sector
There  are  four  possible  sources  of  funds  for  the  non-profit  sector:  private
donations, government transfers, debt capital and self-financing.
Government  contributions  bulk  large  in  Italy,  whereas  private  donations  are
marginal.  The  relationship  between  the  two  is  specular,  and  in  fact  in  countries  where  private
donations play a larger role they are encouraged by favourable tax treatment.
Banks can help to increase the flow of private donations to non-profit enterprises
by offering their customers specially designed financial instruments; for example, the so-called
“ethical”  funds  and  accounts  that  some  financial  intermediaries  have  promoted,  whose  rules
require subscribers or depositors to assign all or part of their income from the investment to non-
profit institutions.
These  products  can  involve  financing  as  well  as  donations;  alongside  the
assignment  of  customer  earnings  or  capital  gains,  there  is  often  an  obligation  for  the
intermediary to invest the monies received only in undertakings that conform to certain ethical
standards or pursue specific objectives.
The  organizational  and  opportunity  costs  of  launching  such  initiatives  are
compensated  for  by  the  enhanced  reputation  and  standing  that  the  intermediary  enjoys  among
socially aware customers.
The specific advantage of banks’ interposition with regard to charitable donations
stems  from  their  placement  power:  branch  networks,  which  give  banks  an  edge  in  supplying
their  own  financial  products  and  those  of  others,  also  put  them  in  a  strong  position  to  sell
“ethical” products to their customers.
Where profit-seeking intermediaries offer customers financial products earmarked
to  fund  the  non-profit  sector,  organizational  and  accounting  controls  are  necessary  to  ensure
transparency.
Other conditions being  equal,  two  factors  may  handicap  non-profit  undertakings
in raising debt capital. First, the rule prohibiting distribution of profits may strike the prospective
lender  as  likely  to  erode  operating  efficiency  in  the  long  run.  Whereas  for  commercial
enterprises the profit motive is the mainspring of survival and growth, for non-profit institutions
there is a problem of ensuring that the altruistic drive does not flag over time. On the other hand,
the ban on distributing profits is also a point of strength, since it allows non-profit enterprises to
screen  and  select  collaborators,  workers  and  managers  who  share  their  altruistic  objectives  of
service.
BIS Review   51/1997
- 10 -
The  second  adverse  factor  is  linked  to  the  eventuality  of  the  non-profit
undertaking failing to repay the loan. In this event, a bank  bringing  action  for  forced  recovery
would  run  the  risk  of  appearing  to  put  its  own  interests  before  the  social,  humanitarian  or
charitable purposes of the distressed undertaking.
Financial  support  can  be  provided  to  the  non-profit  and  voluntary  sector  by
intermediaries  that  exclusively,  prevalently  or  even  only  occasionally  engage  in  such  lending
(so-called  “ethical”  intermediation).  The  record  shows  a  variety  of  such  experiences  in  many
countries.
To  cite  a  few  significant  examples,  Ökobank  in  Germany,  which  focuses  on
environmental and peace issues, had 63,000 customers and 170 billion lire of deposits in 1993;
in  the  Netherlands,  Triodos  Bank,  of  the  eponymous  association  for  social  development  and
environmental  protection,  accounts  for  2.5  per  cent  of  the  country’s  total  bank  deposits;  in
Switzerland, the banner experience is that of Alternative Bank ABS, which in 1992 had around
106  billion  lire  of  loans  outstanding  to  local  non-profit  enterprises  and  associations  for  third-
world development.
Other intermediaries concentrate on fostering small business in the third world or
in economically depressed areas of the industrialized countries.
The best-known example is Grameen Bank of Bangladesh, which lends to farmers
in  the  poorest  rural  areas.  The  key  to  its  success  is  its  technique  of  forming  small  groups  of
customers  who  take  part  in  training  workshops  that  also  serve  to  select  the  creditworthy.  The
small  loans  disbursed  to  them  are  gradually  scaled  up  if  each  member  of  the  group  meets  the
repayment terms. The bank’s high credit quality testifies to the efficacy both of the method used
for  assessing  creditworthiness  and  of  the  system  of  cross-monitoring  among  members  of  a
group. The high risk that nonetheless characterizes the bank’s activity made it advisable for it to
fund its loans primarily with public contributions and the  bank’s  own  resources,  part  of  which
was paid in by the beneficiaries of its lending.
In the  United  States,  a  very  interesting  case  is  that  of  the  Illinois  Neighborhood
Development Corporation, created by non-profit shareholders and licensed to engage in banking
since the seventies. The bank initially operated in one of the worst slums of Chicago, the South
Shore,  and  endeavoured  to  redevelop  the  area  particularly  by  giving  minority  groups  more
access to credit. The programme’s success allowed it to be extended to other rundown, outlying
neighbourhoods.  Thanks  to  its  skilled  and  highly-motivated  staff,  this  bank  has  combined
rigorous  lending  standards  with  a  variety  of  assistance  and  promotional  services,  operating  in
compliance with the normal banking supervisory requirements.
A  complete  review  of  the  experiences  in  various  countries  would  also  have  to
include  the  cases  of  failure  and  those  demonstrating  the  difficulty  of  transplanting  successful
initiatives to different social and institutional settings.
For  an  “ethical”  intermediary  actually  to  achieve  comparative  advantages  in
financing  the  non-profit  and  voluntary  sector,  various  conditions,  not  always  easily  satisfied,
have  to  be  met:  a  highly  motivated  staff,  for  one,  and  savers  receptive  to  the  ethical  aims
pursued and willing to support them over time with deposits.
The  affinity  of  ideals  between  the  bank  and  the  borrower  must  not  tempt  the
former to relax its technical standards of customer selection or neglect to heed the principle of
BIS Review   51/1997
- 11 -
operating profitability. Specialization in the non-profit and voluntary sector must be compatible
with the key principle of the banking system. Operating losses could not only cause the bank to
fail but also have adverse repercussions on similar initiatives.
The success  of  such  projects  essentially  depends  on  devising  techniques  to  limit
the  credit  risk  while  simultaneously  upholding  both  the  “mission”  of  funding  the  non-profit
sector and the banking industry’s standards of competence and prudence.
When a bank is to be established that intends to finance the non-profit sector by
taking  deposits  from  the  public,  the  above  prudential  recommendations  become  especially
cogent.  History  shows  how  high  the  social  costs  of  bank  failures  can  be,  and  how  complex  is
recourse to the instruments that make up the system’s crisis “safety net”.
 Modern economic theory accepts the principle that a solid ethical commitment is
also economically rational. The propagation of virtuous conduct is a value in and of itself, in that
it  lends  strength  and  security  to  economic  agents,  averting  costs  and  formalities  that  would
otherwise be necessary. This reinforces the ties between ethics and finance, between ethics and
business.
Ethical and moral principles are increasingly taking root among economic agents,
producing closer links between the social dimension and the markets.
Modern  society  is  very  attentive  and  sensitive  to  these  values.  The  demand  for
ethical conduct is ever broader and stronger.
Establishing  relations  of  trust  with  customers  invigorates  financial  activity.  The
intermediary must adopt the principle of proper assistance to the customer, of serving the latter’s
best interest. In a framework of competition between financial operators, this must be effected in
conformity with the intrinsically ethical standard of sound and prudent management.
When non-profit institutions are formally organized as enterprises, i.e. when they
are based on the principle that revenues must cover costs, they  can  turn  to  the  banking  system
and  the  capital  markets  for  financing  to  supplement  their  endowments,  private  donations  and
public contributions.
In countries where the non-profit sector has grown  to  significant  dimensions,  its
enterprises  compete  with  commercial  firms  in  the  product  markets  and  in  the  market  for
financial  resources.  They  obtain  funds  from  commercial  intermediaries  on  the  basis  of  proven
solvency and established reputation.
In Italian law the formation and the range of  business  of  an  intermediary  whose
vocation  is  to  finance  the  non-profit  sector  cannot  deviate  from  the  rules  governing  financial
activities in general. These rules respond to needs and interests, including ethical interests, of the
first order, which are expressed in the canon of sound and prudent management and the values
of stability and efficiency.
Only within this framework can financial institutions dedicated to lending to the
non-profit sector succeed, enhancing the contribution of finance to the growth of solidarity and
voluntary agencies.
BIS Review   51/1997
