Mr.  Kent  examines  the  challenges  facing  the  UK  commercial  property
market as it moves towards the 21st century   Speech by Mr. Pen Kent, an Executive Director
of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  The  Investment  Property  Forum  Annual  Lunch  in  London  on
15/1/97.
Introduction
1  The IPF has built up a significant and diverse membership in recent years and
has deservedly become one of the most prominent and respected trade associations within your
industry. I am delighted to have the opportunity to address you all this afternoon.
2    When  Mark  Burton  suggested  that  I  might  look  back  at  developments  in  the
commercial property market during the eight years that I have been doing my present job, that
appealed to me because I shall be retiring from the Bank next month. But I also like to look to
the future and to identify coming issues and challenges. With that in mind, I will also pick out
some of the factors relevant to the industry as it moves forward.
The Past
3    My  involvement  with  commercial  property  began  in  1985,  when  plans  for
Canary  Wharf  were  beginning  to  materialise.  One  of  the  questions  put  to  the  Bank  by  the
developers  was  whether  we  would  change  our  policy  encouraging  banks  to  have  their  offices
close to the Bank. We recognised  that  our  policy  was  distorting  the  market  and  we  decided  to
make the change. I have followed the property story ever since. But, for today’s purposes, I shall
take  as  my  starting  point  a  speech  given  by  the  previous  Governor  to  the  RICS  in  Paris  in
October  1989.  You  will  recall  that  everything  in  the  garden  then  seemed  rosy.  Cranes  were
everywhere  on  the  horizon;  there  was  an  expectation  that  rents  and  capital  values  could  only
move upwards. Banks were developing innovative financing techniques and competing fiercely
with one another to finance all this activity. Income returns were not out of the ordinary but the
market was underpinned by the prospect of capital gain.
4    Yet  some  participants  and  commentators  were  beginning  to  have  concerns
about  the  scale  of  development.  The  Governor  questioned  whether  there  would  be  sufficient
demand for the supply coming on stream. He noted too the banks’ rapidly growing exposure to
the sector. The sector was quite simply heading for overcapacity and overgearing. Why did the
lenders  not  see  it  coming?  Perhaps  inability  or  unwillingness  to  see  the  big  picture  was  one
reason  -  but  more  of  that  later.  We  have  been  asked  quite  often  why  we  as  the  supervisor  of
banks  did  not  stop  them  overlending.  The  answer  remains  the  same.  The  banks  have  to  be
responsible  for  their  own  commercial  decisions.  We  are  there  to  protect  their  depositors,  not
their shareholders. But we can usefully draw their attention to gathering clouds - and that is what
we did.
5  As we all know, the required level of demand did not materialise. The resultant
oversupply  of  space  contributed  to  one  of  the  most  severe  downturns  that  the  commercial
property industry has ever seen.  Since  then,  other  asset  classes  have  outperformed  commercial
property  in  most  years.  Many  institutional  investors  have  responded  by  continuing  to  reduce
their  property  holdings.  Property  companies  have  suffered;  we  have  seen  some  high  profile
failures  and  reschedulings.  The  banks  have  suffered  very  sizeable  losses  on  commercial
property.  Construction  companies  and  associated  professions  such  as  architects  and  designers
have suffered from the reduced workload on commercial property. And we must not forget the
BIS Review   11/1997
- 2 -
valuing  and  surveying  professions;  the  upturn  in  insolvency-related  work  was  not  sufficient  to
offset lower turnover and the corresponding heavy pressure on fees.
6    Possibly  the  only  ones  to  benefit  from  the  downturn  were  tenants  fortunate
enough to sign new leases in an environment of falling rents. The modest extent of subsequent
development has probably meant that even these ‘beneficiaries’ have had a more limited choice
of accommodation.
7    Other  factors  have  also  made  the  market  very  challenging,  especially  for
investors  and  lenders.  These  have  included  the  speed  of  building  obsolescence  and  growing
pressure on companies to manage property resources more effectively. Several initiatives aimed
at enhancing the  market’s  efficiency  and  attractiveness  made  little  headway  in  the  first  half  of
the  1990s.  These  included  efforts  to  enhance  liquidity,  to  develop  property  derivatives,  and  to
improve  information  on  the  very  sizeable  part  of  the  market  that  is  not  ‘prime’.  In  addition,
efforts  to  enhance  transparency  have  not  progressed  as  well  as  I  myself  and  many  market
participants had hoped.
8    There  have  of  course  been  some  positive  developments,  such  as  the
development  by  BZW  of  Property  Investment  Certificates,  the  growing  importance  of  data
produced by the Investment Property Databank, and the development by RICS of new valuation
standards  in  the  revised  Red  Book.  Some  of  the  trade  associations,  such  as  the  IPF  and  the
Association  of  Property  Bankers,  have  also  developed  well  and  have  begun  to  play  a  very
important role. I believe the Bank of England’s Property Forum, set up in 1993 to bring all sides
of the industry together, has also made  a  positive  contribution.  But  these  developments  cannot
obscure the fact that, on the whole, this period has been one of disappointment. Property’s poor
performance  in  the  past  few  years  has  undoubtedly  caused  some  to  consider  very  carefully
whether or not they wish to remain in property.
The Present
9  Are we turning a corner? The commercial property market is important to the
UK  economy  in  many  ways.  Property  and  related  activities  such  as  construction  make  a
significant contribution to GDP. The availability  of  property  of  the  right  standards  at  the  right
price  is  very  important  to  UK  competitiveness.  This  puts  some  onus  on  landlords  to  provide
what is wanted. It is equally important that the planning authorities should continue to provide a
consistent and flexible planning framework in which developers and landlords can  operate  and
earn  a  satisfactory  return.  It  is  pleasing  that  the  market  is  at  last  beginning  to  show  signs  of
strengthening. Indeed there is some evidence of incipient overheating.
10  Many institutional investors are taking the view that commercial property will
be one of the better performing asset classes over the next couple of years and there is significant
buying  activity  both  from  UK  and  overseas.  There  are  increasing  signs  of  development,
involving  both  institutional  investors  and,  on  quite  a  large  scale,  property  companies.  And  the
banks too have been showing strong interest in  the  sector,  with  many  new  entrants  joining  the
large number of more established participants.
11  Finally, there are encouraging signs of progress on several initiatives. The IPF
has made its case to the Treasury for a change in the tax status of securitised vehicles, and others
are  looking  to  develop  existing  routes.  Many  investors  are  telling  us  that  progress  on
securitisation will be crucial if they are to remain in  property  at  all,  so  the  better  tone  is  not  a
valid excuse to give up on structural improvements to the market. There is welcome progress on
BIS Review   11/1997
- 3 -
the  derivatives  front,  through  BZW’s  Property  Index  Forward  instrument  and  the  REIM
initiative.  Some  participants  are  showing  interest  in  improving  the  quality  of  market
information.  The  Incorporated  Society  of  Valuers  and  the  RICS  are  funding  research  by  IPD
into the performance of the secondary market and, although this project is still in its infancy, I
hope very much that you will support these efforts as the project develops. Indeed, on the basis
that transparency generally improves the performance  of  markets,  I  would,  personally,  support
John  Ritblat’s  opinion  that  commercial  transaction  prices  should  be  made  public  through  the
land register. Some of you would lose proprietorial advantage as a result in the short term, but in
the long run a more liquid market benefits the most professional more than the free riders.
12  It would, however, be rash to conclude that the market is now unambiguously
healthy in all respects. There are still several factors which will continue to  pose  challenges  to
the investment,  banking  and  valuing  communities.  For  example,  while  lease  lengths  may  have
temporarily  stabilised,  break  clauses  exercisable  by  tenants  are  becoming  more  common.  And
despite the positive  tone  of  the  recent  CBI/Grimley  survey,  it  is  clear  too  that  many  occupiers
will  continue  over  the  long-term  to  reduce  their  needs  for  space  and  to  demand  greater
flexibility. Privity of contract has disappeared on new leases. All of these factors are making it
less straightforward to  form  a  view  of  the  quality  of  cashflow  likely  to  stem  from  a  particular
building.
13    There  is  a  sizeable  overhang  of  unlet  secondary  property.  The  pool  of  such
property increases every time that a major user of space moves into new offices and releases its
former premises. While some of the better quality secondary property can be refurbished at  an
economic price and relet, much of this stock may never again be relet for its present use and may
not lend itself readily to conversion for alternative uses. This will continue to exert a dampening
influence on the market, and imaginative solutions will be needed.
The Future
14  So, the market may be  improving  but  it  is  still  not  easy.  How  is  the  market
likely to develop over the next eight years? What will I be saying if you invite me back in the
year 2005?
15  As we all know, the property market has, historically, moved in cycles. Some,
notably  RICS,  have  done  work  to  develop  our  understanding  of  these  cycles.  The  economic
cycle itself is clearly one of the driving factors, though it is clear too that property is subject to
its own fluctuations and its own step changes. Contributing factors include the strength of tenant
demand,  the  activities  of  developers  and  the  willingness  of  lenders  to  finance  investment  and
development.
16  My story in the future could be similar - perhaps depressingly similar - to my
review  of  the  recent  past.  Many  of  the  ‘ingredients’  that  contributed  to  the  last  cycle  are
certainly present now. Institutional investors are attracted to the sector in the short-term but they
could easily resume their longer-term departure from property in a couple of years. This could
happen if property’s performance runs out of steam as the economic cycle progresses and other
asset  classes  begin  to  look  more  attractive.  It  is  conceivable  that  the  banks  might  become
disillusioned  with  property  again,  particularly  if  they  relax  their  lending  criteria  too  far  in  the
current exceptionally competitive lending market. This could also happen if they are seduced by
the  outlook  for  the  better  properties  into  taking  excessive  risks  on  the  secondary  and  tertiary
sectors, for which the outlook generally appears rather less bright. We are in favour of healthy
competition  among  lenders  but  history  suggests  that  the  seeds  of  tomorrow’s  losses  are  sown
BIS Review   11/1997
- 4 -
when lenders relax the basics such as loan to value ratios and income cover; or when they take
very bullish views on the likely strength of cashflows. We hear that some lenders are seeking to
pressurise  valuers  into  higher  valuations.  This  is  not  a  healthy  practise  and  we  hope  both  the
lenders and the valuing profession will be strong enough to resist and will stick to the principles
of the new Red Book.
17  There are undoubtedly differences between 1989 and this stage of the present
cycle,  perhaps  the  most  notable  of  which  are  the  comparatively  limited  scale  of  speculative
development and more realistic expectations. And notwithstanding my rather jaundiced remarks
above about forgotten lessons, some of the risks involved in commercial property are now better
understood. This could simply mean that this cycle will repeat history but in a less pronounced
way than last time. Perhaps I should at this point recognise the VAT changes announced in the
last budget. These have caused a strong reaction from the property industry. They have caused a
halt  to  a  number  of  major  deals.  I  do  not  know  how  the  matter  will  be  resolved  and  will  not
speculate whether the  impact  will  be  lasting.  More  of  that  no  doubt  in  coming  weeks.  But  are
there any other new influences which could bring about a different - and better - outcome than
the  last  cycle?  There  are  at  least  four  other  important  factors  which  arguably  did  not  exist  in
1989. They may all make the market less volatile in the years ahead. Let me be a bit visionary.
18  The first of these is a low inflationary environment. The political constituency
for low inflation is now almost certainly stronger than at any time in living memory. There is a
real prospect that a low inflation environment can be sustained into the future. This is a profound
change and should help to smooth the path of future economic cycles. This environment is likely
to mean slower growth in nominal rents and also less volatile capital values. The emphasis will
continue to change from capital gain to running yield. Poor investment or loan decisions will not
be  forgiven  by  inflation.  This  environment  will  alter  attitudes  to  property,  especially  among
users  who  will  increasingly  regard  it  purely  as  a  factor  of  production  subject  to  the  full
disciplines of cost controls. But lower nominal rents need not mean lower real income.
19    The  second  fundamental  difference  lies  in  the  role,  and  potential,  of  the
Private Finance Initiative. In many ways, the PFI simply reflects processes already underway in
the private sector whereby occupiers are seeking more flexible arrangements and are prepared to
pay a price for changing the traditional relationship between landlord and tenant. It opens up the
possibilities  for  more  imaginative  use  of  property,  and  the  principles  are  applicable  both  to
public and private sector users of property. The providers of services, whether public sector or
private, no longer want automatically to own the productive assets needed to provide them. They
prefer  to  rent  them  instead  with  a  higher  level  of  service  as  part  of  the  deal.  Landlords  with
property expertise are well placed to provide this wider type of service and have a competitive
advantage  in  doing  so  compared  with  less  experienced  operators.  And  maybe  the  word
“property” will itself imply something too narrow. Owners will provide a working environment.
They may move from “core and shell” to “finish and  facilitate”.  Indeed  in  some  PFI  cases  the
owners  will  go  even  further  and  operate  as  well,  “provide  and  process”  you  might  say.  This
would  give  outsourcing  a  new  meaning.  Perhaps  from  your  point  of  view  it  should  be  called
insourcing. If risks are properly identified and priced, the PFI potentially can provide the longer-
term bond-type investments that many of you are seeking. It offers great opportunities to all of
you. This revolution has only just begun.
20 A third issue that is particularly relevant now is technology. It has undoubtedly
contributed  to  property  obsolescence.  But  technology  is  potentially  an  important  ally,  and  in
more senses than one. Developments in building and construction techniques, as well as smaller
and more powerful machinery and computer technology, facilitate the construction of buildings
BIS Review   11/1997
- 5 -
that  meet  occupiers’  needs.  Information  technology  enhances  the  usability  and  efficiency  of
property  as  an  asset  class.  Just  as  Mr.  Otis  made  skyscrapers  possible,  one  of  you  will  create
completely new configurations of site exploitation - or develop new and integrated relationships
between  different  buildings.  The  automobile  and  advertising  have  entirely  altered  the  shape,
size,  appearance  and  location  of  shops  in  the  USA  -  and  to  a  lesser  extent  here.  But  today’s
offices still look pretty much to me like those designed by Frank Lloyd  Wright.  Is  there  scope
for  an  IT  driven  revolution  in  the  next  eight  years  in  which  the  working  environment  is
transformed into a virtual reality? I do not know but I am convinced we ain’t seen nothing yet.
21    The  fourth  factor  could  make  an  important  difference  -  greater  market
liquidity  and  instruments  such  as  derivatives  which  will  facilitate  short-term  tactical  position-
taking or investment. The enthusiasm and momentum for them is apparent both from what the
market  tells  us  and  from  recent  surveys.  A  clear  message  from  our  wide  range  of  property
contacts is that greater liquidity is essential if commercial property is to remain attractive as an
asset  class.  There  is  equally  a  clear  message  that  successful  development  of  securitisation  and
derivatives will not on its own  be  the  saviour  of  commercial  property.  But  without  it  property
will not  turn  in  a  performance  which  can  stand  comparison  with  competing  assets.  We  need  a
mature,  liquid  cash  market  in  property  with  a  healthy  derivative  market  to  permit  successful
management of risk. These are essential characteristics of efficient markets which are necessary
for  efficient  use  of  property  by  users  as  a  factor  of  production.  Without  such  a  development
there is a risk that the costs of doing business in the UK will be uncompetitively high. I do not
know how, or indeed whether, the  obstacles  to  the  development  of  such  markets  can  be  easily
found. But I regard these issues as nationally important.
Conclusion
22  So, what is likely to happen in the next eight years? Let me sum up my vision.
23    The  current  strong  commitment  to  keeping  inflation  in  check  will  create
conditions  more  conducive  to  rational  long-term  decisions.  Commercial  property  is  still  to  a
large  extent  a  longer-term  asset  and  should  benefit  from  this  environment.  The  market  will
require property investors and owners to recognise and adapt to changing requirements from the
users,  particularly  their  increasing  wish  to  manage  the  risks  of  property  occupation  more
efficiently.  It  will  require  a  willingness  to  work  in  partnership  with  tenants  and  to  exploit  the
benefits  of  technology  to  the  full.  Lenders  and  other  property  professionals  will  need  to
understand and embrace these changes. I know that some of you already recognise this. Some of
you are not afraid of the PFI. We have recently had the end of history, the end of politics. Will
the end of distance be next? Will “location, location, location” be replaced by “communications,
communications, communications”?
24  This environment offers opportunities which you may - or may not - wish to
take. Those who take these opportunities will be the survivors and thrivers. I leave you with my
old  refrain  ringing  in  your  ears:  transparency;  liquidity;  intelligent  investment;  revenue  not
capital gain; innovation - all the qualities of a deep, high quality market place.
BIS Review   11/1997
