Mr. Macfarlane discusses monetary policy and economic growth in Australia
Talk by the Governor of the Reserve Bank  of  Australia,  Mr.  I.J.  Macfarlane,  to  the  Australian
Institute  of  Company  Directors  (Western  Australia  Division)  Winter  Dinner  held  in  Perth  on
12/8/97.
1. Introduction
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  in  Perth  to  address  the  Western  Australian  Division  of  the
Institute of Company Directors. It is also fitting that I should be talking about economic growth,
since Western Australia has set an example to the rest of Australia by its high growth rate in the
1990s.  Some  would  say  this  is  inevitable,  given  its  resource  base,  but  we  have  seen
internationally that the fastest growth does not coincide with the biggest resource endowments.
Enterprise  and  a  willingness  to  embrace  change  are  also  vital  ingredients,  and  here  Western
Australia has also distinguished itself.
In  the  Reserve  Bank  we  are  often  drawn  into  a  discussion  of  economic  growth
because  of  claims  that  we  have  a  “growth  ceiling”  of  3½  per  cent  per  annum.  I  do  not  know
where this perceived ceiling came from, and I have on several occasions denied its existence. I
will do so again tonight.
It has been suggested to me that one of the reasons for this belief is that I have often highlighted
the data contained in Table 1 below, particularly when  I  have  been  doing  my  patriotic  duty  in
Table  1: OECD  GDP  Growth  Over  the  Past  Six  Years
(Average annualised growth)
Ireland
Australia
Norway
New Zealand
United States
United Kingdom
Canada
Denmark
Netherlands
Austria
Japan
Spain
Finland
Germany
Belgium
France
Italy
Sweden
Switzerland
Real  GDP
6.4
3.5
3.5
3.4
2.7
2.4
2.2
2.1
2.0
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.3
0.9
0.9
-0.1
Source: OECD
BIS Review   75/1997
- 2 -
front of audiences of overseas investors. It shows that over the past six years, that
is  the  period  of  the  current  expansion,  we  have  grown  at  an  annual  average  growth  rate  of
3.5 per  cent.  This  is  very  good  by  the  standards  of  the  “high  income  OECD  countries”.  Only
Ireland has done better, and Norway and New Zealand have grown at about the same rate as we
have.  These  are  all  much  smaller  countries  than  we  are  (their  combined  GDP  is  less  than
Australia’s).  The  other  thing  that  stands  out  from  this  table  is  how  well  the  English-speaking
countries have done in the nineties; the six English-speaking countries are in the top seven spots.
The 3½ per cent per annum contained in this table is there for international comparisons, not as a
yardstick  for  what  we  can  do  this  year,  next  year  or  the  year  after.  For  a  start,  that  six-year
average of 3½ per cent contains years like the past 12 months where we have achieved only 2.4
per cent, but there are other periods like the year to September 1994 when we managed 5½ per
cent.
2.  Economic growth over the cycle
While we do not have a growth target or growth ceiling, we do have an inflation
target.  This  says  that  inflation  should  average  somewhere  between  2  and  3  per  cent  over  the
medium term. That is, when we look back, we should see that it has averaged 2 point something
per  cent,  even  if  we  have  been  over  3  per  cent  on  some  occasions  and  below  2  per  cent  on
others.
This approach is not, as some might think, anti-growth. It is, in fact, pro growth
by favouring forward looking management of the business cycle, which will help in achieving a
stable platform for long-run growth. The other way of expressing an inflation target is to say that
the  economy  should  grow  as  fast  as  possible  consistent  with  maintaining  low  inflation,  but  no
faster. We say no faster because post-war experience in a number of countries has shown us that
allowing  inflation  to  rise  too  much  actually  harms  growth  prospects  in  the  longer  term.
Sustained periods of strong growth have always gone hand in hand with low inflation. Weaker
growth  occurred  in  the  high  inflation  era,  particularly  between  the  mid-seventies  and  mid-
eighties.
We have also emphasised that it is the length of the expansion that is important.
Our last two expansions were cut short by inflationary pressures after about six-and-a-half years.
It would probably be possible on this occasion to engineer a short-lived boom, characterised by
rising  output  and  falling  unemployment,  but  also  by  increasing  inflation,  unrealistically  high
asset values, inflated paper wealth and financial instability - which is, of course, a recipe for  a
slump thereafter. Recessions may come for some other reasons, but there is no reason to run  a
high risk of a self-inflicted one. It is important that we take a longer view in order to achieve a
longer expansion. The value of the inflation targeting regime is that it forces us to do precisely
that. That is why I am confident that, under our present arrangements, we will be able to do all
that can be done to foster a long expansion.
What  does  this  mean  for  the  next  couple  of  years?  That  is  really  a  matter  of
forecasting  rather  than  speed  limits.  With  inflation  tamed,  and  with  some  slack  available,  we
should be quite capable of  growing  by  3½  per  cent,  4  per  cent,  4½  per  cent  (or  possibly  even
faster) over the next couple of years without any significant detrimental effect on inflation. None
of  these  figures  is  a  target;  they  are  simply  illustrative  of  the  sorts  of  numbers  we  might
reasonably expect to see after a period of sub-par growth such as 1996.
Ideally,  as  we  grow  fast  enough  to  take  up  existing  slack,  businesses  would  lift
investment rates further, pushing the capacity constraints further back. If, at the same time, we
found that labour market arrangements were able to bring new employees onto payrolls without
BIS Review   75/1997
- 3 -
generalised  pressure  on  wages,  we  would  be  able  to  sustain  faster  growth  for  longer.  In  other
words, by having a longer expansion, we would be able to drive unemployment down further.
How likely is that outcome? It is hard to say. We do not have a doctrinaire view
on what can be achieved. We will evaluate the evidence as it comes in. Critical in that evidence
is the course of prices. The main test of what is sustainable on the growth front is the inflation
test:  is  the  rate  of  growth  compatible  with  achieving  the  2-3  per  cent  average  for  inflation,
looking  forward  as  best  we  can  over  a  year  or  two?  If  the  answer  is  yes,  then  that  growth  is
sustainable,  at  least  at  that  point  in  time.  To  repeat:  we  do  not  have  a  growth  ceiling,  beyond
which  the  brakes  automatically  go  on.  We  have  an  inflation  target,  appropriately  and  flexibly
defined, which tells us to tighten  when  our  forecast  of  inflation  has  it  exceeding  the  target  for
any  sustained  period  of  time,  and  to  ease  when  the  forecast  has  inflation  sustainably  below
target. Growth per se does not necessarily trigger this response: it is the inflation outlook which
is important. In thinking about the inflation outlook, of course, we need to ask ourselves whether
the  growth  which  is  occurring  now  and  that  which  is  in  prospect  are  likely  to  put  pressure  on
capacity to such an extent that inflation might rise noticeably. But that is a judgement based on a
range of factors, not a mechanical response to the breaching of some arbitrary growth threshold.
Another  point  I  would  like  to  make  is  that  at  the  moment  I  do  not  see  that
monetary  policy  is  placing  any  constraint  on  growth.  This  is  as  it  should  be  -  one  of  the
advantages of an inflation target is that it makes sure monetary policy is eased when the inflation
forecast is below the target average. Hence the five easings over the past year. This might help
to  reassure  those  people  who  think  that  in  order  to  maintain  a  low  average  inflation  rate,
monetary policy has to be kept continuously tight. It does not - monetary policy will be eased as
often  as  it  is  tightened.    Monetary  policy  has  to  be  no  tighter  to  maintain  an  average  inflation
rate of 2½ per cent, than to maintain an average of 5 or 10 per cent. In fact it probably would
have  to  be  tighter  at  the  higher  figures  as  it  would  be  fighting  against  rising  inflationary
expectations.
Another sign that present monetary policy is not restrictive is to look at the effect
it  is  having  on  the  cost  and  availability  of  credit.  If  this  was  too  expensive,  we  would  not  see
much being used, but that is not the case at present. All forms of credit - business, housing and
personal  lending  -  have  been  growing  at  somewhere  between  8  and  11  per  cent  over  the  past
year. This does not suggest that the economy as a whole is finance-constrained, although there
will always be some individuals or firms that are.
Another manifestation of this that may have escaped many people is that we now
have lower interest rates out to five years than the United States, which is the usual benchmark
for  international  comparisons.  Now  this  is  entirely  fit  and  proper,  given  the  different  cyclical
positions of the two economies and given our lower inflation. But even so, it would have been
unthinkable  even  a  few  years  ago.  Financial  markets  took  it  for  granted  that  Australia  would
always  be  a  high  interest  country  relative  to  the  United  States.  (International  investors  put
Australia in with a group of countries called the “high yielders”.) I am strongly of the view that
these lower interest rates are a substantial benefit for Australian businesses.
3. Economic growth in the long run
So  far,  we  have  been  talking  about  growth  over  short  time  horizons  such  as  a
couple of years or so. Over this horizon, growth can vary quite a lot, and monetary policy will
have some influence on the outcome. While monetary policy’s major long-term influence will be
on  the  rate  of  inflation,  over  shorter  periods  it  can  have  a  significant  influence  on  economic
BIS Review   75/1997
- 4 -
activity and employment. If it is too tight, it  will  unnecessarily  constrain  them,  and  if  it  is  too
loose,  it  could  set  up  the  conditions  for  an  inflationary  boom.  The  relationship  between
monetary policy and economic growth is thus essentially a short-term or cyclical one.
But this is not what a lot of people are interested in. They want to know what is
Australia’s  long-term  growth  potential.  Is  our  potential  growth  rate  relatively  low  like  all  the
standard OECD countries in Table 1? Is it a bit higher? Or, alternatively could it be as high, or
nearly as high, as the newly-industrialising countries of Asia? How could it be raised to a higher
figure?
These are all difficult questions to answer, and I shall only attempt a very cursory
one. But before I do that, I want to make an important point - whatever our potential growth rate
is, monetary policy will have little to do with it  compared  with  other  factors.  Monetary  policy
mainly  works  by  affecting  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy.  Fluctuations  in  demand  are  the
normal  (though  not  exclusive)  source  of  business  cycles.  In  thinking  about  long  run  trends,
however,  it  is  the  supply  structure  -  the  economy’s  capacity  to  produce  and  how  that  can  be
increased - that is crucial.
Perhaps  I  can  take  the  liberty  of  illustrating  this  distinction  between  short  and
long run with a stylised diagram. An economy could have an average long-term growth rate as
shown in the straight line Trend A. Its actual growth will never be a straight line because of the
business  cycle,  so  it  is  likely  to  look  like  the  wavy  line  Actual  A.  If  monetary  policy  was
conducted  badly,  we  could  end  up  with  a  boom  and  bust  given  by  the  dotted  line  Actual  A1.
Alternatively, if monetary policy was conducted well, we should expect to have relatively stable
conditions,  including  low  inflation;  with  a  bit  of  luck,  we  should  also  get  longer  lasting
expansions  and  milder  recessions.  Because  a  reasonably  stable  aggregate  price  level  does  not
prompt the distortions in economic decisions seen with high inflation, trend growth should be a
little higher. But while that difference will be worth having, it only adds a little to trend A, and
many people would have trouble noticing the difference.
GGDDPP: : TTrreennd d aannd d AAccttuuaall
200
LLeevveel l 
TTrreennd d BB
AAccttuuaall
TTrreennd d AA
AAccttuuaal l AA
AAccttuuaal l AA''
55
1100
YYeaearrss
1155
2200
oof f 
RReaeal l 
GGDDPP
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
BIS Review   75/1997
- 5 -
Now, people may be unsatisfied with this outcome and say that they would prefer
to be on the faster trend growth line given by Trend B, which is perhaps two or three per cent
higher than Trend A. This is a reasonable aspiration, but it cannot be achieved by an adjustment
to monetary policy.
What factors then explain long-run growth? In simple terms, it is explained by the
growth of the productive factors in the economy - the growth of the labour force, expansion of
the capital stock and growth in productivity of both labour and capital. This is why there is such
focus  on  micro-economic  policies  to  raise  efficiency,  rather  than  manipulation  of  the  macro-
economic  instruments,  when  people  talk  about  long  run  growth  potential.  Again,  all  that
monetary policy can do is to minimise the booms and busts  around  the  higher  trend.  The  only
way  that  the  economy  can  move  from  Trend  A  to  Trend  B  is  by  enacting  policies  that  either
increase the growth of the productive factors or increase their productivity.
I  do  not  intend  to  say  much  about  the  growth  of  the  labour  force,  which  in  the
long run is determined by population growth and participation in the workforce. Note, however,
that in the short run the economy can grow faster than the labour force constraint would suggest
because,  if  there  is  enough  flexibility,  we  can  move  people  out  of  unemployment  into
employment. The other point that I should register is that I do not think in the long run we will
be able to maintain our current low male participation rate. With life expectancy still increasing,
we will not be able to continue the luxury of having so many people entering the workforce in
their early twenties and leaving in their mid fifties. This is a transitory phase, not a  permanent
increase in leisure.
In thinking about how to ensure that the capital side of the production potential is
expanded sufficiently, it is hard to go past the simple idea that investment has to be funded by
saving,  and  we  would  probably  have  more  if  we  increased  our  domestic  saving.  Of  course  it
could be funded by more foreign saving, but that path tends to be a more unstable one. I have no
new  ideas  on  how  to  increase  our  savings  other  than  through  the  familiar  methods  of  making
sure that the government  does  not  reduce  national  savings  through  chronic  budget  deficits  and
by enacting measures to make sure that a higher proportion of retirement incomes are funded out
of private savings.
The really big issue for long-run growth is how we raise productivity. In simple
debate, this is often portrayed as producing the same with less people, either by job shedding or
by  substituting  capital  for  labour.  But  any  business  knows  that  it  is  not  just  manning  levels
which are important. The flexibility of the workforce in using the capital  equipment,  the  skills
which they can bring to bear in response to new demands and opportunities, the capacity of the
firm  to  innovate  and  improve  processes  in  industrial  and  service  applications,  the  ability  to
develop and exploit new technology - these are actually more important ingredients in the long
run.
Of  course,  all  good  firms  are  trying  to  do  this  all  the  time.  In  a  competitive
marketplace,  they  have  to  keep  up  with  their  competitors  or  fall  by  the  wayside.  In  a  global
marketplace, they increasingly have to move towards international best practice, which itself is
always  advancing  as  a  result  of  innovation  and  adoption  of  new  technology.  In  the  process  of
matching their competitors, the best firms drive the development of productivity and the rise in
living standards.
Not  all  firms  nor  all  industries  will  succeed  in  doing  this.  Some  will  thrive  and
others will fail. Some industries will grow, and some industries that we do not even know about
BIS Review   75/1997
- 6 -
as yet will emerge. The only thing we know is that there will be continuous change, not just here
but  in  all  countries,  under  the  constant  pressure  of  competition,  new  technologies  and
globalisation. There is no simple secret to success, but part of the answer must be for both firms
and for countries to facilitate change, and to adapt to it, not to resist it. The central issue is that
all productivity gains involve change. By their nature they involve producing goods and services
in  different  (and  better)  ways,  or  in  producing  different  goods  and  services.  Change  is  a
necessary condition for productivity growth.
These  major  changes  are  going  to  occur  in  the  private  sector  among  both  large
and small firms. The adjustment task will be difficult, but they must try to seek out the profitable
and growing areas. While the role of government will be important, the Government will not be
able  to  do  the  adjustment  for  the  private  sector.  I  find  it  hard  to  believe  that  the  Government
would  be  better  than  the  private  sector  at  picking  the  growth  areas,  so  I  believe  that  the
Government’s  main  contribution  should  be  to  remove  unnecessary  obstacles  to  change,  to
provide a high quality infrastructure, to encourage saving and to work at lifting and maintaining
quality of education.
I  know  this  is  a  difficult  message  to  give  to  a  public  which  is  growing  tired  of
change (not all of it economic). But the alternative of stopping change is really not viable. It has
always been the case that the firms and societies that have managed to embrace the challenge of
change  and  seize  new  opportunities,  rather  than  turning  their  backs,  have  been  the  ones  that
prospered.
It may, of course, be harder for the high income societies like Australia than for
the  newcomers  who  feel  less  attachment  to  established  ideas  and  who  therefore  have  less  to
“lose” in embracing change. But we surely have the capacity to adopt change when we see the
need.  We have to be convinced it is worth it.
The advantages of flexibility have been well demonstrated in the nineties by  the
superior performance, both in terms of growth and in lower levels of unemployment, of the less
regulated English-speaking countries compared to the corporatist European ones.
I  am  not  suggesting  we  should  remove  all  regulation  and  rely  totally  on  laissez
faire. There is clearly a large role for government, but we should always ask whether particular
government initiatives are forward looking, or whether they are protecting an existing industry
or an existing privilege.
The  first  requirement  of  government  is  to  provide  as  stable  a  macro-economic
environment as it can. The second requirement of government is to provide first class, low cost
infrastructure.  This  stretches  from  such  items  as  the  legal  system  and  accountancy  standards
through to more tangible items like the education system and the utilities, including electricity,
gas,  water  and  telecommunications.  The  Government,  of  course,  need  not  be  the  provider  of
each of these, but it will always ultimately set the standards. Inevitably, governments  will  also
be called upon to enact policies which affect one industry at the expense of others. My only plea
here is that they do it in a way that encourages adjustment, perhaps even compensates losers, but
not to do it in a way which resists change.
4. Conclusion
Australia  has  recorded  quite  a  respectable  growth  performance  by  developed
country  standards  during  the  current  upswing.  Even  our  low  point  in  the  mid-cycle  growth
BIS Review   75/1997
- 7 -
pause   -  a  bit  over  2  per  cent  -  is  pretty  good  compared  with  many  countries’  average
performances.  People  are  disappointed  that  more  progress  has  not  yet  been  made  on  reducing
unemployment, but we have made some, and further real progress will be made if we can sustain
a  long  running  expansion.  As  I  have  noted  tonight,  I  think  our  current  monetary  policy
framework is serving us well in this regard, by requiring us to take a medium-term view in our
policy  deliberations  and  maximising  the  chances  for  a  long  recovery.  I  hope  I  have  helped  to
explain our thinking.
When we shift our focus to the economy’s  long  run  growth  prospects,  however,
monetary policy should inevitably  attract  less  attention.  Price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition
for faster long-term growth, but there are many other policies which have to be got right. That’s
why it is so hard. If there is a simple message, I think it is that the heart of the long-term growth
process  is  productivity  enhancement  through  innovation,  technological  change  and  so  on,  and
that to reap the benefits of  those  processes,  we  have  to  embrace  the  forces  of  competition  and
globalisation, with all the changes and discomforts they bring.
BIS Review   75/1997
