Ms. Rivlin discusses the Federal Reserve’s planning  process  and  the  efforts
being  made  to  improve  performance      Testimony  of  the  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Board  of
Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Ms.  Alice  M.  Rivlin,  before  the  Committee  on
Banking and Financial Services of the US House of Representatives on 29/7/97.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here  today  to
discuss  the  Federal  Reserve’s  planning  process  and  the  efforts  we  are  making  to  measure  and
improve our performance in the spirit of the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA).
I am personally a long-term proponent of GPRA and worked hard on its implementation when I
was  at  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget.  While  the  Federal  Reserve  does  not  receive
appropriated funds and is not, strictly speaking, covered by the Act, we are eager to participate
in  the  processes  and  activities  set  forth  in  the  Act.  GPRA  fits  well  with  the  new  efforts  the
Federal Reserve has undertaken to plan further ahead, use our resources more effectively and to
coordinate activities across the whole system more explicitly. The testimony is a brief progress
report on those efforts.
Planning at the Fed
In  its  briefest  form,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  mission  is  to  “foster  the  stability,
BIS Review   72/1997
- 2 -
Reserve have historically been quite decentralized, and major changes have required painstaking
consensus building across the Board/Bank structure.
The  regional  structure  of  the  Federal  Reserve  is  one  of  its  great  strengths.  The
twelve regional Federal Banks work closely with the banks in their region  and  are  closely  tied
into their regional economies. The development of Federal Reserve policy is greatly enriched by
the in-depth knowledge that the regional banks have of the industrial, agricultural and financial
forces  shaping  different  parts  of  the  economy.  The  challenge  confronting  strategic  planning  at
the  Federal  Reserve  is  to  find  a  balance  between  decentralized  regional  planning,  which
preserves the strengths of the regional structure, and the need for a more comprehensive national
plan  aimed  at  increasing  efficiency  by  rationalizing  the  allocation  of  resources  across  regions
and functions.
In recent years, major changes have occurred in the allocation of Federal Reserve
resources  in  response  to  unfolding  events.  When  serious  problems  developed  in  the  banking
industry in the 1980s and in response to increased supervisory responsibility for foreign banking
entities,  more  Federal  Reserve  resources  were  channeled  into  supervision  and  regulation.
Rapidly changing technology, especially telecommunications and automation, has revolutionized
Federal  Reserve  operations  and  required  considerable  investment  in  hardware,  software  and
expertise.  Consolidation  of  the  banking  industry,  evolution  of  payment  systems  patterns  and
technology,  growth  in  derivatives,  globalization  of  financial  services,  concerns  about  equal
credit opportunity and fair housing issues, efforts to reduce systemic risk in the payments area,
and changes in monetary aggregates, have all caused planning and resource adjustments.
Rapid  technological  change  has  also  created  opportunities  for  system-wide
efficiencies resulting from consolidation of activities in one or more Reserve Banks. A number
of  the  twelve  regional  banks  have  developed  specialized  activities  serving  other  regions.  For
example,  Federal  Reserve  Automation  Services  (FRAS)  is  headquartered  in  Richmond,  but
provides mainframe data processing and data communications services to all parts of the system.
This consolidation and specialization has enabled the Reserve Banks to centralize operations of
many of their mission critical applications, such as Fedwire, Automated Clearing House (ACH),
and  accounting.  Continued  technological  advance,  as  well  as  further  consolidation  in  the
financial  services  industry,  is  likely  to  lead  to  further  specialization  among  regional  Federal
Reserve Banks.
New Strategic Planning Activities
In  the  face  of  accelerating  change,  the  Federal  Reserve  recently  recognized  the
need  for  a  more  comprehensive  planning  framework.  In  1995,  a  System  Strategic  Planning
Coordinating Group was appointed, consisting of Board members, Reserve Bank Presidents and
senior  managers,  representing  the  full  range  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  activities.  This  group
produced  an  “umbrella”  framework,  designed  to  enable  the  Board,  the  Reserve  Banks  and
product  and  support  offices  to  produce  their  own  more  detailed  plans  and  decision  documents
under the “umbrella.”
This framework, which is the basis for the document submitted to the House and
Senate Banking Committees, sets forth the mission of the Federal Reserve referred to above. It
also  discusses  the  “values”  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  goals  and  objectives  of  the  Fed,  key
assumptions,  as  well  as  the  external  and  internal  factors  that  could  affect  the  achievement  of
those goals and objectives. With the overall framework as a reference point, strategic  planning
BIS Review  72/1997
- 3 -
activities are proceeding with new energy at the Reserve Banks, at the Board, and with respect to
cross-cutting major functions such as the payments system and bank supervision and regulation.
Individual Reserve Banks have reviewed their operations from the ground up and
reassessed  their  structure  and  effectiveness  in  carrying  out  their  missions.  Some  of  the  Banks
have  launched  fundamental  re-engineering  efforts  that  are  resulting  in  substantial  changes  in
management  structure  and  operations.  The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  calls  its  effort
“Fresh Look”; the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland is engaged in “Transformation: 2000.”
Board planning and budgeting
At the Board, we have restructured the annual planning and budget process to put
more emphasis on planning (and less on detailed line-item budgeting), to lengthen the planning
and budgeting horizon, and to involve the Board itself more heavily in setting priorities. To this
end, we have established a Budget Committee of the Board (consisting of myself and Governors
Phillips and Kelley) assisted by a staff planning group drawn from across the major functions of
the Board. We are working with a four-year planning horizon and intend to produce the Board’s
first biennial budget (1998/1999) to go into effect on January 1, 1998. Our hope is that the new
process  and  structure  will  give  the  Board  a  better  understanding  of  the  options  it  faces  with
respect to alternative ways of carrying out the Federal Reserve’s mission, and a clearer basis for
deciding on priorities.
Payments System study
A  major  study  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  role  in  the  Payments  System,  currently
underway,  is  another  example  of  strategic  planning  with  respect  to  a  major  portion  of  the
Federal Reserve’s activities, under the general umbrella of the strategic planning framework.
Since payments technology and the structure of the financial services industry are
changing rapidly, it seemed important to focus both on how  the  payment  system  was  evolving
(and should evolve) and what role the Federal Reserve should play in that evolution. The United
States is amazingly dependent on paper checks -- Americans wrote 64 billion checks in 1996 --
while  most  of  the  industrial  world  is  shifting  rapidly  to  more  efficient  electronic  based
payments.
The  study,  directed  by  a  committee  of  two  Governors  and  two  Federal  Reserve
Bank  Presidents,  has  drawn  on  analytic  resources  across  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and
outside.  We  began  by  examining  the  consequences  of  substantially  altering  the  role  of  the
Federal Reserve in the retail payments system (checks and wire transfer system know as ACH).
We analyzed the impact of scenarios ranging from withdrawal of the Federal Reserve from the
check  and  ACH  markets  to  more  aggressive  leadership  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  making  the
payment system more efficient and less dependent on paper.
To  get  maximum  input  from  the  participants  in  the  payment  system  --  banks,
clearinghouses, vendors, consumers and others -- in helping us assess alternatives for the future,
we  held  a  series  of  “forums”  around  the  country  in  May  and  June.  We  had  enthusiastic  and
extremely  helpful  participation  from  a  wide  range  of  institutions.  We  learned  a  lot  from  the
process and are now reassessing the alternatives, conducting additional analyses and preparing to
present  preliminary  options  to  the  Board.  I  look  forward  to  sharing  the  study  with  this
Committee.
BIS Review   72/1997
- 4 -
The payments area is a good example of the dilemma posed for planners by rapid
technological  change.  While  rapidly  evolving  technology  makes  focussing  on  future  options
imperative, it  also  makes  it  extremely  important  to  remain  flexible.  Laying  out  a  blueprint  for
the payments system of the next ten or even five years, and rigidly  following  it,  would  almost
certainly  be  a  mistake.  The  technology  is  moving  so  rapidly  that  investments  made  now  may
well be obsolete in a short time.
Performance Measures
A major theme of GPRA is the identification of specific measures of performance
of  projects  and  programs  which  can  be  used  to  evaluate  their  effectiveness.  As  in  most
organizations, performance measurement at the Federal Reserve is more advanced  --  and  more
feasible -- in some types of activities than in others.
In  the  payment  services  areas,  the  Reserve  Banks  have  measured  their
performance  through  various  financial  measures  for  many  years.  For  example,  the  Monetary
Control Act of  1980  imposes  market  discipline  on  the  Federal  Reserve  by  requiring  it  fully  to
cover  its  costs  of  providing  services  to  depository  institutions,  and  compliance  with  this
requirement is monitored closely. Frequently private competitors provide or could provide these
services,  and  our  ability  to  recover  our  costs,  adjusted  to  include  a  factor  for  imputed  profits,
taxes and cost of capital, help determine whether it is beneficial for the economy that we stay in
the  business.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  traditionally  measured  unit  costs  for  its
financial  services  and  has  developed  various  indices  that  allow  a  Reserve  Bank  to  measure  its
cost  performance  over  time  and  in  comparison  to  other  Reserve  Banks.  Private  sector
benchmarks  are  also  being  developed.  The  Federal  Reserve  also  tracks  quality  measures  for
many Reserve Bank services. Finally, the Federal Reserve monitors the progress of the Reserve
Banks against various strategic objectives.
Similarly,  in  bank  supervision,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  long  used  a  variety  of
measures  of  the  effectiveness  of  its  examination  process,  but  the  measurement  challenge  has
taken  on  new  importance  as  supervision  becomes  more  automated  and  more  focused  on
analyzing  risk.  To  meet  this  challenge,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  working  closely  with  other
regulators  to  standardize  and  improve  examination  techniques,  and  has  established  a  Steering
Committee  to  oversee  implementation  of  a  risk-focused  examination  program  and  to  design  a
management information system that will permit the Board to evaluate better the efficient use of
examination  resources  among  the  Reserve  Banks.  For  instance,  supervisory  data  are  used  to
determine in advance of on-site examinations what factors (CAMELS rating, asset size, location,
and  loan  types)  are  most  predictive  as  to  the  resources  needed  for  examinations,  and  which
institutions,  particular  lending  areas  or  other  service  lines  may  require  more  intensive  review.
Such  programs  are  low-cost  because  they  use  information  that  we  already  collect,  and  are
effective and cost-saving because they provide a systematic way to plan and prioritize our time
and resources.
In  other  areas,  such  as  the  research  and  statistical  analysis  on  which  monetary
policy  is  based,  performance  measurement  is  --  and  will  remain  --  far  more  problematic.  The
performance  of  the  economy  itself  is  not  so  hard  to  measure  and  right  now  is  highly  positive.
But it is not clear how much of the economic progress can be attributed to monetary policy, and
even less clear how particular monetary policy actions are related to the quality and quantity of
research and analysis produced by the Fed’s research staff.
BIS Review  72/1997
Conclusion
- 5 -
GPRA provides the opportunity for a major improvement in the management and
effectiveness of Federal agencies. It provides the impetus for agencies to  clarify  their  missions
and objectives, measure their performance better and improve their efficiency and effectiveness.
It must, however, avoid the risk of becoming, like some previous efforts to improve government
management,  largely  a  paper  exercise  which  produces  many  numbers  and  reports  but  few  real
results.
The  Federal  Reserve  welcomes  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  the  GPRA
process. We will work hard to fulfill the vision of the framers of the Act and avoid the pitfalls.
We will have to respond in ways that are appropriate to the Federal Reserve’s diverse missions
and decentralized structure. I believe we have made significant progress toward the GPRA-type
strategic planning and are on the track to making more in the immediate future.
BIS Review   72/1997
