Dr. Stals looks at current developments in monetary policy in South Africa
Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Dr. C. Stals, at a Luncheon of the
Rotary Club of Durban on 17/3/97.
1. Monetary policy and total economic activity
At  this  stage,  there  is  general  expectation  amongst  economists  in  the  private
sector that monetary policy will be eased during the course of 1997. Differences of opinion may
exist on how soon the easing will begin, or by how much interest rates will decline as a result of
the easier conditions.
This  assumption  is  based,  firstly,  on  a  projection  of  some  further  slow-down  in
the  rate  of  expansion  of  the  total  domestic  economic  activity.  Last  year,  the  rate  of  growth  in
gross domestic production declined to 3.1 per cent, down slightly from the 3.4 per cent of 1995.
It must  also  be  noted  that  the  decline  in  the  rate  of  growth  in  the  non-agricultural  sectors  was
even more pronounced, where the rate of increase in total real value added declined from 4½ per
cent in 1995 to only 2 per cent in 1996. In the very important manufacturing sector, the decline
was from 7½ per cent growth in 1995 to only ½ per cent in 1996. It was a strong recovery in the
agricultural sector that maintained overall growth at the level of 3 per cent plus for last year.
Agriculture  will  not  make  the  same  contribution  to  growth  in  1997  and  for
economic  analysis  purposes  it  makes  sense  to  assess  the  future  prospects  for  non-agricultural
production before deciding on a possible course for monetary policy during the rest of this year.
There  were  some  tentative  signs  that  total  manufacturing  production  may  have  started  with  a
new expansionary phase in the fourth quarter of last year when a seasonally adjusted annualised
decline of 1 per cent in the third quarter switched to a 2 per cent expansion in the fourth quarter.
This expansion in production was boosted partly by a rising demand from the rest of the world
for  South  African  products,  following  the  depreciation  of  the  rand  last  year.  This  important
development can make a further contribution to the maintenance of reasonable growth in 1997.
Developments  on  the  demand  side  of  the  economy  also  indicated  a  marked
slow-down in total economic activity last year. The rate of increase in total domestic expenditure
declined from 6.5 per cent in 1994 and 5.2 per cent in 1995, to 3.0 per cent in 1996. In this case,
the decline was more broadly based and the rates of increase in gross domestic fixed investment,
private  sector  consumption  expenditure  and  accumulation  of  inventories  all  receded  last  year.
There  was  only  one  exception,  and  that  was  consumption  expenditure  by  general  government
which rose by 5 per cent in real terms, compared with an increase of only ½ per cent in 1995.
This  slower  rate  of  increase  in  total  domestic  expenditure  established  better
balance between production (supply) and expenditure (demand). With both sides of the economy
now growing at about 3 per cent per annum, there is better equilibrium and less friction in the
economy, which contributes also to more stable conditions in the financial markets.
It is important that this balance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply
be  retained    --    both  should  gradually  be  raised  to  a  higher  level,  but  the  upward  movement
should  be  in  tandem.  Monetary  policy  has  an  important  part  to  play  in  maintaining  this
equilibrium over time. Any artificial stimulation of the economy through a premature easing of
monetary  policy  will  lead  to  further  tensions  in  the  balance  of  payments  and  in  the  financial
markets, and will lead to further upward pressure on inflation.
BIS Review   31/1997
At this stage, economists predict some further slow-down in the rate of increase in
private  sector  consumption  expenditure  with  continued  growth  at  the  current  levels  in  gross
domestic fixed investment. An important factor in this projection therefore will be the behaviour
of  government  consumption  expenditure.  It  is  in  this  regard  that  the  provision  made  by  the
Minister  of  Finance  in  his  Budget  Speech  of  last  week  for  an  increase  in  total  government
expenditure  of  only  6.1  per  cent  in  1997/98  is  of  vital  importance.  In  real  terms,  that  is  after
provision for depreciation, total government expenditure will indeed decline and therefore make
an important contribution to the retention of macroeconomic equilibrium this year.
2. Monetary policy and the balance of payments
Monetary  policy  decisions  are  obviously  also  affected  by  the  overall  balance  of
payments  situation,  and  not  only  by  developments  in  the  domestic  economy.  Last  year,
international economic relations dominated the South African economic scene. Towards the end
of  the  year,  however,  better  equilibrium  was  also  restored  in  the  external  accounts  and  this
contributed to the expectation of an easier monetary policy in 1997.
The  current  account  of  the  South  African  balance  of  payments  showed  a
substantial  and  growing  deficit  in  the  first  half  of  1996.  In  the  second  quarter,  the  seasonally
adjusted  annualised  rate  of  the  deficit  reached  R12.9  billion  and  there  was  justifiable  concern
that  it  could  increase  even  further.  Against  the  background  of  a  slow-down  in  total  domestic
expenditure  in  the  second  half  of  the  year,  the  growth  in  imports  levelled  off  and,  with  some
good  increases  in  exports,  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  improved  to  an
annualised deficit of R4.7 billion in the fourth quarter of last year. Prospects are good that only a
small deficit will be recorded in the current account of the balance of payments in 1997.
The  main  reason  for  the  balance  of  payments  problems  of  last  year  was  to  be
found in the capital account. The net capital inflow declined from R19.2 billion in 1995 to only
R3.9  billion  in  1996.  The  capital  inflow  was  no  longer  sufficient  to  cover  the  deficit  in  the
current account, and the official gross foreign reserves, which were at a very low level to begin
with, declined by R5.4 billion.
These  developments  exerted  extreme  pressures  on  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand
and, as is well-known, the average weighted value of the rand against the basket of currencies of
South Africa’s major trading partners depreciated by 21.9 per cent from 31 December  1995  to
31 December 1996.
The  balance  of  payments  situation  obviously  demanded  a  restrictive  monetary
policy  throughout  the  past  twelve  months.  Here  also,  however,  important  changes  took  place
after  October  1996.  The  improvement  in  the  domestic  economic  situation  and  in  the  current
account  of  the  balance  of  payments  restored  some  confidence  in  the  market  for  foreign
exchange,  particularly  as  the  foreign  reserves  started  rising  again  in  the  fourth  quarter.  The
exchange rate of the rand reached a lower turning point in October 1996, stabilised in November
and December and showed an impressive appreciation of about 9 per cent since the beginning of
the new year.
Optimism  for  the  balance  of  payments  for  1997  rests  very  strongly  on  the
expectation that there will be a good net inflow of capital into the country during this year. So
far, the results have been encouraging with a relatively strong demand for South African equities
and bonds from non-residents. In January and February, non-residents were indeed net buyers of
BIS Review   31/1997
- 3 -
more than R5 billion of South African listed securities, but this total amount did not necessarily
represent a net inflow of foreign exchange into the reserves.
The  announcements  made  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  in  his  Budget  Speech  last
week  for  the  further  relaxation  of  exchange  controls  can  also  have  an  important  effect  on  the
capital  account  of  the  balance  of  payments.  It  is  difficult  to  forecast  how  much  capital  of
residents may leave the country because of these relaxations, but it is generally assumed that this
will  be  balanced  by  the  inflow  of  more  non-resident  funds  into  the  country.  Indeed,  it  is  not
unreasonable  to  assume  that  a  total  net  inflow  of  capital  in  excess  of  the  projected  current
account deficit will add some amount to the official foreign exchange reserves during the course
of this year.
If these assumptions prove to be correct, the exchange rate of the rand, measured
against  the  basket,  should  be  more  stable  this  year  than  the  experience  of  last  year.  Such  a
balance of payments situation will also reduce pressure on monetary policy and will contribute
to easier domestic financial conditions.
3. Monetary policy and the domestic financial situation
In a more stable macroeconomic situation with better equilibrium  in  the  balance
of  payments,  monetary  policy  can  be  aimed  more  directly  at  influencing  developments  in  the
more  important  domestic  financial  aggregates.  In  a  statement  issued  last  Friday,  the  Reserve
Bank indicated that the rate of increase in the M3 money supply should not exceed 10 per cent in
1997. This will provide for real growth in the economy at a rate of between 2 and 3 per cent, and
inflation at a level well below 10 per cent.
The  Reserve  Bank  is  concerned  about  the  rising  trend  in  inflation  that  gained
substantial momentum during the course of 1996. The average rate of inflation for last year was
7.4 per cent, being the lowest rate of inflation South Africa had since 1972. The annual  figure
disguises the fact however, that inflation reached a lower turning point of 5.5 per cent in April
1996, and has since then risen to a level of 9.4 per cent in December 1996 and also in January
1997. In the fourth quarter of last year, the quarter-to-quarter seasonally adjusted annualised rate
of inflation was as high as 12.7 per cent.
The escalation in inflation was caused mainly by the depreciation of the rand, by
sharp rises in food prices, by rising interest rates and also by a rise in the unit labour costs per
unit  of  production.  In  this  situation,  however,  it  is  imperative  that  the  rate  of  increase  in  the
money  supply  will  be  constrained,  which  requires  a  meaningful  slow-down  in  the  rate  of
increase  in  bank  credit  extension.  Last  year,  the  M3  money  supply  rose  by  13.6  per  cent,  and
total bank credit extended to the private sector by 16.1 per cent. If we want to make sure that the
current  trends  in  inflation  will  not  be  perpetuated,  we  must  make  sure  that  increases  in  the
money  supply  will  not  automatically  accommodate  rising  prices,  or  even  further  stimulate  the
inflationary pressures that are emerging from other sources.
The most recent developments in the financial situation therefore do not emit the
same optimistic signals emanating from the real economy and from the balance of payments for
an early easing of monetary policy. On the contrary, the Reserve  Bank  would  still  want  to  see
clear  signs  of  a  slow-down  in  the  rates  of  increase  in  bank  credit  extension  and  in  the  money
supply  before  lending  official  support  to  a  decline  in  interest  rates,  or  an  easing  in  monetary
policy in general.
BIS Review   31/1997
4. Monetary policy and the Budget
For monetary policy purposes, the most important aspect of the Fiscal Budget is
the  deficit  that  must  be  financed  through  borrowing  by  Government.  A  large  deficit  absorbs  a
greater  share  of  the  available  savings  of  the  private  sector  and  therefore  leaves  less  scope  for
expenditure in the private sector. A large deficit will force an increased demand from the private
sector for more bank credit to replace what Government is withdrawing from the savings pool.
More  bank  credit,  however,  creates  more  money  and  increases  the  risk  of  higher  inflation  in
future.
The  Reserve  Bank  is  therefore  particularly  pleased  with  the  determined  effort
made by the Minister of Finance to reduce the deficit in the Budget from 5.4 per cent of gross
domestic  product  in  1996/97  to  4.0  per  cent  in  1997/98.  In  absolute  terms,  the  net  borrowing
requirement (i.e. the deficit after taking the opening cash balance  into  consideration)  increased
by  only  R1.3  billion,  from  R23.5  billion  to  R24.8  billion.  Taking  account  of  a  much  lower
amount of maturing debt in the new fiscal year, the total gross borrowing requirement has in fact
been reduced from R41.0 billion in the current fiscal year to R36.8 billion in the next.
There  are  more  reasons  than  just  relieving  pressure  on  monetary  policy  for
reducing the deficit on the annual budget. One is, of course, the growing burden in the budget of
the  cost  of  servicing  government  debt.  In  the  Budget  Review  Document,  it  was  indicated  that
total Government debt as at the end of February 1997 amounted to R309.5 billion, equal to 55.3
per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product.  This  is  a  relatively  large  deficit  for  a  country  with  a
relatively  low  overall  savings  ratio,  and  with  massive  needs  for  the  development  of
infrastructure. For  the  1997/98  fiscal  year,  total  interest  payments  in  the  government  debt  will
absorb R39 billion, or more than 20 per cent of the total expenditure.
It is also laudable to note that the smaller deficit on the Budget is being achieved
through  constraints  on  government  expenditure,  and  not  through  an  increase  in  taxes.  Both
government expenditure at a level of 30 per cent and government revenue at 26 per cent of gross
domestic  product,  are  regarded  as  on  the  high  side  and  there  is  a  desire  to  reduce  these  levels
over the next few years. This will further ease the burden on monetary policy.
5. Summary
The  1997/98  Budget  will,  in  summary,  bring  about  a  better  balance  in  the
monetary and fiscal policy mix that is required to maintain overall financial stability in the South
African  economy.  In  the  longer  term,  as  the  implications  of  the  Budget  work  through  to  the
financial markets, it should reduce some pressure in monetary policy.
In  the  short  term,  however,  the  main  objective  of  monetary  policy  must  be  to
force a similar mood of financial discipline also in the private sector. Not only government, but
also  private  sector  individuals  and  corporates  must  reduce  their  reliance  on  credit  for  the
financing of their economic activity. Some decline in the rate of increase in the total amount of
bank credit extension to the private sector, together with some slower growth in the total money
supply, have become first priorities of monetary policy. This will be the only way to avoid the
current inflationary pressures in the economy from being perpetuated into a new extended period
of double digit inflation.
BIS Review   31/1997
