Mr.  Duisenberg  discusses  the  comparisons  between  the  structures  and
methods  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  and  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System
Address  held  by  the  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  of  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements, Dr. W.F. Duisenberg, at the Spring Meeting of the Institute of International Finance
in Washington on 29/4/97.
1. Only twenty months to go before EMU takes off; before then, in the summer of
1998 at the latest, the ESCB will be established.  The preparations for this turning-point in the
history of Europe are in full swing.  Next year it will be decided which Member States are to be
in from the outset, a decision to be taken as you know by the Heads of Government on the basis
of  the  measure  of  sustained  convergence  achieved.    Although  the  stability-oriented  tradition
which has grown up over the years is to be continued within EMU, there will be a fundamental
change in the way monetary policy will be determined centrally.  Here questions arise, such as:
how will the centre, i.e. the ECB, and the existing national central banks relate to each other in
such a context, and how can the skills and expertise of those national central banks best be used,
without impairing the single nature of monetary policy?  It is these questions that I would like to
focus  on  today.    As  the  ESCB  will  have  a  federal  structure  comparable  to  that  of  the  Federal
Reserve System, it may be useful to take  a  look  at  the  experience  of  the  United  States,  all  the
more so as the underlying economies will be comparable in size.  In particular, what lessons can
Europe learn from this experience?
2. Let me emphasize a few points at the outset.  On its own,  monetary  policy  is
not  equipped  to  counter  an  unfavourable  macro-economic  development.    That  calls  for  the
concerted  employment  of  all  available  macro-economic  policy  instruments.    In  the  American
situation,  the  Fed  is  expected  to  operate  within  the  framework  of  the  general  economic
objectives set by the Administration.  Coordination is facilitated by the centralized formulation
of monetary policy.  In a monetary union such as the United States and the future EMU, policy
can only be pursued centrally.  It  is  indivisible  by  its  very  nature,  for  one  thing  because  of  its
official interest rates, subjecting all regions making up the union to uniform financial conditions.
As to the question how monetary policy can best be conducted, there is no unequivocal answer.
That question relates to issues such as the economic variables on which policy should focus, or
in other words, the choice of intermediate objective.  In some countries, Germany among them,
policy is targeted at a monetary aggregate, while in others a strategy of direct inflation targeting
is pursued.  Alternatively, monetary authorities may focus on a range of economic indicators, as
is done in the United States.  I will not go into the pros and cons of these methods here today.  In
the European context, the EMI has concluded that in practice the differences between the various
policy strategies that could be pursued by the ESCB are not as large as in theory.  A decision is
to be taken by the ECB on this point next year.
3.  Looking at the structure of the Fed, we see three components, specifically the
Board  of  Governors,  the  regional  reserve  banks  and  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
(FOMC).  The FOMC issues a periodic guideline for monetary policy, while the Board serves as
the  executive  body.    It  is  empowered  to  adjust  policy,  within  the  mandate  provided  by  the
FOMC, when necessary  in  the  period  between  FOMC  meetings.    Thanks  to  a  rotation  system,
the  reserve  banks  are  involved  in  FOMC  decision-making  on  an  alternating  basis.    The
American  legislature  obviously  meant  the  Fed  to  have  a  decentralized  structure,  in  which  the
regional reserve banks can each have their say.  The aim was to prevent Fed policy-makers from
catering unduly to the wishes of either the financial centre, i.e. New York, or the political hub,
i.e. Washington.  In spite of the decentralized nature of the Federal Reserve System, however, a
certain  specialization  tendency  has  increasingly  developed  over  the  years,  due  in  part  to
technological innovations and market developments.  Take, for instance, the operations ensuing
BIS Review   46/1997
- 2 -
from  the  Fed’s  monetary  tasks,  such  as  money  and  foreign  exchange  market  interventions.
These  are  effected  in  their  entirety  in  New  York.    In  other  areas,  too,  such  as  the  payments
system, the reserve banks have developed their own specializations.
4.  In determining monetary policy, the Fed relies on regional input.  The reserve
banks contribute to policy through their role in the discussions and the number of votes they can
cast  (five  out  of  a  total  of  twelve)  at  FOMC  meetings.    At  these  meetings  no  fixed  policy
proposals are presented in advance, the aim being an open discussion where the various parties
reach  agreement  through  mutual  persuasion.  Any  decision  should,  after  all,  be  endorsed  by  as
many parties as possible.  Obviously, in this American context, the chairman must be someone
of considerable stature.  I believe that involving the reserve banks in policy-making and in  the
efforts  to  expound  that  policy  to  the  folks  back  home  is  the  right  way  to  go  about  things,
reinforcing as it does the cohesion within the system.
5.    In  short,  the  Fed  operates  what  is  in  my  view  a  well-balanced  model  of
monetary  decision-making.    Though  policy  is  conducted  centrally,  the  various  interests  of  the
separate regions are not overlooked.  The System is furthermore capable of reacting adroitly, as
evidenced  by  the  United  States’  long-term  record  of  strong  economic  growth  and  modest
inflation.
6.    How  does  everything  I  have  just  said  translate  to  the  future  situation  in
Europe?    As  in  the  United  States,  policy  in  Europe  will  be  determined  centrally  and
implemented,  where  possible  and  appropriate,  decentrally.    In  Europe,  too,  an  institutional
division  into  three  components  will  be  instituted.    Specifically,  the  ESCB  will  be  made  up  of
three elements, the ECB Executive Board, responsible for day-to-day policy, the ESCB Council,
made up of this Board and the governors of the national central banks, and the national central
banks themselves.  There are considerable similarities between this structure and that of the Fed,
made up of the Board of Governors, the FOMC and the reserve banks.  Yet the emphasis will,
on some issues, be placed differently.
7.  One difference concerns voting arrangements within the ESCB Council, which
are  not  the  same  as  those  within  the  FOMC.    In  the  ESCB  Council  the  votes  of  the  national
central  banks,  represented  by  their  governors,  will  predominate  over  those  of  the  Executive
Board.  In the FOMC, it is the votes of the centre, i.e. the Board of Governors, which represent
the majority.  This means that if effective decisions are to be arrived at in Europe, the national
central bank governors will have to be like-minded; in other words, policy-makers will have to
abandon  their  purely  national  outlooks,  exchanging  them  for  a  “European  perspective”.    The
experience of the FOMC shows that is can be achieved.  The ESCB will have the important task
of  helping  to  foster  such  a  European  perspective,  with  the  centre  taking  the  initiative.    The
European  outlook  will  furthermore  have  to  be  disseminated  among  the  general  public.    An
ESCB making an effort to explain and seek understanding for its policy decisions will generate
support for its actions.  This is a task for the national central banks, whose historical ties to their
own  peoples  are  deeply  rooted.    In  this  respect  it  should  also  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  Fed’s
accountability to Congress has no equivalent in Europe.  Although the President of the ESCB is
expected  to  appear  periodically  before  the  European  Parliament,  the  latter  does  not  have  the
same  powers  as  the  US  Congress,  which  can  in  principle  amend  the  Federal  Reserve  Act.
Furthermore,  any  discussion  of  the  European  policy  mix  will  be  different  in  nature  because
budgetary  policy  will  remain  the  province  of  the  European  Member  States.    This  policy  will,
however, be subject to the limitations set out in the Stability Pact recently agreed by the Member
States, which as you know aims to foster sustained sound public finances in Europe.
BIS Review   46/1997
- 3 -
8.  What I have just said about the need to develop a “European” perspective has
implications for monetary and economic analysis.  The  centre  will  need  to  have  at  its  disposal
considerable  analytical  machinery  in  order  to  be  able  to  perform  this  pioneering  role
successfully.  As a system of European statistics and analysis cannot be set up overnight, no time
should be lost.  Indeed, the preparations being made at the EMI in this area are proceeding at full
steam.    Of  course,  these  new  statistics  will  take  getting  used  to.    But,  at  the  same  time,  some
things will remain unchanged.  National analyses will continue to play an important role so long
as Europe has not been transformed into a single economy.  After all, if we wish to understand
what is happening at the European level, we would be well advised also to look at the underlying
national  economic  relationships.    With  respect  to  these  analytical  tasks,  the  division  of  labour
between the centre and the national central banks is likely to evolve of its own accord.  At first
glance,  this  division  seems  likely  to  reflect  that  the  national  central  banks  know  their  own
economies best.
9.  Contrary to the US situation, the implementation of monetary policy in Europe
will  not  take  place  at  one  location  away  from  the  centre  but,  where  possible  and  appropriate,
decentrally.  That has to do with the fact that Europe’s central banks and financial markets have
a rich and extensive history.  A decentral approach makes allowance for differences in European
practices and market conditions.  In this context it should be noted that the formulation chosen
for  decentralization  in  Europe  in  principle  allows  for  the  ECB  to  play  a  role  in  policy
implementation.    There  is  no  knowing  in  advance  how  the  tasks  will  be  divided  among  the
national central banks themselves, and between them and the centre in the more distant  future.
The  American  example  shows  us  that  such  matters  cannot  be  laid  down  in  a  blueprint  for
eternity.    Decentralization  is  a  sound  principle  to  cater  to  initial  national  differences  in  the
financial markets, but it must not stand in the way of further integration.  In other words, policy
must  accommodate  the  disappearance  of  national  financial  market  characteristics  and  the
emergence of a single integrationa European money and capital market.
10.  EMU will remain a  union  of  different  countries.    This  means,  among  other
things,  that  the  differences  prevailing  among  the  various  central  banks  regarding  their
non-monetary  tasks  can,  in  principle,  continue  to  exist.    I  am  referring  here,  for  instance,  to
banking  supervision,  surveillance  of  payment  systems,  and  the  fiscal  agent  function  for  the
benefit of the Government.  It is interesting to see that in the United States, where such matters
have been organized in a uniform manner, some degree of specialization has emerged among the
regional  reserve  banks.    Owing  to  the  continuing  existence  of  national  responsibilities  and
practices, this extent of specialization will not be feasible in Europe.
11.    I  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  of  my  address.    Like  the  Federal  Reserve
System, the ESCB will be characterized by central  and  decentral  elements.    However,  the  mix
will not be the same, due to differences in the starting position, as well as in social and political
conditions.    Yet  the  experience  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  offers  instructive  insights.    It
highlights the importance of “homogenous” thinking  within the system, and of focusing on the
European perspective, without disregarding regional developments.  It will be a challenge for us
in Europe to ensure that a similar balance is achieved within the ESCB.
BIS Review   46/1997
