Mr.  Thompson  considers  the  topic  of  risks  in  banking      Speech  by  the  Deputy
Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr. G.J. Thompson, at the Australian Institute of Banking
and Finance Inc., New South Wales State Committee, in Sydney on 28/10/97.
Introduction
I spoke in June in Canberra to a joint luncheon meeting of the AIBF and two other local
organisations.  My  theme  was  the  many  faces  of  risk  in  banking.  Today  I  would  like  to  expand  on  a
couple of the risks I touched on then, namely:
the Year 2000 problem;
payments  system  risk,  particularly  in  relation  to  settlement  of  foreign  exchange
transactions.
This  also  gives  me  the  opportunity  to  talk  about  the  results  from  two  surveys  recently
conducted by the RBA.
Year 2000
I think almost everyone is now aware that the Year 2000 will bring not only the euphoria
which accompanies the arrival of a new millennium - or the approach of it, for those holding on to  the
view  that  the  third  millennium  starts  in  2001.  It  also  brings  potentially  major  disruption  to  finance,
commerce  and  almost  every  aspect  of  daily  life  if  computers  are  not  able  properly  to  comprehend  the
move from the year programmed as ‘99’ to the one shown as ‘00’.
Financial  institutions  are  almost  totally  dependent  on  computer  systems  for  their
continuing  day-to-day  operations  and  getting  dates  correct  is  a  critical  element  in  this.  They  are,
therefore, heavily at risk from the Year 2000 problem.
The  RBA  is  taking  a  close  interest  in  how  this  problem  is  being  addressed,  both  as
supervisor  of  banks  (for  the  time  being)  and  with  our  broader  interest  in  the  smooth  running  of  the
financial system.
The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision recently turned its attention to Year 2000
risk, and has issued a paper which includes a recommended program of remedial action for all banks. The
main phases of this are:
(i)
(ii)
developing a strategic approach to solving the problem;
creating organisational awareness of its importance;
(iii)
assessing necessary actions and developing detailed plans;
(iv)
renovating systems, applications and equipment;
(v)
validating this renovation through testing; and
(vi)
implementing tested, compliant systems.
The well-prepared financial institution will have completed steps (i) to (iii). It will now
be  engaged  in  step  (iv) --  renovating  systems  and  applications.  The  recommended  completion  date  for
this  work,  to  allow  sufficient  time  for  testing,  is  the  end  of  1998.  The  renovation  of  critical  systems
should be finished by the middle of 1998.
BIS Review   98/1997
- 2 -
To assess the preparation of Australian banks for Year 2000, we asked  them  in  May  to
complete a comprehensive survey. Some of the results from this can be summarised usefully under the
first four headings of the Basle Committee’s recommended program.
(i)
Developing a strategy to tackle the problem: Some banks have been rather slow
to  do  this,  and  several  had  not  completed  their  strategies  when  our  survey  arrived.  Some  banks  have
placed the CEO or a director in charge of their project, while in others an IT staffer has responsibility.
There  are  dangers  in  the  latter  course,  because  Year 2000  is  big  enough  and  threatening  enough  to  be
treated as a business issue and not simply a technical problem.
(ii)
Creating organisational awareness: Awareness appears to be strong  in  IT  areas,
but it varies dramatically elsewhere. Some banks have (or will soon have) arranged training for all staff,
incorporated  Year 2000  into  credit  review  procedures  and  made  relationship  managers  responsible  for
compliance  by  customers.  In  contrast,  others  had  not  even  arranged  formal  briefing  of  people  in  their
non-IT  areas  who  might  be  developing  spreadsheets  and  small  databases  in  blissful  ignorance  of  the
issue.
(iii)
Assessing actions and developing detailed plans: Nearly half the banks had not
completed their assessments at the time of our  survey.  This  might  reflect  their  adoption  of  an  iterative
approach, where key systems were identified early and compliance work begun, with minor systems the
subject of later  investigation.  It  also  indicates,  however,  that  a  few  banks  are  having  trouble  grappling
with the problem.
(iv)
Renovating  systems,  applications  and  equipment:  Most  banks  are  currently  in
this stage, but they have made only modest progress. At mid-year less than 10 per cent of the expected
total  cost  of  Year 2000  compliance --  of  around  $600 million --  had  been  spent.  (Although  substantial,
this figure is itself about 10 per cent of total expected IT expenditures between now and the end of the
decade.)
The  remaining  two  steps -- validation  through  testing  and  the  implementing  of  tested,
compliant systems -- are, of course, still ahead.
A few other observations are worth making from our survey results.
Most  banks  have  adopted  the  end-1998  target  for  achieving  Year 2000  compliance.
Along with the Basle Committee, we regard  this  as  highly  desirable.  A  few  banks  have  acknowledged
that full compliance will not be achieved until some time in 1999. Some of these have  structured  their
projects so that non-critical systems will be dealt with last.
Banks  collectively  have  assigned  over  1,000  in-house  IT  staff  to  fixing  the  problem,
although  this  includes  staff  doing  concurrent  redevelopment  work.  There  has  been  speculation  about
serious  shortages  of  experienced  staff,  but  nearly  half  of  the  banks  in  our  survey  did  not  plan  to  hire
additional people for their projects, and only four expect to increase  staffing  by  more  than  10 per cent.
Staff  resources  do  not,  therefore,  appear  to  be  a  major  issue  in  Australia,  but  there  is  no  room  for
complacency because shortages could well be a bigger problem in other countries and we are  part  of  a
global  labour  market.  Furthermore,  the  resources  required  for  testing  could  be  under-estimated.
Year 2000 testing will be more complex, and on a larger scale, than anything attempted previously.
Many banks have not yet developed formal contingency plans in the event that systems
cannot  be  made  Year 2000  compliant.  Only  one-third  of  them  have  designed  business  resumption
plans -- others are leaving that until closer to the day, in part because they expect that their systems may
have altered substantially by then.
BIS Review   98/1997
- 3 -
The  overall  picture  on  Australian  banks’  current  state  of  preparation  is,  then,  rather
mixed. At this stage, they all appear capable of addressing their own Year 2000  problems  in  time.  But
most  of  the  work  is  still  to  be  done,  and  system  developments  of  the  scale  required  are  notorious  for
running over budget and over time -- a luxury which is not available in this case. Moreover, the testing
phase could well be the most resource-intensive. Compliance work could also  be  complicated  by  other
distractions,  such  as  preparing  for  the  euro  or  managing  mergers.  (On  the  latter,  the  Basle  Committee
noted  that  the  need  to  prepare  for  Year 2000  will  greatly  complicate  mergers  and  acquisitions  among
financial institutions, and that the risks in trying to manage projects in more than one institution in the
time available could be sufficient reason to defer such mergers.)
We will be monitoring the progress of the banks closely, and giving special attention to
the laggards. (Although the lack of contingency and business resumption plans is not of current concern,
we will also need to revisit this issue.)
Most of banks’ compliance work to date has been focused internally, which is where our
survey concentrated. This is only part of the challenge.
Successful  renovation  of  its  internal  systems  will  not  necessarily  protect  a  bank  from
serious  problems  which  may  be  imported  from  elsewhere,  for  instance  through  payments  and  trading
linkages.  Banks  will  need  to  co-operate  closely  to  ensure  that  such  cross-institutional  links  are  fully
tested. The new RTGS system for high-value payments -- on which I will say more in a moment -- was
built with Year 2000 in mind. Even so, a comprehensive test plan has been developed for RTGS and its
suitability is being confirmed with a number of system participants. This plan allows for full testing in
conjunction with participants’ interface systems, and aims to confirm that the RTGS system is Year 2000
compliant by the end of 1998. Meanwhile, the Australian Payments Clearing Association has formed a
special Consultative Group to address issues relating to the other clearing systems.
Banks  must  also  prepare  for  problems  affecting  their  customers  (as  well  as  trading
counterparties  in  wholesale  markets)  and  should  be  inquiring  into  the  Year 2000  readiness  of  their
borrowers and potential borrowers. The effects of Year 2000 could severely interfere with the conduct of
borrowers’  businesses  and  reduce  their  capacity  to  meet  loan  obligations.  Customers  could  also  find
themselves  unable  to  use  electronic  links  to  their  banks,  and  try  to  revert  to  manual  processing.  This
would put considerable strain on banks’ resources. If not well-prepared, banks could also be drawn into
extensive legal actions flowing from Year 2000 breakdowns.
The RBA will continue to disseminate information about Year 2000 issues, and will help
to co-ordinate renovation and testing where we can. We are participating in an Inter-bank Working Group
which will aim to ensure that core banking systems and other shared infrastructure are fully tested, and
that exposure to telecommunications problems are limited; to work with key vendors to ensure that their
products  conform  to  agreed  compliance  guidelines;  and  to  develop  contingency  measures  for  critical
areas. This Group will also be playing an education role with banks’ business partners and customers.
Let me now describe briefly what the RBA is doing about its own house. Our target is to
have  our  systems  fully  Year 2000  compliant  by  the  end  of  next  year.  Our  project  is  overseen  by  a
Steering Group of senior officers.
While  the  scale  of  the  challenge  is  not  as  great  for  us  as  for  many  other  financial
institutions, our technology platform is complex, involving a mix of hardware and software developed in-
house and also provided by third-party suppliers. It encompasses the exchange of data and services with
the Commonwealth Government, some State governments and the financial community at large -- banks,
non-bank  financial  institutions,  Austraclear  and  so  on.  We  also  have  international  linkages  through
SWIFT to our overseas offices and trading counterparties.
Our key internal systems run  on  the  mainframe  platform.  So,  this  is  where  we  focused
our initial efforts. We began assessing and converting our mainframe application systems last year, with
BIS Review   98/1997
- 4 -
the aim of flushing out and fixing date-related problems by end 1997. With one exception, which is now
planned  for  completion  in  mid-1998,  we  are  on  target  and  have  renovated,  tested  and  re-implemented
more than half of our systems.
To prove total compliance, these systems need to be tested on fully compliant platforms
where the dates can be rolled forward into 2000. We aim to have compliant platforms by April next year,
and  to  begin  testing  with  financial  institutions  and  our  other  counterparties  and  customers  from  July
1998.
We  have  also  begun  assessing  our  less  critical  PC  and  spreadsheet  applications  which
have been developed and supported by various user areas. Each business/policy area has “ownership” of
the renovation required for these systems, with support from the IT group. We plan to have these fully
tested and proven clean by September 1998.
Another  area  of  concern  for  all  of  us  is  the  potential  problems  with  embedded  chips
which control the operation of everything from lifts to air  conditioning  to  fax  machines.  Our  Facilities
Management  people  began  tackling  this  last  year.  Having  assessed  key  equipment,  they  are  now
identifying  the  hidden  components  of  building  infrastructure  which  may  have  chips  and  so  need  to  be
assessed. Since many of these items cannot  easily  be  tested  internally,  we  will  be  seeking  certification
and proven test results from the vendors.
Settlement risk -- RTGS
Let  me  turn  briefly  to  the  RTGS  project  which,  as  you  know,  will  allow  high-value
interbank payments to be settled on a “real time”, pay-as-you-go basis  from  the  first  half  of  next  year.
This will eliminate a large proportion of the interbank settlement risk which currently arises because final
settlement is deferred to the day after payments are processed.
Over  the  past  six  months,  several  major  milestones  have  been  achieved  in  the  RTGS
project, and now all of the basic infrastructure is in place:
The  necessary  enhancements  to  RITS  (the  Reserve  Bank  Information  and  Transfer
System), which will form the core of RTGS, were completed early in July.
The SWIFT Payment Delivery System, which will send customer and foreign exchange
payments for real-time settlement, went “live” at  the  end  of  August.  Last  week,  this  system  carried  an
average daily volume of around 1,100 payments, with average daily value around $13 billion. By the end
of this month, we expect 16 banks will be using the system.
Austraclear  commenced  operations  as  a  feeder  system  at  the  end  of  September,  with
settlement details of all interbank transactions through Austraclear now sent automatically to RITS.
Most transactions across these various systems continue to be settled on a next-day basis,
but banks are now able to monitor continuously their exchange settlement account (ESA) balances  and
their net obligations to each other. Prior to full implementation, they will be able to test the queuing, repo
and offset functions which will smooth liquidity management in the RTGS world.
This  project,  which  represents  a  major  advance  in  the  sophistication  of  the  Australian
financial system, is now entering its final stages. Between November and January, payments between the
major banks, which are now carried across RITS, will migrate to the SWIFT Payment Delivery System.
Then,  in  February  next  year,  the  RBA  will  set  a  limit  on  each  bank’s  consolidated  ESA  and  “net
interbank obligation” position. These limits will be reduced progressively to allow us all to adjust to the
new environment. When they reach zero in April 1998, full RTGS will be operative.
Foreign exchange settlement
BIS Review   98/1997
- 5 -
RTGS  will  eliminate  settlement  risk  for  high-value  payments  between  domestic  banks.
Banks  will  remain  exposed  to  foreign  exchange  settlement  risk  because  the  currencies  in  a  foreign
exchange  transaction  are  each  settled  in  a  different  “domestic”  market.  That  makes  synchronised
payment-versus-payment  extremely  difficult  because  the  respective  payment  systems  are  often  in
different time zones. Also, it is unlikely that both parties to the transaction are direct participants (with
final  settlement  capacity)  in  each  market.  So  correspondent  banks  were  invented.  The  time  taken  for
correspondent banks to carry out instructions and to notify their principals adds to settlement risk.
The  exposure --  or  amount  at  risk --  in  a  foreign  exchange  trade  lasts  from  the  time  a
payment instruction for the currency sold can no longer be cancelled unilaterally by a bank until the time
the currency purchased is received with finality. And it equals the full amount of the currency purchased.
Although foreign exchange settlement risk first became a major concern with the failure
of Bankhaus Herstatt in 1974, only in the past few years has a serious attack been made on the problem.
The ball was set rolling by the New York Foreign Exchange Committee and the Committee on Payment
and Settlement Systems of the Group of Ten Countries. (The most recent report by the latter is known as
“the Allsopp Report”). Their work has done much to improve knowledge of the various components of
foreign  exchange  settlement  risk  and  to  promote  ways  of  reducing  it.  Significantly,  these  bodies  have
expressed  a  preference  for  the  private  sector  to  develop  solutions,  but  have  made  it  clear  that  central
banks should encourage and monitor progress with this.
One finding of the Allsopp Report was that the magnitude of foreign exchange risk can
be  very  large.  To  quote:  “Given  current  practices,  a  bank’s  maximum  FX  settlement  exposure  could
equal,  or  even  surpass,  the  amount  receivable  for  three  days’  worth  of  trades,  so  that  at  any  point  in
time -- including weekends and public holidays -- the amount at risk to even a single counterparty could
exceed a bank’s capital.”
Another finding was that banks can often reduce settlement risk through relatively simple
changes  in  procedures -- for  instance,  by  renegotiating  arrangements  with  correspondent  banks,  and  by
making their own back offices more efficient.
More  fundamental  attacks  on  settlement  risk  have  been  through  netting  arrangements,
both  bilateral  and  multilateral,  in  which  gross  obligations  are  replaced  with  much  smaller,  netted
amounts.
The most ambitious scheme is that developed by the “Group of Twenty” banks, which is
known as Continuous Linked Settlement. Many of the details are still to be sorted out, but at the centre of
this  proposal  is  having  a  special-purpose  bank  as  a  member  of  the  payment  system  of  each  of  the
currencies included in the scheme.  Participating  banks  would  hold  individual  currency  accounts  at  this
special  bank,  with  settlement  between  them  transacted  across  these  accounts.  Collateralising
arrangements would avoid the creation of credit risk. With extended operating hours in  some  countries
and  access  to  domestic  payments  systems  being  on  a  real-time  gross  basis,  payments  by  banks  in
different currencies into and out of the special purpose bank would be made with finality on a continuous
basis. FX settlement risk would be eliminated.
Unfortunately,  groups  such  as  the  G10  countries  and  the  G20  banks  do  not  have
Australian representation, and their work has not encompassed either the Australian dollar or our market,
despite their importance in global foreign exchange trading. Consequently, the RBA set out to replicate
some of the international studies to get an idea of the dimensions of the FX risks incurred in Australia,
and to identify any special features of the Australian dollar market.
We  surveyed  24 bank  and  non-bank  foreign  exchange  dealers  during  April  this  year,
asking about their settlement practices and the volumes of transactions handled in different ways. It has
taken longer than we had expected to analyse the results, but the reasons for the delay -- identifying and
BIS Review   98/1997
- 6 -
rectifying  errors  in  a  large  number  of  the  completed  questionnaires -- have  been  instructive  in
themselves.
Our analysis is still not complete, but we do have some preliminary observations. These
impressions from the survey are not particularly comforting. On the other hand, they are also not out of
line with overseas findings.
The  first  point  is  that  many  banks  had  considerable  difficulty  in  even  completing  the
survey -- surprisingly including some who had helped us design it.
Second,  in  many  banks  it  took  quite  some  time  for  our  survey  to  find  a  “home”,
suggesting that they may not have one person (or group) charged with responsibility for FX settlement
risk. Giving someone such “ownership” is considered best practice.
Many banks seem not to have a good feel for the size of their settlement risk. But it is
clear that the magnitudes are huge. Aggregate daily trades of all currencies on the Australian market are
probably at least as large as the $90 billion exchanged each day through the domestic payments system.
Some banks seem to have a poor understanding of exactly when receipts become final in
those countries which do not settle foreign exchange transactions in real time. There is some evidence of
a “no news is good news” policy in respect of assuming settlements have occurred.
Finally, for even the major currency pairs traded out of Australia, the period  of  foreign
exchange settlement risk (leaving aside weekends and holidays) frequently lasts for more than 24 hours.
In some instances, it extends into a third day. For minor currency pairings, and taking into account the
period  for  which  a  bank  might  not  know  whether  a  trade  has  been  settled  or  not,  it  can  be  as  long  as
31 days! And remember that settlement risk which is not extinguished during the day it arises, cumulates
with the risk incurred the following day.
It  goes  without  saying  that,  in  consultation  with  banks,  we  will  be  looking  for
considerable improvement in the management of FX settlement risk after the full results of our survey are
compiled and published in the next month or so. On the positive side, we have seen  some  evidence  of
improvement  already,  as  the  survey  has  encouraged  senior  management  to  pay  more  attention  to  the
subject. This is essential, because FX is clearly the next frontier of risk reduction in the payments system.
We also believe that it is of utmost importance to our banks, and to our financial system generally, that
Australia’s interests are fully represented in any proposed global solutions. We will be working with the
Australian banks to achieve this.
BIS Review   98/1997
