Mr.  Erçel  considers  the  European  financial  markets  and  their  implications  for
Turkish  institutions      Speech  given  by  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey,
Mr. Gazi Erçel, in Istanbul on 23/10/97.
The EMU will be the most important change in the international monetary system since
the creation of the IMF at Bretton Woods. The creation of a new currency, the Euro, is in fact a historical
event  for  the  European  Union  (EU).  It  marks  a  new  quality  in  the  process  of  European  unification
because it is the final point and coronation of efforts since 1958 to create one big market in Europe.
The  success  of  the  Euro  area  will,  of  course,  depend  on  the  future  development  of  the
value of the Euro. The Euro, as we all know, has to compete with two strong international currencies: the
US dollar and the Japanese yen. According to one school of thought, the Euro will have a stable value.
That is  because  the  high  stock  of  assets  in  Euro,  held  by  official  or  private  foreign  holders  and  which
were  converted  from  national  currencies,  in  particular  from  Deutsche  Mark,  will  not  be  switched  into
other currencies.
Besides,  once  the  Euro  is  introduced,  there  could  be  a  significant  switch  of  foreign
exchange reserves out of US dollars and into Euro. This could give a boost to the exchange rate of the
Euro  against  the  US  dollar  over  time.  The  sheer  size  of  the  economy  in  the  monetary  union  will
encourage the use of the Euro instead of the US dollar in trade and foreign exchange transactions. This
process  would  further  be  accelerated  by  the  fact  that  the  use  of  a  single  currency  will  remove  the  not
negligible  cost  of  transactions.  According  to  a  study  conducted  by  the  IFO  Institute  in  Munich,  “the
transaction costs for the inter-European currency  management  may  be  in  the  order  of  nearly  60  billion
ECUs, or nearly 1% the GNP of the European Union”.
Also it is likely that central banks will use the Euro rather than the US dollar in foreign
exchange  interventions.  In  turn,  this  will  encourage  non-EU  central  banks  to  switch  an  increasing
proportion of their reserves into the Euro. This process will take time and the Euro will not usurp the role
of the US dollar in the short term. However, the trend is likely to be persistent and eventually the current
importance of the US dollar in the foreign exchange markets should be replaced by the joint importance
of the US dollar and the Euro. One factor which will affect the speed of this change is the outlook for the
Euro based on the fundamentals of the monetary policy of the European Central Bank (ECB). Moreover,
the  creation  of  a  monetary  union  will  prevent  exchange  rate  volatility  within  the  united  Europe,  the
reason being that the Euro area as a whole will be much less dependent on foreign trade. It is estimated
that the share of foreign trade of the Euro area will be only about 10% of GNP in comparison to about
30% for Germany today. And over the long term, the Euro should become almost as widely used as the
US dollar is today.
One conclusion to  be  inferred  from  this  is  the  following:  since  Turkey  has  close  trade,
service and financial links with Europe, and as the only country connected to Europe in a Customs Union
(CU), which I hope will evolve over time towards full membership, the EMU will create completely new
conditions in Turkey’s international and European relations. Therefore what will happen in Europe will
be decisive for Turkey in the years ahead. It will be a challenge for the Turkish authorities, as well as for
bankers and businessmen.
One of the most important  prerequisites  for  a  successful  monetary  union  is  a  sufficient
degree  of  economic  convergence  among  the  potential  members.  From  that  standpoint  the  degree  of
convergence  among  the  EU  countries  is  remarkable,  particularly  as  regards  the  convergence  criteria;
stable prices, stable exchange rates, low long-term interest rates and healthy public finances. In addition
to  these  criteria,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  requires  that  all  member  countries  in  the  EU  must  grant
independence to  their  central  banks  before  the  Monetary  Union  and  the  establishment  of  the  European
System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB).  The  reason  behind  the  requirement  of  independent  national  central
banks is that fixing exchange rates and unifying currencies requires a common monetary policy.
BIS Review   105/1997
- 2 -
For  a  currency  union  to  function  “smoothly  and  in  a  sustainable  way,  it  is  absolutely
necessary that all participants agree on either a single common  policy  or  closely  coordinated  policies”.
All  costs  and  benefits  of  the  union  must  be  shared  equally.  Any  member  acting  with  the  “free-rider”
mentality, and benefiting from the system at the expense of the others, will eventually cause the system
to  disintegrate.  Therefore,  a  single  common  currency  requires  a  single  monetary  policy  with  a  clearly
defined  target,  which  is  price  stability.  This  basic  principle  of  monetary  policy  has  already  been
embedded in the Maastricht Treaty. And the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) has been made
responsible for achieving it.
In order for the ESCB to  fulfil  the  task  assigned  to  it,  it  must  act  in  full  independence
from  national  governments  or  from  European  institutions.  The  ESCB  Governing  Council,  which  is
composed of the Board of Management of the ESCB and the governors of the participating central banks,
will  not  be  representing  respective  national  interests.  Although  there  are  some  differences  between  the
two  systems,  the  ESCB  is  like  the  Federal  Reserve  System  of  the  US.  For  the  ESCB  to  act
independently,  individual  national  central  banks  must  already  be  acting  independently  of  their
governments,  because  the  ESCB  will  be  built  on  individual  national  central  banks.  That  is  why  the
Maastricht Treaty made it obligatory for the national governments to grant independence to their central
banks in the period leading to the formation of the ESCB.
The  EMU  is  an  event  with  far-reaching  consequences;  in  one  way  or  the  other  all
countries will be affected by it. Unlike the effect of a currency area, a customs union or a free trade area,
a monetary union can affect in various degrees all countries, irrespective of whether they are in or out.
This general fact, together with the signing a Customs Union (CU) Agreement with the EU, make EMU
even more important for Turkey than for other countries outside the EMU. Therefore, I believe that the
Turkish  Central  Bank  has  a  predominant  role  to  play  in  informing  and  educating  all  Turkish  entities
about the choices and implications of EMU.
As you all know, Turkey is one of the potential countries to join the EU. I would say that
our  country’s  ultimate  aim  is  to  become  a  full  member  of  the  EU;  therefore  first  we  need  to  adapt  to
European standards in many areas. The steps Turkey took on the way to the CU are also steps taken to
ensure  full  integration  in  EMU.  After  these  general  remarks  I  would  like  to  look  at  the  issue  from
Turkey’s perspective.
So  far,  the  measures  taken  to  support  the  independence  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey
(CBT) are remarkable. Recently, the Central Bank Law was amended and now limits have been set on
the  so-called  “short-term  advances”  which  the  Treasury  is  legally  entitled  to  obtain  from  the  Central
Bank. Starting from 1994, the Treasury’s annual use of short-term advances is to  be  reduced  gradually
over  five  years  from  15  to  3  percent  of  each  year’s  incremental  budget  appropriations.  By  1998,  the
Treasury  will  be  entitled  to  short-term  advances  totalling  not  more  than  3  percent  of  that  year’s
incremental budget appropriations over the previous year.
In addition to that, the Treasury and the Central Bank have signed a seven-point protocol
to cooperate in fighting inflation. The official aim of this accord is also to give the Central Bank more
independence. So, an important development towards the full independence of the Central Bank has been
initiated, as required in the Maastricht Treaty.
However, we have been in the process of preparing a new Central Bank law in parallel
with the same institutions in the EU. The work has already been done and we are ready to submit it to the
government if and when the political environment is appropriate.
On  the  other  hand,  in  addition  to  the  already  installed  electronic  payments  clearing
system,  the  CB  has  signed  a  contract  to  develop  and  install  a  modern  national  securities  settlement
system. The new system will allow the Bank to increase the efficiency with which government securities
can  be  traded  on  the  capital  markets  and  ensure  that  the  payments  system  will  match  the  standards  of
those in the EU and other western nations. The new system will also be capable of being connected to the
BIS Review   105/1997
- 3 -
TARGET  network.  At  the  same  time  the  system  will  strengthen  Turkey’s  links  with  the  European
member countries and will enable it to trade in the same currency as other members, a requirement for
participation in the EMU. As far as the technical infrastructure is concerned, Turkey is ready to integrate
itself into the EU.
I  would  like  to  remind  you  that  Turkey  has  been  pursuing  a  series  of  liberalization
policies since 1980 which are broadly in line  with  economic  tendencies  in  the  world.  A  wide  range  of
policy measures were put into effect to achieve the restructuring of the economy. Changes in exchange
rate  and  trade  policies  were  the  main  instruments  in  this  process.  This  program  has  brought  a  radical
change in Turkey’s development strategy by increasing its dependence on market forces. In this context,
the fixed exchange rate policy was replaced by the flexible one, restrictive control measures on imports
were  abolished  and  protection  was  reduced  gradually.  Similarly,  foreign  exchange  transactions  were
thoroughly  liberalized,  free  trade  zones  were  established,  foreign  investment  was  further  encouraged
along with the privatization of public enterprises. As a result of these newly adopted policies, there have
been spectacular changes in the Turkish economy, with exports and foreign investments having proved to
be responsive to the structural adjustment process; within this process, the Turkish lira has become fully
convertible and restrictions on capital movements have been effectively removed.
Even though the liberalization policies were adopted independent of the EU perspective,
they  helped  to  facilitate  Turkey’s  attempt  to  apply  for  full  membership,  by  providing  a  solid  basis  for
lasting progress.
On the other hand, member countries of the EU have tried to make some adaptations in
their  banking  regulations  to  integrate  financial  systems.  Competition  among  them  has  increased.  A
universal banking system is accepted. Banks either have increased their assets or have merged with other
banks  in  order  to  be  strong  in  a  market  where  competition  is  intensified.  New  financial  products  are
created every day. Technology is used intensively in order to reduce costs and serve customers better. In
parallel to these developments many  reforms  have  been  made  in  order  to  develop  the  Turkish  banking
system. Some amendments were made to the Banking Law to harmonize it with European standards, and
now we are in the process of preparing a new Banking Law. These changes will require some banks to
strengthen their financial situation and bring their credit risk and equity participation ratios closer to the
EU norms. Within the process of becoming more deeply integrated with the European financial markets,
the  Turkish  banking  system  will  now  face  new  competition.  The  CU  agreement  has  naturally  affected
Turkish banks and changed the dimensions of competition. But Turkish banks seem ready in many ways
for this new and larger competitive environment. Today banks in Turkey are made more dynamic by a
high-technology  electronic  infrastructure,  high-quality  services  and  well-trained  manpower.  What  we
need is to integrate the legal and institutional systems in parallel with the EU banks.
With the introduction of the Euro there would arise a number of technical issues which
must  be  immediately  tackled.  As  of  today,  Turkish  banks  are  allowed  to  maintain  foreign  exchange
positions in 23 foreign currencies, of which  17,  including  the  ECU,  are  European  currencies.  With  the
Euro the CB and the Turkish banks will no longer have to deal in these currencies, but only in Euro.
Of course, initially there will be some currencies, like the British pound and a few others,
which will continue to exist for a while. But within this process, all foreign assets and liabilities in the
currencies of the countries participating in the monetary union will need to be converted into the Euro.
Currently, Turkey follows an exchange rate policy based on a basket consisting of the US
dollar  and  the  Deutsche  Mark.  It  is  assumed  that  since  other  European  currencies  are  related  to  the
Deutsche  Mark  through  the  European  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  (ERM),  the  basket  also  reflects  the
weight of other European currencies through the Deutsche Mark. With monetary union the share of the
Euro area in Turkey’s overall trade in goods or services will be more than 50%. But this will not change
the picture from the exchange rate policy point of view. Therefore the Euro could easily be substitute for
Deutsche Mark in the present basket.
BIS Review   105/1997
- 4 -
Within the CB’s foreign reserves, some positions are being held in the currencies of the
countries which are candidates for monetary union membership. These positions consist of securities and
money market  placements.  It  is  expected  that  security  investments  will  be  converted  to  the  Euro  as  of
January  1st,  1999.  Money  market  placements  on  the  other  hand  will  continue  to  be  transacted  in  their
original currencies until July 1st, 2002. The fixing  of  the  Deutsche  Mark  rate  against  Euro,  the  Euro’s
value against other currencies in the international money markets and the depth and performance of the
Euro  bond  market  will  be  important  factors  in  terms  of  our  reserve  management  policy.  In  the  Euro
market,  there  will  no  longer  be  any  cross-currency  risk  and  cross  currency-induced  interest  rate
differential.  However,  it  is  possible  that  the  country  risk-induced  differential  will  become  more
pronounced.  Therefore  investors  must  pay  attention  to  which  country’s  security  they  are  buying  when
investing in Euro-denominated securities.
There are also issues which should be considered  by  the  real  sector.  In  particular  those
firms  which  are  very  active  in  trades  across  borders  are  likely  to  adopt  the  value  of  the  Euro  in  their
dealings  rather  quickly,  because  firms  competing  in  European  markets,  in  order  to  make  comparison
possible, should set their prices in Euro.
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  CB  and  the  commercial  banks  have  to  convert  the
foreign exchange denominated accounts into the Euro. This is not an easy task and involves changes in
accounting systems  and  data  processing.  Therefore  due  attention  has  to  be  paid  to  these  infrastructural
changes prior to the introduction of the Euro.
The  fact  that  the  EU  is  Turkey’s  most  important  trading  partner  increases  the
implications of EMU for the Turkish economy. On the other hand, the EU has the largest share in foreign
investment  in  Turkey,  and  invisible  earnings  in  the  Turkish  balance  of  payments  have  a  significant
European content. Furthermore, most of our correspondent banks are in the Euro zone. Turkey has close
trade, service and financial links with Europe, as the only country connected to Europe in a CU  which
hopefully will evolve over time towards full membership.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that time is getting short for launching the Euro.
The time remaining must therefore be used efficiently. Those who have prepared and are ready will also
be those who will also derive the greatest benefits. I do believe that we are heading in the right direction.
BIS Review   105/1997
