Mr. Wellink discusses recent developments in the Dutch economy      Address
given by the President of the Netherlands Bank, Dr. A.H.E.M. Wellink, at the XXIst European
meeting of the Trilateral Commission in The Hague on 25/10/97.
Recent success
As you all know, the Dutch economy has been doing remarkably well lately. Over
the past three years, Dutch GDP has grown by an annual average of 3%, i.e., considerably more
than was the case in most major continental European countries. For this year and the next, the
prospects for growth are even better. Growth has furthermore been attended by considerable job
creation,  averaging  nearly  100,000  man-years  per  annum,  or  1.8%,  since  1995.  The  Dutch
unemployment figure has consequently dropped to around 6%.
All  this  is  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  picture  presented  by  most  countries  on  the
continent  of  Europe.  Until  very  recently,  they  were  seeing  no  more  than  a  moderate  cyclical
recovery. Still, this year the growth of output in these countries would seem to be accelerating
substantially.  This  has  not  yet,  unfortunately,  fed  through  to  the  employment  situation.  In
Germany and France, for instance, unemployment is expected to rise even further this year. The
unemployment figure there is about twice that in the Netherlands.
The Dutch upturn has drawn widespread attention, and has come to be known in
some circles as the Dutch model. In my speech today, I will guide you through the roots of the
Dutch  success.  Let  me  start  by  saying  that  the  recent  favourable  economic  development  is
definitely  not  a  miracle.  It  simply  boils  down  to  sound  macro-economic  policies  and
deregulation,  in  particular  of  labour  markets  (including  some  country-specific  deregulation
policies).  Every  country  in  the  world  can  effectively  copy  it.  The  implementation  of  these
policies was possible because of a broad consensus in the Netherlands on their necessity. This is
lacking  in  many  of  our  neighbouring  countries.  But  to  my  mind  this  consensus  among  all
relevant  parties  was  not  caused  by  the  so-called  consensus  model  --  on  the  contrary.  The
consensus  emerged  after  the  consultative  framework  --  which  had  led  to  paralysis  in  the
1970s -- was  made  much  leaner.  I  will  come  back  to  that  later.  Let  my  first  give  you  an
overview of the facts and figures surrounding the so-called “Dutch miracle”.
Making up for lost ground
To see the developments of the last few years in their proper perspective, we must
take  a  look  at  the  situation  in  the  early  1980s.  In  those  years,  Dutch  business  was  in  serious
trouble.  The  international  recession,  when  it  struck,  hit  the  Netherlands  much  harder  than  its
neighbours, because in the 1970s business sector profitability here had been structurally eroded
by excessive rises in wage costs and the consequent deterioration of competitiveness. A vicious
circle  of  labour  shake-out  set  in,  leading  --  via  the  social  security  system  --  to  higher  social
insurance  contributions  and  thus  contributing  to  further  job  destruction.  The  problem  was
compounded  by  an  inappropriate  policy  reaction  to  the  two  oil  crises,  in  the  form  of  an
expansive budget leading to unsustainable deficits (of over 10% of GDP) and, after some delay,
to soaring central government indebtedness.
The figures show only too clearly that  in  those  years  the  Netherlands  was  much
worse off than other countries. In 1970, the Netherlands had still held the sixth place in Europe
in  terms  of  per  capita  GDP  (10%  above  the  European  average).  But  by  1988  it  had  fallen  to
below  that  average,  and  the  Netherlands  had  dropped  to  the  eleventh  place.  Looking  at  the
BIS Review   100/1997
- 2 -
figures for subsequent years, we see that the Netherlands has since regained some of the ground
which it had lost earlier. In 1996, per capita GDP held the seventh place (at nearly 5% above the
European average). A similar pattern is in evidence for the employment situation; between 1972
and 1983, job losses were much worse than in the rest of Europe. But here the relative recovery
set  in  around  1985.  In  other  words,  the  Dutch  success  has  until  now  been  no  more  than  an
exercise in making up for ground lost earlier. In fact, we still have not caught up with Europe in
all respects.
Explanatory factors
In  my  view,  the  turnaround  which  began  in  1982-1983  can  be  ascribed  to  a
combination of sound macroeconomic policy, as well as specific measures aimed at  improving
the operation of markets.
•
The gradual restructuring of public finance, starting in 1982 and resulting in a deficit of
2.1%  of  GDP  in  1997,  compares  favourably  with  those  of  most  countries  in  the  vicinity.  The
introduction of real expenditure  ceilings  at  the  start  of  this  Cabinet  has  proved  instrumental  to
this success. Also, the better control of the budgetary  process  contributed  to  the  outcome.  It  is
gratifying  that  our  efforts  to  achieve  healthier  public  finances  have  mainly  taken  the  form  of
expenditure  cuts.  The  cuts  have  also  made  it  possible  to  alleviate  the  burden  of  taxation  and
social insurance contributions. The positive evaluation made by the ECOFIN Council this spring
is a good incentive to strive over the next few years for a balanced budget. I will be going into
the need for that later.
•
The  fact  that  since  1983  monetary  policy  has  given  absolute  priority  to  stability  of  the
guilder/Deutsche  mark  exchange  rate  is  another  contributing  factor.  That  has  enabled  us  to
import,  as  it  were,  the  usually  favourable  price  climate  prevailing  in  Germany.  Because  of
moderate wage developments at home, this exchange rate policy provided for real exchange rate
stability  as  well,  resulting  in  a  favourable  competitive  position  of  our  business  sector.  This
contrasted sharply with Germany, where excessive wage increases during the reunification boom
contributed to a substantial real appreciation of  the  German  mark  of  about  12%  between  1990
and  1995.  The  real  guilder  appreciation  was  instead  negligible.  The  policy  also  enhanced
confidence in the financial markets, which in turn contributed to a sustained decline of (the risk
premium  contained  in)  interest  rates.  For  over  a  decade,  Dutch  capital  market  rates  have  been
among the lowest in Europe, making for an improved investment climate as well.
•
The  wage  restraint  --  I  mentioned  it  already  --  ensuing  from  the  much  cited  accord  of
Wassenaar  (1982)  was  the  third  factor.  This  entailed  a  trade-off  between  the  employers’
organizations  and  the  trade  unions,  the  latter  relinquishing  automatic  price  compensation  for  a
shorter  working  week.  A  condition  was  that  business  costs  should  not  increase.  It  was
furthermore  agreed  that  wage  negotiations  would  be  decentralized.  The  process  of  wage
moderation  was  boosted  further  by  the  government-initiated  alleviation  of  taxation  and  social
insurance contributions. In the longer term, the results can be seen to be truly impressive. Over
the  past  fifteen  years,  unit  wage  costs  have  remained  well-nigh  stable  in  the  Netherlands,
allowing  a  recovery  of  profitability,  and  an 
the  business  sector’s
competitiveness.
improvement  of 
•
The economy has moved towards greater market orientation, a goal which has been high
on the political agenda since the beginning of the 1990s. The labour market was the first to be
targeted,  with  social  security  legislation  being  amended  to  give  the  market  mechanism  greater
leeway.  In  the  period  from  1983  to  1990,  minimum  wages  and  social  insurance  benefits  had
BIS Review   100/1997
been delinked from the general development of wages. A wide range of measures was directed
at  the  lower  end  of  the  labour  market,  the  aim  being  to  stimulate  businesses  to  employ
low-skilled  personnel  by  way  of  a  reduction  of  social  insurance  contributions  payable  by
employers,  wage  cost  subsidies  and  subsidized  jobs.  Furthermore,  society  has  come  to  accept
flexible forms of labour, such as part-time working and temporary staffing, which have boosted
the expansion of the number of jobs in the services sector. In this respect, the Netherlands holds
a vanguard position internationally, with 40% of all work now being done on flexible contracts.
Not only does this greater flexibility meet the needs of the business sector, employees, too, seem
to  find  it  suits  their  changing  preferences.  Global  calculations  show  that  the  potential
employment gains for other countries, if part-time jobs had developed to the same extent as  in
the Netherlands, could be sizeable (around 3 million jobs in both Germany and France). These
calculations  are  highly  mechanical  and  therefore  one  should  be  cautious  in  interpreting  the
outcome. Nevertheless, I think that part-time work arrangements could be helpful in addressing
a serious unemployment situation, under strict conditions, i.e., they are applied tailor-made and
do not increase businesses’ operating costs. So far the main result in the area of product market
improvement has been the 1996 liberalization of the statutory establishment rules for businesses.
With boundaries disappearing and new technology being developed all the time, we cannot but
go  with  the  grain  of  the  market  on  an  increasing  scale.  We  must  always  keep  in  mind  that  all
countries around us are doing exactly the same thing. Introducing new rules and amending old
ones may be painful at first, apart from being time-consuming, but there seems to be nothing for
it but to go on doing so, if we wish to maintain our prosperity in the longer term.
With so much praise being heaped on the Netherlands and its consensus economy,
people  tend  to  forget  that  consensus  about  how  a  recovery  should  be  brought  about  did  not
materialize out of the blue; in fact, it was enforced by the unfavourable economic developments
during  the  1980-81  recession,  which,  as  I  noted  before,  hit  us  much  harder  than  others.
Ultimately,  it  was  that  very  fact  which  compelled  the  employers’  organizations  and  the  trade
unions to give up their entrenched views, views which had been characteristic of the 1970s. That
episode  illustrates  only  too  vividly  that  having  a  consultative  framework  for  employers  and
employees  does  not  guarantee  fruitful  negotiations.  The  consultative  process  has  been
streamlined in the meantime. One could say that the “consensus model” of the 1970s has given
way to the consensus of the 1990s.
Where do we go from here?
For  all  our  fifteen  years  of  conducting  a  policy  aimed  at  recovery,  we  cannot
afford to indulge in complacency. Things may be going in the right direction, but we still have
several major long-standing problems to see to:
•
 First, there is the continued high rate of economic inactivity. The low participation rate
of our population in general is a major factor underlying our internationally modest position in
terms of prosperity. This applies especially to the older members of the labour force. More than
half of those aged between 50 and 65 do not hold a job. We should really be seeking to reduce
our rate of economic inactivity to the levels prevailing in neighbouring countries.
•
Secondly,  there  is  our  considerable  public  debt.  Although  it  has  been  falling  in  recent
years,  our  debt  ratio  (of  over  70%  of  GDP)  continues  to  be  more  than  10  percentage  points
above the EMU criterion. A rapid further reduction to well below 60% is called for if we wish to
be  able  to  cope  with  the  growing  burden  which  the  imminent  ageing  of  the  population  will
impose  on  public  finance.  In  addition,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  past,  high  debts  make  us  more
BIS Review   100/1997
- 4 -
vulnerable in the event of interest rate rises. European interest rates are currently low, but they
will not stay that way for ever.
Our  fundamentals  are  favourable.  One  major  advantage  is  our  structurally  high
savings surplus, indicating that macro-economically there are no financial impediments to higher
growth.  Furthermore,  we  seem  to  have  scope  for  further  growth,  provided  we  succeed  in
harnessing the current labour reserve. To complete our recovery, we will need further budgetary
restructuring and continue on the path toward greater market orientation.
Policy conclusions
This brings me to the concluding part of my speech: what can we learn from the
Dutch experience? There are five lessons which can be drawn from it.
Firstly, monetary stability is an important ingredient of a stable economic climate.
However,  not  only  nominal  but  also  real  exchange  rate  stability  matters.  If  relative  price  and
labour cost developments are out of line, a country’s competitiveness is seriously affected, even
if  the  nominal  exchange  rate  remains  stable.  This  is  an  important  lesson  with  a  view  to  EMU
when nominal exchange rate stability is a given factor.
Secondly, sound budgetary policy is not only about deficit reduction and cutting
expenditure. It is about redefining the role of the public sector in an economy.
Thirdly, more market pays off. We should not forget that the private sector is the
engine of our economy. So why not give the market sector more leeway? Of course, always on
the basis of a good analysis of what can and can’t be done by the market.
The  fourth  lesson  is  related  to  the  latter.  Policies  geared  at  increasing  labour
market flexibility work. However, it is important to note that -- as far as labour market policies
is concerned -- there is no  overall  recipe  which  can  be  applied.  Policies  should  be  tailor-made
depending on frictions on certain parts of the labour market.
Last, but not least -- and related to the fourth lesson -- reduction in working hours
can, under conditions, play an important role in an economy. In the short term, it  simply  boils
down to a redistribution of work, without affecting the performance of an economy.  However,
redistribution  of  work  can  (in  return  for  moderate  wage  claims)  contribute  to  the  necessary
consensus between  employee  and  employers  organizations  in  an  economy.  And  the  latter  does
improve the performance of the economy in the longer run, as the Dutch experiences teach us.
To  conclude,  there  is  not  really  anything  new  under  the  sun.  The  combination  of  economic
policies  which  the  Netherlands  have  opted  for  have  been  advised  by -- for  instance -- the
International  Monetary  Fund  for  a  long  period.  The  issue  is  how  to  make  society  embark  on
these policies; in other words, how to create consensus. Not by forcing all relevant parties into a
stalemate, but by creating an awareness that a certain combination of policies -- the five lessons
which I mentioned before -- is beneficial for all parties involved.
BIS Review   100/1997
