Mr. Yam looks at the future of Hong Kong as a financial services centre for
China  and  the  Asian  region      Speech  by  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority, Mr. Joseph Yam, JP, to Coopers and Lybrand Financial Services Conference in Hong
Kong on 28/10/97.
I have been asked to speak on Hong Kong’s role as a financial services centre for
China and the Asian region. As you know, many of the economies of the Asian region, including
of  course  the  mainland  of  China,  have  been  undergoing  a  rapid  process  of  financial
liberalization.  This  has  brought  tremendous  benefits  to  the  region,  through  providing  the
mechanisms  for  channelling  savings  into  investments,  domestically  and  internationally,  thus
promoting growth and development of the region.  The  process  has  brought  substantial  risks  to
the region as well, as clearly you have witnessed in the past few months when financial turmoil
spread in the region.
2.  Notwithstanding  the  financial  problems  now  being  faced  by  the  region,  the
balance of opinion is still firmly that financial liberalization is of long-term benefit. The correct
response to such problems is clearly, at least for the immediate future, to take the right medicine
and implement the necessary economic adjustment programmes, prescribed if necessary  by  the
International Monetary Fund. Indeed, this has very much been the focus of recent attention when
one looks at individual economies in this region that have been subject to financial turmoil. But
prevention  is  always  better  than  cure.  Much  attention  will  also  be  required,  in  the  fullness  of
time, to make sure that the financial systems through which financial intermediation takes place
are robust so that the benefits of financial liberalization could be maximized and the associated
risks could be minimized and prudently managed.
3.  As  a  financial  services  centre  which  operates  with  a  highly  liberal  regime,
Hong Kong has  important  roles  to  play  in  all  this.  There  is  not  enough  time  to  go  into  details
here on this occasion, so I shall just identify three general areas for your consideration.
4. The first area concerns financial intermediation within individual economies, in
other words, the channelling of domestic savings into domestic investments. Here Hong Kong,
at this stage at least, largely only plays an advisory role. The less liberalized financial systems in
this  region  are  very  much  dominated  by  domestic  financial  institutions,  particularly  in  the
banking market. Further, domestic politics and a desire to protect domestic financial institutions
from undue competition are such that liberalization to admit foreign financial institutions to take
part  in  domestic  financial  intermediation  would  only  proceed  at  a  pace  dictated  by  these
considerations. For example, it will, I think, take some time and patience for Hong Kong-based
banks  to  gain  a  physical  presence  in  the  mainland  of  China,  be  allowed  access  to  renminbi
5.  But  Hong  Kong’s  expertise  in  developing  markets,  in  building  the  market
infrastructure and, where necessary, in regulating markets and supervising market participants to
uphold  the  efficiency  and  integrity  of  financial  markets  is  there  for  everybody  to  see  and  tap.
Furthermore, we know the region, and particularly in the case of the mainland of China, I would
argue that we know a lot more than others, and so we are in an advantageous position to perform
an  advisory  role.  And  the  financial  community  of  Hong  Kong,  including  the  regulators,  have
been actively playing that advisory role. I can speak from experience here, although it would not
be  appropriate  for  me  to  be  too  specific.  In  many  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority’s
BIS Review   112/1997
- 2 -
contacts  with,  for  example,  our  counterparts  in  the  mainland  of  China,  the  subjects  for
discussion are increasingly on financial affairs in the mainland rather than those in Hong Kong.
6.  I  believe  that  in  performing  this  advisory  role  effectively  we  will  open  up
opportunities  for  the  financial  services  industry  of  Hong  Kong.  As  markets  are  built  and
liberalized in these neighbouring economies, I  am  confident  that  our  own  financial  institutions
will  gain  access  to  the  business  in  those  markets  through  establishing  a  presence  there,  and
eventually compete, I hope, on a level playing field with the domestic financial institutions. In
any  case,  the  need  for  a  physical  presence  with  a  large  branch  network  in  the  provision  of
financial  services  may  soon  become  a  thing  of  the  past  with  the  advancement  of
telecommunications and information technology. It is still early, I think, to come to a definitive
view,  but  the  prospects  are  that  electronic  money  and  the  use  of  the  internet  for  banking  and
other  financial  services  are  breaking  down  geographical  boundaries.  Barriers  to  entry  and
restrictive practices may lead to the diversion of business to offshore markets in locations with
liberal practices.
7.  The  second  area  concerns  financial  intermediation  in  the  international
dimension, involving the flow of savings into investments across international boundaries. Hong
Kong as a financial services centre has a business role of providing the markets, in banking, debt
and  equity,  supported  by  other  efficient  financial  services  and  the  rule  of  law,  to  facilitate  the
international flow of funds in this region. Our  markets  have  the  freedom,  the  liquidity  and  the
integrity to attract international investors managing institutional savings to come here and those
in need of funds to raise them here. The opportunities in this region, in particular in China, are
enormous,  and  international  investors  would  have  a  preference  to  operate  in  markets  in  which
the  rules  of  the  game  are  transparent  and  familiar  to  them,  and  are  of  internationally  accepted
standards. And that means coming to Hong Kong.
8. The banking market in Hong Kong is of course a very international one, with a
total of 182 licensed banks, 151 of which are incorporated outside Hong Kong. 81 of the largest
100 banks  in  the  world  are  licensed  in  Hong  Kong.  Collectively  they  provide  a  wide  range  of
banking and other financial services, not just for Hong Kong but for the region as a whole. The
banking sector of Hong Kong is reputed to be amongst the most efficient and profitable  in  the
world.
9. Hong Kong’s debt market, which has developed quite rapidly in the past eight
years, is also playing a significant role in the region. Financial intermediation through the debt
market is still relatively underdeveloped in the region, but the prospects  are  good.  As  the  very
substantial  savings  of  the  region  is  increasingly  institutionalized  through  the  establishment  of
provident  funds  and  pension  funds,  the  demand  for  debt  securities  would  grow,  perhaps  much
faster  than  that  for  banking  and  equity  instruments.  At  the  same  time,  the  huge  investments
envisaged for the development of the physical infrastructure in the region will require much debt
financing, thus increasing the supply of debt securities. With the first class infrastructure in our
newly developed debt market, Hong Kong is in a very favourable position to take advantage of
these good prospects.
10. Hong Kong’s equity market is of course one of the largest and most liquid in
the  world,  and,  notwithstanding  recent  volatility,  is  the  favourite  market  for  institutional
investors and for those wishing to raise funds. One popular area recently is, of course, the use of
Hong  Kong’s  stock  market  for  raising  funds  by  Chinese  state-owned  enterprises.  Up  to  late
October, 38 enterprises from the mainland of  China  have  made  their  initial  public  offerings  in
Hong Kong in the form of the issue of “H” shares. These shares were bought by investors both
BIS Review   112/1997
- 3 -
in Hong Kong and overseas. It is important to note that when mainland enterprises sought to be
listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, they are required to comply with all the listing rules
and other relevant regulations in Hong Kong. No favouritism or preferential treatment has been
or will be given to mainland companies. Thus, in addition to fund raising, the listing of mainland
companies  in  Hong  Kong  facilitates  the  upgrading  of  corporate  governance  of  these  listed
companies in line with the international standards practised in Hong Kong. Through this process,
Hong Kong has also played a strategic role  in  the  reform  of  the  state-owned  enterprises  in  the
mainland.
11. The third area concerns the management of systemic risks arising from but not
limited  to  financial  liberalization  in  this  region.  There  is  clearly  identified  a  need  for  much
greater monetary cooperation in this region, and here Hong Kong has been actively playing, and
hopes to continue to play actively, a promotional role. We have been instrumental in promoting
greater Asian monetary cooperation, not just in the more visible efforts to deal with the financial
turmoil we all are facing, in one way or another, but also the upgrading and standardization of
supervisory practices, and the building of the financial infrastructure of this region to facilitate
safe  and  efficient  international  financial  intermediation  in  this  region.  Our  ability  to  play  this
role  no  doubt  enhances  Hong  Kong’s  status  as  an  international  financial  centre,  which  is
consistent with the requirement laid down in the Basic Law.
12. We took the initiative on the wake of the Mexican crisis in early 1995 to draw
the central banking fraternity of this region together to talk about Asian monetary cooperation,
which led first to a set of bilateral agreements for the provision of liquidity to each other in case
of  need.  This  was  followed  by  the  establishment  of  three  working  groups  to  share  knowledge
and expertise on financial market development, central bank operations and banking supervision
issues.  Separately,  we  are  also  promoting  the  establishment  of  linkages  of  the  financial
infrastructures of economies in this region, such as payment systems and debt clearing systems,
to  facilitate  the  efficient  and  safe  flow  of  funds  amongst  ourselves.  These  efforts  will  have
long-term benefits for the region, both in terms of the maintenance of financial stability and the
development of the financial sector.
13. While important progress is being made, this has recently been overshadowed
by financial turmoil in the region, and the focus of attention has as a consequence been diverted
to the provision of credit to assist Asian economies in need in making structural adjustments. We
had the financial package for Thailand, and there have since been many ideas put forward for a
general  facility  of  some  sort.  These  are  being  actively  considered  and  we  are  taking  an  active
part in the discussion, although there are currently still quite significant differences of opinion.
The position that we are taking is that whilst regional solidarity is highly appropriate for a region
with  increasing  economic,  trade  and  financial  integration  and  increasing  interdependence,  any
regional  financial  arrangement  must  be  structured  with  regard  to  international  standards  and
practices.  It  would  not  be  appropriate,  for  example,  for  a  regional  institution,  if  there  is  to  be
one,  to  prescribe  medicine,  along  with  financial  assistance,  that  is  different  from  those
prescribed by the International Monetary Fund. It would immediately be seen as a soft window
for  financial  support,  thus  creating  moral  hazard  problems.  I  am  hopeful  that  well-structured
arrangements  will  emerge  in  due  course.  Certainly  the  climate  is  right  and  the  momentum  is
there.
14.  Perhaps  I  should  take  this  opportunity  to  put  the  recent  financial  turmoil  in
Asia in a global perspective. First, the world is in very good economic shape. World economic
output is estimated by the IMF to expand by 4-4½% in 1997 and 1998, the strongest pace in a
decade. In the OECD  countries,  especially  in  the  US,  there  is  solid  growth  with  low  inflation,
BIS Review   112/1997
- 4 -
while  we  are  seeing  signs  of  broad-based  recovery  in  Europe.  Only  in  Asia  have  we  seen  a
slowing  of  growth,  but  the  growth  rates  have  still  been  high  by  world  standard  and  last  year
Japan grew by 3.6%, the fastest since the late 1980s.
15.  Second,  because  of  high  global  liquidity  and  low  inflation,  asset  markets
around the world are at record levels. Capital flows have increased with globalization, and added
to record high stock and bond prices. The fact that Europe has recently raised interest rates, and
the Fed is considering whether to pre-emptively raise rates to prevent wage-push  inflation,  has
made the financial markets much more nervous despite  the  growth  environment.  This  explains
why the financial volatility in Asia has become global in nature. It is very flattering to know that
Hong  Kong  can  move  even  the  mighty  US  and  European  markets,  as  much  as  the  other  way
around.
16.  Third,  Asian  fundamentals,  and  especially  Hong  Kong  fundamentals,  are
strong.  But  there  have  been  different  degrees  of  strength  in  Asia  with  respect  to  the
fundamentals.  The  adjustments  in  exchange  rates  of  currencies  in  this  region  reflect  partly  the
market perception of fundamentals. But as I said recently at the Per Jacobsson lecture, there  is
no perfect exchange rate regime. Some economists think that a shift from a rigid exchange rate
regime to a free float would result in lower interest rates to ease the interest rate pain. However,
recent  experience  in  Asia  has  shown  that  the  market  demands  even  higher  interest  rates  than
before under  a  floating  rate  regime  due  to  the  need  for  hedging,  since  there  is  a  perception  of
higher credit risks and exchange rate risks.
17. I interpret the currency turmoil  in  the  region  not  as  exchange  rate  volatility,
but as a painful but necessary adjustment in the real economy (manifested through the financial
system  and  markets)  to  the  new  world  of  greater  competition.  In  essence,  we  must  all  work
harder  to  get  greater  productivity  gains  to  meet  the  new  challenge.  No  one  can  afford  to  be
complacent in this global world. To the extent that the free market is demanding higher interest
rates because there is a reverse flow of capital from Asia to the OECD markets, we will all have
to bear the pain and adjust accordingly.
18.  And  not  all  interest  rate  pain  is  bad.  Higher  interest  rates  would  increase
savings in Hong Kong and bring inflation down further, thus increasing our competitiveness. To
the  extent  that  higher  interest  rates  would  reduce  house  prices,  they  would  also  make  housing
more affordable.
19.  The  currency  board  system  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate  is  appropriate  for  a
small  and  highly  externally-oriented  economy  like  Hong  Kong.  It  further  imposes  a  strict
discipline on public finances. Hong Kong runs budget surpluses, not deficits. On the other hand,
a  floating  exchange  rate  adds  huge  volatility  to  the  businesses  of  the  external  sector  of  the
economy, requiring further costs in terms of hedging. A volatile exchange rate by contrast does
not  have  quite  such  serious  implications  for  a  large  and  relatively  less  externally-oriented
economy like Japan, where external trade accounts  for  less  than  20%  of  GDP.  In  Hong  Kong,
with  external  trade  accounting  for  285%  of  GDP,  a  volatile  exchange  rate  creates  huge
uncertainties for much of our livelihood, thus undermining our fundamental competitiveness.
20. Hong Kong has always understood that there is no free lunch. We have built up our strengths
and our savings through sheer hard work. If there is greater competition out there, we will adjust
our quality and our skills accordingly. As accountants in a service economy, you know very well
that  you  cannot  price  yourselves  cheaply  in  order  to  compete.  Our  reputation  depends  on  our
ability to deliver quality service that is value for money. This is the strength for Hong Kong. Let
BIS Review   112/1997
- 5 -
me  conclude  by  merely  giving  you  the  assurance  that  our  linked  exchange  rate  system,  which
has served us so well in the past 14 years, is here to stay.
BIS Review   112/1997
