Mr. Stals discusses monetary policy challenges in South Africa      Address  by
the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Dr. Chris Stals, at a South African Financial
Markets  Conference  arranged  by  Standard  Bank  of  South  Africa  Limited  in  Cape  Town,  on
7/11/97.
1. Challenge number one - to find consensus on what the objective of monetary policy should be
in South Africa
In the international community of central bankers, there is widespread consensus
that  the  primary  goal  of  monetary  policy  must  be  domestic  price  stability.  Price  stability,
however, is only a means to an end, and not a final goal of overall macroeconomic policy. The
ultimate goal is determined by governments and is normally linked to the objective of maximum
economic growth, development and the creation of more employment opportunities.
Contemporary  economic  theory  supports  the  view,  however,  that  financial
stability, as measured by a low rate of inflation, is a precondition for the attainment of optimum
economic  development.  Furthermore,  monetary  policy,  being  only  one  of  the  sub-elements  of
overall  macroeconomic  policy,  is  tasked  with  the  responsibility  to  create  and  maintain  such  a
stable  financial  environment  that  will  be  conducive  for  sustainable  economic  growth  at  an
optimum rate in the medium and longer term.
In South Africa, however, confusion remains on what the task and  the  functions
of  the  central  bank  should  be.  The  most  important  delusion,  supported  by  certain  business
people,  politicians  and  even  some  academics,  is  linked  to  the  now  defunct  Phillips  curve
approach  in  terms  of  which  the  assumption  is  made  that  a  higher  inflation  rate  can  produce  a
sustained lift in growth and employment. World-wide experience, as long back as in the 1970s,
provided  sufficient  evidence  that  the  assumed  trade-off  of  higher  inflation  for  lower
unemployment could  only  be  exploited  over  the  limited  period  in  which  inflation  expectations
did not fully adjust to the new higher rate of inflation. With a more effective implementation of
the  theory  of  rational  expectations  within  modern  communities,  this  limited  period  has  indeed
become very short.
Another reason why the conventional theory of demand management through the
application  of  monetary  policy  is  no  longer  appropriate  is  the  major  shift  that  took  place  in
recent  years  in  macroeconomic  management,  away  from  conventional  Keynesian  demand
management  to  contemporary  supply-side  economics.  The  Phillips  curve  approach  is  based  on
the theory of demand-driven inflationary or deflationary conditions. The world-wide situation in
the 1970s, when there was a simultaneous rise in inflation and in unemployment in many of the
industrial countries, refuted the theory of the trade-off and forced new thinking on  particularly
the implementation of monetary policy.
The present universal approach on monetary policy therefore takes account of the
new  electronic  environment  of  instant  communication  leading  to  a  more  swift  dissection  of
policy  actions  and  immediate  reaction  by  markets,  and  of  the  more  general  need  in  most
countries  to  raise  production  capacity,  and  not  to  stimulate  demand.  In  this  environment,  the
appropriate role for monetary policy has been redefined as a responsibility for the creation and
maintenance  of  stable  financial  conditions  that  will  be  reflected  in  low  inflation.  This  is  what
central banks can do best to support governmental programmes for overall economic growth and
development.
BIS Review   108/1997
- 2 -
In  South  Africa,  considering  the  many  attacks  made  on  Reserve  Bank  policy
during  this  past  year,  there  is  still  a  major  lack  of  consensus  on  what  the  prime  objective  of
monetary  policy  should  be.  Unless  we  can  get  consensus  and  support  for  the  almost  global
approach of contemporary central bank policy, and unless we can agree to pursue these policies
also in South Africa, the road to the internationalisation of the South African economy will be
rough and difficult.
2. Challenge number two -- deciding on an appropriate framework for monetary policy
Given the objective of price stability, each central bank must design a framework
or a consistent model within which monetary policy can be implemented, taking account of the
structure  of  the  financial  system  and  of  the  economy  of  the  country.  Various  models  are
available to choose from, but whatever model is preferred, the final objective of monetary policy
should always be the protection of the value of the currency.
In the Bretton Woods system of fixed par values, the main intermediate objective
of monetary policy was the protection of exchange rates, or the external value of the currency.
By  linking  global  exchange  rates  through  fixed  gold  parities,  there  was  a  convergence  of
inflation, at a relatively low level, at least for the many countries that succeeded in maintaining
fixed  exchange  rates  over  relatively  long  periods  of  time.  Needless  to  say,  the  system  broke
down  in  the  late  1960s  and  early  1970s  when  more  expansionary  monetary  policies  were
followed by some of the major industrial countries, and inflation escalated. Today, some smaller
countries  still  attach  their  exchange  rates  to  a  selected  major  international  currency,  and  then
accept  the  unavoidable  consequence  that  the  rate  of  inflation  in  the  smaller  country  must
converge with the rate of inflation in the economy of the anchor currency. A good example of
this approach is provided by Argentina with its convertibility law of 1 Peso = 1 US dollar.
A second widely-used model is the one of monetary targeting where an important
monetary aggregate such as the money supply or the amount of bank credit extension is used as
an  anchor  for  monetary  policy.  Within  the  context  of  the  prime  monetary  policy  objective  of
maintaining  low  inflation,  a  monetary  target  (or  exchange  rate  target)  represents  but  an
intermediate objective of the policy.
South Africa is one of the many countries that introduced money supply targeting
as an anchor for monetary policy during the course of the 1980s. Initially, the policy served the
country  well.  It  made  an  important  contribution  to  a  better  understanding  of  policy  decisions,
and also made a major contribution towards the successful reduction in the level of  the  rate  of
inflation from an average of about 15 per cent over the twenty years from 1973 to 1992, to about
8½ per cent over the past four years.
The South African experience with  money  supply  targeting  is  not  very  different
from  those  of  other  comparable  countries  such  as  Canada  and  Australia  --  with  the  difference
that  the  process  in  South  Africa  is  a  slower  and  lagged  one,  mainly  because  of  the  economic
isolation  of  this  country  from  the  rest  of  the  world  up  to  1993.  Australia  introduced  money
supply  targets  in  1976,  and  then  abandoned  them  “with  reluctance”  in  February  1985.  At  the
time, Australia tendered two reasons for ending the M3-targeting stage:
“The  first  was  the  problem  of  controllability.  The  fact  that  targets  were  often
missed  was  an  indication  that  close  control  was  either  not  possible,  or  would  have  required
undesirable  movements  in  the  policy  instruments.  The  second  was  the  instability  of  the
BIS Review   108/1997
relationship  between  money  supply  and  the  ultimate  objective  of  policy  such  as  inflation  ...”.
(Address  by  Governor  Macfarlane  at  a  Conference  of  Economists  in  Hobart,  29  September
1997.)
It  was  Governor  Gerald  Bouey  of  Canada  at  the  time  who  made  the  famous
statement: “In Canada, we did not abandon money supply targets, they abandoned us”.
In  view  of  the  liberalisation  of  the  South  African  financial  markets  in  recent
years,  the  integration  of  the  South  African  economy  in  the  world  financial  markets  and  the
increasing  importance  of  large  and  volatile  international  capital  flows,  South  Africa  may  have
reached  the  same  stage  now  where  the  usefulness  of  the  M3-money  supply  as  a  target  for
monetary policy has been diluted to a point where some alternative anchor should be considered.
Following  the  demise  of  money  supply  targeting  during  the  mid  1980s,  both
Canada  and  Australia  went  through  a  transitional  period  which  lasted  until  the  early  1990s.
During  this  transitional  period  a  policy  of  “monetary  pragmatism”  was  followed.  There  was
indeed no formal or strictly defined framework to guide monetary policy. A “check-list”  of  an
ad  hoc  mixture  of  intermediate  objectives  was  introduced  and  the  central  bank  was  allowed  a
wide  degree  of  discretion  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  After  the  “rule”  of
monetary targeting broke down, the policy was “to look at everything”.
Although such  a  pragmatic  approach  may  have  some  advantages,  particularly  in
an  environment  of  major  structural  changes  and  volatile  international  shocks,  it  has  the  major
disadvantage of not being transparent. As Charles Goodhart put it:
“Supporters would describe it as sensible pragmatism, detractors as a reversion to
a muddled discretion which, once again, allows the authorities more rope than is good for them,
or us”. (The Conduct of Monetary Policy, Economic Journal 1989.)
Both  Australia  and  Canada,  and  a  growing  number  of  other  countries,  have
recently moved to direct targeting of inflation. In all these countries, however, not only central
banks but also governments commit themselves jointly with the central banks to a predetermined
target  for  inflation.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  indeed  sets  the
target for inflation in his Annual Budget, and then instructs the Bank of England to pursue the
goal with its monetary policy instruments. Nowhere does the central bank on its own decide on
an inflation target.
For an inflation target to be credible, there must be a commitment at least of the
central bank and the government, and, if possible, also of the business community and labour, to
the  achievement  of  the  goal.  Furthermore,  it  will  do  more  harm  than  good  for  a  country  to
introduce  a  formal  inflation  target  that  is  much  out  of  line  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Of  the
seven countries reported in the BIS Annual Report for 1996 with formal inflation targets, no one
has set a goal for inflation of more than 3 per cent per annum. The central bank must be given
sufficient operational autonomy to pursue the inflation target with vigour and without the fear of
intimidation by politicians or other pressure groups. And, finally, markets must be free, flexible
and responsive to underlying changes. Inflation  is  often  a  symptom  of  malfunctioning  markets
and the cure lies not with monetary policy, but with a restructuring of the markets.
It is a big challenge for South Africa to  prepare  itself  for  this  new  age  of  direct
inflation targeting as an anchor for monetary policy. The proposals made by the Reserve Bank
last  week  for  the  introduction  in  March  next  year  of  a  more  flexible  system  of  providing
BIS Review   108/1997
- 4 -
accommodation to banking institutions, represents an important further step on this road towards
a more effective monetary policy system that will be compatible with global policies.
3.  Challenge  number  three  -  establishing  an  effective  institutional  framework  for  monetary
policy
There is a lot of misunderstanding in South Africa about what is meant with the
independence of the Reserve Bank. The Bank can never be made responsible for determining the
overall  macroeconomic  policy  objectives  of  the  country.  This  is  a  prerogative  of  government.
The central bank must, however, be given a clear mandate from government on what its policy
objective should be, but should then be given the necessary autonomy to pursue and achieve this
objective.
Taking  account  of  the  powers  and  influences  of  central  banks,  the  obvious
directive by government to the monetary authority should be to protect the value of the currency
in the interest of sustainable optimum economic growth and development in the longer term. To
achieve  this  objective,  a  central  bank  must  at  times  apply  financial  disciplines  that  are
unpopular, will be opposed by  pressure  groups  and  are  perceived  to  be  against  the  interests  of
private  sector  profiteers,  and  political  popularity.  It  is  inter  alia  for  this  reason,  and  only  in
respect of the implementation of measures that may at times prove to be unpopular, that central
banks  should  be  given  “independence”  from  governments.  To  quote  once  more  from  what  a
former Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia once said:
“The  Reserve  Bank  must  be  given  all  the  freedom  of  the  prison  exercise  yard”.
(R.A. Johnston - “Comments on Professor Schedvin - Economic Papers - 1992.)
Although  this  autonomy  has  been  given  to  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  in
terms of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, the disciplinary actions applied by the
Bank in the pursuance of its mandate are often challenged  by  economists,  business  people  and
politicians whenever they believe their vested interests are impeded by the actions. Many South
Africans must still learn to be more tolerable towards the need  of  painful  financial  disciplines,
when  justified  by  adverse  macroeconomic  situations.  These  may  often  be  forced  on  us  by
international developments over which we have no control.
Apart  from  an  effective  institutional  framework  for  the  Reserve  Bank,  South
Africa  also  needs  well-managed  private  sector  banking  institutions,  well-functioning  financial
markets  and  an  effective  clearing,  settlement  and  payment  arrangement  for  inter-bank
transactions. The challenge is therefore not only to liberalise the South African financial sector
further, but also to ensure good and prudent financial regulation, and to provide the country with
a modern electronically-based national payment system. The new system to be introduced by the
Reserve  Bank  in  March  1998  for  an  improved  clearing  and  settlement  system  will  provide  a
further step on the road of preparing for an effective integration of the South African financial
system in the global economy.
The challenge for South Africa is not to isolate itself from the adverse effects of
the  globalisation  process,  but  to  continue  to  participate  in  the  programme  of  gradual
international integration.
4. The overriding challenge for monetary policy is to keep inflation low
BIS Review   108/1997
Financial  stability  in  South  Africa  is  threatened  from  time  to  time  by  new  and
more intensive inflationary pressures. We have not yet succeeded in suppressing the prevailing
inflation  psychosis  in  this  country.  Expectations  at  this  juncture  may  have  settled  around  the
8 per  cent  per  annum  level,  which  is  about  half  of  what  it  used  to  be  at  the  beginning  of  this
decade. But this is still about three times the amount of actual inflation in the economies of our
major trading partners.
The  process  of  globalisation  unavoidably  leads  to  a  convergence  of  the  major
financial aggregates such as inflation, real rates of interest and budget deficits. South Africa will
either continue to be part of the globalisation process,  together  with  its  inevitable  convergence
effects,  or  will  be  marginalised  and  excluded  from  the  advantages  of  being  part  of  the
world-wide process.
In this period of transition from monetary policy targeting to the introduction of a
national  inflation  objective,  monetary  policy  must  continue  to  maintain  overall  financial
stability. This is essential in order to buy time while other policies (as proposed in GEAR) are
put in place to handle the more deep-seated structural deficiencies that must be corrected before
South Africa will be able to experience optimum economic growth with financial stability.
5. Conclusion and summary
The  challenges  facing  monetary  policy  in  South  Africa  at  this  stage  can  be
summarised as follows:
    We must convince more South Africans that the one and only task for  monetary  policy
must be to protect the value of the currency.
We must adapt monetary policy to the changing environment in which we now have to
operate. This may require of us to move away from money supply targeting and to adopt
a more direct focus on inflation developments.
We  must  guard  against  growing  pressures  in  our  country  for  the  curtailment  of  the
autonomy of the central bank.
The Reserve  Bank  must  continue  to  guide  the  South  African  financial  markets  into  the
world  financial  system.  This  will  require  further  progress  in  the  gradual  elimination  of
exchange control, the modernisation of  the  payments  system,  the  encouragement  of  the
development  of  more  efficient  markets  and,  in  the  context  of  Africa,  support  for
co-operation  and 
the  Southern  Africa
Development Community.
integration  of  financial  markets  within 
The  overriding  challenge  remains  to  bring  inflation  in  South  Africa  to  a  lower
level that will be more in line  with  the  average  rate  of  inflation  of  our  major  trading  partners.
This will require a sound monetary policy approach, based on realistic (but not necessarily low)
interest  rates;  a  stable  (but  not  necessarily  fixed)  exchange  rate;  a  sound  (but  not  necessarily
protected) banking sector, and effective and well-functioning financial markets.
BIS Review   108/1997
