Mr.  Plenderleith  considers  what  is  new  in  the  financial  markets  in  the  United
Kingdom   Speech by Mr. Ian Plenderleith, an Executive Director of the Bank of England, at the 6th
Central Banking Conference, in London on 18/11/97.
1.  This  has  been  a  year  marked  by  important  developments  in  the  UK  financial
markets and I am delighted to have this opportunity to take you through some of the highlights.
The UK’s new monetary framework
2. Perhaps the single most momentous change  in  the  financial  landscape  in  the  UK
has been the new government’s decision, in May, to give operational responsibility for interest rates
to the Bank of England -- essentially, to establish operational independence for the central bank. This
significant  reform,  which  took  effect  immediately,  and  is  to  be  the  subject  of  legislation  recently
introduced  in  the  UK  Parliament,  represented  an  immediate  concrete  demonstration  of  the  new
government’s commitment to monetary stability. It ensures that monetary policy will continue to be
directed  to  the  pursuit  of  low  inflation,  recognising  that  that  is  an  essential  pre-condition  for
achieving the sustained growth in output and employment that we all seek to achieve. The step was
warmly welcomed by the markets, as was evidenced by the immediate fall of around 50 basis points
it precipitated in long bond yields.
3. The framework put in place with that announcement has been carefully constructed
and  I  would  like  to  point  to  four  features  of  it  that  I  believe  will  be  important  to  its  long-run
effectiveness.
4.  First,  the  target  the  Bank  of  England  is  to  pursue  --  a  low  inflation  target  of
2½% -- is set by the government. In an open market economy, the conduct of an effective monetary
policy is helped enormously if the authorities can be clear and open about the price stability objective
they  are  pursuing;  and  in  a  democratic  system,  it  is  absolutely  right  that  the  elected  government
should set this critical strategic objective for the central bank to pursue.
5. Secondly, it is then the responsibility of the Bank of England to achieve this low
inflation  target,  principally  through  management  of  interest  rates.  But  this  responsibility  is  to  be
conducted within a structured framework. Decisions on interest rates are taken by a Monetary Policy
Committee in the Bank, consisting of nine members: five of these come from within the Bank -- the
Governor,  the  two  Deputy  Governors  and  the  two  Executive  Directors  responsible  for  monetary
policy; the other four are appointed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer and are recognised experts in
their  field  --  in  fact,  four  economists  of  outstanding  reputation.  A  representative  of  the  Treasury
attends  the  meetings  and  can  contribute  to  the  discussion,  but  has  no  vote.  The  Monetary  Policy
Committee meets monthly. It announces its decision each month as soon as its meeting  concludes,
and  the  minutes  of  its  meetings  are  published  within  six  weeks,  including  details  of  how  each
member voted.
6. A third important feature is that monetary policy is conducted with a high degree of
transparency. I have indicated that the Monetary Policy Committee’s decisions on interest rates are
announced immediately; and that the minutes of its meetings are published. In addition, the Bank of
England publishes a quarterly Inflation Report, which gives a  full  account  of  its  monetary  actions,
and their effect, over the past quarter, and a detailed assessment of the forward outlook for inflation,
including  a  projection  looking  two  years  or  so  ahead  and  an  assessment  of  the  relevant  upside  or
downside  risks.  This  degree  of  transparency  is,  we  believe,  important  in  generating  greater  public
understanding of the stance of monetary policy, as well as better-informed public debate and greater
public confidence in the process.
BIS Review   110/1997
- 2 -
7.  Closely  related  is  a  fourth  key  feature  of  the  arrangements  --  a  high  degree  of
accountability by the central bank for its actions. We are accountable in the first instance to our own
Court of non-executive Directors, who are specially charged with monitoring the process by which
the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  discharges  its  responsibilities.  We  are  accountable  also  to  the
government,  for  which  purpose  we  are  required  to  write  an  open  letter  to  the  Chancellor  of  the
Exchequer  if  inflation  deviates  by  more  than  1%  either  side  of  the  2½%  target,  explaining  the
divergence  and  the  action  taken  to  bring  it  back  on  course  --  an  open  letter,  and  hence  a  further
element of transparency.  We  are  accountable  also  to  Parliament,  which  will  entail  members  of  the
Monetary Policy Committee giving evidence to the House of Commons Treasury Select Committee,
most probably on the basis of our quarterly Inflation Report, as well as the Bank’s  Annual  Report
being  debated  in  the  full  House.  And  we  are  accountable  to  the  public  through  the  framework  of
transparency.
8. Put together, these elements provide for greater transparency and accountability of
the  monetary  policy  process  than  in  any  other  country  in  the  world.  None  of  this,  of  course,
guarantees success.  But  I  believe  that  this  new,  and  carefully-constructed,  framework  provides  the
best  prospect  we  have  had  for  years  of  delivering  price  stability  as  a  steady  foundation  for  the
sustained growth of output and employment that the UK is capable of achieving. This framework for
monetary  stability,  combined  with  the  parallel  commitment  the  government  has  demonstrated  to
fiscal  responsibility  and  to  promoting  a  flexible  and  competitive  supply-side  structure  for  the
economy,  provides  a  basis  for  the  UK  economy  to  continue  to  grow  on  a  sustainable  basis  in  the
years ahead.
Preparations for EMU
9. These changes in the monetary framework have been a major focus of interest of
the UK financial markets over the past summer. But in parallel there has also been close focus on the
continuing progress being made within the European Union towards Economic and Monetary Union
(EMU).
10. The UK government’s statement on EMU last month provided a clear account of
UK policy in relation to the monetary union. That statement indicated that, in principle, a successful
single currency within a single European market would be of benefit to Europe and to Britain. But, in
order for EMU to be right for Britain, the economic benefit should be clear and unambiguous. If, in
the end, a single currency is successful, and the economic case is clear and unambiguous, then the
government  believes  Britain  should  be  part  of  it.  The  statement  identified  five  economic  tests  that
define  whether  a  clear  and  unambiguous  case  can  be  made  for  the  UK  to  join  EMU.  These  are:
whether  there  can  be  sustainable  convergence  between  Britain  and  the  economies  of  a  single
currency;  whether  there  is  sufficient  flexibility  to  cope  with  economic  change;  the  effect  on
investment;  the  impact  on  the  UK’s  financial  services  industry;  and  whether  it  is  good  for
employment.
11. Applying these five economic tests has led the government to the conclusion that
British membership of a single currency in 1999 could not meet the tests, so that joining at the start of
EMU  is  not  in  the  country’s  economic  interests.  The  government  will  therefore  be  notifying  our
European partners, in accordance with the Maastricht Treaty, that we will not seek membership of the
single  currency  on  1  January  1999;  and,  barring  some  fundamental  and  unforeseen  change  in
economic circumstances, making a decision during this Parliament to join is not seen as realistic. The
statement therefore indicates that it is therefore sensible for business and the country to plan on the
basis that, in this Parliament, the government does not propose to enter a single currency. However,
the government has said that if a single currency works and is successful, Britain should join it. The
BIS Review   110/1997
- 3 -
government  believes  that  we  should  therefore  begin  now  to  prepare  ourselves  so  that,  should  the
economic tests be met, a decision to join a successful single currency can be made early in the next
Parliament. To help with the essential preparations, the Chancellor has invited the Governor of the
Bank of England and the heads of the two main bodies representing industry and commerce, and two
other Ministers, to join him on a Standing Committee to lead the preparations for EMU.
12.  In  the  UK  wholesale  financial  markets,  practical  preparations  are  accordingly
proceeding apace.
13.  We  at  the  Bank  of  England  have  been  taking  an  active  role  in  helping  the  UK
financial markets to prepare for the euro. We do this because, even though the UK will not be in at
the start, it is plain  that  banks  and  financial  institutions  in  the  UK,  in  their  wholesale  business  for
their corporate and institutional customers, in the UK and overseas, will want to be able to offer the
full range of financial facilities in the euro from the outset. They will want to be able to offer their
customers deposits  and  foreign  exchange  facilities  in  the  euro,  lending  and  borrowing  in  the  euro,
hedging and collateral in the euro and financing and settlement facilities. The London markets will
need to be able to operate in euro from the outset across the full range of their wholesale activities,
and practical preparations are now well advanced to achieve that by January 1999.
14. The Bank of England’s part in this extensive process of market-wide preparation,
besides equipping ourselves internally for operations in the euro, is a co-ordinating one, in three main
ways:
   first, our job is to ensure that the necessary infrastructure is developed in the UK to allow anyone
who wishes to do so to use the euro in wholesale payments and across the financial markets from
the first day of EMU.
second,  we  aim  to  promote  discussion  between  the  EMI,  national  central  banks  and  market
participants  across  Europe  about  practical  issues  on  which  the  market  is  seeking  a  degree  of
coordination.
and  third,  we  provide  information:  for  example,  through  a  quarterly  publication  on  Practical
Issues Arising from the Introduction of the Euro, which is distributed to around 32,000 recipients,
including 4,000 directly overseas. The next edition will appear shortly, neatly timed for people’s
Christmas reading, and I confidently expect it to be on the best sellers’ list for the festive season.
And  following  the  successful  symposium  we  held  early  this  year,  we  are  planning  to  hold  a
further symposium, next January at the Bank, on London as the international financial centre for
the euro.
15. This exercise -- to prepare the UK markets for wholesale activity in the euro by
January  1999  --  has  now  gathered  substantial  momentum.  Let  me  touch  on  a  few  of  the  main
priorities being pursued:
16. First, market participants agree on the need to be able to trade in London the full
range of euro-denominated instruments.
17.  Secondly,  they  also  agree  on  the  need  for  appropriate  payments  mechanisms  in
London to carry out transactions in euro both between parties within the UK and cross-border to and
from the UK.
18.  Thirdly,  efficient,  cost-effective  mechanisms  for  settling 
transactions 
in
euro-denominated securities also need to be made available in London.
BIS Review   110/1997
- 4 -
19. Fourthly, there is agreement on the desirability of harmonised market conventions
for the issuing and trading of euro-denominated instruments.
20. Fifthly, there is agreement on the need for as sound a legal basis as possible for
euro transactions, to provide legal certainty and to ensure continuity of contract.
21.  Sixthly,  there  are  tax  and  accounting  issues  to  be  addressed,  related  to  the
introduction of the euro.
22.  There  is  work  going  on  in  each  of  these  areas,  and  good  progress  on  many  of
them.  Let  me  give  you  one  example  --  the  payments  system,  which  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  UK’s
preparations  for  the  euro.  The  UK’s  sterling  Real-Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  system  is  being
developed to accommodate the euro, so that from  the  beginning  of  1999  euro  wholesale  payments
may be made in a safe, efficient and cost-effective way as sterling payments can now, even though
the UK will not be a participant in the monetary union at the outset. That development remains on
schedule, and it is encouraging that the UK system (CHAPS) has had expressions of interest recently
from a number of overseas banks wishing to join.
23.  The  UK  euro  system  --  CHAPS  euro  --  will  allow  payments  to  be  made  both
between parties within the UK and cross-border from and to the UK through its link to TARGET.
Using the knowledge and expertise we have acquired  through  developing  and  operating  by  far  the
largest RTGS system in Europe -- with average daily volumes of some 70,000 payments, worth some
£150  bn  --  we  are  contributing  a  great  deal  to  the  technical  development  of  TARGET.  Because  it
extends  the  benefits  of  RTGS  systems,  in  reducing  the  risk  in  payments,  for  the  first  time
cross-border, it is a project we wholeheartedly support.
24. But we also want to see TARGET as efficient and effective as possible, so that it
becomes the payment system of first choice for banks, in order to maximise its benefits in reducing
systemic risk. We have to recognise that TARGET will be competing with alternative euro payments
mechanisms,  including  correspondent  banking  and  the  European  Banking  Association’s  net
end-of-day  settlement  systems.  Consistently  with  this  view,  we  believe  that  it  is  essential  that
payments be able to flow freely throughout the TARGET system.
25.  Why  do  we  devote  this  effort  for  preparing  for  the  euro?  The  reason  is  very
straightforward. London’s pre-eminent position as an international financial centre rests on the fact
that it provides broad and liquid markets for the full range of internationally-traded currencies and for
the vast array of different instruments and facilities denominated in them. The euro will undoubtedly
become  a  major  internationally-traded  currency,  and  it  is  therefore  certain  that  it  will  be  traded
extensively in the London markets. The euro thus represents an opportunity, rather than a threat, for
the London markets, and it is important that the London markets prepare in good time the systems
and infrastructure needed to take advantage of this opportunity.
London as a financial centre after EMU
26. The reason why we are convinced that the euro represents a major opportunity for
the London markets relates essentially to the strengths that the London markets have displayed over
the years:
• London is a global financial centre rather than just a European centre, with much of its business
generated around the world, not just within Europe.
BIS Review   110/1997
- 5 -
• London has always thrived on financial innovation, and has a strong track record of capitalising
on new opportunities.
• The euro may very well bring greater financial activity to the main Continental financial markets.
But expansion in these markets is not, on past experience, a zero sum game: it is likely to lead to
more, not less, activity in London since London is the major interface with the rest of the world in
the European time zone.
• The economics of financial market activity point to concentration, to gain economies of scale and
facilitate better management control. That is why many firms have been moving their operations,
and  even  headquarters,  to  London  as  the  preferred  financial  centre.  Uncertainty  about  UK
participation  in  the  single  currency  has  been  with  us  for  some  time.  But  undeterred  by  that
uncertainty, firms have continued to concentrate their trading activities in London.
• London has an unrivalled range of markets and ancillary services; and  an  associated  deep  skill
base; and an unbureaucratic approach to financial regulation, which has been developed working
with the grain of the market.
27. All these advantages and more help to explain why there are more people working
in financial services in the City of London -- over 600,000 -- than there are in the entire population of
Frankfurt and its surrounding region!
28. None of this gives any grounds for complacency: the financial services industry is
an  intensely  competitive  business.  But  importantly,  if  we  can  harness  the  strengths  of  the  London
markets to the opportunity presented by the euro, I believe that will be an important contribution to
the  success  of  the  single  currency.  Of  course,  London  will  benefit.  But  London  is  not  just  a  UK
financial centre. It is a European financial centre, and by providing competitive trading facilities in
the euro London can help provide better facilities for business and industry across the whole single
market and bring more business into Europe from the rest of the world.
Opportunities in euro for market participants
29. I have talked so far principally about the steps the authorities are taking to help
prepare the London markets for the euro. But of course, at the end of the day, the authorities can only
facilitate: the real challenge in seizing the opportunities presented by  the  single  currency  has  to  be
met by market participants themselves. Let me touch on three areas where the advent of the euro is
likely  to  usher  in  significant  changes  --  but,  I  believe,  positive  changes,  offering  new  business
opportunities -- for financial market participants.
30. First, in the bond markets, monetary union will serve to unify the various national
government bond markets of the EMU participants, and  the  already  substantial  ECU  bond  market,
into a  single  market  in  a  single  currency  with  multiple  national  government  issuers.  Currency  risk
will be removed, at a stroke. This does not, of course, mean that all government bonds of the different
national  issuers  will  trade  at  the  same  price:  differences  will  still  remain  in  trading  structures  and
liquidity, in perceptions of sovereign risk and the scale of supply by different governments, and in
investors’  basic  preferences.  But  the  different  national  government  bonds  will  tend  to  trade  on
essentially the same yield curve, with the focus of the market being concentrated, even more so than
at present, on spread relationships.
31.  This  of  course  raises  the  interesting  question  --  spread  over  what?  Who  will
provide the benchmark issues? Moreover, the intensified focus on spread may produce two further
results. First, there will be even greater incentives than at present for national governments, who will
BIS Review   110/1997
- 6 -
remain responsible for their own debt management, to converge in their techniques for issuing and
marketing  their  debt.  It  will  be  interesting  to  see  whether  this  will  generate  greater  co-ordination
amongst debt management authorities in  managing  their  debt  programmes,  including,  for  example,
their auction timetables.
32.  A  second  effect  in  this  area  flowing  from  the  concentration  on  spreads  may  be
greater interest in developing a diversified, deeper corporate bond market in euro, as has long been
present  in  the  United  States,  but  much  less  so  in  other  countries.  If  this  happens,  it  could  be  a
considerable boon to corporate borrowers as a whole because it would extend the range of financing
opportunities open to them.
33. A second area where financial market activity in the euro is likely to generate new
opportunities  is  in  the  short-dated  money  markets.  Foreign  exchange  traders  do  clearly  face  some
contraction in their activity, as an inevitable consequence of currency unification. But I do not expect
to  see  too  many  destitute  foreign  exchange  traders  miserably  wandering  the  streets  in  search  of
charity or menial employment because of course, as trading amongst the EMU currencies disappears,
new  international  trading  is  developing  in  a  range  of  currencies  of  leading  emerging  market
economies.  But  more  importantly,  the  advent  of  the  euro  will  usher  in  potentially  much  deeper
markets than exist in the individual national centres at present in a range of different money market
instruments -- short-dated government and/or central bank paper, commercial bills, CDs, inter-bank
deposits,  commercial  paper,  repos,  interest-rate  futures,  swaps,  FRAs,  options  and  a  miscellany  of
tailor-made variants on these basic products. Markets in these products are of very varying depth and
liquidity, where they exist at all, in the individual local-currency  markets  of  the  countries  likely  to
participate  in  EMU.  But  all  of  these  instruments  are,  as  it  happens,  traded  in  London  in  the  main
international currencies; and with the advent of the euro, all of them will also, for the first time, be
traded in the major European currency. This represents a tremendous business opportunity for banks
and financial institutions with the capacity to trade these instruments and to harness them to the needs
of their customers.
34. But there is a third impact on financial markets from the euro that is essentially a
necessary prerequisite that must be fulfilled if the benefits from integration of the bond and money
markets that I have identified are to be achieved. This is that the new single-currency, euro, markets
develop  trading  practices  and  standards  of  conduct,  and  the  necessary  infrastructure,  that  will
genuinely facilitate integration. In terms of infrastructure, for example, real-time, same-day wholesale
payments  are  essential  to  tie  together  money  market  activity  conducted  in  different  centres  in  the
same  instrument  in  the  single  currency;  and  similarly,  linkages  may  also  need  to  be  considered
between different settlement systems. Common trading practices, and market conventions, will also
need to be developed. The lead here lies in many cases with market participants themselves, and with
the systems they have developed to serve their trading needs. But it is a process we are very familiar
with in London, where we have sought when necessary to encourage just such common initiatives in
order to enhance the effectiveness of  international  trading  activity  in  London.  And  with  an  eye  on
EMU, we have encouraged trading activity in the ECU, particularly in the money markets: hence, for
example, the regular programme of monthly auctions for UK government ECU treasury bills, and the
quarterly  auctions  of  UK  government  three-year  ECU  notes,  which  have  been  running  for  some
years. Because of the international flavour of our markets, and because we are conscious that these
markets will want to trade the full range of euro instruments in London, we will continue to support
initiatives  aimed  at  achieving  the  necessary  market  structure  where  we  feel  we  can  make  a
contribution.
Reforms in the London markets
BIS Review   110/1997
- 7 -
35. In parallel, we have been pressing ahead with reform in the structure of the UK
sterling financial markets, and the pace of progress has notably quickened in 1997. Last year saw two
notable  events  --  the  start  of  the  gilt  repo  market  and  the  completion  of  the  Stock  Exchange’s
Sequence project, to provide it with a new and modern integrated electronic platform for its trading
and  information  services.  This  year  we  have  already  doubled  up  on  last  year,  with  four  major
initiatives  --  reform  of  the  structure  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  money  market  operations;  the
completion  of  migration  to  electronic  settlement  of  equities  on  CREST;  the  successful  launch  of
SETS, the Stock Exchange electronic order book for equity trading; and a major upgrade of the CGO
electronic settlement system for gilts. We have a fifth advance to come next month, with the start of a
strips facility for gilts. But for the fact that a central banker is not supposed to reveal that he knows
how to play poker, I would call that a “full house”!
36. I believe these are major steps forward to improve trading market facilities, and
the essential market infrastructure, in London. And the fact that the London markets have been able
to bring so many major projects to a successful conclusion in so short a space of time speaks highly
of  the  resources  in  depth  available  in  the  London  markets  and  the  ancillary  services.  But  I  would
draw attention to one particular feature, which I think is of wider significance. The upgrade of CGO
has  been  effected  utilising  CREST  software  --  deliberately,  in  order  to  align  those  two  electronic
settlement systems -- CGO for gilts,  CREST  for  equities  --  more  closely.  This  was  a  considerable
technical achievement, because  the  operating  processes  in  the  two  markets  are  different  --  equities
settle on T+5, gilts on T+1 (and in some cases T+0); the equity market comprises a large number of
relatively moderate-value deals, the gilt market a smaller number of much higher-value deals; hence
delay  in  settlement  in  gilts  is  much  more  disruptive,  and  needs  to  be  much  less  frequent,  than  in
equities.  Overcoming  these  differences  has  been  a  considerable  challenge  to  the  Bank  team  and  I
would like to pay tribute to their dedication and expertise and to their achievement in  bringing  the
CGO upgrade to a successful and so far smooth launch just last week. I say this without immodesty
because, though I was closely involved in overseeing the project, it was their technical proficiency
that delivered the goods.
37.  But  this  achievement  has  a  wider  significance.  By  utilising  CREST  software  in
CGO,  we  have  now  achieved  for  the  market  much  of  the  benefit  sought  by  those  who  favour  a
merger  of  the  two  systems.  In  particular,  both  utilise  the  same  hardware,  and  the  same  software
application;  they  operate  on  the  same  networks;  and  users  can  access  both  systems  via  a  single
terminal using a common gateway. The Bank is, as already announced, planning to seek the views of
market participants on what the relative priorities should be in developing payments and settlement
systems in London in the year ahead. This will include the possibility of full merger between CGO
and CREST, but recognises that merger is only one of a number of IT projects UK financial markets
may have to contemplate over the next few years, all of which represent potential claims on scarce IT
resources. What is important in the meantime is that a big step  towards  integration  of  systems  has
been achieved, to the benefit of all market users.
Conclusion
38.  I  have  tried  in  these  remarks  to  explain  major  developments  in  UK  financial
markets over the past year. Looking ahead, there is more to do, and I believe EMU will open up new
opportunities  for  the  financial  markets.  I  believe  this  will  be  particularly  so  for  the  international
markets in London. We intend to be ready to take full advantage of these opportunities, right from the
outset in January 1999, even though the UK will not participate in EMU at that stage. The reason for
this is very simple: London is the major European financial market, and we think that extending its
activity to include financial services in euro is a significant contribution we in the UK can make from
the outset to the success of the monetary union and of the single European market as a whole.
BIS Review   110/1997
