Mr.  Sherwin  considers  growth,  productivity  and  monetary  policy:  the
longer-term perspective   Address by the Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand,
Mr. Murray Sherwin, to the Annual Conference of the New Zealand Forest Owners Association in
Auckland on 12/11/97.
Introduction: competitiveness and productivity
I have been asked to discuss the New Zealand  economy  in  a  medium-term  context,
with  particular  reference  to  the  place  of  forestry.  I  am  conscious  also  of  the  overall  theme  of  this
conference -- The Competition Gap. I applaud the Association for choosing to focus on that theme,
because while that is clearly a very relevant issue for the forestry sector to be debating, it is equally
relevant to the broader economy.
We all wish to raise living standards in New Zealand. The reform effort of the past
13 years  has  been  focused  on  precisely  that  goal.  To  achieve  it,  we  require  a  sustained  lift  in
productivity, across the New Zealand economy. Improved productivity and “meeting the competition
gap” are one and the same thing.
It is not my intention to provide a substantive projection of New Zealand’s economic
prospects over the growth cycle of a GF17 pine tree. Nor do I intend to discuss the likely prospects of
the forestry sector. Rather, I will try to lay out a  few  of  the  very  broad  factors  that  will  shape  the
development of the New Zealand economy over the medium term, and to reflect a little on the factors
that influence interest rates and exchange rates over longer time horizons.
The determinants of economic growth
Last  month,  Governor  Don  Brash  delivered  a  speech  to  the  Auckland  Rotary  Club
under the topic “How Fast Can the New Zealand Economy Grow?” The  key  theme  of  that  speech
was  that  our  growth  potential  is  determined  ultimately  by  quantities  and  quality.  The  quantity  of
people and the quantity of capital -- in the form of factories, forests, trucks, roads, computers and all
the tools of a modern economy. And the quality of those same inputs -- how well they work, and how
efficiently they are deployed.
As  Dr.  Brash  went  on  to  say,  the  Reserve  Bank  believes  that  New  Zealand’s
longer-term growth potential is probably of the order of 3 percent annually at present -- a result of a
trend  growth  in  the  working  age  population  of  around  1.5  percent  and  trend  growth  in  output  per
person, or productivity, also of around 1.5 percent.
Lifting that growth potential requires bigger quantities or better qualities -- of people,
attitudes, and equipment.
On the quantities side, we can’t do a great deal in the short term about the size of the
working age population. After centuries of diligent practice, it still takes around 9 months to produce
a new Kiwi and, only a little quicker than Pinus Radiata -- around 20 years -- to get that new Kiwi
into the work force. Of course, we can import new workers “ready built up”. But even then, as we
have  discovered  in  recent  years,  there  are  limitations  on  how  quickly  new  immigrants  can  be
absorbed.
In  any  event,  while  increasing  the  size  of  the  labour  force  may  enable  us  to  boost
overall  economic  growth,  what  really  matters  for  living  standards  is  per  capita  growth.  And  that
BIS Review   107/1997
- 2 -
means we need to focus on output per person, or the productivity of our work force, not just its raw
quantity.
In the longer term, and at the risk of doing some violence to the wealth of economic
research  on  the  subject,  productivity  is  heavily  dependent  on  one  key  factor  --  the  quality  of  our
human resources. Living standards rise on the back of overall educational attainment and attitudes.
That implies a continuing need to raise the quality of our general educational effort. It means raising
the  numbers  participating  in  higher  education.  It  means  improved  on-the-job  training.  It  means
better-trained  managers  able  to  make  smarter  decisions  and  provide  improved  management  of  our
work force -- in the forest, on the factory floor, in the research laboratories, within both the public
and private sectors. And it means smarter governance from within the nation’s boardrooms.
The role of capital investment
Intertwined with the quality of our work force and how well it is managed is the issue
of  the  quality  and  quantity  of  physical  capital  available  to  each  person.  By  teaming  better-trained
people with better technology and working with more and better physical capital we can provide a
recipe for making serious progress in raising  productivity.  And  through  that,  we  can  make  serious
advances in our living standards.
New  Zealand’s  history  provides  some  useful  insights  into  the  role  of  capital
investment. During our slow growth phase -- through the 1970s and 1980s -- our investment levels
were  quite  respectable  by  the  standards  of  other  developed  economies  --  somewhere  around  25
percent of GDP per annum. What was impeding growth was not so much an inadequate quantity of
investment,  but  poor  quality  investment  --  a  persistent  tendency  to  direct  capital  into  low-yielding
activities.
The  sources  of  that  misdirection  of  capital  are  not  hard  to  find.  They  lie  with
government-led  investment  decisions  --  for  example,  “Think  Big”  projects  --  and  with  investment
encouraged  into  sectors  or  activities  sheltered  by  protections  of  various  kinds.  It  is  those
protections -- the import quotas, licensing arrangements, or tax incentives -- that produce situations in
which the returns to private investors become disconnected from the underlying market realities. The
individual investor may be profiting as a  consequence  of  those  protections,  but  only  at  the  cost  of
overall national efficiency and income.
Raising productivity means allowing change
It  is  with  those  considerations  in  mind  that  countries  seeking  to  boost  their  growth
performance look to micro-economic reforms -- to reduced protection, to deregulation, to flatter and
broader tax structures, to increased market flexibility -- in order to encourage available resources of
labour  and  capital  to  move  into  those  areas  where  private  financial  returns  and  national  economic
returns are similarly high.
Of  course,  encouraging  the  flow  of  resources  into  higher-yielding  activities  also
implies that those same resources, labour and capital, are permitted to move away from activities in
which returns are low. So when we see sheep and beef farms being converted into either dairy units,
on the one hand, or pine forests on the other, we need to check if there are particular regulatory or
taxation  reasons  encouraging  that  shift.  If  there  are  none,  we  are  entitled  to  conclude  that  rational
investors  are  making  a  judgement  that  the  future  returns  on  investment  in  dairying  or  forestry  are
likely to be superior to the future returns on sheep and beef farming.  Moreover,  we  are  entitled  to
BIS Review   107/1997
- 3 -
presume that, as a result of that changed land use, our national growth potential will be higher. The
efficiency of our capital stock will have increased.
Of course, rational investors may be wrong in their judgements. Only time will tell.
But so long as those investors are risking their own money, in an efficient regulatory
and  tax  environment,  we  stand  the  best  possible  chance  of  maximising  the  performance  of  the
economy overall.
One  message  should  be  very  clear.  We  cannot  lift  our  economic  performance  by
locking  land,  labour  or  capital  into  low-yielding  activities.  Lifting  our  growth  performance  will
inevitably mean continuing change, including the decline of some sectors, in order to free resources
for movement to expanding, higher-yielding activities. And in a world of ever-faster innovation, the
high performance economies are likely to be the more flexible ones -- the ones most able to quickly
take up emerging technologies and production processes and to encourage the shift of resources from
one industry or production technique to another.
Monetary policy has a background role in facilitating faster growth
You will note that so far I have managed to avoid any mention of monetary policy or
the  role  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  all  of  this.  Interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  haven’t  entered  the
equation. That’s because monetary policy and the Reserve Bank have an  important,  but  essentially
“background”, role in allowing the economy to achieve its longer-term growth potential.
A couple of points are relevant here.
What  I  have  discussed  so  far  are  the  “real”  contributors  to  economic  growth  --  the
quantity and quality of inputs. These are the “supply side” factors.
Monetary  policy  and  the  Reserve  Bank  operate  on  the  demand  side.  The  task  of
monetary policy is to maintain  price  stability.  That  involves  ensuring  that  demand  in  the  economy
grows roughly in line with the capacity of the economy to meet that demand. The Reserve Bank’s
Policy Targets Agreement (PTA), signed by the Minister of Finance and the Governor, sets a 0 to 3
percent inflation target as the Governor’s sole objective. The PTA establishes that single objective of
price  stability  “...  so  that  monetary  policy  can  make  its  maximum  contribution  to  sustainable
economic growth, employment and development opportunities within the New Zealand economy”.
The rationale for that position is quite straightforward, and is particularly relevant to a
sector  such  as  forestry,  which  involves  such  long  investment  horizons.  In  an  inflation-free
environment, investors and the public generally get their best shot at reading accurately the signals
that markets are delivering -- which goods and services represent best value, where the best returns
on investment may be found, how much to consume and how much to save.
Simply  adopting  an  easy  monetary  policy  does  nothing  to  increase  the  supply  of
labour or its skill level. It does nothing to improve the availability of better technologies. But most
importantly,  an  easy  monetary  policy  that  gives  rise  to  a  risk  of  future  inflation  is  likely  to  divert
investment and the flow of resources away from sectors with longer-term investment horizons -- such
as forestry -- towards quick-return real estate and similar investments that exploit the tax and other
distortions which emerge in an inflationary environment.
BIS Review   107/1997
- 4 -
Once price stability has been achieved, monetary policy is essentially an exercise in
smoothing economic cycles -- slowing the economy when it looks likely to overheat, stimulating it as
activity slows.
That is not a straightforward exercise. Even if we get it right, (and we won’t always)
there will still be economic cycles. But we should be able to avoid the boom/bust cycles of old. If our
longer-term growth potential is around 3 percent, it is probably the case that growth outturns in the
1 percent to 5 percent range will be the norm. Occasional external shocks and surprises --  climate,
international events, and so on -- may take us outside that range. But surprises of that sort should be
rare.
However, a sustained growth performance within a range of that sort would represent
a  substantial  step  up  from  our  experience  through  the  1960s  and  1970s,  and  would  place  us
somewhere near the top end of the OECD growth league.
Interest rates are determined by international conditions and local risk factors
So what does that mean for interest rates and exchange rates in New Zealand over the
longer term?
Essentially, in our world of open capital markets, interest rates in New Zealand will
tend to settle at some margin above or below a benchmark set in US financial markets. How large
that margin is (and whether it is positive or negative) will depend on the risks and returns that savers,
both domestic and foreign, associate with New Zealand.
There are, of course, many different risks that enter that assessment. But a key one is
the  risk  of  future  inflation.  A  firm  commitment  to  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  is  already
resulting  in  substantially  lower  interest  rates  in  New  Zealand.  The  rate  paid  by  the  New  Zealand
Government on its New Zealand dollar 10-year bonds has fallen from around 10 percentage points
above that paid by the US Government on 10-year US dollar bonds in the mid 1980s, to little more
than half of one percent above the US rate.
Our  shorter-term  interest  rates  have  also  fallen  sharply  relative  to  those  in  other
countries  over  the  past  decade  or  so,  but  they  remain  high  by  OECD  standards,  and  high  in  real
terms. That will remain the case so long as the strong demand for borrowing that we have seen over
the past several years continues.
On  that  note,  it  is  worth  reminding  ourselves  that  the  route  to  consistently  lower
interest rates lies in allowing both savers and borrowers to become confident that the risk of future
inflation is slight.
We can’t look to the exchange rate to boost international competitiveness
A conference examining competitiveness may find it tempting to look to the exchange
rate for salvation at some point. Don’t bother.
The  forestry  industry,  like  every  other  export  industry  in  New  Zealand,  is  going  to
have to live with an exchange rate that varies. There is nothing you can do about that, and there is
nothing  the  government  or  the  Reserve  Bank  can  do  about  that.  We  live  in  a  world  of  floating
exchange rates.
BIS Review   107/1997
- 5 -
While it is conceivable that we could fix our exchange rate to the US dollar, or  the
Australian dollar, or even the TWI (as we once did) we can’t fix to all simultaneously. Inevitably we
have to learn to cope with exchange rate variability.
In fact, on measures of shorter-term exchange rate volatility, the New Zealand dollar
is  a  surprisingly  good  performer.  Day-to-day  volatility  of  our  currency  is  modest  when  measured
alongside the experience of other developed countries -- even those much larger than New Zealand.
To  assess  the  impact  of  longer-term  exchange  rate  trends,  we  need  to  look  to
measures  of  the  “real”  or  inflation-adjusted  exchange  rate  --  because  that  is  what  matters  for
exporters. On that basis, we find that the New Zealand dollar moves through the inevitable cycles, but
will typically be found within about 15 percent to 20 percent of its longer-term average. Our recent
experience has been consistent with that. The real TWI was around 10 percent below its long-term
average at its last trough in 1992. At its recent peak, in April of this year, it was around 17 percent
above that same longer-term average.
While  cycles  in  the  real  exchange  rate  of  that  amplitude  can  certainly  create
discomfort  for  exporters,  it  is  clear  that  they  are  well  within  the  range  experienced  by  other
currencies. In essence, exporters should be factoring cycles of that sort into their business planning. It
is clearly relevant to the variability of their future earnings stream, and therefore, to the value of their
assets and to the nature of the capital structure they require to stay in business. Of course, it is also
relevant to their balance sheet management and to risk-hedging strategies they may need to adopt.
The best contribution that governments and central banks can make to moderating real
exchange rate cycles is to embrace policy consistency and transparency -- in monetary policy, fiscal
policy,  and  in  tax  and  regulatory  policies.  The  decline  in  exchange  rate  volatility  in  recent  years
provides some evidence to support that.
One  point  we  should  all  be  clear  on.  There  is  no  future  in  thinking  we  can  pursue
competitiveness, in forestry or any other sector, through attempts to use monetary policy to engineer
a weaker exchange rate. I say that for several reasons:
• Competitiveness and the productivity improvements that ensure competitiveness are products of
“real” advances in efficiency, technology and management. Lowering the exchange rate makes no
one more efficient.
• The focus of monetary policy on the single objective of price stability is key to convincing savers
and investors that, in taking their decisions, they do not need to factor in a large inflation risk. It is
only in that way that we can get sustainably lower interest rates.
• As our own history well demonstrates, any short-term gains that may be available to exporters as
a  result  of  a  one-off  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  are  quickly  eroded  as  future  inflation
increases. As a fix for competitiveness problems, exchange rate depreciations are both addictive
and ultimately destructive.
• Central  banks  do  not  determine  real  exchange  rates  in  the  long  term.  Markets  and  relative
economic efficiency/productivity trends determine real exchange rates.
What of the balance of payments deficit?
Let me touch on one other issue that is relevant to the longer-term behaviour of the
New Zealand dollar and New Zealand interest rates -- the balance of payments.
BIS Review   107/1997
- 6 -
We are currently running a current account deficit of the order of 6 percent of GDP.
That puts us amongst the largest external  deficits  in  the  OECD.  Note  also  that  New  Zealand’s  net
foreign  debt  currently  amounts  to  around  80  percent  of  GDP  --  which  puts  us  at  the  top  end  of
international experience. To prevent that external debt ratio from increasing further, it is necessary for
the current account deficit to decrease to less than the annual growth of GDP -- ie, to something less
than about 3 percent.
The key issue here is domestic savings behaviour. To the extent that domestic savings
are insufficient to fund the nation’s investment needs, we must rely on foreign savings. And if we are
reliant on foreign savings, we must, by definition, continue to run a current account deficit. That is a
simple accounting identity.
I note with interest the estimates of some commentators who suggest that the forestry
industry alone will require substantial volumes of foreign investment over the next few years. They
may  be  correct  in  their  estimates  of  investment  needs.  But  if  those  needs  are  met  from  foreign
investment, we must accept that that is equivalent to saying that New Zealand must continue to run a
current account deficit.
Will  New  Zealand  generally,  and  the  forestry  sector  in  particular,  have  difficulty
attracting the investment capital it requires?
Probably not. So long as investors have confidence in the quality of our industries, the
reliability of future earning streams, and the quality of our future macro and micro economic policies,
it is unlikely that we will have difficulty in attracting the necessary investment.
We compete in a global market to sell our products. Equally, we compete in a global
market  to  attract  savings  for  investment.  The  pool  of  savings  available  globally  is  enormous,  and
New  Zealand’s  needs  represent  just  a  minute  fraction  of  that  available.  New  Zealand  need  not,
therefore, regard itself as investment constrained.
But to the extent that our domestic savings fall short of the levels required to fund our
investment  needs,  our  external  debt  ratios  continue  to  rise,  then  the  risks  perceived  by  potential
investors will also rise. With higher risks come increased interest rate margins. It is probably also the
case  that  those  high  external  debt  ratios  leave  New  Zealand  a  little  more  vulnerable  to  shifts  in
international  market  sentiment,  which  may  reveal  themselves  in  sharp  and  sometimes  disruptive
movements in interest rates and exchange rates.
For those reasons, it is our belief that New Zealand would face a more secure future if
our dependence on the savings of others were reduced.
BIS Review   107/1997
