Mr.  Tietmeyer  asks  whether  the  euro  can  assume  the  role  of  a  major
international  currency      Speech  given  by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Prof.  Hans
Tietmeyer, at a luncheon at the American Express Company in Paris on 28/10/97.
I.
The “American Express Company” is not only a financial institution, but also a brand-
name  familiar  throughout  the  world.  The  “American  Express  credit  card”  and  “American  Express
travellers’ cheque” are acknowledged in most countries as  safe  and  convenient  means  of  payment,
which facilitate not just travel. For decades past, therefore, “American Express” has been a symbol of
increasing globalisation. There are not many other enterprises that can claim that.
Today,  however,  I  do  not  want  to  talk  about  payment  instruments.  Even  so,  my
reference  to  the  travellers’  cheque  takes  us  straight  to  our  topic:  alongside  the  “greenback”,  the
travellers’ cheque is likewise a symbol of the dollar’s status as the absolute Number One among the
currencies of the world.
II.
A currency which serves at the same time as a unit of account, a medium of exchange
and a store of value -- for private investors and public monetary authorities alike -- is known  as  an
international key currency.
What are the pre-requisites that a national payment medium needs, in order to assume
these functions?
Monetary  history  teaches  us  that  the  international  role  of  a  currency  may  often
develop  spontaneously  with  the  country’s  political  and  economic  significance.  Hence  it  is  not
surprising  that,  besides  gold,  the  pound  sterling  played  the  overriding  role  in  the  international
monetary system for many decades. A well-functioning banking system and efficient capital markets
had evolved in the United Kingdom at an early date. The industrial revolution began in Great Britain,
and helped the British economy to gain an edge over all other countries.
The  role  of  sterling  was  primarily  based  on  the  UK’s  position  as  a  great  power,  in
both  economic  and  political  terms.  What  is  more,  over  a  period  of  two  centuries  sterling  did  not
depreciate against other currencies. Once the significance of sterling started to decline, the dollar took
the stage as the principal international currency. This was due not only to the US’ rise to the status of
a world power. Another important factor was that, for a long period, the dollar was far less exposed
to inflationary pressures than other currencies.
By  virtue  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system,  the  US  dollar  became  the  official  key
currency in 1944. It served national central banks as a benchmark currency, an intervention currency
and  a  reserve  currency  alike.  Following  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system,  and  given  the
domestic stability problems in the United States, the dollar forfeited that formal function.
Even so, it retained a leading role. As before, the United States remains the world’s
leading  industrial  and  trading  nation.  That  is  why  dollars  are  so  highly  acceptable  worldwide.
Moreover, the magnitude of the US financial market ensures a wide variety of investment options.
The  decontrol  of  exchange  rates,  the  increasing  freedom  of  capital  movements  and
diverging stability records are the reason why other currencies, such as the Deutsche Mark, have been
BIS Review   101/1997
- 2 -
able  to  establish  themselves  alongside  the  dollar -- albeit  on  a  far  more  modest  scale.  After  all,
currencies, too, compete to an increasing extent for the favour of the international transactor.
Besides economic significance, a dynamic economy and a sufficiently large economic
area  (duly  integrated  in  world  trade),  it  is  primarily  monetary  conditions  that  must  be  met.  An
international key currency must be able to exhibit a successful stability record over a lengthy period.
While  the  markets  may  forgive  short-lived  slips,  long-term  failures  are  penalised.  The  markets’
memory often stretches back a surprisingly long way. They heed the faintest signs that a currency’s
stability may be at risk.
It is that which makes the credibility that the responsible monetary authority enjoys all
the more important. It has transpired that such credibility increases with the degree of independence
from government instructions. If a central bank has to serve two masters, namely monetary stability
and the promotion of economic activity, it usually comes to grief in both areas. Then its credibility is
compromised for a long while.
III.
The introduction of the euro marks a watershed, not only for the monetary situation in
Europe  but  also  for  the  global  monetary  system.  Little  more  than  a  year  before  its  planned
introduction, the world’s financial markets are now wondering: will the new currency be strong or
weak?  Can  it  become  a  serious  alternative  to  the  dollar  as  a  reserve,  investment  and  transaction
currency?
In Europe, great economic and political hopes are being pinned on the euro. The old
continent is to be strengthened as a global economic power, European integration is to be fostered. It
is hoped that it will be possible to cope more effectively with the challenges posed by globalisation.
Moreover,  many  people  are  hoping  that  the  euro  will  constitute  a  significant  counterweight  to  the
pre-eminent dollar. That is what Jacques Chirac, the French President, said recently in an interview
he gave to a German news magazine.
But the crucial factor will be whether the euro turns out to be sustainably stable, and
what the market expectations in that respect are. The institutional conditions for a stability-oriented
monetary  policy  in  Europe  are  pretty  well  assured,  thanks  to  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the
independent  central  bank  envisaged  therein.  However,  a  good  deal  will  also  depend  on  the
appointments to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank. Independence chiefly means the
independence of individuals.
Among  the  European  central  bank  governors  in  the  European  Monetary  Institute,
there is a broad consensus today about monetary policy objectives and strategy. That consensus must
be preserved in the European Central Bank. That applies also to the view that internal stability has
priority  over  external  stability.  The  external  value  of  the  euro  is  inseparably  associated  with  the
precondition  of  internal  stability:  “stability  begins  at  home”.  But  the  crucial  event  for  the  new
currency  will  be  the  convergence  examination  in  the  spring  of  1998,  and  the  selection  of  the
participating countries.
Only  countries  with  virtually  identical  stability  orientations  and  sufficiently  sound
public  financial  positions  right  from  the  start  can  accede  to  a  durably  stable  monetary  union.  The
selection of the participating countries is therefore a matter of paramount importance. The vital issue
is the sustainability of the convergence achieved and the necessary adaptability of the participating
economies to the constantly changing challenges. In this connection, special attention will be focused
on Germany and France, since monetary union is almost inconceivable without the participation of
either of these countries.
BIS Review   101/1997
- 3 -
However, the task of achieving and maintaining convergence in anti-inflation policy
does not apply merely at the time of entry into monetary union. Even after that, the policy mix must
be right. This is because, in the monetary union, we shall be pursuing a single monetary policy, but at
the same time largely national economic, financial and social policies.
When  adopting  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  Amsterdam  in  June 1997,  the
participating states undertook “immediately to take corrective budgetary action if there are signs of
any  considerable  departure  from  the  objectives  of  the  stability  and  convergence  programmes,  and
particularly from the medium-term budgetary target of a nearly balanced or in-surplus budget, or if an
excessive deficit is in prospect.” That is a far-reaching undertaking.
In  the  event  of  excessive  deficits,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  provides  that  the
European Council should automatically impose sanctions. The sanction mechanism is designed not
only to foster confidence but also to protect the single currency from unbridled public deficits and to
prevent conflicts between monetary and fiscal policy. It sets strict limits to national financial policy.
IV.
An  international  key  currency  generally  has  to  assume  the  function  of  an  anchor
currency. The markets expect it. In the present EMS this function has been, and is being, performed
by  the  Deutsche  Mark.  In  the  case  of  EMS II,  the  exchange  rate  arrangement  for  those  countries
which are not participating in the single currency from the outset, the euro is to perform this function
of an anchor currency.
Furthermore,  in  future  a  strong  orientation  towards  the  euro  is  to  be  expected,
particularly  in  central  and  eastern  European  countries.  The  euro  will  exert  a  strong  attraction,
especially  on  potential  candidates  for  admission  to  the  monetary  union -- at  any  rate,  if  it  proves
stable.
V.
In themselves, however, the future larger economic area and credible compliance with
the convergence  criteria  will  not  guarantee  that  the  euro  actually,  and  above  all  globally,  develops
into  a  serious  alternative  to  the  dollar.  Ultimately,  the  real  economic  environment  in  Europe  must
likewise  be  right.  The  former  Chairman  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche  Bank,  Alfred
Herrhausen, once said: “A currency becomes good if its underlying economy is also good”.
At present the European continent is being handicapped, above all, by the high degree
of official regulation and the manifold inflexibilities on the labour market. In Germany, in particular,
a  confusing  tax  system  with  a  high  tax  ratio  is  crippling  economic  dynamism.  With  respect  to
competitiveness, if Europe’s economy loses touch with other regions in the long run, this is bound to
have adverse effects on the euro as well. At all events, the euro will not in itself solve the structural
problems besetting Europe.
Worldwide locational competition calls for flexibility and the willingness to undertake
structural  reforms.  Nowadays  these  characteristics  are  distinctly  more  marked  in  the  United  States
than in most European countries. But there are some examples, on the old continent as well, which
warrant hope.
BIS Review   101/1997
VI.
- 4 -
In some quarters, the planned European monetary union is being viewed with concern
through American eyes. That is understandable, for a soft euro -- let alone a failure of the monetary
union -- is in the interest neither of Europe nor of the United States.
But there are a number of reasons for hoping for a stable euro that can play a leading
role in the international monetary system:
 In Europe international investors find sophisticated financial markets encompassing a broad range
of products and maturities. Structural changes in the international financial markets over the last
fifteen years have worked to the detriment of the dollar.  They  have  resulted  in  a  rising  market
share of European currencies.
• Given roughly equal economic  potential,  the  European  Union  is  more  closely  integrated  in  the
international division of labour than the United States. That suggests that the demand for euros as
a transaction currency will be strong.
• The European Central Bank will be independent of political instructions. It is committed solely to
the priority of internal monetary stability.
• The potential for excessive budget deficits is strictly limited by the Treaty of Maastricht and the
Stability and Growth Pact.
• The  Maastricht  Treaty  has  noticeably  fostered  stability-consciousness  in  Europe.  Inflation
performance  here  is  better  than  ever  before.  Only  countries  which  can  show  evidence  of
long-standing stability are supposed to participate in monetary union.
• The euro can take up the torch from some illustrious currencies. That applies particularly to the
Deutsche Mark -- today the world’s second biggest reserve currency, after the dollar.
Of  course,  ultimately  the  development  of  the  euro  will  hinge  on  whether  it  proves
lastingly stable and to that extent can assume the legacy of those currencies which are already stable
today. But all those involved are quite convinced: the euro has to be a success.
Despite all the headway made up to now, however, a great deal remains to be done. In
the  forefront  are  the  sustained  consolidation  of  public  finance  and  the  dismantling  of  structural
rigidities. I am sure these needs are increasingly being recognised.
Anyway, there is certainly a good prospect of the euro duly playing its role of being
an international investment, reserve and transaction currency alongside the dollar. That is, after all, in
the best interests of Europe, the United States and third countries alike.
BIS Review   101/1997
