Bank  of  Japan’s  November  review  of  monetary  and  economic  trends  in
Japan   BANK OF JAPAN, COMMUNICATION, 26/11/97.
Japan’s  economic  growth  is  decelerating  further.  Although  corporate  profits,
employment  and  income  conditions  continue  to  improve  moderately,  weak  household
expenditures since April have gradually begun to affect  production,  and  corporate  sentiment  is
also weakening.
With respect to final demand, public-sector investment has been  decreasing,  and
housing  investment  has  also  dropped  significantly.  Personal  consumption  has  continued  to  be
weak  on  the  whole,  although  the  impact  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  has  gradually  begun  to
subside. On the other hand, net exports have continued to increase and business fixed investment
has been rising moderately against the background of the increase in corporate profits. Excessive
inventories are seen in some industries. Owing to weak final demand and inventory adjustments,
industrial production has recently declined somewhat. The pace of improvement in employment
and income conditions has slowed somewhat. Prices have remained stable on the whole, with the
exception  of  wholesale  prices  which  have  declined  somewhat.  The  growth  of  monetary
aggregates has recently slowed.
Personal consumption has continued to be weak on the whole. Outlays for travel
have been increasing moderately, and there are some signs in the sales of goods which suggest
that the impact of the consumption tax hike has  gradually  begun  to  subside.  However,  sales  at
department stores and supermarkets have been below the previous year’s level, while passenger
car  sales  have  fallen  below  the  level  recorded  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  1996  when  sales
surged, and have not even recovered the levels recorded before then.
Among  leading  indicators  of  business  fixed  investment,  machinery  orders  have
continued on an increasing trend since early 1997 after having surged in the second half of 1996.
Recently,  however,  orders  from  non-manufacturing  firms  have  been  weak.  Construction  floor
area has followed a moderate recovery trend, albeit with some fluctuations.
With 
respect 
the
seasonally-adjusted annual rate declined in July to 1.24 million, the lowest level since September
1985, following the surge in demand in the second half of  1996  ahead  of  the  consumption  tax
hike. Housing starts have since remained weak at around 1.3 - 1.35 million.
investment,  housing  starts 
to  housing 
terms  of 
in 
Regarding  public-sector  investment,  the  amount  of  public  works  contracted  has
followed a decreasing trend reflecting the restrained budget for fiscal 1997.
Against the background of steady overseas demand and the yen’s depreciation to
date,  real  exports  remained  high  in  the  third  quarter  1997,  although  they  decreased  somewhat
from  the  second  quarter  when  exports  showed  a  significant  rise.  Real  exports  rose  again  in
October. Real imports, on the other hand, have remained virtually unchanged on average. As a
result,  the  real  trade  surplus  has  been  increasing  with  some  fluctuations.  Reflecting  these
developments  in  exports  and  imports,  the  nominal  current-account  surplus  has  also  been
expanding significantly since April 1997.
Industrial  production  has  recently  been  somewhat  weak.  Production  in  the  third
quarter 1997 remained  virtually  unchanged  on  the  whole.  This  is  because  production  has  been
BIS Review   112/1997
- 2 -
cut  back  mainly  in  the  industries  with  excessive  inventories,  such  as  consumer  durables  and
construction-related  goods,  although  production  of  electrical  machinery  continued  to  increase,
reflecting  steady  exports.  Production  in  October  and  November  is  expected  to  decrease  as  a
result of inventory adjustment pressures.
With respect to labor market conditions, the unemployment rate has remained at a
high level, and the ratio of job offers to job applications has recently eased somewhat. Growth in
overtime  working  hours  and  nominal  wages  has  slowed  slightly  reflecting  weak  production.
However,  year-to-year  employment  growth  has  been  moderate  but  steady.  Thus,  employment
and income conditions continue to improve moderately on the whole, but the pace of  recovery
has slowed somewhat.
Prices remained stable on the whole, excluding the effect of the consumption tax
hike. Domestic wholesale prices (adjusted  for  seasonal  electricity  rates)  have  declined  to  some
extent  as  domestic  demand  and  supply  conditions  started 
in
construction-related  goods.  The  year-to-year  declines  in  corporate  service  prices  on  the  whole
have  been  narrowing  further  owing  to  the  improvement  in  supply  and  demand  conditions,
particularly  for  real  estate  rents  and  information  services,  although  leasing  charges  continue
declining. Consumer prices (nationwide, excluding perishables) rose year to year in September,
reflecting  the  temporary  factor;  i.e.,  a  rise  in  medical  charges  which  resulted  from  medical
insurance  reform.  Excluding  this,  however,  consumer  prices  have  remained  stable  at  a  level
slightly above that of the previous year.
to  ease,  particularly 
Monetary  aggregates,  measured  in  terms  of  year-to-year  growth  of  M2  +  CDs
average outstanding, declined somewhat in October to 2.7 per cent.
Regarding  money  market  rates,  the  overnight  call  rate  (uncollateralized)  has
moved  at  a  level  slightly  below  the  official  discount  rate.  The  3-month  CD  rate  has  stayed  at
around  0.50  -  0.55  per  cent.  Against  the  background  of  uncertainties  about  future  economic
growth,  the  long-term  government  bond  yield  had  been  declining  since  the  end  of  May  and
reached the record low of 1.5 - 1.6 per cent at the end of October, but recently rose to 1.6 - 1.8
per cent.
With  respect  to  bank  lending  rates,  the  short-term  prime  lending  rate  has
remained  at  a  record  low  level  of  1.625  per  cent  since  September  1995.  The  long-term  prime
lending rate has been lowered since June and reached a record low of 2.3 per cent in October. In
these circumstances, short- and long-term contracted interest rates for  new  loans  and  discounts
(up to September) have stayed at record low levels.
On  the  stock  exchange,  the  Nikkei  225  stock  average  has  been  declining  since
August, partly reflecting uncertainties about future economic growth and  the  fall  in  U.S.  stock
prices,  and  fell  below  ¥18,000  in  early  September.  It  dropped  further  after  late  October  as  a
result  of  the  precipitous  decline  in  Hong  Kong  stock  prices  and  temporarily  reached  around
¥15,000, but has recently recovered to around ¥16,000.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen moved at around ¥119-123 to the U.S. dollar between
September  and  October.  However,  the  yen  later  depreciated  in  early  November,  owing  to
growing concerns about future economic growth, as well as the fall in stock prices. Recently, it
has moved at  around  ¥125-128.  Meanwhile,  the  yen  started  to  depreciate  against  the  Deutsche
Mark, after having peaked at around ¥62 in mid-August, and has recently moved at around ¥71-
74.
BIS Review   112/1997
