Mr. Issing considers the future role of the euro in the international financial
system      Speech  delivered  by  a  member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,
Professor Otmar Issing, at the conference of the Royal Institute of Interntional Affairs in London
on 24/10/97.
1. Momentous changes in the financial markets
The introduction of the euro is increasingly affecting expectations in the financial
markets worldwide. We are little more than a year away from the start of the third stage of EMU
on  January  1,  1999,  as  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty;  and  in  about  six  months’  time  the
participating countries are to be selected.
 From  the  viewpoint  of  financial  market  players,  a  multitude  of  questions  arise:
What will be the role of the euro as an international currency? How strong (or how weak) will
the future European currency be? And what changes will there be in the business environment of
market players owing to the advent of the euro?
Expecting  reliable  answers  to  these  questions  implies  greatly  overrating  an
economist’s  capabilities.  Trustworthy  forecasts  at  times  of  a  change  of  regime  --  and  the
monetary  union  in  Europe  undoubtedly  constitutes  such  a  change - are,  to  say  the  least,
extremely problematic, if  not  utterly  impossible.  Even  so,  the  economist  finds  it  appealing  “to
gaze into the future” and to ponder over possible patterns of development in terms of “informed
guesses”.
A conceivable starting point for such “brain-teasers” is the status quo: the role of
the euro, as measured by the present position of potential EMU participants in the international
financial markets and relative to the dollar.
But  the  analysis  must  not  stop  at  that  point.  EMU  will  trigger  changes  in  the
financial  markets  which  have  to  be  taken  into  account  in  any  dynamic  survey.  The  single
currency will eliminate market fragmentation in Europe in the important area of currencies, and
will enhance the intensity of competition in the financial sector. That will have a major impact
on the position of the euro.
But it is not only economic considerations that are of significance here, since the
international  role  of  a  currency  also  depends  crucially  on  political  factors.  It  was  not  least
political (i.e., foreign policy) considerations that prompted a fresh start in the direction of EMU
in the late 1980s. The very aim of monetary union was to “reduce dependency on the dollar” and
“strengthen (the member states’) scope for monetary policy action”.1 A tripolar currency world
is  evidently  what  many  people  had  (and  some  still  have)  in  mind.  The  aim  is  for  the  euro  to
“compete  as  an  international  vehicular  currency  with  the  dollar  and  the  yen  on  an  equal
footing”.2  The  single  currency  will,  it  is  claimed,  finally  give  Europe  its  due  weight  in  the
concert of world powers. A rather cautious approach to the “key currency role”, such as was still
widespread in Germany in the seventies, is not discernible in Europe at the political level.
                                                  
1Genscher, H.D., (translated from) Memorandum für die Schaffung eines europäischen Währungsraumes und
einer Europäischen Zentralbank: reprinted in Deutsche Bundesbank, Auszüge aus Presseartikeln (Press excerpts),
No. 15, March 1, 1988, p. 6.
2EC Commission, One market, one money. An evaluation of the potential benefits and costs of forming an
economic and monetary union. European Economy, No. 44, October 1990, p. 26.
BIS Review   100/1997
2. The euro as an international currency
- 2 -
Claiming a prominent role for a currency, even before it comes into being, is one
part -- the easier one. The other, unquestionably much more difficult part, is realising that claim.
What role the euro will actually play in the concert of major currencies will be decided, first and
foremost, in the international financial markets. It is only when the economic preconditions are
right  that  investors  will  be  prepared  to  hold  assets  denominated  in  euros,  only  then  that
cross-border transactions outside the EU will be settled in euros on a significant scale, and only
then that the euro will become an international currency.
Expectations of the euro playing a major role in the international monetary system
are chiefly predicated on the stability of the new currency. The euro must earn its position in the
portfolios of public and private investors in competition with  other  currencies.  That  will  hinge
crucially on expected exchange rate movements relative to its major competitors -- above all, the
US  dollar.  The  key  variables  for  exchange  rate  expectations  are  -- 
longer
term -- anticipated  inflation  differentials,  since  a  tendency  for  exchange  rate  movements  to
match purchasing power parity prevails in the long run. 3
the 
in 
Those wishing to establish the euro as an international currency would  therefore
do well to make the maintenance of price stability their primary goal. The external trend of the
euro is inseparably linked to the prerequisite of internal stability -- stability begins at home.
On  the  (often  tacit)  assumption  that  the  anti-inflationary  pre-conditions  are  met,
widespread speculation is thriving at present about which market shares the euro might capture
and  whether  there  may  be  major  portfolio  shifts  in  the  course  of  adjustment  to  the  new
conditions. Far-reaching conclusions are being drawn, in turn, as to the potential exchange rate
trend of the euro.  The  starting  point  of  these  notions  is  the  various  functions  performed  by  an
international  currency  and  the  quantitative  dimensions  involved  in  the  international  financial
markets.
Specifically, this concerns the role of the euro
- as a reserve currency
- as an investment currency
- as a transaction currency, and
- as an anchor currency for exchange rate arrangements
2.1 The euro as a reserve currency
World foreign currency reserves amounted to around US$1,500 billion at the end
of  June  1997.  The  lion’s  share  was  accounted  for  by  US  dollar  reserves  (65%),  followed  at  a
considerable  distance  by  reserves  denominated  in  Deutsche  Mark  (13%).  Smaller  shares  were
also accounted for by the yen and the currencies of other EU member states.
                                                  
3See Deutsche Bundesbank, “Overall determinants of the trends in the real external value of the Deutsche Mark”,
August 1995, pp. 17 - 37.
BIS Review   100/1997
Upon  entry  into  the  third  stage  of  monetary  union  (by  2002  at  the  latest),  all
assets that are still denominated in currencies participating in EMU will be converted into euro
assets; that will apply, in principle, to central banks’ asset holdings, too. From the point of view
of the participating countries, “foreign currency reserves” denominated in these “in” currencies
will become domestic euro assets.
Considered  in  isolation,  the  euro’s  potential  as  a  reserve  currency  will  therefore
initially be lower than the market share of all “in” currencies taken together. Will third countries
be able to fill that “gap”? For the “immediate neighbours” of the euro area, a major role will be
played by the  precise  nature  of  the  currency  arrangement  (i.e.,  EMS  II).  The  more  closely  the
exchange rate is pegged to the euro, and the greater the recourse to intervention is, the higher the
demand for euro reserves is likely to be in the countries in question -- at least during the period
up to their entry into EMU. From the present  perspective,  it  is  not  possible  to  make  a  definite
prediction as to whether other countries outside the monetary union will, in future, hold part of
their  reserves  in  euros.  Portfolio-theoretical  considerations  argue,  in  principle,  for  a
diversification  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  That  would  open  up  opportunities  for  the  euro.
Ultimately, the investment decisions of  central  banks  will  hinge  chiefly  on  their  assessment  of
the future European currency’s stability.
The  question  of  how  the  roles  of  the  US  dollar  or  the  yen  as  reserve  currencies
will be affected by the euro’s entry into the international financial markets is not all that easy to
answer,  either.  On  the  one  hand,  shifts  out  of  Deutsche  Mark  assets  into  US  dollar  assets  are
possible; that will apply -- as some anticipate -- to the introductory period in particular, when the
euro’s  reputation  still  has  to  be  established.  On  the  other  hand,  the  overall  global  demand  for
currency reserves might fall, because some of the EMS-related need for currency  reserves  will
no longer exist, and because the degree of openness of those economies which are linked to one
another by monetary integration will decline in purely arithmetical terms.4 That is because part
of  what  was  previously  foreign  trade  --  already  characterised  separately  as  “intra-trade”  in  the
single market -- will then durably become internal trade from the monetary point of view.
It  is  possible  to  conjecture  that,  for  the  group  of  participating  countries,  the
“need” for currency reserves to cushion unforeseen events will not be as great as it is under the
status  quo  of  different  currencies;  this  fall  in  demand  is  likely  to  affect  the  US  dollar,  in
particular, primarily because the dollar has repeatedly played a major role in interventions in the
EMS, too. It is not possible to state a priori what the ultimate outcome of these various effects
will  be  on  balance.  In  that  respect,  whether  the  other  reserve  currencies  will  benefit  from  the
introduction of the euro, or not, must remain an open question. This applies all the more since a
steeply rising share of global currency reserves is meanwhile being held by Asian central banks,
which (at least up to now) have shown a preference for the US dollar.
2.2 The euro as an investment currency
Although  the  reserve  holdings  of  monetary  authorities  are  certainly  a  major
factor, trends in the financial markets are determined to a much greater extent by the decisions
of private investors. Currency  reserves  are  accompanied  by  international  bank  loans  which  are
                                                  
4At  present,  over  60  %  of  EU  foreign  trade  is  accounted  for  by  cross-border  transactions  with  other  member
states. Assuming that all member states will (sooner or later) enter the third stage of EMU, the share of foreign
trade in GDP on an average of all EU countries will fall to around 10 %, and will thus correspond roughly to the
ratio for the United States. But even if all the member states do not adopt the single currency immediately, the
internal orientation in the euro economic area will be greater than it is at present in the EU.
BIS Review   100/1997
- 4 -
(in net terms) more than three times as  large  and  by  international  debt  securities  amounting  to
twice  their  size;5  on  top  of  these,  there  are  direct  cross-border  lending  operations  between
non-banks that are not included in the above-mentioned international financial market data.
The  US  dollar  is  the  dominant  investment  currency,  too.  The  Deutsche  Mark
accounts  for  less  than  15%  of  international  financial  assets.  It  is  precisely  in  the  international
financial markets that a large number of other potential participating currencies in EMU, taken
together,  have  a  significant  share,  too.  (The  share  of  the  pound  sterling,  for  example,  is  about
5%.)
The  structural  changes  in  the  international  financial  markets  over  the  past
15 years, however, have been to the detriment of the US dollar, and have afforded the European
currencies  a  rising  market  share.  Theoretical  considerations  seem  to  suggest  that  this  process
might actually be reinforced by monetary union.
A crucial factor determining the widespread international use of a currency is the
degree of sophistication and openness of its financial markets. Financial markets that guarantee a
wide range of products, a broad maturity range and  a  high  level  of  market  liquidity  exercise  a
magnetic  attraction  internationally.  If  cross-border  capital  transactions  are  free  of  restrictions,
funds  are  attracted,  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  the  currency  concerned  becomes
available for borrowing by non-residents, too. In short, the international use of that currency is
fostered.
In  that  respect,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  is  likely  to  have  a  further  positive
impact on capital markets within EMU. The currency-related segmentation  of  the  markets  will
be  eliminated,  there  will  be  a  broader  range  of  investment  opportunities  available,  and  the
liquidity of the individual products will increase. Already, in the run-up to EMU, member states
are  gearing  themselves  to  intensifying  competition,  and  are  “updating”  both  their  financial
markets and their financial instruments.
In  terms  of  its  total  volume,  the  euro  bond  market  will  probably  be  the  second
largest  after  the  US  dollar  bond  market;  if  all  the  EU  member  states  ultimately  participate  in
EMU, bonds denominated in euros will amount to around 60% of the volume of the US market.
Even  if  the  third  stage  starts  with  only  a  limited  number  of  participants,  the  increase  in  the
financial  market’s  efficiency  will  be  important  in  fostering  the  euro.  This  effect  would  be
reinforced if the larger euro currency area succeeded in dissociating itself more than previously
from developments in the United States.
On  the  other  hand,  the  euro  will  face  greater  problems  than  the  US  dollar
inasmuch as the euro will not have the backing of a centralised European government, and as it
therefore still remains to be seen which securities will be able to perform a benchmark function
in the euro bond market.
2.3 The euro as a transaction currency
An  international  payment  medium’s  function  as  a  transaction  currency  plays  a
role in transactions in goods and in foreign exchange trading.
                                                  
5See BIS, International Banking and Financial Market Developments, Basle, August 1997.
BIS Review   100/1997
There are no up-to-date and reliable figures on the worldwide invoicing shares of
individual  currencies  in  foreign  trade.  Estimates  (for  1992)  assume  that  about  one-half  of
aggregate global exports are settled in US dollars, just over 15% in Deutsche Mark and around
6%  each  in  French  francs  and  pounds  sterling.6  These  figures  should  be  put  into  perspective,
however, since they are influenced to a great extent by individual countries’ respective shares in
world  trade;  in  general,  every  country  has  a  comparatively  large  invoicing  share  of  its  own
exports  in  domestic  currency.  If  the  figures  are  adjusted  to  allow  for  that  effect,  only  the  US
dollar and the Deutsche Mark can be classed as “international invoicing currencies”.
Since, as explained above, a considerable  part  of  what  is  now  foreign  trade  will
become internal trade in the euro area under EMU, the euro is likely, if anything, to account for
smaller  market  shares  in  “genuine  foreign  trade”  in  the  first  few  years  than  the  participating
currencies  do  at  present.  In  the  longer  term,  however,  it  is  quite  possible  to  foresee  the  euro
assuming growing importance, since it will be backed by a large economic area -- particularly as
it is precisely in the case of invoicing currencies that market size is obviously a major factor.7
The  economic  advantages  of  invoicing  in  one’s  own  currency  should  not  be
overrated,  however.  Given  short-term  exchange  rate  fluctuations,  it  may  be  an  advantage  to
settle in one’s own currency than  in  a  foreign  one.  In  the  medium  to  long  term,  however,  any
exchange risks are to be borne by  the  counterparties,  irrespective  of  the  invoicing  currency,  in
line with market conditions.
Transaction  currencies  are  often  referred  to  in  connection  with  their  use  in
international  foreign  exchange  trading.  In  order  to  facilitate  bilateral  transactions  between
different  currencies  in  narrow  markets,  “vehicle  currencies”  have  developed,  through  which
foreign exchange market transactions are settled.
After the US dollar, the Deutsche Mark is the most frequently employed currency
in the foreign exchange markets -- in particular, as a vehicle in transactions between European
currencies.8  How  important  the  euro  is  in  foreign  exchange  trading  will  hinge  crucially  on  its
market shares as an investment and reserve currency, as well as on its role as a potential anchor
currency in Europe. If it does establish itself in those areas, it certainly has the potential to go on
to become a major transaction currency in foreign exchange trading, albeit without being able to
deprive the US dollar of significant market shares in the short term. Under those conditions, it is
likewise predestined to become a vehicle currency for transactions in other European currencies.
It is also clear, however, that a major segment of European foreign exchange trading will cease
to exist as a result of the merging of currencies.
2.4 The euro as an anchor currency
The  last  function  of  the  euro  which  is  to  be  scrutinised  --  and  to  which  I  have
already referred -- is that of being an anchor in the international monetary system. There is no
longer merely speculation to rely on in that area, as some of the broad outlines are already taking
shape.  An  exchange  rate  arrangement  with  the  euro  at  its  centre  is  envisaged  for  those  EU
countries which are not going to participate  in  the  single  currency  from  the  outset.  Above  and
                                                  
6See ECU Institute (ed.), International Currency Competition and the Future Role of the Single European
Currency, London 1995, p. 70.
7The EU is larger than the United States in terms of its population, and more or less on an equal footing in terms
of GDP and foreign trade.
8See BIS, Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivative Market Activity, Basle, May 1996.
BIS Review   100/1997
- 6 -
beyond that, orientation to the euro is to be expected, above all, in the countries of central and
eastern  Europe,  either  in  the  form  of  unilateral  pegging  exclusively  to  the  euro  or  by  gearing
exchange rate policy to a basket of currencies in which the euro has a heavy weighting. The euro
will be highly attractive to potential candidates for accession to monetary union, in particular.
3. Some reflections on the external value of the Euro
The  introduction  of  the  euro  represents  a  radical  change  in  the  international
monetary  system.  It  will  call  into  question  positions  in  world  financial  markets  which  have
developed  over  a  period  of  decades;  the  conditions  which  obtain  at  present  in  global  financial
markets can serve, at most, as rough guidelines for the moment of conversion to euros.  Which
direction  future  trends  will  take  --  and  this  is  an  important  implication  of  the  preceding
section -- cannot be readily predicted in every case, as different forces are at work.
That applies to monetary reserves and to private financial assets alike. And it also
applies  to  the  external  value  of  the  euro.  The  analysis  has  shown  that,  especially  in  the  initial
stages,  the  euro  will  have  to  build  up  a  reputation  of  being  a  trustworthy  currency.  This  is
occasionally  interpreted  as  implying  that  a  weakness  of  the  euro  is  to  be  expected  initially.
Diametrically  opposed  to  this  hypothesis  are  the  forecasts  which  prophesy  a  considerable
appreciation  potential  for  the  euro  on  account  of  expected  massive  shifts  in  international
portfolios  owing  to  the  increasing  efficiency  of  the  financial  markets  in  Europe  and  possible
diversification  advantages,  with  interest  rates  being  only  weakly  correlated  with  other
currencies.
Both  these  arguments  seem  to  me  to  fall  short  of  the  truth.  Certainly,  a  high
degree of uncertainty can be expected in the early stages of EMU. However, the ECB, given its
independence  and  single-minded  commitment  to  the  objective  of  price  stability,  deserves  a
measure  of  confidence  in  advance.  That  applies  all  the  more  as  --  viewed  from  the  present
vantage  point  --  the  starting  conditions  for  EMU,  with  low  inflation  rates  in  virtually  all
potential  participating  countries,  are  decidedly  favourable.  Risks  to  the  euro  are  to  be  seen,
rather, in the general political environment, where in some quarters -- with an eye  on  the  high
level  of  unemployment  in  Europe  --  talk  of  a  weak  euro  is  widespread.  However,  (verbal)
exchange rate manipulations will serve neither to solve the serious employment problems nor to
establish the euro as an internationally respected currency.
The high level of unemployment in Europe is largely structural  and  can  only  be
overcome by energetic, far-reaching reforms -- for which responsibility lies more or less entirely
at  the  national  level.  The  hope  that  EMU  will  make  a  lasting  contribution  to  reducing
unemployment  should  rest  on  the  expectation  of  low  interest  rates  and  a  high  level  of
investment. These, in turn, depend crucially on investors’ confidence in  the  long-term  stability
of  the  euro.  The  misuse  of  the  currency  for  employment  (or  trade)  policy  purposes  would  not
only  jeopardise  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  it  might  also  provoke  retaliation  from  other
countries. This, after all, would be of no use to anybody.
Some  commentators  are  inferring  from  an  expected  substitution  of  euro  for
dollar-denominated assets that the single currency will have a substantial appreciation potential.
Such  thinking  is  predicated  on  a  portfolio  structure  that  is  in  line  with  other  macroeconomic
benchmarks, such as the ratio to GDP or the share of the euro area in world trade. In my view,
these  rather  mechanistic  approaches  take  too  little  account  of  the  supply  side  in  the  financial
markets.  The  broader  and  deeper  European  financial  market  will  not  only  attract  investment
capital, it will also result in enhanced cross-border borrowing in euros, which, in itself, tends to
BIS Review   100/1997
dampen rates.9 Which effect will prevail in the end, and what the consequent time profile will be
for the movement of the euro rate relative to other currencies, can hardly be forecast reliably a
priori. In the long run -- as already stated -- relative inflation differentials will largely determine
the nominal euro rate.
4. Concluding remarks
The  statute  of  the  ECB  --  above  all,  central  bank  independence  and  the  priority
given to the objective of price stability -- establishes crucial prerequisites for a stable euro at the
institutional level. It is now up to those responsible to fill this monetary constitution with life, to
implement  its  targets  in  the  real  world.  Especially  in  the  difficult  start-up  phase,  it  will  be
important  to  appoint  the  right  people  --  people  who  are  regarded  in  the  public  eye,  and
particularly in the financial markets, as guarantors of a stability-oriented monetary policy. Any
lack  of  confidence  in  the  management  of  the  ECB  would  be  reflected  in  corresponding  risk
premiums on interest rates, and hence might cost the participants in EMU dear.
Thus  we  come  full  circle:  the  political  objective  of  establishing  the  euro  as  an
international  currency  will  be  attained  only  if  the  market  accepts  the  newcomer.  Investors,  for
their part, will prefer a strong euro, which presupposes stability within EMU. That is a challenge
to  the  ECB,  but  the  other  economic  policy  players,  especially  the  fiscal  policy  makers,  must
likewise do their bit to (continue to) keep inflationary risks as low as possible.
                                                  
9For a critical discussion see also McCauley, P.N.,  White,  W.R.,  “The  Euro  and  European  Financial  Markets”,
BIS Working Papers No. 41, Basle, May 1997, pp. 18 - 20.
BIS Review   100/1997
