Mr.  Sheng  looks  at  asset  prices,  capital  flows  and  risk  management      Address
given by the Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Mr. Andrew Sheng, at
the Asian Securities Analysts Federation Conference in Bangkok, on 17/11/97 (slightly abridged).
1. I am very honoured to be invited today to address this distinguished Conference.
The title of my paper is “Asset Prices, Capital Flows and Risk Management”. All these factors have
been  the  main  players  in  the  recent  market  turbulence  in  the  region.  I  will  therefore  focus  my
discussion today on the lessons from the recent Asian market turmoil and also the impact on Hong
Kong.
The Surge in Capital Flows
2.  In  the  past  decade,  capital  flows  surged  within  the  Asian  region  and  globally.
According  to  IMF  statistics,  average  annual  net  capital  inflows  to  developing  countries  exceeded
US$150 billion in 1990-96, and more than 40% of which actually came to Asia. In the last two years
we saw even more capital inflows to the region, recording a net total of US$107 billion in 1996 and a
similar growth rate in the first half  of  1997.  In  some  Asian  economies,  net  inflows  have  averaged
5-8% of GDP over long periods, with over half of such capital flows in the form of foreign direct
investment.
3.  The  growth  in  international  capital  flows  is  the  result  of  greater  financial
liberalization and sophistication in markets around the world, the rise of institutional investors such
as  mutual  and  pension  funds,  and  growing  financial  innovation  and  intermediation,  especially  in
derivative products. We all know that capital movements help growth through a more global efficient
allocation of resources and bring new knowledge and technology to emerging economies.
4. On the other hand, international capital flows can be very volatile in nature, with
the tendency of reversing direction when there is the slightest hint of risk, whether it is in the conduct
of macroeconomic policies or concerns over the fragility of the financial sector. Capital flows now
drive the balance of payments more than trade flows. Portfolio shifts operate on the basis of market
expectations of risk, return and liquidity. A high level of arbitraging, such as the borrowing of funds
from  one  market  to  invest  in  another  market,  leads  to  contagion  effects.  Losses  in  one  market
therefore result in sales in another. This is a risk that should be addressed not only by those who are
now  under  the  process  of  capital  liberalization,  but  also  by  the  whole  international  community.
Global markets mean global contagion. This is no longer a uniquely Asian problem.
5. Let us now consider the recent Asian market turbulence in the global context. Until
recently,  Asia  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  the  high  global  liquidity,  and  recorded  admirable  levels  of
capital inflows, as driven by the high global liquidity in G-3 economies. Indeed, high global liquidity
is  also  the  consequence  of  strong  productivity  growth,  low  inflation  and  improved  government
savings, especially in the United States, which has resulted in the strongest growth in world trade in
decades.
6.  With  well-behaved  inflation,  the  ample  international  liquidity  has  resulted  in  a
global stock market boom in the 1990s, in both Europe and the US, as well as emerging markets in
Latin  America  and  Eastern  Europe.  But  this  has  also  caused  a  global  compression  of  interest  rate
spreads  and  record  levels  of  new  issuance  in  both  domestic  and  international  bond  markets.  Such
narrowing of spreads did not reflect the potential credit and market risks associated with the emerging
markets.  So  when  investors  finally  realize  that  the  emerging  markets  are  carrying  more  risks  than
they have assumed, the risk premium as measured by the yield spreads will widen sharply to reflect
this.
BIS Review   109/1997
- 2 -
7. This scenario was complicated by the fact that the flood of global liquidity has been
largely channelled to the bond, equity and property markets of East Asia. Buoyed by optimism about
the  Asian  miracle  growth  of  the  last  decade,  both  domestic  and  foreign  investors  committed  the
classic “fallacy of  composition”.  Initially,  each  individual  may  perceive  a  high  return  and  increase
their investments in assets, leading in aggregate to excess demand and a market overshoot. A reversal
of perception leads to a sharp market correction, which is exactly what is happening not only in Asia,
but globally. As Chairman Greenspan said recently, "in  retrospect,  it  is  clear  that  more  investment
monies flowed into these economies than could be profitably employed at modest risk".
8.  The  strong  Asian  growth  would  have  continued  but  for  the  fact  that  global
competition in external trade has emerged with newly industrialized and export-oriented economies
with cheap labour, such as China, India, Latin American and Eastern Europe. The failure of central
planning has brought at least three billion new workers and consumers into the global market. These
new  markets  began  to  benefit  from  the  growing  trade  liberalization  and  inflows  of  foreign
investments, thus putting greater pressure on the markets of the earlier “tigers” of East Asia, leading
to a widening of their current account deficits as they  continued  their  investments  in  infrastructure
and real estate.
Issues in Asia
9. If we look more closely at the situation in Asia, the economic fundamentals remain
intact.  Asia  has  been  the  fastest-growing  region  in  the  world,  recording  growth  rates  of  around
5%-9%.  Asian  economies  have  low  inflation  rates  and  exchange  rates  were  stable  until  recently.
Current account for the region as a whole is broadly in balance, while the fiscal account, excluding
Japan,  is  in  surplus.  Asia  has  exceptionally  high  savings  rates  of  above  30%  of  GDP.  Official
savings,  in  terms  of  foreign  currency  reserves,  were  even  higher.  In  Asia,  70%  of  the  inflows
contributed to reserve accumulation. As a result, Asian central banks are now holding about 40% of
the world’s foreign exchange reserves. Five of the top six foreign exchange holders in the world are
now Asians.
10.  The  strong  fundamentals  --  a  young,  educated,  flexible  workforce,  stable
government,  good  natural  resources  and  communications  infrastructure,  openness  to  trade  and
innovation, and high savings and investment rates -- these have not basically changed. Asia is still
outward-looking, with open markets and openness to technology and innovation. The aspirations of
Asia  are  also  real:  an  entrepreneurial  approach  to  innovation,  competition  and  better  standards  of
living for the rising urban population. Where Asians have perhaps kept their eyes off the ball is the
need to develop the services sector in complementary step with the manufacturing or export sectors.
Delays  in  opening  the  financial  sectors  to  global  competition  make  them  vulnerable  to  real  sector
excesses or imbalances, such  as  the  overconcentration  of  risks  in  certain  areas,  including  the  asset
markets.
11. The momentum of growth depends critically on continued vigorous trade reform,
fiscal prudence and improvements in finance, health and education policies. Increasingly, exports are
changing from labour-intensive industrial production, and more toward higher value-added industries
and services. This poses the challenge of sustaining productivity growth.
12. The Asian turmoil being a financial turmoil  on  the  surface,  let  me  focus  on  the
interesting  way  Asia  recycles  its  surplus  savings.  As  my  colleague  Joseph  Yam  has  consistently
pointed out, a large portion of Asian  foreign  exchange  reserves  is  invested  in  assets  of  the  OECD
countries, which provides safe and liquid instruments. These funds return to the region in the form of
foreign direct investment and foreign portfolio investment. This global recycling also exposes Asian
economies  to  volatile  portfolio  adjustments  due  to  policy  mistakes  or  shifts  in  the  international
economic environment. Currently, there are no deep, liquid and mature debt markets in Asia for the
BIS Review   109/1997
intermediation process to function more efficiently. The process has begun in the last few years, and
with the building of better financial infrastructure, this round of turmoil should add greater impetus to
greater cooperation in building better regional financial intermediation.
13. As we all can see in hindsight, the risks involved in international capital flows are
exacerbated when short-term capital flows are all attracted to the asset markets. This has led to asset
bubbles, with all the painful consequences of asset price deflation.
14. But what is much more evident in Asia is that the process of hedging, arbitrage
and “carry trade”, whereby arbitrageurs borrow in one market and invest in another market that offers
higher interest rates, has created both regional and global contagion. Portfolio shifts mean that when
asset prices change (and in this I would include: consumer prices, interest rates, exchange rates, debt
and equity prices and property prices) funds will flow in and out to follow the “law of one price”.
This  suggests  that  open  economies  must  adjust  to  global  prices.  The  speed  of  such  adjustments  is
only determined by the degree of openness of the domestic economy and financial markets. In other
words, whether we like it or not, we are being priced globally by the market.
15. Many of us have not fully appreciated the full logic of this. The financial turmoil
suggests that while the real sector causes of  the  stress  is  global  competition,  the  financial  effect  is
stress on domestic banking systems, as the banks intermediate the global portfolio adjustments. In an
open  economy,  capital  inflows  will  increase  the  deposit  base  of  domestic  banks  which  may  be
channelled  through  credit  mistakes  into  fuelling  domestic  asset  price  bubbles.  There  are  two
implications. First, asset price inflation eventually feeds into domestic inflation and erodes external
competitiveness.  Second,  excessive  lending  concentration  into  less  productive  assets,  either  real
estate or over-investment in infrastructure and production capacity, exposes the financial institutions
to huge risks.
16. From the viewpoint of financial intermediation, there are three major risks in Asia
that underlie the shocks there:
• First,  maturity  mismatch  --  Asian  markets  made  the  mistake  of  borrowing  short-term  capital
flows  to  finance  illiquid  non-tradables,  such  as  property,  thus  exposing  themselves  to  huge
liquidity needs when capital flows reversed.
• Second,  currency  mismatch  --  corporations  who  borrowed  foreign  currency  funds  to  finance
investments  that  do  not  generate  sufficient  foreign  exchange  to  repay  the  debt  run  a  currency
mismatch.
• Third, credit risk -- lending or investments ultimately must be against sound profits that generate
long-term returns higher than the borrowing rate or prospective dividends. Undue exuberance on
the  part  of  investors,  when  price-earning  ratios  grow  beyond  fundamentals,  or  on  the  part  of
bankers who failed to assess the impact of high interest rates on collateral or cash flows, would
expose both the investor and the lender to asset losses.
17. Specifically, banks in Asia, having easier access to funds as a result of high global
liquidity, were able to expand lending much more quickly and, thereby, incurred higher risks in their
portfolios that they need to manage more soundly. Ironically, domestic banks may have been induced
to  move  into  more  risky  lending  due  to  increased  competition  in  the  form  of  new  entrants  and
financial intermediation. There is no question that they need to manage these new risks better.
18. There is also one distinguishing feature of the Asian turmoil. The debt problems
have not been those of the public sector. On the contrary, the fiscal positions of Asian governments
have by and large been quite sound. East Asia, excluding Japan, ran a fiscal surplus of US$5.4 billion
BIS Review   109/1997
- 4 -
or  0.1%  of  GDP  in  1996.  The  debt  burden,  in  fact,  has  been  largely  one  of  private  sector
overborrowing.  The  resolution  of  the  debt  of  the  private  sector  makes  the  Asian  problems  quite
different from the experience of the sovereign debt issues of the 1980s.
19.  In  essence,  the  Asian  problem  is  the  age-old  question  of  efficient  resource
allocation. Asia has no shortage of funds, only that its high level of savings are invested in less liquid
long-term investments. Thus, one of the more pressing issues in Asia is to build a more competitive,
stable financial system and a robust infrastructure to facilitate efficient financial intermediation. The
better risk management of the financial system would also assist both corporations and investors to
manage  also  their  risks  better.  Ultimately,  a  balanced  and  flexible  economy  with  sound  risk
management will then be in a better position to withstand global shocks and avoid crisis.
The need for national risk management
20.  We  are  all  aware  of  the  complexities  of  risks  in  financial  markets.  Aside  from
credit  risks,  market  risks  such  as  interest  rate,  exchange  rate,  legal  risks,  operational  risks  and
systemic risks all have to be managed, both at the micro level and at  the  macro  level.  All  markets
suffer  from  the  “fallacy  of  composition”.  Mistakes  at  the  corporate  or  bank  level  will  add  up  to
national  mistakes,  which  now  may  add  up  to  regional  or  international  crisis  through  contagion.
Traditional  risk  management  at  corporate  or  sectoral  level  simply  shift  risks  from  one  sector  to
another. Risks still remain in the economy as a whole. Thus, increasingly in the 1980s, there emerged
the awareness that financial sector regulation was all about national risk management.
21. National risk management covers six major aspects:
• Credible  policies,  with  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  consistent  with  each  other,  and  applied
consistently.
• Capital account liberalization should be phased appropriately.
• Sound  fundamentals  include  a  high  domestic  savings  rate,  sustainable  fiscal  and  balance  of
payments positions, high foreign exchange reserves and prudent debt management.
• Good supervision involves the maintenance of solid capital adequacy and liquidity requirements
for the financial sector, as well as regular examination and monitoring of financial institutions and
markets. The banking system must have the capacity to avoid excessive credit concentrations and
risks, and to manage market risks well.
• A robust financial infrastructure would encompass an efficient payments and settlements system
for domestic and international transactions. In essence, the world is moving towards Real Time
Gross Settlement (RTGS) system, which support Delivery vs. Payment (DvP) and Payment vs.
Payment  (PvP).  RTGS  reduces  payment  risks  and  allows  central  banks  to  monitor  flows  in
domestic currency as well as exposure of banks on a real time basis.
• A  non-distortive  incentive  structure,  such  as  taxation  or  regulatory  restrictions  that  would  not
encourage risk concentrations or excessive leverage in any economic sectors.
22.  Put  simply,  managing  national  risks  is  equivalent  to  achieving  three  objectives.
First,  lower  national  gearing,  because  leveraging  adds  risks,  especially  if  this  is  leveraged  from
external  borrowing.  The  more  you  borrow  abroad,  the  more  you  become  vulnerable  to  external
shocks. Second, the higher the level of domestic savings, which should be reflected in higher bank
capital, lower credit/GDP ratio, and higher fiscal surpluses, the greater the resilience to the pain of
adjustment to external or internal shocks. Third, irrespective of the exchange rate regime, there must
BIS Review   109/1997
be a commitment to a stable currency, and this means strong external reserves, low inflation and a
sound banking system.
Asset prices and the exchange rate regime
23. The Asian market turmoil also raises the question as to whether the exchange rate
regime matters. I believe the debate about whether the nominal exchange rate should be floating or
fixed  misses  the  point  in  Asia.  The  real  issue  is  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  economy,
namely, its underlying productivity and global competitiveness.
24. For example, there is a mistaken perception that fixed exchange rates give rise to
asset bubbles. But if you look at the recent evidence of asset price bubbles in advanced economies,
asset  price  bubbles  also  occurred  in  the  1980s  in  countries  with  flexible  exchange  rates,  such  as
Japan,  Scandinavia  and  the  United  Kingdom.  Asset  price  appreciation  cannot  be  tackled  alone  by
interest rates, since there are multiple reasons for such appreciation
25. In Asia, we can perhaps identify four main reasons:
• First,  the  Asian  household  has  always  looked  upon  house  ownership  not  only  as  a  social
necessity, but also as the best hedge against inflation.
• Second, Asia is a young market, experiencing a high rate of urbanization. The strong demand for
housing arising from demographics alone will fairly quickly eliminate excess capacity  in  many
economies.
• Third, housing supply constraints also gave rise to high housing costs. Examples are inadequate
supply of land, excessive tax burden on housing and construction, and inefficient urban planning
and  approval  procedures  that  delay  market  responses  to  the  rising  demand  for  housing.
Over-rapid liberalization of supply constraints were also one reason for the emergence of excess
supply.
• Fourth, the high global liquidity that appeared has improved access to funds, which resulted in
excessive exuberance on asset price inflation.
The Impact on Hong Kong
26. Amidst the recent attacks to the regional currency markets, no economy in Asia
has been totally immune, not least Hong Kong, despite the strong fundamentals.
27. If we identify the real issues in Asia as one of structural competitiveness  in  the
global economy, caused by shifts in global resources and rising productivity outside the region, then
structural  adjustment  must  come  through  changes  in  either  the  internal  price  or  the  external  price.
With a fixed exchange rate regime and therefore a fixed external price, such as in Hong Kong, the
adjustment  comes  through  changes  in  the  internal  prices,  especially  the  asset  markets.  In  those
economies with  floating  exchange  rates,  there  may  be  adjustment  in  both  the  internal  and  external
prices.  This  is  exactly  what  is  happening  right  now.  Using  the  US  dollar  still  as  the  benchmark
currency, it is very interesting to see that since the beginning of the year, the Hang Seng Index has
declined by 26% as of last Friday, Singapore Strait Times Index by 32%, the Nikkei 225 by 28% and
the other ASEAN indices by between 50-60%. Thus, markets adjust irrespective of the exchange rate
regime and the unit of account.
28.  Is  there  any  easy  way  of  avoiding  the  pain  of  adjustment  in  Asia  due  to  rising
global competition? The answer is clearly no. As a general rule, the faster we adjust, the less the pain.
BIS Review   109/1997
- 6 -
There have been different approaches to this issue. There are some who think that a floating exchange
rate regime would cushion the pain, but many forget that Hong Kong has tried the floating exchange
rate  regime  before,  in  1974-83.  During  that  period,  growth  was  more  volatile  and  inflation  much
higher than what we are experiencing now. As an open economy with trade accounting for 285% of
GDP,  any  inflation  would  be  immediately  imported  under  exchange  rate  volatility.  The  recent
experience in Asia actually shows that contrary to the theory, floating exchange rates requires even
higher interest rates, because of the higher risks associated with exchange rate volatility.
29. Here I would like to correct the common image that the Hong Kong’s exchange
rate regime is a peg. The Hong Kong dollar is a fixed exchange rate, not a peg which can be adjusted
from  time  to  time.  The  linked  exchange  rate  system  in  Hong  Kong  operates  as  a  currency  board
system whereby the issue of Hong Kong dollar notes is fully backed by the US dollar at the fixed rate
of US$1 to HK$7.80. Such a note-issuing mechanism ensures that currency issued is fully backed by
foreign exchange. With the sustained budget surplus and accumulated surplus on the Exchange Fund
and Land Fund assets, the actual amount of  foreign  reserves  in  Hong  Kong  amounted  to  US$88.1
billion at the end of September, the third largest in the world. This is more than seven times Hong
Kong dollar cash in circulation or over three times HK$ M1.
30. The currency board system has an automatic adjustment mechanism to maintain
exchange  rate  stability.  When  there  are  outflows  of  funds  from  the  Hong  Kong  dollar,  the  Hong
Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  will  sell  US  dollars  to  banks  for  Hong  Kong  dollar.  On
settlement day, the HKMA will debit the clearing accounts of the banks for the necessary amounts of
Hong Kong dollars in return for the US dollar that will be credited to the New York accounts of the
same banks. Since banks may have  sold  more  Hong  Kong  dollars  than  they  have  in  their  clearing
accounts with the HKMA, they can only obtain Hong Kong dollars by borrowing from other banks,
by bidding up the interbank rates, or selling back the US dollars to the HKMA, that is, by reversing
their  short  position.  In  fact,  the  banks  do  not  hold  excess  Hong  Kong  dollars  because  they  are
generally  long  in  foreign  currency.  The  latest  data  at  the  end  of  July  shows  that  the  Hong  Kong
banking system is short roughly HK$33 billion or US$4 billion.
31.  In  addition  to  the  robust  currency  board  mechanism,  the  linked  exchange  rate
system is underpinned by some of the strongest fundamentals in Asia, if not the world:
• Growth is strong, at 5.5%.
• Fiscal position has been consistently strong, with an average fiscal surplus averaging 2% of GDP
for the past decade. Fiscal surplus in 1997 so far is 4.4% of GDP and is expected to exceed 5% of
GDP.
• The government has no external debt.
• Exchange Fund and Land Fund together have more than US$100 billion in assets.
• Corporate debt ratios are amongst the lowest in Asia.
• The external account is broadly in balance.
32.  The  free  markets  and  strong  fundamentals  mean  that  the  nature  of  the  shock  is
absorbable. Hong Kong does have a strong competitive edge, since we are a service economy with
83%  in  the  services  sector.  As  a  major  investor  and  integrator  of  production  in  the  region,  with
manufacturing concerns in China and Southeast Asia, Hong Kong companies could adjust production
to areas which have the greatest export competitiveness. In addition, the mainland Chinese economy
is  still  growing  at  8-9%  per  annum,  with  low  inflation,  a  balanced  external  account  and  strong
BIS Review   109/1997
commitment to reforms in the enterprise and financial sectors. All these auger well for Hong Kong as
the main gateway to the Chinese market.
33. The current higher interest rates reflect somewhat a slightly higher risk premium
in  Asia  due  to  the  currency  turmoil.  We  do  admit  that  the  higher  interest  rates  affected  the  stock
market and property market. But we should also remember that high interest rates are necessary to
cool  the  overheating  in  the  asset  markets  that  prevailed  until  recently.  Given  the  excess  demand
situation  in  Hong  Kong  as  the  economy  grew  by  6.4%  in  the  second  quarter,  a  correction  was
expected.  A  moderation  in  property  prices  will  help  bring  houses  to  more  affordable  levels  to
homebuyers.
34. Higher interest rates will also bring down inflation, by encouraging savings. Once
inflation and the asset markets correct under the free market regime, Hong Kong will become much
more  competitive.  In  real  effective  exchange  rate  terms,  the  competitive  effect  of  neighbouring
depreciation will be offset somewhat by a rise in domestic inflation. Higher interest rates  will  also
bring the external account more in line with the fundamentals and improve the trade balance. Hong
Kong, as a free market economy, is adjusting exactly according to the textbook.
35. Moreover, our banking sector is very robust and strongly capitalized to withstand
any shocks. Operating profits of the local banks grew by about 18% in the first half of 1997 and the
bad debt charged fell in the first half of 1997 as the level of classified loans was 2.08%, down from
2.91% a year earlier. The capital adequacy ratios of local banks as a whole exceeds 17%. The average
loan-to-value ratio is 70%, with the actual  measured  loan-to-value  ratio  being  53.3%,  according  to
our  survey  at  end  September  1994.  Therefore,  HKMA’s  efforts  to  build  a  strong  banking  sector,
including the distribution of maturity risks through the mortgage corporation and the creation of an
efficient RTGS payment system are all necessary efforts to prevent an external shock from affecting
the  banking  system.  In  particular,  the  RTGS  system  allows  the  HKMA  to  monitor  closely  banks’
settlement  transactions  on  a  real  time  basis.  Banks  would  also  have  to  fund  their  settlements  and
provide ample liquidity on a more prudent basis. All these are in line with our objective of making
the  markets  more  efficient  to  enable  the  free  market  to  clear  aggregate  supply  and  demand  at  an
equilibrium price quickly.
36. But we should always remember that there is no free lunch. The fixed exchange
rate regime implies a flexible economy to adjust to the exchange rate. Hong Kong has high flexibility,
attributable  to  a  high  savings  rate,  entrepreneurial  spirit  and  high  labour  productivity.  A  fixed
exchange  rate  is  a  discipline  on  both  the  private  and  public  sectors:  the  economy  adjusts  to  the
exchange rate, not the other way around. We do not pretend to say that a fixed exchange rate is the
perfect system, because even the IMF admits that there is no perfect system. But it is the best system
for Hong Kong. The linked exchange rate system is here to stay.
Conclusion
37. As one of the contributors to the World Bank study on the Asian Miracle, I have
never  considered  the  Asian  growth  story  as  a  miracle.  Paul  Krugman  called  it  perspiration,  not
inspiration.  Yes,  it  was  the  result  of  hard  work,  high  savings,  stable  governments  and  good
aspirations. But no one can deny that Asian corporations rank amongst some of the most productive
and efficient in the world. Perhaps we were victims of our own success. Global capital inflows were
the  most  sincere  form  of  flattery,  and  those  of  us  who  succumbed  to  the  easy  money  have  now
wakened to new challenges and risks.
38.  Asia  is  now  in  a  new  growth  league,  with  greater  global  competition.  The
adjustments will not be easy, especially building stronger and more robust financial systems to handle
the new risks of globalization. There is a new realism in Asia, that however painful the adjustment,
BIS Review   109/1997
- 8 -
we  have  to  make  the  necessary  changes.  As  competition  intensifies  at  all  levels,  there  can  be  no
reversal to the globalization, and we simply have to recognize that we live in one globe and we share
the same growing pains. I am confident that Asia’s basic strength of flexibility, realism and pragmatic
policies will see the region through, with a little bit of help from the IMF. In the words of Mr. Michel
Camdessus, IMF Managing Director, what has happened is a blessing in disguise. Asia will emerge
stronger and more resilient, and it will continue to be a pillar of growth in the new global economy.
BIS Review   109/1997
