Mr.  Fazio  considers  the  issue  of  efficiency  and  instability  in  global  finance
Address  given  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  Dott.  Antonio  Fazio,  at  an  international
conference celebrating 50 years of Quarterly Review/Moneta e Credito in Rome, on 20/11/97.
In the wake of the Great Depression and the Second World War, the new monetary
system set up  by  the  Bretton  Woods  agreements,  together  with  the  liberalisation  and  expansion  of
international trade, laid the foundations for a long period of economic growth and stability.
From 1950 to 1973 the world economy grew at an annual rate of 4.9%; the industrial
countries achieved 4.4%, Latin America, Asia and Oceania a higher rate. Inflation was a little above
3% in the industrial countries and less than 5% in the world as a whole.
The  economic  devastation  of  the  Great  Depression  had  undermined  the  classical
vision of the economy based on the hypothesis of equilibrium, in which the action of policy-makers
was constrained by the rigid rules of the gold standard. Following Keynes, in the new monetary order
economic policies were assigned a pre-eminent role in governing the cycle. Controls were imposed
on capital movements to permit interest rates to be managed in pursuit of domestic objectives.
The liberalisation of trade contrasted with a  segmentation  of  the  market  for  savings
and financial assets on a national basis. Current account imbalances were to be promptly corrected by
means of a fiscal policy serving to re-establish the equality between saving and investment.
The  system  broke  down  in  August 1971,  with  the  suspension  of  the  dollar’s
convertibility into gold. The main cause of the crisis lay in the US budget and balance-of-payments
deficits, which generated an overhang that was incompatible with the dollar’s role of anchor. Other
factors  included  economic  policies  in  most  countries  focused  primarily  on  domestic  growth  and
employment,  the  rise  in  public  expenditure  in  relation  to  GDP,  the  emergence  of  international
financial markets and increasingly large flows of hot money, which reduced the effectiveness of the
restrictions on capital movements.
In a situation where monetary policies were still concerned with the control of interest
rates  rather  than  credit  flows  and  the  quantity  of  money,  floating  rates  ended  up  by  fostering  an
increase in inflation in the industrial countries and in the rest of the world. Monetary growth in the
leading industrial countries continued, at an annual rate of 13%. The oil crisis had an impact that was
simultaneously inflationary and recessionary.
The growth rate of the industrial countries slowed to around 2.5% in the years from
1973 to 1980, inflation accelerated to 10%. Except in Germany, where monetary policy was directed
with  greater  determination  to  controlling  inflation,  the  1970s  were  marked  by  high  negative  real
interest rates.
The shift in US monetary policy introduced by Paul Volcker in 1979 gave priority to
controlling the quantities of credit and money; interest rates rose sharply to well above the inflation
rate. The upward movement spread to all the other leading countries.
1. Global finance
During the 1980s flexibility of the exchange rates between the main economic regions
of the world was accompanied by the dismantling of the barriers to capital movements. Growth in the
industrial countries was no more rapid than in the previous decade; it slowed in the 1990s.
BIS Review   110/1997
- 2 -
The persistence of budget deficits and large external imbalances, the rapid advances in
data  processing  and  telecommunications,  financial  innovation  and  the  activity  of  institutions  that
collect and invest savings on a world scale all contributed to the creation of a single, global market
for  currencies  and  finance.  The  harbinger  of  this  development  was  the  growth  of  the  Eurodollar
market, which had been boosted in the 1970s by the recycling of the surpluses of the oil-producing
countries.
 The new conditions made it possible for countries to adopt a gradualist approach to
correcting  budget  and,  above  all,  external  deficits;  it  was  no  longer  necessary  for  saving  to  equal
investment in any given period.
 The  global  market  was  fuelled  by  the  steady  accumulation  of  external  debt  by  the
United  States  and  the  build-up  of  a  net  credit  position  by  Germany  and  Japan.  In  all  the  leading
industrial countries except the United Kingdom public debt continued to rise in relation to GDP.
Gross  financial  assets  and  liabilities  continued  to  grow  much  more  rapidly  than
economic activity. Between 1982 and 1995 the total liabilities of the six largest industrial countries
rose from US$ 25 trillion to US$ 110 trillion and from four to six times their GDP. Over the same
period  the  degree  of  financial  integration  increased;  today,  external  liabilities  are  equal  to  60%  of
GDP. The growth in foreign exchange trading proceeded apace.
Favourable  investment  opportunities  encouraged  huge  flows  of  capital  into  the
emerging  economies;  high 
large
balance-of-payments  deficits  and  stable  exchange  rates.  Foreign  investment  in  these  markets
increased from US$ 50 billion in 1990 to US$ 200 billion in 1995.
rates  of  economic  growth  were  often  coupled  with 
In  the  OECD  countries  the  assets  managed  by  institutional  investors  rose  over  the
same period from US$ 14 trillion to US$ 23 trillion and from 85 to 102% of the area’s GDP. These
intermediaries manage portfolios that tend to be global and take on technically complex risks. They
can modify the composition of their assets extremely rapidly even for the sake of making small gains;
they  exploit  the  arbitrage  opportunities  stemming  from  fiscal  segmentation  or  price  differences
between different financial centres.
2. Efficiency and stability
Savings  are  now  freer  to  flow  towards  what  investors  consider  the  most  profitable
investment opportunities. This results in a more efficient allocation of the resources available, support
for capital formation and better growth prospects, especially for backward economies.
The  increase  in  lending  to  the  developing  countries,  where  the  return  on  capital  is
higher, is certainly evidence of the markets’ efficiency; on the other hand it brings with it the problem
of the sustainability of these countries’ foreign debt and the associated risks for stability, including
that of the international financial system.
The  Mexico  crisis  and  that  still  open  in  South-East  Asia,  like  the  debt  crisis  of  the
early  1980s  in  Latin  America,  have  shown  that  a  large  inflow  of  funds  can  temporarily  prop  up
unsustainable  economic  conditions.  Anchoring  the  national  currency  to  strong  currencies  when
economic policies are inadequate causes the real exchange rate to rise, creating the conditions for a
crisis. Insufficient supervision of banks and markets is a contributory factor.
BIS Review   110/1997
- 3 -
The  liquidity  of  markets,  the  belief  that  securities  can  be  sold  without  incurring
substantial losses can lead to an erroneous perception of the risk. Widespread expectations that the
international organisations will intervene can accentuate behaviour on the part of intermediaries that
is not consistent with the riskiness of investments.
It  is  becoming  increasingly  important  to  ensure  sound  and  orderly  economic
conditions  and  at  the  same  time  to  strengthen  and  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the  supervision  of
intermediaries  and  markets  at  the  supranational  as  well  as  the  national  level,  with  the  aim  of
forestalling systemic crises.
The  restrictive  monetary  policies  adopted  in  the  industrial  countries  brought  annual
inflation down from 10% in the 1970s to 5.8% in the 1980s. In the 1990s the objectives have become
more ambitious; inflation has fallen further,  to  an  average  of  3.1%.  Prices  have  also  slowed  down
considerably in the last three years in the countries of eastern Europe and above all in Latin America.
Real interest rates rose substantially in the industrial countries in the 1980s and 1990s.
They  increased  by  around  6  percentage  points  in  the  early  1980s  in  response  to  the  change  in  the
focus of US monetary policy. Real long-term rates stood at about 5% in the first half of the 1980s.
Today, excluding Japan, they still stand at around 4%, above the rate of economic growth.
The  high  level  of  real  interest  rates  is  a  reflection  of  the  high  returns  that  can  be
earned on investments in the emerging countries and the growing risks of a financial nature, which,
even though they originate in national markets, affect the whole system. To an even greater extent,
with the money supply constant or even slightly declining in relation to  GDP  as  a  consequence  of
rigorous  monetary  policies,  real  interest  rates  are  influenced  by  the  rapid  growth  in  the  volume  of
private and, above all, public sector securities.
The ratio of the quantity of money to nominal output has held steady or fallen a little
in the leading countries in the 1990s; in 1996 it stood at about 64%. After rising sharply in the 1980s,
international liquidity as measured by cross-border deposits has remained virtually unchanged.
For  the  private  sector  to  acquire  the  growing  stock  of  financial  assets,  real  interest
rates have to be high; the growth in public debt, due first and foremost to the imbalances in social
security  systems,  is  a  source  of  pressure  on  real  resources.  The  gap  between  interest  rates  and
economic growth rates is a cause of rising unemployment.
3. Italy’s role in international finance
In  the  course  of  the  1990s,  with  the  complete  liberalisation  of  capital  movements,
Italy has become a full participant in the international financial  markets.  Gross  capital  inflows  and
outflows have increased enormously. This process has sustained the accumulation of financial assets
and  encouraged  residents  to  diversify  their  portfolios  by  type  of  instrument,  country  of  issue  and
currency of denomination.
Between  1990  and  1996  net  portfolio  investment  abroad  by  the  private  sector
amounted to 190 trillion lire, accounting for 9% of the growth in total financial assets. The share of
foreign instruments in the total financial assets of the private sector rose from 6% at the end of 1989
to 14% at the end of 1996.
The  growing  flow  of  savings  invested  abroad  also  reflects  a  domestic  supply  of
financial instruments that is still not sufficiently diversified in terms of risks and returns.
BIS Review   110/1997
- 4 -
Italy’s  participation  in  the  global  market  of  finance  has  encouraged  foreign  capital
inflows,  mainly  directed  towards  the  government  securities  market.  At  the  end  of  last  year
non-residents  held  370 trillion lire  of  Italian  government  securities  or  20%  of  the  total  amount
outstanding, compared with 4% at the end of the 1980s.
When doubts have emerged about the soundness of economic policy, foreign capital
inflows  have  ceased  suddenly  and  given  way  to  outflows,  supplemented  by  substantial  exports  of
Italian capital. In late 1992 and again in early 1995 non-residents disposed of very large quantities of
Italian  securities;  at  the  same  time  residents’  purchases  of  foreign  financial  assets  increased
considerably.
These  outflows  put  the  lira  and  securities  prices  under  very  heavy  pressure.  The
reaffirmation  of  monetary  policy’s  counter-inflationary  commitment,  the  continuation,  albeit  with
pauses, of the efforts to adjust the public finances, and the policy of wage moderation were decisive
in easing the pressure and restoring conditions for a stable inflow of capital from abroad.
Looking ahead to a situation of recovery in economic activity and a reduction in the
external  current  account  surplus,  the  diversification  of  residents’  financial  portfolios  will  not  put
pressure on the exchange rate if non-residents continue to buy large amounts of Italian securities.
During the current year, characterised by favourable expectations regarding the Italian
economy  and  the  prospects  for  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  non-residents’  purchases  of
government  securities,  totalling  more  than  80 trillion lire  up  to  September,  have  contributed  to  the
sharp  contraction  in  the  long-term  interest  rate  differential  between  Italy  and  the  countries  with  a
longer record of price stability and a lower level of public debt. Exports of Italian capital have also
increased, however.
One of the reasons for  the  gradualness  with  which  monetary  policy  has  been  eased
has  been  to  ensure  favourable  conditions  for  foreign  investment  in  Italy,  taking  into  account  the
continual, structural outflow of Italian capital.
As Economic and Monetary Union draws closer and national monetary policy’s room
for  manoeuvre  gradually  narrows  to  the  point  of  disappearing,  the  macroeconomic  equilibrium  of
each country will come to depend increasingly on budgetary, incomes and structural policies. In the
absence of changes in the relative values of currencies, imbalances will impinge on competitiveness,
production and employment.
Public spending in Italy is now equal to more than 50% of GDP. Reducing this ratio
will  make  it  possible  to  ease  the  burden  of  taxation  and  social  security  contributions.  In  order  to
enhance  Italy’s  competitiveness  and  reduce  the  cost  of  labour,  it  is  also  necessary  to  remove  the
obstacles hindering competition in the markets for goods and arrive at a more flexible use of labour.
4. Concluding remarks
In addition to benefiting the participating countries, the creation of a stable monetary
area in Europe will contribute to the stability of the real and  financial  macroeconomy  at  the  world
level.
In  recent  years  Europe  has  been  beset  by  modest  growth  and  insufficient  use  of
available resources; between 1990 and 1996 employment declined by 2 million units. Adverse factors
include inefficiencies in some parts of the productive system, market rigidities and excessively large
budgets.
BIS Review   110/1997
- 5 -
 The  implementation  of  a  closer  economic  union  and  the  soundness  of  money  and
finance  over  time  cannot  be  entrusted  exclusively  to  monetary  policy.  They  require  conditions  of
greater economic efficiency and the harmonisation of institutional arrangements in the participating
countries.
 A sound currency requires a dynamic economy. Money is largely the product of the
credit granted to firms and the State. The stability of its value does not depend only on the quantity in
circulation but also on the efficient use of credit.
Economic convergence must therefore be pursued not only in the nominal  variables
but also in labour productivity, a level of taxation that will enhance international competitiveness, and
an  efficient  use  of  the  resources  the  public  sector  appropriates.  These  are  the  conditions  for  a
monetary union to have the necessary stability and solidity.
The  global  market  for  currencies  and  finance  influences  the  performance  of  all
economies.  The  conditions  in  that  market  increasingly  appear  as  exogenous  variables  of  decisive
importance. The macroeconomic equilibria of individual economies have to be related to the level and
movements of interest rates determined in it and to the exchange rates established there between the
leading currencies.
The external constraint is increasingly taking the form of  the  need  for  each  country
and economic region to be in overall balance, in terms of financial assets and liabilities, with respect
to the rest of the world.
The development of the global financial market in the last ten years parallels that of
national  financial  markets  in  the  later  nineteenth  century  and  the  first  half  of  this  century.  The
increase in financial activity within each national market, the expansion of credit and the development
of intermediaries all made a decisive contribution to investment, production and employment. But the
need  rapidly  emerged  for  overall  control  of  money  creation  and  even  earlier  for  a  system  of
prudential supervision of intermediaries’ activities. Today’s central banks are the result.
At the international level the expansion in the nominal amounts of credit and money
has  no  longer  been  limited  by  the  availability  of  primary  liquidity  since  the  link  with  gold  was
broken. The present configuration of the market has evolved spontaneously, largely in conditions of
fierce  competition.  However,  given  the  nature  of  the  variables  involved,  it  is  unlikely  that  a
Pareto-efficient equilibrium will be reached.
Money produces credit and credit produces more money; it is necessary to govern the
growth  of  these  aggregates;  an  anchor  is  needed  to  stabilise  their  value  in  terms  of  goods.  In  the
absence of binding rules and appropriate policies, national economies and the international economy
are exposed to the risks of inflation and instability in intermediaries and markets.
This inflationary drift is likely to lead to speculative bubbles, excessive increases in
the value of real and financial assets. The international crises that occur from time to time diminish
the value of financial wealth and curb inflationary pressures at the world level.
With many economies suffering from stagnation and poor fundamentals, the low cost
and rapid expansion  of  dollar  financing  in  the  early  1990s  and  the  subsequent  restriction,  together
with  the  more  recent  monetary  expansion  in  Japan  and  loss  of  value  of  the  yen,  have  probably
contributed to the instability of the global market for finance.
BIS Review   110/1997
- 6 -
The  efforts,  redoubled  in  recent  years,  to  achieve  monetary  stability  in  most  of  the
industrial countries, the banking supervision started by the Group of Ten for developed countries, its
extension to the emerging countries and the surveillance performed by the IMF are playing a role of
great systemic importance.
Faced with open and competitive markets, the strengthening of cooperation helps to
forestall  crises,  increases  the  efficacy  of  corrective  action.  Effective  action  by  central  banks,
supervisory authorities and the IMF is a first response to the new problems of monetary and financial
stability  raised  by  the  globalisation  of  markets;  it  may  require  more  certain  and  firmly  based
international institutional arrangements.
BIS Review   110/1997
