Mr. Greenspan's testimony before the US House of Representatives Committee
on the Budget   Testimony by the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve
System, Mr. Alan Greenspan, in Washington on 8/10/97.
After decades of budgetary imprudence, there has been a growing recognition of our
fiscal problems in recent years and an increased willingness of Presidents and Congresses to address
them. The capping of discretionary programs and the first steps to deal with entitlement programs are
encouraging,  as,  unquestionably,  is  the  slower  pace  at  which  we  are  creating  new  entitlement
programs.  But  it  is  important  to  place  this  improvement  in  the  context  of  the  decades-long
deterioration in our fiscal position; we have stopped the erosion for now, but we have made only a
downpayment on the longer-range problem confronting us.
Moreover, much of the fiscal improvement of recent years is less the result of a return
to the prudent attitudes and actions of earlier generations, than the emergence of benevolent forces
largely  external  to  the  fiscal  process.  The  end  of  the  Cold  War  has  yielded  a  substantial  peace
dividend,  and  the  best  economic  performance  in  decades  has  augmented  tax  revenues  far  beyond
expectations while restraining countercyclically sensitive outlays.
The payout of the peace dividend is coming  to  an  end.  Defense  outlays  have  fallen
from 6.2 percent of GDP in 1985 to 3.4 percent this year. Further cuts may be difficult to achieve, for
even if we are fortunate enough to enjoy a relatively tranquil world, spending will tend to be buoyed
by  the  need  to  replace  technologically  obsolescent  equipment,  as  well  as  by  the  usual  political
pressures.
The  long-term  outlook  for  the  American  economy  presents  us  with,  perhaps,  even
greater uncertainties. There can be little doubt that the American economy in the last several years
has performed far better than the history of business expansions would have led us to expect. Labor
markets have tightened considerably without inflation emerging as it has in the past. Encouraged by
these  results,  financial  markets  seem  to  have  priced  in  an  optimistic  outlook,  characterized  by  a
significant reduction in risk and an increasingly benevolent inflation process.
For example, in equity markets, continual upward revisions of longer-term corporate
earnings expectations have driven price-earnings ratios to levels not often observed at this stage of an
economic expansion.
Contributing to the expected increases in profits is a perceived marked increase in the
prospective rate of return on new business ventures. This is evidenced by the sharp increase in capital
investment  since  early  1993,  especially  in  hi-tech  equipment,  which  has  persisted  and  even
accelerated in recent quarters.
Underlying  this  apparent  bulge  in  expected  profitability  and  rates  of  return,  as  I
suggested  in  my  July  Humphrey-Hawkins  testimony,  may  be  a  maturing  of  major  technologies  in
recent years. The synergies of lasers and fiber optics have spurred large increases in communications
investments.  The  continued  extraordinary  spread  of  computer-related  applications,  as  costs  of
manipulating data  and  other  information  fall,  has  also  been  a  major  factor  in  increased  investment
outlays. The combination of advancing telecommunications and computer technologies have induced
large  investment  outlays  to  support  the  Internet  and  utilize  it  to  realize  efficiencies  in  purchasing,
production, and marketing.
This  dramatic  change  in  technology,  as  I  pointed  out  in  earlier  testimony,  has
markedly  shortened  the  lead  times  in  bringing  new  production  facilities  on  line  to  meet  increased
BIS Review   93/1997
- 2 -
demand, and has accordingly significantly reduced longer-term bottlenecks and materials shortages,
phenomena often leading to inflation in the past.
Indeed,  this  faster  response  of  facility  capacity,  coupled  with  dramatic  declines  in
transportation costs owing to a downsizing of products, has led to speculation that we are operating
with a new “paradigm,” where price pressures need rarely ever arise because low-cost capacity, both
here and abroad, can be brought on sufficiently rapidly when demand accelerates.
Before we go too far in this direction, however, we need to recall that it was just three
years ago that we were confronted  with  bottlenecks  in  the  industrial  sector.  Though  less  extensive
than in years past at similarly high levels of capacity utilization, they were nonetheless putting visible
upward  pressures  on  prices  at  early  stages  of  the  production  chain.  Further  strides  toward  greater
flexibility  of  facilities  have  occurred  since  1994,  but  this  is  clearly  an  evolutionary,  not  a
revolutionary, process. At least for the foreseeable future, it will still take time to bring many types of
new facilities into the production process, and productive capacity will still impose limits on meeting
large unexpected increases in demand in a short period.
More relevant, by far, however, is that technology and management changes have had
only  a  limited  effect  on  the  ability  of  labor  supply  to  respond  to  changes  in  demand.  To  be  sure,
individual  firms  have  acquired  additional  flexibility  through  increased  use  of  outsourcing  and
temporary workers. In addition, smaller work teams may be able to adapt more readily to variations
in order flows. While these techniques put the right workers at the right spots to reduce bottlenecks,
they do not increase the aggregate supply of labor. That supply is sensitive to changes in demand, but
to a far more limited extent than facilities. New plants can almost always be built. But labor capacity
for an individual country is constrained by the size of the working-age population, which, except for
immigration, is basically determined several decades in  the  past.  Its  lead  time  reflects  biology,  not
technology.
Of  course,  the  demand  for  capital  facilities  and  labor  are  not  entirely  independent.
Within  limits,  labor  and  capital  are  substitutes,  and  slack  in  one  market  can  offset  tightness  in
another. For example, additional work shifts often can expand output without significant addition to
facilities.  Similarly,  more  labor-saving  equipment  can  permit  production  to  be  increased  with  the
same level of employment, an outcome that we would observe as increased labor productivity. As I
will be discussing in a moment, we are seeing some favorable signs in this regard, but they are only
suggestive,  and  the  potential  for  increased  productivity  to  enhance  the  effective  supply  of  labor  is
limited.
The fact is, that despite large additions to the capital stock in recent years, the supply
of labor has kept pace with the demand for goods and services and the labor to produce them only by
reducing the margin of slack in labor markets.
Of the more than two million net new hires at an annual rate from early 1994 through
the third quarter of this year, little more than half came from an expansion in the population aged 16
to 64 who wanted a job, and more than a third of those were net new immigrants. The remaining one
million  per  year  increase  in  employment  was  pulled  from  those  who  had  been  reported  as
unemployed (nearly 700 thousand annually) and those who wanted, but had not actively sought, a job
(more than 300 thousand annually). The latter, of course, are not in the official unemployment count.
The key point is that continuously digging ever deeper into the available working-age
population  is  not  a  sustainable  trajectory  for  job  creation.  The  unemployment  rate  has  a  downside
limit, if for no other reason than unemployment, in part, reflects voluntary periods of job search and
other frictional unemployment, and includes people whose skills are not well adapted to work today
and would be very costly to employ.
BIS Review   93/1997
In addition, there is a limit on how many of the millions who wanted a job but were
not actively seeking one could be readily absorbed into jobs -- in particular, the large number whose
availability is limited by their enrollment in school, and those who may lack the necessary skills or
may face other barriers to taking jobs. The number of people saying they would like a job, but have
not  been  engaged  in  active  job  search,  declined  dramatically  in  1996.  But,  despite  increasingly
favorable labor markets, few more of these 5 million individuals have been added to payrolls in 1997.
This  group  of  potential  workers,  on  balance,  is  at  its  lowest  level  relative  to  the  working-age
population since at least 1970. As a source of new workers we may have reached about as far as is
feasible into this group of the population.
Presumably,  some  of  the  early  retirees,  students,  or  homemakers  who  do  not  now
profess to want to work could be lured to the job market. Rewards sufficient to make jobs attractive,
however,  could  conceivably  also  engender  upward  pressures  on  labor  costs  that  would  trigger
renewed price pressures, undermining the expansion.
Thus,  there  would  seem  to  be  emerging  constraints  on  potential  labor  input.  If  the
recent 2 million plus annual pace of job creation were to continue, the pressures on wages and other
costs of hiring large numbers of such individuals could escalate more rapidly. To be sure, job growth
slowed significantly in August and September, but it did not slow enough to close, from the demand
side  alone,  the  gap  of  the  demand  for  labor  over  the  supply  from  increases  in  the  working-age
population.
Thus, the performance of the labor markets this year suggests that the economy has
been on an unsustainable track. That the marked rate of absorption of potential workers since 1994
has not induced a more dramatic increase in employee compensation per hour and price inflation has
come as a major surprise to most analysts.
The  strengthened  exchange  value  of  the  dollar,  which  has  helped  contain  price
increases, is certainly one factor in explaining business reluctance to grant wage increases. Another
explanation I have offered in the past is that the acceleration in technology and capital investment, in
part  by  engendering  important  changes  in  the  types  of  facilities  with  which  people  work  on  a
day-by-day basis, has also induced a discernible increase in fear of job skill obsolescence and, hence,
an increasing willingness to seek job security in lieu of wage gains. Certainly, the dramatic  rise  in
recent  years  of  on-the-job 
to
school -- especially  those  aged  twenty-five  to  thirty-four,  mainly  at  the  college  level  --  suggests
significant concerns about skills.
training  and  a  substantial 
in  people 
returning 
increase 
But  the  force  of  insecurity  may  be  fading.  Public  opinion  polls,  which  recorded  a
marked  increase  in  fear  of  job  loss  from  1991  to  1995,  a  period  of  tightening  labor  markets,  now
indicate a partial reversal of that uptrend.
To be sure, there is still little evidence of wage acceleration. To believe, however, that
wage pressures will not intensify as the group of people who are not working, but who would like to,
rapidly diminishes, strains credibility. The law of supply and demand has not been repealed. If labor
demand  continues  to  outpace  sustainable  increases  in  supply,  the  question  is  surely  when,  not
whether, labor costs will escalate more rapidly.
Of course, a fall-off in the current pace of demand for goods and services could close
the  gap  and  avoid  the  emergence  of  inflationary  pressures.  So  could  a  sharp  improvement  in
productivity growth, which would reduce the pace of new hiring required to produce a given rate of
growth of real output.
BIS Review   93/1997
- 4 -
Productivity growth in manufacturing, as best we can measure it, apparently did pick
up some in the third quarter and the broader measures of productivity growth have exhibited a modest
quickening this year. Certainly, the persistence, even acceleration, of commitments to invest in new
facilities suggests that the actual profitability of recent past investments, and by extension increased
productivity, has already been achieved to some degree rather than being merely prospective.
However,  to  reduce  the  recent  two  million  plus  annual  rate  of  job  gains  to  the  one
million  rate  consistent  with  long-term  population  growth  would  require,  all  else  equal,  a  full
percentage point increase in the rate of productivity growth. While not inconceivable,  such  a  rapid
change  is  rare  in  the  annals  of  business  history,  especially  for  a  mature  industrial  society  of  our
breadth and scope.
Clearly,  impressive  new  technologies  have  imparted  a  sense  of  change  in  which
previous economic relationships are seen as being  less  reliable  now.  Improvements  in  productivity
are  possible  if  worker  skills  increase,  but  gains  come  slowly  through  experience,  education,  and
on-the-job training. They are also possible as capital substitutes for labor, but that is limited by the
state  of  current  technology.  Very  significant  advances  in  productivity  require  technological
breakthroughs  that  alter  fundamentally  the  efficiency  with  which  we  use  our  labor  and  capital
resources.  But  at  the  cutting  edge  of  technology,  where  America  finds  itself,  major  improvements
cannot be produced on demand. New ideas that matter are hard won.
Short  of  a  marked  slowing  in  the  demand  for  goods  and  services  and,  hence,
labor -- or  a  degree  of  acceleration  of  productivity  growth  that  appears  unlikely  --  the  imbalance
between the growth in labor demand and the expansion of potential labor supply of recent years must
eventually erode the current state of inflation quiescence and, with it, the solid growth of real activity.
In this context, the economic outlook sketched out for the United States by both the
Office of Management and Budget and  the  Congressional  Budget  Office  is  realistic,  even  in  some
sense  conservative.  But  you  should  recognize  the  range  of  possible  long-term  outcomes,  both
significantly better or worse, has risen markedly in the last year.
An acceleration of productivity growth, should it materialize, would put the economy
on a higher trend growth path than they have projected. The development of inflationary pressures,
on the other hand, would doubtless create an environment of slower growth in real output than that
projected by OMB or CBO. A re-emergence of inflation is, without question, the greatest threat to
sustaining what has been a balanced economic expansion virtually without parallel in recent decades.
In this regard, we at the Federal Reserve  recognize  that  how  we  handle  monetary  policy  will  be  a
significant factor influencing the path of economic growth and, hence, fiscal outcomes.
Given  the  wider  range  of  possible  outcomes  that  we  face  for  long-term  economic
growth, the corresponding ranges of possible budget outcomes over the next five to ten years also has
widened appreciably.
In addition to the uncertainties associated with economic outcomes, questions may be
raised about other assumptions behind both projected receipts and outlays. With regard to the former,
it is difficult to believe that our much higher-than-expected income tax receipts of late are unrelated
to the  huge  increase  in  capital  gains,  which  since  1995  have  totaled  the  equivalent  of  one-third  of
national income. Aside from the question of whether stock prices will rise or fall, it clearly would be
unrealistic to look for a continuation of stock market gains of anything like the magnitude of those
recorded in the past couple of years.
On  the  outlay  side,  the  recently  enacted  budget  agreement  relies  importantly  on
significant, but as-yet-unspecified, restraints on discretionary spending to be made in the years 2001,
BIS Review   93/1997
2002, and thereafter. Supporters of each program expect the restraints to fall elsewhere. Inevitably,
the  eventual  publication  of  the  detail  will  expose  deep  political  divisions,  which  could  make  the
realization  of  the  budget  projections  less  likely.  In  addition,  while  the  budget  agreement  included
significant  cuts  in  Medicare  spending,  past  experience  has  shown  us  how  difficult  Medicare  is  to
control, raising the possibility that savings will never be realized. More generally, I wonder whether
there  is  enough  funding  slack  to  accommodate  contingencies,  or  the  inevitable  new,  but  as  yet
unidentified, spending programs.
Budget  forecasts  are  understandably  subject  to  fairly  large  errors.  Seemingly  small
changes in receipts and outlays are magnified in the budget deficit. For example, during the 1990s,
the average absolute error in the projections of February for receipts and outlays in the fiscal years
starting  the  subsequent  October  has  been  greater  than  four  percent.  A  four  percent  error  in  both
outlays and receipts in opposite directions amounts to more than $125 billion annually. Indeed, the
uncertainty of budget forecasts is no better illustrated than by an admittedly extreme case. During the
last two and a half years the projection of the fiscal balance, excluding new initiatives, for the year
2002 has changed by about $250 billion. While all this fortunately has been in the direction of smaller
deficits, the degree of uncertainty suggests that the error could just as easily be on the other side.
With this high level of uncertainty in projecting budget totals and associated deficits,
the Congress needs to evaluate  the  consequences  to  long-term  economic  growth  of  errors  in  fiscal
policy. A base issue in such an evaluation is whether we are better off to be targeting a large deficit,
balance, or a chronic surplus in our unified budget.
There is nothing special about budget balance per se, except that it is far superior to
deficits. I have always emphasized the value of a budgetary surplus in increasing national savings,
especially when American private domestic savings is low, as it is today.
Higher national savings lead in the long run to higher investment and living standards.
They also foster low inflation. Low inflation itself may be responsible, in part, for higher productivity
growth and larger gains in standards of living.
If  economic  growth  and  rising  living  standards,  fostered  by  investment  and  price
stability, are our goal, fiscal policy in my judgment will need to be biased toward  surpluses  in  the
years immediately ahead. This is especially so given the inexorable demographic trends that threaten
huge increases in outlays beyond 2010. We should view the recent budget agreement, even if receipts
and outlays evolve as expected, as only an important downpayment on the larger steps we need to
take to solve the harder problem -- putting our entitlement programs on a sound financial footing for
the 21st century.
Moreover, targeted surpluses could hopefully help to offset the inbuilt political bias in
favor of budget deficits. I have been in too many budget meetings in the last three decades not to have
learned that the ideal fiscal initiative from a political perspective is one that creates visible benefits for
one group of constituents without a perceived cost to anybody else, a form of political single-entry
bookkeeping.
To be sure, in recent years we have been showing some real restraint in our approach
to  fiscal  policy.  Yet,  despite  terminating  a  number  of  programs,  the  ratio  of  federal  nondefense,
noninterest, spending to GDP still stands at nearly 14 percent, double what it was in the 1950s. This
may be one reason why inflation premiums, embodied in long-term interest rates, still are significant.
There is, thus, doubtless a lot of catching up to do.
The  current  initiatives  toward  welfare,  social  security,  and  Medicare  reform  are
clearly steps in the right direction, but far more is required. Let us not squander years of efforts to
BIS Review   93/1997
- 6 -
balance the budget and the benefits of ideal economic conditions by failing to address our long-term
imbalances.
A critical imbalance is the one faced by social security. Its fund’s reported imbalance
stems  primarily  from  the  fact  that,  until  very  recently,  the  payments  into  the  social  security  trust
accounts by the average employee, plus employer contributions and interest earned, were inadequate,
at  retirement,  to  fund  the  total  of  retirement  benefits.  This  has  started  to  change.  Under  the  most
recent  revisions  to  the  law,  and  presumably  conservative  economic  and  demographic  assumptions,
today’s  younger  workers  will  be  paying  social  security  taxes  over  their  working  years  that  appear
sufficient to fund their benefits during retirement. However, the huge liability for current retirees, as
well  as  for  much  of  the  work  force  closer  to  retirement,  leaves  the  system,  as  a  whole,  badly
underfunded. The official unfunded liability for the Old Age, Survivors and Disability funds, which
takes  into  account  expected  future  tax  payments  and  benefits  out  to  the  year  2070,  has  reached  a
staggering $3 trillion.
This issue of funding underscores the critical elements in the forthcoming debate on
social security reform, because it focusses on  the  core  of  any  retirement  system,  private  or  public.
Simply put, enough must be set aside over a lifetime of work to fund the excess of consumption over
claims  on  production  a  retiree  may  enjoy.  At  the  most  rudimentary  level,  one  could  envision
households saving by actually storing goods purchased during their working years for consumption
during retirement. Even better, the resources that would have otherwise gone into the stored goods
could be diverted to the production of new capital assets, which would, cumulatively, over a working
lifetime, produce an even greater quantity of goods and services to be consumed in retirement. In the
latter case, we would be getting more output per worker, our traditional measure of productivity, and
a factor that is central in all calculations of long-term social security trust fund financing.
Hence,  the  bottom  line  in  all  retirement  programs  is  physical  resource  availability.
The finance of any system is merely to facilitate the underlying system of allocating real resources
that fund retirement consumption of goods and services. Unless social security savings are increased
by higher taxes (with negative consequences for growth) or lowered benefits, domestic savings must
be  augmented  by  greater  private  saving  or  surpluses  in  the  rest  of  the  government  budget  to  help
ensure that there is enough savings to finance adequate productive capacity down the road to meet the
consumption needs of both retirees and active workers.
The basic premise of our current largely pay-as-you-go social security system is that
future  productivity  growth  will  be  sufficient  to  supply  promised  retirement  benefits  for  current
workers. However, even supposing some acceleration in long-term productivity growth from recent
experience, at existing rates of domestic saving and capital investment this is becoming increasingly
dubious.
Accordingly, short of a far more general reform of the system, there are a number of
initiatives,  at  a  minimum,  that  should  be  addressed.  As  I  argued  at  length  in  the  Social  Security
Commission deliberations of 1983, with only marginal effect, some delaying of the age of eligibility
for  retirement  benefits  will  become  increasingly  pressing.  For  example,  adjusting  the  full-benefits
retirement age to keep pace with increases in life expectancy in a way that would keep the ratio of
retirement years to expected life span approximately constant would help to significantly narrow the
funding  gap.  Such  an  initiative  will  become  easier  to  implement  as  fewer  and  fewer  of  our  older
citizens retire from physically arduous work. Hopefully, other modifications to social security, such
as improved cost of living indexing, will be instituted.
There  are  a  number  of  thoughtful  reform  initiatives  that,  through  the  process  of
privatization, could increase domestic saving rates. These are clearly worthy of intensive evaluation.
Perhaps the strongest argument for privatization is that replacing the current underfunded system with
BIS Review   93/1997
a fully funded one could boost domestic saving. But, we must remember it is because privatization
plans  might  increase  savings  that  makes  them  potentially  valuable,  not  their  particular  form  of
financing. As I have argued elsewhere, unless national savings is increased, shifting social security
trust funds to private securities, while increasing government retirement system income, will lower
retirement incomes in the private sector to an offsetting degree. This would not be an improvement to
our overall retirement system.
The  types  of  changes  that  will  be  required  to  restore  fiscal  balance  to  our  social
security accounts, in the broader scheme of things, are significant but manageable. More important,
most  entail  changes  that  are  less  unsettling  if  they  are  enacted  soon,  even  if  their  effects  are
significantly delayed, rather than waiting five or ten years or longer for legislation.
Minimizing the potential disruptions associated with the inevitable changes to social
security is made all  the  more  essential  because  of  the  pressing  financial  problems  in  the  Medicare
system, social security’s companion program for retirees.  Medicare  as  you  are  well  aware  is  in  an
even more precarious position than social security. The financing of Medicare faces some of the same
problems associated with demographics  and  productivity  as  social  security  but  faces  different,  and
currently greater, pressures owing to the behavior of medical costs and utilization rates. Reform of
the Medicare system will require more immediate and potentially more dramatic changes than those
necessary to reform social security.
We owe it to those who will retire after the turn of the century to be given sufficient
advance notice to make what alterations in retirement planning may be required. The longer we wait
to  make  what  are  surely  inevitable  adjustments,  the  more  difficult  they  will  become.  If  we
procrastinate  too  long,  the  adjustments  could  be  truly  wrenching.  Our  senior  citizens,  both  current
and future, deserve better.
BIS Review   93/1997
