Øystein Olsen: Monetary policy and wealth management in a small 
petroleum economy 
Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
Harvard Kennedy School, Cambridge, USA, 9 April 2013. 
Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. Charts in pdf-format 
 Introduction 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  at  the  Harvard  Kennedy  School,  and  I  really  appreciate  this 
opportunity to talk to you. My topics are Norwegian monetary policy and the central bank’s 
management of Norway’s oil fund, the Government Pension Fund Global. 
I will begin with some background on the macroeconomic policy framework in Norway, and 
why  we  believe  it  works  well.  A  rules-based  approach  was  adopted  after  two  turbulent 
decades of boom-bust economic cycles. The path towards the current regime was developed 
and  supported  by  successive  governments  in  the  1990s  and  early  2000s  as  it  gradually 
came  into  place.  Since  2001,  the  operational  target  of  monetary  policy  has  been  annual 
consumer price inflation of around 2.5 percent over time. 
With  growing  petroleum  revenues,  asset  management  has  also  become  one  of  Norges 
Bank’s  main  tasks.  Both  in  our  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  in  asset  management, 
transparency is a guiding principle. I will explain how we see ourselves as a global financial 
investor, and elaborate on the main elements of our investment strategy. 
Some background 
Chart: Oil wealth has brought strong rise in prosperity 
In order to put the Norwegian economy into some perspective, we can compare Norway with 
Sweden, our close neighbour and a country  with many similar characteristics. The relative 
income level between the two countries was stable – until 1969, when oil was discovered in 
the Norwegian part of the North Sea. Since then, Norway’s income has pulled ahead. 
Chart: Terms of trade and real exchange rate in Norway and other countries 
Our national income reflects the considerable improvement in Norway’s terms of trade over 
the past couple of decades compared with other resource-rich countries. Nonetheless, the 
real exchange rate in Norway has not appreciated as sharply as in these countries. 
The extraction of oil and natural gas from the sea bed along Norway’s  coast has come to 
play a major role in the economy. The petroleum sector now accounts for 50 percent of our 
exports  and  more  than  20  percent  of  GDP.  Furthermore,  tax  payments  by  oil  and  gas 
companies1  and  direct  government  ownership  interests  in  oil  and  gas  fields  ensure  that 
economic rent largely accrues to the public sector. Petroleum income makes up 30 percent 
of government revenues. 
Chart: Oil and gas exporters 
                                                
1   Both ordinary income tax and an additional resource rent tax. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
On the world market, Norway’s most significant role is that of natural gas exporter. Norway 
was the world’s second largest exporter of natural gas in 20102. Our role in the world market 
for oil exports is more modest. 
Back in the 1970s, policymakers’ handling of the newly discovered petroleum wealth got off 
to a rather weak start. Public spending surged before export revenues had started to kick in. 
Fiscal  policy  fuelled  a  boom  and  had  to  be  reversed  and  tightened.  By  the  late  1970s, 
Norway was in the midst of a deep recession. 
In  the  mid-1980s,  the  Norwegian  economy  experienced  a  new  boom,  this  time  fuelled  by 
private debt growth. After the fall in oil prices in 1986, we experienced a collapse in housing 
prices, as well as a severe banking crisis and a soaring public deficit. The turbulence made 
clear how vulnerable a small open economy is to terms of trade disturbances. 
The downturn in the early 1990s was the deepest that Norway had experienced since World 
War II. The authorities realised that the old policy framework was no longer suitable. With a 
globalised  economy  and  deregulated  credit  and  capital  markets,  our  economy  was  more 
vulnerable to external shocks than before. A number of major reforms were implemented to 
improve  cost  competitiveness  and  boost  growth.  And  the  establishment  of  the  oil  fund  in 
1990  and  the  reform  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  in  2001  made  the  economy  more 
robust to external shocks. 
Chart: Norwegian exports 
The need for a robust policy framework is greater than ever: Petroleum products now make 
up  more than  50  percent  of  exports,  and  – more  recently  –  oil  services  exports  have  also 
picked up. Exports of other commodities add to the vulnerability of our economy to terms of 
trade  shocks.3  The  total  commodity-related  share  of  exports  has  risen  from  less  than 
40 percent in 1978 to a good 65 percent in 2012. 
Rules-based fiscal policy 
We  know  that  commodity  producing  countries  tend  to  experience  pronounced  economic 
cycles.  However,  as  noted  by  Jeffrey  Frankel  (2011)4,  this  can  be  reduced  through  well-
chosen regimes for fiscal and monetary policy: 
“We need to set up regimes ex ante which are more likely to deliver the right result ex post, 
in a world inhabited by human beings, not angels.” 
In  Norway,  the  act  of  parliament  relating  to  the  oil  fund,  passed  in  1990,  provided  a  new 
framework for fiscal policy. The policy guidelines were clarified in 2001, and rules governing 
the interaction between Norway’s petroleum wealth and fiscal policy were established. These 
rules state: 
Chart: The Government Pension Fund Global and the fiscal rule 
                                                
2   For  more  information  about  the  Norwegian  petroleum  sector,  see  “Facts  2012:  The  Norwegian  petroleum 
sector”,  Ministry  of  Petroleum  and  Energy,  http://www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/oed/documents-and-
publications/Reports/2012/facts-2012-the-norwegian-petroleum-secto.html?id=714606. 
3   Using  a  factor-augmented  vector  autoregressive  (FAVAR)  model  that  allows  them  to  distinguish  between 
different groups of countries, Aastveit et. al (2012) find that demand from emerging economies (most notably 
from Asian countries) is more than twice as important as demand from developed countries in accounting for 
the fluctuations in the real price of oil and in oil production. See Aastveit, Knut Are, Hilde C. Bjørnland and Leif 
Anders  Thorsrud  (2012):  “What  drives  oil  prices?  Emerging  versus  developed  economies”,  Norges  Bank 
Working Paper 2012/11 http://www.norges-bank.no/no/om/publisert/publikasjoner/working-papers/2012/11/. 
4   Frankel,  Jeffrey  A.  (2011),  “How  Can  Commodity  Producers  Make  Fiscal  and  Monetary  Policy  Less 
Procyclical?” in Beyond the Curse: Policies to Harness the Power of Natural Resources, ed. by Rabah Arezki, 
Thorvaldur Gylfason and Amadou Sy, International Monetary Fund. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 All government revenues from the oil sector must be transferred to the fund. 
Government spending, on average over the cycle, must be limited to the expected 
real return on the fund – estimated at 4 percent. This is known as the fiscal rule. The 
aim is to spend only the return generated by the fund’s investments, not the capital 
itself. 
All of the fund’s capital is invested abroad. 
• 
Chart: Projected size of the oil fund 
At  the  time  the  fund  was  established,  Norway  was  in  the  midst  of  a  deep  recession,  and 
many  doubted  that  any  petroleum  revenues  would  ever  be  saved.  However,  after  a  few 
years, the government’s cash flow from the petroleum sector started to increase sharply. The 
savings plan has since remained intact and the fund has now reached a size of more than 
USD 700 billion, or 140 percent of GDP. 
Chart: Structural non-oil budget surplus 
As a result of the fiscal rule, economic policy is more robust: First, by decoupling spending 
from  current  petroleum  revenues,  the  fiscal  rule  provides  for  a  gradual  and  sustainable 
phasing-in  of  petroleum  revenue  spending.  Second,  the  guidelines  ensure  the  necessary 
flexibility to allow automatic stabilisers to work. Third, they allow for careful countercyclical 
policy.5  Structural  public  non-oil  deficits  have  counteracted  movements  in  the  output  gap 
since the fiscal rule was adopted. In particular, reserves accumulated in the fund provided 
fiscal leeway during the economic setback in 2008 and 2009. 
At  the  same  time,  cyclical  fluctuations  in  mainland  production  are  strongly  influenced  by 
petroleum-related  demand.  This  indicates  that  there  is  a  strong  link  between  Norway’s 
mainland output gap and the oil price. 
Chart: The size of Norges Bank’s balance sheet including the oil fund 
There  is  a  direct  link  between  the  fund  mechanism  and  the  central  bank’s  purchases  of 
foreign  exchange.  Petroleum  taxes  are  paid  in  Norwegian  kroner.  The  central  bank  buys 
foreign exchange to transfer to the fund in order to secure the necessary net capital outflow. 
The fund ends up on the asset side of the central bank’s balance sheet and these assets are 
exactly offset by government claims on the central bank. Bank reserves held in the central 
bank are unaffected by this and have remained low and stable in comparison. 
Chart: Real exchange rate and oil price 
The krone clearly responds to oil price shocks. However, compared with other commodity-
based economies, like Canada, Australia and New Zealand, fluctuations in the real exchange 
rate have been moderate.6 The build-up of the fund may have helped contain a temporary 
real appreciation during a period of high oil revenues. 
                                                
5   Norwegian  fiscal  policy  has  become  more  countercyclical.  See  e.g.  figures  2  and  3  in  Frankel,  Jeffrey  A., 
Carlos  Végh  and  Guillermo  Vuletin  (2011):  “On  graduation  from  fiscal  procyclicality”,  NBER  Working 
Paper 17619. 
6   Chen,  Yu-Chin.  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff  (2003):  “Commodity  Currencies”,  Journal  of 
International 
Economics 60,  133–169,  documents  that  commodity  exports  have  a  strong  and  stable  influence  on  the 
floating (real) exchange rates of Australia, Canada and New Zealand. Ferraro, Domenico, Barbara Rossi and 
Kenneth. S. Rogoff (2012): “Can Oil Prices Forecast Exchange rates?” NBER Working Paper 17998 extends 
the analysis to higher frequency data and out-of-sample forecasting and finds that both contemporaneous and 
lagged oil prices have significant predictive ability for the NOK/USD-exchange rate and oil prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Inflation targeting with interest rate forecasting 
Chart: Inflation 
When  the  fiscal  rule  was  introduced  in  2001,  Norges  Bank  was  charged  with  the  task  of 
keeping consumer price inflation low and stable. The value of the krone exchange rate was 
allowed  to float freely.  The  operational  target  of monetary  policy  is  annual  consumer  price 
inflation of close to 2.5 percent over time, under a regime of flexible inflation targeting. 
In the conduct of monetary policy, the aim of reaching the inflation target is balanced against 
the aim of stabilising output and employment. In addition, monetary policy should be robust 
by seeking to mitigate the risk of a build-up of financial imbalances. Over the past ten years, 
average inflation in Norway has been somewhat below, but close to, 2.5 percent. 
Chart: Key policy rate in the baseline scenario 
The degree of transparency regarding Norges Bank’s interest rate decisions has increased 
gradually  since  inflation  targeting  was  introduced.  We  provide  clear  guidance  about  the 
future path of the key policy rate. Explicit interest rate forecasts were introduced in 2005. 
A key objective is to convey the contingency and the uncertainty in the forecast. To that end, 
we  seek  to  be  transparent  about  the  considerations  underlying  each  interest  rate  forecast 
and  what  the  objectives  and  trade-offs  are.  We  consider  it  important  to  explain  why  our 
forecast  has  changed.  In  our  Monetary  Policy  Report,  the  interest  rate  forecast  is 
accompanied  by  a  separate  chart  showing  the  revision  since  the  previous  report  due  to 
changes in news and new assessments. Monetary policy also seeks to mitigate the risk of a 
build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  Operationally,  and  as  a  support  to  monetary  policy 
decisions, our objectives and trade-offs are described by a monetary policy loss function7 The 
loss function is minimised subject to our model of the Norwegian economy, and the implied 
interest  rate  path  is  an  important  aid  to  the  policy  decision  process8  Since  models  are 
simplifications,  our  projections  are  based  on  a  combination  of  model  analyses  and 
professional judgement. 
Transparency allows financial market participants and other interested parties to make their 
own judgments on the revisions to our interest rate forecast – and the revisions will often be 
anticipated.  Ideally,  our  response  pattern  is  reflected  in  market  interest  rates  as  soon  as 
economic news arrives, enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
And we do indeed find that market expectations tend to react to economic news largely in 
line with the Bank’s response pattern. We also find evidence of reduced volatility in market 
interest  rates  on  the  days  interest  rate  decisions  are  announced,  compared  to  the  period 
before  the  introduction  of  the  interest  rate  forecast.  This  suggests  that  a  more  precise 
communication  of  policy  intentions  has  improved  market  participants’  understanding  of the 
central  bank’s  response  pattern.9  The  contingency  of  the  forecasts  seems  to  be  well 
understood. 
                                                
7   The  monetary  policy  loss  function  is  described  in  e.g.  http://www.norges-bank.no/en/about/published-
/publications/monetary-policy-report/1/ p.15. In March 2012, the operational loss function was revised in order 
to make Norges Bank’s consideration of financial stability when setting the key policy rate more explicit. 
8   For further comments on the Norwegian framework, see also Lars E.O. Svensson (2011): “Inflation Targeting”, 
Chapter  22  in  Benjamin  M.  Friedman  and  Michael  Woodford  (eds.),  Handbook  of  Monetary  Economics, 
Volume 3B, Amsterdam: North-Holland in an imprint of Elsevier, 2011. 
9   See  Holmsen,  Amund,  Jan  F.  Qvigstad,  Øistein  Røisland  and  Kristin  Solberg-Johansen  (2008): 
“Communicating  monetary  policy  intentions:  The  case  of  Norges  Bank”,  Norges  Bank  Working  Papers 
2008/20. See also Taylor, John. B. (2010): “The Transparent Effect of Foreign Interest Rates on Central Bank 
Decisions”,  26  September, 
in  his  blog  Economics  One,  http://johnbtaylorsblog.blogspot.no/2010/09/-
transparent-effect-of-foreign-interest.html. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Management of the fund 
Besides making monetary policy decisions, one of Norges Bank’s main tasks is to manage 
Norway’s oil fund. 
Chart: Governance structure 
The  Ministry  of  Finance  holds  the  political  responsibility  for  the  fund.  The  overall 
management principles and strategy are anchored in parliament and the Ministry reports to 
parliament at regular intervals. 
The management of the fund is fully delegated to the central bank – to Norges Bank. Our 
task as manager of the fund is strictly commercial: to maximise returns within the guidelines 
defined by the government. All investment decisions are made by Norges Bank Investment 
Management, a separate division within the central bank. Neither Norges Bank’s Executive 
Board  nor  the  Ministry  of  Finance  is  involved  in  any  individual  investment  decisions.  This 
governance structure was set up to ensure that the fund was not used as an instrument of 
foreign policy. 
The  purpose  of  the  fund  is  to  ensure  that  future  generations  receive  their  fair  share  of 
Norway’s petroleum wealth. To achieve this, the fund was designed to be invested for the 
long  term.  Size  and  a  long  investment  horizon  are  the  fund’s  two  key  characteristics. 
Together, they form the backbone of the fund’s investment strategy: 
• 
First, the fund’s long investment horizon implies substantial risk-taking capacity. We 
are able to act as a countercyclical investor. 
Second,  the  fund’s  size  makes  it  possible  to  take  advantage  of  investment 
opportunities worldwide, in a number of asset classes. 
Thirdly, a fund owned by the government must be highly transparent, not only to the 
Norwegian public but also in an international context. 
  Let me elaborate on these aspects. 
In  the  early  summer  of  2007,  the  fund’s  strategic  equity  share  was  raised  from  40  to 
60 percent. From summer 2007 to 2009, the fund bought equities worth USD 180 billion in 
international  markets,  equivalent  to  0.5  percent  of  all  globally  listed  equities.  The  largest 
volume of transactions was carried out in the midst of the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009. 
The  long-term  horizon  also  enables  us  to  invest  countercyclically,  by  rebalancing  asset 
classes:  If  the  equity  share  increases  by  more  than  4  percentage  points  from  the  target 
weight  of  60  percent,  we  will  sell  equities  and  buy  bonds.  Conversely,  if  the  equity  share 
drops below 56 percent, we will sell bonds and buy equities. 
The capacity to withstand market turmoil was demonstrated during the financial crisis in 2008 
and  2009.  For  a  period  of  18  months,  the  fund’s  losses  totalled  roughly  USD  120  billion  
– more than 25 percent of Norway’s GDP. The losses did not go unnoticed. They led to lively 
public debate on the fund’s investment strategy. However, the conclusion drawn was that the 
strategy was robust, and the government remained committed to it.10 Norway would have to 
accept that the fund’s capital would fluctuate, sometimes dramatically, given the high equity 
share. Indeed, through 2009 and 2010, not only were those losses reversed, but additional 
gains were also made. 
Chart: Changing the regional allocation 
The  investment  strategy  was  further  revised  last  year.  The  conclusion  was  a  clear  step 
towards  a  more  globally  diversified  portfolio.  From  a  considerable  strategic  overweight  in 
                                                
10   The  fund’s  risk-bearing  capacity  is  also  exploited  through  rebalancing,  please  see  NBIM  discussion  
note 1–2012: “Time-varying expected returns and investor heterogeneity: foundations for rebalancing”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
European markets, a larger share of the fund will now be invested in the Americas and Asia. 
At the end of 2012, just short of 30 per cent of the fund was invested in US securities. 
A  key  role  of  the  bond  investments  in  the  fund  is  to  reduce  short-term  fluctuations  in  the 
fund’s  value  during  periods  of  financial  stress.  One  lesson  of  the  financial  crisis  is  that 
government  bonds  issued  by  countries  with  good  debt-servicing  capacity  best fill  this  role. 
The  new  strategic  benchmark  for  fixed  income  investments,  which  was  adopted  in  2012, 
clearly distinguishes between government bonds and corporate bonds. Government bonds 
comprise 70 percent of the bond portfolio. These bonds are now weighted according to the 
size  of  each  country’s  GDP  rather  than  the  size  of  its  debt.  The  strategic  index  for  fixed 
income  investments  has  also  been  simplified  by  removing  certain  bond  classes,  such  as 
mortgage-backed  bonds.  We  have  also  significantly  reduced  the  number  of  bonds  in  the 
fixed income portfolio. 
Several emerging market currencies were also added to our bond portfolio last year, among 
them  the  Mexican  peso  and  South  Korean  won.  These  adjustments  will  provide  a  more 
balanced exposure to global output. 
Two years ago, the fund made its first real estate investments in Europe. We have recently 
begun investing in US real estate. In February, the fund announced a joint venture with the 
TIAA-CREF11, where we invested in five properties on the east coast. One of the properties is 
on  Arch  Street  here  in  Boston.  Direct  real  estate  investments  will  provide  a  fairly  stable, 
inflation-adjusted cash flow. Over time, we aim to invest up to 5 percent of the fund in real 
estate. Investments will be allocated to more countries as we gain experience. 
Chart: Further information 
Regulatory requirements may limit the distribution of certain types of information and must 
always  be  met.  However,  our  aim  is  to  be  as  relevant  and  transparent  as  possible  in  our 
communication. Our  policy  is  to  be  transparent about  our evaluation  of markets.  All  of  the 
fund’s holdings at the end of 2012 are listed in the recently published annual report, as is the 
fund’s voting at 10 000 shareholder meetings last year. 
The fund is a large investor in a macro perspective. At company level, however, we are a 
minority  shareholder.  Strengthening  shareholder  rights  and  promoting  equal  treatment  of 
shareholders are two of our key targets when we work with companies and standard-setting 
authorities.  In  this  regard,  we  are  happy  to  cooperate  with  the  program  on  corporate 
governance at Harvard Law School12. 
Final remarks 
The Norwegian economy has over the past four decades benefitted enormously from its rich 
natural resources. Lessons have been learned, and policy rules have been established for 
the management of our oil and gas reserves. For the moment, the petroleum industry both 
provides exposure to an entire global economy and shields us from the current low growth 
environment across the OECD area. 
However, it is too early to say whether Norway has managed to establish a framework that 
makes the economy robust enough to withstand strong fluctuations in our terms of trade. Our 
present  framework  has  yet  to  be  tested  against  a  large  and  persistent  negative  oil  price 
shock.  I  believe  the  real  test  of  our  framework  will  come  when  the  present  boom  in  the 
petroleum industry – at  some point – is reversed. Norway’s oil and gas resources, though 
                                                
11   Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association – College Retirement Equities Fund. 
12   For  more 
the  Harvard  Law  School  Program  on 
information  on 
http://pii.law.harvard.edu/. 
Institutional 
Investors,  see 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
rich,  will  not  last  forever.  As  in  any  other  country,  emphasis  should  be  given  to  further 
development of human capital as the primary source of long-term prosperity and wealth. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
  10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
