Øystein Olsen: Management of the Government Pension Fund Global 
(GPFG) 
Introductory statement by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of 
Norway), before the Storting’s Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs, Oslo, 
30 April 2013. 
 Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. Charts in pdf 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Chairman  and  thank  you  for  giving  Norges  Bank  the  opportunity 
again  this  year  to  report  on  the  management  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global 
(GPFG). 
Chart: Changing the regional allocation 
The  investment  strategy  of  the  GPFG  builds  on  its  specific  features,  purpose  and  our 
perception of the functioning of financial markets. The GPFG is a large fund and features a 
long investment horizon. The objective of investment management is to preserve the long-
term international purchasing power of the GPFG. 
In 2012, the investment strategy was changed. As a result, investments in emerging markets 
have  increased.  Just  over  10  percent  of  the  overall  portfolio  is  now  invested  in  these 
markets. 
Chart: Increasing investments in real assets 
The allocation to equities was increased to 60 percent between 2007 and 2009. When the 
allocation  to  real  estate  reaches  5  percent  further  ahead,  the  GPFG's  allocation  to  real 
assets will make up two-thirds of the overall portfolio. The long-term expected return on real 
assets is higher than on nominal bonds. The risk is also higher, but the long-term investment 
horizon puts us in a solid position to carry that risk. 
The key to realising the higher return is to adhere to the strategy also in times of heightened 
uncertainty, as we did through the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009. An official framework for 
rebalancing  back  to  a  set  allocation  to  equities  has  now  been  established.  This  will  help 
ensure  that  this  strategy  is  carried  out  during  the  next  period  of  high  volatility  in  financial 
markets. 
Chart: Lower costs 
Management  costs  for  equities  are  higher  than  for  fixed-income  securities.  The  cost  of 
managing many small shareholdings is higher than managing a few large ones, as is the cost 
of managing investments in emerging markets in relation to developed markets. 
Overall management costs as a percentage of the GPFG have nonetheless fallen over time. 
We have exploited its size to realise economies of scale. In the past few years, costs have 
been reduced also in krone terms. This is partly due to reduced use of external managers. 
Costs for external services, such as IT, custodian and settlement services, have also been 
lowered. 
Relative to the size of the GPFG, management costs are modest. Norges Bank continuously 
seeks to achieve efficiency gains without impairing the quality of investment management. In 
2012, management costs came to 0.05 percent of the GPFG. 
Chart: Transparent and professional management 
Norges Bank meets international and national transparency standards relating to investment 
management.  We  have  high  ambitions  with  regard  to  transparency.  Yet,  we  must  weigh 
different  considerations.  In  the  case  of  investments  in  individual  companies,  extensive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
transparency  can  come  into  conflict  with  confidentiality  requirements.  In  order  to  ensure 
confidential communication with the governing bodies of the companies in which we have a 
stake, both parties must be certain that the dialogue is indeed confidential. 
In  2012,  we  expanded  our  collaboration  with  Norwegian  academia.  NBIM  participated  by 
giving  lectures  on  investment  management  at  several  universities  and  other  academic 
institutions. 
Our programme, the Norwegian Finance Initiative, has helped support research in financial 
economics at different levels. This initiative contributes to enhancing the quality of research 
in  financial  economics  among  Norwegian  academic  institutions  and  to  stimulating  public 
debate on the management of the GPFG. This framework for cooperation is also used within 
Norges Bank, both in investment management and the development of strategy. 
Thank  you  for  your  attention.  I  now  give  the  floor  to  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  NBIM, 
Yngve Slyngstad. 
 
 
 
 
 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   3 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
