Lars Rohde: The European crisis and the development of the European 
Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Rohde,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  European 
Affairs Committee’s consultation: “The European crisis and the development of the European 
Union”, former Upper Chamber of the Danish Parliament, Copenhagen, 26 February 2013. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 
The  EU  member  states  have  been  severely  affected  by  the  financial  crisis  and  then  the 
sovereign debt crisis. The recession is now in its fifth year. Many measures have been taken 
to contain the crisis, and more are in the pipeline. 
Being a small, open economy, Denmark is highly vulnerable to developments in the EU. We 
participate in many community efforts, but not in the monetary union. We have opted out, but 
at  the  same  time  the  krone  is  tied  closely  to  the  euro.  The  purpose  of  keeping  the  krone 
stable against the euro is to avoid exchange-rate uncertainty – which is very important to an 
economy  such  as  the  Danish  one,  with  exports  accounting  for  almost  half  of  the  gross 
domestic product. At the same time, inflation and inflation expectations are anchored to an 
area  pursuing  stability-oriented  economic  policies  with  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  fixed-
exchange-rate policy means that fiscal policy is the instrument at our disposal to stabilise the 
economy. This arrangement has served us well for 30 years. 
Denmark’s  economic  policy  enjoys  considerable  credibility  –  also  in  the  financial  markets. 
This is why we have for some time been – and indeed, we are still – seen as a safe haven for 
international investors. This has resulted in historically low interest rates. Despite the most 
recent  increase,  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  deposit  rate  is  still  negative.  The  low  level  of 
interest  rates  has  mitigated  the  real  economic  consequences  of  the  financial  crisis.  But  at 
some point interest rates will normalise. 
The  stability  of  the  anchor  currency  –  i.e.  of  the  euro  area  –  is  important  to  the  Danish 
economy. The political system in a non-euro area EU member state such as Denmark must 
perform a balancing act – how far should we go in terms of participation? This question was 
topical  in  relation  to  the  issue  of  closer  fiscal  cooperation,  as  it  is  in  the  current  process 
towards a banking union. 
In  the  early  1990s,  the European foreign-exchange market  came  under  strong speculative 
pressure and one currency after the other came under attack. The crisis culminated in 1993 
with  speculation  against  the  Exchange-Rate  Mechanism,  ERM,  existing  at  the  time.  Some 
20 years  down  the  line,  the  financial  crisis  and  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  certain  European 
countries  have  once  again  put  the  European  economic  cooperation  under  pressure.  The 
most recent crisis has differed from the situation in the early 1990s when each EU member 
state had its own currency. If national currencies had not been replaced by the euro in 1999, 
we could very well have seen an extensive currency crisis on top of the financial crisis and 
the sovereign debt crisis. For the euro area, the euro has prevented this. The Danish krone, 
on  the  other  hand,  was  hit  by  short-term  currency  unrest  in  the  autumn  of  2008,  as  were 
other small currencies. Subsequently, the sovereign debt crisis has, from time to time, led to 
pressure on the krone, but this has been upward pressure due to large capital inflows. 
A  fixed-exchange-rate  system  is  not  in  itself  an  effective  bulwark  against  irresponsible 
policies. The euro area sovereign debt crisis could very well have taken a far more dramatic 
path, leading to disorderly sovereign defaults, without the variety of pan-European initiatives 
to solve the sovereign debt crisis that were the result of the economic-political cooperation 
between the euro area member states. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The introduction of the euro back at the turn of the millennium caused interest rates to drop 
markedly in many euro area member states, and yield spreads within the euro area were all 
but  eliminated.  But  the  interest-rate  gains  were  not  used  for  consolidation.  Instead,  they 
boosted  domestic  demand.  As  a  result,  competitiveness  was  eroded,  and  these  member 
states  saw  increasing  current-  account  imbalances.  At  the  same  time,  housing  bubbles 
emerged  in  several  member  states,  and  this  later  caused  distress  for  the  banks  that  had 
helped to fund property projects at inflated prices. The euro area systems for monitoring and 
addressing  government  deficits  and  other  macroeconomic  imbalances  proved  to  be 
completely  inadequate.  This  was  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  imbalances  were  allowed  to 
develop – and to become much more serious than they had been ahead of the crisis in the 
early 1990s. Furthermore, risk premiums on the government bonds of these member states 
were  unsustainably  low  for  a  long  period  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  Hence  market 
pressures  for  political  action  were  correspondingly  low.  This  changed  abruptly  when  the 
financial crisis and sovereign debt crisis set in. 
Since many countries had failed to take advantage of the favourable economic climate in the 
early years of this century to consolidate public finances, their position was weak when the 
crisis struck. Still, most countries eased fiscal policy in 2009 as part of concerted European 
efforts  to  offset  the  negative  impact  of  the  crisis  on  growth  and  employment.  This  caused 
further deterioration of public finances, and for several euro area member states it led to an 
outright  sovereign  debt  crisis.  One  reason  was  that  the  banks’  non-  performing  loans 
eventually became a problem for the public sector, thereby weighing down on government 
finances. In many countries, fiscal expansion during the boom immediately before the crisis 
has  now  made  way  for  extensive  consolidation.  In  other  words,  fiscal  policy  has  amplified 
cyclical fluctuations instead of dampening them. 
Therefore, the lesson to us all – from the ERM  crisis in the early 1990s and recent years’ 
financial crisis and sovereign debt crisis – is that it is important to address macroeconomic 
imbalances in time to prevent systemic risk. The financial crisis and the sovereign debt crisis 
revealed a clear need to strengthen political cooperation between euro area member states. 
The  most  recent  crisis  has  exposed  at  least  two  fundamental  weaknesses  in  the  EU’s 
economic cooperation. Firstly, the pressure for budgetary discipline was not strong enough. 
Secondly, the one-sided focus on fiscal policy was too narrow. A comprehensive view of the 
member states’ economic situation is required. It is also evident that price stability alone is 
not sufficient to ensure financial stability. 
In  recent  years,  the  EU  member  states  have  adopted  a  series  of  new  rules  aimed  at 
addressing 
the 
requirements for fiscal discipline. In addition, the EU member states have adopted rules for 
surveillance  of  macroeconomic  imbalances,  under  which  the  European  Commission  is  to 
monitor  whether  a  member  state  is  building  up  excessive  imbalances.  There  is  now  more 
focus on systemic risk, and a European Systemic Risk Board, ESRB, has been set up. In 
Denmark, we have introduced the Systemic Risk Council, whose members were appointed 
last Thursday. 
Although Denmark has, in many ways, navigated the financial crisis better than many other 
countries, we have generally had to learn the same economic policy lessons as others. In 
Denmark, too, fiscal policy in the pre-crisis years reinforced the boom rather than dampening 
it. Among other things, this led to higher wage inflation and weaker competitiveness. As a 
result of the procyclical fiscal policy, the downturn was more severe than it would otherwise 
have been. 
But  the  underlying  fiscal  policy  was  sounder  than  in  the  member  states  now  experiencing 
problems. This is true both in terms of cyclical stabilisation and long-term fiscal sustainability, 
although  we  lost  focus  in  the  pre-crisis  years.  The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from 
developments in the 2000s, not only in Denmark but throughout the EU, is that if fiscal policy 
the  Fiscal  Compact,  which 
these  weaknesses, 
including 
tightens 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is  procyclical  in  a  boom,  it  will  have  to  be  procyclical  also  in  the  subsequent  downturn. 
Obviously, this is not expedient. 
Denmark  has  chosen  to  adopt  the  Fiscal  Compact  as  a  framework  for  future  fiscal  policy. 
This has been reflected in a Budget Act with a more stringent sanctions regime vis-à-vis local 
and  regional  government  –  the  levels  at  which  it  has,  historically,  been  most  difficult  to 
observe budgets and agreements. 
Major  steps  have  already  been  taken  to  strengthen  economic  cooperation  in  the  EU  with 
stronger budgetary discipline and increased macroeconomic surveillance, but all the same it 
is essential that there is still political will to ensure that the policies pursued have a strong 
medium-term  orientation  while  also  dampening,  not  amplifying  cyclical  fluctuations.  It  is 
important to observe the spirit as well as the letter of the common rules. This also applies in 
the event of a future banking union. 
 The financial crisis was succeeded by a sovereign debt crisis in the EU. This has revealed 
close negative interaction between the economy and bank finances in a number of member 
states. 
To prevent the credit lending from collapsing, governments have had to use public funds to 
support  the  banking  sector.  At  the  same  time,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  made  these 
governments  more  dependent  on  the  banks,  which  buy  up  a  large  share  of  the  domestic 
government bonds. 
Fiscal developments have raised concerns about these member states’ ability to continue to 
support the banking sector. This has had a negative impact on the banks’ access to funding 
and reinforced the tendency for banks to reduce their lending. Since lower lending volumes 
may further curb economic activity, the economic challenges become even greater. 
In the short term, the banking union represents an attempt to break the negative interaction 
between governments and banks. The vision behind the banking union is to prevent crises 
like the one seen in recent years and to mitigate the impact if a crisis should, nevertheless, 
arise. The aim is to shield developments in the financial sector from developments in public 
finances in individual member states – and vice versa – and increase financial stability. In the 
longer term, a banking union is to help support financial integration in the EU, and hence the 
single financial market. 
Vulnerable euro area member states are facing major challenges in relation to both public 
finances  and  the  financial  sector.  A  banking  union  does  not  necessarily  address  these 
challenges.  The  reforms  required  in  these  member  states  will  undoubtedly  be  costly  and 
have real economic implications. It is imperative to find a solution to existing challenges in 
vulnerable states and banks so as to bring them back on the right track without undue delay. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  supports  the  overall  vision  for  a  banking  union.  A  banking  union 
makes good sense in an integrated financial market, where financial institutions are free to 
operate across national borders. 
The single market for financial services has contributed to strengthening competition and the 
supply  of  credit,  to  the  benefit  of  both  the  Danish  financial  sector  and  its  customers. 
Integration within the European financial sector increased until 2007, but has since the onset 
of the financial crisis been decreasing. Like the other EU member states, Denmark has an 
interest in a well-functioning single financial market. I see merit in the current discussions on 
the establishment of a banking union as a mechanism for supporting financial integration in 
the EU. 
Developing the individual elements of a banking union will be a huge task. If the vision is to 
be  realised,  the  banking  union  must  comprise  at  least  three  elements:  (1)  a  single 
supervisory mechanism, (2) a single resolution mechanism for failing banks, and (3) a single 
deposit guarantee scheme. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Initially, focus has been on establishing a single supervisory mechanism under the auspices 
of  the  European  Central  Bank  in  order  to  solve  some  of  the  problems  currently  faced  by 
some European banks. The single supervisory  mechanism is primarily  aimed at euro area 
banks,  but  non-euro  area  member  states may  opt  in.  The framework  conditions  will  differ, 
depending  on  whether  the  member  state  in  question  has  adopted  the  euro.  At  present  it 
looks as if non- euro area member states will be able to participate in the single supervisory 
mechanism on an equal footing with euro area member states. This is positive. 
The  set-up  with  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  can  enhance  the  credibility  of  financial 
supervision  in  the  EU,  especially  in  the  euro  area,  and  will  contribute  to  financial  stability, 
which will also be an advantage for the Danish economy – whether or not we decide to join. 
The Commission is expected to table proposals for the remaining elements of the banking 
union  later  this  year.  The  content  is  as  yet  unknown,  and  it  is  difficult  to  predict  the  final 
set-up. 
The distribution of costs is a politically sensitive issue, not least in terms of whether legacy 
assets are to be included in the equation. 
The  establishment  of  a  strong  single  deposit  guarantee  scheme,  and  not  least  a  credible 
single resolution mechanism with bail-in for failing banks, is essential if the EU is to succeed 
in containing the negative contagion from banks to governments in a future banking union. In 
Denmark we already have a credible resolution mechanism, and we have retained our AAA 
rating throughout the crisis. Both have served us well. All the same, it cannot be ruled out 
that Denmark’s independent resolution approach has increased the banks’ funding costs in 
the short term, so it is important to establish a single European framework for resolution of 
banks. 
The Danish banking sector is characterised by substantial cross-border activities among the 
largest  banks.  The  consolidated  assets  of  Danish  banks  amount  to  almost  four  times 
Denmark’s  GDP.  In  addition,  the  ratio  of  the  largest  Danish  bank's  consolidated  assets  to 
GDP  is  among  the  highest  in  the  EU.  Due  to  the  size  of  the  banking  sector  and  the  high 
degree of concentration, a single European insurance scheme, as provided for by a banking 
union,  will,  other  things  being  equal,  be  attractive  from  a  Danish  point  of  view.  After  all, 
insurance schemes work best when many equal policyholders share the burden. 
 Overall,  I  believe  that  it  would  be  an  advantage  for  Denmark  to  participate  in  the  banking 
union  once  the  remaining  two  legs  –  the  deposit  guarantee  scheme  and  the  resolution 
mechanism – are in place. Therefore it is important to remain firmly seated at the negotiation 
table and contribute to ensuring a robust and effective set-up which Denmark may join if we 
choose to do so. 
If a credible framework is established for a banking union, and tax payers will not have to foot 
the bill when banks fail in the future, this will have a stabilising effect, not only within the euro 
area but also in other member states. As I see it, that is in itself a strong argument in favour 
of Danish participation in a banking union. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
