Tiff Macklem: Regearing our economic growth 
Text  of  the  W  Edmund  Clark  Distinguished  Lecture  by  Mr  Tiff  Macklem,  Senior  Deputy 
Governor of the Bank of Canada, at Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, 10 January 2013. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  at  Queen’s.  I  discovered  my  passion  for  economics  and  its 
potential to inform public policy as a Queen’s student. I also developed a passion for a smart 
and attractive Queen’s Commerce student when I was here and we have been married now 
for more than 25 years. Our oldest son is currently a fourth-year Queen’s student – soon to 
be a graduate, I trust. And before all of us, my father went to Queen’s. So Queen’s has long 
played a big role in our family and I always like coming back. 
It is a particular honour to be here to deliver the W. Edmund Clark Distinguished Lecture. Ed 
Clark had an illustrious career with Canada’s federal public service before becoming a leader 
in  the  financial  services  industry.  His  success  in  both  the  public  and  private  sectors,  and 
particularly his contributions to building a stronger Canadian economy, is an inspiration to us 
all. So it is fitting that I will talk today about building on our economic strengths. 
As  you  know  well,  how  you  meet  academic  challenges  depends  a  great  deal  on  your 
preparation, determination and confidence. The same can be said of economic challenges. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  review  how  these  very  qualities  helped  Canada  outpace  other 
major  advanced  economies  through  the  recent  global  recession  and  recovery.  I  will  also 
suggest  that  to  maintain  our  leading  position  we  need  to  build  on  our  strengths,  with 
determination and confidence, and rotate our growth so it is less reliant on credit-financed 
household spending and more geared to exports, investment and innovation. 
I will do this in two parts. I will begin with an 8-minute version – the short story, if you will. 
Then I will use the luxury of time afforded by this lecture to develop the short story in more 
detail and provide supporting facts and analysis along the way. 
The short story 
When you read the international economic and financial news, it is easy to feel queasy. The 
U.S.  economy  is  experiencing  its  weakest  recovery  since  the  Great  Depression  and  must 
now  confront  its  fiscal  realities.  The  euro  area  has  fallen  back  into  recession  and  must 
refound itself. The Japanese economy is floundering. 
By  comparison,  Canada  has  done  well.  We  had  the  shortest  recession  and  the  strongest 
recovery among major advanced economies. Indeed, Canada is unique among this group to 
have regained its pre-recession level of both real GDP and employment (Charts 1 and 2). 
Canada is by itself in an expansion. 
Why have we done so well? 
It would be a conceit to think it is because we’re smarter, better educated, more inventive or 
harder working. The truth is more humbling. 
We had our crises earlier. 
In the 1970s, we lost our monetary anchor, and suffered the harmful consequences of high 
and variable inflation. 
In the mid–1980s, two Canadian banks failed and two more were saved only by merging with 
larger institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In the mid–1990s, contagion from the Mexican peso crisis caused foreign investors to wake 
up to Canada’s precarious fiscal situation, and we suffered our own sovereign debt crisis. 
Where we can take credit is that we learned from our mistakes. In the aftermath of each of 
these crises, we put in place sound policy frameworks. 
In  1991,  Canada  was  the  second  country  in  the  world  to  adopt  an  inflation  target.  The 
subsequent change in the behaviour of inflation was unequivocal. Since the adoption of the 
2 per  cent  target,  inflation  has  averaged  very  close  to  2  per  cent,  and  its  variability,  as 
measured by its standard deviation, has been cut by two-thirds (Chart 3). 
Following the bank failures of the 1980s, the government created a new prudential agency, 
the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI), with a clear mandate and 
the  authority  to  take  necessary  corrective  measures  expeditiously.  Financial  regulatory 
standards  were  raised  above  international  minimums,  and  supervision  and  oversight  were 
strengthened. 
The fiscal transformation that followed our sovereign debt crisis was no less dramatic. After 
allowing  government  debt  relative  to  GDP  to  rise  almost  without  interruption  from  1975  to 
1995,  successive  governments  ran  10  years  of  surpluses,  cutting  the  government 
debt-to-GDP ratio from almost 70 per cent in 1995 to 22 per cent in 2008 (Chart 4). As a 
result, Canada’s net debt relative to GDP went from being the second-highest ratio among 
the G–7 countries in 1995 – second only to Italy – to the lowest today (Chart 5). 
Just as important, we have stuck with the discipline of these foundational policy frameworks 
while continuing to strengthen them, even as our crises have faded into history. These policy 
frameworks  have  served  Canada  well  into  the  new  millennium,  underpinning  almost  two 
decades  of  solid  and  stable  growth.  But  their  full  value  was  revealed  through  the  recent 
global financial crisis. 
In  Canada,  no  banks  failed  or  had  to  be  rescued,  and  our  financial  system  continued  to 
provide credit to households and businesses. So when the Bank of Canada, guided by its 
inflation target, lowered the policy interest rate to near zero and took the unconventional step 
of  making  a  conditional  commitment  to  hold  the  rate  there  for  more  than  a  year,  the 
stimulative  effects  of  monetary  policy  worked  powerfully.1  This  monetary  response  was 
buttressed by a large fiscal stimulus package, including infrastructure spending, tax cuts and 
measures  to  enhance  employment  insurance,  skills  development  and  training.  The 
combination  of  a  financial  sector  that  continued  to  work  and  extraordinary  monetary  and 
fiscal  stimulus  resulted  in  the  smallest  decline  and  by  far  the  most  rapid  recovery  in  final 
domestic demand among major advanced economies (Chart 6). 
Thorough preparation combined with determined action and confident execution worked. 
With the recession behind us, the extraordinary fiscal stimulus has now been unwound. The 
Bank of Canada has moved off its exceptional policy, dropping its conditional commitment 
and raising the policy rate to 1 per cent. But with foreign headwinds in the form of a weak 
global  recovery  and  elevated  uncertainty,  and  a  persistently  strong  Canadian  dollar,  the 
policy rate has remained at 1 per cent even as global financial conditions have improved and 
domestic lending rates have eased to near historic lows. This has provided ongoing support 
to household spending. 
As successful as it has been, this growth model is now reaching its limits. 
Today,  the  balance  sheets  of  households  are  stretched.  After  11  consecutive  years  with 
household  outlays  exceeding  disposable  income,  household  debt  burdens  have  increased 
                                                
1   The Bank of Canada, together with the federal government, also provided exceptional liquidity to the financial 
system so that our sound banks could replace the short-term liquidity and wholesale funding that had dried up 
in the immediate aftermath of the failure of Lehman Brothers. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that  remain  below 
substantially.  Household  debt  as  a  percentage  of  disposable  income  has  risen  by  almost 
60 percentage points to 165 per cent today,2 and Canadians are now more indebted than the 
Americans or the British (Chart 7).3 Housing activity in Canada is at a near record share of 
GDP, and there are indications of overbuilding and overvaluation in some segments of the 
housing  market.  Reflecting  the  strength  in  spending  relative  to  income,  Canada’s  current 
account has been in deficit for the past four years. 
These trends are not sustainable. 
The good news is that there are now signs a gradual correction of these imbalances may be 
under way. It is too early to tell whether it will continue, and there are risks on both sides. The 
correction could turn out to be short lived and the unsustainable trends could continue for a 
time. Or it could accelerate, risking too much adjustment too quickly. A gradual correction is 
desirable to reduce vulnerability and avoid a larger, more abrupt and disruptive correction in 
the future. 
But as desirable as a gradual correction is, something needs to take the place of increasingly 
leveraged household spending or economic growth in Canada will slow. The component of 
demand that has underperformed the most is exports (Chart 8). Indeed, exports are the only 
component  of  GDP 
their  pre-recession  peak.  They  have  also 
underperformed when compared with most other advanced economies (Chart 9). To pick up 
the slack in exports will require investment, which has been the next weakest component of 
GDP. 
What to do? 
First,  learn  from  the  mistakes  of  others  to  ensure  we  are  prepared  for  the  risks  ahead. 
Second,  confront  our  weaknesses  with  clarity  and  determination.  And  third,  have  the 
confidence to build on our strengths. 
We are fortunate to have many: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
If we build on these strengths, there is no reason why we can’t regear our growth and retain 
our pole position among advanced countries. 
That’s the short version. I will now use the rest of this lecture to make this somewhat abstract 
prescription more concrete. 
a well-educated and increasingly efficient labour force; 
privileged global access to capital; 
abundant commodities; 
a resilient financial system; and 
sound fiscal and monetary policy. 
                                                
2   As measured by Statistics Canada, see Chart 10. 
3  
In Chart 7, for the purposes of international comparability, the data for Canada include both households and 
non-profit institutions serving households and the definition of disposable income is adjusted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Two challenges 
Stretched consumers 
Allow  me  to  review  the  financial  situation  of  consumers  in  a  bit  more  depth.  Household 
indebtedness  is  elevated  and  a  range  of  indicators  suggest  that  some  segments  of  the 
housing market exhibit stretched valuations and overbuilding.4  
In  the  last  10  years,  the  pace  of  household  debt  accumulation  has  been  unusually  rapid. 
Household debt relative to disposable income increased about three times faster in the last 
10 years than in the previous decade (Chart 10). The bulk of this rise in debt – 66 per cent, 
or  $636  billion  –  has  been  in  the  form  of  mortgage  debt,  putting  Canadians  in  an 
uncomfortable  neighbourhood  –  between  Spain  and  the  United  States  –  in  the  ranking  of 
household mortgage debt across countries (Chart 11). 
Rising  mortgage  debt  has  fuelled  housing  activity,  including  resales,  renovation  and  new 
home building. Housing activity has been elevated relative to historical norms for close to a 
decade now (Chart 12). After a sharp but brief decline when consumers froze in the darkest 
days of the financial crisis, housing activity rebounded quickly, rising to a near record level in 
2012. The total number of housing units under construction is now  well  above  its average 
relative  to  population  (Chart  13).  This  is  entirely  accounted  for  by  multiple-unit  dwellings 
(which include condominium units). While this may to a degree reflect fundamental factors 
such as a shortage of land for single-family house development in some large metropolitan 
areas, there is also abundant anecdotal evidence that building has been spurred by investor 
demand, and is therefore more susceptible to changes in buyer sentiment. 
The strength in housing activity has also been reflected in rising house prices. Over the past 
decade, the price of the average home has risen from 3.5 times disposable income to more 
than  5  times  (Chart  14),  and  the  house  price-to-rent  ratio  has  increased  from  1.3  to 
2.3 (Chart 15). Both of these measures are now well above their historical averages. 
Restoring  sustainable  levels  of  borrowing  and  housing  activity  is  a  shared  responsibility. 
First, households need to assess their ability to pay year after year, factoring in the reality 
that  borrowing  rates  will  eventually  return  to  more  normal  levels.  Many  households  are 
prudently  responding  by  locking  into  fixed  mortgage  rates.  The  share  of  new  fixed-rate 
mortgages increased from 50 per cent in 2011 to almost 90 per cent last year – a reflection 
of both attractively priced fixed rates and the Bank of Canada’s tightening bias. 
Second, banks and other lenders need to carefully consider risks when they extend loans to 
households. 
Third, the federal government has on four occasions between 2008 and 2012 taken prudent 
and timely measures to support the long-term stability of the housing market by tightening 
the  minimum  standards for government-backed  insured  mortgages.  These  measures  have 
been complemented by OSFI’s new tougher underwriting standards for home-equity loans, 
enhanced  supervisory  scrutiny,  and  requirement  that  banks  meet  the  more  demanding 
Basel III  capital  standards  as  of  January  2013,  well  ahead  of  the  internationally-agreed 
maximum phase-in deadline of 2019. 
The cumulative effect of these measures, together with increased consumer awareness, is 
having an impact. In the past six months, the growth of household credit has continued to 
moderate, with total household credit growth slowing to slightly below 4  per cent in recent 
months (Chart 16). If this is sustained, the ratio of household debt to disposable income can 
be expected to stabilize later this year. 
                                                
4   For a more detailed discussion of the Bank’s current view of household finances and the housing market, see 
the Bank of Canada Financial System Review, (December 2012):19–32. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Housing activity has also moderated recently. Sales of existing houses have softened, falling 
below  their  10-year  average  in  the  third  quarter.  More  recently,  housing  starts  have  also 
fallen  from  very  high  levels,  declining  from  225,000  units  through  much  of  2012  to  about 
200,000  units  in  November  and  December.  Even  with  this  decline,  housing  construction 
remains above demographic demand, which is estimated to be about 185,000 units. Further 
slowing is expected to bring a convergence of housing starts and demographic demand this 
year. 
The growth in house prices has also slowed, although prices are still close to 18 per cent 
higher than the previous peak in August 2008 (Chart 17). 
These  are  encouraging  signs  of  a  stabilization  of  household  imbalances  and  a  more 
sustainable housing market. But after a decade of buildup, it is too early to be sure. 
Lacklustre exports 
Even though desirable, eliminating the household sector’s net financial deficit would leave a 
noticeable  gap  in  the  economy.  The  reduction  of  about  $50  billion  in  annual  household 
spending  could  be  compensated  by  an  additional  4  percentage  points  of  annual  export 
growth. Today, relative to the average recovery path for exports, we are losing $123 billion 
annually  (Chart  18).  In  other  words,  in  order  to  replace  $50  billion  in  credit-financed 
household  spending,  exports  need  to  close  just  two-fifths  of  the  gap  between  the  current 
recovery in exports and the average recovery. This should be doable. 
The underperformance of our exports is due in part to weakness in foreign demand. With the 
United  States  –  our  major  trading  partner  –  experiencing  its  worst  recession  and  weakest 
recovery  since  the Great  Depression,  our  exports fell  sharply  in  2008  and  have  recovered 
only slowly. 
But  a  longer  view  reveals  that  the  global  recession  only  exacerbated  an  already  existing 
trend. 
In the last decade, Canada’s share of the world export market has slipped from about 4.5 per 
cent to about 2.5 per cent and our share of the export market for manufactured goods has 
been cut in half. Even more revealing, our export performance has been the second worst in 
the G–20 (Chart 19). 
Why have we done so badly? 
There are two reinforcing factors – structure and competitiveness. 
Two-thirds of this underperformance reflects who we trade with.5 Almost 85 per cent of our 
exports go to slow growing advanced economies – 74 per cent to the United States alone – 
and  only  9  per  cent  to  fast  growing  emerging-market  economies  (EMEs)  (Chart  20). 
Compared with our peers, Canada’s exposure to emerging markets is low when measured 
as a share of exports (Chart 21). 
The  other  third  reflects  declining  competitiveness.  This  is  manifest  in  our  most  important 
trading  relationship,  where  we  have  lost  considerable  market  share.  From  2000  to  2011, 
China increased its share of U.S. imports from 8 to 18 per cent, surpassing Canada as the 
largest exporter to the United States (Chart 22). Over the same period, Canada’s share of 
U.S. imports fell from almost 20 per cent to less than 15 per cent. Moreover, while the large 
increase in China’s share is affecting other countries, a number of countries, notably Mexico 
and Germany, have fared much better than Canada. 
                                                
5   M. Carney, “Exporting in a Post-Crisis World,” (speech delivered to the Greater Kitchener Waterloo Chamber 
of Commerce, Waterloo, Ontario, 2 April 2012). Also see D. de Munnik, J. Jacob, and W. Sze, “The Evolution 
of Canada’s Global Export Market Share,” Working Paper No. 2012–31, Bank of Canada, October 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
A comparison of the evolution of unit labour costs in Canada and the United States is telling. 
Between 2000 and 2011, the labour cost of producing a unit of output in Canada compared 
with the United States, adjusted for the exchange rate, increased 75 per cent (Chart 23). The 
majority of this loss of competitiveness reflects the appreciation of the Canadian dollar, but 
weak  productivity  growth  in  Canada  relative  to  the  United  States  played  a  significant  role. 
Business sector labour productivity in Canada has grown at an average annual rate of just 
0.8 per cent since the start of 2000, compared with 2.3 per cent in the United States. This 
accounts for about one-third of our lost competitiveness. 
What should Canadian businesses do? 
First, don’t count on a weaker Canadian dollar. Hoping for a weaker Canadian dollar is not a 
business  plan.  A  sustainable  export  strategy  cannot  rely  on  expectations  of  a  more 
favourable  exchange  rate,  since  Canada  is  likely  to  remain  an  attractive  investment 
destination. 
Second, businesses should intensify their efforts to develop new markets for their products in 
fast-growing  EMEs.  This  is  being facilitated  by  a federal  trade  strategy  that  is  increasingly 
EME  focused.  The  Canadian  government  is  currently  negotiating  a  new  trade  agreement 
with India, has struck terms for a new investment agreement with China (the Canada-China 
Foreign  Investment  Promotion  and  Protection  Agreement)  and  is  participating  in  the 
multilateral negotiations of the Trans-Pacific Partnership. These are important initiatives – not 
just for our trade with EMEs, which now account for one-half of all global import growth – but 
also because they are essential to secure our positions in global supply chains. 
Third, improve productivity. To do that, we need to build on our strengths. 
Building on our strengths 
While  our  current  growth  model  is  reaching  its  limits,  Canada  has  far  from  exhausted  its 
opportunities.  Quite  the  reverse  –  our  strengths  are  many.  Regearing  requires  building  on 
them  with  determination,  and  harnessing their  complementarity  with  confidence. I  will  start 
with  our  factors  of  production  (labour,  capital  and  commodities),  before  moving  to  critical 
enablers (our financial system and policy frameworks). 
A well-educated and flexible labour force 
The  most  important  factor  of  production  and  our  biggest  strength  is  our  labour  force. 
Canadian workers are well educated, and our labour market is increasingly flexible. 
High-school  completion  in  Canada  is  near  universal,  and  Canadian  students  perform  well 
relative to their peers, based on results of international assessments. Among the members of 
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), we have the highest 
level of tertiary education (including universities, colleges and polytechnics). Canada ranks 
well  in  the  sciences,  technology,  engineering  and  maths,  fields  where  the  proportion  of 
tertiary graduates exceeds the OECD average. We have strong research capacity centred on 
our universities, as measured by per capita academic of publications, which are well above 
the OECD average. And our spending on research and development (R&D) by institutions of 
higher education in proportion to GDP is the fifth highest in the OECD.6  
Over the past several decades, the efficiency of our labour market in matching workers and 
jobs  has  also  improved  dramatically.  The  Beveridge  curve  measures  how  well  labour 
markets  match  workers  looking  for  jobs  with  job  vacancies  (Chart  24).  The  closer  the 
Beveridge curve is to its origin (zero vacancies and unemployment), the more efficient the 
labour  market.  As  shown,  the  curve  in  the  1980s  (blue  line)  has  a  higher  level  of 
                                                
6   Education at a Glance 2012, OECD Indicators. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
unemployment for a given level of vacancies than the curve in the 1990s and early 2000s 
(red line).7  
Part of that improvement in efficiency is due to the increasing mobility of Canadian workers. 
Interprovincial  migration  has  long  been  an  important  adjustment  mechanism  for  the 
Canadian  economy.  Recent  Bank  research  suggests  that  long  travel  distances  across 
Canada may not be as great a barrier to labour mobility as they once were. Over the past 
decade  and  a  half,  people  have  moved  from regions  with  excess  labour  to  those  with  the 
tightest  labour  markets,  leading  to  the  convergence  of  unemployment,  participation  and 
employment  rates.  By  2011,  the  gap,  or  disparity  in  employment  rates  across  the 
10 provinces,  was  at  its  lowest  level  and  was  not  very  different  from  the  dispersion  of 
employment rates across the United States (Chart 25).8  
In a geographically large, knowledge-based economy, these are important advantages. To 
regear, we need to build on them. 
While we are leading the world in tertiary educational attainment, we lag in the attainment of 
more  advanced  degrees  and  business  degrees.  Among  OECD  countries,  we  have  the 
highest  attainment  of  college  degrees.  For  university  degrees,  we  are  only  slightly  above 
average,  and  for  master’s  and  PhD  degrees,  we  are  in  the  bottom  third.9  In  the  field  of 
business  education,  our  proportion  of  graduates  is  slightly  below  the  OECD  average  and 
25 per cent below the United States. 
These trends in educational attainment are significant for at least two reasons. 
First, they show up in our work force. Compared with U.S. firms, Canadian firms lag in the 
employment  of  workers  with  advanced  degrees  and  in  the  educational  attainment  of  their 
managers. Canadian firms hire fewer employees with PhDs and other postgraduate degrees, 
especially in the sciences. Only one-third of managers in Canada have a university degree, 
compared with almost half of American managers.10  
Second,  a  significant  body  of  research  suggests  that  education  improves  the  quality  of 
management, and the quality of management influences investment in new technologies, in 
the introduction of new processes, and in the development of new markets. Highly educated 
individuals are much more likely to be owners of high-growth innovative firms. 
This all points to a need for more Canadian students to invest further in their education and 
for Canadian firms to put more emphasis on skills. 
There  is  also  scope  to  further  improve  the  matching  of  workers  and  jobs.  There  is  some 
evidence of a mismatch between the supply of graduates in certain fields and the needs of 
employers. In particular, Canada has a disproportionately large share of university graduates 
in  the  bottom-earning  quartile  relative  to  other  OECD  countries.  In  addition,  Canada’s 
employment rate for university graduates is below the OECD average. This underscores the 
importance  of the  dialogue  between  industry,  labour  and  educational  institutions to  ensure 
that workers have the skills employers are seeking. It also points to the need to continue to 
eliminate differences in occupational licensing and other barriers to inter-provincial migration. 
                                                
7   Data on vacancies end in 2003. 
8   D.  Amirault,  D.  de  Munnik  and  S.  Miller,  “What  Drags  and  Drives  Mobility:  Explaining  Canada’s  Aggregate 
Migration Patterns,” Working Paper No. 2012–28, Bank of Canada, 2012. 
9   OECD Economic Surveys, Canada June 2012. 
10   Institute  for  Competitiveness  and  Prosperity,  “Management  Matters,”  Working  Paper  No.  12,  March  2009; 
N. Bloom,  “Management  and  Productivity  in  Canada:  What  Does  the  Evidence  Say?”  Industry  Canada, 
Working Paper No. 2011–05. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Privileged global access to capital 
Access to capital has rarely, if ever, been better in Canada, both on an absolute scale and 
relative to our competitors. 
Corporate bond yields in Canada are at record lows (Chart 26). Our surveys of banks and 
businesses suggest that business-lending conditions have continued to ease almost without 
interruption since late 2009 (Chart 27). 
Our  economic  advantages  have  made  Canada  an  attractive  investment  destination  and  a 
rare safe haven in a risky world. This status is reflected in the behaviour of Canadian 10-year 
yields, which tend to decline at the same time as risky assets such as global equity prices. 
The correlation suggests that money flows into Canadian bonds in response to increases in 
perceived risk. Indeed, by this measure, Canada is viewed as among the safest of havens 
(Chart 28). 
This privileged global access to capital is a critical advantage. We need to use it wisely to 
invest in productive capital and research and development (R&D) rather than in houses. 
There is a large empirical literature that finds two of the best predictors of productivity growth 
are 
information  and 
communication technology (ICT), and investment in R&D. Canada is lagging in both. 
Between  1987  and  2010,  Canadian  investment  per  worker  in  M&E  and  ICT  averaged 
74 per cent and 57 per cent, respectively, of that invested in the United States. By 2010, on 
average, Canadian workers had only about half as much M&E and ICT capital stock to work 
with as their U.S. counterparts. 
While public support for R&D in Canada is strong, business investment in R&D is below the 
OECD average and half the rate in the United States. 
Investment in Canada in recent years has been solid, but not spectacular. Despite record-low 
interest rates, historically low corporate leverage and a strong Canadian dollar, the recovery 
in investment remains below the average cycle (Chart 29). We need to invest more in M&E, 
and we need to get more out of these investments with greater spending on organizational 
capital and process improvement. To regear, we must do better than solid. 
in  machinery  and  equipment 
(M&E),  particularly 
investment 
Abundant commodities 
Abundant  commodities  have  long  played  a  critical  role  in  our  economic  development  but 
dramatic changes underway in the structure of the global economy have made commodities 
an even greater advantage. 
While commodity prices have fallen 19 per cent since their peak in April of last year, they 
remain about 20 per cent above their longer-term averages in real terms (Chart 30). In fact, 
real prices for energy and metals have been well above their long-term averages for more 
than  eight  years  and  real  food  prices  are  now  at  their  highest  level  in  36  years.  While 
commodity prices will continue to be volatile, this trend strength can be expected to persist. 
Underpinning  this  commodity  super  cycle  is  a  sustained  increase  in  demand  from  rapidly 
growing emerging markets, particularly China and India. Together, they account for most of 
the increase in global demand for commodities in the last five years. For example, increases 
in Chinese demand have played an important role in the rise of oil prices seen since 2002 
(Chart  31).  With  convergence  to  Western  levels  of  consumption  still  a  long  way  off,  the 
demand  for  commodities  can  be  expected  to  remain  robust  and  prices  elevated  for  some 
time. 
In Canada, the impact of rising commodity prices has been reinforced by strong growth in the 
supply  of  some  commodities.  Oil  is  now  our  most  important  commodity  by  value,  with  its 
share of total Canadian commodity production rising over the past 15 years from 18 per cent 
to 46 per cent (Chart 32). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Our challenge is to develop our commodities intelligently and sustainably and to ensure that 
the  whole  country  benefits.  Infrastructure  investments  in  pipelines  and  refineries  to  get 
Western  heavy  oil,  which  is  trading  $40  below  the  world  price,  to  Central  Canada  and  to 
foreign  markets  would  bring  more  of  the  benefits  of  the  commodity  boom  to  more  of  the 
country. Increased interprovincial trade in goods and services provides another channel to 
capture more of the value added from energy, mining and agriculture for all of Canada. This 
is already happening. For most provinces, trade inside Canada has continued to grow from 
2007  to  2011,  offsetting  all  or  some  of  the  weakness  in  international  trade  over  the  same 
period (Chart 33). 
Resilient financial system 
The financial system is a critical enabler, channelling savings to productive investments and 
helping firms and households to manage risks. 
Our banks withstood the 2008 financial crisis and are considerably stronger today than they 
were then. They have substantially lengthened liquidity horizons. They have increased their 
common  equity  capital  by  77  per  cent,  or  $72  billion,  since  the  end  of  2007.  And,  as  of 
10 days ago, Canadian banks met the new Basel III capital requirements, well ahead of the 
maximum  phase-in  period  that  extends  to  2019.  Businesses  can  be  confident  that  bank 
funding will remain available. 
Core funding markets are also being strengthened so that market-based finance is a resilient 
source of diversification and innovation in funding markets, not instability. Last February, the 
Canadian Derivatives Clearing Corporation launched a new central counterparty service for 
repo transactions. Canada is on track to meet the G–20 commitments regarding the clearing 
of over-the-counter derivatives. In this regard, in October, Canadian authorities announced 
that market participants will be able to clear standardized over-the-counter derivatives using 
any  central  counterparty  recognized  by  Canadian  authorities,  including  global  central 
counterparties. 
Our  priority  is  to  be  among the  leaders  in  adopting  new,  stronger global  standards  and to 
encourage  others  to  do  the  same  to  maintain  an  open  and  competitive  global  financial 
system. 
Sound fiscal and monetary policy 
Thanks  to  our  sound  fiscal  policy,  Canada  is  among  a  select  and  dwindling  group  of 
countries  with  a risk-free  rate. This  is  underpinning  our  privileged  access  to global  capital. 
Canada’s  competitive  position  is  improving  as  other  countries  must  increase  taxes  to 
address fiscal imperatives. And while returning to budget balance in Canada will require a 
determined effort, it pales in comparison to the scale and duration of the adjustment needed 
in  the  United  States.  There  are  very  real  benefits  to  Canada’s  record  of  sound  fiscal 
management. 
Finally, monetary policy. What can it do? 
Canadians can remain confident that inflation will remain low, stable and predictable. After 
more  than  20  years  of  low  inflation,  the  consequences  of  high  and  variable  inflation  are 
fading  in  the collective  memory  of  Canadians, making  it  easy  to  discount  the  value  of  this 
commitment. That would be a mistake. 
Low  and  stable  inflation  has  allowed  consumers  and  businesses to manage their finances 
with greater certainty about the future purchasing power of their savings and income. Interest 
rates have also been lower and less variable in both nominal and real terms across a range 
of maturities. By working to stabilize inflation, monetary policy has helped to encourage more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
stable  economic  growth,  lower  and  less  variable  unemployment,  and  greater  efficiency  in 
financial markets.11  
Maintaining low and stable inflation is the primary focus of monetary policy, but it is not the 
singular focus. Consistent with our mandate to “promote the economic and financial welfare 
of  Canadians,”  our  flexible  inflation-targeting  framework  requires  that  we  consider  the 
consequences  for  volatility  in  output,  employment  and  financial  markets  when  determining 
the optimal path and horizon over which to return inflation to target. In practice, the variation 
in that optimal path has resulted in an inflation-target horizon as short as two quarters and as 
long as 11 quarters since the Bank began publishing its projections in 1998.12  
This  flexibility  is  enhanced  by  the  credibility  of  Canada’s  monetary  policy.  Inflation 
expectations are well anchored at the 2 per cent target. But this flexibility is also an asset that 
must be used with care. Credibility is hard to earn and easy to lose. 
While the crisis of 2008 re-affirmed the value of our flexible inflation-targeting framework, it 
was  also  a  powerful  reminder  that  price  and  financial  stability  are  inextricably  linked,  and 
pursuing the first without due regard to the second risks achieving neither. The primary tools 
to  deal  with  financial  stability  are  micro-  and  macroprudential  regulation  and  supervision. 
However, it may be appropriate in some circumstances for monetary policy to complement 
macroprudential policy and contribute to financial stability directly. 
There can be tension between price and financial stability over the typical monetary policy 
time  frame  because  the  consequences  of  financial  excesses  may  be  felt  over  a  longer 
horizon than other economic disturbances. In current circumstances, the Bank may want to 
set interest rates higher than would otherwise be warranted to bring inflation back to target 
within the typical six- to eight-quarter time frame. In particular, the Bank has indicated that 
the evolution of household imbalances may be a factor affecting the timing and degree of any 
withdrawal  of  monetary  stimulus.  If  the  Bank  were  to  lean  against  such  imbalances,  we 
would clearly say we are doing so, and indicate how much longer we expect it would take for 
inflation to return to the 2 per cent target. 
For now, signs indicate that the pace of household-debt accumulation is moderating, but, as I 
have stressed already, it is too early to tell if this will be sustained. 
Conclusion 
It is time to wrap up. 
I  will  conclude  with  a  brief  comment  on  current  economic  developments.  As  I  mentioned 
earlier,  housing  activity  is  beginning  to  decline  broadly  in  line  with  our  expectations. 
Canadian exports are expected to add to GDP growth, but continue to be restrained by weak 
foreign  demand  and  ongoing  competitiveness  challenges.  Economic  activity  in  the  third 
quarter of last year was weak owing in part to transitory disruptions in the energy sector. We 
continue to expect economic activity to pick up through 2013, but near-term momentum now 
appears to be slightly softer than previously anticipated. These and other developments will 
all  be  taken  into  consideration  as  we  revise  our  economic  projections,  to  be  published  on 
January 23 with the next interest rate decision. 
The strength and durability of the pick-up in growth through 2013 and beyond  will depend 
critically  on  how  successful  we  are  in  regearing  our  growth  to  exports,  investment  and 
innovation. We are well prepared. We have a myriad of strengths. If we build on these with 
                                                
11   T.  Macklem,  “A  Measure  of  Work”  (speech  to  the  Winnipeg  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Winnipeg,  4  October 
2012). 
12   Bank of Canada, “Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information – November 2011.” 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
determination and confidence, there is no reason why we cannot continue to outperform our 
peers to the benefit of all Canadians. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   4 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
