Erkki Liikanen: Banking structure and monetary policy – what have we 
learned in the last 20 years? 
Presentation  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland  and  Chairman  of  the 
Highlevel Expert Group on the structure of the EU banking sector, at the conference “Twenty 
years  of  transition  –  experiences  and  challenges”,  arranged  by  the  National  Bank  of 
Slovakia, Bratislava, 3 May 2013. 
 How is today’s perspective on monetary policy different from what prevailed 20 years ago?  
Twenty years ago, the world of today was being formed in many ways.  
1993 was the year when the Economic and Monetary Union project was becoming political 
reality: the Maastricht treaty had been signed and was in the process of being ratified.  
It  was  also  the  time  when  the  mainstream  approach  to  monetary  policy  was  beginning  to 
converge  to  the flexible  inflation targeting framework.  A  number  of  countries  had  then  just 
adopted an explicit inflation targeting strategy. 
In the sphere of banking regulation, too, a new era was beginning. A significant reorientation 
was going on, away from regulating the conduct of banks and towards the new risk-based 
approach. The regulatory trend, based on increased freedom for banks but subject to risk-
based capital requirements, would continue all the way to the eruption of the financial crisis 
in 2008. 
In the EU, the second banking directive took effect from the beginning of 1993, creating a 
single  market  in  banking.  The  directive  sought  to  prevent  discrimination  and  to  increase 
efficiency  through  competition.  There  was  discussion  on  the  implications  of  this  for 
supervision,  but  little  action.  So,  while  European  banking  markets  were  being  integrated, 
financial supervision remained a national competence.  
In  the  U.S.,  deregulation  was  also  moving  forward.  For  instance  the  Glass-Steagall  Act, 
separating banking from securities and insurance, was under growing criticism and would be 
ultimately  repealed  in  1995.  One  reason  for  the  dissatisfaction  with  the  Glass-Steagall 
system in the US was competition from European banks which were less restricted in what 
they could do.  
Twenty  years  ago,  the  striking  improvement  in  macroeconomic  performance,  later  named 
“the great moderation” by chairman Bernanke, was spreading to the whole developed world. 
The  almost  surprising success  of  monetary  policy  in  improving  price  stability  and  reducing 
fluctuations in economic activity,  while also keeping interest rates at historically low levels, 
was interpreted as a major victory for the art of economic policy making. 
Now we know that there was trouble brewing under the surface. The underpinnings of global 
financial stability were becoming weaker. Global indebtedness increased, fuelled by current 
account balances and the “deepening” of international financial markets (read: recycling the 
same funds several times over). 
The decline of inflation was not only due to monetary policy, but also the avalanche of cheap 
consumer goods from the emerging economies such as China contributed to it.  
For  banks, the  new  financial  environment  was  characterized  by  low  interest rates  and  low 
perceived risks. It also turned out that the new risk-based capital requirements allowed the 
banks to expand their balance sheets enormously  without increasing their equity capital in 
the same proportion.  
So,  gradually  the  large  banking  groups  started  to  increase  their  trading  portfolios.  This 
development happened in a gradual fashion in the 1990’s but accelerated dramatically from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
about  2004.  Banks redirected their  business focus from  interest margins  to fee-based  and 
trading activities. Universal banking, as it had been known in Europe, started to change. The 
asset mix of the largest banks changed so that securities portfolios activities grew more and 
more important. 
Only now, from the perspective given by the worst financial crisis since the Second World 
War,  do  we  see  clearly  the  fragility  and  weakness  of  the  regulatory  arrangements  which 
came into force in the 1990s. From today’s point of view, they performed well only as long as 
no  major  systemic risks  materialized.  Even  worse, they  allowed  risks  to  accumulate  in the 
financial system which were only waiting to be realized.  
Then  came  2007  and  the  collapse  of  the  US  property  market;  2008  and  the  collapse  of 
interbank  money  markets  following  the  Lehman  Brothers  crisis;  and  2009  with  The  Great 
Recession. The painful process of competitive deleveraging started.  
The reassessment  of  economic  policies followed  in  the  last two  decades  has  also  started. 
Especially financial regulation has been reconsidered and is being strengthened. We need to 
think of monetary policy, too, especially in its connection to financial stability.  
Monetary policy and financial stability 
There  is  a  common  dictum  that  a  stable  financial  system  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
successful monetary policy, and that price stability in turn creates the best preconditions for 
financial stability.  
I agree. Still, the experience of this crisis has thought us a lot more. 
First of all, we now know that price stability does not by itself guarantee financial stability. 
Risks can accumulate in the banking system even if monetary policy succeeds in maintaining 
price stability and controlling inflationary expectations really well.  
Second, we also know that central banks can maintain an admirable degree of price stability 
even when financial stability is under a lot of strain. Do these two points mean that financial 
stability and monetary policy are not connected after all? No. They are very closely related. 
Independence of monetary policy 
One of the lasting lessons learned in the last decades is the value of the independence of 
monetary  policy.  The  independence  of  central  banks  has  been  essential  keeping  inflation 
expectations as well anchored as they have been in this crisis despite all the turmoil in the 
financial  markets.  Independence  has  also  made  it  easier  for  central  banks  to  act  quickly 
when it has been necessary in order to maintain financial stability.  
It  is  especially  important  to  avoid  two  threats  to  independence:  fiscal  dominance  and 
financial dominance.  
Fiscal dominance is the older concept of the two. It would arise if the government financing 
constraint  would  become  an  overriding  influence  on  monetary  policy.  The  idea  of  fiscal 
dominance  was  formalized  by  Tom  Sargent  and  Neil  Wallace  in  1981,  but  of  course  the 
worry that deficit financing may cause inflation has much longer roots in monetary thought.1  
The  idea  that  tight  monetary  policy  may  become  impossible  without  accompanying  fiscal 
adjustment was also well understood when the blueprints for the EMU were being prepared. 
This is why the Maastricht treaty had its fiscal policy clauses and also why the Stability and 
Growth  Pact  was  concluded.  Also  the  prohibition  of  direct  central  bank  credit  to  the 
                                                
1   Sargent,  T.J.,  and  Wallace,  N.:  Some  unpleasant  monetarist  arithmetic.  The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 1981. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
government and the institutional independence of the central banks are in effect protections 
against fiscal dominance. 
Now  we  know,  of  course,  that  the  fiscal  framework  as  put  in  place  before  the  start  of  the 
EMU was not strong enough to prevent fiscal problems from emerging. Some have argued 
that fiscal dominance has taken hold in the in the big industrialized countries during the crisis 
when  the  central  banks  have  used  government  bond  purchases  in  order  to  stabilize  the 
markets  (as  the  ECB)  or  to  produce  additional  monetary  stimulus  when  the  interest  rate 
instrument has already been used to the maximum (like the Federal Reserve and the Bank of 
Japan).  
As to the euro area, for me there is now no evidence of fiscal dominance. Fiscal dominance 
implies  that  monetary  policy  would  break  its  price  stability  objective  for  the  sake  of 
maintaining the solvency of the government sector. This is not the case. Price stability has 
not and will not be abandoned.  
We  have  well  known  fiscal  problems  in  some  of  the  euro  area  countries.  Still,  the  ECB’s 
ability to go on maintaining price stability has not been weakened. In particular the inflation 
expectations,  which  are  the  most  essential  indicators  of  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy, 
have remained well in line with the price stability objective. 
The parallel idea of financial dominance is more recent than fiscal dominance.2 Financial 
dominance refers to the possibility that the condition of the banking system could become a 
constraint, or dominant influence, on monetary policy, effectively forcing the central bank to 
pursue second- or third-best monetary policies in order to maintain financial stability. 
Is the spill-over from financial instability to monetary policy a realistic threat? Can financial 
stability considerations lead the central banks to tolerate too high inflation, just to keep the 
banking sector afloat?  
In principle it is easy to see why it could be. One can imagine a central bank which would 
have to tighten its monetary policy for price stability reasons, but is prevented from doing so 
for the fear that the value of the assets of the banking system would decrease and a financial 
crisis could ensue.  
Episodes which fit the description of financial dominance have been observed in emerging 
economies after some banking crises in the past. 
But looking at recent experience, this has not been the case in the developed economies. 
The bust of the credit boom has not led monetary policy to tolerate a higher-than-mandated 
rate  of  inflation.  Instead,  in  the  large  developed  economies  at  least,  the  bursting  of  the 
bubble has coincided with a sudden contraction of private demand and a deep recession.  
The  negative  effect  of  the  bust  on  economic  activity  has  actually  reduced  inflationary 
pressures  and  in  some  cases  (such  as  in  Japan  in  the  1990’s)  created  a  real  danger  of 
deflation.  The  main  problem  has  then  become  how  to  prevent  the  credit  contraction  from 
starting  a  deflationary  spiral.  In  such  conditions,  the  same  monetary  policy  will  then  both 
ease the strain on the banking sector and support price stability. 
This observation does not mean that financial instability would not pose a serious challenge 
to  monetary  policy.  On  the  contrary,  the  downward  impact  of  a  bust,  if  it  is  large,  may  be 
more difficult to control than the preceding period of credit expansion.  
                                                
2   An early exposition of financial dominance is in Fraga, A., Goldfajn, I., and Minella, A.: Inflation Targeting in 
Emerging Market Economies. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2003. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
There was a famous discussion on how monetary policy should relate to asset prices in the 
Jackson Hole conference of 2007, where Rick Mishkin introduced the topic.3 At that time, the 
prevalent  thinking  in  central  banking  circles  was  what  professor  Issing  later  called  “the 
Jackson  Hole  consensus”, meaning  that  it  is  better for monetary  policy  only  to  “clean”  (up 
afterwards) than to “lean” (against the wind). After the hard lessons we learned over the last 
five  years  the  case  for  benign  neglect  of  asset  booms  and  only  picking  up  the  pieces 
afterwards is not so strong any more. 
The crisis experience supports rather the idea that financial excesses are better prevented 
as they happen than only managed after they have caused a recession. This would be the 
best  way  to  prevent  “downward  financial  dominance”  which  could  arise  if  monetary  policy 
could not effectively counteract credit contraction.  
Unconventional tools and the independence of monetary policy 
Recent experience shows that the central banks’ box of potential tools is actually very deep, 
and if it has become necessary to utilize unconventional tools, as in the present crisis, these 
new tools have been developed and deployed.  
In the case of the ECB, the new tools have included the transition to full allotment auctions, 
the  long  term  refinance  operations  up  to  three  years,  widening  of  the  scope  of  eligible 
collateral, and the various bond purchase programmes. The most recent of these is the OMT 
programme announced last summer but not yet commenced in practice.  
The development of new tools has been justified. The slip of the depressed economies to 
dangerous  deflation  has  been  averted,  and  the  debt  and  banking  problems  have  not 
developed into systemic financial meltdowns in the affected countries.  
We have seen that central banks can pursue successful price stability policy also under very 
difficult conditions. The events around the world since the collapse of Lehman Brothers are 
evidence of that. Deflation has been avoided despite a severe recession in many countries.  
However, there are also certain problems with relying on the enlarged toolkit of the central 
banks. 
The ability to act in crisis has led to the central banks being even called “the only game in 
town”.  We  should  resist  this  idea  and  beware  of  the  danger  that  problems  which  are 
fundamentally  political  could  be  pushed 
to  solve.  A  division  of 
responsibilities between appointed officials and elected politicians should be preserved. 
Monetary policy cannot administer the needed structural transformation in the real sector of 
the economy or solve excessive deficit problems of governments. 
There are situations where the central banks just have to act and do their best to stabilize the 
economy, even if they would have to use tools which go beyond just adjusting the short rate 
of interest or the aggregate liquidity of the banking system. The present financial crisis has 
constituted one such situation.  
Avoiding the busts which seem to follow credit booms and periods of “financial exuberance” 
would  make  the  tasks  of  monetary  policy  much  easier  and  protect  the  independence  of 
central banks.  
But  there  are  also  difficulties  with  the  leaning  against  the  wind.  One  has  to  do  with  the 
problem  of  detecting  the  credit  cycle  in  time,  and  correctly  timing  the  monetary  policy 
response. Another problem is that price stability might get less attention. To mitigate these 
to  central  banks 
                                                
3   Mishkin, Frederick: Housing and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism. In: Housing, Housing Finance and 
Monetary Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2008 (Proceedings of the Jackson Hole Symposium 
of 2007). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
problems, something else besides more vigilant interest rate policy is needed to prevent low 
and stable interest rates from leading to excesses in banks and financial markets.  
One  development  can  be  the  development  of  macro-prudential  instruments  which  are 
designed to improve the stability of the financial system as a whole. The major work in this 
field was done by the de Larosière group. Otmar Issing was a member of the group. 
Especially interesting are those macro-prudential instruments which have a time dimension 
so that they can be adjusted according to the changing situation in the credit markets. Such 
instruments  include,  in  particular,  the  countercyclical  capital  requirements,  as  well  as  the 
adjustable  restrictions  on  Loan-to-Value  ratios.  The  CRD  IV  directive  will  make  the  former 
instrument  obligatory  in  the  EU  countries;  implementation  of  the  latter  is  left  to  national 
discretion.  
Now  it  is  very  important  to  establish  an  effective  toolkit  for  both  European  and  national 
authorities. We must also create institutional conditions which do not prevent these tools to 
be used when needed. Therefore, we need clear decision making competences at all levels. 
The connection between macro-prudential policy and its time dimension with monetary policy 
is so intimate that central banks must be closely involved in macro-prudential analysis and 
decision making.  
Macro-prudential policy is important, but it needs to be supported by structural reforms which 
would make the banking system more resilient, and - I emphasise - less prone to unstable 
behaviour. 
The Structural reform proposals  
In order to prevent the present crisis from being ever repeated, governments and authorities 
have  started  a  large-scale  overhaul  of  financial  regulation.  The  regulatory  agenda  can  be 
broadly divided into the following areas: 
• 
• 
• 
Strengthening of the prudential regulation of solvency and liquidity 
Improving the institutional basis for supervision and crisis management  
Introduction of macro-prudential instruments to prevent systemic risks in the banking 
system and financial markets 
Regulating the structure of the banking sector 
• 
The structural reform proposals which appear as the last item on this list aim to separate the 
riskiest  securities  and  derivatives  business  from  the  deposit  banking  activities.  This  is  the 
essential  content  of  the  proposals  by  the  EU  High  Level  Expert  Group,  which  I  chaired, 
published last autumn. It is also at the core of the Volcker rule which is being implemented in 
the  US,  and  the  Vickers  proposal  in  the  UK.  The  current  legislative  proposals  which  are 
underway in France and Germany are also in the same vein. 
A  particular  concern  of  these  proposals  has  been  to  limit  the  extent  of  explicit  or  implicit 
public  guarantees,  so  that  they  would  not  induce  additional  risk  taking.  This  kind  of 
competitive  distortion  could  result  in  securities  trading  getting  concentrated  in  the  largest 
deposit  banks,  and  these  deposit  banks  becoming  enormous  risk  concentrations  built  on 
implicit  or  even  explicit  public  guarantees.  Separation  proposals  try  to  isolate  securities 
business  from  the  sources  of  this  distortion  and  reduce  the  incentives  to  excessive  risk-
taking and risk concentration.  
In must be emphasized that the structural reform we proposed is not a cure-all but should be 
seen as a part of a comprehensive regulatory agenda which is already moving forward. This 
includes  better  solvency  and  liquidity  rules.  Also,  the  EU  will  finally  get  supervision  and 
resolution frameworks at the union level. The different components of the current regulatory 
agenda complement and support each other.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In  this  European  context,  the  structure  and  stability  of  the  banking  sector  is  of  vital 
importance to the economy. It is imperative to improve its resiliency.  
The High Level Expert Group report contains five main recommendations on how to reform 
the banking sector.4 I will just refer to three of them here:  
• 
The  first  is  to  separate  any  significant  proprietary  trading  in  securities  and 
derivatives from deposit banks. These activities could be carried out in a separately 
capitalized and funded subsidiary, a trading entity, which could belong to the same 
banking  group  as  the  deposit  bank.  We  proposed  that  also  market  making  be 
allocated to the trading subsidiary in order to prevent the use of trading inventory to 
circumvent the prohibition on proprietary trading. 
The  use  of trading  subsidiaries  would  allow  the  banking groups  to  offer “one-stop 
banking” to their clients, but without the possibility of funding trading activities with 
insured retail deposits. Financial linkages between the deposit bank and the trading 
unit would have to be restricted in accordance to normal large exposure rules.  
Another  of  our  proposals  is  to  develop  specific,  designated  bail-in  instruments  to 
improve  the  loss  absorbency  of  banks.  A  requirement  to  issue  such  bail-in  debt 
would help ensure the participation of investors to the recapitalization of a bank if 
this should become necessary. Such designated bail-in instruments would clarify the 
hierarchy of debt commitments and allow investors to predict the eventual treatment 
of the respective instruments in case of recapitalization or resolution. 
The group also proposed that the capital requirements on trading assets and real 
estate related loans be reviewed. Both of these asset categories came to have very 
low  risk  weights  in  the  Basel  II  regime,  mostly  because  the  way  internal  models 
were applied.  
   Why banking structure matters for monetary policy 
Let me recapitulate my main points. 
First,  for  monetary  policy,  financial  stability  is  very  important.  While  monetary  policy  has 
proven to be able to pursue price stability even under rather strained financial conditions, the 
central banks are not able to insulate the real economy completely from the after-effects of 
financial  crises.  A  more  stable  banking  sector  which  is  less  prone  to  crisis  will  reduce  the 
likelihood of crises and therefore protect the balance sheets of the central bank from financial 
risks and thereby protect its independence and credibility. 
Second,  the  most  important  part  of  stability  policy  is  crisis  prevention.  Improving  loss 
absorbency of banks and the crisis management powers of the authorities are necessary, but 
it is even more important to make sure that excessive growth of credit and indebtedness can 
be  better  controlled  in  the  future.  In  this  way,  credit  crunches  and  banking  crises  can  be 
made less likely – and milder, should they happen.  
Third,  financial  stability  would  benefit  from  structural  reform  of  the  banking  system.  By 
separating the most risky securities and derivative activities from deposit banking, the spill 
over  from  deposit  protection  to  speculative  risk  taking  would  be  prevented.  This  would 
reduce the distorted incentives to expand trading activities and concentrate risks in deposit 
banks because of their privileged position in the deposit market.  
Finally, the structural reform of banking is a complement, not a substitute for other regulatory 
improvements.  For  central  banks,  the  development  of  macro-prudential  policies  and 
                                                
4   High-Level  Expert  Group  on  reforming  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector.  Final  report.  Brussels, 
2 October 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
instruments  is  especially  relevant.  Those  macro-prudential  instruments  which  can  be 
adjusted over time to manage the conditions in the credit market will offer a way to better 
control  the  accumulation  of  excess  risk  and  help  prevent  future  crises.  These  instruments 
operate so close to monetary policy that central banks should be very closely involved, if not 
themselves responsible, in developing and using them.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
