Rundheersing Bheenick: Mauritius – the financial crossroads of the 
world 
Text  of  the  OMFIF (The  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum)  Lecture  by  Mr 
Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, London, 30 May 2013. 
 Thank you OMFIF for the invitation to address such an impressive audience as the one I see 
this morning at the equally-impressive Armourers’ Hall. This elegant and sophisticated hall is 
steeped in history. I understand that it has served as the home of the Armourers’ Company 
for  over  six  and  half  centuries  since  1346.  This  company  has  played  a  special  role  in  the 
defence  of  the  City  and  supported  many  charities  focusing,  amongst  others  on  education. 
One could hardly have wished for a better venue than this magnificent hall. 
OMFIF  suggested  as  the  theme  for  my  address  this  morning  “Mauritius:  The  Financial 
Crossroads of the World”. At first, I thought that the theme was proposed perhaps half in jest. 
The  qualifier  would  certainly  be  more  appropriate  for  the  City  of  London  where  we  are 
meeting – but Mauritius as a financial crossroad, and that too of the world, who would have 
thought  such  a  thing?  Close  examination  of  the  OMFIF  cheek  did  not  reveal  any  sign  of 
tongue. They were quite serious about it, and there was no alternative but to go ahead and 
get organised to talk to you on this subject. 
As  I  was  trying  to  gather  my  thoughts  about  what  exactly  I  should  be  talking  about  this 
morning, I could not help reflecting what a difference the last fifty years have made in the life 
of this small island-state, tucked far away in a remote corner of the Indian Ocean. Fifty years 
ago, few  people  in  the  banking  and  business  community  had  even  heard  about  Mauritius, 
much less thought of it as a Financial Crossroad. Those who knew the place thought of it as 
a  basket  case,  without  any  prospects.  I  have  it  on  good  authority  that the first-ever World 
Bank mission to Mauritius in 1962, just a few years before the country became independent, 
had delivered a devastating verdict: 
“This country exudes an air of hopelessness” 
This was the view of Jean Baneth, World Bank Mission Chief, who was then working on India 
and had been sent to do a quick diagnosis of the Mauritian case. He was not alone in his 
negative  judgment  of  the  country.  V.S.  Naipaul,  acclaimed  novelist  and  commentator,  had 
also delivered an equally scathing verdict after a short visit to Mauritius in 1967. This was 
well  encapsulated  in  the  title  of  the  piece  he  wrote,  and  which  he  obviously  liked  as  he 
retained it as the title of his subsequent book, which included the Mauritius piece along with 
several other longer articles of his. What was the title? 
“The Overcrowded Barracoon” 
Mauritius  was  not  just  reducing  visiting  World  Bank  experts  and  noted  political  and  social 
commentators  to  despair.  The  contagion  engulfed  such  famous  academics  as  Richard 
Titmus,  the  noted  sociologist,  and  the  future  Nobel  economics  prize-winner  Sir  James 
Meade. For them, and for many others who followed, Mauritius was sinking under the weight 
of  runaway  population  growth  which  its  sugar  economy  could  not  conceivably  bear.  The 
country’s  economic  future  looked  dim  and  its  citizens  were  leaving  its  shores  in  droves 
looking  for  better  prospects  elsewhere  –  Australia,  Canada,  South  Africa  and  the  United 
Kingdom.  Another  bugbear  exercising the  minds  of knowledgeable  observers  was  that  the 
country  was  heading  for  a  monumental  blow-up.  Surely,  half  a  million  people  of  diverse 
origin,  −  African,  Asian,  European,  −  practising  many  religions  and  speaking  a  Babel  of 
languages, could not survive on this crowded, impoverished island. They were bound to be 
at each other’s throat as soon as the colonial overlord left. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Mauritius  had  indeed  come  down  in  the  world.  To  understand  the  full  impact  of  this 
déchéance, it would be good to remind ourselves that, much earlier, during the height of the 
colonial struggle after Vasco da Gama had rounded the Cape of Good Hope in search of the 
riches of the Indies, Mauritius was at the centre of the colonial scramble for position in this 
part of the Indian Ocean. A favourable location in the Indian Ocean, added to the prevailing 
trade winds, turned Mauritius into a staging post of choice for sailing ships on their way to 
India  and  the  Dutch  East  Indies.  We  proudly  sport  a  relic  of  those  glorious  days,  in  our 
national Coat of Arms: 
Stella Clavisque Maris Indici. 
The Star and the Key of the Indian Ocean − no less! 
By the time of James Meade and the others, sugar, which was the mainstay of the economy 
had earned the country the reputation of Sugar Bowl Island. And sugar was rapidly running 
out of steam. The economic problem had been reduced to a race between population and 
productivity. The Star had definitely lost its shine and the Key was not unlocking any door, 
certainly not one to a brighter future. It certainly looked as if Mauritius was going the way of 
the  dodo,  the  eponymous  bird  that  had  forgotten  how  to  fly  on  the  isolated  island  of  no 
predators and fell victim to the appetite of struggling Dutch settlers. It is not my intention to 
tell  you  the  full  story  of  either  of  these  two  transformations,  from  Star  and  Key  to  basket-
case, and then from basket-case to a rising star on the African continent. I evoke it just to 
drive  home  the  sheer  enormity  of  the  task  accomplished  in  this  second  transformation, 
achieved  in  slightly  over  one  generation,  so that  it  now  seems  perfectly  natural  to  discuss 
whether this erstwhile basket-case is now a financial crossroad of the world. 
In what follows, I interpret “financial crossroads” to refer to International Financial Centres, or 
IFC’s. Let me state categorically that I do not view tax havens as IFC’s and I do not believe 
that  traditional,  secretive,  opaque  tax-havens  have  much  of  a  business  case  these  days. 
These  “sunny  places  with  shady  finances”,  as  they  have  been  called,  will  have  to  change 
rapidly if they are to survive in some form or other. We in Mauritius have always rejected the 
“tax-haven” label as we are a jurisdiction of substance, which comes with a real, diversified, 
and thriving economy attached. 
I  could  begin  by  debunking  the  notion  that  Mauritius  is,  or  will  soon  become,  the financial 
crossroad of the world. Had I come from our investment promotion agency, I would probably 
be arguing that Mauritius is not only the financial crossroad of the world, but perhaps also the 
centre of the universe. I shall take a more measured view. In my substantive remarks, I shall 
discuss  briefly  the  case  for  offshore  jurisdictions,  and  offshore  banking  and  tax  planning 
facilities.  I  shall  consider  the  recent  Cyprus  episode  and  seek  to  draw  some  lessons  for 
IFC’s. I shall spend a little more time on the Mauritian offshore experience and argue that 
Mauritius  is  an  IFC  with  a  difference.  Offshore  is  not  the  only  game  in  town  as  Mauritius 
comes with a real economy attached. There will be continuing demand for packaging a rising 
volume of investment flows and for other professional services on the African continent and 
elsewhere which could drive Mauritius to a more prominent position in the offshore space. 
I. 
The case for small offshore jurisdictions, offshore banking and tax planning 
facilities. 
Small  jurisdictions  seem  to  have  a  comparative  advantage  as  IFC’s.  Historically,  partly  at 
least because of their size  which limited other economic activities, small states have been 
more  open  to  the  world.  This  has  allowed  them  to  exploit  emerging  niches  and  embrace 
global trends more rapidly than bigger countries. They have proved to be more flexible than 
bigger  economies  and  have  adapted  more  easily  to  changing  circumstances.  Both  their 
populations and their GDP are but a tiny fraction of world population and world GDP. Faced 
with  limited  options  for  development,  many  sought  to  become  Offshore  Financial  Centres 
(OFC’s). OFC’s are generally defined as small, low-tax jurisdictions specializing in providing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
corporate  and  commercial  services  to  non-resident  offshore  companies  and  for  the 
investment  of  offshore  funds.  However,  abuse  in  some  jurisdictions  has  too  easily  and 
mistakenly  fed  the  perception  that  OFC’s  are  tax  havens.  Unsurprisingly,  OFC’s  are  the 
object  of  constant  attack,  especially  from  the  OECD  and  the  G20.  They  seem  to  have 
spawned a cottage-industry of specialists regularly taking potshots at OFC’s. 
We  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that  small  country  IFC’s  play  an  important  role  as  conduits  of 
cross-border capital flows and investments. It is estimated that as much as half the world's 
capital flows  go  through  offshore  centres.  An  estimated  £13–20  trillion  is  hoarded  away  in 
offshore accounts. Small country IFC’s, with a little over 1% of world population, hold 26% of 
the world's wealth, and 31% of the net profits of United States multinationals transit through 
them. 
II. 
Let me turn to the question whether the Cyprus episode spells the knell for 
IFC’s as we know them. 
There is no denying that the reputation of small country IFC’s has taken a severe blow in the 
wake of the Cyprus crisis. Cyprus incurred direct losses of the order of EUR4 billion or 23% 
of its GDP. The mind boggles at the thought of our economies taking such a big hit because 
of malfeasance in our offshore banking activity. The austerity cure, imposed by the Troika, 
and  the  population’s  reaction  to  it  has  added  new  jargon  to  the  language  of  economic 
discourse. The thought of being “cypressed” strikes fear in the mind of policy-makers in all 
small countries, not just IFC’s. For most IFC’s, such a possibility is extremely remote. Some 
attributed  the  crisis  to  the  fact  that  the  Cypriot  banking  sector  was  disproportionate  to  the 
size  of  the  economy.  This  led  to  the  policy  prescription  of  a  quantitative  limit  on  banking 
assets of 3.5 times of GDP, arbitrarily proposed at the EU level. With the benefit of hindsight, 
we can assert that such a limit would not have prevented the kind of problems encountered 
by Cyprus. The truth lies in the fact that Cyprus was excessively exposed to Greece on the 
assets side and to Russia on the liabilities side. 
The lesson that I draw from this is not that IFC’s as a class are bound to disappear or, at 
best,  condemned  to  a  slow  death.  I  would  rather  argue  that  small  country  IFC’s  need  to 
exercise care in the conduct of their business, appropriately assess potential sources of risk 
and better manage their asset and liability mix. Both of these points are clearly illustrated in 
the  next  two  slides,  which  compare  Cyprus  banking  ratios  and  financial  soundness 
indicators,  with  three  other  offshore jurisdictions  including  Luxemburg  and  Mauritius.  Malta 
and  Luxemburg  have  8  times  and  17  times  of  their  GDP,  respectively,  by  way  of  banking 
assets. But their FSI’s in the next slide, show that they had a more robust banking sector, as 
reflected for example by their non-performing loans – less than 0.5% for Luxemburg while it 
was nearly 16% for Cyprus. The case of Luxemburg provides ample evidence of the solidity 
of the banking sector of a country even when its banking assets represent 17 times its GDP. 
The short story is that the Cyprus episode does have lessons for other jurisdictions but it has 
no immediate relevance for most of them because they do not run their banking and finance 
the way Cyprus did. It certainly does not mark the end of the road for solid, transparent, well-
regulated IFC’s. 
III. 
Which brings me rather neatly to Mauritius and its home-grown model of an 
IFC. 
The previous two slides provide an indication of the size of the Mauritius offshore banking 
sector and its financial soundness. Our banking sector assets are less than three times our 
GDP, the lowest in the sample, and evenly divided between domestic and offshore assets. 
The  FSI’s  show  a  sound  banking  sector,  well-capitalised  and  nearer  Luxemburg  on  most 
measures with, for example, non-performing loans at less than 4%, half the level of Malta, 
and regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets at 17%, very close to Luxemburg’s 19%. We 
started  on  our  offshore  journey  in  1988.  An  earlier  attempt,  a  decade  earlier  when  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
economy was about to go into intensive care, proposed by a Caribbean consulting company 
unashamedly  calling  itself  Tax  Haven  International,  was  shot  down  by  the  IMF  which  had 
been called in to advise on the matter. By the late 1980’s, we had emerged from the tutelage 
of  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions  and  a  bevy  of  stabilisation  and  structural  adjustment 
programs.  The  economy  was  fitter  and  on  the  lookout  for  new  engines  to  power  the  next 
stage of growth, to add to sugar, export manufacturing and tourism which were all doing well. 
It may not be deemed prudent these days to admit to any Cyprus connection but we did draw 
on  the  Cyprus  experience  when  we  were  finalising  plans  for  our  own  offshore  business 
sector. It may be still less prudent to admit that it was BCCI staff on the ground that facilitated 
our contacts with the Cypriot authorities and its offshore banking sector. We drew on this and 
other models as we set about developing, in a phased manner, our home-grown model. This 
has proved to be more resilient than some of the models that inspired us – not least because 
our  financial  sector  benefited  from  an  increasingly-diversified  and  growing  real  sector  and 
from  a  multilingual  pool  of  professionals  in  accounting,  law,  management,  and  finance. 
Financial Intermediation today provides more than 2% of the total employment in the country 
and the trend is on the rise. 
We developed an extensive network of Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAA) and 
Investment  Promotion  and  Protection  Agreements  (IPPA)  with  several  countries,  both 
developed and emerging. Our strategic location in the Indian Ocean proved to be an added 
advantage  which  enabled  us  to  carve  a  niche  in  the  region.  When  India  started  major 
economic reforms in the wake of the 1991 balance of payments crisis, Mauritius which had 
signed  a  DTAA  with  India  years  earlier,  seized  the  opportunity  to  emerge  as  the  largest 
conduit of foreign inflows to India averaging 43% of total inflows into the Asian giant over the 
past  decade.  The  most  important  provision  in  the  DTAA  between  India  and  Mauritius  has 
been that the capital gains earned by a company resident in Mauritius on disposal of shares 
of an Indian company are tax-exempt in India. As a consequence, Mauritius has enjoyed a 
prominent  place  in  tax  treaty  planning  of  private  equity  players,  multinationals,  and  global 
fund houses investing into India. 
We  adopted  high  standards  of  rigorously-enforced  regulation  proposed  by  the  Financial 
Action  Task  Force,  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  (OECD) 
and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  We  go  beyond  merely  applying  those 
international  norms;  we  are  also  committed  and  cooperative  partners  in  compliance 
legislation. Our efforts paid dividends – OECD placed us on its white list which means that 
our jurisdiction has substantially implemented the internationally-agreed tax standards. More 
recently,  we  have  initiated  consultations  with  the  US  Revenue  Authority  to  become 
FATCA-compliant.  Mauritius  has  also  adopted  tax  information  exchange protocols  to  allow 
foreign countries to investigate suspected tax evasion. 
As  a  small,  isolated,  island,  we  lost  no  opportunity  to  join  regional  economic  groupings. 
When some of our needs were not met by existing bodies, we set about creating others, and 
two of these are actually headquartered in Mauritius. Mauritius joined the Common Market 
for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), having been a founder-member of its precursor, 
the  Preferential  Trade  Area.  We  joined  the  Southern  African  Development  Community 
(SADC), at the same time that SADC opened its doors to post-apartheid South Africa. We 
initiated the short process that culminated rapidly in the establishment of the Indian Ocean 
Commission in 1982 and the bigger Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation 
in  1995.  We  are  committed  to  be  an  active  player  in  regional  cooperation.  The  Bank  of 
Mauritius serves as the Settlement Bank of the Regional Payments and Settlement System 
of COMESA. Mauritius hosts AFRITAC (South) – the 4th regional technical assistance centre 
of the IMF in Africa. The COMESA Fund and the Africa Training Institute of the IMF will soon 
start operations in Mauritius. The day is not far when Mauritius will obtain observer status in 
the Eastern African Community and ASEAN. Our vision to become a bridge between rising 
Asia and Africa is something that we have been patiently working on for several decades. A 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
visible  outcome  is  the  fact  that  nearly  half  of  our  GBCs  have  been  used  as  vehicles  for 
investment in Kenya, Mozambique, Zimbabwe and South Africa. 
Our banking sector 
Little did we know how radically we were going to transform the financial landscape when we 
adopted in 1988 banking legislation to enable offshore banking. That was just 25 years ago. 
We then had 13 banks, all involved in domestic banking. By 1998, the numbers had changed 
to 10 domestic banks and 9 offshore banks. The sector was quite dynamic. By 2002, after 
some consolidation, there were 10 domestic banks and 12 offshore banks when there were 
also 221 offshore funds and around 19,350 Global Business Licence (GBL) Companies. The 
offshore  banks  employed  around  170  persons  and  their  assets  amounted  to  94%  of  our 
GDP. In 2005, we distinguished ourselves from other OFC’s by introducing a single banking 
licence. We adopted Segmental Reporting requiring the disclosure of financial information on 
two  distinct  segments  of  banking  activity–  Segment  B  for  banking  business  giving  rise  to 
“foreign source income”, and Segment A for all other banking business. Today, we have 21 
banks  operating  in  our jurisdiction,  all  involved  to  varying  degrees  in  cross-border  banking 
activities. Some have extended their footprint beyond our shores, setting up operations in the 
region.  Our  banking  sector  assets  represent  around  3  times  our  GDP.  There  were  nearly 
25,000 GBL companies and their deposit base at the end of 2012 represented around 39% 
of total banking deposits. There is a long way to go before we reach the size of other small 
IFC’s. 
Our banks perform well  and have proved to be very resilient. They have contributed in no 
small  measure  to  the  resilience  of  the  Mauritian  economy.  The  robustness  of  our  banking 
sector is itself the result of prudential measures adopted in a timely manner over the years. 
The Global Competitiveness Report 2012–2013 provides a good indication of the health of 
the  sector.  It  ranks  the  Mauritian  banking  sector  15th  out  of  144  countries  in  terms  of  the 
soundness of banks, and 35th in terms of financial market development. In the ranking of the 
African Banker magazine, seven Mauritian banks figured among the top 100 banks in Africa 
in 2012. This is no mean achievement if we consider that the Mauritian GDP adds up to a 
grand  total  of  one-fifth  of  one  percent  of  African  GDP.  I  have  been  focusing  more  on  the 
central  bank  and  its  regulatees  but  the  change  was  broad-based.  The  other  financial  and 
market  regulators,  namely  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius  and  the  Financial  Services 
Commission, have also garnered international accolades. 
I am certainly not saying that there have not been some major tremors in our financial sector, 
because there have been. But these had nothing to do with the ongoing global financial and 
economic crisis. We had a major financial scandal in 2003, very much home-grown too. This 
was  the  infamous  MCB/NPF  saga  which  takes  its  name  from  the  protagonists  involved, 
which happened to be the largest bank and the largest pension fund in the country. Recently 
we  have  suffered  from  a  rash  of  “Ponzi  Schemes”.  Such  “accidents”  have  triggered 
corrective  measures  to  ensure  that  there  is  no  recurrence.  We  have  learnt  some  lessons 
from the unfortunate experience of others in the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis and 
we are applying them to our banking system. We have taken several policy initiatives to deal 
with complex banking structures of domestic systemically important banks which are too-big-
to-fail  and  too-connected-to-fail  in  our  close-knit  economy.  As  many  Mauritian  banks  have 
grown regional, we are also addressing cross-border banking issues. 
Just  to  give  you  an  idea  of  the  challenge  facing  the  central  bank,  let  me  point  out  five 
pertinent facts. First, the Bank is 45 years old, and has been an independent institution only 
for  a  little  over  eight  years  since  2004.  Second,  the  largest  domestic  bank  has  been  in 
continuous existence for the better part of two centuries, which makes it one of the oldest 
surviving  commercial  banks  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  and  not  just  on  the  African 
continent. Third, the two largest banks in the country, both domestic, account for two thirds of 
domestic  banking  assets.  Fourth, there  is  tremendous  concentration  of asset  ownership  in 
the country in the hands of a handful of conglomerates. And fifth, when the central bank tries 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
to  address  the  underlying  problems,  its  Governor  is  regularly  accused  of  suffering  from 
Marxist  hang-ups  and  acute  personality  disorders  and  his  imminent  departure  has  been  a 
constant refrain of the hyper-active rumour mill for over six years now. 
I just walked you through some of the initiatives, measures and policies adopted by Mauritius 
in  its  quest  to  become  an  IFC  of  international  repute.  Notwithstanding  our  best  efforts 
sustained over decades to keep our jurisdiction clean, the Mauritian offshore sector has been 
constantly  under  attack,  both  from  official  quarters  and  from  unofficial  self-appointed 
vigilantes.  India  has  undoubtedly  benefited  from  increased  FDI  through  the  so-called 
“Mauritius Route”. This has not prevented the DTAA between the two countries from regular 
attacks in the Indian press, which often look suspiciously like part of a “dirty-tricks” campaign 
by a competing jurisdiction when, that is, they are not being fuelled by holier-than-thou Indian 
politicians  on  the  campaign  trail  who  scapegoat  Mauritius  as  an  expiatory  target  in  their 
“bring black money back from overseas campaign”. 
Teflon-like,  Mauritius  stoically  shrugs  off  these  attacks  as  it  does  not  practice  a  culture  of 
opacity. Mauritius has always been more than willing to share information with the banking 
and tax authorities of partner-countries. That is why attempts from various quarters to qualify 
Mauritius as a tax haven have not succeeded, anymore than veiled threats from OECD to put 
Mauritius on its grey list. Many cling to the view that all IFC’s are tarred with the same brush 
and perpetuate the myth of Mauritius, the tax haven in the Indian Ocean. Mauritius is a global 
facilitator  with  unparalleled  transparency,  and  serious  credentials,  and  not  the  answer  to 
round-tripper’s dream. 
Mauritius – an IFC with a difference 
IV. 
The  challenge  confronting  Mauritius  now  is  perhaps  its  toughest  since  it  embarked  on  the 
offshore business a quarter century ago. It is one thing to be a competitive back-office hub 
and an efficient conduit for capital flows to India and Africa, but it is quite another to become 
a significant value-added platform, effectively enhancing South-South trade and investment. 
The name of the game now is greater substance and more value addition. 
Depressed  conditions  in  the  crisis-hit  West,  coupled  with  slowdown  in  India,  have  forced 
Mauritius to target other markets to grow its export of goods and services. Fortunately, the 
next growth frontier that is Sub-Saharan Africa is just next door. Africa has definitely turned 
the corner. The African Union, marking its 50th anniversary last week, had a lot to celebrate. 
Its predecessor, the OAU – or the Organisation of African Unity – had attracted the charge 
that it was trading under false pretences: there was neither organisation nor unity in Africa! 
Global powers, old and new, are now making a bee-line for the continent, attracted by policy 
reforms,  institutional  strengthening  and  resource  discoveries.  Some  thirteen  years  ago,  in 
May  2000,  back  when  investment  gurus  were  still  fascinated  by  the  BRICs  and  the  good 
things  that  would  come  out  of  the  European  Union,  The  Economist  magazine  carried  a 
devastating front page cover “Africa, the Hopeless Continent.” 
The  article  which  followed  talked  about  how  Africa  would  struggle  to  resolve  famine,  HIV 
AIDS, high debt, bad governance and its many wars. To be fair, some of the criticism levelled 
at  the  continent  remains  true  even  today,  but  Africa  has  now  got  its  act  together  and  is 
playing catch-up. This is perhaps why The Economist recanted two years ago, and blazoned 
an altogether different message on its front cover in December 2011, this time titled ‘Africa 
Rising’.  The  titles  have  become  even  more  positive  ever  since,  with  its  March  2013  issue 
talking about ‘Aspiring Africa’. Let me quote the introductory paragraph from the latter just to 
give you the flavour and a sense of the changing times. 
“CELEBRATIONS are in order on the poorest continent… Life expectancy rose by a tenth in 
the  past  decade  and  foreign  direct  investment  has  tripled.  Consumer  spending  will  almost 
double in the next ten years; the number of countries with average incomes above $1,000 
per person a year will grow from less than half of Africa’s 55 states to three-quarters.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
How times have changed! How very sporting of The Economist to recognise and celebrate 
this changing sentiment towards Africa. 
Which rather reminds me that The Economist had meted out a similarly harsh treatment to 
Mauritius, but without any subsequent recantation. It was in the late 1980’s, if memory serves 
me  right.  We  had  stabilised  the  economy,  consolidated  public  finances  with  austerity  and 
wage  restraint,  strengthened  the  sugar  sector,  tourism  and  export  manufacturing,  and 
changed  governments  through  free  and  fair  elections  –  as  has  always  been  the  practice 
since  independence,  and  started  offshore  activities.  We  were  doing  quite  well,  one  would 
have thought. The World Bank certainly thought so: its country report on Mauritius had the 
tell-tale  title  “Managing  Success.”  The  Economist,  however,  took  a  more  jaundiced  view, 
buying the myth that Mauritius was rolling out the red carpet for money launderers. It carried 
a short article, with the admonishing title “A Naughty way to Salvation.” It was well-hidden in 
an inside page – no cover page on The Economist for small-island states unless they have 
been  particularly  naughty  like  Cyprus,  or  Iceland  before  it.  Maybe  it’s  high  time  for  The 
Economist to make some amende honorable... 
The African narrative has got a rush of superlatives going. “Lions on the Move”, trumpeted a 
McKinsey  study  on  the  continent.  As  their  largest  trading  partner,  the  EU  is  mired  in 
recession this year, Mauritians can count their blessings as their country happens to be in 
one of the fastest growing regions of the planet: East Africa will grow by around 6%. This is 
impressive enough. Its southern African neighbours, Mozambique and Zambia, are likely to 
clock more than 7% growth. 
What  is  driving  all  this  growth  you  may  ask?  Not  only  has  the  region  discovered  oil  and 
natural gas but it is also blessed with a young population and a rising middle class. Falling 
trade  barriers,  stable  interest  rates,  and  greater  currency  stability  are  encouraging  inter-
regional  trade.  Large  Kenyan  banks  like  Equity  Bank  which  used  to  have  100%  of  its 
revenues  from  within  Kenya  in  2007,  now  gets  12.5%  of  its  revenues from  the  rest  of the 
region  as  expansion  plans  bear  fruit.  With  banking  penetration  rates  in  Africa  at  close  to 
20%,  large  African  banks  are  raising  deposits  cheaply  from  the  villages,  in  increasingly 
innovative  ways,  and  lending  it  at  huge  spreads  to  the  corporate  sector  and  upper  middle 
class. Yes, these are good times for the banking industry in Africa. With 40% of the African 
workforce between the ages of 15–24, and with the continent becoming increasingly urban, 
Africa’s challenge is to use its demographic dividend wisely. 
With  strong  growth  comes  increased  global  investor  attention.  Just  to  give  you  a  few 
examples,  last  year  two  of  the  best  performing  stock  markets  in  the  world  were  African  – 
Nigeria and Kenya. Last September, Zambia’s debut USD750 million Eurobond auction was 
oversubscribed by a staggering 15 times, pushing its yield down to 5.6%! Africa will issue a 
record USD7 Billion in  Eurobonds this year, more than the cumulative sum of the last five 
years. 
With  Western  nations  curtailing  donor  aid,  fast-growing  African  nations,  with  manageable 
debt to GDP ratios, are not finding problems in attracting money in a world where the search 
for  yield  is  increasingly  becoming  important.  Money  has  increasingly  been  flowing  into  the 
domestic  bond  market  in  the  likes  of  Nigeria,  where  a  well-functioning  secondary  bond 
market exists, with the inclusion in the JP Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index helping to 
push down yields at the long end of the curve. Unlike in the West where interest rates hover 
at, or near, the zero-bound, with interest rates in Kenya and Nigeria for example between 8% 
to 14%, there is much scope for compression in Africa as monetary policy gains traction and 
inflation falls, which will in turn help unlock still more growth. The Africa growth story is just 
only  beginning.  Mauritius,  as  the  friendly,  neighbourhood,  well-connected  IFC,  can  expect 
much business to come its way. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
What does the future hold for Mauritius? 
Before  Mauritius  can  move  up  the  value  chain,  it  needs  to  recognize  its  limitations.  It  is  a 
small country, with limited resources and it needs to do things differently. Mauritius cannot 
afford to be a common, garden-variety, IFC, undistinguishable from a dozen others. It must 
seek, at all times, to be increasingly an IFC with a difference. For this to happen, it needs 
both  scope  and  scale.  To  add  value,  it  needs  foreign  investors  not  only  to  invest  through 
Mauritius but increasingly with Mauritian investors. And for this to happen, we need to show 
substance by bringing both knowledge and seed capital on the table. Mauritius can become 
the private equity vehicle of choice for small- and medium-scale projects in the Eastern and 
Southern parts of Africa within sectors where it has a comparative advantage. 
The country does not have the knowhow or financial clout to finance oil exploration, power 
plants, aluminium smelters or mining projects. But, it has already demonstrated that it can be 
the ideal vehicle for such investments as medium-sized clinic in Uganda, a bank in Kenya, a 
sugar mill project in Tanzania, a stone-crushing plant in Sri Lanka, or textiles in Bangladesh. 
You  do  not  need  huge  sums  of  capital  to  set  up  a  chicken  farm  in  Madagascar  or 
Mozambique  or  to  offer  Mauritian  savoir-faire  to  the  booming  hotel  industry  of  the  region. 
Investors in the big-ticket projects of the continent, who tap the myriad of large US, European 
and Middle Eastern private equity funds, can still find it convenient to use the Mauritian IFC 
platform  to  package,  administer  and  route  their  investments.  But  for  investors  looking  for 
diversification from the same old investment themes, and seeking to capture Africa from the 
bottom-up, Mauritius can be the ideal platform. Mauritian banks are increasingly interested in 
forming partnerships with small- and medium-sized banks in the East African Community but 
their  relatively  small  size  and  current  Capital  Adequacy  Ratios  mean  that  they  need  more 
funding. 
Historically,  Mauritian  private  sector  captains  have  preferred  the  go-it-alone  approach.  A 
local  bank,  which  had  recently  acquired  a  minority  stake  in  one  of  the  smaller  banks  in 
Zimbabwe,  has  paid  a  high  price  to  learn  the  lesson  that  investing  in  Africa  can  be  quite 
risky. There is a strong case to pool together available know-how and seed capital to build 
the critical mass required for larger projects, diversify risks, and leverage external funding. 
Mauritius has been toying with the idea of setting up a sovereign wealth fund which could 
become a source of equity funding for a more aggressive move into Africa. There is scope 
for increased public-private partnerships, which are still a rare phenomenon on the continent. 
The  African  Development  Bank  has  floated  the  idea  of  an  African  Infrastructure  Fund, 
financed partly from central bank reserves. It will be setting up an office in Mauritius this year. 
There is truly a ferment of investment and finance activity in, and around, Mauritius. 
All this leads me to conclude that there are bright days ahead for the Mauritian IFC because 
it is an IFC with a difference. Its thriving real economy means that offshore activities are only 
a small chunk of the panoply of activities going on in the country. 
Mauritius has made major strides during the two last decades to become a bigger regional 
financial centre. Compared to other small IFC’s, we still have a long road to travel to become 
what Singapore is to Asia or Luxemburg to Europe. We have always strived to live up to the 
“fit and proper” image of a reputable jurisdiction. We have tried hard to be a jurisdiction of 
substance.  We  can  confidently  lay  claim  to  be  the  best  in  our  class,  a  target  that  has 
constantly been in our sights since the very beginning. 
We collaborate fully with all global stakeholders of the financial world  – OECD, FATF, IMF 
and the like. Cyprus holds no lessons for a clean jurisdiction like Mauritius. Current attacks 
on offshore jurisdictions coming from the G20 do not pose a particular problem as long as 
there  is  level  playing  field  across  jurisdictions  and  transparency  is  upheld  through  well-
coordinated  exchange  of  information.  There  is  no  dearth  of  growth  opportunities  for  the 
Mauritian IFC from Aspiring Africa next door, and the prodigious developments expected in 
Asia. There is increasing demand for reliable and trusted products and services for efficient 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
tax planning as there is for better packaging and distribution of investments with greater real 
sector involvement. Mauritius is positioning itself to make the most of these opportunities. 
Mauritius: the Financial Crossroads of the world? Probably not. But quite possibly a financial 
crossroad,  along  with  several  others,  meeting  a  real  need  of  investors,  savers  and 
corporates from all over the world. Not a bad prospect for a country that was exuding such 
an air of hopelessness only half a century ago, wouldn’t you agree? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
