Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the CBI Northern Ireland 
Mid-Winter Dinner, Belfast, 22 January 2013. 
 I  am  delighted  to  be  in  Belfast  to  deliver  my  final  regional  speech  as  Governor.  After  the 
Bank  obtained  independence  in  1997,  we  decided  to  establish  a  physical  presence  in 
Northern Ireland for the first time. And I was able to announce the opening of the Agency 
when I visited Belfast in  May 1999. Since then the links between the business community 
and the Agency have gone from strength to strength. None of this would have been possible 
without the commitment of a remarkable group of Bank of England Agents: first, Nigel Falls, 
then  Phil  Eckersley  and  now  Frances  Hill,  all  supported  by  Gillian  Anderson,  today  the 
Deputy Agent.  
During  that  same  visit,  I  met  with  a  group  of  politicians  from  right  across  the  political 
spectrum.  They  were  surprisingly  eager  to  talk  with,  not  at,  each  other  –  because  they 
wanted to exchange views about the economic future of Northern Ireland, and to get away, at 
least for a while, from the divisive nature of daily politics. You would have been hard put to 
identify  the  affiliation  of  those  politicians  from  their  views  on  how  to  promote  economic 
prosperity in Northern Ireland. And this is the key to the future. In my regular visits, I have 
criss-crossed the Province and come to realise how important is the business community as 
the agent of change and reconciliation. It is a challenge to which you continue to rise with 
spirit and determination. And it is why I enjoy coming here to meet with you, to learn about 
your progress, and to appreciate the extraordinary beauty of the Province. 
I  am  conscious  that  there  are  significant  differences  between  the  economies  of  Northern 
Ireland and the rest of the United Kingdom. Tonight, however, I want to focus mainly on the 
economic outlook for the United Kingdom as a whole. 
What are the Bank of England’s diagnosis, prescription and prognosis for the UK economy? 
At  one  level,  the  diagnosis  is  self-evident.  Growth  has  been  much  weaker  than  most 
commentators expected. In fact, according to the official figures, there has been barely any 
growth  at  all  over  the  past  2½  years.  Unemployment,  at  a  rate  of  almost  8%,  is  markedly 
higher than the level of around 5½% before the crisis. And inflation, despite its fall over the 
past  fifteen  months  from  over  5%  to  around  2½%,  remains  above  our  2%  target.  Living 
standards have been squeezed for longer than at any time in living memory. 
Much  of  this  reflects  the  inevitable  correction  of  exuberance  on  the  part  of  borrowers  and 
lenders, the conditions for which were created by the failure to tackle the global imbalances 
that  left  most  major  countries  with  unsustainable  exchange  rates,  unsustainable  paths  of 
consumption, saving and borrowing, and unsustainably low long-term real interest rates. Our 
economy  too  needs  to  rebalance  as  it  recovers,  and  that  affects  the  pace  of  recovery. 
Although the downturn in UK GDP from the peak in 2008 to the trough in 2009, at around 
6%, was broadly similar to that in most other industrialised countries, our recovery has been 
noticeably  slower,  with  a  cumulative  rise  in  output  from  the  middle  of  2009  of  only  about 
3½% compared with 6% or more in many other countries. But has the process of recovery 
and rebalancing been derailed or merely delayed? With the right prescription we can ensure 
that it has been only delayed. 
Three factors in particular have adversely affected the pace of recovery in the UK. The first is 
an  especially  deep  and  protracted  squeeze  on  the  level  of  many  people’s  real  take-home 
pay. Over the past four years, money wages have on average been rising at less than 2% a 
year. And higher energy and food prices, as well as tax changes and a lower exchange rate, 
passing  through  to  the  level  of  consumer  prices,  have  all  contributed  to  the  squeeze.  On 
average, real take-home pay is no higher than back in 2004. That has been responsible for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
an unusually weak recovery in consumer spending which, after falling initially by some 7%, is 
still more than 4% below its peak. The result is a large number of vacant retail premises – 
visible here in Belfast, as elsewhere. 
The  second  factor  is  the  extent  to  which  the  balance  sheets  of  the  major  UK  banks  had 
grown before the crisis hit, and had been financed primarily by borrowing. So the subsequent 
reduction  in  bank  lending  –  the  deleveraging  –  was  greater  here  than  in  many  other 
countries.  That  deleveraging  has  as  its  counterpart  a  reduction  in  the  amount  of  (broad) 
money in the economy and a reduced willingness on the part of banks to expand lending to 
finance the recovery. 
And the third is the crisis in our main trading partner – the euro area – where the near term 
outlook  is  weak,  and  the  longer  term  prospects  for  tackling  the  evident  fault  lines  in  the 
monetary union uncertain. The former means that our current account deficit has remained 
stubbornly high, and the latter is holding back corporate investment 
With a disappointingly slow recovery, and unemployment one million higher than before the 
crisis,  the  main  aim  of  economic  policy  has  been  to  generate  both  a  recovery  and  a 
rebalancing of the economy, and bring unemployment down without putting at risk hard-won 
medium-term price stability. 
The  Bank  of  England  has  played  its  part  by  administering  a  powerful  combination  of 
medicines. First, interest rates have been at all-time lows, with Bank Rate at near zero now 
for  nearly  four  years.  This  has  lowered  the  rate  at  which  families,  businesses,  the 
government and banks can borrow. Second, the Bank’s programme of asset purchases has 
prevented what might have been a serious contraction of the money supply. An enormous 
amount of new money has been injected into the economy, now amounting to about 25% of 
annual GDP. This was crucial in avoiding a depression. And, in addition to these monetary 
policy measures, we introduced last summer, in conjunction with the Treasury, the Funding 
for Lending Scheme to provide cheap funding to banks for a period of four years to enable 
them  to  finance  lending  to  UK  households  and  businesses.  The  Scheme  has  already 
reduced banks’ funding costs: for example, major UK banks’ senior unsecured bond spreads 
have  fallen  by  around  125  basis  points.  And  the  availability  and  price  of  credit  for  many 
borrowers has improved. 
But there remains spare capacity – certainly in the labour market. So should we do more to 
revive the patient? 
The short answer is yes – but the harder question is, what? 
In many countries, including the UK, fiscal policy is constrained by the size of government 
indebtedness, and monetary policy has come to be seen as the only game in town. Monetary 
stimulus is already very powerful. Markets expect policy rates to remain at exceptionally low 
levels for a considerable period of time. Of course, we could provide even more monetary 
stimulus through further asset purchases. And we  will continue to assess the benefits and 
costs  of further reductions  in  overnight  interest rates.  Be  in  no  doubt that  we  are ready  to 
provide more stimulus if it is needed. 
Relying on generalised monetary stimulus alone, however, is not a panacea. Monetary policy 
works, at least in part, by providing incentives to households and businesses to bring forward 
spending  from  the  future  to  the  present.  But  that  reduces  spending  plans  tomorrow.  And 
when  tomorrow  arrives,  an  even  larger  stimulus  is  required  to  bring  forward  yet  more 
spending from the future. As time passes, larger and larger doses of stimulus are required. 
We are not in a typical post-war business cycle recession. 
And,  as  with  many  medicines,  there  are  side-effects  from  the  prolonged  use  of  monetary 
stimulus.  With  long  bond  yields  at  unsustainably  low  levels,  there  is  a  risk  to  financial 
stability. Real interest rates (that is, returns adjusted for expected inflation) on government 
bonds  are  negative  out to  a  horizon  of  25  years. That  is  not consistent with  a  sustainable 
economic recovery and a return to more normal levels of interest rates. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A long period of exceptionally low interest rates may also encourage excessive risk-taking, 
leading to vulnerabilities in important financial institutions. 
So  if  we  cannot  rely  on  monetary  stimulus  alone,  what  additional  policies  should  we 
consider? The right prescription now is a programme that complements monetary stimulus 
with measures to promote the necessary long-run rebalancing of the economy, enabling us 
to  return  eventually  to  more  normal  levels  of  interest  rates.  Only  then  can  we  return  to  a 
sustainable growth path. We must not be inactive, but we must be selective in order to be 
effective. 
What are those other policies? They come under three headings: restoring confidence in our 
banks, reforms to raise the future potential supply of our economy, and changes in the world 
economy and exchange rates. 
Much has already been done to fix the banking system in this country. And there has been a 
real improvement in the position of UK banks. Capital ratios have risen, leverage has fallen, 
liquidity  has  improved,  and  bank  funding  costs  have  fallen  sharply,  especially  since  the 
announcement  of  the  Funding  for  Lending  Scheme  last  summer  and  an  improvement  in 
market sentiment towards the euro area. 
Banks  are  now  overflowing  with  liquidity,  largely  as  a  result  of  the  enormous  increase  in 
central bank reserves held by commercial banks. Yet there remains anxiety in markets about 
the resilience of UK banks. That is affecting the terms on which banks can obtain funding 
and so their ability to lend to the rest of the economy. Some argue that UK banks’ capital 
ratios  compare  favourably  with  many  of  their  continental  counterparts.  They  do,  and  we 
should  welcome  that.  But  there  is  only  one  simple  test  of  whether  UK  banks  now  have 
sufficient capital. It is whether they can convince investors that it is safe to provide them with 
funding at reasonable spreads over Bank Rate without central bank support. As the Financial 
Policy Committee (FPC) noted in its recent Review, UK banks are still some way from being 
able to convince the market in this respect. 
Regulators,  who  from  1  April  will  be  in  the  Bank  of  England’s  new  Prudential  Regulation 
Authority,  are  now  working  hard  to  ensure  that  banks  are  making  adequate  provisions  for 
future  losses,  the  likely  costs  of  regulatory  penalties  and  compensation  to  customers,  and 
stating the riskiness of their assets in a more prudent way. A lesson from past crises, and 
also from this one, is that it is important to act now rather than hope that problems will go 
away  of  their  own  accord.  As  the  FPC  said  last  December,  it  is  likely  that  banks  will  be 
required either to raise more capital or to restructure their businesses or exposures, and the 
FPC  will review the position in  March. There is no single remedy appropriate to all banks. 
With  proper  implementation,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  two  banks  with  significant  state 
shareholdings could not largely be back in the private sector within a relatively short period. 
After all, in the United States banks that received state support are already back in private 
hands. 
Restoring our banking system to full – and transparent – health is only one of the structural 
changes that will be necessary to rebalance the economy. Structural reforms are the familiar 
mantra  of  all  international  meetings.  As  a  means  of  compensating  for  a  large  loss  of 
competitiveness they are too slow acting to be effective. But in current circumstances they 
are, for the UK, a necessary complement to the other measures I have described. Since the 
crisis began real wages have fallen by almost 10% – a large but necessary adjustment to 
make the production of tradable goods and services more attractive than non-tradables, and 
to  stabilise  the  public  finances.  Supply  reforms  can  make  that  adjustment  more  palatable, 
and, by raising expected future incomes, they increase the rate of return on new investment 
and encourage spending, both investment and consumption, today. 
It  cannot  be  for  a  central  bank  to  design  a  programme  of  such  supply  initiatives,  but  in 
economic terms there has never been a better time for supply-side reform. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The need to rebalance the economy means that all of the policy responses I have discussed 
will be required to restore the economy to full health. 
The final part of the prescription is outside the UK’s control. Engineering a recovery while our 
main trading partner is in a downturn is a difficult undertaking. We would all benefit from a 
resolution of the problems in the euro area. The actions by the ECB have brought a period of 
calm to financial markets, and so bought more time. But, as the President of the European 
Central Bank, Mario Draghi, has said on many occasions, only politicians can produce lasting 
solutions to the problems facing the euro area, whether by restoring competitiveness to the 
periphery or creating a framework for a transfer union. 
The euro area illustrates a major problem for the world economy as a whole – the need to 
rebalance  domestic  demand  away  from  countries  with  trade  deficits  to  those  with  trade 
surpluses. Without that, an increasing number of countries are coming to the view that only a 
lower real exchange rate will provide the stimulus to demand that their economies require. 
Several have taken action to achieve that end. That is a recipe for competitive depreciations, 
what some have called “currency wars”. Yet the existing configuration of exchange rates is 
unlikely to deliver stability. For almost two decades the world has struggled with, but failed to 
resolve, this problem. So it is hard to be optimistic about how easy it will be to manage the 
resulting tensions. 
The fall  in  our  own  exchange  rate,  of  some  25%  between  late  2007  and  the  beginning of 
2009, has reduced the gap between our exports and imports in real terms from around 3½% 
of GDP to around 1½%. But the persistence of the current account deficit is evidence that an 
adjustment  of  sterling  of  that  order  was  certainly  necessary  for  a  full  rebalancing  of  our 
economy. 
With  that  diagnosis  and  prescription,  what  then is  the prognosis:  what does  2013  hold  in 
store for the UK economy? On Friday we shall see the first official estimate for growth in the 
fourth  quarter  of  last  year.  As  we  saw  throughout  last  year,  quarter  to  quarter  changes  in 
growth rates tell us little about the underlying strength of the economy, affected as they are 
by one-off factors such as the Diamond Jubilee and the Olympics. The continuation of the 
“zig-zag” pattern of growth rates last year means that, whether negative or positive, growth in 
Q4 will almost certainly turn out to have been considerably weaker than in Q3. 
Inflation too has disappointed recently. It is set to remain above target for much of this year – 
in part because administered and regulated prices, such as those for electricity and gas, rail 
fares and university tuition fees, will put unusually strong upward pressure on inflation. Those 
prices are less susceptible to the influence of monetary policy, and will soon be contributing 
around one percentage point to measured inflation. So prices set in the market sector of the 
economy will need to rise by only about 1% a year if inflation is to meet the 2% target. That is 
a tall order. But the Monetary Policy Committee can respond flexibly by looking through the 
effects  of  administered  prices  as  long  as  market-generated  inflation  pressures  remain 
subdued. 
There  are  good  reasons  to  suppose  that  a  gentle  recovery  is  underway.  Broad  money 
growth,  adjusted  for  transactions  between  financial  intermediaries,  is  now  rising  at  around 
4½%  a  year,  a  rate  that  should,  if  maintained,  show  up  in  a  recovery  during  2013.  Credit 
conditions  have  improved,  and  should  improve  further  as  the  impact  of  the  Funding  for 
Lending  Scheme  kicks  in.  Mortgage  rates  have  fallen,  especially  for  high  loan  to  value 
mortgages. Big companies have large holdings of cash and ready access to capital markets. 
Equity prices are nearly 10% higher than last January. If the policy prescriptions I mentioned 
earlier  were  adopted,  then  confidence  that  we  were  moving  in  the  right  direction  should 
translate into higher business and housing investment, and underpin the recovery. 
Recent  actions  by  central  banks  and  governments  in  a  number  of  industrialised  countries 
have  raised  questions  about  the  frameworks  within  which  monetary  policy  is  being 
conducted. In the UK, the inflation target was introduced almost 21 years ago, and it has now 
come of age. It would be sensible to review the arrangements for setting monetary policy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Last October I reviewed the first two decades of experience with the inflation target. In that 
speech,  I  argued  that  there  were  times  when  a  concern  for  financial  stability  might  justify 
deviating from the inflation target, but that policies aimed directly at preventing too rapid an 
expansion  of  financial  balance  sheets,  of  the  kind  now  available  to  the  Bank’s  Financial 
Policy  Committee, might  be  a  less  costly  way,  in  terms  of  lost  output  and  employment,  of 
achieving  overall  stability.  And  I  also  argued  that  price  stability  in  the  long  run  remained 
essential for economic success. 
That  is  why  price  stability  is  the  central  plank  of  the  remit  given  to  the  MPC  by  the 
Chancellor. The other part of the remit makes clear that we are not expected to pursue 2% 
inflation in the short run whatever the cost – it recognises that attempting to hit the inflation 
target at all times may cause “undesirable volatility in output”. The remit overall has become 
known as “flexible inflation targeting”. It is a way of trading off output and inflation variability 
in the short run, while ensuring that inflation remains on track to return to the 2% target. 
Until the crisis, there appeared to be no real tension between hitting the inflation target and 
ensuring steady growth. More recently, we have had to make difficult choices. The MPC has 
looked through the impact of temporary external shocks and administered prices (including 
changes  to  VAT)  on  the  level  of  CPI  inflation  and  focussed  on  the  level  of  domestically 
generated inflation in the market sector. Money wage increases have been low and stable. 
But  CPI  inflation  has  been  above  the  2%  target  for  a  long  period.  Should  the  MPC  have 
taken action to bring inflation down? To do that would have meant driving down wages by 
creating  a  deeper  recession,  even  higher  unemployment  and  lasting  damage  to  the  job 
prospects of many young people. I know of no-one who has argued that the problem with the 
UK economy is that it has not had a sufficiently deep recession. Inflation rose to over 5% but 
has now come down to 2.7%, and the Committee believes that it is likely to come back to the 
target over the next two years. In effect the MPC has allowed a longer inflation overshoot 
than usual in order to avoid pushing up unemployment. 
Our current remit does not specify how the MPC should strike a balance between growth and 
inflation  in  the  short  run.  The  horizon  over  which  inflation  should  come  back  to  target  is 
effectively delegated to the MPC. 
But should the MPC itself choose how quickly to bring inflation back to target, or should the 
government use its annual remit to set that horizon? Is there a gain from trying to quantify 
how  the  MPC  should  manage  the  trade-off  between  growth  and  inflation  in  the  short  run? 
The  recent  guidance  by  the  Federal  Reserve  about  the  conditions  under  which  it  would 
continue to hold interest rates at close to zero is a way of quantifying the “flexibility” in flexible 
inflation targeting. It describes how the Federal Reserve will interpret its freedom to balance 
its twin objectives for employment and inflation. How much discretion to give to the MPC and 
how much should remain with the Chancellor is an interesting question that was raised, but 
not  fully  resolved,  in  1997  with  the  system  of  open  letters  which  gives  the  Chancellor  the 
opportunity to comment on the horizon over which the MPC plans to bring inflation back to 
target. So there are certainly aspects of the inflation targeting regime to consider. 
In  assessing  the  current  framework,  however,  there  are  two  factors  that  should  not  be 
ignored. First, the primary responsibility of any central bank is to ensure stability of the price 
level in the long run. To drop the objective of low inflation would be to forget a lesson from 
our  post-war  history.  In  the  1960s,  Britain  stood  out  from  much  of  the  rest  of  the 
industrialised world in trying to target an unrealistic growth rate for the economy as a whole, 
while pretending that its pursuit was consistent with stable inflation. The painful experience of 
the 1970s showed that this illusion on the part of policy-makers came at a terrible price for 
working men and women in this country. The battle to bring inflation expectations down was 
long and hard, and involved persistently high levels of unemployment. Wishful thinking can 
be indulged if the costs fall on the dreamers; when the costs fall on others, it is unacceptable. 
So  a  long-run  target  of  2%  inflation  should  be  an  essential  part  of  our  macroeconomic 
framework. And it is interesting to note that within the past year both the Federal Reserve 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
and the Bank of Japan have adopted a target for annual inflation of 2%. The anchoring of 
inflation expectations has been the most successful aspect of the inflation targeting regime 
and  it  has  allowed  the  Bank  to  avoid  an  unnecessarily  damaging  tightening  of  policy  in 
response to short-run movements in inflation. It would be irresponsible to lose that. 
Second,  the  inflation  target  is  not  an  impediment  to  achieving  recovery  today.  It  has  not 
prevented  the  MPC  from  taking  measures  to  combat  the  downward  momentum  in  the 
economy following the shock of 2008. It is precisely because inflation expectations have so 
far  remained  firmly  anchored  that  the  MPC  has  been  able  to  respond  flexibly  to  weak 
demand. So the challenge we face is not the inadequacy of the framework, but the fact that 
there is no easy route to recovery after a major banking crisis. Recovery is inevitably slow 
and protracted. The healing process will take time, and patience is not a quality associated 
with our political debate. 
Patience  and  a  sense  of  realism  are  sometimes  mistaken  for  fatalism.  Our  economy  is 
recovering, more slowly than we might wish, but we are moving in the right direction. The 
Bank  has  not  been,  and  will  not  be,  inactive.  Low  interest  rates  will  not  be  withdrawn 
prematurely, but we should not rely solely on general stimulus to aggregate demand. If we 
embark on the type of programme I have outlined tonight, I believe we can roll back the black 
cloud of uncertainty darkening the outlook for demand, allow the rays of supply optimism to 
peer through, and sustain a recovery based on a successful rebalancing of the UK economy. 
The  need  to  fix  the  banking  system  and  introduce  improvements  to  the  future  supply 
performance of the economy are, I know, felt even more keenly here in Northern Ireland than 
in Great Britain. And patience is a quality that has been demanded of you all in the Province 
over many years. The business community is the key to the prosperity of Northern Ireland. I 
wish all of you success in the challenges ahead. And I look forward to returning in a private 
capacity to enjoy the beauty of your Province.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
