Guy Debelle: Funding Australia’s future 
Remarks by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  at  the  Launch  of  Funding  Australia’s  Future,  The  Australia  Centre  for  Financial 
Studies, Sydney, 10 July 2013. 
Thanks to Chris Stewart for his help with these remarks.  
 The  Australian  Centre  for  Financial  Studies  has  put  together  a  very  interesting  and  timely 
body  of  work  on  an  important  topic.1  It  is  a  good  example  of  a  collaborative  effort  that 
encompasses academic research with a very applied focus.  
The  financial  sector  plays  a  unique  role  in  the  functioning  of  the  economy.  It  acts  as  the 
intermediary between the myriad saving and spending decisions of households, businesses 
and  government,  both  domestic  and  foreign.  In  doing  so,  it  is  unlike  other  parts  of  the 
economy.  As  I’ve  said  before,  the  financial  sector  is  not  at  the  end  of  a  production  chain 
producing  something  which  directly  generates  utility  for  society.2  Rather,  it  is  a  critical  link 
along  the  way,  the  oil  that  keeps  the  economy  ticking  over.  When  the  oil  dries  up,  the 
economic engine starts to malfunction and can ultimately grind to a halt.  
So in that sense, the set of papers that we have here tonight gets right to the heart of the 
issue of how well that oil is working and whether there’s any risk of it drying up in the future.  
There’s clearly been a lot going on in the global financial sector over the past few years. At 
various times, some channels of financial intermediation have actually seized up, much more 
so offshore than onshore. So the question at the heart of these set of papers is well worth 
posing. It is also very timely as the financial sector is still undergoing considerable change as 
it adjusts to the lessons learned from the turmoil of recent years and the regulatory changes 
that have come along with that.  
Today,  I  will  try  to  give  a  quick  overview  of  the  work  that  has  been  done  as  part  of  this 
project, and talk a bit about where to from here. But the main point I would like to get across 
is that you should take the time to read each of these three papers. They each provide plenty 
of food for thought.  
Before getting to the papers individually, I’ll step back and talk about the project as a whole. 
The aims of the Funding Australia’s Future project are to:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
assess the future demand for and supply of finance in Australia;  
consider the interaction between different participants in the financial system;  
identify the potential challenges facing the system; and  
outline  institutional  or  regulatory  changes  that  might  improve  the  operation  of  the 
system.  
That’s a fairly hefty agenda, as you can see.  
In looking at the papers, where I think they are the most useful is in providing a clear, well-
articulated framework to think about these issues. Such a framework has often been lacking 
in the debate that has gone on at various times over the past few years.  
                                                
1  <http://www.fundingaustraliasfuture.com> 
2  See Debelle G (2012), “Credo et Fido: Credit and Trust”, Deakin University's 2012 Richard Searby Oration, 
Melbourne, 25 September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Take one current example, which is on the G20 agenda, namely the “lack of infrastructure 
funding”. To answer this question appropriately, we need to know whether it is a problem for 
financing different stages of a project, what type of risk is holding any financing back, what 
type  of  institutions  and  instruments  might  help  any  shortfall,  etc.  But  there  needs  to  be  a 
coherent framework in mind to be able to do this, and to know what are the right questions to 
be posing.  
The papers commissioned for Stage 1 of the project are designed to set the scene. I will give 
a brief summary of each of the main points I take away from the three papers.  
Kevin  Davis’  paper,  “Funding  Australia’s  Future:  From Where  Do We  Begin?”  provides  an 
insightful overview on a number of topics. Let me give a brief disclaimer here. Kevin was my 
first macroeconomics lecturer at university back in the day, so I am very much in his debt for 
all he taught me about macro and monetary economics.  
• 
The first main  point  in  Kevin’s  paper  is  the  identification  of the  ways  in  which  the 
Australian financial system differs to other developed economies.  
Second, it discusses the main consequences of the financial crisis for financial flows 
in Australia as well as some of the more fundamental forces influencing the longer-
term evolution of the sector.  
Lastly, it identifies some of the implications of these influences. For example, it links 
changes in the competitive advantage of banks in raising deposits to changes in the 
nature  of  the  loan  origination  process,  the  length  of  the  financial  intermediation 
“chain”, and the overall cost of intermediation.  
  Daniel  Mulino’s  paper, 
Infrastructure”,  provides  a 
comprehensive overview of what the Australian financial system does well and summarises 
current and prospective issues.  
• 
“Improving  Australia’s  Financial 
While  Daniel  notes  that  the  sector  performs  well  in  supporting  the  economy,  he 
argues there are a number of issues that are worth further exploration. In doing so, 
he highlights, for instance, the potential improvements to the payments system; the 
financing  of  greenfield  infrastructure  and  high-risk  innovation  projects;  and  the 
arrangements  around  post-retirement  savings  products  and  the  regulation  around 
SMSFs.  
Dr Mulino notes that in some areas, such as the payments system, there is already 
work  underway  by  agencies  including  the  RBA.  In  other  areas,  such  as 
infrastructure funding, he notes that Australia is not alone in dealing with some of 
these challenges.  
 Rodney  Maddock  and  Peter  Munckton’s  paper,  “The  Future  Demand  and  Supply  of 
Finance”,  considers  the  longer-term  availability  of  funding  for  Australia’s  economic  growth, 
the composition of these funding flows, and the role of regulation in their determination.  
• 
As such, it sits between the other two papers in that it provides a longer-run analysis 
of the flow of funds in the economy – such as the domestic savings rate back to the 
1870s – as  well as a broader overview of the role of regulation on these flows. It 
also places a much greater emphasis on the flows within the system rather than the 
balance sheet structures.  
Overall,  it  concludes  that  the  demand for  and  supply  of finance  should  align  over 
coming years, although there are a number of factors that might alter this balance 
and hence the cost of intermediation.  
 This  last  point  is  a  particularly  important  one.  The  experience  over  the  past  few  years  in 
Australia  shows  that  even  in  the  most  stressed  of  circumstances,  the  financial  sector  can 
often adapt and re-equilibrate to quite dramatic changes in circumstances. This might involve 
sizeable  changes  in  prices,  but  it  is  important  to  look  at  things  from  a  general  equilibrium 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
perspective,  rather  than  analysing  things  in  a  partial  manner.  The  financial  system  is  very 
much a system, with a high degree of interconnectedness.  
A number of other general lessons can also be gathered from the papers.  
1. 
As  noted  by  Kevin  Davis,  the financial  sector  influences  the  amount  of aggregate 
risk-taking in the economy, it affects how that risk is distributed, and in doing so can 
either amplify or moderate the effects of shocks to the system.  
The  structure  and  activities  of  the  financial  sector  are  the  outcome  of  numerous 
forces over long periods of time.  
Looking  at  aggregate  information,  or  one  aspect  in  isolation,  can  often  be 
misleading.  This  is  true  when  we  are  looking  at  the  capital  flows  into  and  out  of 
Australia.  The  net  flows,  which  are  often  the  focus  of  analysis,  conceal  a  lot  of 
important  information  that  is  only  evident  if  you  look  at  the  gross  flows.3  Another 
example  is  thinking  about  the  financing  of  the  corporate  sector,  where  the 
preference  for  debt  versus  equity  funding  varies  considerably  depending  on  the 
nature  and  size  of  the  business.  Just  looking  at  bond  and  equity  financing  in 
aggregate again conceals much of the interesting information.  
Stocks  matter  at  least  as  much  as  flows.  Just  as  a  disproportionate  amount  of 
analysis is partial rather than general, stocks are very often neglected in favour of 
flows, as on the price side, are levels rather than rates of change.  
The financial system is always evolving – in both cyclical and structural senses.  
– 
In  terms  of  cyclical  aspects,  financial  institutions  currently  have  a  better 
appreciation of liquidity risk than they did six years ago. But if history is any 
guide,  at  some  point  in  the  future,  that  appreciation  is  likely  to  wane;  for 
example,  the  lessons  from  the  runs  on  some  deposit-taking  institutions  and 
trusts in the early 1990s or the concerns about liquidity in Sydney’s early days 
as  a  colony  (there  aren’t  too many  around  in  the financial  sector today  who 
remember that).  
The financial system is also continuously evolving in a structural sense. There 
are a large array of financial products that simply didn’t exist two decades ago. 
In some cases, their arrival has not always been a good thing. In other cases, 
such  as  that  of  asset-backed  securities,  or  going  back  a  bit  further,  junk 
bonds, a new product arrived, the market grew too fast too quickly resulting in 
considerable  dislocation,  before  settling  down  to  be  an  important,  but  much 
smaller part of the financial landscape.  
 The  factors  driving  evolution  are  sometimes  very  similar  over  the  decades,  while 
some factors fade in importance and new drivers emerge.  
– 
The increasing size of superannuation funds has played an important role in 
influencing the shape of the financial sector in Australia for the past couple of 
decades,  and  given  its  current  size,  is  likely  to  continue  to  do  so  for  the 
foreseeable future.  
Likewise, government financing arrangements, banking regulations and banks’ 
liquid asset holdings continue to be strongly related.  
In  contrast,  unlike  the  1990s,  we  no  longer  talk  about  how  life  insurance 
offices’  mortgage  lending  activities  might  return  to  their  1950s  and  1960s 
levels of importance.  
                                                  
3  See, for example, Debelle G (2013), “Funding the Resources Investment Boom”, Address to the Melbourne 
Institute Public Economic Forum, Canberra, 16 April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
7. 
More  generally,  how  the  system  evolves  to  these  forces  is  impossible  to  fully 
comprehend ahead of time.  
– 
Twenty years ago, for example, it would have been very hard to see exactly 
how  the  competitive  dynamics  would  play  out  in  the  banking  sector.  In  the 
housing  loan  market,  discounts  became  increasingly  common  (and  larger) 
while  in  the  credit  card  market  banks  initially  competed  through  loyalty 
programs rather than through lower interest rates.  
Furthermore, there was a view in the mid 1990s that a rapid expansion in the 
debt market could be driven by the growth of superannuation funds, but it was 
unclear  whether  any  disintermediation  would  be  most  pronounced  in  the 
corporate bond or mortgage markets.  
Likewise,  while  people  understood  that  new  distribution  methods  in  the 
banking sector were likely to evolve, few people would have appreciated the 
move from ATMs and telephone banking to internet banking and banking on 
our mobile phones.  
This  reflects  the  fact  that  technology  progresses  in  ways  that  we  can’t 
imagine.  
Differences in incentives and the starting position of market participants matter 
a lot in terms of behaviours and subsequent developments.  
Society’s  attitudes  towards  efficiency  and  risk  evolve  and  are  very  much 
shaped  by  the  course  of  history.  Someone  born  in  the  Depression  had  a 
different  attitude  to  risk  than  a  baby  boomer  who  in  turn  probably  has  a 
different attitude to risk than someone gaining financial literacy in the current 
environment.  
     8. 
A  key  consequence  of  this  last  point  is  that  the  industry  and  regulators  have  to 
ensure  that  institutions  are  resilient  to  short-run  shocks  but  are  able  to  adjust  to 
longer-run  secular  trends  with  adequate  consideration  for  both  competition  and 
financial system stability.  
With these three papers providing a sound foundation, where to now? 
Just as there are differences in opinions on some of the issues raised in these papers, there 
will  also  be  different  views  about  how  to  prioritise  these  areas  for  the  next  stage  of  the 
review. But as I said earlier, I think one of the most useful outcomes of the work to date is the 
articulation of a coherent framework with which to consider the question.  
That said, I think one of the key areas that requires more work is one which is very much in a 
state of flux at the moment, namely the implementation of the vast regulatory reform agenda. 
A holistic view of how the Australian and global financial system is being transformed by this 
would be very welcome and is much needed. 
Finally, a particularly useful outcome of this project is the bringing together of many of the 
key participants in the sector to discuss the issues and providing a fruitful forum with which to 
do so. I thank the ACFS for the efforts in coordinating the work and wish the participants luck 
in this regard as well as again commending the amount of work already accomplished. As I 
said earlier, my main recommendation is that you spare the time to read these three papers.  
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
