Andreas Dombret: The European sovereign debt crisis – past, present 
and future 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, to participants of the GMAP of Fletcher School, Berlin, 26 August 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Dean Nutter, 
Dear Ambassador Scharioth, 
Dear students of the Fletcher School, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
On 25 March 2010, Jean-Claude Juncker, the President of the Eurogroup, made a statement 
on  Greece.  This  statement  included  the  following  words:  “As  part  of  a  package  involving 
substantial  International  Monetary  Fund  financing  and  a  majority  of  European  financing, 
euro-area member states are ready to contribute to coordinated bilateral loans.” 
That sounds somewhat long-winded. Put simply, it means that the euro-area heads of state 
and government were ready to support Greece financially. That statement could be seen as 
the official start of the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area, the “starting shot” so to speak. 
It wasn’t of course the real start. The crisis was not something that happened suddenly, but 
rather the end of a long road. And the road leading out of the crisis is just as long. It is just as 
long, but much more arduous, particularly for those countries which are directly affected by 
the crisis. 
And  everyone  agrees  on  where  the  road  should  lead:  a  stable  monetary  union.  What  is 
controversial, however, is what road we have to take in order to arrive at that destination. 
In order to recognise the direction in which we have to go, we should first look at where we 
have  come  from.  Let  us  therefore  look  back  at  the  road  that  led  us  into  the  crisis,  at  its 
causes. 
Looking back: the causes of the sovereign debt crisis 
2. 
There are a very large number of angles from which it is possible to look at such a complex 
phenomenon as the sovereign debt crisis. And depending on the angle, it is possible to tell 
somewhat  a  different  story.  The  core  elements  of  those  stories  are  always  the  same, 
however. We can find them at both the national and the European levels. 
Let  us  first  take  a  look  at  the  national  level;  in  other  words,  the  countries  themselves. 
Following  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  a  large  amount  of  capital  flowed  into  the  countries 
which  are  now  at  the  centre  of  the  crisis  such  as  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal,  Spain  and 
Cyprus.  First  of  all,  that  is  economically  plausible:  capital  flows  from  highly  developed 
countries into countries that are catching up economically. 
In  our  case,  however,  the  inflowing  capital  did  not  finance  a  sound  catching-up  process. 
Instead,  it  financed  house  price  bubbles  in  some  countries  –  such  as  Ireland  and  Spain. 
Elsewhere, it funded excessive government consumption – for example, in Greece. 
The  inflowing  capital  did  not  fund  sound  growth:  instead,  it  masked  an  existing  lack  of 
competitiveness  and,  in  fact,  made  it  even  worse.  And  it  was  precisely  these  structural 
problems that were the breeding ground for the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
What  was  the  situation  at  the  European  level?  Here,  it  was  mainly  shortcomings  in  the 
framework of monetary union that laid the ground for the crisis. 
In order to understand these shortcomings, it is important to know the particular features of 
monetary  union.  The  European  monetary  union  is  special  because  it  combines  a  single 
monetary policy with national fiscal policies. 
The  monetary  policy  for  the  17  countries  of  the  euro  area  is  decided  by  the  Governing 
Council of the ECB in Frankfurt. However, the fiscal policies of the 17 members of the euro 
area  is  a  matter  for  the  national  policymakers  –  each  country  decides  itself  on  its  own 
government revenues and expenditures. 
Given  such  an  imbalance  of  responsibilities,  the  individual  countries  have  incentives  to 
borrow.  You  see,  the  costs  of  borrowing  are  spread  across  all  the  member  states  of  the 
monetary union – for example, by means of a higher interest rate level for all of them. 
This  incentive  to  borrow,  this  “deficit  bias”,  was  also  recognised  by  the  founders  of  the 
monetary union. In order to reduce it, they did two things. 
First, they created explicit rules on borrowing in the form of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
This Pact was intended to keep a tight check on national fiscal policies. 
Second,  the  founders  of  monetary  union  incorporated  the  “no  bail-out”  principle  into  the 
Maastricht  Treaty:  no  euro-area  country  was  to  be  liable  for the  debts of  another member 
state. 
Thus, individual responsibility was to be the guiding principle for fiscal policy in the monetary 
union. Each country was itself to bear the consequences of its own fiscal policy. 
These rules were intended to keep borrowing by the euro-area countries within reasonable 
limits. But rules were not the only means of achieving this. The financial market actors, too, 
were to ensure that that the euro-area countries did not incur excessive debt. 
The idea behind this is simple: if a country were to become excessively indebted, it would 
only be able to borrow on the financial markets in future at very high rates of interest. This 
means that the country in question would have to reduce its debt to a sustainable level. 
Yet, neither of these two safeguards worked. Neither the discipline of the financial markets 
nor the rules were able to prevent individual countries running up excessive debt. 
Investors on the financial markets tolerated the problems of individual  countries for far too 
long.  At  the  same  time,  policymakers  stretched  and  sometimes  ignored  the  rules  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. 
And  then,  in  2008,  came  the  global  financial  crisis.  Many  countries  had  to  rescue  their 
banking systems and support economic activity. And that dramatically drove up their levels of 
sovereign debt. 
And,  suddenly,  the  investors  on  the  financial  markets  seemed  to  become  aware  of  the 
problems which some countries were experiencing. Now they saw the high level of sovereign 
debt,  the  lack  of  competitiveness  and  the  risk  of  contagion  effects  between  the  individual 
countries.  In short: they  lost  confidence  in  the  crisis-hit  countries.  But this  also  meant that 
capital flows dried up – the capital flows that had previously covered up the problems. 
And that brings us to the statement by the Eurogroup that I quoted when I began my speech. 
In order to safeguard financial stability in the monetary union as a whole, rescue packages 
were set up first for Greece, then for Ireland, Portugal, for the Spanish banking system and, 
finally, for Cyprus. 
At the same time, central banks took various non-standard measures in order to stabilise the 
situation – I shall return to this point later. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  an  exceptional  crisis,  taking  exceptional  measures  is  undoubtedly  the  right  thing  to  do. 
However, looking to the future, neither course can provide a permanent solution to the crisis. 
Neither the rescue packages nor monetary policy can remedy the basic underlying problems 
that I have just mentioned. 
Looking forward: ways out of the sovereign debt crisis 
3. 
In order to achieve that, three things are necessary. First, government finances have to be 
put  back  in  order;  second,  competitiveness  has  to  be  improved;  third,  the  framework  of 
monetary union has to be strengthened. Let us look at these three necessities in more detail. 
Budget consolidation and structural reforms 
3.1 
Many euro-area countries have very high levels of sovereign debt. In Greece at the end of 
2012,  it  was  roughly  one  and  a  half  times  annual  economic  output.  And  in  other  member 
states,  too,  sovereign  debt  is  well  above  annual  economic  output.  Against  that  backdrop, 
reducing government debt appears to be an urgent necessity. 
The associated course of fiscal consolidation has come in for some criticism, however. It is 
argued that, especially in a crisis, too many austerity measures place an unnecessary drag 
on the economy. However, a distinction has to be made at this point: in the long term, sound 
government finances are good for the economy – no-one disputes that. In the same way, no-
one disputes that austerity measures can dampen economic activity in the short term. 
But  we  should  look  beyond  the  present  moment  and,  above  all,  not  confuse  cause  and 
effect. What triggered the crisis was the very fact that governments were no longer able to 
borrow  on  the  markets  because  they  had  already  accumulated  excessive  levels  of  debt. 
Saving is essential in order to regain the confidence of the markets. That is the only way to 
eliminate the financing problems. 
By the way, according to a survey by the Pew Research Center, in many countries a majority 
of the general public is in favour of fiscal consolidation – 81% in France, 67% in Spain, 59% 
in Italy, and 67% in Germany. 
On one point, the critics are right, however: saving is not enough on its own, it is only part of 
the necessary structural reforms. 
And that brings us to the second thing that is needed. Not only do the countries have to put 
their government finances in order, they have to reform their national economies so that they 
become competitive again. 
There is no ready-made solution for this; each country needs different reforms. There is one 
common denominator, however. The labour markets have to be made more flexible. Flexible 
labour  markets  help  enterprises  to  adapt  quickly  to  changing  conditions.  This  is  not  only 
important in crises; it also promotes the overall pace of economic growth. 
All  these  reforms  are  painful  and  arduous.  But  they  are  indispensable  and  we  are  seeing 
initial  signs  of  success.  Ireland  has  already  improved  its  competitiveness.  Spain,  too,  has 
undertaken  significant  structural  reforms  and  made  good  progress  in  reducing  its  current 
account deficit. It will now be important for the governments to maintain that course. 
A better architecture for the monetary union 
3.2 
However, if we want a stable monetary union, it will not be enough to eliminate the problems 
at the national level alone. We also have to improve the architecture of the monetary union. 
I cited the central weakness at the start of my speech: the imbalance between a monetary 
policy conducted at the European level and fiscal policies conducted at the national level. 
Basically,  there  are  two  ways  to  realign  this  imbalance:  either  the  European  level  gains 
certain  control  rights  over  national  budgets  –  which  would  mean  a  deeper  political 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
integration.  Or  we  leave  control  of  fiscal  policy  at  the  national  level.  But  then  the  national 
level  also  has  to  assume  liability  for  its  policies  –  that  would  mean  strengthening  the 
Maastricht framework. 
The first course would amount to what is known as a fiscal union. But that would depend on 
the countries of the euro area transferring national sovereignty to the European level – for 
example, by giving the European level the right to intervene in the case of unsound public 
finances. 
Giving  up  sovereignty  in  this  way  would  be  a  radical  change  and  require  wide-ranging 
legislative changes nationally and at the European level. More than anything, such changes 
would need the support not only of policymakers but also of the general public. And, on this 
point, we should be realistic. It is not possible to identify any willingness to do that at present 
– not in Germany or in any other country of the euro area. 
This just leaves the second course of action: that is, an improved Maastricht framework, a 
“Maastricht 2.0”. Among other things, that means strengthening the rules on borrowing – the 
Stability and Growth Pact not only needs teeth, it also has to be able to bite. The rules have 
since been tightened – now they have to be applied and complied with. 
A “Maastricht 2.0” would also mean taking the no bail-out principle more seriously again. But 
that calls for the possibility of sovereign default as the ultimate logical conclusion of individual 
responsibility.  Sovereign  defaults  have  to  be  possible  without  destabilising  the  financial 
system of the euro area as a whole. 
The banking union as part of a better architecture 
3.3 
And that is an important point, because the close link between government finances and the 
financial system was a major element of the crisis. 
Basically, this is very much a vicious circle: if public finances run into difficulties, the banks 
are  put  under  strain–  if  the  banks  hold  government  bonds  on  their  balance  sheets,  for 
example. 
Conversely,  if  banks  run  into  difficulties,  public  finances  are  put  under  strain.  Take  the 
example  of  Ireland:  in  order  to  save  its  banking  sector,  Ireland  ran  up  a  budget  deficit 
amounting to 30% of its economic output in 2010. 
There  are  various  approaches  to  breaking  through  this  vicious  circle.  One  of  them  is  the 
planned European banking union. 
The  banking  union  consists  of  two  elements.  One  element  is  joint  banking  supervision  for 
large  banks,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  Joint  supervision  would  allow  banks 
everywhere  to  be  supervised  according  to  the same  high  standards.  It would  also  make  it 
possible to take better account of cross-border effects. 
But all of that cannot entirely rule out the possibility of bank failure. And that is a good thing. 
After all, the risk of corporate failure is a core element of the market economy. 
Therefore, measures have to be taken to ensure that banks can fail without placing a strain 
on government finances. And this is where the second element of the banking union comes 
into play: a single resolution and restructuring mechanism for banks. And that, too, is under 
development at present. 
Properly equipped, the banking union is thus a key component of a stable monetary union. 
With  the  banking  union,  government finances  will  be  better  protected  in  the  future  against 
crises in the banking sector. 
But we have to break through the vicious circle from another direction, too. We also have to 
protect banks from government finances running into difficulties. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
One  of  the  most  important  measures  in  this  respect  concerns  banking  regulation.  Banks 
should back government bonds with capital that corresponds to their risk. 
For one thing, this would strengthen the market mechanism: banks would have an incentive 
to  demand  appropriate  risk  premiums  for  government  bonds.  That,  in  turn,  would  be  an 
important market signal for governments. For another, it would also create a buffer protecting 
banks against a government running into financial difficulties and its bonds losing value. 
The role of monetary policy 
4. 
I  believe  one  thing  has become  clear. The  crisis  cannot  be  easily  resolved  just  like that  – 
there  is  no  magic  formula  for  solving  all  the  problems  at  one  stroke.  Instead,  we  need 
reforms at many different levels. We are undoubtedly making progress, but we have not yet 
reached our destination. 
Travelling the rest of the way will certainly not be easy. Nevertheless, policymakers must not 
give in to the temptation of taking what they think is a convenient shortcut. And that brings 
me to the last point in my speech: monetary policy. 
Monetary policy has already played a big part in helping to contain the crisis. But it cannot 
resolve the crisis – everyone is in agreement on that. And, with the measures taken so far, it 
has already ventured far into unknown and dangerous territory. 
It  is  no  secret  that  the  Bundesbank  takes  a  critical  view  of  the  ECB’s  government  bond 
purchase  programmes  in  particular.  If  Eurosystem  central  banks  buy  government  bonds 
issued by countries with poor credit ratings, the risks of an unsound national fiscal policy will 
be spread across all the euro-area states. 
But only elected parliaments should decide on such a redistribution of risks, not independent 
central banks. And that is more than a problem concerning the theory of democracy. It might 
indeed also be a temptation to call central bank independence into question. And that would 
be disastrous in terms of central banks’ ability to safeguard price stability. 
All that monetary policymakers have done so far has bought time for governments to solve 
the crisis. It is now up to governments to use that time, because monetary policy measures 
are not without risks and side effects. We should be aware of that. 
Conclusion 
5. 
I would therefore like to stress once more how important it is for the reforms in Europe to go 
ahead.  Undertaking  the  necessary  political  steps  is  the  only  way  to  achieve  our  common 
goals of a stable monetary union and a stable euro. 
And  the  economic  advantages  of  a  single  currency  will  benefit  all  the  member  states  – 
including Germany. Of course, it is extremely difficult to put an exact figure on the concrete 
benefit. However, the people seem to understand to what extent they benefit from the euro. 
According to a recent poll by the forsa Institute nearly 70% of the Germans favour the euro. 
But we should not think about the euro only in economic categories. As long ago as 1950, 
the French economist Jacques Rueff noted that Europe will be made though the currency or 
not at all. 
The  euro  is  not  only  an  economic  project.  It  is  also  a  political  project.  It  is  an  important 
building  block  of  a  united  Europe.  Not  least  for  that  reason,  it  is  something  that  is  worth 
fighting for. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
