Jens Weidmann: Making the financial system more resilient 
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 2013 
FESE (Federation of European Securities Exchanges) Convention, Berlin, 27 June 2013. 
 Introduction 
1.  
President Jochumsen 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for having me here today at this year’s FESE Convention. It is the first time I have 
attended  this  event,  although  there  are  numerous  points  of  contact  between  securities 
exchanges and central banks. 
Central banks and securities exchanges have in common that they provide the economy with 
an  infrastructure  which  is  essential  for  a  well-functioning  market  economy.  Exchanges 
provide functioning and regulated platforms for the trading of securities, and so contribute to 
an efficient allocation of capital and resources. Central banks maintain price stability, thereby 
among  other  things  also  contributing  to  allocation  efficiency  and  laying  the  foundation  for 
sustainable growth. 
Another important task of central banks is to smooth the operation of payment systems. The 
Eurosystem  provides 
in  particular 
TARGET2.  By  establishing  TARGET2-Securities  the  Eurosystem  will  also  provide  a 
harmonised  and  centralised  method  of  settling  securities  in  central  bank  money  in  Europe 
that will improve settlement efficiency. 
financial  system, 
infrastructure 
important 
the 
for 
The role of financial market regulation 
2.  
Some years ago, financial integration in Europe was considered a one-way street leading to 
greater wealth. This view has been challenged by the financial crisis, since it has shown the 
flip-side  of  financial  integration  in  Europe,  which  is  mutual  contagion.  In  order  to  reap  the 
benefits of financial integration without having the downside risk of contagion effects, micro-
prudential  regulation  needs  tightening  and  effective  macro-prudential  regulation  has  to  be 
established. 
More  generally,  the  crisis  has  also  challenged  the  formerly  wide-spread  view  that  the 
outcome of financial deregulation is always good. Adair Turner, the former Chairman of the 
British FSA, self-critically confessed in a speech he gave at Cass Business School in 2010: 
“We  were  philosophically  inclined  to  accept  that  if  innovation  created  new  markets  and 
products that must be beneficial, and that if regulation stymied innovation that must be bad.” 
I definitely do not want to deny the merits of innovative, flexible financial markets. But with 
hindsight, I think it is also hard to deny that insufficient financial market regulation as well as 
inadequate  oversight  and  supervision  helped  macroeconomic  and  financial  imbalances  to 
emerge  or  to  intensify.  Moreover,  differences  in  the  speed  and  scope  of  financial 
deregulation at the national or regional level led to regulatory arbitrage by financial market 
players. 
The  pendulum  has  been  swinging  back  since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis.  When  the 
leaders  of  the  G20  pledged  in  November  2008  “to  strengthen  our  regulatory  regimes, 
prudential oversight, and risk management, and ensure that all financial markets, products 
and  participants  are  regulated  or  subject  to  oversight”,  this  was  the  starting  shot  for  a 
comprehensive global regulatory reform agenda. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Almost  five  years  later,  a  great  deal  has  been  done.  Many  issues  have  been  tackled  and 
reforms have already been implemented. Yet a great deal still needs to be done and we have 
to maintain political interest in a stable financial system with appropriate regulation. 
The key objective of financial regulation should be to make the financial system more stable 
and  therefore  more  resistant  to  shocks.  On  the  other  hand,  regulation  must  maintain  the 
financial system’s ability to fulfil its servicing role for the real economy appropriately. 
In this regard, I agree with Robert Shiller, who believes in the value added of the financial 
system.  In  his  most  recent  book  he  writes:  “Finance,  despite  its  flaws  and  excesses,  is  a 
force  that  potentially  can  help  us  to  create  a  better,  more  prosperous  and  more  equitable 
society.”  Hence,  financial  regulation  is  about  addressing  market  failure  and  not  about 
abolishing the market mechanism. 
Strengthening the principle of liability 
3.  
In order to achieve the key objective of a more stable and shock-resistant financial system, it 
is essential to strengthen the principle of individual responsibility and of liability. 
The principle of liability is one of the basic principles for the functioning of market economies, 
and it should clearly also apply to the financial system. Essentially, it says that those who 
have the benefit should also bear the costs. 
One of the root causes of the financial crisis is that, in the financial sector, the principle of 
liability  was  too  weakly  implemented.  However,  lacking  liability  creates  incentives  to  take 
excessive  risks.  The  problem  of  banks  that  are  “too  big  to  fail”  may  illustrate  this. 
Ultimately,  systemic  importance  infringes  the  principle  of  liability.  Excessively  risky 
transactions go unpunished because those who have the benefit do not bear the costs. 
The decisive question now is how the principle of liability could be strengthened by regulatory 
measures. 
• 
In  the  case  of  banks,  higher  capital  requirements  are  the  favourable  and  chosen 
way.  They  enable  banks  to  shoulder greater  losses  by  themselves,  and  thus  shift 
the risk back to the owners. The implementation of Basel III – not only in Europe but 
hopefully in the United States, too – is therefore an important step towards making 
the financial system safer. 
In addition to the implementation of Basel III, I am convinced that it would make the 
banking  sector  less  vulnerable  and,  thus,  strengthen  its  liability  if  banks  were 
required  to  hold  sufficient  capital  for  claims  on  sovereigns  and  not  be  allowed  to 
accumulate them on too large a scale in future. 
The  principle  of  liability  is  also  important  with  regard  to  the  establishment  of  a 
European banking union, which is currently the subject of heated debate. 
The main task of the single resolution mechanism that is currently being developed 
is  to  ensure  the  correct  sequence  of  liability.  If  a  bank  is  to  be  restructured  or 
resolved, equity investors should be called on first to take losses, followed by the 
providers of debt capital and only then by depositors, taking due account of deposit 
guarantees in the respective member states and national or European rescue funds. 
Taxpayers should only be called upon as a very last resort.  
While joint liability implies joint control, the other way round is also true. However, 
even  after  the  creation  of  a  banking  union,  banks’  balance  sheets  also  remain  a 
mirror of national economic and legal developments. Changes in national insolvency 
law i.e. would have an impact on the burden possibly to be financed by European 
funds.  Hence,  the  banking  union  needs  far-reaching  coordination  and  tighter  joint 
regulation. Remaining room for manoeuvre in regulation at national level has to be 
considered  when  deciding  on  the  distribution  of  the  financial  burden  between  the 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
member states. Legacy risks, however, should not be related to the banking union. If 
it is actually decided to communitise legacy debts, this would be a financial transfer. 
Transparency for members of the general public and taxpayers then also requires 
that  this  transfer  be  disclosed  as  such.  Of  course,  transfers  are  usually  not 
reinforcing the liability principle. 
It goes without saying that strengthening the liability principle goes beyond bank regulation. 
Regulatory measures in other fields of the financial system have to make sure that non-bank 
financial entities become more liable and accountable, too. 
Let me give you two examples 
In  future,  credit  rating  agencies  will  be  held  liable  in  the  event  of  intentional  or  grossly 
negligent violations of the respective European regulation. I appreciate this, but it is clear that 
it will be difficult to prove deliberate intent or gross negligence in practice. 
However, while making credit rating agencies more liable and accountable helps to improve 
the quality and integrity of credit ratings, it is not sufficient to ensure proper risk management 
in  the  financial  system.  In  order  to  improve  due  diligence,  it  will  also  be  required  –  as 
intended by the new EU regulation CRA III – to reduce the mechanistic reference to external 
credit  ratings  in  financial  market  regulation,  which  has  led  to  an  overreliance  on  external 
ratings. 
Although external ratings will still have a role to play in financial markets, investors should 
become better able to conduct their own risk assessment, and so become more responsible 
for their investment decisions. After all, a rating is no substitute for thought. 
Another case that could be seen as an example of regulators’ commitment to increase the 
liability of all market participants is the reform of OTC derivatives markets. 
Much progress has already been made by requiring sufficient collateralisation for derivatives 
positions,  especially  when  cleared  centrally  through  central  counterparties.  In  other  words, 
market  participants  will  be  forced  to  bear  further  costs  of  their  derivatives  business  in  the 
near future. The clearing obligation will be complemented by a trading obligation for eligible 
OTC derivatives. 
Last week EU finance ministers agreed on a common position regarding a revision of MiFID 
(Markets in Financial Instruments Directive) which will have a significant impact on European 
exchanges and other trading venues. The MiFID review will shift a significant share of OTC 
derivatives  trading to  exchanges  or  other regulated trading  venues.  Light  will  be  shone  on 
dark  trading  by  trade  transparency  requirements,  leading  to  more  accountability  for 
derivatives traders. 
Beware the risk of government failure 
4.  
The basic task of financial regulation is to cure market failure. The large number of regulatory 
work  strands  might  create  the  impression  that  the,  at  times,  exaggerated  faith  in  the 
efficiency  of  the  markets  before  the  crisis  is  now  being  replaced  by  excessive  faith  in 
governments. The financial crisis, however, is not only the result of market failure. To some 
extent, it is also the result of government failure and undue regulation. 
Just think about how public incentives for home ownership helped housing bubbles in various 
countries  to  emerge  or how  the  zero-risk  weighting  of  sovereign  bonds  gave  incentives  to 
over-invest in sovereigns. Hence, regulators should refrain from substituting and fine-tuning 
markets and private agents. 
We  should  bear  in  mind  what  Walter  Eucken,  one  of  the  founding  fathers  of  German 
ordoliberalism, once wrote, namely that economic policy should aim at “the shaping of the 
forms of order of an economy” and “not the direction of economic process”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Regulation is not an end in itself. The costs and benefits of the planned measures, including 
their  side-effects  and  interactions,  have  to  be  weighed  up.  One  example  of  this  is  the 
planned financial transaction tax. While a fundamental political consensus has been reached 
on the introduction of the tax in some countries of the EU, the unintended side-effects have 
to be considered carefully. 
In  its  originally  envisaged  form,  the  tax  would  also  cover  collateralised  money  market 
transactions, known as repo transactions. This would cause considerable harm to the repo 
market,  which  plays  a  key  role  in  the  redistribution  of  liquidity  among  commercial  banks. 
However, hampering it would make banks more dependent on liquidity provision by central 
banks. 
Conclusion 
5.  
To sum up, over the past five years, substantial progress has been made in the regulation of 
the  financial  system.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  room  for  complacency.  There  are  still 
shortcomings in financial regulation to be eliminated. 
This notwithstanding, it is necessary to thoroughly assess the impact of the different reforms 
and measures. 
Ensuring that players in the financial system have to, and are able to, better bear losses and 
risks  themselves  in  future  will  make  the  financial  system  more  stable.  Strengthening  the 
principle of liability will help the financial system to serve the economy and society better. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
