Malcolm Edey: The financial system in the post-crisis environment 
Remarks by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank 
of  Australia,  to  the  Australian  Centre  for  Financial  Studies  (ACFS)  and  Financial  Services 
Institute of Australasia (Finsia) Leadership Luncheon Series, Melbourne, 22 March 2013. 
 I  want  to  talk  today  about  how  the  financial  system  has  changed  in  the  post-crisis 
environment.  In  order  to  think  about  that,  it  is  useful  first  to  look  back  at  the  enormous 
changes that took place in the roughly quarter-century period between financial deregulation 
and the onset of the global financial crisis (GFC). Then I want to ask how far those earlier 
trends might be expected to reassert themselves as conditions normalise. 
Perhaps the most obvious aspect of that earlier period of change was in the financial sector’s 
relative size. To give a few summary measures: 
• 
The ratio of credit to GDP increased from around 50 per cent in the mid-1980s to 
around 160 per cent in 2007. 
Over the same period, the total assets of the banking system rose from around 50 to 
around 200 per cent of GDP (Graph 1). 
Measures of financial market turnover increased dramatically on a range of fronts. 
To give just one example, foreign exchange turnover increased by a factor of more 
than  30  in  nominal  dollar  terms  over  that  quarter-century,  when  the  nominal 
economy itself expanded only by a factor of 4½. 
  Graph 1 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The system also changed profoundly in other ways than just size. One was in its degree of 
openness to competition and in the nature of that competition. The post-Campbell reforms 
allowed market forces to work, and opened up the system to new competitors. The Wallis 
reforms followed that up by placing the regulation of banks and non-bank intermediaries on a 
more equal footing. 
We can see the consequences of these forces in the cost and availability of financial services 
to end users. Deregulation ended the artificial rationing of bank loans, making credit much 
more  widely  available.  Another  consequence  that  we  are  apt  to  forget  is  that  the  cost  of 
financial  intermediation  came  down  very  substantially.  In  the  late  1980s  the  average  net 
interest margin of the major banks was more than 5 percentage points. By the middle of the 
last  decade  it  had  fallen  to  a  level  less  than  half  that  –  where,  broadly  speaking,  it  still  is 
today. So finance became both cheaper and more widely available (Graph 2). 
Graph 2 
 These forces also had the effect of changing the focal point of competition. The rationing that 
existed in the old regulated environment had encouraged banks to compete on a “whole of 
institution” basis, rather than at the level of individual product lines. In effect, banks offered a 
package of loan, deposit and payment services and competed for customers at the level of 
the package as a whole. In this situation, wide interest margins were used to cross-subsidise 
payment services, and customer mobility was limited because loyalty to a bank was one of 
the critical factors in obtaining access to scarce loans. 
Deregulation changed that model by allowing innovators to compete separately for the most 
profitable  lines  of  business.  Cross-subsidies  in  the  banking  system  were  competed  down, 
and this helped to drive the reduction in net interest margins. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  for  much  of  the  pre-crisis  period,  competition  among  financial 
intermediaries  was  focused  mainly  on  the  lending  side  of  the  business.  In  effect, 
intermediaries could operate with a business model that assumed the availability of funding, 
and mainly competed for market share in lending out the available funds. This is one of the 
things that has changed since the GFC. With investors now much more discerning in their 
risk  assessments,  banks  have  had  to  compete  harder  in  the  deposit  and  other  funding 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
markets, and this is changing the way they do business. I will return to this point later when I 
conclude. 
A final area to mention in briefly rounding up the pre-crisis environment is the growth of the 
wealth management sector. Funds under management (principally in superannuation and life 
offices) expanded from around 30 to around 130 per cent of GDP between 1985 and 2007, 
broadly matching the growth rate seen in the deposit and loan sector. And, of course, there 
has  been  a  huge  growth  in  services  related  to  asset  and  risk  management,  including 
securities and derivatives trading. 
Many of these developments had their counterparts in overseas financial systems, which is 
not surprising because the same sorts of forces were at work. The majority of high-income 
economies  experienced  high  rates  of  credit  growth  and  in  some  cases  financial  activity 
expanded even faster than was the case in Australia. 
In the post-crisis environment these trends have slowed down, halted or in some cases partly 
reversed.  In  Australia  the  credit  and  debt  measures  that  I  cited  earlier  have  been  broadly 
stable for the past five years. Internationally, credit has contracted in nominal terms in some 
markets. There has also been a big change in attitudes and perceptions about financial risk. 
Although  confidence  in  global  markets  has  partly  returned,  risk  appetite  now  is  clearly  not 
what  it  was.  And  certain  kinds  of  financial  activity,  particularly  in  wholesale,  securities  and 
derivatives markets have settled at much lower levels than they were in the pre-crisis period. 
All  of  this  raises  the  question  as  to  what  the  new  normal  might  look  like  in  our  financial 
systems. Has the world changed forever? To what extent can we expect the earlier causal 
factors driving financial change to reassert themselves? 
In thinking about this, I find it useful to categorise these causal factors into three groups. I 
see these as being conceptually distinct even though they are likely to interact in complex 
ways in practice. 
In  the  first  group  are  the  long-run  forces  driven  by  trends  in  incomes,  technology  and 
demographics. Viewed in the abstract, there are a number of reasons to think that financial 
activity  might  be  able  to  grow  faster  than  the  general  economy  for  sustained  periods,  and 
even that this configuration might be some kind of norm. 
On the demand side it seems plausible that, as people get richer, more of their income can 
be spent on financial services, including debt servicing, as proportionately less needs to be 
spent  on  necessities.  Associated  with  this,  the  relative  value  of  scarce  assets  that  are 
financed  by  debt  might  be  expected  to  rise  over  time.  And  the  combination  of  increasing 
wealth and greater longevity in our societies is likely to generate rising demand for services 
in the wealth management and retirement income sector. 
On the supply side, the key point is that finance is an information-intensive industry. Its key 
outputs depend on the capacity to store, analyse and transmit information securely. We’re 
not actually very good at measuring the real value of financial outputs and hence not good 
either  at  measuring  productivity  in  the  sector.  But  it  would  be  surprising  if  the  ongoing 
advances in information technology were not generating significant growth in finance industry 
productivity relative to that in less information-intensive sectors. This is a process that can 
continue as long as the technology itself goes on improving. 
So there are some valid reasons to think that both supply and demand for financial services 
can grow faster than nominal incomes over time, other things being unchanged. 
The second set of forces to consider are the one-off factors that made this particular quarter 
century,  in  financial  terms,  unique.  One  of  these  I  have  already  alluded  to:  the  financial 
deregulation  that  took  place  around  the  world  mainly  in  the  late  1970s  and  early  1980s. 
Fundamentally,  we  have  moved  from  a  situation  where  credit  was  price-controlled  and 
quantity-rationed, to one where credit availability is market determined. It is probably fair to 
say that the credit expansions that followed this shift around the world were larger and more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
protracted than many had expected. Nonetheless, it was by nature a one-time adjustment, 
and one that has probably now run its course. 
Another factor in the one-off category is the transition to low inflation and the consequent fall 
in  nominal  interest  rates.  In  the  late  1980s,  mortgage  interest  rates  in  Australia  reached  a 
now unimaginable 17 per cent. Although that peak was partly cyclical, it also partly reflected 
the  inflation  premium  built  into  the  interest  rate  structure.  As  inflation  expectations  and 
nominal interest rates came down in the 1990s, there was a corresponding increase in the 
average household’s capacity to borrow. 
As  a  simple  illustrative  calculation,  if  we  assume  a  debt  service  ratio  of  30  per  cent  on  a 
standard 25 year mortgage, a household’s borrowing capacity would have gone from around 
two times annual income in the late 1980s to something like four times income a decade and 
a half later. Taken in combination with the removal of regulatory constraints on credit supply, 
this  would  go  a  long  way  towards  explaining  the  quarter-century  rise  in  household  debt 
ratios.1 The adjustment to this new reality seems to have been spread over a fairly lengthy 
period  of  time.  But  again,  with  inflation  having  been  low  and  stable  for  more  than  two 
decades now, it can be seen as essentially a one-off factor that has probably run its course. 
My  third  category  of  forces  are  those  associated  with  the  cyclical  dynamics  of  credit  and 
asset  prices.  The  financial  sector  has  a  well-documented  capacity  to  engage  in  bouts  of 
overexpansion,  driven  by  self-reinforcing  expectations  and 
followed  by  periods  of 
readjustment and consolidation. Credit cycles of this nature can be unpredictable in duration, 
ranging from the short and sharp to longer episodes spanning a decade or more. But we can 
think of these dynamics as being superimposed on the longer-term forces that I’ve already 
described. 
Even  though  these  forces  might  be  conceptually  distinct,  they  are  in  practice  likely  to  be 
highly interconnected. A financial bubble doesn’t usually come out of nowhere. Typically it 
starts  as  a  well-based  reaction  to  some  genuinely  new  event,  but  then  develops  a  self-
fulfilling momentum of its own, often with elements of irresponsibility, dishonesty and outright 
fraud as part of the mix. 
Globally, there were certainly elements of bubble-like behaviour in the few years leading up 
to  the  GFC.  But  we  can  also  pose  the  question  of  whether  the  world  financial  system 
overexpanded  on  a  longer  timescale,  maybe  a  quarter-century  scale,  in  reacting  to  the 
various forces that I’ve been describing. Did the financial sector in aggregate become too big 
relative to the size of the real economy? And if so, does that mean we are in for a period of 
ongoing correction to restore the balance? 
It is hard to be definitive about these things, but a few observations seem relevant: 
• 
First of all, it seems clear that at least some parts of the world financial system did 
overexpand by a significant margin. To cite some extreme cases, the total assets of 
the Irish banking system peaked in 2009 at a ratio of 9 times that country’s annual 
GDP,  a  figure  way  outside  its  own  (and  other  countries’)  historical  experience. 
Iceland’s  ratio  peaked  at  7  times.  In  the  UK,  the  peak  was  around  5,  and  in 
France 4. All of these numbers are high by the standards of longer-run experience 
(Graph 3). 
                                                 
1   This is a point that the Bank has been making for some time. See RBA (2003), “Household Debt: What the 
Data  Show”,  RBA  Bulletin,  March,  pp  1–11  and  Ellis  L  (2005),  “Disinflation  and  the  Dynamics  of  Mortgage 
Debt”, BIS Papers No 22, pp 5–20, available at <http://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap22b.pdf>. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 3 
     Behaviour in the post-crisis period in most economies is consistent with a period of 
private  sector  financial  consolidation.  Ratios  of  credit  or  banking  assets  to  GDP 
have  tended  to  stabilise  or  decline,  particularly  in  the  countries  where  they  had 
previously been highest. 
The combination of regulatory and private sector responses around the world seems 
likely to result in reduced financial risk-taking in the foreseeable future. Regulators 
are  taking  much-needed  action  to  ensure  that  risks  are  better  managed,  and  the 
appetite for financial risk in the household and business sectors now is clearly much 
less than it was. 
In Australia the banking sector did expand relative to the economy, but it remains 
significantly  smaller  than  many  others.  On  the  rough  metric  of  banking  assets  to 
GDP, Australia’s ratio is about 2, which is well within the international range and well 
below  those  in  the  euro  area,  the  UK  and  Japan.  So  to  the  extent  that  any 
generalised  financial  overhang  exists,  it  is  less  likely  to  be  a  problem  here  than 
elsewhere. 
That said, attitudes to risk and debt accumulation in the Australian household sector 
have clearly changed. Saving rates are up, the appetite for new debt is down, and 
attitudes to both the level and composition of household saving have become more 
conservative (Graph 4). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Graph 4 
 So what of the future? To return to my three sets of causal factors: 
• 
There are some reasons to think that longer-run trends in income and demographics 
can contribute to further growth of the financial sector over time. 
However, much of the expansion over the pre-GFC quarter-century was driven by 
one-off  factors,  notably  the  adjustments  to  deregulation  and  low  inflation.  These 
adjustments have now run their course. 
And, while we can’t be definitive, it is plausible that the world financial system has 
overexpanded in relative terms and needs a period of readjustment, though this is 
less likely to be a major factor in Australia than elsewhere. 
  The ongoing development of the financial system in the post-crisis period will depend on the 
interplay  of  those  three  factors.  On  any  reading,  it  seems  clear  that  this  will  be  an 
environment where it is harder in general for banks and for the system as a whole to grow. 
While it is difficult to specify what that might mean in numerical terms, a return to financial 
sector growth rates consistently higher than the growth of nominal GDP seems unlikely for 
the foreseeable future. That is my first concluding comment. 
My other comment concerns the nature of competition. The pre-GFC quarter century was an 
unusual period, in that competition in financial intermediation came to be focused mainly on 
the lending side of the balance sheet. That now looks to have been an aberration, and we 
seem  to  be  entering  a  period  where  significant  competition  on  both  sides  of  the  balance 
sheet  becomes  the  norm.  It  might  take  some  time  to  get  used  to  this  new  reality.  But  in 
general I see it as a healthy development because it will mean banks being under greater 
market discipline to manage their risks. 
And of course, regulators will be doing their part on that front as well. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
