Benoît Cœuré: Monetary policy and the risk of a lost decade 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Amundi  World  Investment  Forum  2013  “Mapping  uncharted  territories  of  investing”, 
Paris, 5 July 2013. 
 I wish to thank Georgi Krustev, Alexander Popov and Philip Vermeulen for their contributions to these remarks. I 
remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be here with you. 
Today, I would like to discuss the risks which characterise the long-term outlook for the euro 
area. I will also offer my view on some of the policy responses that are necessary to ensure 
that those risks do not materialise. The specific risk scenario that I wish to consider is that of 
a “lost decade” – the possibility of a much more protracted period of stagnation than currently 
anticipated. Like others, in referring to a lost decade, I am drawing an analogy with Japan’s 
experience between 1991 and 2000, when average annual per capita GDP growth was less 
than 0.5%. 
With  Japan’s  experience  in  mind,  a  particularly  worrisome  scenario  for  the  euro  area  is 
related  to  the  possibility  that  the  banking  sector’s  efforts  to  reduce  leverage  and  to 
restructure its balance sheets have not yet been completed. Troubled banks’ balance sheets 
have  the  potential  to  choke  the  engine  of  recovery  and  exert  a  more  persistent  drag  on 
economic growth. A protracted slowdown may also produce longer-lasting consequences on 
potential output growth. This is why I will study the implications of such a scenario in some 
detail. 
Let  me  repeat  that  this  is  a  risk  scenario.  In  the  short  term,  the  modal  scenario  in  the 
Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections is that the euro area economy will stabilise and 
recover in the course of the year, albeit at a subdued pace and with risks continuing to be on 
the  downside.  It  is  the  policymakers’  duty,  however,  to  identify  the  potential  factors  which 
may  lead  to a  “lost  decade”  scenario  and  design  the  policy  actions  that  are  best  suited  to 
pre-empt it. 
The euro area outlook 
But, let me start first with the current outlook for the euro area. 
The euro area is still suffering from the consequences of the financial crisis. Euro area real 
GDP declined, quarter on quarter, by 0.3% in the first quarter of 2013, following a contraction 
of 0.6% in the previous quarter. Since the trough in output in the second quarter of 2009, the 
euro area economy has barely grown: four years later, in the first quarter of 2013, euro area 
GDP stood only 2.5% higher. Compared with the previous peak in the first quarter of 2008, 
GDP is still down by 3.3%. Domestic demand remains subdued due to low confidence and 
high unemployment. Indeed, unemployment figures continue to disappoint. The latest euro 
area seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 12.2% in May 2013. 
Looking ahead to later in the year and to 2014, euro area export growth should benefit from a 
gradual  recovery  in  global  demand,  while  domestic  demand  should  be  supported  by  the 
accommodative monetary policy stance as well as the recent gains in real income owing to 
generally  lower  inflation.  Furthermore,  notwithstanding  recent  developments,  the  overall 
improvements in financial markets seen since last summer should work their way through to 
the  real  economy,  as  should  the  progress  made  in  fiscal  consolidation.  This  said,  the 
remaining  necessary  balance  sheet  adjustments  in  the  public  and  private  sectors  will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
continue to weigh on economic activity. Overall, euro area economic activity should stabilise 
and recover in the course of the year, albeit at a subdued pace. 
The  risks  surrounding  this  economic  outlook  continue  to  be  on  the  downside.  The  recent 
tightening  of  global  money  and  financial  market  conditions  and  related  uncertainties  may 
have the potential to negatively affect economic conditions. Other downside risks include the 
possibility  of  weaker  than  expected  domestic  and  global  demand  and  slow  or  insufficient 
implementation of structural reforms in euro area countries. 
The  monetary  policy  stance  in  the  euro  area  will  remain  accommodative  for  as  long  as 
necessary. The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  expects  the  key  interest  rates  to remain  at 
present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  This  expectation  is  based  on  the 
overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, given the broad-based 
weakness in the real economy and subdued monetary dynamics. In the period ahead, the 
Governing  Council  will  monitor  all  incoming  information  on  economic  and  monetary 
developments and assess any impact on the outlook for price stability. 
If the short term risks scenarios were to materialise, they might push the full recovery back 
by some quarters. A more worrisome possibility, however, is that of a persistent slowdown. 
Action is necessary to ensure that it does not materialise. This is what I would like to discuss 
now. 
Zombie banks and the risks to potential output growth 
Although total factor productivity growth had been slowing down even before the crisis, the 
financial  crisis  had  a  lasting  impact  on  the  level  of  potential  output  in  the  euro  area,  and 
maybe  also  on  its  trend  growth  rate.  According to  the  2013  spring  report  of the  European 
Commission, the decline in the level of potential output has been structural and mainly driven 
by increases in structural unemployment, slower growth in the population of working age and 
weaker investment trends. The Commission concludes that the most likely long-run impact of 
the crisis will be a permanent loss in the level of the euro area’s output of roughly 5%, with 
no long-run effect on its growth rate. 
Various factors could contribute to determining such an outcome.1 For example, long spells 
of  unemployment  could  result  in  the  destruction  of  human  capital  and,  in  the  absence  of 
active labour market policies, a permanent deterioration in the chances of finding a new job. 
“Unemployment  hysteresis”,  which  refers 
in 
unemployment become permanent, might also be observed, in the presence of segmented 
labour markets, where wages are set between workers and firms and unemployed workers 
are  not  represented.2  The  ensuing  fall  in  the  natural  level  of  unemployment  will  tend  to 
reduce  the  productive  capacity  of the  economy.  In  addition  to that,  depressed  demand for 
services  in  a  recessionary  environment  could  slow  down  the  adoption  of  information 
technologies  in  industries  such  as  retail,  business  services,  and  finance,  resulting  in  a 
persistently lower growth in total factor productivity. The ageing population of the euro area 
could further depress potential output, for example by lowering labour-force participation and 
saving rates. 
This  has  also  implications  for  fiscal  policy.  In  a  slow  potential  growth  environment,  fiscal 
deficits have to become smaller to sustain a given debt-to-GDP ratio. This may reinforce the 
the  possibility 
increases 
that  any 
to 
                                                
1  See  also  European  Commission  (2009),  “Impact  of  the  current  economic  and  financial  crisis  on  potential 
output”,  Occasional  Papers,  No  49;  Haugh,  D.,  Ollivaud,  P.  and  Turner,  D.  (2009),  “The  macroeconomic 
consequences of banking crises in OECD countries”, OECD Economics Department Working Paper, No 683. 
2  Blanchard,  O.  and  Summers,  L.  (1986),  “Hysteresis  and  the  European  unemployment  problem”,  NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 1, pp. 15–90. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
need  to  adjust  our  social  models,  so  that  they  are  not  financed  at  the  expense  of  future 
generations. 
Clearly, the crisis makes it even more necessary to undertake reforms that support the level 
and  growth  rate  of  potential  output  growth.  Such  reforms  are  diverse  and  mutually 
supportive. Action can be taken to improve participation in the labour market, to make tax 
structures supportive of private investment and to make sure that fiscal consolidation plans 
do not sacrifice socially profitable public investment. Total factor productivity can benefit from 
support  to  higher  education  and  research  and  from  educating  and  training  the  young  and 
low-skilled workers. 
All of this is essential but it is not in the hands of central banks. The specific factors I wish to 
explore today are the impact of a delay in the banking sector’s balance sheet adjustments on 
potential growth and what monetary policy can do in this process. 
Following a financial crisis triggered by the bursting of a bubble, which was originally fuelled 
by  a  build-up  of  massive  leverage  ratios  in  the  banking  sector,  the  lack  of  balance  sheet 
restructuring can indeed have severe implications for real economic activity. 
A  well-identified  danger  is  the  emergence  of  so-called  “zombie  banks”.  These  are  banks 
which are undercapitalised but can continue to operate by failing to recognise losses on their 
loan portfolios. Such banks remain weak and, in the short term, overly sensitive to adverse 
shocks. They are a problem for regulators because they have an incentive to take excessive 
risks, for example, by extending loans to ex ante risky new customers. A deeper concern, 
however, is that zombie banks may pose risks for medium to long-term growth if they engage 
in the so-called “evergreening” of loans, which is often discussed with reference to Japan.3 
The collapse of the Japanese stock and real estate markets in the early 1990s led to severe 
losses  for  Japan’s  non-financial  corporations,  a  large  number  of  which  became  unable  to 
service  their  bank  loans.  If  banks  had  decided  to  call  in  non-performing  loans,  they  would 
have been forced to write off existing capital. The fear of falling below the regulatory capital 
standards  gave  them  the  perverse  incentive  to  continue  extending  credit  to  insolvent 
borrowers, gambling on the hope that the firms would recover or that the government would 
bail  them  out. This  resulted  in  the  evergreening of  loans to troubled firms.  By keeping  the 
loans current, banks’ balance sheets also looked healthier because the troubled loans were 
not reported as non-performing. 
“Zombie  lending”  is  dangerous,  as  it  can  stifle  the  physiological  progress  of  creative 
destruction which contributes to fostering productivity growth. The adverse consequences on 
the Japanese real economy are  well documented in the literature.4 The normal process of 
industrial  churning  was  severely  disrupted  in  sectors  populated  by  “zombie  firms”.  Under 
normal conditions, unprofitable enterprises would have lost market value or been driven out 
of the market, paving the way for profitable new entrants. By guaranteeing the liabilities of 
banks that supported such zombies, the government effectively kept wages high and prices 
low,  reducing  the  profits  that  new  productive  firms  generated  and  distorting  market 
competition. As a result, even solvent banks had very few good lending opportunities and the 
economy remained stagnant throughout the 1990s. 
The risks of a lost decade in the euro area 
How likely is a full-blown Japan-style scenario in the euro area? 
                                                
3  Peek, J. and Rosengren, E. (2005), “Unnatural selection: Perverse incentives and the misallocation of credit in 
Japan”, American Economic Review, Vol. 95, pp. 1144–1166. 
4  Caballero,  R.,  Hoshi,  T.  and  Kashyap,  A.  (2008),  “Zombie  lending  and  depressed  restructuring  in  Japan”, 
American Economic Review, Vol. 98, pp. 1943–1977. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Many underlying conditions in the economic situation in Japan in the 1990s and in Europe 
today clearly differ. Let me mention four of them. 
First, at the aggregate level, balance sheet problems are less obvious for the euro area in 
contrast to 1990’s Japan, which faced severe adjustment needs in the corporate sector. For 
example,  the  ratio  of  the  debt  of  non-financial  corporations  relative  to  GDP  declined  from 
130% to just 80% in the 15 years that followed the peak in economic activity in the case of 
Japan. For the euro area, the corresponding ratio has hovered around much lower levels of 
75–80% since 2007. The indebtedness of euro area households is also lower compared with 
that of Japanese households. 
The second key difference between the two episodes is that the adjustment of asset prices 
was  more  subdued  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Four  years  after  the  peak  in  residential 
property prices in the euro area in 2008, the cumulative decline at the aggregate level has 
been  around  3%.  Euro  area  equity  prices  have  also  rebounded  from  their  post-Lehman 
trough. This contrasts with the larger pre-crisis bubble in Japan, which was deflated by the 
collapse of equity prices persisting for the next ten years and of real estate prices, which fell 
by 40% in the decade after their peak in 1991. 
A third major difference concerns inflation expectations and the monetary policy response to 
the crisis. Interest rates in Japan remained at a considerably higher level than in the euro 
area after the start of the corrections in stock markets and land prices. The rapid decline in 
inflation in Japan in the 1990s also complicated monetary policy and ultimately prompted the 
Bank  of  Japan’s  announcement  of  a  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing.  By 
contrast, inflation expectations in the euro area have remained very well anchored close to 
2%. 
Fourth, the impact on the supply side of the economy was also different. Unlike Japan during 
the 1990s, the euro area has avoided a significant slowdown in total factor productivity since 
the start of the financial crisis. In Japan, average annual growth in total factor productivity5 
had fallen from 1.3% in the 1980s to 0.2% in the 1990. Based on the previously discussed 
estimates  by  the  European  Commission,  the  decline  in  potential  growth  in  the  euro  area 
since  2009  has  largely  been  a  result  of  lower  contributions  from  capital  and  labour.  Total 
factor  productivity  has  held  up  relatively  well,  by  declining  relatively  mildly  from  0.7%  over 
2000–07 to 0.5% over 2008–12. 
That  said,  the  evidence  presented  must  not  lead  to  complacency  among  euro  area  policy 
makers. First, the aggregate euro area numbers mask significant heterogeneity among euro 
area  countries.  Second,  challenges  to  reform  the  governance  structure  of  Economic  and 
Monetary Union make crisis resolution necessarily slower and more complex than in Japan. 
Now, what about the risk of “zombie banks”? The risk that a few undercapitalised banks still 
operate  in  the  euro  area  cannot  be  dismissed.  Indeed,  the  financial  crisis  of  2008–09  left 
banks with relatively low capital ratios. In some cases, this problem was tackled by means of 
interventions  that  directly  sought  to  restore  appropriate  capitalisation  levels  through 
incentives  to  restructure  bad  loans  and  free  up  resources  for  new  economic  activities.  In 
other  cases,  governments  have  reacted  by  delaying  recapitalisation,  instead  issuing 
guarantees on bank liabilities. It has been argued that such measures tend to provide banks 
with an incentive to roll over bad loans and shift risks to depositors or the government.6 
                                                
5  See ECB Monthly Bulletin May, 2012 on “Comparing the recent financial crisis in the United States and the 
Euro  Area  with  the  experience  of  Japan  in  the  1990s”.  Estimates  are  based  on  data  from  the  Japanese 
Cabinet Office, and Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communication. 
6  Homar, T. and van Wijbergen, S. (2013), “On zombie banks and recessions after systemic banking crises: It 
does matter how governments intervene”, University of Amsterdam mimeo. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It  is  however  unclear  whether  bank  capital  constraints  may  be  leading  to  quantitatively 
significant evergreening of loans or excessive risk taking. Academic research has identified 
cases  of  small  undercapitalised  banks  providing  loans  to  risky  firms  after  the  collapse  of 
Lehman  Brothers,  but  these  cases  were  isolated  and  the  amounts  involved  were  not 
quantitatively significant.7 Today, the ratio of non-performing loans continues to deteriorate in 
a  number  of  jurisdictions,  but  it  has  remained  stable  at  the  aggregate  level  for  large  and 
complex banking groups. Solvency positions have improved as a result of from both rising 
core Tier 1 capital and reductions in risk-weighted assets. The median core Tier 1 ratio of the 
euro area large and complex banking groups reached 11.1% in the first quarter of 2013, up 
from 9.6% at the end of 2011.8 
Furthermore, the results of the ECB’s Euro area bank lending survey, showing that euro area 
banks started tightening credit standards as early as the third quarter of 2007, may also be 
interpreted as going against the hypothesis of excessive risk taking. Also, the evidence of the 
deleveraging  of  non-financial  corporations  during  the  financial  crisis  points  against  the 
hypothesis of the evergreening of loans. 
However,  the  observed  large  exposure  of  banks  to  sovereign  debt  may  have  longer-term 
effects on the non-financial sector of the economy. Recent research suggests that banks with 
sizeable  balance  sheet  exposures  to  stressed  government  debt  at  the  beginning  of  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis  have  extended  substantially  less  credit  to  non-financial  corporations 
than otherwise similar non-exposed banks.9 
Indeed, what is of concern at the moment is that a number of euro area banks seem to have 
intentionally sought to increase their holdings of government debt, at least in the early stages 
of the crisis. Banks in countries under stress have, in particular, been investing in relatively 
risky  government  bonds,  using  cheap  short-term  funding,  hoping  to  pocket  the  spread 
between the bond return and the cost of funding on the upside.10 This phenomenon shares 
unsavoury features with the behaviour of banks during Japan’s lost decade. In Japan, bank 
portfolios  were  rebalanced  away  from  lending  to  creditworthy  firms  because  regulatory 
requirements incentivised banks to keep lending to non-viable firms in order not to recognise 
credit losses. In the euro area, bank portfolios may have been rebalanced away from lending 
to  creditworthy  firms  because  high  yields  have  incentivised  banks  to  undertake  long 
sovereign bond positions. 
This sovereign-bank nexus, whereby domestic banks become the main creditor to national 
governments,  in  return  increasing  the  government’s  incentive  to  intervene  in  its  banking 
sector, can become a threat to long-term economic recovery in the euro area. Unless both 
bank balance sheets and public finances are sanitised, and the link between the banks and 
sovereigns  is  broken,  the  euro  area  may  indeed  have  a  long  recovery  ahead  of  it,  with 
insufficient  loan  supply  to  creditworthy  enterprises,  depressed  productivity  and  high 
unemployment rates. 
Policy options and concluding remarks 
A number of policy actions have to be implemented in order to avert such a scenario. 
                                                
7  Albertazzi,  U.  and  Marchetti,  D.  (2010),  “Credit  supply,  flight  to  quality  and  evergreening:  An  analysis  of 
bank-firm relationships after Lehman”, Banca d’Italia, Working Papers, No 756. 
8  See ECB Financial Stability Review, May 2013. 
9  Popov, A. and van Horen, N. (2012), “The impact of sovereign debt exposure on bank lending: Evidence from 
the European debt crisis”, ECB mimeo; Bofondi, M., Carpinelli, L. and Sette, E. (2012), “Credit supply during a 
sovereign crisis”, Banca d’Italia mimeo. 
10  Acharya,  V.  and  Steffen,  S.  (2013),  “The  ‘greatest’  carry  trade  ever?  Understanding  Eurozone  bank  risks”, 
NBER Working Paper Series, No 19039. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The most important action is to ensure that a broad quality review of banks’ assets is carried 
out, so as to ensure that any hidden balance sheet losses are brought to the surface. This is 
one  of  the  priorities  for  the  new  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  which  is  being 
established as the first pillar of the European banking union. 
The SSM could start operating in the late summer of 2014 and will directly supervise the euro 
area’s largest and systemically important banks. The banking union in general and the SSM 
in  particular  are  expected  to  reduce  the  risks  of  regulatory  forbearance  resulting  from 
closeness  between  the  financial  industry  and  local  regulators.  The  recognition  of  hidden 
losses in banks’ portfolios, starting with the inaugural balance sheet assessment of directly 
supervised  banks,  to  be  performed  before  the  start  of  the  SSM,  would  eliminate  the 
incentives to evergreen non-performing loans and eventually ensure that credit is reallocated 
to  its  most  productive  users.  The  establishment  of  a  central  supervisory  body  should  also 
help break the sovereign-bank nexus by allowing liquidity and capital to be allocated freely 
across participating jurisdictions, and by removing incentives for banks to act as main players 
in  the  market  for  domestic  sovereign  debt.  This  should  further  free  resources  that  can  be 
used to finance profitable activities in the real economy. 
Finally, a credible framework for resolving failing banks is necessary to eliminate the risk of a 
long period of economic stagnation brought about by chronically weak bank balance sheets. 
The Council agreement on the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, including the new 
bail-in  rules,  is  a  step  forward.  The  SSM  should  now  be  complemented  with  a  Single 
Resolution Mechanism, with a single Authority and a common financial backstop, and at a 
later stage by a single deposit guarantee scheme. 
The establishment of the SSM is an important step forward, but potential growth-enhancing 
policies should also be implemented. The agenda for structural reform must be implemented 
with  renewed  impetus.  Obstacles  to  competition  in  product  and  even  more  importantly  in 
service  markets  should  be  removed  so  as  to  curtail  rent-seeking  behaviours  and  to  foster 
productivity  improvements.  Labour  market  segmentation  between  highly  protected  workers 
on permanent contracts and limited protection for those on fixed-term contracts perpetrates 
the  insider-outsider  structure  which  was  arguably  responsible  for  the  high  European 
unemployment rates of the 1980s and should be combated. 
Labour  market  segmentation  also  increases  the  social  costs  of  the  recession  for  those 
workers that bear the brunt of the economic adjustment process. Youth unemployment is a 
case in point. Before the crisis, the youth unemployment rate was twice the average rate of 
overall  unemployment;  it  is  now  2.6  times  higher. The  emergence  of  a  “lost generation”  is 
morally unacceptable. It would be a failure of the European project and would affect potential 
output in the euro area in diverse and persistent ways. 
What can monetary policy do in this process? In the short term, monetary policy can avert 
the short-term risk of fire sales and of a freeze in specific financial market segments. After 
the financial crisis of 2008–09, and throughout the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area, the 
ECB  implemented  a  number  of  standard  and  non-standard  measures  to  ensure  that  the 
transmission of monetary policy stimuli to the economy would remain active, in the face of 
impairments in different financial market segments. This is arguably an important difference 
with  respect  to  the  Japanese  experience  in  the  1990s,  where  commentators  have  argued 
that non-standard measures could have been implemented earlier.11 
Looking ahead, anchoring inflationary expectations is crucial to provide a stable environment 
for the decisions to invest and hire workers, and to avoid the deflationary pressures which 
exacerbated  and  prolonged  economic  stagnation  during  Japan’s  lost  decade.  The  firm 
                                                
11  See, for example, Ueda (2012), “Deleveraging and monetary policy: Japan since the 1990s and the United 
States since 2007”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 26, pp. 177–202. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
commitment  of  the  ECB  to  its  medium-term  inflation  objective  is  its  best  contribution  to 
sustainable economic growth. The recent decisions of the ECB and the forward guidance it 
has provided on its future monetary policy stance are geared towards this objective. 
I thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
