Zeti Akhtar Aziz: 10th year anniversary of the establishment of the 
Islamic Financial Services Board 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Islamic 
Financial Services Board (IFSB) 10th Anniversary Dinner, Kuala Lumpur, 16 May 2013. 
 It is my great pleasure to welcome Your Excellencies and distinguished guests to this IFSB 
10th Anniversary Dinner, organised in conjunction with the 10th IFSB Summit. Tonight is a 
landmark  celebration  of  the  10th  year  anniversary  of  the  establishment  of  the  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB),  as  we  commemorate  a  decade  of  milestones  and 
achievements  of  the  IFSB  and  pay  tribute  to  its  members  and  industry  stakeholders  that 
have provided undivided support to the Board. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  indeed  honoured  to  have  the  opportunity  to  host  this  10th  IFSB 
Summit,  which  is  exactly  ten  years  since  we  hosted  the  IFSB  inauguration  in  November 
2002. We are also very pleased to welcome back the Founding Members and many of the 
industry leaders that witnessed the inauguration of the IFSB. We are very honoured to have 
your presence at this Anniversary Dinner. 
It was in the year 2000 that the discussion began on the merits of establishing a dedicated 
organisation to develop a separate and distinct regulatory framework for the global Islamic 
finance industry. The aspirations of ten Central Banks and the Islamic Development Bank – 
was to lay the foundation for the development of a sound and stable Islamic financial system 
that will pave the way for its successful integration as a viable and credible component of the 
global financial system. A decade later, the IFSB has build a solid international reputation as 
a credible standard-setting body for Islamic finance, with the IFSB charting its achievements 
in  increasing  regulatory  cooperation,  encouraging  uniformity  of  regulatory  frameworks  and 
enhancing the monitoring of financial risks in the Islamic financial system. 
The  current  global  landscape  of  the  Islamic  financial  system,  with  enhanced  stability  and 
resilience that has contributed to the vibrant growth and internationalisation of Islamic finance 
is a realisation of the aspiration and vision of the IFSB Founding Members. The efforts are 
largely  attributable  to  the  unwavering  commitment  and  dedication  of  the  members  of  the 
IFSB that have relentlessly pursued the goals. The increasing support for the IFSB, signified 
by  its  continuous  growth  of  membership  over  the  decade  would  ensure  a  progressive 
continuity  in  the  work  of  the  Founding  Members.  There  are  now  187  members  from  43 
jurisdictions. Malaysia is honoured to host the IFSB here in Kuala Lumpur, and is committed 
to  provide  full  support  in  the  journey  to  achieve  a  sound  and  resilient  Islamic  financial 
services  industry.  Strong  international  cooperation  and  collective  support  from  member 
Central Banks and regulatory authorities of the IFSB and global institutions, as well as the 
strong  connectivity  with  other 
relevant 
organisations would ensure continuous close engagements that would allow the attainment 
of balanced views. 
The IFSB has had a key role in shaping the global Islamic financial industry, with a decade of 
achievements  that  have  provided  a  solid  foundation  for  the  progressive  growth  of  Islamic 
finance  that  is  underpinned  with  stability.  Significant  contributions  have  been  made  by  the 
IFSB in realising the recommendations in the eight building blocks identified in the Islamic 
Finance  and  Global  Financial  Stability  Report  2010,  particularly  in  the  areas  of  prudential 
standards  and  liquidity  management.  It  is  encouraging  that  the  cross-sectoral  prudential 
standards issued by the IFSB since 2005 have now been implemented in nine countries and 
more  are  expected  to  follow  as  we  progress  forward.  These  standards  have  taken  into 
account  the  distinct  characteristics  and  specificities  of  Islamic  finance.  The  effective 
implementation  of  these  standards  contribute  to  promoting  the  soundness  and  stability  of 
Islamic financial institutions. There has also been strong support by the IFSB for its members 
international  standard  setting  bodies  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to  effectively  implement  the  standards  through  technical  assistance  that  aims  to  enhance 
juridictional preparedness in adopting the standards. The initiative of the IFSB to establish 
the  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM)  in  2010  is  also  a  major 
breakthrough in strengthening the liquidity arrangements for the international Islamic financial 
system, particularly in facilitating more efficient cross-border liquidity management by Islamic 
financial institutions. 
The  Islamic  Financial  Stability  Forum  (IFSF),  set  up  by  the  IFSB  in  2010,  is  another 
milestone  in  strengthening  collaborative  efforts  amongst  IFSB  members  by  providing  a 
platform for constructive dialogues for regulators to deliberate on issues relating to financial 
stability. Seven meetings have been organised since the first IFSF held in Khartoum, Sudan 
in 2010. A wide range of common issues pertaining to risks to financial stability of the Islamic 
financial  system  have  been  deliberated,  all  of  which  have  the  potential  to  further  solidify 
global efforts in the areas that will contribute towards safeguarding financial stability. 
A  joint  initiative  between  IFSB  and  the  Islamic  Research  and  Training  Institute  (IRTI)  to 
develop the Ten-Year Framework and Strategies for the development of the Islamic financial 
services  industry  that  was  released  in  2007  has  also  provided  guidance  to  national 
authorities in their initiatives to develop Islamic finance within their jurisdictions. A review of 
the framework was conducted in the recent IFSB-IRTI Roundtable Discussion in Doha and in 
the  Pre-Summit  Event  of  the  10th  IFSB  Summit  two  days  ago.  It  is  hoped  that  the 
assessments would provide further synchronisation to the implementation of the strategies. 
The IFSB has also paved the way for greater awareness on issues relating to regulation and 
supervision  of  Islamic  finance  through  its  active  organisation  of  international  conferences 
such as the IFSB Summits, seminars, workshops, meetings and dialogues that have been 
staged in many countries in different parts of the world. 
The milestones and achievements of the IFSB in the modern history of Islamic finance is a 
culmination  of  various  collective  wisdoms  that  have  charted  the  path  of  the  IFSB.  In  a 
decade, the IFSB has had the opportunity to be under the stewardship of all nine Founding 
Members  that  have  successfully  held  the  Chairmanship  of  the  Board.  As  a  Founding 
Member,  it  is  indeed  an  honour  to  witness  the  crystallisation  of  ideas  that  had  been 
envisioned to build a robust and sound Islamic financial system. 
The journey of the IFSB in these ten years was however not without its challenges. As we 
continue our journey ahead, the forces of globalisation, financial liberalisation, technological 
advancements, intensified competition, financial innovation and internationalisation of Islamic 
finance  would  create  new  risks  that  are  more  complex  and  with  more  profound  systemic 
implications.  It  has  therefore  become  more  demanding  and  challenging  for  prudential 
regulation and supervisory oversight to manage these risks. In cognisant of this increasingly 
challenging environment, the role of the IFSB remains instrumental and a more robust and 
forward  looking  IFSB  would  indeed  contribute  towards  a  more  effective  policy  response. 
More strategic partnerships would also expand the IFSB’s capabilities in research, training 
and  provision  of  technical  assistance,  all  of  which  are  critical  to  the  development  of  the 
industry.  Continued  and  stronger  support  for  the  IFSB,  including  active  feedback  from 
members  on  its  Consultative  Papers  and  participation  in  IFSB  related  events,  as  well  as 
greater collaboration and cooperation between the members would further support the work 
of the IFSB. Consistent implementation of the prudential standards issued by the IFSB also 
enhances  regulatory  harmonisation  and  promotes  full  adoption  of  the  standards.  Of 
importance  is  the  need  for  the  IFSB  to  ensure  that  regulatory  standards  remain  not  only 
adaptive  and  effective  in  the  changing  regulatory  environment,  but  also  in  riding  the 
evolutionary waves of financial innovation that is prevalent in Islamic finance. 
Our quest and shared aspirations for financial stability requires concerted efforts on all fronts 
to foster a resilient and sound global Islamic financial system. The IFSB is an important part 
of  these  endeavours  and  its  work  remains  relevant  as  we  face  a  time  of  increasing 
uncertainties. The strategies identified in the IFSB’s Strategic Performance Plan for the year 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2013 to 2015 provides the focus for the IFSB to achieve the key result areas charted in the 
roadmap. I am confident that the IFSB would effectively manage its journey ahead amidst the 
increasing challenges, with the collective support from its members. 
Indeed,  we  look  forward  to  the  constructive  outcome  of  the  deliberations  during  this  10th 
IFSB Summit. We also hope that you will also have the opportunity to experience Malaysia 
during your time here. On that note, I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
