Deepak Mohanty: Interest rates and economic activity 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  to  the 
Association of Financial Professionals of India (AFPI), Pune, 23 August 2013. 
 The assistance provided by Sitikantha Pattnaik and Abhiman Das in preparation of the speech is acknowledged. 
I  thank  Ms.  Preeta  Misra,  Director  &  Member  Secretary,  Association  of  Financial 
Professionals of India (AFPI) for this opportunity to interact with distinguished professionals 
of corporate India. In the recent period, there has been an animated debate on the role of 
interest rates in influencing real economic activities. In particular, the discussion has been on 
how  a  change  in  policy  interest  rate  impacts  the  lending  rates,  and  thereby  industrial 
performance and overall economic activity. In this context, the last decade through 2012–13 
has  been  eventful  with  rapid  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  stance  responding  to  the 
evolving growth-inflation dynamics. This is a period in which we recorded one of our highest 
output growth rate as also one of the lowest. Inflation showed significant variation. We also 
experienced the global financial crisis, the adverse effects of which are still lingering. 
As you know, Indian economy is currently passing through a very challenging phase: growth 
has  slowed;  though  wholesale  price  inflation  has  come  down  consumer  price  inflation 
remains close to double digits, and financial market volatility has increased. A major factor in 
the  recent  growth  slowdown  is  a  significant  deceleration  in  private  corporate  investment. 
Since you are the key professionals taking investment decisions, I thought it will be relevant 
to  discuss  how  does  monetary  policy  decisions,  through  interest  rate  changes,  affect 
investment decisions and thus economic activity? Another motivation for this subject is that 
colleagues  in  the  Reserve  Bank  have  done  substantial  research  in  this  area  and  a  paper 
entitled “Real Interest Rate Impact on Investment and Growth: What the Empirical Evidence 
for India Suggests?” was placed in the public domain.1 I will urge you to look at that paper so 
that it generates further research and discussion.  
Against this background, my presentation will be as follows: I will briefly review the stance of 
monetary  policy  and  economic  outcome  during  the  last  decade  through  2012–13;  discuss 
monetary transmission with a focus on the interest rate channel; and examine the impact of 
interest rate changes on economic activity both at the macro and micro levels. 
Changes in monetary stance 
In  the  last  10-year  period  from  2003–04  to  2012–13,  monetary  policy  response  can  be 
broadly  categorised  into  four  phases  based  on  growth-inflation  outcome  and  the  rapidly 
changing monetary policy response: 
 
Phase I of 5 years of 2003–08 of high growth but rising inflation concern towards the 
later part of the period when repo rate was raised from 6 per cent to 9 per cent and 
the cash reserve ratio (CRR) was raised from 4.5 per cent to 9 per cent. 
Phase II of 2 years of 2008–10 following the global financial crisis when the repo 
rate was reduced from 9 per cent to 5.25 per cent and CRR was reduced from 9 per 
cent to 5.75 per cent. 
Phase III of 2 years of 2010–12 of monetary tightening responding to rising inflation 
when  policy  rate  was  raised  from  5.25  per  cent  to  8.5  per  cent  but  CRR  was 
reduced to 5.5 per cent. 
                                                   
1  http://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/publications/PDFs/IDGSR08082013.pdf (on August 8, 2013) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 Phase IV of over a year of monetary easing in 2012–13 and 2013–14 so far with the 
repo rate reduced to 7.25 per cent and CRR lowered to 4.0 per cent; though since 
mid-July 2013, the RBI has tightened the monetary and liquidity conditions without 
changing the policy repo rate and CRR to address exchange market volatility.  
Monetary  policy  stance  in  any  particular  phase  is  generally  conditioned  by  the  growth-
inflation  balance,  the  outlook  for  growth-inflation  in  a  forward  looking  context  and  an 
assessment  of  macroeconomic  risks.  Essentially,  monetary  policy  aims  at  attaining  high 
growth in a non-inflationary manner. But at times high growth in excess of potential growth 
could  trigger  inflation  putting  the  sustainability  of  the  very  growth  path  to  risks.  Hence, 
monetary policy tends to do a careful balancing act so that it is not too accommodative of 
growth  in  excess  of  its  potential  and  at  the  same  time  not  too  stimulative  of  inflation. 
However, there could be periods of rising inflation and falling growth below its potential. This 
could arise from several sources such as the lagged impact of policy stimulus from earlier 
phases and adverse supply shocks, both domestic and external, which persist. 
The challenge of rebalancing growth and inflation is evident from the four phases of growth-
inflation presented in Table 1 and Chart 1. In the first phase, high growth coincided with low 
inflation.  However,  towards  the  latter  part  of  the  period  as  inflationary  pressures  rose  it 
warranted monetary tightening. In the second phase, reflecting the impact of global financial 
crisis,  growth  decelerated  and  weak  commodity  prices  globally  and  relatively  stable 
exchange rate contained inflation. That created the space for monetary easing. In the third 
phase,  India  recovered  ahead  of  the  global  economy,  and  actual  growth  in  2010–11  at 
9.3 per cent exceeded significantly the post-crisis estimated potential growth of 7.5–8.0 per 
cent. With a sharp recovery in growth, inflation too caught up rapidly, partly complicated by a 
rebound in global commodity prices. The anti-inflationary thrust of monetary policy became 
unavoidable to contain inflation and anchor inflationary expectations. 
Post-crisis as growth recovered inflation picked up 
Table 1 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 In  the  fourth  phase,  softening  of  inflation  created  space  for  monetary  easing.  However, 
growth is yet to pick up reflecting both weak global demand, domestic supply constraints and 
slowdown in corporate investment. In this context, the role of monetary policy has also come 
to the fore: the question being to what extent monetary policy has played a role in the growth 
slowdown? Let me try to address this issue. 
Monetary policy transmission 
While  there  is  considerable  attention  even  to  small  changes  in  policy  interest  rate,  the 
question is: does this really matter? The response to this question lies in an assessment of 
how  does  this  policy  rate  changes  affect  market  rates,  particularly  the  cost  of  credit,  and 
ultimately  impacts  the  investment  and  consumption  decisions  of  economic  entities.  Apart 
from market rates, expectations about future outcomes play an important role. There could 
also be transmission lags. Moreover, the magnitude of change in market interest rates may 
be different, ranging from money market rates to lending rates. 
While  policy  rate  changes  do  matter,  it  is  not  that  straight  forward  as  to  how  they  impact 
lending rates in the transmission chain. In this context, how policy rate changes, impact bank 
deposit  rates  become  important  as  banks  rely  on  cost  plus  pricing  of  their  loan  products. 
Apart from cost of deposits, banks also load a risk premium which may change in different 
phases of the business cycle, and therefore, the lags could be longer. Hence, how fast the 
banks  are  able  to  change  these  parameters  would  largely  determine  the  changes  in  their 
lending rates. Thus, nominal lending rate determination in the market is a complex process, 
and how changes in lending rates impact overall growth is even more uncertain. This is the 
reason  why  monetary  policy  transmission  is  often  dubbed  as  a  “black  box”.2  Hence, 
explaining monetary transmission is a constant challenge for every central bank.  
Let me now turn to the issue of transmission of monetary policy in India. In the last few years, 
there have been several empirical studies, examining the interest rate channel of monetary 
transmission. The general conclusion from these studies is that increases in policy rate have 
                                                 
2  Bernanke,  Ben  and  Alan  Blinder  (1995),  “Inside  the  Black  Box:  The  Credit  Channel  of  Monetary 
Transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9, 27–48. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
a  statistically  significant  negative  impact  on  output  and  moderating  impact  on  inflation. 
However,  the  negative  effect  of  a  policy  rate  increase  is  first  felt  on  output  before  the 
moderating impact on inflation. The lags in policy rate changes on output are 2–3 quarters 
and on inflation 3–4 quarters. The total impact on policy change could, however, linger for  
8–10 quarters.3  
A notable feature of monetary policy transmission in India is the asymmetry one observes 
during different phases of a monetary policy cycle. Usually, during a phase of rising policy 
rate, banks may be quick in raising their lending rates while in a phase of falling policy rate, 
banks  may  be  slow  in  reducing  their  lending  rates  as  cost  of  deposits  does  not  adjust 
commensurately given the fixed nature of deposit contracts. This pattern reflects that loans, 
being mostly at variable rates, can be re-priced at a quicker pace than the fixed rate bank 
deposits. 
The asymmetric transmission also needs to be seen in relation to overall liquidity conditions. 
For example, in a tight liquidity condition, even if the policy rate is reduced banks may not be 
in a position to reduce deposit rates and hence lending rates with the apprehension of losing 
deposits. There could be other considerations for not lowering deposit rates if rates of return 
in competing products such as small savings and mutual funds are more attractive. Another 
consideration in a falling interest rate scenario could be that banks might want to protect their 
profit margin through a more sluggish adjustment of their lending rates. 
Notwithstanding various complexities, the interest rate channel of monetary transmission has 
been  evident  over  the  monetary  policy  cycles  in  the  recent  years.  The  policy  interest  rate 
changes did impact the market interest rate in the same direction, though at varying intensity. 
The magnitude of changes in lending rates, however, more closely followed the changes in 
deposit rates (Table 2). 
 
                                                  
3  Please see, Mohanty, Deepak (2012), “Evidence of Interest Rate Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission in 
India”, RBI Working Paper Series WPS (DEPR): 6 / 2012, May and Michael Debabrata Patra and Muneesh 
Kapur (2010), “A Monetary Policy Model Without Money for India”, IMF Working Paper WP/10/183. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Transmission to the money market rates was much faster than to lending rates 
Table 2 
 Nominal or real interest rate? 
Another aspect of monetary transmission is whether it is the nominal interest rate or the real 
interest  rate  that  can  influence  growth  and  investment.  In  the  literature,  the  stance  of 
monetary policy is judged as loose or tight depending on the level of real policy rate. Most 
economists believe that it is the real interest rate that could influence real economic activity.4 
However, as individuals and corporates we take economic decisions looking at the nominal 
rates as these are the rates that we can observe. Is it that these are two distinct concepts? I 
do not think so. Notwithstanding apparent differences, is it not that at the back of our mind 
there is no inflation metric while planning an investment project, howsoever different it may 
be  for  different  entities?  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  a  negative  real  interest  rate  favours  debtors 
whereas a positive interest rate favours creditors? 
The link between the real interest rate and nominal interest rate is provided by the famous 
Fisher  equation  which  postulates  that  the  nominal  interest  rate  is  the  sum  total  of  a  real 
                                                 
4  Taylor, P. Mark (1999). “Real interest rates and macroeconomic activity”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 
15, 2, 95–113. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
interest rate and expected inflation.5 One implication of this is that the nominal interest rates 
should  move  in  tandem  with  inflation.  In  the  real  world,  nominal  interest  rates  may  not 
change one for one with the inflation rate but the direction more often is similar. Countries 
with  higher  inflation  tend  to  have  higher  nominal  interest  rates  than  countries  with  lower 
inflation. Accordingly, the nominal interest rates in advanced countries tend to be lower than 
in emerging market and developing countries. 
While the notion of a real interest rate poses conceptual difficulties, the compilation of a real 
lending rate is even more difficult. It involves two steps: first to compute an effective nominal 
lending rate, and second to deflate it with an appropriate inflation metric. In our context, while 
the  base  rates  of  banks  generally  provide  the  floor  to  their  lending  rates  actual  borrower 
specific lending rates are different. Estimates  of weighted average lending rate (WALR) of 
banks both in nominal and real terms are presented in Chart 2. The real rates are obtained 
by deflating the nominal rates by the annual average wholesale price inflation. 
 During the period of the high growth phase of 2003–08, WALR of all scheduled commercial 
banks  stood  at  12.4  per  cent,  which  dropped  to  11.0  per  cent  during  the  crisis  period  of 
2008–10.  Subsequently,  it  went  up  and  has  remained  around  12  per  cent  thereafter 
(Chart 3). WALR in real terms declined sharply from 6.9 per cent in the high growth phase of 
2003–08 to 5.0 per cent in the crises period of 2008–10. It fell further to 2.7 per cent during 
2010–12  period  and  then  went  up  to  4.8  per  cent  in  the  subsequent  period.  Despite 
stickiness in the nominal interest rate, the reduction in the real rate was higher as inflation on 
an average turned out to be higher. However, in 2012–13 as inflation showed a significant 
moderation the real lending rate has risen. 
Why  did  the  investment  growth  slacken  despite  moderation  in  real  lending  rates?  In  this 
context,  let  me  now  turn  to  micro-level  corporate  finance  data  of  a  fairly  large  diversified 
                                                 
5 
i = r +π; where “i” is nominal interest rate, “r” is real interest rate and “π” is the inflation rate. Fisher, Irving 
(1930), The Theory of Interest, (New York: Macmillan). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sample.6 The analysis shows that interest cost as a ratio of sales went up from 2.6 per cent 
in the high growth phase of 2003–08 to over 3 per cent during the crisis period of 2008–10. 
However, during this period the average sales growth declined from about 21 per cent per 
annum to 15.7 per cent. Following subsequent recovery to 19.5 per cent per annum, it has 
plummeted  to  9.5  per  cent  in  2012–13.  Consequently  interest  cost  to  sales  ratio  rose  to 
3.8 per cent. It will thus seem that deceleration in sales growth has accentuated the interest 
burden on the corporates at the micro level. 
The  Reserve  Bank  study  I  cited  earlier  suggests  that  for  100  basis  point  increase  in  real 
interest  rate,  investment  rate  may  decline  by  50  basis  points  and  real  GDP  growth  may 
moderate by 20 basis points. As indeed the real interest rate has moderated in the post-crisis 
period,  it  should  not  have  had  a  large  negative  impact  on  investment,  but  for  significant 
deterioration in the prospects of return on investment driven by non-monetary factors. 
 Decline in marginal efficiency of capital 
In  this  context,  let  me  turn  to  the  investment  decision  at  the  firm  level.  This  is  an  area  in 
where you are better informed than me. At the firm level, investment decisions may be driven 
by a comparison of the internal rate of return (IRR) with the hurdle rate.7 As long as interest 
rate  is  lower  than  IRR,  additional  investment  may  continue.  While  IRR  is  seen  in  nominal 
terms,  marginal  efficiency  of  capital  (MEC)  which  is  measured  in  real  terms  plays  an 
important role. In a phase of sustained slowdown in economic growth, non-monetary factors 
may lower MEC faster than the extent to which interest rate may decline. As a result, despite 
a lower interest rate, investment may not pick up. The fall in IRR could be driven by adverse 
shocks to cash flows and deterioration in macroeconomic conditions. 
                                                 
6  Various  RBI  studies  on  quarterly  corporate  performance  based  on  over  2500  listed  companies  in 
manufacturing and services. 
7  The IRR is that rate of discount which would equate discounted present value of expected return over the life 
time of a project to the cost of the project, thereby making the NPV (net present value) of the project equal to 
zero. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
At  the  macroeconomic  level  supply  bottlenecks  and  sluggish  demand  can  depress  MEC, 
which can more than offset the beneficial impact of a lower lending rate on investment and 
growth. The incremental capital output ratio (ICOR) has been rising in India in the last four 
years since 2008–09. The implicit marginal productivity of capital (MPC), which is the inverse 
of ICOR, accordingly has been declining (Chart 4). 
 Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  traversing  a  growth-inflation  knife  edge  in 
recent  years.  The  sluggish  growth  conditions  in  the  last  two  years  and  the  dampened 
investment  activities  warranted  a  shift  in  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  The  extent  of 
monetary policy easing, however, has been circumscribed by the persisting risks to inflation 
and the external balance position. Price stability and exchange rate stability are necessary 
preconditions  to  sustainable  high  growth.  Furthermore,  when  non-monetary  factors  are 
impeding  a  robust  revival  in  growth,  lower  real  or  nominal  interest  rates  may  not  be  just 
enough to stimulate growth. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
