Agathe Côté: Toward a stronger financial market infrastructure for 
Canada – taking stock 
Remarks by Ms Agathe Côté, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Association for 
Financial Professionals of Canada (Montreal Chapter), Montreal, 26 March 2013. 
 Introduction 
It’s a pleasure to be here today. 
I am going to take advantage of this audience of financial professionals to talk about financial 
market infrastructure, a subject that affects every single person in one way or another – you, 
because of the nature of your work, more than others. 
Usually,  when  people  talk  about  infrastructure,  they  think  about  roads  and  transportation 
systems. Montrealers, like everyone who lives in a big city, know only too well what happens 
when  a  city’s  infrastructure  system  is  weak  or  fails:  delays,  disruptions  of  all  kinds,  and 
various degrees of chaos. 
The nature of infrastructure is such that we only truly understand its importance when it fails 
us. 
The  same  goes  for  financial  market  infrastructure.  Virtually  all  financial  transactions  are 
cleared,  settled  and  recorded  through  financial  market  infrastructures  (FMIs).  FMIs  allow 
consumers and firms to safely and efficiently purchase goods and services, make financial 
investments, and transfer funds. 
Given the critical role of FMIs, their risk management is of paramount importance; indeed, 
the subject of “systemic risk” was a hot topic in discussions about infrastructure long before 
the recent financial crisis. 
Over the past twenty years, there has been a steady stream of improvements, for example, 
developing payments systems and safely settling foreign exchange transactions across time 
zones.  These  improvements  proved  their  worth  during  the  crisis.  Despite  numerous 
institutional  failures  around  the  world  and  extreme  levels  of  uncertainty  and  risk  aversion, 
FMIs continued to perform their critical functions. 
The  crisis  also  highlighted  the  importance  of  one  type  of  FMI  in  particular  –  central 
counterparties (CCPs). A CCP acts as a buyer to every seller and a seller to every buyer for 
the  financial  transactions  that  it  clears.  An  appropriately  risk-controlled  CCP  improves  the 
market’s  resilience  by  reducing  counterparty  credit  risk  and,  therefore,  the  potential  for 
disruptions  to  be  transmitted  through  the financial  system. This  helps  essential  markets  to 
remain continuously open, even in times of severe stress. A CCP also provides enhanced 
netting efficiencies to its members, and helps to manage defaults in a controlled manner. 
For example, the Lehman Brothers default, one of the most memorable and dramatic of the 
recent crisis, would have been even worse if the London Clearing House, which is the CCP 
for a large portion of OTC interest rate derivatives, had not managed the default as well as it 
did. More generally, we saw that markets served by CCPs tended to be more resilient during 
the crisis than bilaterally settled markets. 
Given this track record, it is not surprising that market infrastructure, and CCPs in particular, 
have been key elements of the G-20’s efforts to strengthen financial stability. 
The Bank of Canada has a very strong interest in FMIs. Under the Payment Clearing and 
Settlement Act, the Bank is responsible for the regulatory oversight of FMIs with a view to 
controlling systemic risk in Canada. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But  the  Bank  is  just  one  part  of  the  equation.  Canada’s  regulatory  community  and  the 
industry are moving forward together to strengthen Canadian financial market infrastructure, 
and thus increase the resilience of the financial system. 
In  the  rest  of  my  remarks,  I  will  highlight  some  of  the  principal  initiatives  under  way. 
Considerable progress has been made, but there is still work to be done. 
Greater participation in the Canadian CCP for fixed-income repos is essential 
I will start with an initiative that is close to home. Here in Montréal, the Canadian Derivatives 
Clearing Corporation (CDCC) launched a central counterparty service for the Canadian fixed-
income repo market called the Canadian Derivatives Clearing Service (or CDCS) in February 
2012. This CCP has been under the oversight of the Bank of Canada since 30 April 2012.1  
Repos  represent  a  major  source  of  wholesale  funding  for  financial  institutions  and  are 
critically important to the functioning and liquidity of other important related markets, such as 
the  market  for  government  bonds.  CDCS  was  developed  to  facilitate  a  continuously  open 
repo market, and to help prevent a repeat of the severe liquidity crunch that occurred in this 
market during the recent financial crisis.2  
In the short time since it began operations, CDCS has expanded its product offerings, added 
participants  and  seen  a  steady  increase  in  the  average  daily  value  cleared  through  the 
system. This is all to the good, but not enough. At present, just 10 to 15 per cent of repo 
transactions  are  cleared  through  CDCS  –  not  nearly  enough  to  ensure  that  the  markets 
remain open in times of stress. 
While  most  of  Canada’s  major  banks  and  securities  broker-dealers  are  currently  CDCS 
participants, the majority of Canadian repo trades involve at least one non-CDCS participant 
on one side of the transaction.3 Since CDCS cannot clear a trade unless both counterparties 
are participants, it will not be able to materially  increase the proportion of the repo market 
that it serves without capturing a broader set of participants. 
Clearly,  the  challenge  is  getting  more  participants  on  board,  but  several  issues  must  be 
addressed  before  some  institutions  can  participate  given  the  current  CDCS  model.  For 
instance, smaller dealers may not be willing or able to meet daily operational demands or to 
actively participate in actions necessary to manage exposures in the event of a default. And 
large buy-side firms, in particular, pension funds, do not currently meet all the requirements 
for  direct  membership.4  Pension  fund  participation  is  especially  important  because  these 
institutions are on one side of a large proportion of repo transactions. 
CDCC  and  its  members  are  already  working  to  find  a  way  for  both  of  these  groups  to 
participate. 
CDCC  is  considering  how  to  set  up  a  mechanism  that  would  allow  smaller  firms  to  clear 
indirectly – that is, through a direct member that provides clearing services. This is a tried-
and-true approach, one that is well understood by financial institutions. 
                                                
1 
In addition to fixed-income and repo transactions, CDCS centrally clears options and futures traded on the MX 
and over-the-counter (OTC) equity options. 
2  P. Chatterjee, L. Embree and P. Youngman, “Reducing Systemic Risk: Canada’s New Central Counterparty 
for the Fixed-Income Market,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2012): 43–49. 
3  The current CDCS participants are: Bank of Montreal, CIBC World Markets Inc., Desjardins Securities Inc., 
Merrill  Lynch  Canada  Inc.,  Morgan  Stanley  Canada  Limited,  National  Bank  of  Canada,  NBCN  Inc.,  RBC 
Dominion Securities Inc., Royal Bank of Canada, Scotia Capital Inc., and Toronto-Dominion Bank. 
4  CDCS  participants  must  be  either  a  member  in  good  standing  of  an  exchange  recognized  in  a  Canadian 
province, or a bank to which the Bank Act (Canada) applies. Pension funds generally do not fall into either of 
these categories. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Current  CDCS  participants  have  a  role  to  play  in  facilitating  this  initiative.  They  need  to 
consider whether or not to provide clearing services to smaller institutions and, if they choose 
to do so, to develop the capacity to take on this business. They will also need to determine 
how to manage their exposure to their customers. 
For  large  pension  funds,  indirect  membership  may  not  be  a  viable  option,  given  the 
concentration  of  risk  that  would  result  if  these  entities  cleared  through  a  single  direct 
participant.  CDCC  and  the  industry  are  examining  an  approach  that  would  allow  these 
entities to directly participate in the CCP in such a way that risk is managed without requiring 
them  to  be  subject  to the  same  mutualized  loss-sharing  arrangements. It  is  important  that 
efforts  to  determine  the  exact  details  of  how  this  arrangement  could  work  in  practice  be 
pursued. 
The Bank of Canada strongly supports the work currently being undertaken by CDCC and 
the  Investment  Industry  Association  of  Canada  to  increase  participation  in  the  CCP.  The 
Bank  will  continue  to  be  involved  to  ensure  that  the  solutions  put  in  place  meet  our  high 
standards for risk management. 
While  there  are  costs  to  participate  in  CDCS,  the  benefits  are  substantial,  and  they  are 
reaped  in  both  normal  times  and  in  times  of  stress.  Not  only  will  the  Canadian  financial 
system  benefit  from  more  repos  being  centrally  cleared,  but  both  current  and  future 
participants  will  benefit from  increased  netting  efficiencies  and  reduced  counterparty  credit 
risk. 
These  benefits  will  be  further  enhanced  as  the  industry  develops  a  generalized  collateral 
repo product, in which any security in a predetermined basket of instruments can serve as 
collateral.  This  product  should  increase  the  liquidity  and  efficiency  of  the  Canadian  repo 
market. 
The Central Clearing of OTC interest rate derivatives is increasing 
Let me now turn to another effort to strengthen financial stability through the use of CCPs. 
I’m sure you are all well aware of the G-20 leaders’ commitment that all standardized over-
the-counter (OTC) derivatives be cleared through CCPs. 
Canadian  authorities,  like  those  of  most member  countries  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB),  decided  last  autumn  that  we  would  allow  our  institutions  to  meet  the  G-20 
commitment by using any CCP recognized by Canadian authorities, including global CCPs.5 
While a CCP in Canada would provide the most straightforward oversight and capacity for 
Canadian authorities to intervene to mitigate risks, if needed, there are many advantages to 
the global solution. Global CCPs better promote liquidity and efficiency in what is largely a 
global  OTC  derivatives  market.  A  global  CCP  makes  the  financial  system  more  robust  to 
shocks and allows derivatives users to appropriately manage their risk.6  
The  result  though  is  that,  globally,  there  will  likely  be  a  concentration  of  transactions  in  a 
small  number  of  CCPs  –  these  are  truly  becoming  international  systemically  important 
financial institutions. To address this concentration of risk and to ensure that local authorities 
have  the  tools  needed  to  protect  local  markets,  the  FSB  developed  safeguards  for  global 
clearing. 
These safeguards mean that global CCPs must: 
• 
provide fair and open access;  
                                                
5  This does not preclude the development and use of a local CCP in the future. 
6  See the December Financial System Review for more details on the analysis: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/ 
wp-content/uploads/2012/12/fsr-1212-chande.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
be subject to effective co-operative oversight arrangements;  
have robust recovery and resolution plans; and  
have access to emergency liquidity in all relevant currencies.  
• 
• 
• 
Now, when it comes to OTC derivatives, the most systemically important market for Canada 
is  the  interest  rate  derivatives  market;  and  the  largest  global  CCP  for  this  market  is  LCH. 
Clearnet’s  SwapClear  service,  located  in  London.  The  Bank  is  satisfied  with  the  progress 
being  made  to  implement  the  safeguards  for  SwapClear  and  has  joined  a  multilateral 
arrangement  for  oversight  co-operation  put  in  place  on  14  December  2012  by  the  U.K. 
Financial Services Authority. 
To be clear, the safeguards have not yet been fully achieved, in particular the development 
of  recovery  and  resolution  regimes  for  CCPs.  Going  forward,  authorities  in  Canada  will 
monitor  the  implementation  of  the  safeguards  in  any  CCP  that  becomes  important  to  the 
stability of Canadian OTC derivatives markets. 
Canadian  institutions  have  steadily  moved  their  interest  rate  derivatives  transactions  to 
SwapClear.7  We  expect  this  trend  to  continue  as  Canadian  banks  satisfy  the  G-20’s 
commitment to central clearing. 
Indeed,  the  progress  is  such  that  the  Bank  of  Canada  now  considers  SwapClear  to  be 
systemically  important,  and  it  will  become  subject  to  Bank  oversight  as  of  2  April. 
Designation, which the Minister of Finance agrees is in the public interest, gives the Bank the 
authority and responsibility to assure itself that SwapClear has appropriate and effective risk 
controls  in  place.  The  Bank  believes  that  the  combination  of  co-operative  oversight  of 
SwapClear and the tools that come with designation will provide the Bank with the ability to 
effectively control systemic risk within this critical market and thereby improve the resilience 
of the Canadian financial system. 
Holding financial market infrastructures to more stringent risk-management standards 
The last area of reform that I want to discuss today is the new risk-management standards 
for  systemically  important  financial  market  infrastructures.  In  2010,  the  Committee  on 
Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO) initiated a complete review of their risk-management standards. The 
goal  was  to  make  the  standards  consistent  with  current  best  practices  and  to  reflect  the 
experience  of  authorities  in  applying  them,  taking  into  account  lessons  learned  from  the 
financial crisis. 
The resulting Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures were finalized last year. The new 
standards are considerably more stringent than the previous ones and sharpen the focus on 
the  control  of  systemic  risk.  They  place  a  stronger  emphasis  on  governance,  and  require 
FMIs to have comprehensive risk-management frameworks in place and to hold substantially 
more financial resources. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  has  adopted these  Principles  and  will  apply  them  to  the  FMIs  that  it 
oversees.8  
All  FMIs  –  including  those  in  Canada  –  will  need  to  make  improvements  to  their  risk-
management practices to meet the new standards. At the moment, each designated FMI is 
                                                
7  The Big Five Canadian banks are direct clearing members at SwapClear. 
8 
In addition to CDCS, the Bank oversees the Large Value Transfer System (LVTS), Canada’s main electronic 
funds-transfer system; CDSX, Canada’s securities settlement system and central securities depository; and 
the Canadian-dollar leg of CLS Bank, which is a global payment system for the settlement of foreign exchange 
transactions, including those involving the Canadian dollar. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
undertaking a rigorous analysis of its practices against the new Principles, identifying gaps 
and developing plans to address them. The Bank and other Canadian regulators are working 
closely with FMIs to ensure timely compliance. 
What this means for participants, for you and your firms, is that there will be changes in the 
FMI’s  risk-management  practices  as  they  move  to  meet  the  new  standards.  New  risk-
management  practices  will  mean  higher  costs  for  FMIs  which  will  have  an  impact  on 
participants. In some cases, there will also be higher collateral requirements, but there will be 
greater assurance that transactions are carried out according to the wishes of participants, in 
good times and in bad. FMIs will inform their participants of upcoming changes as they work 
out the details. 
We are on our way, but we’re not there yet 
So where does this leave us? 
Emerging from the crisis, a key element of international reforms to strengthen the financial 
system  was  to  reinforce  FMIs.  The  goal  is  to  reduce  systemic  risk  and  keep  essential 
markets continuously open. 
In Canada, we have made much progress by creating a CCP for fixed-income repos and by 
substantially increasing the share of the OTC derivatives interest rate market that is centrally 
cleared. As well, we are putting in place new, more rigorous international standards for our 
FMIs. 
It is impressive how much has been accomplished, but there is more to be done. 
We recognize that many of the improvements involve costs, in both time and money, for the 
financial services sector. I do not want to understate the commitment this requires from all 
stakeholders. But the benefits will greatly outweigh the costs. And now is not the time to stop 
or  slow  down.  It  is  essential  to  continue  to  invest  in  financial  market  infrastructure.  With 
continued investments, we will have the assurance that FMIs will serve us well in the future. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
