Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Building broader horizons in 2013 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the Annual Convention of the Chamber of Thrift Banks, Makati 
City, 20 March 2013. 
 The officers and members of the Chamber of Thrift Banks, under the leadership of outgoing 
president, Patrick Cheng, and incoming president, Jose Teodoro Limcaoco, Members of the 
Monetary Board, Fellow BSPers, my colleagues in the banking industry and in government 
service, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
The  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  is  pleased  to  once  again  take  part  in  your  annual 
convention.  As  I  begin  my  remarks  this  morning,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the 
outgoing officers and members of the board for your efforts. I am pleased that we were able 
to move forward on several fronts, even as we still have a full plate of reforms. Let me also 
congratulate  your  incoming  officers.  Indeed,  to  be  elected  to  the  CTB  board  shows  the 
confidence that your peers have in you. More importantly, your accepting such a challenge 
underscores your commitment to work for the greater good. 
A part of the tradition of your convention that I appreciate is the row of display booths one 
has to pass through as one enters the ballroom. Stalls of the various companies that have 
grown because of partnership with the industry. To me, the variety and quality of the displays 
have  been  an  indicator  of  the  state  of  the  thrift  banking  industry.  If  this  year’s  display 
continues in that tradition, I believe it is telling us that good things are in the offing for the 
CTB and our economy. 
What is in the horizon? 
This brings me to your chosen theme. “Building a Broader Horizon for 2013.” 
Horizon is an interesting word. It has a couple of meanings and evokes several feelings. One 
meaning of horizon is that it is the “apparent intersection of the earth and sky.” We’re coming 
into the summer months. And I am sure, if you find yourself on the beach in the next few 
weeks, you will discover that it is hard to escape the temptation to stand on the shoreline, 
maybe  barefoot,  and  then  fix  your  gaze  towards  the  vastness  of  the  ocean  –  just  to  see 
where the ocean and sky seem to meet the horizon. 
Another  meaning  of  horizon  in  the  Webster  dictionary  is  that  it  is  the  “range  of  one’s 
perception and experience”. 
Putting these two meanings together suggests to me that when you chose this topic for this 
year’s convention, you were actually asking your members to find ways of enlarging “what 
the industry knows about what it can experience and what it is able to do”. You were, in a 
sense, asking your members to find ways to enlarge these things to the point where the sky 
and earth seem to meet. 
I wish to tell you even now, that in this journey you have chosen, the industry can expect the 
BSP to provide an operating environment that would allow you to traverse this path, but in a 
way that makes you also mindful of the impact of your actions – not only on yourselves but 
also on the rest of the members of the financial eco-system you are in. 
How shall we broaden the horizon? 
Your goal for 2013 is clear – to broaden the industry’s horizon. But how would you achieve 
this?  In  geometry  and  in  nautical  science,  I  am  told  practitioners  have  derived  a 
mathematical formula for calculating the distance to the visible horizon. The exact equation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
will depend on whether adjustments for refraction, i.e., the distortions due to light, are done 
or  not.  But  the  common  element  in  any  of  the  equations  is  this  –  that  the  distance  to  the 
horizon is a function of the height from which you are taking your view. More specifically, the 
visible horizon will be further from you, the higher you are above the ground. 
This natural law is quite interesting in that it also applies to the laws of economics. If I were to 
apply  this  law  to  your  chosen  goal,  I  would  paraphrase  as  follows.  If  the  CTB  wishes  to 
broaden its horizon, the Chamber needs to raise its vantage point. 
The stage is set 
Using  2012  as  our  gauge,  I  believe  you  will  agree  with  me  that  the  country  has  certainly 
raised  its  vantage  point.  When  we  consider  our  markets,  the  environment  is  indeed  more 
favourable now than it has been in the recent past. The economy expanded by 6.6 percent in 
2012  and  this  growth  was  matched  by  generally  stable  prices  as  inflation  averaged 
3.2 percent last year. 
The high growth-low inflation scenario was further supported by our robust external position. 
The country’s balance of payments remains in surplus due to investment growth, business 
process outsourcing receipts and the steady rise in remittances. This led to the further build-
up in our Gross International Reserves, which stood at 83.8 billion dollars at end-February. 
This is about one year’s worth of imports of goods and services, more than adequate by any 
of the standard measures of adequacy. 
These  positive  developments  have  heightened  investor  confidence  in  the  country  while 
further expanding the financial services extended by our banks. 
For  the  thrift  banking  industry,  your  assets  rose  to  Php  666.17  billion  last  year  (up  from 
Php 607.43 billion in 2011 or a growth rate of about 9.7 percent). This was on the back of 
Php 529.80 billion in deposits and matched by Php 449.27 billion in loans. 
Given  this  starting  point  for  2013,  I  ask  the  officers  and  members  of  the  CTB,  can  we 
broaden our horizon? I think the answer should be a resounding yes. We have entered 2013 
from a position of strength, and with some momentum. The onus is on you, on us, to make 
the most of this advantage, to bring you forward in your chosen objective. 
Opportunities abound – some specific directions 
I’d  like  to  spend  the  rest  of  the  time  allotted  on  some  specific  suggestions  for  broadening 
your horizon. 
A quick review of the industry’s loan portfolio shows that about a third of the industry’s total 
lending continues to be towards the Real Estate and Construction Businesses. In addition, 
while such lending remains concentrated toward the acquisition of residential property, there 
has been an improvement in the take up of loans for commercial purposes, principally from 
the BPO sector. 
These  trends  make  the  recent  approval  of  the  BSP  of  prudential  reference  standards  for 
Contract-to-sell (CTS) financing important . Furthermore, against the backdrop of low interest 
rates  and  the  constant  temptation  among  banks  to  chase  after  higher  yields,  this  market 
approach  dovetails  quite  well  with  the  prudential  thrust  of  the  BSP  to  strengthen  credit 
underwriting  practices  for  real  estate  activities.  The  BSP  has  not  yet  moved  to  formal 
prescriptive regulations at this stage. But, it appreciates the fact that the market itself sought 
to define the guidelines to streamline market practice since no common standards have been 
recognized to date. 
In the context of this year’s convention theme, a market approach such as this can be seen 
as the industry’s way of broadening its horizon, with financial stability specifically in mind. As 
we  have  already  taken the  steps forward  on  mortgage finance,  perhaps  the  Chamber  can 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
likewise consider similar standards for auto loans in order to ensure that banks don’t end up 
financing “lemons”. We would also like to see the Chamber actively contributing towards an 
equivalent effort for credit card receivables and other modes of consumer financing. 
Business  cycles  come  and  go,  and  therefore  it  is  important  that  we  have  the  rules  of  the 
game squarely in place, so that any market inflection points will not cause instability in the 
market. As market opportunities expand, we need to also work together so we can maintain 
strong credit discipline and avoid imprudent lending and investments. 
Ladies and gentlemen. We are an economy of 96 million Filipinos spread over 7,101 islands. 
It stands to reason that consumer-related financing, your bread and butter, will be a major 
factor in the economy. Hence, the BSP’s push to improve credit underwriting standards for 
consumer  loans.  But  in  parallel  with  this,  we  believe  thrift  banks  should  also  actively 
participate in the culture and practice of financial education and consumer protection. 
These  are  not  just  fancy  buzz  words.  In  fact,  in  the  BSP,  we  take  these  twin  advocacies 
seriously. Through our economic and financial learning centers (EFLCs) in our head office 
and 21 regional offices and branches, we undertake outreaches to raise the awareness of 
the  financial  consumer  so  that  each  of  them  can  make  informed  saving  and  investment 
choices. The BSP has partnered with the Chamber on some of these programs and we look 
forward to engaging the Chamber even more. We would also like to see individual members 
of the Chamber embark on your own literacy programs. 
As  a  complement,  we  have  created  a  specialized  department  in  BSP  called  the  Financial 
Consumer  Affairs  Group  (FCAG).  It  is  set  up  as  a  clearing  hub  for  complaints  and  as  a 
redress mechanism so that those who have clearly been victimized through no fault of their 
own do not have to suffer the added penalty of delayed attention. Furthermore, the BSP is in 
the  early  stages  of  formalizing  specific  standards  for  consumer  protection,  including  how 
banks  should  handle  consumer  complaints.  This  move  is  aimed  at  elevating  consumer 
protection to a stature of a core bank function, and not simply an ancillary advocacy. 
Let me now leave the world of real estate and consumer finance. And turn to another sector 
that  the  Chamber  is  well-equipped  to  support.  Here  I  mean  the  world  of  Micro,  Small  and 
Medium Enterprises. The Philippines is traditionally an MSME market. And if we are to raise 
our  national  economic  vantage  point  and  take  advantage  of  the  momentum  coming  into 
2013,  thrift  banks  need  to  consider  lending  more  to  this  economic  segment.  I  say  this 
because MSMEs provide great employment opportunities. A healthier MSME sector will help 
ensure our economic growth is broad-based and inclusive. 
Thrift banks, however, must not just lend more in terms of nominal amounts. The challenge 
to the industry really is to ensure that such lending continuously creates further opportunities. 
In this way, MSMEs can be assured of viability, regardless of mandated credit programs. 
Final thoughts 
Friends,  you  want  this  convention  to  be  a  discussion  on  broadening  your  horizon,  our 
horizon. In trying to look ahead, I took us through the more scenic route of our recent past. 
The  numbers  tell  us  an  encouraging  story  of  growth  and  consistency  of  economic  and 
financial stability. 
However, the paradox of financial stability is that we may just be at our weakest when we 
believe we are at our strongest position. Complacency often sets in when positive news is 
continuous and this is reinforced by encouraging market parameters. If we fall into this trap of 
complacency, we risk losing our focus. 
For the thrift banking industry, the growth trajectory that many are anticipating suggests even 
better times ahead. It is therefore in our collective interest, if we  wish to truly broaden our 
horizon, to agree on a common vision where thrift banks have a definitive role to play. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In  my  remarks,  I  have  suggested  specific  action  points  you  may  consider  in  order  to 
accomplish  just  that,  and  over  time  broaden  your  horizon.  I  challenge  the  industry  to 
1) further improve credit underwriting standards for real estate and consumer loans and raise 
your vantage point by looking at your processes with the lens of financial stability, 2) interact 
with your clients and raise your vantage point by enhancing your practices with the heart of 
consumer protection and financial education, and 3) increase lending to  MSMEs and raise 
your vantage point by lending with the mind to create greater value. But much more can be 
done. As the old Board takes its place in CTB lore, your new Board is now at the helm to 
guide the industry forward. 
It  is  never  an  easy  task  to  move  forward  but  rest  assured  that  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng 
Pilipinas will be with you as we take that journey together into broader horizons. 
Thank you very much and good day to all of you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
