Glenn Stevens Global economic overview and developments in Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Canberra, 22 February 2013. 
 In the six months since the August hearing, economic and financial conditions abroad have 
generally improved. We can see three key sets of developments. 
First, the threat perceived in the middle of last year of extreme financial instability arising in 
the euro area – and, in the eyes of some, possible disintegration of the euro – has abated. 
This followed various important steps taken by European policymakers. Interest rates faced 
by some of the key sovereigns which were under acute pressure have declined markedly, 
and funding conditions for many European banks have improved to the point where some of 
the  central  bank  funding  that  had  been  supplied  has  been  repaid.  These  countries,  and 
Europe generally, still face immense challenges and it is, as usual, important to stress that 
sentiment remains vulnerable to setbacks. But a truly disastrous outcome was, once again, 
avoided. 
Second, the United States has continued its gradual recovery and has avoided the worst of 
the so-called “fiscal cliff”. Some of the headwinds for the US economy are subsiding – the 
housing market seems to have turned, for example. There are still some key decision points 
in  the  fiscal  area  ahead,  but  if  they  can  be  satisfactorily  managed,  the  US  has  as  good  a 
chance of delivering an upside surprise as a downside one over the period ahead. 
Third, the slowdown in China’s economy has come to an end. The medium-term outlook for 
China is for a less hectic pace of growth than we saw on average over the past decade, and 
with  more  attention  paid  to  the  various  risks  –  financial  and  environmental  included  – 
associated  with  that  growth.  Having  said  that,  the  greater  absolute  size  of  the  Chinese 
economy  now  means  that  even  less  hectic  growth  is  still  of  global  significance  and  of 
importance to Australia. 
Conditions  have  improved  in  international  financial  markets  as  the  perceived  probability  of 
very bad events occurring has declined and as major central banks have maintained highly 
accommodative policies. Share prices have risen around the world, with global indexes up by 
about 20 per cent from the lows in June last year. Borrowing conditions in capital markets for 
creditworthy  borrowers  internationally  remain  extraordinarily  favourable.  For  investors, 
conversely,  returns  on  “low  risk”  assets  are  very  low  and  the  “search  for  yield”  has 
intensified. 
World  GDP  growth  is  thought  to  have  been  about  3¼  per  cent  in  2012  –  a  little  below 
average. Forecasts for 2013 are for something a bit higher than that, with a further pick-up in 
2014. Those seem reasonable guesses at this point in time. Risks now seem less tilted to the 
downside than they were. 
Australia’s terms of trade have declined by about 17 per cent since their exceptional peak in 
the middle of 2011. We are assuming they will fall further over the next couple of years. Even 
with that, however, they will probably be more than 50 per cent above their twentieth century 
average over that period. This amounts to an external environment for Australia that, while 
not without some challenges, is still broadly positive. 
Turning to the Australian economy, the information we have at present suggests that growth 
was  close  to  trend  over  2012  as  a  whole.  There  was,  though,  some  softening  around  the 
middle of the year, and sentiment among many businesses, including some that had seen 
important positive spillovers from the mining boom, became less optimistic. Associated with 
this, the labour market softened in the second half of the year, with job vacancies declining, 
employment  growth  slowing,  and  unemployment  increasing  somewhat.  Labour  force 
participation also declined. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Looking  ahead,  it  appears  that  the  peak  in  the  level  of  resource  sector  investment  is  now 
close. It is a very high peak, but we do not think that there will be a rapid decline in the near 
term after the peak. However, it seems pretty clear that this type of investment will not be 
adding to demand for much longer. Investment spending by businesses in other sectors has 
thus far remained somewhat subdued in comparison. There are good reasons to expect it 
will strengthen in due course, but the available indicators at present do not suggest that is 
going to happen in the very near term. We will get another reading on the investment outlook 
next week. The outlook for public spending is being constrained as a result of the budgetary 
restraint being pursued by governments. It is also noteworthy that in several sectors of the 
economy a combination of factors is putting pressure on business models, and firms have 
been  responding  with  an  emphasis  on  lifting  productivity  and  paring  back  costs.  This 
process, while unavoidable, doubtless feeds into measures of sentiment. 
Sentiment  of  households,  in  contrast,  has  improved.  Despite  continual  commentary  that 
households are very cautious, actual measures of confidence have in fact shown an upward 
trend since the middle of last year and are currently a bit above longer-run average levels. 
Admittedly, households do not feel the same ebullience they did for some years prior to the 
financial  crisis  in  the  major  countries.  But  that  degree  of  confidence,  with  its  associated 
patterns of saving and increasing leverage, was unusual, and is not likely to recur. 
Our  expectation  is  that consumer  demand  will record  growth  roughly  in  line  with  the  trend 
rise  in  income  over  the  period  ahead.  Housing  investment  should  strengthen  given  that 
several  factors  are  supportive  –  interest  rates  are  low,  housing  prices  are  tending  to  rise, 
gross rental yields have increased, population growth remains strong and is even picking up 
a little. Admittedly, we are as yet very early in this phase. The increased capacity to extract 
and  ship  raw  materials  will  see  export  volumes  continue  to  strengthen,  probably  quite 
substantially, over the next couple of years. Some other categories of exports seem to have 
stopped declining, notwithstanding that the exchange rate remains high. 
Putting  all  that  together,  while  growth  was  probably  about  trend  in  2012  as  a  whole,  our 
sense  is  that  the  economy  has  entered  2013  at  a  pace  a  little  below  that.  We  have  been 
inclined  to  think  that  the  near-term  outlook  could  be  for  more  of  the  same,  but  things  are 
likely  to  strengthen  further  out.  We  are,  of  course,  conscious  that  forecasts  have  a 
considerable  margin  of  error.  We  have  put  some  emphasis  on  this  point  in  the  way  we 
present our forecasts in recent times. 
Stepping back from the numbers, in broad terms, the economy will be adjusting to the peak 
of the mining boom and some other areas of demand will have room to grow more quickly 
than they have in recent years. This transition will not necessarily be seamless – these things 
seldom are – but there are reasonable prospects of it occurring over time. As we go through 
this period, the pressures to adapt business models, contain costs, increase productivity and 
innovate  will  remain.  But  such  adjustments  are  actually  positive  for  longer-run  economic 
performance. 
Inflation is currently consistent with the target. The high exchange rate has lowered prices for 
tradable goods and services and so helped to hold down measures of inflation over the past 
couple of years. But some domestic costs have also slowed, in response to softer demand 
conditions in some areas, even as prices for things such as utilities have risen sharply. The 
effect  of  the  carbon  price  on  the  CPI  so  far  has,  as  best  we  can  judge,  been  broadly  as 
expected. Our assessment is that inflation will be consistent with the target over the next one 
to two years. 
Taking account of the evolving outlook for growth and inflation, the Board eased monetary 
policy further in the last quarter of last year, following up its easing actions in mid year, and 
earlier actions in the last quarter of 2011. The cash rate has been reduced six times over the 
past sixteen months, for a total decline of 175 basis points. Allowing for some change in the 
gap between the cash rate and other rates, lending rates nonetheless have fallen to be not 
far from their historic lows. The share of household income devoted to interest payments has 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
likewise  declined  considerably.  Indeed  housing  “affordability”  as  conventionally  measured, 
for purchasers, has improved a lot over the past two years. 
That represents quite a substantial change in policy settings. It is having an effect. Housing 
prices  have  been  rising  since  last  May,  having  declined  for  a  period  prior  to  that.  Share 
prices have also risen quite significantly, and if anything by a little more than in comparable 
markets  overseas.  The  returns  available  to  savers  on  safe  assets  –  like  bonds  and  bank 
deposits  –  have  fallen  by  enough  to  prompt  Australian  savers  to  consider  shifting  their 
portfolios towards other assets. These are channels of monetary policy at work. 
At the same time, as we have noted repeatedly, the exchange rate remains somewhat higher 
than one might have expected given the decline in export prices so far observed. This has 
been a relevant factor in the setting of interest rates. It is not that interest rates are seeking a 
particular exchange rate response, but they are being set with a recognition of the exchange 
rate’s effect on the economy. 
Overall, there is a good deal of interest rate stimulus in the pipeline. At its meeting earlier this 
month  the  Board  judged  that  it  was  sensible  to  allow  it  time  to  do  its  work.  The  Board 
believed that the inflation outlook, at least as we assess it at present, would provide scope to 
ease further, should that be necessary to support demand. But for now, the Board decided it 
was prudent to sit still. 
Turning briefly to other areas of the Bank’s responsibilities, in June last year the Payments 
System  Board  released  the  Conclusions  from  its  Strategic  Review  of  Innovation  in  the 
Payments  System.  The  review  identified  areas  in  which  innovation  in  the  Australian 
payments  system  could  be 
through  more  effective  cooperation  between 
stakeholders  and  regulators.  One  of  the  gaps  identified  in  the  review  was  the  inability  of 
businesses and consumers to make payments through the banking system that are received 
immediately,  including  when  the  payer  and  receiver  have  their  accounts  with  different 
institutions.  The  Payments  System  Board  believes  that  Australia  should  develop  such 
capability over the medium term, and proposed a target for the payments industry to achieve 
that goal by the end of 2016. The Board met last week and reviewed an industry proposal for 
real-time payments that was submitted to the Bank in late 2012. The Board considers that 
the industry has made good progress and endorsed the proposal in an announcement earlier 
this week. There are many details to be resolved that will require the Bank and industry to 
work  closely  together  over  the  next  few  years,  within  a  governance  framework  that  gives 
appropriate  voice  to  the  various  stakeholders.  But  we  view  this  as  a  very  positive 
development  and  we  welcome 
to  deliver  world-class 
improvements to the payments system by the end of 2016. 
My colleagues and I are here to respond to your questions. 
 
industry’s  commitment 
improved 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
