Jörg Asmussen: Exchange of views with the Economic and Monetary 
Affairs Committee of the European Parliament on financial assistance to 
Cyprus 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the European Parliament, Brussels, 8 May 2013. 
 Dear Madam Chair, 
Honourable Members of Parliament, 
Thank you for inviting me to this exchange of views on financial assistance to Cyprus. 
The substance of the decisions, and process of how they  were taken, have been debated 
controversially  –  also  in  this  House.  I  am  therefore  pleased  to  be  given  the  opportunity  to 
provide the ECB’s views and to participate in a public debate on this matter. 
Initial conditions in Cyprus 
Before  discussing  the  key  elements  of  the  EU/IMF  adjustment  programme,  it  is  very 
important to understand how Cyprus got itself into such difficult situation in the first place. 
Why were imbalances of such magnitude allowed to develop? 
What made the nature of the challenges faced by Cyprus so exceptional? 
I find these  essential questions  that I  hope  we  can  address  during  our exchange  of  views 
today. 
Let me focus here on the banking sector. 
In the 2000s, the Cypriot economy evolved towards a rather unbalanced business model with 
an inordinate weight for the financial industry. The country aimed to become leading provider 
of  international  banking services.  Cypriot  banks  attracted  large  inflows  of foreign  deposits. 
They expanded their balance sheets dramatically over recent years, both domestically and 
externally.  The  overall  banking  system  represented  more  than  700%  of  GDP.  In  terms  of 
employment, every third job was related to the financial and professional service sector. 
An active use of the relevant policy tools could  – and indeed should –  have curbed these 
unsustainable developments. But prudential supervision was too weak and did not prevent 
the  build-up  of  large  financial  sector  imbalances.  Asset  growth  outpaced  deposit  inflows. 
Banks became increasingly exposed to funding vulnerabilities. They tried to attract deposits 
by offering very high deposit rates – on average, nearly 2 percentage points higher than in 
the rest of the euro area 1. Domestic credit expansion and imprudent lending practices fuelled 
a  domestic  property  boom.  As 
increased 
dramatically.  Moreover,  Cypriot  banks  underwent  sizeable  losses  following  the Greek  debt 
restructuring. This further deteriorated the soundness of their balance sheets. 
The lop-sided nature of the economic model was not confined to the banking sector alone. At 
the same time, significant external and internal imbalances had built up – notably persistent 
current account deficits, significant losses in competitiveness, rising fiscal deficits and public 
debt. All this left Cyprus in a weak position to tackle the problems of its banking sector. And 
these  problems  appeared  to  be  daunting  –  especially  compared  to  the  small  size  of  the 
the  bubble  burst,  non-performing 
loans 
                                                
1   The  rate  for  term  deposits  from  households  and  non-financial  corporations  as  of  March  2013  was  4.4%  in 
Cyprus and 2,5% in the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
economy. The two largest banks, which account for half of the domestic banking sector, had 
prospective  capital  needs  of  close  to  EUR  8  billion  –  or  44%  of  GDP.  This  is  what  the 
independent due diligence exercise revealed in February 2013. 
If the sovereign had shouldered these massive recapitalisation needs, debt would have risen 
to  145%  of  GDP.  This  would  have  critically  endangered  public  debt  sustainability.  At  the 
same  time,  traditional  ways  of  burden  sharing  by  the  private  sector  bank  creditors  were 
limited, given little junior debt outstanding in banks. 
All this made the situation in Cyprus highly challenging and exceptional. One needs to bear 
in  mind  the  starting  conditions  when  assessing  the  design  of  the  EU/IMF  programme,  to 
which I will now turn. 
Key elements of the EU/IMF programme 
Three key objectives guided the negotiations of the MoU: first, to reduce the risks posed by 
the  financial  sector;  second,  to  preserve  debt  sustainability;  and  third,  to  restore  the 
conditions  for  sustainable  and  balanced  growth.  Combining  these  three  objectives  has 
proved to be a challenge, to say the least. 
Not  only  did  the  programme  have  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  short-term  financial 
stability concerns and long-term debt sustainability considerations. It also had to be framed 
within  a  political  context  which  requires  unanimous  decisions  in  the  Eurogroup  and  ESM 
decision making bodies. 
Due  to  these  exceptional  economic  and  political  circumstances,  programme  negotiations 
dragged on for too long, and the situation of the banking sector became critical. This forced 
the  ECB  to  act.  The  provision  of  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance  (ELA)  by  the  national 
central  bank  is  aimed  at  supporting  solvent  banks  facing  liquidity  problems.  Without  a 
credible  recapitalisation  perspective,  the  two  largest  and  weakest  Cypriot  banks  could  not 
have been considered solvent any longer. Further providing ELA to these banks would not 
have been in line with the rules of the Eurosystem and, ultimately, with the Treaty provisions. 
Therefore,  the  ECB  decided  on  21  March  that  ELA  would  be  continued  if  and  only  if  a 
programme was in place that would ensure the solvency of the banks concerned. After the 
Eurogroup agreement on 25 March, the ECB did not object to the request for the provision of 
ELA by the Central Bank of Cyprus. On both occasions, the ECB acted strictly in line with its 
Statute. It implemented the existing rules. Nothing more, nothing less. 
The  finally  agreed  EU/IMF  programme  reflects  the  three  objectives  I  mentioned  earlier.  In 
particular,  it  was  decided  to  cover  the  capital  needs  of  the  two  largest  banks  exclusively 
through  the  own  contributions  of  uninsured  depositors  and  senior  and  junior  debt  holders. 
The creditors of the two banks would not be made worse-off than they would have been in 
the  case  of  liquidation,  which  would  have  been  the  alternative  to  the  programme.  This  is 
necessary to guarantee the sustainability of public debt. It will also contribute to restoring the 
conditions for sustainable and balanced growth. In addition, the EU/IMF programme foresees 
a rapid and substantial downsizing of the domestic banking sector, from about 550% to about 
350%  of  GDP  at  the  beginning  of  the  programme.  This  is  indispensable  to  reduce  future 
contingent liabilities from the banks to the sovereign. The EU/IMF programme also foresees 
the full  protection  of  deposits  below  100,000  euros  which  will  not  suffer  any  loss  from the 
resolution strategy. 
Despite  the  unprecedented  steps  taken  so  far,  the  banking  sector  has  not  yet  been 
stabilised.  The  burden  sharing  arrangement  negatively  affected  depositor  confidence  and 
required the introduction of temporary and proportionate capital controls and restrictions on 
deposit withdrawals. Short term risks are high, as the deep recession is expected to take a 
toll  on  banks’  balance  sheets.  The  reliance  of  the  largest  bank  on  ELA  continues  to  be 
exceptionally high. Hence, firm steps are needed to complete the financial sector reform so 
as to rebuild confidence in the viability of the banking system. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Let me now turn to the lessons which we can draw from the experience in Cyprus. 
Lessons from the Cypriot experience 
The  Cypriot  case  has  been  a  salutary  reminder  of  the  importance  of  establishing  banking 
union  as  swiftly  as  possible.  Only  then  we  will  be  able  to  break  the  negative  interaction 
between sovereigns and their banking systems. 
First,  it  has  shown  that  the  speedy  entry  into  force  and  implementation  of  the  single 
supervisory mechanism (SSM) is essential. The centralisation of supervision as well as the 
effective  use  of  macroprudential  tools  should  help  identify  and  prevent  the  persistent 
accumulation of financial imbalances at an early stage. This will help ensure a more resilient 
and  viable  financial  sector.  A financial  sector  that  is  capable  of  contributing  to  sustainable 
growth. 
Second, it has demonstrated that we urgently need a European framework for the resolution 
of financial institutions. This should include a clear set of commonly known ex ante rules for 
bail-in, buffers of ‘bail-inable’ assets and depositor preference. 
Regarding the latter, the new framework should place depositors at the top of the creditor 
hierarchy  and  ensure  that  the  role  of  DGS  in  resolution  is  limited  to  insuring  eligible 
depositors.  This  will  contribute  to  reducing  the  risks  to  financial  stability  by  providing  legal 
certainty and predictability to resolution. 
Third, it has revealed the pressing need to establish a single resolution mechanism (SRM). 
The SRM is a fundamental pillar of the banking union and is a necessary complement to the 
SSM. This requires a strong authority at its centre which should provide timely and impartial 
decision-making which minimises the costs of resolution. The SRM should have a European 
resolution fund at its disposal which should have access to a temporary and fiscally neutral 
public backstop. 
I thank you for your attention and stand at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
