Guy Debelle: The impact of payments system and prudential reforms on 
the Reserve Bank of Australia’s provision of liquidity 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  to  the  Australian  Financial  Markets  Association  (AFMA)  and  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia (RBA) Briefing, Sydney, 16 August 2013. 
 This speech was co-authored with Matt Boge.  
Today,  I  wish  to  talk  about  several  important  changes  that  will  be  made  to  the framework 
under which the Reserve Bank operates in domestic financial markets. These changes will 
be  introduced  at  different  points  during  the  next  18  months  and  will  have  significant 
implications for the size of the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet and the way in which the Bank 
provides liquidity to financial institutions. 
The primary purpose of the Bank’s operating framework is to implement the monetary policy 
decisions of the Reserve Bank Board. As you would be aware, the Board states its policy 
stance  in  terms  of  a  target  for  the  cash  rate.  To  be  precise,  it’s  the  rate  on  overnight 
unsecured loans between authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs). While the Board has 
been announcing targets for the cash rate since 1990, the Bank’s operating framework has 
continued to evolve over this time, although the underlying principles haven’t changed. 
To  a  large  extent,  these  modifications  have  been  prompted  by  the  need  to  accommodate 
structural  changes  within  markets,  such  as  the  end  of  the  arrangements  for  Authorised 
Money Market Dealers in the mid-1990s and the reduced supply of government bonds during 
the following decade. 
In  responding  to  these  developments,  the  Bank  has  been  guided  by  the  need  for  its 
operating framework to enable the Bank to meet the Board’s cash rate target and to facilitate 
the  most  effective  transmission  of  those  policy  decisions  to  the  prices  of  financial  assets 
more broadly, and ultimately, to the real economy. 
With  that  in  mind,  during  the  global  financial  crisis,  when  different  segments  of  financial 
markets  became  impaired  to  varying  degrees,  the  Bank  modified  several  aspects  of  its 
operating framework. Some of these changes were only temporary and  were discontinued 
after  markets  stabilised,  such  as  offering  term  deposits  and  US  dollar  repos  to  domestic 
financial institutions. Other changes have been permanent, such as broadening the range of 
securities that are eligible for the Bank’s repurchase transactions. 
The  Bank’s  operating  framework  has  also  needed  to  adapt  to  changes  in  the  payments 
system, such as the shift to real-time gross settlement in the late 1990s and the settlement of 
the Australian dollar leg of foreign currency transactions via CLS Bank a few years after that. 
Going forward, further innovations to the payments system as well as the introduction of the 
Basel  III  liquidity  reforms  will  require  more  changes  to  be  made.  Before  describing  these 
changes, it is worth recapping what the core features of the Bank’s operating framework are. 
Essentially, the Bank seeks to control the supply of settlement funds that ADIs use to meet 
their payment obligations, so that the rate at which ADIs borrow and lend these funds to each 
other is equal to the Board’s target for the cash rate. To create the incentive for exchange 
settlement (ES) account holders to participate in the overnight cash market, the Bank pays 
account holders 25 basis points below the cash rate target on their end-of-day balances. On 
the  other  side,  a penalty  rate  of  25  basis  points  above  the  cash  rate  is  charged  if  an  ADI 
needs  to  borrow  overnight  from  the  Reserve  Bank  to  ensure  its  ES  balance  is  positive. 
Together, these rates comprise the 50 basis point interest rate “corridor” that the Bank uses 
to guide the cash rate to the Board’s target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
As  payments  to  and  from  the  Reserve  Bank  (or  its  clients)  are  constantly  changing  the 
supply  of  exchange  settlement  funds,  each  day  the  Bank  will  transact  in  the  market  to 
maintain the appropriate supply of funds.1 These transactions are almost always repos; that 
is, the Bank’s counterparty agrees to repurchase the security it has sold to the Bank at some 
future date. 
This framework has been successful in achieving its objectives: the interbank cash market is 
quite active, with usually around $5 billion transacted each day;2 the cash rate consistently 
trades at the Board’s target; and changes in the cash rate pass through rapidly to the overall 
rate structure within the domestic market. 
Given that background, I’ll now turn to the forthcoming changes to the payments system and 
liquidity regulations and explain what they are likely to mean for the demand for ES balances. 
At the present time, the demand for ES balances is generally low as ADIs seek to minimise their 
balances, subject to the constraint that they must be positive. Although ES funds are a risk-free 
investment, the 25 basis point spread to the cash rate is usually wide enough to discourage ADIs 
from  using  them  as  a  store  of  liquidity.  During  periods  of  financial  turmoil,  that  can  change. 
Between 2007 and 2009, the amount of ES funds rose as ADIs became increasingly risk averse 
and sought to hold larger precautionary balances at the central bank, which the Reserve Bank 
accommodated  with  increased  supply  (Graph  1).3,4  However,  for  the  past  three  years  or  so, 
aggregate ES balances at the end of each day has usually only been around $1 billion, a very 
small component of the Reserve Bank’s liabilities and of ADIs’ liquid assets. 
Graph 1 
                                                 
1  See  Baker  A  and  D  Jacobs  (2010),  “Domestic  Market  Operations  and  Liquidity  Forecasting”,  RBA  Bulletin, 
December, pp 37–43. 
2  The data on activity in the cash market can be found on the RBA website in Statistical Table F1. 
3  See Debelle G (2010), “The Evolving Financial Situation”, Address to the Women in Finance Lunch, Sydney, 
16 February. 
4  A recent report by a study group that I chaired, “Central Bank Collateral Frameworks and Practices” published 
by the Markets Committee at the BIS, documents a similar phenomenon globally over this period. The report 
also  highlights  the  interesting  point  that  banks  globally  did  not  generally  present  the  cheapest  to  deliver 
collateral to access central bank liquidity over the course of the crisis. This is relevant to the sort of changes 
that I am talking about in this speech and it will be interesting to see if something similar occurs here. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As payments arrangements evolve in the coming years, the demand for ES funds will rise 
significantly.  As  you  might  be  aware,  the  Payments  System  Board  last  year  established  a 
number of strategic objectives for the payments system, including improving the process for 
settling electronic “direct entry” (DE) payments. The direct entry system is used very widely, 
such  as  for  salary  payments,  the  payment  of  Centrelink  benefits,  “Pay  Anyone”  internet 
transfers and for many dividend payments. While most individual direct credit and direct debit 
transfers  are  quite  low  in  value,  the  total  value  of  such  payments  averages  more  than 
$40 billion per day. 
At present, like most low-value payments, direct entry payments are not settled on the same 
day  that  the  details  of  the  transaction  are  exchanged  between  financial  institutions.  DE 
payments are settled in one batch at 9 am on the following business day. 
From November this year, DE payments will be able to be settled for same-day value, albeit 
still  in  batches.  While  this  should  be  of  great  benefit  to  financial  institutions  and  their 
customers, some of these settlements will be taking place outside of normal banking hours 
(Figure 1). Furthermore, at the time the interbank cash market closes at the end of the day, 
ADIs will not know the size of these payments (or receipts) that they will need to settle later 
that evening. Potentially, these payments could be quite large. 
Figure 1 
 To  be  assured  of  having  sufficient  funds  with  which  to  meet  payments  throughout  the 
evening, ADIs directly involved in the DE exchanges will each need to retain higher balances 
in  their  ES  account.  From  November, the  Reserve  Bank  expects  ES  balances  to  increase 
from their current level of $1 billion to be between $20 and $30 billion on an ongoing basis. 
This is designed to ensure that payments made after the close of the day don’t result in ADIs 
facing  negative  ES  balances  and  hence  being  unable  to  make  the  payments.  The  size  of 
these balances has been calculated by examining the largest payment obligations that have 
arisen from these later batches in recent times and providing a buffer above that. The size 
will be reviewed regularly as we see how the payments patterns evolve after November. 
The Bank will manage this expansion in its balance sheet through its existing liquidity facility 
for  ES  account  holders.  Unlike  open  market  operations  (which  are  conducted  by  auction), 
repos  via  the  Bank’s  liquidity  facility  are  made  available  to  ES  account  holders  on 
pre-specified terms. At the present time, ES account holders usually only access this facility 
for intraday funding; repos used for this purpose carry no interest charge. During the course 
of a normal day, the pool of ES balances (and therefore the size of the Bank’s balance sheet) 
tends to expand by around $10 to $15 billion as ADIs use intraday repos to give them the 
capacity to make payments before the settlement of incoming funds. By the end of each day, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
these repos are unwound. On the very rare occasions that such repos are carried over to the 
next day, a penalty interest rate 25 basis points above the cash rate target applies. 
From November, the Bank will allow ES account holders to access a pre-determined amount 
of  funds  through  its  liquidity  facility  on  an  “open”  basis;  open  repos  are  those  contracted 
without an agreed maturity date. The interest rate on these open repos will be set at the cash 
rate  target.  At  the  same  time,  the  Reserve  Bank  will  change  the  way  that  interest  on  ES 
balances is calculated. To the extent that account holders retain matching funds against their 
open  repo  position, those  ES  balances  will  earn  the  cash  rate rather  than  25  basis  points 
below. Hence while these changes will increase the size of the Bank’s balance sheet, they 
won’t change the net income the Bank earns. 
In net terms then, there need be no cost to holding an open repo position. However, as is the 
case currently, surplus ES funds, that is, funds held in excess of an open repo position, will 
earn a rate 25 basis points below the cash rate target. Similarly, any shortfall in funds below 
the account holder’s open repo position will incur a 25 basis point penalty. An allowance will 
be made for variations in ES balances arising from direct entry payments that settle during 
the evening. 
This  arrangement  will  not  only  provide  the  means  for  ADIs  to  hold  sufficient  liquidity  to 
complete their payments throughout the evening, it also preserves the incentive for ADIs to 
participate  in  the  interbank  cash  market  while  it  is  open,  lending  surplus  balances  or 
borrowing  against  a  shortfall.  We  would  expect  the  “excess”  supply  of  ES  balances  to  be 
much as it is now, around $1 billion above the sum of outstanding positions in open repos. 
Consequently, these operational changes will not alter the way in which the Bank implements 
monetary  policy,  as  the  operation  of  the  cash  market  will  be  insulated  from  the  structural 
increase  in  ES  balances.  This  framework  leaves  us  well  placed  to  accommodate  further 
innovations  in  the  payments  system  in  the  coming  years,  such  as  the  planned  shift  to 
24/7 settlement for retail payments. 
One consequence of the new arrangements is that it will largely remove the need for an ES 
account holder to contract intraday repos with the Reserve Bank. For this reason, the Bank 
will  allow  all  ADIs  that  operate  ES  accounts  to  contract  open  repos,  not  just  those 
participating in the direct entry exchanges. 
Despite the operational changes the Bank is making, we nevertheless recognise that shifting 
a  large  quantity  of  payments  activity  to  same-day  settlement  will  complicate  the  task  of 
liquidity managers. It is always difficult to forecast customers’ payments activity; this is not 
only true for ADIs, it is also true for the Reserve Bank. 
The  size  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  daily  open  market  operations  each  morning  are  largely 
based on a forecast of that day’s cash flows across the Australian Government’s accounts 
with the Reserve Bank. Settling direct entry payments for same-day value will make it more 
difficult to forecast flows such as tax receipts. It may be that the Reserve Bank will need to 
conduct operations in the open market late in the day to address any unexpected payment 
flows and ensure the right amount of settlement funds are in the banking system to allow the 
cash market to function appropriately. 
In the past, the Bank has needed to resort to these “second rounds” of dealing only two or 
three times a year. Going forward, we anticipate that second rounds of dealing will be more 
frequent.  Given  this,  we  intend  to  formalise  the  arrangements  for  these  operations, 
announcing at a set time each day whether further open market operations will be conducted 
and, if so, on what terms. Where there is a need for an operation, it will be important that 
there is active participation from ADIs. 
As  with  our  regular  open  market  operations,  it will  not  be  the  Bank’s  aim to  simply  supply 
overnight funds to those individual institutions that are short, or absorb overnight funds from 
those  that  are  long  cash. That  is  what  the  interbank  cash  market  is for.  As  I  mentioned  a 
minute ago, the Reserve Bank’s operations are designed to put the appropriate amount of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
settlement funds in the system as a whole so that, in managing their individual ES accounts, 
ADIs will transact with each other at the cash rate target. 
I’ll  now  turn  to  the  Basel  III  liquidity  reforms,  which  will  be  introduced  in  Australia  from 
January  2015.  As  is  well  known,  those  ADIs  to  which  APRA  applies  the  Basel  III  liquidity 
standard  will  be  required  to  hold  enough  high-quality  liquid  assets  (HQLA)  to  withstand  a 
30-day  period  of  stress.  As  is  equally  well  known,  with  only  Commonwealth  Government 
Securities  (CGS)  and  semi-government  securities  (semis)  meeting  the  Basel  criteria  for 
HQLA in the domestic securities market, there will not be enough securities to enable ADIs to 
meet this liquidity standard. 
At  the  present  time,  ADIs  own  around  $130  billion  of  these  securities.  A  rough  estimate 
would be that this is as much as $300 billion short of where they would need to be to meet 
the Basel standard, given their current balance sheet structures. Mostly, the ADIs’ holdings 
are in semis. These holdings of semis have increased almost tenfold since 2007, and now 
are around 40 per cent of the semi-government market. 
Our  assessment  is  that  ADIs’  aggregate  holdings  of  HQLA  are  broadly  appropriate  to  the 
current  size  of  the  market. This  assessment  was  contained  in  a  media  release  put  out  by 
APRA  last  week.5  Should  the  supply  of  these  securities  increase  further,  as  is  currently 
projected,  we  would  expect  that  ADIs  would  raise  their  holdings  in  line  with  the  increased 
supply. That said, it is not possible or desirable to be too precise about what is appropriate. 
The aim is to ensure that the markets for government securities continue to function well. We 
don’t want to find out the hard way that ADIs are holding too large a share of the market. 
Compelling ADIs to hold the entire supply of government debt would be counterproductive for 
the liquidity of these markets. It would defeat the purpose of the liquidity standards which is 
for banks to hold liquid assets. Notwithstanding that fundamental issue, it would be difficult to 
actually engineer such an outcome. At some point, the scarcity of available securities would 
cause their yields to fall to a particularly low level. To some extent this is already the case 
with CGS, which generally trade in Australia at an expensive price compared to sovereign 
debt in other jurisdictions.6 If it was the case that the yields on both CGS and semis fell to a 
particularly low level, this would raise the demand for ES balances, given these balances are 
also HQLA. While the rate paid on “surplus” ES balances – 25 basis points below the cash 
rate – generally means that ADIs don’t hold them as a store of liquidity, in the absence of 
sufficiently attractive alternatives, ADIs would inevitably use them to comply with the liquidity 
standard. 
Higher demand for ES balances need not be a problem in itself. However, it is important that 
it does not interfere with the Reserve Bank’s ability to implement monetary policy. Within the 
Bank’s  framework,  it  would  be  quite  problematic  if  the  demand  for  ES  balances  varied  to 
allow ADIs to comply with a liquidity standard, rather than with changes in their actual cash 
position. 
For this reason, in November 2010, the Reserve Bank Board approved the introduction of a 
committed liquidity facility (CLF) that is consistent with the arrangements for such facilities 
set out within the Basel standards. The facility was announced publicly the following month.7 
The technical details of the CLF were worked out during 2011 in consultation with APRA and 
                                                
5  APRA (Australian Prudential Regulation Authority) (2013), “Implementation of the Basel III liquidity framework 
in  Australia”,  Media  Release  No  13.25,  8  August.  Available  at  <http://www.apra.gov.au/MediaReleases/ 
Pages/13_25.aspx>. 
6  RBA (2012), “Box E: Yields on Sovereign Debt”, Statement on Monetary Policy, May, pp 59–60. 
7  RBA (2011), “The RBA Committed Liquidity Facility”, Media Release No 2011–25, 16 November. And Debelle 
G (2011), “The Committed Liquidity Facility”, Speech to the APRA Basel III Implementation Workshop 2011, 
Sydney, 23 November.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
were  announced  publicly  at  the  end  of  that  year.8  There  was  then  a  public  consultation 
process following APRA’s announcement of the new liquidity arrangements that ran for three 
months. 
Put  simply,  for  the  payment  of  a  fee,  the  CLF  will  commit  the  Reserve  Bank  to  purchase 
eligible  securities  from  ADIs  under  repurchase  agreements.  As  the  range  of  securities 
eligible to be sold to the Reserve Bank is considerably broader than just CGS and semis, it 
addresses the  problem of  there  being  insufficient  securities for  ADIs  to  hold  that meet  the 
Basel  III  standards.  Subject  to  APRA’s  approval,  an  ADI  will  be  able  to  use  the  Reserve 
Bank’s commitment under the CLF to bridge the gap between its holdings of CGS and semis 
and the amount of HQLA required to meet the standard. 
When it comes into operation in January 2015, the CLF will work in exactly the same way as 
the Bank’s existing liquidity facility. Indeed, the CLF is simply a means by which the Reserve 
Bank  will  make  a  contractual  commitment  to  an  ADI  to  provide  funding  under  its  liquidity 
facility.  As  is  the  case  in  commercial  lending  contracts  more  generally,  the  Bank’s 
commitment under the CLF will be contingent on appropriate conditions being met, namely 
an assessment that the ADI continues to have positive net worth. 
As I have said, the CLF simply guarantees access to the Bank’s existing liquidity facility, and 
ES  account  holders  use  this  facility  every  day.  At  the  present  time,  it  is  used  almost 
exclusively for intraday funding; after November this year when DE payments are settled for 
same-day value, it will be used for open repos as well. 
From 2015, ADIs subject to the Basel III liquidity standards will only be able to use CGS and 
semis in the Bank’s liquidity facility, unless they have paid the 15 basis points commitment 
fee for the CLF. In this way, any ES balances acquired from the Bank’s liquidity facility will 
always represent the exchange of one liquid asset for another and cannot improve an ADI’s 
compliance with the liquidity standard. 
The consequence of this is that small “drawings” on the CLF will be a routine event as part of 
normal operations to manage payment flows. Provided the funds are repaid same-day or, in 
the case of open repos, are retained in the ADI’s ES account, there need be no cost to using 
the facility in this way. 
However,  should  the  funds  be  used  for  any  other  purpose  such  that  the  balance  on  the 
account is below where it should be, the penalty will be 25 basis points above the cash rate 
target.  Such  a  use  of  the  CLF  is  likely  to  occur  in  more  stressed  circumstances.  As  I 
mentioned  earlier,  25  basis  points  has  long  been  the  penalty  rate  attached  to  the  Bank’s 
liquidity facility and it is designed to discourage ADIs from relying upon the facility for funding 
purposes during normal times. 
In  a  stress  scenario,  of  course,  this  penalty  rate  of  25  basis  points  may  not  appear  so 
onerous.  That  is  by  design.  In  such  circumstances,  it  is  appropriate  that  the  central  bank 
provides liquidity support against suitable collateral. This principle of central banking dates 
back at least to Bagehot: lend against good collateral at a penalty rate but not a penal rate. 
The experience here in Australia over many years is that this penalty of 25 basis points has 
been sufficient to ensure that there has not been excessive use of the central bank’s liquidity 
facility. The usage of this facility is published on the website with a small lag and recorded in 
the Bank’s Annual Reports in the chapter on Operations in Financial  Markets. Even in the 
stressed environment of 2008 and 2009, the facility was only drawn on a couple of times for 
small amounts, and for no longer than one day, to deal with unexpected payment flows. 
                                                
8  Technical details of the CLF and its relationship to the Reserve Bank’s existing liquidity facility can be found 
on the Bank’s website. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
To put the rationale for the CLF another way, the purpose of holding liquid assets is to sell 
them during periods of stress. In the Australian context, this will mean using funds raised via 
the  CLF.  This  need  not  be  the  “last  resort”;  that  is,  after  all  other  avenues  have  been 
exhausted.  The  point  of  liquidity  regulations  is  to  avoid  fire  sales  of  non-liquid  assets  and 
other actions that might have adverse effects on broader financial stability. 
Again, that a central bank should be prepared to play this role is nothing new. In this sense, 
the fee of 15 basis points that the Reserve Bank will apply to any commitments made under 
the CLF can be seen as a means of explicitly charging the large ADIs an appropriate price 
for a liquidity option they have always implicitly held. 
In thinking about the appropriateness of such a fee, it is important to remember that under 
the CLF, the Reserve Bank will only provide funding against the market value of an eligible 
security at the time the facility is accessed, not the market value at the time any commitment 
is established. Furthermore, the Bank will haircut the security’s market value by as much as 
25 per cent, depending on the type of security involved. So, taking account of the haircut, the 
effective  cost  of  obtaining  this  liquidity  can  be  considerably  higher  than  the  25  basis  point 
penalty combined with the annual 15 basis point commitment fee. 
Consequently, the CLF is only (and not completely) insuring an ADI against the liquidity risk 
on its securities. The credit and market risks attached to any securities remain with the ADI. 
As is the case with all repos contracted by the Reserve Bank, should the market value of a 
security  decline,  the  Bank  will  require  additional  securities  to  be  delivered  to  restore  the 
original value of the repo. Similarly, should the credit quality of a security held by the Bank 
fall below a certain threshold, the ADI will be required to replace the security with one that 
meets the eligibility criteria. 
Deriving  the  precise  value  of  such  a  liquidity  option  is  not  straightforward.  Certainly,  as 
acknowledged in the Basel standards, it is not appropriate to simply look at the yield differential 
between government bonds and other securities eligible for the CLF. That spread will largely 
reflect compensation for credit and other non-liquidity risks, as well as that part of the liquidity 
risk which the Bank is not insuring – the Bank’s haircut. The Bank is only interested in charging 
for  the  liquidity  component.  The  credit  spread  should  be  retained  by  the  party  bearing  the 
ongoing credit risk, the ADI in this case. For example, if we look at the spread between a three-
month bank bill and the expected cash rate, it is around 18 basis points currently. Before 2007, 
it  was  in  the  single  digits.  Much  of  this  spread  is  credit  risk  which  implies  the  liquidity 
component  is  small.  While  this  spread  rose  considerably  during  the  crisis  and  some  of  this 
reflected an increase in the liquidity premium, much of the increase was a result of heightened 
credit concerns, evidenced by the rise in CDS premia at the same time. 
Theoretically, some indication of the cost of hedging liquidity risk can be extracted from term 
repo  rates  on  eligible  securities.  By  way  of  illustration,  since  adopting  its  current  haircut 
schedule for repos, the Reserve Bank has, through its open market operations, contracted 
one-month  repos  at  an  average  premium  of  about  4  basis  points  above  cash,  while  for  a 
six-month repo the average premium is about 8 basis points over the expected cash rate.9 
The CLF is effectively an option with a strike price set 25 basis points above the cash rate. 
Of  course,  during  periods  of  stress,  the  cost  of  liquidity  can  rise  significantly  and  it  is  the 
potential for this to occur that would give the option some value. 
Separate to any market-derived estimates, an equally important consideration in pricing the 
CLF was to maintain consistency with the rest of the Reserve Bank’s operating framework 
and not compromise the Bank’s ability to implement monetary policy. As I suggested earlier, 
it is likely that at least initially, the Bank will be making commitments under the CLF of around 
                                                
9 
“Cash” in this context means rates on overnight indexed swaps, which are referenced against the cash rate. 
This information can be obtained from the RBA website, where information on our daily operations in the cash 
market is published. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
$300 billion; we will have a more precise indication of that figure after APRA completes the 
trial liquidity budgeting exercise that is currently underway. 
Instead of introducing a CLF and committing to fund assets, the Bank could have opted to 
purchase the assets ex ante, expanding the supply of ES balances, and the Bank’s balance 
sheet, by $300 billion. That is, the liquidity provision could be provided for the whole system 
ex ante, rather than provided to an individual institution when required. 
Effectively, the CLF requires ADIs to pre-position the securities but retain them on their own 
balance  sheet.  The  alternative  approach  would  see  the  Reserve  Bank’s  balance  sheet 
increase  by  more  than  three  times  over.  Such  an  outcome  would  not  only  jeopardise  the 
functioning of the cash market and hence the implementation of domestic monetary policy, 
but also impair the functioning of domestic securities markets. 
Moreover, it would not be feasible for the Bank to conduct such large-scale asset purchases 
through  its  regular  open-market  operations.  This  would  mean  a  large-scale  purchase  of 
domestic securities by the RBA, but there simply is not a large enough pool of such assets 
that the Reserve Bank is willing to hold on an outright basis. Hence, it would have meant a 
series of bilateral arrangements with ADIs along the lines of the open repo arrangements I 
discussed  earlier,  with  self-securitised  assets  serving  as  the  collateral.  To  implement 
monetary policy in such an environment, the price of accessing such an arrangement would 
have needed to be set so as not to create an incentive for ADIs to generate the required ES 
balances through other means. This is no different to the CLF. 
The purpose of establishing the CLF was to ensure that ES balances could continue to play 
their existing role in the Bank’s operations. This means that ADIs seeking to raise their liquid 
asset  holdings  should,  at  the  margin,  prefer  to  use  additional  CGS,  semis  and/or  an 
increased subscription to the CLF for this purpose instead of ES balances. Our assessment 
is that a CLF fee of 15 basis points should allow this to be the case. 
information 
The  pre-positioning  of 
requirements for asset-backed securities the Bank announced last year,10 will allow the Bank 
to make a much more detailed credit assessment of the securities. Consequently, the Bank 
will be able to more precisely assess the value of these securities at any point in time and will 
be able to reduce its use of ratings agencies. 
To  conclude,  over  the  next  18  months, there  will  be  some  significant  developments  in  the 
Reserve  Bank’s  balance  sheet,  resulting  from  some  upcoming  changes  in  the  payments 
system and the commencement of the Committed Liquidity Facility. Both of these changes 
are being accommodated within the general framework for the implementation of monetary 
policy that has operated successfully in Australia for some considerable time. The payments 
system changes will see some increase in the size of the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet, but 
no material change in either the risk or income derived from that balance sheet. The design 
of  the  CLF  is  very  much  in  keeping  with  the  Reserve  Bank’s  (and  other  central  bank’s) 
provision of liquidity to the financial system. It should not result in any material change in the 
size of the Bank’s balance sheet and has been structured to avoid a significant increase in 
the balance sheet that would have risked the effective functioning of domestic markets.  
these  securities,  combined  with 
the  enhanced 
                                                
10  RBA (2012), “New Eligibility Criteria for Residential Mortgage Backed Securities”, Media Release No 2012–31, 
22 October. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
