Sayuri Shirai: Japan’s economy and monetary policy in an increasingly 
integrated Asia 
Speech  by  Ms  Sayuri  Shirai,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
Penang Economic Conference in Malaysia, Penang, 29 June 2013. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Good  morning.  It  is  a  great  honor  to  be  here  today  at  the  Penang  Economic  Conference. 
Although I have often visited other places in Malaysia, this is my first time in Penang, so I am 
really looking forward to learning from you about this region. In my presentation today, I will 
focus  on  Japan’s  recent  monetary  policy  as  well  as  the  implications  for  the  rest  of  Asia. 
Some  of  you  may  know  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  a  new  monetary  policy  called 
Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
April 3 and 4, 2013. So I would like to take this opportunity to speak to you about our policy 
to promote understanding of the situation of the Japanese economy. 
II.  
The features of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) and the 
transmission mechanism  
First of all, I would like to point out that Japan has suffered from a long-standing negative 
output  gap  and  mild  deflation  over  nearly  the  entire  period  since  the  second  half  of  the 
1990s. Some may find it difficult to understand why achieving even a degree of small inflation 
is such a challenging task. Japan is unique in the sense that such macroeconomic problems 
have not yet been overcome despite a series of accommodative monetary policy measures 
adopted previously. For this reason, in April the Bank introduced a new large-scale monetary 
policy framework, QQE, with the aim of achieving at the earliest possible time the 2 percent 
price  stability  target  that  had  been  adopted  in  January  2013  under  the  previous 
accommodative monetary policy regime, with a time horizon of about two years. Of course, a 
one-off achievement of the 2 percent target is not sufficient and the Bank intends to achieve 
the target stably in a favorable environment characterized by sustainable economic growth. 
Upon the introduction of QQE, the Bank made a commitment that it would continue with QQE 
as  long  as  it  is  necessary  to  maintain  the  target  in  a  stable  manner.  This  is  the  so-called 
commitment to achieve the 2 percent target stably. I will now explain the essence of QQE by 
highlighting  its  three  main  characteristics  and  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary 
easing.  
The three characteristics of QQE 
A.  
The  first  characteristic  of  QQE  is  that  the  Bank  designated  the  purchase  of  Japanese 
government  bonds  (JGBs)  as  the  most  important  tool  for  achieving  the  2  percent  price 
stability target at the earliest possible time. Moreover, it was decided to extend the average 
remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB purchases from the original level of slightly under three 
years to about seven years (that is, six to eight years) by purchasing JGBs with maturities of 
up to 40 years. The purpose is to exert further downward pressure on the entire yield curve. 
The yearly pace of increase in the amount outstanding of JGBs held by the Bank was set at 
about  50  trillion  yen,  and  the  increase  will  continue  over  two  years,  thereby  doubling  the 
amount outstanding from the end of 2012 to the end of 2014 (Chart 1). I believe that these 
changes  constitute  a  considerable  departure  from  previous  practice  both  in  terms  of 
“quantity” (based on the size of the Bank’s Asset Purchase Program) and “quality” (based on 
the maturity length). 
The  second  characteristic  of  QQE  is  an  increase  in  the  purchase  of  two  risk  assets  – 
exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs)  –  since 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
there  is  some  room  for  further  lowering  of  the  levels  of  risk  premia  (that  is,  the  expected 
excess  returns  demanded  by  investors  relative  to  safe  assets)  and  it  is  thought  that  the 
purchase of the two risk assets will have a large economic impact. Considering the market 
size  and  the  risk  volume  borne  by  the  Bank,  the  yearly  purchase  amount  of  ETFs  and 
J-REITs was set at about 1 trillion yen and 30 billion yen, respectively. This would double the 
amount outstanding of ETFs held by the Bank from the end of 2012 to the end of 2014.  
The third characteristic of QQE is an emphasis on the expectations of markets, firms, and 
households – particularly medium- to long-term inflation expectations – as one of the most 
important channels for achieving the 2 percent target. If firms and households expect inflation 
to rise in the medium to long term, this may positively affect the current levels of sales prices 
and wages. Moreover, as long as the pace of increase in inflation expectations exceeds that 
in long-term nominal interest rates, long-term interest rates in real terms will decline and thus 
support  an  accommodative  monetary  environment.  Aiming  to  raise  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations,  the  Bank  decided  to  change  the  main  operating  target  for  money 
market operations from the uncollateralized overnight call rate (that is, interest rates) to the 
monetary base (that is, “quantity”), with the aim of communicating to the public in a clear and 
intelligible manner. On this basis, it was decided that the monetary base should rise at an 
annual  pace  of  about  60-70  trillion  yen  over  two  years;  this  would  double  the  amount 
outstanding  from  138  trillion  yen  at  end-2012  to  about  200  trillion  yen  at  end-2013  and  to 
270 trillion yen at end-2014 (Chart 1). The last figure would account for nearly 60 percent of 
nominal GDP – far above the levels of other advanced economies. 
Transmission mechanism for achieving the 2 percent target under QQE 
B.  
Regarding  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  easing  under  QQE  on  economic 
activity, three channels have been considered. In terms of the first channel, the purchase of 
assets  continues  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  long-term  nominal  interest  rates  and  the 
risk  premia  of  risk  asset  prices.  This  channel  would  contribute  to  increasing  firms’  and 
households’ investment and consumption activities through (1) a decline in the funding costs 
of  firms  and  households,  (2)  improvement  in  the  balance  sheets  of  firms  and  financial 
institutions,  and  (3)  the  wealth  effect  of  households.  In  terms  of  the  second  channel,  the 
continuation  of  JGB  purchases  by  the  Bank  may  encourage  investors  and  financial 
institutions to shift some of their portfolios to risk assets as they adjust some of their asset 
management  policies  away  from  deflation-oriented  strategies.  This  so-called  portfolio 
rebalance effect may generate some risk money that could be allocated to viable, innovative 
emerging or growing firms, strengthening the growth potential of the Japanese economy. In 
terms  of  the  third  channel,  increases  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are 
expected  to  lead  to  a  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates  in  real  terms.  In  addition,  the 
anticipation  of  higher  inflation  may  hasten  firms’  business  investment  and  households’ 
durable goods consumption as well as residential investment.  
Through these three channels, an expansion of aggregate demand, an improvement in the 
output gap, and a rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations are likely to take place, 
thereby raising the rate of actual price changes. Personally, I see the second channel, which 
would induce some degree of risk-taking, as essential to invigorate the Japanese economy. 
In  the  face  of  the  deflation  mindset  that  currently  prevails,  the  opportunity  cost  of  holding 
cash is so low that risk money is hardly generated, thereby restraining the allocation of funds 
to new business investment, research and development, or the promotion of entrepreneurs. 
This is one of the main reasons why the Bank decided to introduce QQE, hoping to affect 
investment  strategies  and  corporate  price-setting  behavior  that  have  been  accustomed  to 
deflation.  Moreover,  lowering  long-term  interest  rates  in  real  terms  by  raising  inflation 
expectations  is  a  new  element  of  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy,  and  is  important  to  raise 
aggregate  demand.  Indeed,  while  different  indicators  may  show  different  results,  interest 
rates in real terms appear likely to have declined in recent months (Chart 2).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Impact of QQE on Japan’s financial and capital markets and on Asia 
III.  
Following the introduction of QQE in early April, volatility increased in Japan’s financial and 
capital markets, particularly in the JGB market, followed by increased volatility in the stock 
and  foreign  exchange  markets.  Here,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  factors  related  to  these 
movements, especially with regard to the JGB market (although some signs of stabilization 
have been observed more recently), in addition to the impact of QQE on Asia. 
A.  
Developments in Japan’s financial and capital markets, and the foreign 
exchange market  
in 
trend 
It  is  widely  known  that  long-term  interest  rates  can  conceptually  be  decomposed  into  two 
components: (1) the risk premia (such as the term premium and the liquidity premium); and 
(2) the expected path of short-term interest rates. Based on this understanding, the Bank’s 
JGB  purchases  are  expected  to  generate  downward  pressure  primarily  on  the  risk  premia 
and  then  on  the  expected  path  of  short-term  interest  rates.  Moreover,  the  Bank’s 
commitment  to  achieve  the  2  percent  target  stably  is  likely  to  enhance  the  downward 
pressure. Meanwhile, an improvement in the economic outlook, a gradual rise in medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations, and a rise in overseas long-term interest rates may lead to 
an increase in the expected path of short-term interest rates. 
Developments  in  long-term  interest  rates  since  the  introduction  of  QQE  reflect  such 
downward pressure as well as upward pressure (Chart 3). My view is that three main factors 
have  been  at  play.  First,  the  U.S.  economy  has  maintained  moderate  economic  and 
employment  growth  with  a  relatively  solid  recovery 
the  housing  market, 
notwithstanding the tightening of fiscal policy since the start of 2013. This indicates that the 
macroeconomic  fundamentals  have  been  strengthening.  In  May  and  June  2013,  Federal 
Reserve  Board  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  indicated  the  possibility  of  tapering  the  monthly 
85 billion  U.S.  dollar  bond  purchase  program  by  late  this  year  as  long  as  the  Federal 
Reserve observes continued, sustainable improvement. Some presidents of regional Federal 
Reserve  Banks  have  suggested  the  same  possibility.  While  these  remarks  are  thought  to 
have  raised  the  awareness  of  many  market  participants  about  the  direction  of  the Federal 
Reserve’s monetary policy toward the exit, the fact that economic data are mixed has led to 
divergent  views  on  the  timing  of  the  tapering  process.  This  seems  to  have  contributed  to 
amplifying the volatility of U.S. long-term interest rates, stock prices, and the exchange rate 
of the dollar, thereby affecting the government bond, stock, and foreign exchange markets in 
Japan and other economies (charts 4 and 5). 
The  second  factor  at  play  is  that  the  market  environment  has  been  gradually  changing  in 
Japan. In the past, long-term interest rates and volatility remained at low levels. However, 
since  the  introduction  of  QQE,  some  market  participants  have  promptly  adopted  new 
investment  strategies  by  taking  into  account  the  possibility  of  future  inflation,  while  others 
have taken a wait-and-see attitude, and these divergent strategies and attitudes appear to be 
reflected on the movements of long-term interest rates. Meanwhile, the transaction volume of 
JGBs has not declined significantly, except during early April. Nor have bid-ask spreads been 
particularly high in light of historical levels. At the same time, however, it has been pointed 
out  that  fewer  market  makers  are  standing  behind  their  bid  and  ask  quotes,  and  so  the 
execution of large-scale transactions at the same (preferred) prices as before has become 
difficult.  In  other  words,  transaction  costs  have  increased  and  the  price-discovery  function 
has weakened somewhat. Moreover, an indicator of market liquidity – defined as the ratio of 
the daily price range to the transaction volume – has reached relatively high levels (Chart 6). 
The third factor at play, which is related to the second factor, arises from the fact that market 
participants have significantly different views on the impact of QQE in terms of the degree to 
which it will affect long-term interest rates, and the speed. Some believe that yields will rise 
relatively  quickly,  while  others  expect  a  gradual  increase.  This  divergence  may  have 
contributed  to  the  volatility  of  the  yields.  On  this  issue,  the  Bank  remains  committed  to 
achieving the 2 percent target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
years. And indeed, in the Bank’s Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, released on April 
26,  2013,  the  median  of  the  forecasts  by  the  Bank’s  Policy  Board  members  –  which  is 
regarded as the Bank’s view – indicates that an inflation rate of 1.9 percent is projected for 
fiscal 2015. To add to this, I place great importance on the Bank’s commitment to achieve 
the  2  percent  target  stably,  and  believe  that  it  is  crucial  to  make  steady  progress  toward 
achieving this target.  
As  for  the  outlook  for  long-term  interest  rates,  even  during  a  phase  of  intensified  upward 
pressure, the continuation of the large-scale asset purchases is likely to maintain downward 
pressure, and this downward pressure may even strengthen with the cumulative growth of 
the amount purchased – in addition to the commitment to achieve the 2 percent target stably. 
These  developments,  together  with  a  gradual  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations,  are  likely  to  be  reflected  in  long-term  interest  rates,  which  would  eventually 
stabilize at levels consistent with the 2 percent price stability target. The Bank will continue to 
closely  monitor  developments  in  financial  markets,  including  the  bond  market,  under  the 
flexible  operational  framework  for  JGB  purchases  and  the  fixed-rate  funds-supplying 
operations,  and  through  discussions  with  market  participants.  The  Bank  expects  that  both 
short- and long-term interest rates will move on a stable path on the whole. 
Impacts on other financial markets and bank lending 
B.  
While volatility in the JGB and stock markets increased temporarily, issuance conditions in 
the CP and corporate bond markets have not changed. Since April, issuance rates on CP 
have generally remained at low levels, and previously higher rates on the CP of some firms 
with  less  favorable  business  performance  have  recently  declined.  In  addition,  issuance  of 
corporate bonds has steadily increased and their spreads have remained flat at low levels on 
the  whole.  Lending  by  financial  institutions  has  increased  moderately,  and  the  amount 
outstanding of bank lending grew at a relatively high rate of 2.1 percent year on year both in 
April and in May. Some long-term fixed interest rates, such as fixed-rate mortgage and long-
term prime lending rates, have risen somewhat lately. However, the amounts of mortgages 
and loans to the corporate sector have been growing and it appears that an adverse impact 
on economic activity has so far been avoided. 
Impact on financial and capital markets in Asia  
C.  
Concerns have been raised in emerging economies that the highly accommodative monetary 
policy  stance  by  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  may  lead  to  volatile  capital  flows  and 
unstable foreign exchange rate movements. In particular, some financial and capital markets 
in Asia are relatively small and in the process of development, so that a massive scale of 
capital inflows from abroad cannot be easily and effectively absorbed and increases the risk 
of credit booms and asset bubbles. This holds especially when the nature of capital inflows is 
short term and sensitive to various shocks, since such shocks could cause a sudden reversal 
of  capital  flows  and  subsequently  a  domestic  financial  crisis  following  the  bursting  of  a 
bubble.  It  has  also  been  pointed  out  that  some  Asian  bond  markets  have  seen  a  sharp 
increase in foreign currency-denominated bonds issued offshore since 2012 (largely in U.S. 
dollars, but also in euros and yen), with the pace accelerating further in the first half of 2013. 
The issues consist largely of investment-grade bonds, but also include high-yield, low-rated 
bonds whose issuance has been growing reflecting a decline in issuance rates and spreads. 
High-yield  bonds  largely  originated  from  the  United  States  and  Europe,  but  have  recently 
become more widespread in some Asian countries. In addition, some Asian countries face 
rapidly increasing real estate prices, a sign of overheating in asset markets. For these Asian 
economies,  there  may  be  a  risk  associated  with  a  sudden  reversal  of  capital  flows  and  a 
resultant shortage of liquidity.  
With regard to the Bank’s QQE, however, the impact on Asian economies and financial and 
capital  markets  appears  thus  far  to  be  limited.  A  look  at  the  activity  of  large  Japanese 
financial institutions shows that cross-border claims in Asia have grown since around 2010 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and continue to rise steadily. This increase has not contributed to an overheating in regional 
economies,  since  exposures  by  financial  institutions  from  other  Asian  economies  (such  as 
Hong  Kong  and  Singapore)  have  expanded  even  further  and  the  increase  in  cross-border 
claims  by  Japanese  financial  institutions  has  partially  offset  a  curtailment  of  cross-border 
claims by the euro area banks (Chart 7). Most of the loans extended to Asia by Japanese 
financial institutions have been made in U.S. dollars, and these dollar funds often originate 
from  headquarters  in  Japan.  Some  Japanese  financial  institutions  plan  to  extend  credit 
denominated in local currencies as they increase and diversify the sources of local currency 
funding for both Japanese and non-Japanese customers operating in Asia. 
As  for  the  balance  of  portfolio  investment,  Japan  currently  records  a  net  inflow.  The 
movement  of  outward  portfolio  investment  has  continued  to  indicate  a  net  inflow  (or  the 
amount  of  disposal  exceeding  that  of  acquisition)  since  the  beginning  of  2013,  mostly 
because outward bond investment shifted from a net outflow (net acquisition) to a net inflow 
(net disposal), as seen in Chart 8. Japanese investors traditionally tend to concentrate their 
bond  investment  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  with  a limited  amount  allocated  to  Asia 
(Chart  9).  Outward  bond  investment  has  recently  turned  from  a  net  acquisition  to  a 
substantial  net  disposal,  and  a  similar  pattern  has  been  observed  in  the  case  of  outward 
stock  investment,  albeit  to  a  lesser  extent.  Some  point  out  that  a  shift  to  a  net  inflow  in 
outward bond investment reflects (1) activity to maintain a stable degree of foreign exposure 
by some Japanese investors (so that an increase in foreign assets valued in yen as a result 
of the yen’s depreciation has induced a cut in their investment positions); (2) low returns on 
investment  in  European  and  U.S.  bonds  relative  to  domestic  bond  investment  after  taking 
into account the cost of foreign exchange hedging (Chart 10); and (3) low returns on the yen 
carry trade relative to historical trends. On the other hand, individual investors appear to be 
investing  in  securities  originating  in  North  America  and  some  Asian  countries,  largely  by 
utilizing investment trusts.  
Instead,  there  has  been  a  large  increase  in  “inward  portfolio  investment”  to  Japan  from 
abroad, including Asia, indicating a net inflow (Chart 11). In particular, active investment in 
Japanese stocks is observed among foreign investors. Foreign investors shifted to net sellers 
(net disposal) in late May 2013 partly due to a plunge in stock prices. Since then, there have 
been somewhat volatile movements. Many of these investors base their investment on not 
only specific stocks but also economic growth strategies formulated by Prime Minister Shinzo 
Abe’s administration and the implementation of these strategies.  
Although  the  above  observations  do  not  necessarily  suggest  active  cross-border  outward 
portfolio investment, the Bank will continue to closely monitor the spillover effects of Japan’s 
monetary  policy  to  cross-border  movements  of  capital  flows  into  the  region.  I  personally 
believe that it would be beneficial for Asia if some of the abundant liquidity accumulated in 
Japan (partly as a result of growing deposits and savings and partly due to accommodative 
monetary  policy)  could  be  utilized  to  achieve  a  sustainable  growth  path  in  the  region  with 
high  growth  momentum  –  while  enabling  Japanese  investors  to  diversify  their  asset 
allocation.  It  would  be  a  positive  development  if  such  funds  originating  from  Japan 
contributed  to  further  deepening  of  financial  and  capital  markets  in  the  region.  Some 
economies in the region also face challenges of an inadequate infrastructure and a shortage 
of  long-term  capital.  An  increase  in  the  circulation  of  funds  used  for  productive  purposes 
within the region could generate a “win-win” situation in Asia as a whole, including Japan. 
Regional financial cooperation Initiatives in Asia  
D.  
Underlying the expansion in capital inflows to emerging countries including those in Asia are 
both pull factors (that is, higher growth and yields) and push factors (that is, low interest rates 
and low growth in advanced countries, as well as investors’ pursuit of higher profits). With the 
latter  factors  in  mind,  economies  have  introduced  a  range  of  country-specific  measures 
including macro-prudential regulations to respond to sudden capital inflows and outflows in 
emerging  economies.  Thus  far,  there  is  no  consensus  on  appropriate  approaches  to  deal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
with  such  volatile  capital  flows.  However,  from  a  long-term  perspective,  it  is  important  for 
Asia  to  develop  stronger  domestic  financial  and  capital  markets  (denominated  in  local 
currencies), especially markets for long-term capital funding.  
In this sense, the long-standing initiatives by governments and central banks to foster local 
currency-denominated bond markets – such as the Asian Bond Markets Initiative (ABMI) and 
the  Asian  Bond  Fund  (ABF)  –  are  highly  significant.  The  amount  outstanding  of  local 
currency bonds in Asia has exceeded 7 trillion U.S. dollars, more than six times the level of 
ten  years  ago.  The  bond  markets  are  now  a  valuable  source  of  funding,  for  not  only  the 
public sector but also the private sector, which I view as favorable developments. To reduce 
the vulnerability of local bond markets, however, it is crucial to improve transparency of the 
markets  and  foster  domestic  institutional  investors.  In  addition,  it  makes  sense  for  Asian 
economies to actively utilize their own savings for domestic productive purposes, provided 
that many of them enjoy surpluses in current account balances.  
From the viewpoint of monitoring capital flow movements and improving crisis prevention and 
management capacity in the region, I would like to stress the importance of the Chiang Mai 
Initiative (CMI), later renamed the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization (CMIM). The CMI 
was established in 2000 as a framework for crisis prevention and management among the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Plus Three (ASEAN+3) countries. In early May 2013, 
the meeting of the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors of ASEAN+3 reached a 
consensus  to  transform  the  ASEAN+3  Macroeconomic  Research  Office  (AMRO)  –  an 
independent  regional  surveillance  unit  supporting  the  CMIM  –  into  an  international 
organization. Considering that the AMRO conducts monitoring to see whether financial and 
economic conditions in Asia have accumulated imbalances, its promotion to an international 
organization can be regarded as an important decision ensuring its independence. Moreover, 
it was agreed in May 2013 to amend the CMIM Agreement to reflect the following measures 
agreed  in  May  2012:  doubling  the  size  of  the  CMIM  from  120  billion  to  240  billion  U.S. 
dollars, introducing a crisis prevention facility of the Precautionary Line, and minimizing the 
IMF-linked portion from 80 percent to 70 percent (and further to 60 percent in 2014). I hope 
that these regional cooperation efforts will prevent the occurrence of financial crises or foster 
the capacity to manage crises effectively if they occur.   
Impact on trade relations with Asia 
E.  
Finally, I would like to offer some remarks on the impact of QQE on Japan’s trade relations 
with  the  rest  of  Asia.  There  are  positive  aspects  of  QQE  on  Asian  economies,  since 
economic recovery in Japan is likely to encourage imports from the region, contributing to an 
expansion of regional aggregate demand. On the other hand, some have expressed concern 
about  possible  side  effects  of  QQE,  in  that  a  further  depreciation  of the  yen  may  intensify 
competition  between  firms  in  Japan  and  those  elsewhere  in  Asia.  However,  it  is  also 
important to bear in mind that a further depreciation of the yen may help to strengthen the 
competitiveness of Asian products by inducing a decline in the prices of intermediate goods 
imported from Japan to the region. Therefore, grasping the impact of QQE on trade relations 
with Asia is not all that simple.   
This  reflects  a  formation  of  supply  chain  production  networks  across  Asia  involving  Japan 
and many other economies. This means that the trade relations between Japan and the rest 
of Asia are highly integrated and complex. This is evident from the fact that Japanese firms 
have steadily increased their ratios of overseas production to total production as a result of 
large  outward  foreign  direct  investment.  Consequently,  the  amount  of  sales  by  foreign 
subsidiaries  of  Japanese  firms  has  already  exceeded  that  of  exports  (charts  12  and  13). 
Based  on  these  observations,  we  could  say  that  Japan’s  economic  recovery  and  stable 
economic growth generally have a positive impact on the rest of Asia.   
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
The  Bank  has  been  conducting  aggressive  monetary  easing  since  early  April  2013,  to 
overcome  long-standing  mild  deflation  and  reinvigorate  the  economy.  For  its  part,  the 
government has implemented expansionary economic policy and unveiled economic growth 
strategies.  I  believe  that  Japan  can  contribute  to  development  in  Asia  through  its  financial 
and  trade  activities  as  an  Asian  country.  Moreover,  Japan’s  experience  at  the  forefront  of 
rapid population aging has the potential to contribute to the region as well, since some other 
economies  will  soon  face  similar  aging  issues.  To  this  end,  the  Bank  will  do  its  utmost  to 
revitalize Japan’s economy and achieve sustainable economic growth. The Bank will do its 
best  to  achieve  the  2  percent  price  stability  target.  Your  understanding  of  the  Bank’s 
monetary policy is therefore greatly appreciated.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
 14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
