Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Excellence in communication at a strategic 
level 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of 
International  Association  of  Business 
Communicators (IABC) 2013 CEO Excel Lifetime Achievement Award, Manila, 25 July 2013. 
the  Philippines),  at 
receiving 
the 
 The  officers  and  members  of  IABC  under  the  leadership  of  Chair  Elpi  Cuna  and  IABC 
President  Ritzi  Ronquillo,  distinguished  fellow  awardees,  special  guests,  friends,  good 
evening.  
I am deeply honored to  receive the 2013 CEO Excel Lifetime Achievement Award and for 
this I thank the IABC.  
In your letter informing me of this award, you described the awardees as belonging “to the 
select  group  of  outstanding  national  and  industry  leaders  who  epitomize  management 
competence  and  excellence  in  communication  at  a  strategic  level;  a  leader  for  good 
governance  and  responsible  corporate  citizenship  who  inspires  others  to  serve  for  the 
greater good.” 
Ladies and gentlemen. I have been a central banker for 39 years now, of which eight years 
have been spent at the helm of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas as Governor and Chairman 
of  the  Monetary  Board.  And  to  this  day,  I  still  find  my  work  challenging,  meaningful  and 
fulfilling. Indeed, I have always felt it is a privilege being given the opportunity to serve our 
people and our country as a public servant.  
Across the country, the commitment to serve runs deep at the BSP – from our 18 branches, 
three regional offices to our Security Plant to our Manila Head Office. I therefore share this 
award  with  my  colleagues,  whose  drive  to  excel  is  motivated  by  the  singular  vision  of 
achieving a better life for Filipinos through sound monetary and banking policies.  
At all times, we are conscious that what we do or what we say can affect millions of Filipinos 
for  the  better  or  not.  In  this  connection,  we  make  sure  that  two-way  communication  is 
maintained with our various constituents.  
Among  others,  the  Bangko  Sentral  has  maintained  a  consultative  process  given  that 
concerns of financial markets have become broader in breadth and deeper in consequence. 
Clearly,  we  cannot  afford  a  unilateral  approach;  even  if  we  do  not  agree  on  every  policy 
detail, we continue to find ways to address issues together. 
With open channels of communication the Bangko Sentral and the banking sector continue 
to evolve in response to the needs of our growing economy. Today, our banking sector is 
sound,  stable  and  liquid.  In  fact,  the  stability  of  our  banking  system  in  the  midst  of  global 
turmoil  has  been  a  factor  in  our  country  finally  getting  out  of  junk  status  and  receiving 
investment  grade  from  S&P  and  Fitch  credit  rating  agencies.  This  is  important.  A  higher 
credit rating generally enables a country and its corporations to have access to international 
capital markets at lower rates. 
Similarly, our continuing efforts to involve and engage our stakeholders on key policy issues 
have produced positive results. For instance, our quarterly Consumer Expectations Survey of 
5,000 households and Business Expectations Survey of our top 7,000 corporations help us 
formulate sound policy decisions.  
The  continuous  improvement  in  the  quality  of  our  surveys  and  our  consultative  approach 
provide  a  good  anchor  for  the  monetary  policies  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  the 
objective of which is to keep prices low and stable. In fact, when we tracked the correlation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
between the results of our expectation surveys with actual data on the GDP, inflation, interest 
rates and foreign exchange we found significantly high overall convergence.  
As  a  result,  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  policy  decisions  continue  to  provide  the  stability  that 
preserves the public’s purchasing power and creates a planning environment conducive to 
strong and sustainable growth. In particular, we continue to be successful in taming inflation 
at low single digit levels – 2.8% as of June 2013, with year-to-date inflation at 2.9 percent.  
And  with  BSP’s  policy  rates  now  at  record  low  levels,  average  interest  rates  charged  by 
banks  to  their  customers  have  also  dropped  to  single  digit  levels.  This  has  benefitted 
consumers  in  terms  of  gaining  access  to  more  affordable  credit  while  business  is  able  to 
expand and create new jobs with lower financing costs.  
We are also heartened by our progress in developing a more inclusive financial system, the 
implementation of our nationwide economic and financial learning program, and enhancing 
protection  for  finance  consumers.  Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  ability  to  make  informed 
financial decisions is now recognized globally as a life skill needed if one is to be successful. 
Again, how to communicate finance lessons across different sectors, regions and age groups 
is a challenge the Bangko Sentral has taken up.  
Finally,  we  observe  that  the  resilience  of  our  economy  strongly  reflects  the  efficient 
performance  of  our  communication  exchange  with  key  stakeholders.  To  us  at  the  Bangko 
Sentral therefore, efficient communication leads to transformational growth.  
Of  course,  you  and  I know  communications  is  always  fraught  with  challenges. Wittingly  or 
unwittingly,  statements from  the  Bangko  Sentral  move  markets.  The  same  is  true  of  other 
central banks.  
We  have  also  witnessed  how  global  markets  –  big  or  small  –  can  rise  or  fall  sharply  in 
reaction  to  statements  from  central  bank  heads.  US  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Ben 
Bernanke  today  and  Alan  Greenspan  before  him  come  to  mind.  In  the  same  vein,  the 
European  Central  Bank  said  credibility  and  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  come  with 
effective communication. 
Indeed,  as  much  as  credible  policy  actions,  effective  communication  is  of  fundamental 
importance to central banks.  
And for this reason, this Lifetime Award on Communication Excellence from the IABC is truly 
meaningful and deeply appreciated.  
I also thank my fellow central bankers at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas who have been part 
of my journey as a public servant.  
And  finally,  I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  my  family,  particularly  my  wife  Elma  and  my 
children, for their unconditional love and support. I can say I am truly blessed.  
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
