Stephen S Poloz: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference  following  the  release  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Report,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  17  July 
2013. 
 Good morning. Tiff and I are pleased to be here with you today to discuss the July Monetary 
Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
• 
Global  economic  growth  remains  modest,  although  the  pace  of  economic  activity 
varies significantly across the major economies. 
The  U.S.  economic  expansion  is  proceeding  at  a  moderate  pace.  The  continued 
strengthening  in  private  demand  is  being  partly  offset  by  the  impact  of  fiscal 
consolidation. 
In Japan, fiscal and monetary policy stimulus is contributing to a rapid recovery in 
economic growth. 
In contrast, economic activity in the euro area remains weak. 
In  China  and  other  emerging  market  economies,  real  GDP  growth  has  slowed, 
although it is stronger than in the advanced economies. This is exerting downward 
pressure on global commodity prices. 
And,  as  a  consequence,  the  Bank  has  downgraded  slightly  its  global  growth 
forecast. 
The global economy is still expected to pick up in 2014 and 2015. 
In Canada, economic growth is expected to be choppy in the near term, owing to 
unusual  temporary  factors.  The  overall  outlook  is  little  changed  from  the  Bank’s 
projection in April. 
Annual  GDP  growth 
in  2013  and  
2.7  per  cent  in  both  2014  and  2015,  supported  by  very  accommodative  financial 
conditions. 
Despite  ongoing  competitiveness  challenges,  exports  are  projected  to  gather 
momentum. This should boost confidence and lead to increasingly solid growth in 
business  investment. The  economy  will  also  be  supported  by  continued growth  in 
consumer  spending,  while  further  modest  declines  in  residential  investment  are 
expected. 
Growth  in  real  GDP  is  projected  to  be  sufficient  to  absorb  the  current  material 
excess  capacity  in  the  economy,  closing  the  output  gap  around  mid-2015,  as 
projected in April. 
Inflation has been low in recent months and is expected to remain subdued in the 
near term. 
The  weakness  in  core  inflation  reflects  persistent  material  excess  capacity, 
heightened  competitive  pressures  on retailers,  relatively  subdued  wage increases, 
and  some  temporary  sector-specific  factors.  Total  CPI  inflation  has  also  been 
restrained by declining mortgage interest costs. 
As  the  economy  gradually  returns  to  full  capacity  and  with  inflation  expectations 
well-anchored, both core and total CPI inflation are expected to return to 2 per cent 
around mid-2015. 
to  average  1.8  per  cent 
is  projected 
           BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    The outlook balances the many upside and downside risks to inflation. Three of the 
most  important  emanate  from  the  external  environment,  and  include  the  risks  of 
stronger U.S. private demand, a failure to contain the crisis in Europe, and weaker 
growth in China and other emerging-market economies. 
The most important domestic source of risk to the Canadian economy remains the 
possibility of a disorderly unwinding of household sector imbalances. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  Bank  today  decided  to  maintain  the  target  for  the 
overnight rate at 1 per cent.  
As long as there is significant slack in the Canadian economy, the inflation outlook 
remains  muted,  and  imbalances  in  the  household  sector  continue  to  evolve 
constructively,  the  considerable  monetary  policy  stimulus  currently  in  place  will 
remain appropriate. Over time, as the normalization of these conditions unfolds, a 
gradual normalization of policy interest rates can also be expected, consistent with 
achieving the 2 per cent inflation target. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
