Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening Malaysia’s financial system 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launch of 
the Finance Accreditation Agency, Kuala Lumpur, 6 September 2013. 
 It is my great pleasure to join you this morning on the occasion of the launch of the Finance 
Accreditation Agency. The establishment of the Finance Accreditation Agency (FAA) is part 
of the efforts to strengthen the financial system as it continues to evolve in a rapidly changing 
environment.  The  change  in  our  financial  system  in  this  recent  decade  since  the  Asian 
financial crisis has been transformational. It has encompassed major structural reforms in the 
banking  sector,  the  development  of  a  deep  and  vibrant  securities  market  which  has  now 
assumed  a  key  role  in  financial  intermediation,  the  growth  of  Islamic  finance  and  the 
modernisation  of  the  insurance  sector.  The  regulatory  and  supervisory  structure  and 
approach has also evolved to become more risk-focused, more aligned with efficient capital 
and financial markets, and less reliant on prescriptive and direct controls. This has fostered 
greater innovation and competition in our financial system, while preserving strong incentives 
for  prudent  risk-taking.  This  has  been  reinforced  through  the  supervisory  oversight  and 
increased  market  transparency.  The  evolution  of  business  and  distribution  models  has 
followed, with significant gains achieved in efficiency, greater financial inclusion and a more 
dynamic  and  responsive  financial  industry  to  better  serve  the  economy.  In  addition,  our 
financial system has become more global in its orientation, in turn lifting Malaysia’s economic 
potential. 
The  strategic  importance  of  human  capital  has  been  central  to  this  transformation.  The 
quality of human capital has become a key driver and enabler of the change in this recent 
decade, with greater emphasis on productivity, and on elevating the skills and competencies 
of the talent pool in the financial industry. Today, the financial sector workforce in Malaysia 
has  the  highest  total-factor  productivity  growth  relative  to  other  sectors  of  the  economy. 
Employment  growth  in  the  financial  sector  has  also  been  in  the  higher  skilled  roles.  This 
accounts for the higher level of wages in the financial sector which is more than one and half 
times the national average. Financial services employees are also generally educated to a 
higher level, with higher expectations for individuals in key and senior-level positions within 
the industry to hold post-graduate or professional qualifications, in addition to relevant work 
experience. 
Going forward, the  human  capital  imperative  will  increase  in  importance  – for the financial 
industry to sustain and reinforce the strong foundations that have been built, and to take the 
industry to a new level  of depth and maturity, with greater resilience. Accreditation has an 
important role in meeting this imperative. 
Although it is only being officially launched today, I am greatly encouraged by what FAA has 
already been able to achieve in just slightly over a year of full operations. Some of you may 
know that FAA had its beginnings as a division within the Asian Institute of Finance, to review 
the quality of programmes being offered by AIF’s affiliated institutes. As the components of a 
quality assurance framework and process started to come together under the AIF, it became 
clear that in order to realize the vision of a highly competent and high performing workforce 
in the financial sector, assuring the quality of the learning programs that serve the industry 
was vital. This led the Board of AIF to take the decision to establish an independent entity 
which would spearhead and develop this important role to its full potential. 
That  decision  was  motivated  by  two  objectives.  The  first  was  to  ensure  that  the  quality 
assurance function would be fully independent of any interests in program development or 
delivery. This is necessary to provide a high level of confidence to the industry which should 
be able to rely on quality assurance assessments as a basis for decisions on training and 
development  priorities.  As  a  separate  agency  with  a  transparent  governance  structure  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
place,  FAA  has  been  able  to  build  a  high  level  of  credibility  in  providing  an  independent, 
objective assessment of the quality of training and development programs in meeting defined 
learning objectives. 
The  second  objective  was  the  desire  to  contribute  towards raising standards  on  education 
and development in the area of financial services. As a separate agency, FAA’s role extends 
beyond the program offerings of IBBM, MII, IBFIM and SIDC which are the affiliated institutes 
of AIF. I understand that FAA has already attracted both global and regional interests in its 
accreditation services, including from the UK, Asia and Middle East regions. FAA’s current 
work to develop a qualifications structure that will link the various qualifications relevant to 
financial  practitioners  under  a  cohesive  framework  is  also  strategically  significant.  Such  a 
structure  will  allow  for  the  mutual  recognition  of  qualifications  and  provide  clear  and 
systematic  learning  pathways  for  financial  professionals.  This  is  important  to  meet  the 
increasing demand for talent in the financial services industry – not just in terms of numbers, 
but also in the quality. 
I  would  also  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  acknowledge  the  critical  role  of  the  industry  in 
enabling the FAA to meet its objectives. Ultimately, the value of the accreditation process lies 
in  its  ability  to  ensure  that  the  educational  foundations  for  professionals  employed  in  the 
industry  are  preparing  them  adequately  for  their  roles.  The  involvement  of  industry 
practitioners  on  the  various  accreditation  committees  and  panels  of  the  FAA  provides  that 
essential link to close the gaps between what the industry needs, and the training programs 
being offered. It also provides a platform for practitioners and training providers to engage on 
the  future  needs  of  the  industry  and  the  ways  in  which  these  needs  can  be  met  through 
professional education and training. If the talent requirements of the financial sector are to be 
effectively addressed and managed, the industry cannot be a spectator. It is acknowledged 
that  there  are  already  many  practitioners  who  are  already  serving  on  the  Accreditation 
Technical  Committees  and  the  Board  of  FAA  from  different  parts  of  the  world,  who  have 
committed their valuable time, experience and knowledge to this important initiative. These 
will be important contributions as the industry continues to develop and mature. 
On  that  note,  let  me  once  again  congratulate  the  Board  and  management  of  FAA  on  this 
occasion  of  its  official  launch.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  together  with  the  Securities 
Commission fully supports the FAA in its important role. I am confident that the FAA will have 
a significant impact in the efforts to sustain a strong talent pipeline for the financial sector in 
this more dynamic and challenging environment ahead. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
