Yves Mersch: Post-trade harmonisation and financial market integration 
in Europe 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  conference  “Post-trade  harmonisation  and  the  integration  of  financial 
markets:  a  joint  effort”,  organised  by  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  European 
Commission, Frankfurt am Main, 19 March 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
We have come to the end of today’s very intense programme. I now have the pleasure of 
sharing with you some thoughts on the main messages that have emerged in the course of 
today. 
Financial integration remains at the core of the European agenda. For the future of Europe, it 
is important that the Single Market project is taken forward with the full determination of all of 
us, even in times of difficulty. As President Mario Draghi remarked this morning, “in times of 
severe  economic  challenges,  it  is  particularly  important  that  our  commitment  to  achieve  a 
truly single European market is reaffirmed”.  
From  the  Eurosystem’s  perspective,  financial  integration  is  of  great  importance.  First,  it  is 
vital for the single monetary policy of the euro area: monetary policy is implemented through 
the financial system, which has to be as efficient as possible in order to guarantee a smooth 
and effective transmission of monetary policy impulses. A highly integrated financial system 
ensures that impulses diffuse homogeneously across the whole euro area.  
Second, financial integration has implications for the stability of markets. Integration results in 
increasing  interconnections  and  cross-border  activity.  A  higher  level  of  integration  will 
therefore  be  beneficial  for  our  economy,  enabling  investors  to  find  profitable  investment 
opportunities  whenever  and  wherever  they  arise.  It  will  also  enhance  competition  among 
financial intermediaries and among financial infrastructures and, as a consequence, reduce 
the  costs  of  intermediation.  However,  highly  interconnected  systems  could  also  be  more 
prone  to  systemic  risks.  To  avoid  those  risks,  integration  initiatives  are  being  undertaken 
which  place  a  very  strong  emphasis  on  the  safety  and  resilience  of  financial  markets  and 
infrastructures.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  post-trade  harmonisation,  the  central  theme  of  this  conference.  The 
harmonisation  of  market  practices,  rules  and  standards  in  post-trading  is  a  necessary 
component  of  financial  integration.  Inefficiencies  and  barriers  in  clearing  and  settlement 
make market access difficult for investors and for issuers. The European securities market 
cannot be said to be fully integrated if post-trade arrangements are not harmonised, ensuring 
safety, full competition and the absence of barriers across national markets.  
This is why both authorities and industry players are making great efforts to achieve post-
trade  harmonisation.  Today,  we  have  been  offered  a  comprehensive  overview  of  what  is 
currently happening in  Europe at the post-trade level. On behalf of Commissioner Barnier, 
Mr Paulis  highlighted  how,  with  the  crisis,  the  speed  of  financial  reforms  has  accelerated. 
Many participants have underscored the importance of transparency to achieve safer post-
trading and to increase the existing level of competition in the industry.  
We have heard an interesting discussion on the legal initiatives currently being undertaken at 
EU  level  to  remove  the  barriers  that  are  hindering  the  single  market  objectives.  MiFID  is 
being  revised  to  increase  investor  protection  and  improve  the  functioning  of  EU  capital 
markets. EMIR entered into force in summer 2012, requiring standard derivative contracts to 
be cleared through central counterparties and establishing stringent organisational, business 
conduct and prudential requirements for central counterparties. The European Commission’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
proposal  for  a  CSD  Regulation  improving  securities  settlement  is  under  scrutiny  by  the 
EU legislators;  it  will  enhance  the  legal  and  operational  conditions  for  cross-border 
settlement  in  the  Union  in  general,  and  a  strong  emphasis  has  been  placed  today  on  the 
importance of its timely adoption. I noted that the majority of the audience saw the need to 
adopt  the  CSD  Regulation  at  the  latest  by  the  start  of  2014,  also  with  a  view  to  allowing 
sufficient time for the technical standards. The representatives from the Parliament and the 
Commission have highlighted the importance and feasibility of this objective. Finally, another 
initiative is in the pipeline to harmonise the securities law legislation, establishing an EU-wide 
framework  for  the  ownership  of  securities  and  increasing  legal  certainty  in  cross-border 
environments.  Combined,  the  review  of  MiFID,  the  EMIR,  the  CSD  Regulation  and  the 
securities  law  legislation  are  consistently  building  a  harmonised  legal  framework  for  the 
whole securities transaction chain – from trading to clearing to settlement.  
Important  progress  is  also  being  made  at  the  operational  and  business  levels.  The  most 
notable example mentioned by many today is T2S, a project with huge potential for market 
integration. T2S will enable the participating CSDs to focus on value-added services  while 
the basic settlement service is provided via the single T2S platform. T2S will thereby make it 
easier  for  business  to  move  from  one  CSD  to  another.  The  actors  that  harmonise  in  T2S 
have  a  greater  chance  of  reaping  the  full  benefits  of  T2S  and  widening  their  business. 
Conversely,  the  European  CSDs  that  do  not  harmonise  may  see  the  securities  issued  via 
their CSD being settled predominantly in another CSD participating in T2S.  
An  area  of  opportunities  mentioned  several  times  by  speakers  today  is  collateral 
management. Some of the regulatory initiatives I mentioned before, aiming to enhance safety 
in financial markets, are generating greater demand for high-quality collateral. At the same 
time,  the  crisis  is  making  this  collateral  scarcer:  there  has  been  a  shift  from  unsecured  to 
secured  funding  and  greater  recourse  to  central  bank  liquidity.  The  increased  demand  for 
collateral is prompting market participants as well as the Eurosystem to develop innovative 
ways  to  make  better  use  of  existing  collateral,  i.e.  to  make  assets  more  easily  available, 
when  and  where  they  are  needed.  Harmonisation  in  this  area  is  crucial  to  facilitate  the 
efficient  mobilisation  of  collateral  across  Europe.  Examples  are  the  auto-collateralisation 
functionality that will be offered by the T2S platform and the several initiatives underway to 
establish tri-party settlement interoperability.  
It  has  clearly  emerged  from  the  discussion  today  that  post-trade  harmonisation  is  gaining 
momentum and achieving concrete results.  
The example we heard about in more detail is the progress made on the T2S harmonisation 
agenda.  The  T2S  Community  and 
the 
implementation of harmonised standards and market practice in areas such as cut-off times, 
ISO messages, corporate actions processing, account numbering and settlement finality. As 
Jean-Michel  Godeffroy  illustrated  earlier  today,  there  is  an  ambitious  plan  in  place  for  the 
coming  months  and  a  sound  record  of  achievement  so  far.  I  noted  that  the  audience 
expressed moderate optimism that the “priority one harmonisation topics” would be achieved 
by the launch of T2S. 
However, there is still a lot of work to be done in order to complete all these projects. It was 
very interesting in this regard to hear about the experience of Professor Giovannini, whose 
very name is closely associated with harmonisation and market integration. In particular, he 
analysed the problems faced by the Giovannini Group in the early 2000s. These reflections 
are  very  important  for  us  now  to  learn  from  past  experiences  and  to  be  able  to  achieve 
concrete results going forward.  
The  large  participation  at  this  conference  today,  with  distinguished  speakers  and  almost 
250 participants  from  all  over  Europe,  is  testimony  to  the  joint  willingness  of  both  the 
European and national institutions and market players to achieve post-trade harmonisation, 
and thus contribute to financial integration in Europe. Let me stress once more that the cause 
to which this process is contributing – the Single Market – is one of making Europe stronger 
industry  have  engaged 
the  post-trade 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  more  attractive  for  national  as  well  as  cross-border  investment,  thus  activating  and 
sustaining growth.  
To conclude, I wish to thank you all very much for your participation. Particular thanks go to 
all  speakers  and  panellists  for  making  the  discussions  so  lively  and  thought-provoking. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  all  those,  from  both  the  European 
Commission and the ECB, involved in preparing this very interesting conference. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
