Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya: Preserving the safety and security of 
Malaysia’s banking system 
Speech by Mr Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia,  at  the  launch  of  the  e-Banking  Fraud  Awareness  Campaign,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
15 January 2013. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  and  honour  to  be  invited  to  launch  this  joint  e-Banking  fraud  awareness 
campaign. I would like to thank the Association of Banks in Malaysia for this invitation and 
the coordinated efforts in undertaking this important awareness campaign. 
A significant initiative 
This campaign is indeed a very important initiative for the banking industry in Malaysia. This 
is the first time that all banks have come together in a concerted effort to help create greater 
awareness of online fraud with the cooperation of CyberSecurity and the Police Force. This 
is to be lauded as all stakeholders have a role to play in preserving the safety and security of 
the banking system. 
Maintaining confidence in online banking services 
Online transactions have been growing at a rapid pace over the years. Over the last decade, 
the  use  of  electronic  payments  has  increased  at  an  average  annual  growth  of  23.4%.  In 
2012,  Malaysian  households  and  businesses  performed  more  than  300  million  financial 
transactions  with  a  value  close  to  RM15  trillion  via  electronic  channels  comprising  mainly 
funds  transfers,  bill  payments,  top-up  for  prepaid  cards,  purchases  of  phone  cards  and 
payments  for  investments  in  the  capital  market.  Among  the  electronic  channels,  internet 
banking is the most popular. 
Fundamental  to the growth  of  internet  banking  over  the  years  is  the  confidence  which  the 
public has in its convenience and security. This is something that we cannot take for granted 
and  must  be  continuously  preserved.  Advancement  in  technology  and  innovation  has 
resulted  in  greater  consumer  convenience  and  enhanced  efficiency.  However,  the  same 
technology and innovation have also created new methods of perpetrating fraud that could 
be executed faster and with greater reach. Cyber criminals have been active ever since the 
advent of the internet, and are constantly finding new ways to defraud innocent victims. 
Safety  and  security  of  transactions  in  the  banking  system  is  fundamental  in  ensuring 
consumer confidence. Hence, an important function and responsibility of the Central Bank is 
to ensure online transactions can be made in a safe and efficient manner in the economy, in 
the pursuit of monetary and financial stability objectives. 
The need for constant vigilance & cooperation 
This  fight  that  the  banks  are  launching  today  is  something  that  requires  the  support  of  all 
parties. We  are  aware  of  the  creative  ways  in  which  criminals  have  attempted  to  deceive 
customers over the years and measures were required to be taken by the banks to protect 
the  customers. While  it  is  good  to  know  that  banks  have  played  their  roles  in  investing  in 
robust security systems, they must also ensure that customers play their part in protecting 
their own assets and savings. 
The reminder and greater awareness from the Banks through this campaign is timely. It will 
not  only  reinforce  the  need  for  constant  vigilance  from  all  parties,  but  also  help  create  an 
environment where everyone is risk conscious and responsible in protecting the interests of 
each  other.  These  initiatives  would  not  achieve  the  desired  outcomes  without  effective 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
communication, and the media has a critical role to play in conveying the message from the 
banks.  We  have  always  acknowledged  the  importance  of  the  media  and  I  would  like  to 
record  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  appreciation  for  the  assistance  rendered  by  the  media  in 
creating awareness of this issue in the past. We hope that with the support of the media on 
this occasion too, this campaign will be a success, and the public will have heightened levels 
of understanding and vigilance over this issue. 
On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia, I would like to thank all the banks for taking this initiative 
to  undertake  this  joint  e-banking  awareness  campaign.  Our  thanks  also  to  Cyber  Security 
and the Police Force for your ongoing efforts to collaborate with the banking industry. I wish 
all of you the best and assure you that Bank Negara Malaysia will continuously support you 
in this noble effort.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
