James McAndrews: The economy and the household debt and credit 
report 
Remarks  by  Mr  James McAndrews,  Executive  Vice  President  and  Director  of  Research of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the household debt and credit press briefing, New 
York City, 28 February 2013. 
 Good morning and welcome to the New York Fed. I am pleased to have this opportunity to 
talk  with  you  about  some  of  the  exciting  research  we  are  doing  here  at  the  Bank.  This 
morning my remarks will focus on national economic conditions and then I will introduce our 
special  presentation  today  on  household  debt  and  credit  conditions.  What  I  have  to  say 
reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
or the Federal Reserve System. 
National economic conditions 
It has been three and one half years since the end of the “Great Recession.” But, the pace of 
this  expansion  so  far  remains  very  sluggish  compared  with  previous  post-World  War  II 
business cycles: the level of real gross domestic product (GDP) in the fourth quarter of 2012 
was only around 2½ percent above its previous peak in the fourth quarter of 2007. To put this 
into perspective, at this point in time following recessions in 1973, 1981, 1990 and 2001, the 
level of real GDP ranged from 14 percent to 18 percent above the previous cyclical peak. 
After  falling  by  3.1  percent  in  2009,  growth  in  real  GDP  averaged  2.4  percent  in  2010, 
1.8 percent in 2011 and 2.2 percent in 2012, a consistent but sluggish pace. 
This  sluggishness  has  been  quite  evident  in  the  labor  market.  After falling  by  421,000  per 
month in 2009, payroll employment grew by 85,000 per month in 2010, 175,000 per month in 
2011, and 181,000 in 2012. To put these numbers in perspective, the trend rate of growth of 
the civilian non-institutional population is around 200,000 per month. The unemployment rate 
has declined from a peak of 10 percent in October of 2009 to just under 8 percent recently, 
due  largely  to  the  fact  that  the  labor  force  participation  rate  has  declined  by  considerably 
more  than  would  be  suggested  by  underlying  demographic  trends.  Fortunately,  long-term 
unemployment,  defined  as  those  unemployed  for  15  weeks  or  longer,  has  declined  from 
nearly 9 million in the first quarter of 2010 to about 6.6 million in recent months – a decline of 
28  percent.  The  median  duration  of  unemployment  has  declined  from  23  weeks  in  the 
second quarter of 2010 to 16 weeks recently. 
Nonetheless, as of January there were still about 3.2 million fewer jobs than at the end of 
2007.  The  unemployment  rate  remains  elevated,  despite  a  significant  decline  of  the  labor 
force participation rate. And the ratio of employment to population in January was lower than 
it was at the end of the recession, indicating that employment growth has not kept pace with 
population growth. 
Since  the  end  of  the  Great  Recession,  overall  inflation  has  averaged  near  the  2  percent 
longer-run objective of the FOMC. The rate of overall inflation in each of the past few years 
has been somewhat variable, reflecting sharp swings in energy and commodity prices that 
largely  have  been  driven  by  conditions  outside  of  the  United  States.  While  swings  in 
commodity prices can cause fluctuations in expenditures for consumers that can be difficult 
for  them  to  manage,  these  swings  tend  to  be  transitory  and  self-correcting.  For  these 
reasons,  most  economists  prefer  to  gauge  underlying  inflation  pressures  by  monitoring 
movements in prices that are less transitory. These include, but are not limited to, the core 
measures  of  inflation  that  exclude  food  and  energy  components.  Based  on  the  personal 
consumption  expenditures  deflator,  or  PCE,  measure  of  consumer  price  inflation,  which  is 
more comprehensive  than  the more  widely  known  consumer  price  index,  or  CPI measure, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  core  inflation  rate  was  1.4  percent  over  the  12  months  through  December,  below  the 
2 percent level that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has stated as its inflation 
objective, consistent with its mandate of price stability. The latest CPI indicates that inflation 
remained similarly subdued in January. Measures of longer-term inflation expectations have 
remained stable. 
Sluggish  improvement  in  labor  market  conditions,  subdued  inflation,  and  well-anchored 
inflation expectations, were noted as the primary factors underlying the FOMC’s decision, at 
its  January  meeting,  to  continue  to  pursue  a  “highly  accommodative”  policy  stance.  That 
stance combines an exceptionally low policy interest rate – the federal funds rate in a range 
of  0  to  25  basis  points  –  with  forward  guidance  indicating  that  this  range  would  be 
appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation is 
projected  to  be  no  more  than  2½  percent  between  one  and  two  years  in  the  future,  and 
inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored.  Moreover,  to  support  a  stronger  economic 
recovery, the FOMC is purchasing Treasury securities at a rate of $45 billion per month and 
agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at a rate of $40 billion per month, and has stated 
its intention to continue purchasing assets until it sees substantial improvement in the outlook 
for the labor market, conditional on ongoing assessment of benefits and costs. Combined, 
these actions are intended to ease financial conditions and thereby help to establish a self-
sustaining economic expansion. 
Turning to  recent  developments,  incoming  data  on  the  U.S.  economy  have  been  mixed  of 
late. Based on the advance estimate, real GDP declined slightly in the final quarter of 2012, 
which  was  below  the  consensus  expectations  of  an  increase  of  around  one  percent.  In 
addition,  in  January  payroll  employment  rose  by  just  157,000,  below  the  200,000  average 
monthly gain in the fourth quarter, and the unemployment rate edged up to 7.9 percent. 
Offsetting these soft indicators, we see evidence beneath the surface that private demand 
firmed  in  the  final  months  of  2012  and  has  been  reasonably  well  maintained  thus  far  this 
year.  Taking  into  account  price  changes,  the  January  retail  sales  data  were  reasonably 
strong.  Consumer  spending,  particularly  for  durable  goods  such  as  motor  vehicles,  has 
clearly  strengthened.  Light-weight  motor  vehicle  sales  in  January  were  well  above  the 
average  pace  of  the  first  quarter  of  2012.  This  stronger  durable  goods  spending  reflects 
some  improvements  in  labor  market  conditions,  consumer  confidence,  household  balance 
sheets and access to credit. 
Another major plus for the economy entering 2013 is the housing market, with upward trends 
evident in housing starts, home sales and home prices. To see why this is so important, in 
2009  residential  investment  was  a  0.4  percentage  point  drag  on  growth  of  GDP,  while  in 
2013 it is likely to provide a boost to growth on the order of 0.5 percentage point – a swing of 
nearly  a  full  percentage  point.  Business  investment  in  equipment  and  software,  another 
component  of  private  final  demand,  strengthened  in  the  fourth  quarter,  and  orders  for 
nondefense  capital  goods  have  moved  higher  in  recent  months.  Indicators  of  the  U.S. 
manufacturing sector have begun to look a bit brighter as well, with the ISM manufacturing 
index at  its highest level since last April. Survey-based indicators of manufacturing activity 
also have begun to improve in several other major economies around the world. 
Of  course  the  quickening  pace  of  auto,  home,  and  capital  goods  sales  and  orders,  all 
interest-sensitive  goods,  is  consistent  with  the  highly  accommodative  stance  of  monetary 
policy, which not only lowers interest rates but enhances credit availability as well. 
Along with these positive economic developments, there has been a notable increase in risk 
appetite among financial market participants over recent months, although there was some 
pull-back and volatility this week following the election results in Italy. From their recent lows 
in  mid-November,  equity  prices  in  the  United  States  are  up  around  10  percent.  Credit 
spreads also have narrowed. Clearly, a perceived decline of downside risks has contributed 
to the improved tone in financial markets. Notably, in the United States the full fiscal cliff was 
avoided and the risk of a debt ceiling crisis has been taken off the table at least for the next 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
few months. In addition, the market showed greater confidence in the policy responses to the 
Euro  area  fiscal  and  banking  crisis,  although  policy  challenges  remain.  Overall,  while  still 
tentative, I see signs of reduced headwinds and possibly greater monetary policy traction. 
However, several factors lead us to remain cautious about the outlook. First, in the past three 
years enthusiasm at the beginning of the year has given way to gloom by midyear. Second, 
households  are  still  adjusting  to  increased  tax  burdens  that  began  on  January  1,  which 
reduces disposable incomes significantly for many households. It remains to be seen what 
the  split  between  lower  household  spending  and  lower  saving  will  be,  but  we  currently 
anticipate  that  consumer  spending  will  weaken  some  in  this  quarter.  Indeed,  anecdotal 
reports  suggest  that  consumer  spending  during  the  month  of  February  was  adversely 
affected  by  the  increase  in  taxes.  Third,  while  we  avoided  the  full  fiscal  cliff  back  in  early 
January,  there  remain  several  vexing  fiscal  policy  issues  on  the  immediate  horizon  that, 
depending  on  how  they  are  resolved,  could  adversely  affect  the  economy.  Indeed,  at  this 
time it looks like the sequester will go into effect on March 1. If it remains in effect for the full 
year, estimates from forecasters suggest that the sequester could reduce projected real GDP 
growth  for  2013  by  about  ½  percentage  point,  which  would  be  on  top  of  the  ¾  to 
1 percentage point drag coming from already-implemented fiscal policy actions. 
Presentations on household debt and credit 
Our  special  topic  today  is  household  debt  and  credit.  Over  the  last  several  years, 
researchers  at  the  New  York  Fed  have  put  considerable  effort  into  improving  public 
understanding  of  consumer  debt  and  credit  conditions.  Consumer  debts  occupy  the 
intersection of Main and Wall Streets, and are thus of great interest to the public. In addition, 
of course, by most accounts the financial crisis grew out of the mortgage market – the largest 
and most important form of consumer debt. So to better inform the public and policymakers, 
New York Fed economists have developed a series of quarterly reports and topical studies 
on consumer debts. 
We will have two presentations. In the first, Wilbert van der Klaauw will provide an overview 
of fourth quarter and full year 2012 developments in household debt and credit; much of what 
Wilbert will describe is covered in our Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit. The 
quarterly report has documented the enormous rise in consumer delinquencies and defaults 
as the housing bust and the Great Recession unfolded, and, over the last several years has 
provided an in-depth look at a very large reduction in household debt – the largest we have 
ever  witnessed.  Since  the  third  quarter  of  2008,  its  peak,  household  debt  has  fallen  by 
$1.3 trillion – about 10 percent – mostly because of declining mortgage balances. 
This morning we are releasing our latest quarterly report – for the fourth quarter of 2012. The 
report shows some clear signs of healing in consumer debt markets. First, and perhaps most 
interesting,  the  data  indicate  that  the  recent  improvement  in  the  housing  market  was 
accompanied  by  a  slight  increase  in  the  level  of  household  debt.  While  it  is  too  soon  to 
conclude that a trend has been established in which households are beginning to increase 
their debts again, there are signs that the four-year long contraction is slowing. Consumer 
delinquency rates continue to slowly recover as well, with overall delinquency rates now back 
to pre-recession levels – around 8½ percent – but still well above the 3–5 percent rates that 
prevailed in the first half of the 2000s. 
During this long period of consumer retrenchment, only one form of consumer borrowing – 
student loans – consistently grew, and educational debt has now become the largest form of 
consumer debt, after mortgages. Student loans are widely held – roughly 39 million people 
have  student  loans,  including  a  third  of  people  in  their  20s  and  30s.  For  many  of  these 
families, educational debt is the tool that allows them to obtain higher education in spite of its 
large up-front cost. And higher education is, of course, the key to higher wages and a better 
standard of living. Nonetheless, student loans are not well measured or widely understood. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In  the  second  presentation  Donghoon  Lee  will  describe  the  latest  trends  in  the  continuing 
growth in student loan debt and delinquencies, and their implications. 
Thank you. I will now ask Wilbert to give an overview of developments in household debt and 
credit conditions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
