Madis Müller: New models in Northern Europe? 
Speech  by  Mr  Madis  Müller,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Estonia  (Eesti  Pank),  at  a 
symposium organised by the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung, Berlin, 28 November 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for this excellent opportunity to discuss together with colleagues from Latvia and 
Lithuania  the  experience  of  the  three  Baltic  countries  during  the  financial  crisis.  While  the 
situation  of  each  country  is  undoubtedly  different,  we  can  still  consider  if  there  are  any 
lessons one could learn from the Baltic cases. 
In my opening comments, I would like to address specifically the question of what is the best 
pace for economic adjustments once a country has been hit by a crisis. We hear today many 
suggestions  that  austerity  requirements  have  gone  too  far  and  that  we  should  allow  more 
time for implementing difficult reforms. 
First, let me start by saying that in more open economies, the crisis was felt almost instantly. 
In small and open countries such as the Baltic countries, there was no domestic demand to 
substitute for the lost export income. The economic reality had changed very suddenly. 
The EU countries could be divided into two groups. The countries that had a higher export 
dependence had to react fast to the changed economic environment. This applies especially 
to smaller countries, including the Baltic States, although Germany’s economy is also heavily 
reliant on exports. Those small countries in particular had to accept the new economic reality 
of  lower  demand,  higher  unemployment  and forced fiscal  consolidation  due  to  a fall  in  tax 
income or borrowing difficulties. 
The other group consists of bigger or more closed economies that were relying on domestic 
demand.  They  were  able  to  smooth  the  initial  impact  of  the  crisis  with  more  extensive 
government  support  measures.  There  was  also  the  expectation  that  the  crisis  would  be 
temporary. With the benefit of hindsight we know that we were not facing a temporary bump 
on the road, but a more fundamental need for adjustment. The initial smoothing of the shock 
may have been even more costly as it resulted in a higher level of public debt. 
Secondly,  the  required  policy  adjustment  involves  a  dimension  which  we  now  consider 
critical:  the  speed  of  reacting  and  the  decisiveness  of  policy  actions.  The  Baltic  countries 
have learned it firsthand through their experience, which of course is the hard way. 
There  are  few  economists  today  that  would  fundamentally  question  the  need  for  fiscal 
consolidation and structural reforms in Europe, as the crisis has clearly turned out not to be 
temporary.  However,  we  all  know  it  is  politically  difficult  to  cut  government  spending  and 
implement  reforms  fast.  The  natural  tendency  for  most  politicians  is  to  favour  gradual 
adjustment. “Gradualists” say that in case of fast changes the risk of possible policy mistakes 
is higher, leading to losses in physical and human capital. Opponents of that view, including 
myself, certainly acknowledge those risks. But we feel that the costs of delayed action may 
sometimes  outweigh  its  benefits,  as  postponing  the  inevitable  and  failing  to  accept  the 
changed reality will lead to additional unnecessary costs. One should not want to keep alive 
old  structures  that  clearly  cannot  be  sustainable  in  the  changed  world  for  longer  than 
necessary. This is a waste of limited resources and reduces long-term productivity. There is 
a saying that “a crisis should not be wasted” – negative shocks to an economy should lead to 
productivity gains. 
Our  experience  shows  that  quick  decision-making  and  decisive  policy  actions  can  shorten 
the period of uncertainty that also weighs on economic activity. People and entrepreneurs in 
countries  with  delayed  reforms  overreact,  leading  to  a  higher  level  of  risk  aversion  than 
necessary.  Overshooting  in  risk  aversion  results  in  lost  jobs  and  postponed  investments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Estonia, for example, lost almost 20% of its GDP during the crisis. By now we have regained 
the pre-crisis level, contrary to many countries that preferred to delay the necessary reforms. 
Some of them still face years of decreasing economic output. 
In summary, I would like to stress that prolonged fiscal consolidation and structural reforms 
can lead to unnecessary costs to the society. Some countries have chosen to delay the pain 
and  take  only  gradual  steps  with  their  structural  reforms,  but  this  has  in  fact  resulted  in  a 
reduction of the overall economic activity to the extent that might be no less than the short-
term cost of a quicker adjustment. The difference is that they are still not done and cannot 
hope for a rebound that might otherwise be there.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
