Jörg Asmussen: Interview in To Vima 
Interview with Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  in  To  Vima,  conducted  by  Mr  Angelos  Athanasopoulosand  on  21  August  2013  and 
published on 24 August 2013. 
 You came in Athens one day after Mr. Schauble made public what we all had in the 
back  of  our  minds  here.  Athens  has  been  full  of  rumors  since  the  beginning  of 
summer that something “big” will take place, like a new bailout program. There is a 
wider understanding that as soon as Greece reaches a primary surplus, its eurozone 
partners will examine ways to ease its debt burden. How could this commitment be 
fulfilled? 
“Let  me  say  first  of  all  that  my  visit  here  was  planned  many  months  ago  when  Yannis 
Stournaras suggested to me that in the calm summer break I should come. So, it has nothing 
to do with recent comments and there has been no coordination. In my view, these repeated 
talks about a debt reduction, a haircut or whatever you call it, are not helpful. It distracts the 
attention  of  all  stakeholders  from  what  needs  to  be  done  under  the  current  adjustment 
program. There is a clear Eurogroup decision, which is public, from the 27th of November 
last year. This mentioned, as you rightly pointed out, some conditions – and these conditions 
define the timeframe. When Greece has reached a primary surplus on an annual basis, the 
programme  is  fully  implemented  and  the  debt  level  still  considered  to  be  too  high,  then 
European partners will consider additional measures. But we will only know by spring next 
year  the  outcome  for  the  fiscal  year  2013.  The  Eurogroup  statement  identifies  possible 
measures. It was very carefully drafted. I remember because I was there that night. It says 
“inter alia” lowering the interest rates for the Greek loan facility again and/or looking at the 
co-financing of structural funds. These are two obvious ways but there are other ways. Olli 
Rehn for example mentioned yesterday in a Finnish newspaper lengthening the maturities. 
These are some options but the timeframe is quite clear”. 
We  have  the  prospect  of  a  new  bailout  program  on  the  table  officially  and,  if  I 
understand well, Olli Rehn connected it with debt reduction. The last troika report and 
more specifically the last IMF report is very clear that there is a financing gap for the 
second half of 2014 and for 2015–2016, approximately 11 billion euros. How possible 
is a third bailout program and if so, what form could it take? In the details of triggering 
the  OMT  program,  there  is  a  distinction  between  a  precautionary  credit  line  and  an 
emergency credit line. How could a third bailout program take place? 
“This discussion is also premature. The current program runs until the end of next year. This 
is  more  or  less  one  and  a  half  year  to  go. We  have  to  make  this  program  a  success.  As 
regards the future, there is a clear paragraph in the November 2012 Eurogroup statement 
which I already referred to. It says that the European partners commit to provide assistance 
to  Greece  during  the  life  of  the  program  and  beyond  if  Greece  has  not  regained  capital 
market access and implements fully the adjustment program. This is public and it is nothing 
new. It is true that the debt level of the country will be elevated for years to come and this 
means  that full  market  access  will  be  challenging.  You  touched  upon  two  different  issues. 
The first issue is that the country’s budget has a fiscal gap for the years 2015–2016 and the 
second issue is that we have a financing gap of the existing program in the second half of 
next  year.  These  two  issues  have  to  be  dealt  with  under  the  current  program.  Completely 
separate are the necessary conditions for an OMT program – you must be in a situation in 
which you are regaining full bond market access and you must have an ESM program, either 
a  fully  fledged  or  a  precautionary  program  and  there  has  to  be  an  appropriate  IMF 
involvement. So, it depends on whether the country is in a situation in which it can have the 
possibility of regaining full market access”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
from 
is  more 
the  program 
the  capital  markets.  Otherwise, 
We  know  that  the  Greek  government  is  preparing  to  go  to  the  bond  market  very 
carefully. Could this be helpful? 
“Any  use  of  a  precautionary  line  would  assume  that  you  can  cover  as  a  country  all  your 
financing  needs 
than 
precautionary.  And  one  has  to  assess  very  carefully  when  a  country  can  access  capital 
markets. In my personal view, there are at least two preconditions. One is that the country 
has  reached  a  primary  surplus  and  second  that  it  has  returned  to  positive  real  growth. 
Tapping capital markets is a challenge and it will remain a challenge”. 
You have been following the Greek crisis since 2010. Three years later, what would 
you say about the progress Athens has made in putting it fiscal affairs in order? 
“I am glad that you are asking this question. The program from the beginning consisted of 
two pillars: the fiscal side and the “growth enhancing” structural reforms side. On the fiscal 
side, I think we have really seen significant progress. It is a significant progress compared to 
any  other  fiscal  adjustment  after  World  War  II.  It  was  necessary  because  of  the 
unsustainable  fiscal  situation  and  we  have  to  pay  respect  to  the  efforts.  During  my  talks  I 
received an update about the fiscal situation after the first seven months and if it continues 
like this, a primary balance by the end of the year as the program foresees is in reach”. 
The main problems though are centered on the structural side of the program. Even 
the present Greek government, which has shown a clear commitment, does not seem 
to have full ownership when it comes to structural reforms. You know very well what 
happened with the “mobility scheme” in the public sector, you have also seen what is 
going on with privatizations. How can these shortcomings be overcome? 
“My impression after the talks I had is that there is a clear commitment to the program. And I 
made  it  very  clear:  this  is  not  the  program  of  the  troika,  it  is  the  program  of  the  Greek 
authorities.  I  acknowledge  that  many  things  have  happened  and  at  the  same  time  more 
needs to be done. The main issue for the citizens is: do you create growth and jobs? We 
have reached levels of unemployment which are unacceptable and one should focus on the 
structural reforms side to increase competitiveness and create jobs, especially for the young. 
What  we  see  is  that  wages  are  decreasing  but  we  are  not  seeing  a  similar  movement 
downwards for prices. This is a sign that there is not enough competition in the economy”. 
When you mention this to your interlocutors in Athens, what do they answer? 
“I cannot speak for them but my impression was that they are aware of this problem and are 
willing to tackle it. If you look at the most recent data, it is in reach to have a moderate but 
positive growth next year. But one has to show perseverance on this kind of reforms and not 
unravel what has been achieved”. 
We understand that the next troika review will be extremely difficult. Both Mr. Samaras 
and  Mr.  Venizelos  are  insisting  that  no  new  measures,  meaning  cuts  in  wages  or 
pensions, are going to be taken although we have heard this many times in the past 
but in vain. Do you believe that the stability of the Greek government, given the fact 
that  its  parliamentary  majority  is  smaller,  could  be  in  danger  if  new  measures  are 
needed? 
“It is undisputed that we have a fiscal gap for the years 2015–2016. We have to see how big 
it will be. Then we have to discuss, as part of the Medium Term Fiscal Strategy (MTFS), how 
to  close  it.  We  need  a  credible  MTFS  in  order  to  re-enter  capital  markets.  This  is 
unavoidable.  I  understand  the  difficult  political  situation  and  the  majority  situation  in  the 
Parliament  but  as  I  said  one  should  not  unravel  what  has  been  achieved  –  with  political  
pain  –  up  to  now.  And the  question  is:  what  is the  credible  alternative  to  this?  So I  would 
really focus the efforts on growth enhancing measures because they create jobs. We need to 
balance between the two pillars of the program”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Are  you  aware  of  any  EU-oriented  measures  to  help  enhance  growth  in  Greece 
because this seems like the only way funds can be poured into the Greek economy? 
The Greek banks are still not able to lend and from the Greek government we listen 
mostly wishes. How can we push for growth? 
“First, the program has a number of product market reforms to increase the growth potential, 
but it takes time to feed into the economy. On the EU side, one can make much more use of 
structural funds. Currently, they are used only partly, because there is a lack of sustainable 
projects.  Any  bilateral  help  is  also  welcome.  We  must  undertake  a  joint  effort  to  reach  a 
critical mass of structural reforms so that investors from inside and outside the country are 
convinced that we are creating a positive momentum”. 
Even though all banks, especially in Southern Europe, are provided with liquidity they 
seem unwilling or unable to transmit it to the real economy. In Greece we are facing a 
suffocating credit crunch. What was your message to the Central Bank Governor and 
what do you think about the situation of the Greek banking sector? 
“The banking part of the program has been a real success. All four core banks have been 
recapitalized and thus financial stability has been restored. I do not know what the outcome 
of the BlackRock exercise will be and the results will be known by the end of the year. There 
is  a  buffer  in  the  Bank  Stabilization  Fund  and  if  a  need  arises,  this  is  an  assurance  to 
financial stability and depositors. You are right that credit provision to the real economy is a 
concern.  In  my  view,  it  will  help  if  the  work  on  the  Non  Perfoming  Loans  (NPLs)  is 
accelerated. They are slightly below 30% and if banks have such high NPLs it is difficult to 
start new lending”. 
A clash is looming in autumn between the Europeans on one side and the IMF on the 
other, mostly because of the Greek debt sustainability issue. Should the Europeans 
take the situation completely in their own hands or we need the IMF? 
“In my experience, in all the countries cases that I know, the troika is functioning well and this 
is especially true here. There are convincing reasons to have the IMF on board. They have a 
unique knowledge when it comes to program design and implementation. They are not part 
of European politics, they are like an “external policeman”. There is also a clear request from 
a  number  of  member  states  to  have  the  IMF  on  board.  This  does  not  exclude  that  in  the 
longer term, after the crisis, we have a second look at how we would deal with this kind of 
situations.  Here,  one  can  look  e.g  at  what  the  role  of  the  ESM  could  be.  But  this  is  not 
something to change during the crisis”. 
How  is  the  process  of  the  banking  union  going?  The  SSM  is  supposed  to  become 
operational some time in 2014. Is the ECB ready? 
“The  banking  union  in  all  its  elements  is  for  us  the  key  project.  It  is  probably  the  biggest 
institutional  change  since  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency.  As  far  as  the  SSM  is 
concerned, what is lacking is the final decision by the European Parliament. Wιthout it we do 
not have the legal basis, for example to employ people. I expect the decision will be taken in 
September this year and then the ECB will assume responsibility a year later, in fall 2014”. 
I suppose you are also expecting a decision on the SRM which is evolving in a kind of 
battlefield between the Commission and Berlin… Do you agree with the Commission 
proposal or you think it should be watered down? 
“The SRM is the second key element of the banking union. It would be preferable to have the 
SRM  operational  when  supervision  starts  because  the  ECB  can  close  down  a  bank  only 
when it knows what happens after that. I think one can generally welcome the Commission 
proposal”.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
I recently read that, concerning the Bank Resolution and Recovery Directive (BRRD) 
agreed in the Council, you mentioned that it leaves a wide discretionary “window” to 
member – states for exclusions from bail-in. Why did you say that? 
“The  BRRD  is  a  step  forward  and  a  positive  development.  I  was  referring  to  one  element 
which is the pecking order and in my view it is preferable to have a clear ex ante pecking 
order so that global investors know what the rules of the game in Europe are. The Council 
decision foresees some flexibility and I would hope that this flexibility would be reduced in the 
coming trilogue with the European Parliament. I understand why the Council introduced this 
flexibility because it had to do with different national circumstances but I really would like to 
stress the need for a European level playing field”. 
You  were  present  during  the  long  nights  in  Brussels  when  the  “Cyprus  issue”  was 
discussed.  Now  that  the  bail  in  doctrine  is  in  place,  don’t  you  believe  that  this  is  a 
danger for the European financial system? Depositors do not feel safe anywhere and 
this applies in Greece too as you understand. How can you build trust?  
“Let  me  first  be  clear  and  say  that  the  situation  of  the  Cypriot  banking  sector  was  and  is 
unique in the whole EU. There is no need to replicate what was done. I think the instruments 
under the BRRD, including bailing-in, are a step forward because in the past we only had two 
possible solutions: either you liquidate a bank or you bail it out with taxpayers money. With 
the bail-in of creditors there will be a third option. But it is important that such rules are known 
in  advance  to  investors.  We  are  now  implementing  in  Europe  a  similar  framework  which 
exists and functions in the US. 
Is the ECB ready to do “whatever it takes” to save the euro? 
“To be precise, we are ready to do whatever it takes within our mandate. This is what Mario 
Draghi  said  and  it  is  important.  Yes,  we  are  ready.  I  mean  we  are  ready  to  activate  OMT 
when  the  necessary  conditions  are  fulfilled.  And  the  Governing  Council  will  take  an 
independent decision from a monetary policy perspective”. 
On September 22nd German elections take place. It seems that everything has been in 
a  standstill  until  then  and  at  the  same  time  may  people  expect  something  “big”  to 
happen after them. What should we really expect? 
“I do not share the view that we are in a standstill. We have the SSM, the SRM. The whole 
project of the banking union is making progress. I am always a bit surprised when people 
focus so much on the German elections. If one looks on how all decisions regarding Europe 
passed the German Parliament, there is roughly an 80% stable majority. This is very likely 
not  going  to  change.  On  European  and  international  economics  policy  I  would  not  expect 
many things to change as a result of these elections”. 
What is, in your view, the most important problem Europe is facing today? 
“There are a number of things. The biggest risk to the positive trend I see is that we are not 
doing enough – that we are in positive territory, that markets stay calm. So, the biggest risk is 
complacency and reform fatigue. The second one that worries me is that in this crisis we see 
national stereotypes resurface. I believed my generation would have overcome this but this is 
untrue neither in Northern nor in Southern Europe. The third thing is how do we re-develop 
the European project? Every generation has to redefine what we mean by this. The banking 
union is the first element, but we also need a fiscal union, a democratically legitimate political 
union. The fourth is how do we stay competitive in a globalizing world? We have discussed 
Europe. But we are very much inward looking while the rest of the world is moving. How do 
we stay competitive in an ageing society?”. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
