Jörg Asmussen: Introductory statement by the ECB in the proceedings 
before the Federal Constitutional Court 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  in  the  proceedings  before  the  Federal  Constitutional  Court, 
Karlsruhe, 11 June 2013. 
 Mr President, 
Members of the Federal Constitutional Court, 
Introduction 
The Federal Constitutional Court has invited the European Central Bank to comment on its 
monetary policy mandate, and particularly the decision taken by the Governing Council of the 
ECB in respect of the bond-buying programme, Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs). 
My aim is to demonstrate that our measures were necessary, that they are effective, and that 
they fall within the mandate of the ECB. 
I  will  confine  myself  to  the  most  important  aspects  of  our  written  statement,  looking  in 
particular at two aspects – the “scope of monetary policy” and the “possible consequences of 
the ECB’s measures for national budgets” – as specifically requested by the rapporteur for 
today’s oral proceedings. 
The necessity and effectiveness of the ECB’s actions 
Let me first briefly explain why the European Central Bank opted for the OMT programme. 
The need for monetary policy operations 
In order to understand the need for our monetary policy measures, it is important to be aware 
of the economic environment that we faced last summer. 
Fears of an involuntary break-up of the single currency led to severe tensions in the capital 
markets. At the heart of those distortions lay turmoil in the government bond market – the 
largest capital market in the euro area. The government bond market is extremely important 
for  price  formation  in  other  capital  market  sectors  –  for  bank  and  corporate  bonds,  for 
example.  Spreads  between  the  yields  on  the  government  bonds  of  euro  area  countries 
increased  to  levels  that,  in  a  number  of  cases,  significantly  exceeded  those  justified  by 
fundamentals. 
Yields on Spanish and Italian ten-year government bonds incorporated premia of more than 
6 and 5 percentage points respectively relative to German government bonds. Even at the 
short  end  of  the  yield  curve,  distortions  could  be  observed:  in  July  2012  the  yields  on 
Spanish  and  Italian  two-year  government  bonds  peaked  at  6.6%  and  5.1%  respectively, 
while the ECB’s main refinancing rate was 0.75% at that time. 
Those spreads could, in part, be attributed to concerns by market participants regarding the 
sustainability  of  public  finances.  Fiscal  reasons  alone  did  not  provide  a  full  explanation, 
however, because the rapid rise in spreads in the first half of 2012 was not accompanied by 
an equivalent deterioration in those countries’ fundamentals. At the same time, there was an 
acute risk that contagion would affect other euro area countries, pointing to systemic risks 
that were not limited to specific countries. 
A key factor driving those developments was fears in the markets regarding an involuntary 
break-up  of  the  euro  area  –  i.e.  fears  concerning  the  “reversibility  of  the  euro”  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
associated implicit exchange rate risk. This view was supported by model calculations which 
showed that, in July 2012, the spread that could not be attributed to fundamentals stood at 
up to 2 percentage points for Italian and Spanish two-year government bonds. 
There  were  also  signs  that  international  firms  were  hedging  against  the  risk  of  individual 
Member States leaving the euro area. Britain’s financial supervision authorities were advising 
financial institutions to be prepared in the event of the euro area collapsing. 
Moreover, Spanish and Italian banks lost their access to market-based financing instruments. 
Between April and July 2012 Spanish bank bonds to the value of €36 billion matured, but no 
more than €0.5 billion of Spanish bank bonds could be newly issued during that period. 
Against that background, we had to conclude that, in individual parts of the euro area, the 
steering of monetary policy was not functioning fully, or was in part not functioning at all. The 
key interest rate had lost its key function, with considerable disruption of the transmission of 
monetary policy on account of the implicit exchange rate risk. 
This economic environment clearly pointed to a significant credit crunch and a severe decline 
in economic activity. There was a risk of an incipient deflationary spiral – a process involving 
continual declines in prices. Price stability would then no longer have been ensured across 
the euro area. We in the Governing Council of the ECB discussed and debated at length the 
issue of what the European Central Bank should and had to do in such a situation in order to 
fulfil its tasks and responsibilities. 
Effective action 
The  instrument  being  considered  had  to  be  effective,  in  order  to  eliminate  the  unfounded 
fears  regarding  the  reversibility  of  Monetary  Union  and  the  resulting  interference  with  our 
monetary policy mandate. In setting up the OMT programme, we learnt from our experience 
with the first bond buying programme from 2010 – the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) 
– and made the OMTs even more targeted. The OMT programme differs from the SMP in the 
following ways. 
First, there is strict conditionality because the OMTs are attached to a European Financial 
Stability  Facility/European  Stability  Mechanism  (EFSF/ESM)  programme,  thereby  ensuring 
that  the  Member  States  concerned  remain  under  considerable  pressure  to  implement 
reforms  and  maintain  fiscal  discipline.  The  OMT  programme  seeks  only  to  reduce 
unwarranted interest rate spikes. I would like to make it very clear at this point that the OMT 
programme  was  not  aimed  at  harmonising  the  financing  conditions  of  the  Member  States. 
The market mechanism will continue to operate. 
Another important point in this regard is that an EFSF/ESM programme is a necessary – but 
not  a  sufficient  –  condition  for  OMTs.  There  is  no  automatic  follow-on.  The  Governing 
Council of the ECB will decide independently in each individual case, looking exclusively at 
the necessity of OMTs from a monetary policy perspective. 
Second, our OMT programme is limited to the short end of the yield curve – i.e. to maturities 
of  between  one  and  three  years  –  as  the  Eurosystem’s  other  monetary  policy  instruments 
have also traditionally been aimed at this period. 
The  third  distinction  between  the  OMTs  and  the  SMP  is  the  transparency  of  our  actions, 
through the publication of relevant information on OMT interventions. 
A  fourth  way  in  which  the  programmes  differ  from  one  another  is  that,  under  the  OMT 
programme, we are not only able to buy government bonds, but also to sell them again, and 
their valuation is based on market prices rather than on final maturity. 
Fifth, we announced that our OMT interventions would be ex ante “unlimited”. We have no 
doubt  that  this  strong  signal  was  required  in  order  to  convince  market  participants  of  our 
seriousness and decisiveness in pursuing the objective of price stability. At the same time, 
however, the design of OMTs makes it clear to everyone that the programme is effectively 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
limited, for one by the restriction to the shorter part of the yield curve and the resulting limited 
pool of bonds which may actually be purchased. 
OMTs – in the event that they are conducted – will not give rise to any inflationary risks. For 
every euro that the Eurosystem spends on government bonds, one euro will be withdrawn 
from  the money  supply  in  the  euro  area. We  already  did  the  same  successfully  under  the 
SMP, which has now come to an end. 
Barely  a  year  after  the  announcement  of  OMTs,  the  positive  effects  are  obvious,  and  this 
development has certainly also been enabled by the reform efforts as a whole. 
First, banks and firms regained access to the capital market. 
Second, the spread between the yields on Spanish and German ten-year government bonds 
fell from more than 6 percentage points in July 2012 to just under 3 percentage points in May 
2013.  At  the  same time,  the  premium  on  Italian  bond  yields  was  halved,  down  from  more 
than 5 percentage points. One further sign of the normalisation of developments – one that is 
important  for  German  savers  –  is  the  fact  that  yields  on  German  government  bonds 
increased by around one-quarter of a percentage point over the same period. 
Third, TARGET balances – which are an important indicator of fragmentation within the euro 
area – have declined noticeably. They are down by €285 billion – around 25% – compared 
with their peak in 2012, so they are now back at the level observed at the end of 2011. 
In  conclusion,  we  can  see  that the  announcement  of OMTs  significantly  contributed to the 
stabilisation  of  the  situation.  Firms,  banks  and  households  throughout  the  euro  area 
benefited from this measure. Destructive extreme scenarios were ruled out and the damaged 
transmission mechanism was, to a certain extent, repaired. 
Scope of monetary policy and acting within the ECB’s mandate 
I  will  now  come  to  the  first  of  two  points  to  which  the  rapporteur  has  requested  we  pay 
particular attention: the “scope of monetary policy”. This includes the question of whether we 
are acting within our mandate. 
Our  mandate  is  clearly  formulated  in  Article  127  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the 
European Union: to maintain price stability. 
According to primary EU law, the ECB and the national central banks of the Eurosystem are 
already permitted to purchase government bonds in the financial markets in the context of 
their  monetary  policy  tasks (Article  18.1  of  the Statute  of  the  European  System  of  Central 
Banks and of the European Central Bank). 
While  the  Treaty  clearly  states  the  objective  the  ECB  has  to  pursue,  it  describes  just  as 
clearly what the ECB is not allowed to do. 
Article 123 of the Treaty prohibits monetary financing. In particular, we are not allowed to buy 
any government bonds directly, i.e. on the primary market. Government bonds can only be 
purchased if they are already on the market and traded freely. The market mechanism – the 
basic principle Member States have to follow to finance themselves independently – should 
apply. 
We  therefore  also  interpret  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  as  being  comprehensive 
insofar as ways to circumvent it are addressed. It is not possible to purchase newly issued 
government  bonds  at  certain  times.  Furthermore,  the  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem 
observe  the  issuing  behaviour  of  Member  States,  banks  and  market  players  for  signs  of 
collusion. If, for example, a country were to convert all its bond issues to a short maturity (of 
up to three years), we would react. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Possible consequences of the ECB’s measures for national budgets 
The rapporteur has also asked us to address the possible consequences of our measures for 
national budgets. 
Of course, conducting monetary policy will always be associated with risks. For this reason, 
central banks hold capital and set aside funds for provisions and reserves as a pre-caution. 
This adds to their financial independence. 
In view of the expansion in balance sheets in previous years and the added risks associated 
with  this,  the  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  have  further  strengthened  their  financial 
buffers. By the end of 2012, funds for provisions had increased to €56.5 billion and those for 
reserves to €76.6 billion. 
The  Eurosystem  is  obliged  to  keep  financial  risks  under  control  as  best  it  can.  The 
institutional  framework  for  OMTs  is  therefore  designed  in  such  a  way  that  risks  for  the 
Eurosystem  are  manageable  and  controllable,  for  example  through  the  aforementioned 
orientation of the programme towards short-term maturities. 
The risks associated with OMTs would materialise only if a Member State operated un-sound 
policies and failed to service its debt. 
Put  simply,  the  mechanism  according  to  which  losses  go  into  the  profit  and  loss  account 
applies  to  both  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks.  If  a  net  loss  remains  even  after 
taking into account all provisions and reserves, it could be recorded on the balance sheet as 
losses carried forward and be offset by any net income in the following years. 
It is important that it is understood from the principle of financial independence that a central 
bank needs to be adequately capitalised in the long term. But in no way does it follow from 
this  that  all  losses  carried  forward  would  have  to  be  offset  immediately  and  in  full  by  the 
capital holders or Member States. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, I would like to summarise my arguments. 
The announcement of OMTs was and is the necessary and appropriate step to eliminate the 
disruption in the transmission of monetary policy caused by concerns that there would be an 
unwanted break-up of the euro. The risks of not acting would have been greater. 
The ECB and its decision-makers are aware of the limits of its monetary policy mandate. Our 
measures  are  aimed  at  maintaining  monetary  policy  transmission  and  preventing  an 
unwanted  break-up  of  the  euro.  It  is  not  allowed  to,  is  not  able  to  and  does  not  want  to 
replace  the  actions  of  democratically  elected  governments.  Quite  the  opposite.  The  OMT 
programme  is  therefore  aimed  at  protecting  the  market  mechanism  so  as  to  urge  the 
Member States to make the necessary reforms. 
The ECB will decide completely independently – on the basis of its own assessment of the 
situation – when and whether to intervene on the secondary market for government bonds 
for monetary policy reasons. 
Not  only  do  the  framework  conditions  set  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  for OMTs 
ensure that the ECB acts within its monetary policy mandate, they also ensure compliance 
with EU law, particularly the prohibition of monetary financing. 
I  am  firmly  convinced  that  introducing  the  OMT  programme  was  the  right  thing  to  do  to 
ensure price stability in the euro area. After all, a currency can only be stable if its continued 
existence is not in doubt. 
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
