Stanley Fischer: Issues of fiscal policy 
Summary  of  remarks  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer, Governor  of  the  Bank  of Israel,  at  the 
Bank of Israel Research Department’s annual seminar, Jerusalem, 27 December 2012. 
 The area of taxation in particular, and the fiscal area in general, are in my view among the 
most  interesting  areas,  and  among  the  areas  where  theory  can  contribute  the  most  to 
delineating policy. My lecture will deal more with macroeconomics, where theory is perhaps 
less deep but still very important. So what is the starting point for the economy heading into 
the upcoming period? 
From the standpoint of growth, we are in a relatively good position. The average growth rate 
over the past few years has been about 3.7 percent. Currently we are growing at a rate lower 
than  that,  if  we  don’t  take  into  account  the  expected  effect  that  the  start  of  natural  gas 
production will have on growth. The Israeli economy grew at an impressive rate in the years 
prior  to  the  crisis,  and  the  recession  during  the  global  crisis  was  relatively  moderate.  The 
unemployment rate is relatively low, even though we are still having difficulties interpreting 
the  new  Labour  Force  Survey  data.  Long-term  interest  rates  are  low,  and  the  yields  on 
ten-year government bonds are under 4 percent, and are continuing to decline despite the 
problems the economy is facing. 
In  the  fiscal  area,  there  has  been  a  continued  decline  in  government  expenditure  as  a 
percentage of GDP since the start of the program led by Prime Minister Sharon and Finance 
Minister Netanyahu that began in 2003. The rule that determined that expenditures shall not 
grow  by  more  than  1  percent  in  real  terms  is  to  a  large  extent  responsible  for  this  trend. 
Another factor is the defense budget, which reached 35 percent of GDP after the Yom Kippur 
War, was 20 percent of GDP prior to the stabilization plan, and has been in constant decline 
since  then,  other  than  during the  Second  Intifada. We currently  have  a  defense  burden  of 
about 6.5 percent of GDP, lower than the ratio that existed, for instance, in the United States 
during the Korean War. 
Government revenues also declined in relation to GDP in recent years, reaching 38 percent 
of GDP in 2011. This is mainly the result of the reduction in direct statutory tax rates, which 
has led to a change in the tax mix. In 2003, the deficit was slightly greater than 6 percent of 
GDP,  but  the  cyclically  adjusted  deficit  was  about  3.5  percent.  However,  today,  the  deficit 
itself is lower than it was in 2003, although the cyclically adjusted deficit is close to 4 percent 
– higher than it was in 2003. Since 2007, when the actual deficit was almost zero, the deficit 
has grown during the crisis, declined somewhat in 2010, and since then has not declined. 
The  result  is  that  we  have  a  deficit  of  about  4  percent  in  a  situation  of  almost  full 
employment. I feel very uneasy with this kind of deficit in the current situation, since if the 
economy enters a recession – a scenario which we must take into account – the deficit will 
grow, and it will be harder to deal with it. 
The  debt-to-GDP  ratio  declined  from  a  level  of  almost  300  percent  of  GDP  prior  to  the 
stabilization plan, climbed slightly to a level of about 100 percent during the recession at the 
beginning of the 2000s, and continued to decline since then to a level of 74 percent today. 
Compared to other countries, we have greatly improved in this parameter due to an increase 
in the debt levels of many countries as a result of the crisis, but it is very important for the 
State  of  Israel  that the  debt  to  GDP  ratio  be  low. We  are  exposed  much  more  than  other 
countries to geopolitical risks, and if God forbid we find ourselves one day in a conflict with 
our neighbors, near or far, it is important that we not come into it with this kind of debt ratio. It 
is very important, therefore, to continue reducing the debt to GDP ratio. 
In  2012,  the  Government  adjusted  the  deficit  path  such  that  the  deficit  targets  would  be 
reduced more slowly than planned beforehand. In practice, if we grow at an average rate of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
3.75 percent per year, the deficit will decline even more slowly than the path decided upon by 
the  Government,  based  on  the  existing  tax  rates  in  the  existing  legislation  –  that  is,  even 
taking into account the increase in the VAT and direct tax rates recently enacted. According 
to  this  estimation  by  the  Bank  of  Israel,  the  deficit  in  the  coming  year  will  apparently  be 
3.5 percent,  and  will  reach  a  level  of  2  percent  only  in  the  year  2020.  According  to  this 
projection, debt will also decline more slowly than the Government estimated when setting 
the legislation. 
The  fiscal  rule  which  guides  our  actions  is  the  result  of  a  joint  effort  by  the  Ministry  of 
Finance, the Prime Minister’s Office, and the Bank of Israel. It is a relatively simple rule that 
can be easily explained to the public. We know that the expenses planned for the coming 
years,  according  to  Government  decisions  that  have  already  been  approved,  exceed  the 
expenses permitted as per the fiscal rule by NIS 12 billion in 2013, NIS 22 billion in 2014, 
and NIS 25 billion in 2015. We must remember that this is the situation after the government 
took the very rare step of raising VAT and direct taxes a short time before elections, and this 
is a very responsible step from the standpoint of the government. 
At the beginning of 2013, the Government will operate based on the 1/12 rule due to the fact 
that  the  budget  has  not  yet  been  approved.  However,  the  law  also  takes  into  account 
expenditure on debt repayments, which were very high in 2012 and are expected to be lower 
in 2013. Therefore, we do not expect marked restraint as a result of the 1/12 rule. Revenues 
are projected to be below the expenses limitation. Therefore, the Government will need to 
close a gap of more than NIS 12 billion in 2013. So what will the Government do? 
The limitation on the budget is a law,  which can be changed. I hope that the Government 
does not change this law, since we are coming close to an expenditure level of 43.5 percent 
of  GDP  this  year,  and  we  must  maintain  a  safety  margin  in  case  of  a  security  crisis.  The 
Government will therefore need to reduce the level of planned expenditure, and we obviously 
must remember that there will still be an increase of about 5 percent in expenses in 2013 
over 2012, due to inflation adjustments. But the planned expenses are supposed to increase 
by 10 percent, and this is even before accounting for the ramifications of Operation “Pillar of 
Defense” with the Ministry of Defense. I would not want to trade places with the person who 
will need to explain to some of the public that “we promised, but we didn’t promise to carry it 
out”. But that is the work of the politicians. The Government will need to decide what to do, 
and it will be very difficult. 
If I had to choose, I would prefer that the Government meet the deficit target as well as the 
expenditure rule. However, if it is necessary to change the expenditure rule and to increase 
it,  which  is  not  desirable,  I  prefer  that  this  be  done  through  an  increase  in  taxes  and  a 
significant  reduction  in  the  deficit,  preferably  even  to  slightly  below  3  percent.  It  is  not 
recommended  to  delay  these  decisions.  The  tensions  within  the  Government  will  only 
increase  as  we  move  farther  away  from  the  elections,  and  it  is  preferable  to  make  these 
decisions  right  at  the  beginning  of  the  Government’s  term. We  must  remember  that  there 
may also be security challenges, and it is the supreme responsibility of the Government to 
protect its citizens.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
