K C Chakrabarty: The what, why, who and how of financial literacy 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
stakeholders’ workshop on “Financial literacy”, organized jointly by the UNDP, NABARD and 
MicroSave, Mumbai, 4 February 2013. 
 The  assistance  provided  by  Smt.  Jaya  Mohanty  and  Smt.  Pallavi  Chavan  in  preparation  of  this  address  is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
Dr. Prakash Bakshi, Chairman, NABARD; Ms. Caitlin Wiesen, Country Director, UNDP India; 
Mr.  Manoj  K.  Sharma,  Director,  MicroSave;  delegates  at  the  Workshop,  ladies  and 
gentlemen. As you all know, financial literacy has emerged as a focus area for policy makers 
not just in India, but all across the globe, particularly in the aftermath of the global financial 
crisis. Success in dissemination of financial literacy has been identified as key to meeting the 
critical objectives of financial inclusion and consequently, financial stability. The workshop is 
extremely topical as it brings together key stakeholders and brainstorms on steps needed to 
provide impetus to the financial literacy mission going forward. I congratulate the organizers 
for today’s initiative and hope that some meaningful and credible strategies emerge from the 
deliberations. 
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has had a significant impact on the 
social emancipation of people across the globe, ever since  its inception in 1966. Over the 
years, it has focused on Poverty Reduction, Democratic Governance, Crisis Prevention and 
Recovery;  and  Environment  and  Sustainable  Development.  It  is  heartening  to  note  that 
UNDP  has  partnered  with  the  Government  machinery  and  civil  society  in  India,  with  a 
particular focus on seven of the less developed states, to work towards improvement in the 
quality  of  lives  of  the  poorest  of  the  poor.  Achieving  inclusive  growth  has  been  one  of  the 
predominant objectives of UNDP’s programmes in India and across the world. NABARD, as 
you  all  know,  was  set  up  with  a  mandate  of  facilitating  credit  flow  for  promotion  and 
development of agriculture, rural industries and services. It has evolved to occupy a pivotal 
position  in  the  financial  inclusion  efforts,  particularly  in  the  rural  hinterland  of  the  country. 
Similarly, MicroSave has also made important contributions in the field of financial inclusion 
by  successfully partnering with diverse stakeholders such as financial institutions, investors, 
donors, corporate and regulators for providing, what its corporate tagline claims, “Market-led 
solutions for financial services”. I am happy to note that the three organizations have come 
together to host today’s seminar and hope that the partnership yields fruitful results for our 
financial inclusion/ financial literacy initiatives. 
I am happy to note that at the behest of UNDP and NABARD, MicroSave has conducted a 
Financial Literacy Assessment Survey to assess the current status of financial literacy in the 
UN  focused  states  and  to  gather  relevant  inputs  from  other  similar  programs  operating 
nationally/ internationally. It is, indeed, very important not only to work hard, but also to have 
periodic  appraisals  of  the  performance,  as  it  helps  one  to  refocus,  reorient  and  undertake 
mid-course correction, which is so very vital to the achievement of the ultimate objective. I 
am sure the insight gained from this exercise would provide valuable guidance to UNDP and 
help them in further streamlining the existing programs and taking it further, both – in terms 
of its penetration across the targeted states and the impact it has on the financial behavior of 
the beneficiaries. 
In my address today, I shall answer four basic questions about financial literacy: 
• 
• 
• 
What is implied by the concept of financial literacy? 
Why is financial literacy necessary? 
Who all need to be made financially literate and in what aspects? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 And finally, how to spread financial literacy? 
What is implied by the concept of Financial Literacy? 
Let me begin by answering the first question. Financial literacy is not a new term to all of us 
present here. While we have heard a number of definitions of financial literacy, I would use 
the  one  given  by  OECD,  which  defines  it  as  “a  combination  of  financial  awareness, 
knowledge, skills, attitude and behaviours necessary to make sound financial decisions and 
ultimately achieve individual financial wellbeing.” Financial literacy is expected to impart the 
wherewithal  to  make  ordinary  individuals  into  informed  and  questioning  users  of  financial 
services.  It  is  not  just  about  markets  and  investing,  but  also  about  saving,  budgeting, 
financial planning, basics of banking and most importantly, about being “Financially Smart”. 
Financial  literacy  is  a  complex  concept,  and  it  is  important  to  understand  its full  import.  In 
fact, as a society, we are yet to fully recognise the need and potential of financial literacy. As 
I would explain subsequently, financial illiteracy permeates across all levels of society and 
economic strata. The nature of illiteracy and its manifestations may vary, but it gets reflected 
in the everyday financial choices that many of us make. The lack of basic knowledge about 
financial products and services and their risk-return framework is one common instance of 
financial illiteracy that is widely observed. The greed for higher returns eventually culminates 
into a crisis involving larger number of retail investors. This basic lesson holds true not just 
for an individual investing his hard earned savings in financial products, but also for a bank or 
financial institution that manages public funds and channels them, either as investments or 
loans. Thus, appreciation of various aspects of financial literacy and how it impacts our lives 
holds the key to prudent financial planning and welfare maximisation, both- at the individual 
level and for the society as a whole. 
Why is Financial Literacy necessary? 
I,  now,  come  to  the  second  question:  Why  is  financial  literacy  necessary?  Together  with 
Financial  Inclusion  and  Consumer  Protection,  Financial  Literacy  forms  a  triad,  which  is 
necessary for ensuring financial stability. Not only do the three have a bearing on financial 
stability, they also have a strong interplay among each other, with each having a vital impact 
on  the  other.  Thus,  financial  literacy  has  significant  relevance  for  financial  inclusion  and 
consumer protection. Without financial literacy, we cannot expect to make major headway in 
either financial inclusion or consumer protection. 
Financial  inclusion,  essentially,  involves  two  elements,  one  of  access  and  the  other  of 
awareness. It is a global issue, and the relative emphasis on the two elements varies from 
country  to  country.  For  developed  countries  with  widespread  financial  infrastructure,  the 
access  to  financial  products/services  is  not  a  matter  of  concern.  It  is  more  of  a  financial 
literacy  issue  in  that  market  players/consumers  are  required  to  be  educated  about  the 
characteristics of the available financial products/services, including their risks and returns. In 
developing countries like India, however, the access to products itself is lacking. Therefore, 
here, both the elements, i.e. access and awareness need to be emphasized, with improving 
access assuming greater priority. 
Financial Stability, as a policy objective, refers to the avoidance of financial crises as also to 
the ability of the financial system to limit, contain, and deal with the emergence of imbalances 
before they pose a threat to the economic processes.1 The recent global financial crisis is a 
glaring example of how lack of financial literacy can impact financial stability. The genesis of 
the crisis was in the sale of inappropriate mortgage products to sub-prime borrowers, who 
did not understand the product characteristics. The crisis was also fanned by the creation of 
                                                
1   Schinasi, Garry (2004), “Defining Financial Stability”, IMF Working Paper, WP/04/187. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sophisticated 
financial  products  by  seemingly  expert  market  participants,  without 
understanding the underlying risks involved. Ben Bernanke, Chairman, Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System, remarked “In light of the problems that have arisen in the 
subprime mortgage market, we are reminded of how critically important it is for individuals to 
become financially literate at an early age so that they are better prepared to make decisions 
and navigate an increasingly complex financial marketplace”.2 
As already noted, financial literacy involves imparting knowledge about the risk and return of 
financial products to the users and providers of these products. It is this knowledge that helps 
in containing risks and maintaining stability in the financial system. I would like to argue that 
with  knowledge,  financial  market  players  are  expected  to  control  their  avarice  for  higher 
returns, keeping in view their inherent risk taking abilities. 
Financial  literacy  is  an  essential  pre-requisite  for  ensuring  consumer  protection.  The  low 
levels  of  transparency  and  the  consequent  inability  of  consumers  in  identifying  and 
understanding  the  fine-print  from  a  large  volume  of  information  leads  to  an  information 
asymmetry  between  the  financial  intermediary  and  the  consumer.  In  this  context,  financial 
education  can  greatly  help  the  consumers  to  narrow  this  information  divide.  Besides, 
knowledge about the existence of an effective grievance redress mechanism is essential for 
gaining the confidence of the unbanked population and overcoming apprehensions they may 
have about joining, what would appear to be a complex and unfriendly financial marketplace. 
For  the  population  group  that  would  have  newly  entered  into  the  formal  financial  system 
through  our  financial  inclusion  initiatives,  awareness  about  the  consumer  protection 
mechanism  is  critical  as  any  unsavory  experience  could  result  in  them  being  permanently 
lost to the financial system. 
Who needs to be financially literate and in what respect? 
This brings me to the third question of who needs to be financially literate. I shall argue here 
that  everyone  associated  with  the  financial  system  needs  to  be  financially  literate.  This 
includes all users of financial services, be it the financially excluded resource-poor, the lower 
and middle income groups or the high net worth individuals; the providers of services; and 
even the policy makers and the regulators. 
For the resource-poor population, which operates at the margin, vulnerability can be acute 
due  to  constant  financial  pressures.  Household  cash  management  can  be  daunting  under 
difficult circumstances, with few resources to fall back upon. Financial literacy efforts, in case 
of such population groups, essentially, involves educating them about the benefits of being 
part of the formal financial system and managing short term volatility in incomes and meeting 
unexpected emergencies without getting trapped in unnecessary debt. To cite one example, 
a study by NCAER and Max New York Life has shown that in India, around 60 per cent of 
labourers surveyed stored cash at home, while borrowing from moneylenders at high interest 
rates; a pattern of saving money that is bound to aggravate financial vulnerability of these 
labourers.3 The process of educating these excluded sections would involve addressing deep 
entrenched behavioural and psychological factors that are major barriers to participating in 
the financial system. 
For the middle and lower-middle income groups that are participating in financial markets as 
either savers or borrowers or both, i.e. the financially included, financial literacy efforts should 
aim at enhancing their knowledge about the market and new products/services. For instance, 
                                                
2   “The  Importance  of  Financial  Education  and  the  National  Jump$tart  Coalition  Survey”,  Remarks  by  Ben 
Bernanke,  Chairman,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  at  the  Jump$tart  Coalition  for 
Personal Financial Literacy and Federal Reserve Board joint news conference, on April 9, 2008 at Washington 
D.C. 
3   “How India Earns, Spends and Saves”, A Max New York Life-NCAER Study, 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
there  is  a  large  section  of  our  population  that  has  a  bank  account  but  refrains  from 
participating in the capital market on account of lack of knowledge. Financial literacy, in such 
cases, would focus on creating awareness about the way the capital market functions and 
also about the fact that the equity market provides relatively higher returns as compared to 
other investments, over a longer time horizon. 
Similarly  for  high  net  worth  individuals,  better  knowledge  about  the  financial  markets,  new 
and innovative products and instruments is important as it helps them in making better use of 
the  available  avenues  in  the  financial  markets.  This  knowledge  is  also  useful  for  fetching 
greater returns from their investments in the market and to avail credit at relatively cheaper 
rates.  However,  whether  saving  or  investing,  the  basic  lesson  that  “higher  return  implies 
higher risks” should not be lost sight of. 
While  the  need  for  financial  literacy  for  the  users  of  financial  products/  services  is  a  well 
accepted  fact,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  even  banks,  financial  institutions  and  other 
market  players  need  to  be  financially  literate  and  be  fully  aware  of  the  risk  and  return 
framework.  Financial 
involve 
understanding  the  risks  involved  in  their  businesses  and  in  the  products  that  they  offer  to 
their  customers.  As  market  players,  they  need  to  understand  risks  inherent  in  complex 
financial products and choose wisely while committing funds. For service providers, financial 
literacy  also  involves  understanding  the  needs  of  existing  and  potential  customers  and 
creating products and services suited to those needs. 
Finally,  I  would  argue  that  financial  literacy  is  also  relevant  for  opinion  makers  and  policy 
makers. Literacy is a must to gauge the needs of the population and financial institutions; to 
understand the risks inherent in products and markets; and to create a policy environment 
conducive  to  attainment  of  the  national  goals.  Only  such  an  approach  would  ensure  that 
physical and financial resources are put to their optimum use to generate higher economic 
growth, while minimizing the financial stability risks. 
Some basic concepts are not fully appreciated even by seemingly literate groups, resulting in 
assumption  of  excessive  risks.  One  example  that  I  often  quote  about  the  widespread 
financial  illiteracy  is  the  theory  being  floated  around  by  the  so  called  “financial  advisers” 
about investment in gold being a “hedge against inflation” and a “safe asset”. The steep rise 
in gold prices over the past few years only indicates that the risk involved in investment in 
gold has heightened, a fact which is not recognized by people. 
financial  services  would 
the  providers  of 
literacy 
for 
they  have  also 
How to spread Financial Literacy 
Let me now turn to my final question about how to promote financial literacy and who should 
spearhead  the  process.  As  I  have  already  argued,  financial  literacy  is  required  for  each 
player in the economy, albeit in different degrees, forms and modules. 
World  over,  countries  have  targeted  programmes  for  schoolchildren,  teachers,  research 
institutions,  among  others.  Further, 
launched  mass  media 
campaigns/websites providing simplified information, often in vernacular mediums, which can 
be  used  by  the  public  to  learn  about  the monetary  and  banking  system.  A  global  problem 
requires a global approach. Realizing this, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development  (OECD)  created  the  International  Network  on  Financial  Education  (INFE)  in 
2008  to  promote  and  facilitate  international  co-operation  between  policy  makers  and  other 
stakeholders on financial education issues worldwide. Currently, more than 200 institutions 
from 90 countries have joined the OECD/INFE. 
In  view  of  the  sheer  magnitude  of  the  task  at  hand,  it  is  beneficial  to  have  a  strong 
institutional architecture guiding and coordinating the efforts of various stakeholders towards 
spreading financial literacy. In India, we have that advantage through the Financial Stability 
and  Development  Council  (FSDC),  which  is  chaired  by  the  Union  Finance  Minister  with 
heads of all financial sector regulatory authorities as members. FSDC is mandated, inter alia 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to focus on spread of financial inclusion and financial literacy. The Reserve Bank, besides its 
role as a member of the FSDC, has also taken numerous initiatives for spreading financial 
inclusion and financial literacy, both in terms of creating an enabling policy environment and 
providing institutional support. 
Under the aegis of the FSDC, the draft National Strategy for Financial Education (NSFE) for 
India has been prepared. The Strategy envisages ways of creating awareness and educating 
consumers on access to financial services; availability of various types of products and their 
features; changing attitudes to translate knowledge into responsible financial behaviour; and 
making consumers of financial services understand their rights and obligations. The Strategy 
calls for active involvement of individuals, financial sector regulators, educational institutions, 
NGOs, financial sector entities, multilateral international players and the Government at both 
Centre and State. 
The  Strategy  envisages  a  time  frame  of  five  years  for  its  massive  financial  education 
campaign.  It  envisages  that  financial  education  will  be  delivered  to  different  target  groups 
through trained users. Basic financial education is aimed to be included in school curricula up 
to senior secondary level. This is based upon the premise that the most effective way is to 
weave  financial  education  into  the  normal  content  of  curriculum.  Accordingly,  we  are 
engaging  with  the  curriculum  setting  bodies  like  the  National  Council  of  Educational 
Research  and  Training  (NCERT),  Education  Boards  like  the  Central  Board  for  Secondary 
Education (CBSE), Central and State Governments to try and embed such concepts in the 
school curriculum. 
Simultaneously,  the  Strategy  aims  at  establishing  initial  contact  with  500  million  adults, 
educating them on key savings, protection and investment related products so that they are 
empowered  to  take  prudent  financial  decisions.  It  also  seeks  to  create  awareness  about 
consumer  protection  and  grievances  redressal  machinery  available  in  the  country.  All  the 
above  measures  would  be  undertaken  through  various  stakeholders  including  NGOs,  civil 
society and by using all available channels of mass communication. As a first step towards 
increasing  financial  education,  the  NSFE  envisages  conducting  a  National  Survey  on 
Financial Education to provide a holistic assessment of the need for financial education in the 
country. 
Since  the  challenge  in  India  is  to  link  large  number  of  financially  excluded  people  to  the 
formal financial system, the focus of our strategy at the base level is to create awareness of 
basic financial products. Some of the steps that have been taken by the Reserve Bank and 
other stakeholders to promote financial literacy in India are as under: 
• 
Outreach visits by Top Executives of Reserve Bank of India to remote villages: The 
objective  of  these  visits  is  to  understand  the  ground  level  position,  spread 
awareness  about  benefits  of  being  connected  to  the  formal  financial  system  and 
disseminate information about the functioning of RBI. 
RBI website – A link on Financial Education in the RBI website, containing material 
in  English,  Hindi  and  11  vernacular  languages,  which  includes  comic  books  on 
money and banking for children, films, messages on financial planning, games on 
financial education and link for accessing the Banking Ombudsman Scheme. 
Awareness  –  distributing  pamphlets,  comic  books,  enacting  plays  and  skits, 
arranging  stalls  in  local  fairs,  exhibitions,  participation  in  information  /  literacy 
programmes organized by Press. Books on financial planning for students and new 
professionals have also been released. 
Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) have been opened by various banks with focus 
on  the  spread  of  Financial  Literacy,  to  create  awareness  about  financial  products 
and provision of counseling facilities for customers of banks. There were 575 FLCs 
in the country as on September 30, 2012. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
        Conducting  Town  Hall  events  across  the  country,  including  in  Tier  II  and  smaller 
cities, bringing together commercial banks and other stakeholders. 
Newsibition  on  Mint  Road  Milestones has  become  the  focal  point  for  financial 
literacy  activities  with  all  activities  relating  to  financial  literacy  coalescing  at  a 
common forum at each centre 
Setting  up  of  a  monetary  museum  by  RBI  to  create  awareness  about  money  and 
banking among general public and spread knowledge about the history of money. 
Use of mobile Financial Literacy vans by banks in the North Eastern States 
Awareness  programmes  on  various  Government  Sponsored  self  employment 
schemes  involving  bank  loans  and  subsidy  by  Government  agencies  like  KVIC, 
DICs and SC/ST corporations. 
Mass  media  campaign  tie  ups  with  educational  institutes,  financial  awareness 
workshops/  help  lines,  books,  pamphlets  and  publications  on  financial  literacy  by 
NGOs, financial market players, etc. 
National  and  State  level  rural  livelihood  missions  have  large  number  of  field 
functionaries for proper handholding support to large number of Self Help Groups. 
Large  number  of  websites/portals  of  banks/  State  Level  Bankers  Committees 
disseminating information on banking services 
Conduct  of  Financial  Literacy  programmes  by  Rural  Self  Employment  Training 
Institutes 
In line with the “catch them young” strategy for our financial education initiatives, the Reserve 
Bank launched the RBIQ, an all India inter school quiz competition, in 2012. The quiz seeks 
to be an effective platform for disseminating financial education by creating awareness and 
sensitization  about  the  history  and  role  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  about  banking  and  finance, 
economics, current affairs, etc., besides seeking to build a “connect” between the Reserve 
Bank and the young student community enrolled in schools across the country. 
As part of its efforts to gain from international perspectives on financial literacy initiatives, the 
Reserve Bank, in association with the World Bank and the OECD, is organizing a Regional 
Conference on Financial Education in New Delhi next month. The Conference is among the 
various  events  organized  globally  to  disseminate  the  knowledge  and  products  developed 
through the Financial Literacy and Education Trust Fund, managed by the World Bank and 
the  OECD,  for  strengthening  the  capacity  for  planning  and  implementation  of  financial 
education programs. 
One of the objectives of the NSFE is to standardize the messages that various stakeholders 
seek to disseminate through their financial education initiatives. The draft NSFE document 
identifies certain simple messages such as why save; why invest; why insure; why save with 
banks; why borrow within limits; why repay loans in time; why borrow for income generating 
purposes, what is interest and how moneylenders charge very high interest rates, etc. It is a 
well  recognized  fact  that  the  standardization  will  help  in  ensuring  consistency  in  the 
messages  reaching  the  target  audience  from  various  sources  and  making  them  more 
focused and powerful. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  released  on  its  website  on  January  31,  2013,  a  comprehensive 
Financial Literacy Guide, which, banks have been advised to use as a standard curriculum to 
impart  basic  conceptual  understanding  of  financial  products  and  services.  The  financial 
literacy guide consists of Guidance Note for trainers, Operational guidelines for conduct of 
financial  literacy  camps,  and  financial  literacy  material,  including  posters.  The  guide  also 
contains a financial diary to be distributed to the target audience, so as to enable them to 
keep a record of their income and expenses, as a first step towards financial planning. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I am glad to note that the Assessment Survey conducted by MicroSave has highlighted that 
most  of  the  UNDP  programmes  were  liked  by  the  targeted  population  and  succeeded  in 
creating a positive change in their knowledge, skills and financial behavior. I agree with the 
survey observation that there is a need for closer integration between the financial literacy 
and financial inclusion initiatives, as our experience shows that the two are complementary to 
each other and the absence of any one diminishes the effectiveness of the other. About the 
suggestion  regarding  introduction  of  chapters  on  financial  literacy  by  UNDP  in  school 
curriculum through CBSE/ NCERT, our experience within the FSDC sub-committee, is that 
financial  education  needs  to  be  embedded  into  the  existing  school  curriculum.  Significant 
work has already been done in this regard, under the aegis of the FSDC, in association with 
the CBSE/ NCERT. We would be happy to receive suggestions/ inputs from the UNDP on 
this. 
Conclusion 
While  a  number  of  measures  have  and  are  being  taken  across  the  country,  given  the 
enormity of the task, a lot of ground still needs to be covered. Apart from the Government 
and  the  regulatory  bodies,  there  is  a  need  for  involving  the  civil  society  and  all  other 
stakeholders in spreading financial literacy. We need to evolve distinct strategies targeting 
the school children and the adult population. We are still evolving a formalized curriculum for 
schools, which teaches the schoolchildren the basic principles of money, credit, savings and 
investments and introduces them to the way our financial system operates. After all, while 
one-time,  targeted  programmes  are  useful,  including  financial  education  into  school 
curriculum  in  an  on-going  manner  would  hold  the  key  to  making  our  future  generations 
financially literate. I congratulate the UNDP, NABARD and MicroSave for their contributions 
to improving the quality of lives of the poor through their financial literacy initiatives. However, 
the widespread existence of financial illiteracy indicates that we need to do a lot more. 
I  once  again  thank  the  organizers  of  this  Workshop  for  providing  me  the  opportunity  to 
present my thoughts on the important subject of financial literacy. Conferences such as these 
are important in generating new ideas and diffusing clarity of thought and purpose among the 
various  stakeholders.  By  way  of  anecdotal  evidence,  I  would  like  to  share  the  feedback  I 
received on the positive impact that a seminar on financial inclusion, that I addressed last 
December, had on the conference participants. I am informed that based on the awareness 
generated  during  the  conference  about  recent  relaxations  in  KYC  norms  for  opening  new 
bank  accounts,  there  was  a  perceptible  improvement  in  the  willingness  of  banks  to  open 
accounts  of  the  marginalized  and  migrant  workers  in  the  unorganized  sector,  thereby 
providing  them  access  to  various  financial  services.  The  message  disseminated  at  the 
seminar galvanized the organizers to conduct several camps where sizeable number of bank 
accounts were opened. They plan to conduct several such camps in the coming days. I hope 
today’s workshop will also have a similar impact on the participants present here. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
