Yves Mersch: The European Central Bank’s role in overcoming the crisis 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the UniCredit Business Dialogue, Hamburg, 17 June 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Many thanks for the invitation to the Business Dialogue. 
When I last gave a speech in Hamburg – almost exactly two years ago – I also focused on 
overcoming the crisis. Though the crisis is indeed not over yet, much has certainly happened 
in the meantime: 
• 
• 
• 
we have a powerful set of instruments for overcoming the crisis; 
the economic governance framework at European level has been reinforced; 
we are on the path towards a banking union that can break the negative feedback 
loop between banks and sovereign debtors. 
The organisers have asked me to address the ECB’s role in this context and I’m happy to 
honour their request. But let me make it quite clear from the start: the ECB has an explicit 
mandate.  Our  task  is  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  and  our  non-standard 
measures  have  contributed  to  that  objective.  But  monetary  policy  cannot  be  called  on  to 
overcome the crisis. A sustainable resolution to the crisis lies in the hands of the Member 
States. 
So this evening I would like to look at two questions: 
• 
• 
First, what is the role of monetary policy in overcoming the crisis? 
Second, are the euro area governments living up to their responsibility to eliminate 
the causes of the crisis? 
Let me begin with the role of the ECB. 
The ECB’s core task is to ensure price stability. That has not changed, nor will it change. 
We have a clear mandate, which was conferred on us by the Member States’ governments 
at supra-national level under the European treaties. It is virtually cast in stone. At the same 
time, we have operational leeway in choosing how to fulfil this mandate – provided that we 
stay within its limits. 
During  the  crisis  it  emerged  that,  in  some  places,  the  transmission  of  our  monetary  policy 
signals  to  the  real  economy  was  restricted  or  uneven.  In  central  banking  we  speak  of  a 
distorted monetary transmission mechanism. 
We  therefore  took  non-standard  measures  so  that  our  monetary  policy  would  be  more 
effectively  passed  through  to  the  financing  conditions  for  the  real  economy.  These  non-
standard  measures  complement  our  traditional  set  of  instruments.  Put  simply:  our  interest 
rate decisions are aimed at price stability. The non-standard measures seek to ensure that 
the desired effect of these decisions also spreads across the entire euro area. 
One  of  these  non-standard  measures  is  the  policy  of  full  allotment  in  our  refinancing 
operations  against  appropriate  collateral.  We  have  also  extended  the  maturities  of  our 
refinancing operations up to three years and have expanded the collateral framework. These 
measures are geared towards banks‘ refinancing conditions, which in turn make it easier for 
credit institutions to provide sufficient credit to the economy at favourable terms. 
Last summer we decided on more far-reaching measures – notably the announcement of the 
Outright Monetary Transactions. Prior to this announcement, we had to observe that market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
financing conditions were increasingly characterised by the fears among market participants 
that Member States would revert back to their national currencies. The markets hence priced 
in  a  conversion  risk  premium. Owing  in  part  to this  premium,  the refinancing  conditions  of 
many commercial banks – and thereby the real economy – deteriorated dramatically. 
The ECB’s monetary policy is committed to maintaining price stability in the euro area as a 
whole. So we had to take measures that would ensure that our single monetary policy would 
take effect in all Member States. 
Since  the  summer  of  last  year, financing  conditions for  the  real  economy  in  the  euro  area 
have clearly improved. The situation is clearly returning to normal. That is also felt by savers, 
pension  funds  and  insurance  companies  here  in  Germany:  the  yields  on  German 
government  bonds  have  increased,  having  previously  been  extremely  low  because  some 
investors  had  been  panicked  into  reshuffling  their  portfolios  in  favour  of  supposedly  safer 
havens.  These  yields  had  even  turned  negative  at  times.  The  distortions  of  the  monetary 
transmission mechanism have thus visibly receded. 
At the same time, the influence of monetary policy on the return on savings is overestimated. 
For one, the real return is what primarily feeds savings in an economy. In the long term, the 
real return is mainly defined by production potential. By adjusting the interest rate, monetary 
policy  only  serves  to  smoothen  developments  in  order  to  prevent  the  economy  from 
overheating, causing an acceleration in inflation or – during a crisis, say – from entering a 
deflationary spiral. 
Second, monetary policy behaves neutrally towards different savings instruments. It does not 
give preference to savings over investments in equities or in fixed income securities, both of 
which have gained considerably in value in Germany over the past few months. 
All  of  our  non-standard  measures  are  only  temporary.  For  a  short  time,  an  overly  ample 
provision of central bank liquidity to the banking sector is not incompatible with our mandate 
to  maintain  purchasing power. We  can  adjust the  interest rate for  these  operations  at  any 
time. And excessive liquidity is automatically returned: banks demand less liquidity as soon 
as the monetary transmission mechanism improves. This process is in full swing. The three-
year longer-term refinancing operations that I referred to before will expire at the beginning of 
2015.  Many  banks  have,  however,  already  repaid  the  funds  they  had  borrowed.  So  the 
design  of  our  non-standard  measures  is  such  that  a  special  withdrawal  strategy  is  not 
required. 
At the same time, we are aware of the long-term risks to stability associated with extremely 
low  rates  and  excessive  liquidity  over  too  long  a  period.  It  is  hence  imperative  that  repair 
efforts in other areas are carried out resolutely and thoroughly. The ECB is indeed making an 
important  contribution  to  crisis  management  but  it  cannot  resolve  the  crisis  by  monetary 
means. In the end, it can only  win time for other policy sectors to carry out the necessary 
adjustments and reforms. 
It is up to the governments of the Member States to live up to their responsibility. They need 
to  remedy  remaining  deficiencies  in  the  European  governance  framework.  And  they  must 
gear their economic policies to the demands of an economic and monetary union. 
Important steps have been taken since the outset of the crisis. The Member States must now 
single-mindedly continue on the path towards a new and more robust political economy. 
The  first  step  taken  was  the  establishment  of  an  effective  set  of  instruments  for  the 
management and resolution of crises in the euro area. Initially, crisis-related measures by the 
Member States and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) had had to be arranged ad hoc. 
Since  October  last  year,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  has  replaced  the 
European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  that  had  been  designed  as  a  temporary 
measure. The ESM has the organisation structure of an intergovernmental body. With a view 
to  the  progressive  deepening  of  European  integration,  its  further  development  into  a  truly 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
federal  institution  would  certainly  be  more  appropriate  that  any  questioning  of  the  ECB’s 
mandate. 
The  new  measures  taken  at  the  European  level  have  proved  to  be  effective  in  countering 
contagion  in  the  euro  area  in  the  most  serious stages  of the  crisis.  Financial  markets  and 
consumers are gaining renewed confidence in the euro area, even though the prospects for 
growth and employment remain weak over the medium term. 
Combining  financial  assistance  with  strict  conditions  has  brought  the  negative  economic 
trends in the programme countries to a halt. The economic downturn in some of the most 
strongly affected countries may even have bottomed out in the near future. What is crucial 
now is to ensure that the programme countries do not stray from the path of essential fiscal, 
financial and structural adjustment. 
The second step undertaken was the strengthening of the framework for steering economic 
policy at the European level. It is aimed at preventing dangerous imbalances in both public 
budgets and current accounts more effectively in future. The Governing Council of the ECB 
has urged time and again that economic governance in the euro area be improved, calling for 
the Stability and Growth Pact to be strengthened, for procedures to be put in place to counter 
macroeconomic  imbalances  and  for  the  ceilings  on  public  debt  and  deficits  set  out  in  the 
Stability and Growth Pact to be transposed into national legislation in all Member States. We 
welcome that the regulatory framework has been reformed accordingly. 
However, the regulatory framework alone cannot ensure that economic policies are sound. 
Paper doesn’t blush, as clearly evidenced by the failure of the original Stability and Growth 
Pact.  The  new  governance  framework  can  only  be  successful  if  it  is  implemented 
consistently, according to both the letter and the spirit of what has been agreed. Its success 
thus depends on the action taken by the European Commission and the Council of Ministers. 
All  this  is  confirmed  by  taking  a  brief  look  at  the  current  “European  semester”,  the  new 
process  for  the  coordination  of  economic  policy  in  the  European  Union.  I  fear  that  the 
unsound  economic  policies  in  some  Member  States  are  once  again  not  being  opposed 
decisively  enough.  The  rules  of  the  new  European  governance  framework  can  only  be 
effective if they are strictly applied. 
In  particular,  deadlines for  the  correction  of  excessive  budget  deficits  should, for  instance, 
only be extended, by way of exception, in the event of exceedingly adverse circumstances. 
Extensions should not become the rule. 
The  third  set  of  measures  is  to  be  found  in  the  first  steps  undertaken  towards  a  banking 
union. The measures are aimed, in particular, at disrupting negative feedback loops between 
banks  and  public  sector  debtors,  and  at  halting  the  increasing  fragmentation  of  European 
financial markets. 
All  banks  in  the  euro  area,  as  well  as  the  credit  institutions  in  Member  States  that  have 
arranged for  close  cooperation  with  the  ECB,  will  be  subject  to  European  supervision,  the 
“Single  Supervisory  Mechanism”.  Although  the  ECB  will  be  responsible  for  the  direct 
supervision of only large, systemically important credit institutions, this does not mean that 
other banks will not be covered by the ECB’s supervisory framework. National supervisory 
authorities will have to comply with the regulations, guidelines and instructions of the ECB. 
Moreover,  the  ECB  will  be  able  at  any  time  to  take  over  the  direct  supervision  of  smaller 
credit  institutions.  Current  plans  envisage  that  common  supervision  will  commence  in  the 
second half of next year. 
However,  common  banking  supervision  is  only  one  element  of  a  true  banking  union.  In 
parallel,  we  also  need  a  common  resolution  mechanism. The  two  elements  are  somewhat 
like Siamese twins – one cannot survive without the other. Their combination is the only way 
in  which  negative  feedback  loops  between  the  banking  sector  and  public  budgets  can  be 
disrupted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  detailed  design  of  the  “single  resolution  mechanism”  is  still  the  subject  of  debate  in 
Brussels and the Member States’ capital cities. Without prejudice to any decisions thereon, I 
would  like  to  highlight  two  elements  that  I  regard  as  being  particularly  important  when 
designing  the  single  resolution  mechanism:  on  the  one  hand,  the  geographical  and 
institutional scope of applicability of the single resolution mechanism should be the same as 
that of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. A European resolution authority would ensure that 
decisions are taken in a timely and objective manner. A network of national authorities would 
fall short of what is necessary in this respect. Cases where a bank finds itself in a precarious 
situation call for swift and efficient action. A European resolution authority would be able to 
avoid  unnecessary  delays  and  overcome  coordination-related  constraints.  That  would  also 
keep the resolution costs low. 
On the other hand, the use of taxpayers’ money should be limited to exceptional cases. The 
first step should be to use equity and bail-ins of shareholders and creditors to the greatest 
extent  possible.  The  next  step  should  then  be  to  tap  a  European  resolution  fund financed 
through bank contributions. Public funds such as those of the European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM) should only be used temporarily in emergencies. Such temporary assistance should 
be covered by subsequent levies on banks, so that it ultimately has no fiscal policy impact. 
The  European  Commission  will  be  submitting  draft  legislation  on  a  common  resolution 
mechanism at the end of the month. Thereafter, the Member States will need to ensure that 
we establish an effective resolution mechanism in addition to common supervision. 
That brings me back to where I started my speech today: it is the Member States who are 
responsible for finding a lasting solution to the crisis. 
What  the  central  bank  has  to  do  is  to  ensure  that  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
functions properly again. The instruments we need for doing so are at our disposal. However, 
our  hands  are  tied  where  disruptions  to  the  socio-economic  transmission  mechanism  are 
concerned.  Returning  to  more  realistic  views  when  making  election  promises  and  both 
explaining  and  implementing  unpopular  measures  wherever  necessary  are  the  prerogative 
and responsibility of the – national – political domain. 
Werner Schneyder, an Austrian political satirist, once said that Europe consists of countries 
that do not want to be ruled by what they themselves have decided. That must change. Only 
then will it be possible to sustainably resolve the crisis. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
