Mark Carney: Canada works 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  to  the  Board  of  Trade  of  Metropolitan  Montreal/Chambre  de 
commerce du Montréal métropolitain (CCMM), Montreal, Quebec, 21 May 2013. 
 Introduction 
It  is  almost  six  years  since  the  start  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  and  its  dynamics  still 
dominate the economic outlook. 
In the United States, households are emerging from a painful period of deleveraging. Their 
economic  expansion  continues  at  a  modest  pace,  with  gradually  strengthening  private 
demand partly offset by accelerated fiscal consolidation. Despite recent progress, the U.S. 
economy has not yet achieved escape velocity. 
Europe  remains  in  recession,  with  economic  activity  constrained  by  fiscal  austerity,  low 
confidence  and  tight  credit  conditions.  Deep  challenges  persist  in  its  financial  system. 
Without sustained and significant reforms, a decade of stagnation threatens. 
Europe can draw lessons from Japan on the dangers of half measures. It is now more than 
two decades since the Japanese financial crisis erupted. To end its debilitating legacy, Japan 
has  just  embarked  on  a  bold  policy  experiment.  Its  success  or  failure  will  have  a  major 
impact on the outlook over the coming years. 
Amongst the G-7, Canada is unique. For us, the global financial crisis was an external rather 
than  internal  shock.  When  Canadian  policy-makers  responded  quickly  and  forcefully,  our 
financial  system  channelled  credit  to  where  it  was  needed  and  our  economy  adjusted 
smartly. 
As painful as our recession was, Canada suffered less. By the start of 2011, all of the output 
and all of the jobs lost during the recession had been recovered (Charts 1 and 2). A further 
480,000  jobs  have  been  created  since,  with  the  vast  majority  of  them  full-time  and  in  the 
private sector. Nearly all the new jobs are in industries that pay above-average wages. 
Relative to our peers, Canada is working. 
Why did we fare better? Our outperformance reflects four critical advantages: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I will discuss these foundations of our prosperity in more detail, but I don’t intend to oversell 
them.  These  are  the  cornerstones  of  Canada’s  prosperity,  but  lasting  growth  depends  on 
what  is  built  on  this  foundation  through  longer-term  investments  in  infrastructure,  human 
capital, innovation and new markets. 
A monetary union that works 
Canada’s  monetary  union  has  the  essential  elements  of  an  effective  currency  union:  an 
integrated economy, fiscal federalism and labour market flexibility. Allow me to elaborate. 
responsible fiscal policy, 
sound monetary policy, 
a resilient financial system, and 
a monetary union that works. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
An integrated economy 
While the composition of provincial output varies, the Canadian economy is highly integrated. 
Consider the case of commodities. 
When commodity prices increase, all provinces benefit. All else equal, the Canadian dollar 
appreciates. Its adverse impact on our non-commodity exports is partially offset by the fact 
that  a  stronger  currency  reduces  the  cost  of  productivity-enhancing  machinery  and 
equipment  and  imported  inputs  to  production.1  Various  mechanisms  distribute  benefits 
across provinces: fiscal policy; increases in personal wealth through income and ownership 
of stock; and movements in internal real exchange rates and interprovincial trade.2  
During the recession and its aftermath, the importance of interprovincial trade was clear. For 
example,  the  increased  demand  from  other  provinces  for  Quebec’s  goods  and  services 
significantly offset lost international exports (Chart 3). 
Movements  in  provincial  real  exchange  rates  are  another  important  part  of  the  adjustment 
process. Although there is one exchange rate for Canada as a whole (we all use Canadian 
dollars), price differentials across the country yield different real provincial exchange rates. 
This matters. 
Consider  the  Alberta/Quebec  real  exchange  rate  (Chart  4).  When  higher  energy  prices 
stimulate  production  and  investment  in  Alberta,  extraction,  construction  and  labour  costs 
there rise. This increases the real Alberta exchange rate, making goods and services from 
the  other  provinces,  including  Quebec,  more  competitive.  Interprovincial  trade  is  boosted, 
spreading benefits from energy price increases throughout the economy. 
It is interesting to compare developments in the Canadian and European internal exchange 
rates. For example, since the euro was introduced, Spanish competitiveness (as measured 
by  GDP  deflators)  has  fallen  by  about  30  per  cent  relative  to  Germany.  During  the  same 
period, the Alberta exchange rate moved even more dramatically, rising 40 per cent relative 
to  Quebec  (Chart  5).  Intra-regional  exchange  rates  in  Canada  have  generally  been  more 
volatile on average than most internal exchange rates in the euro area (See Tables 1 and 2, 
Appendix). 
And yet, the challenges of regaining competitiveness are central to the economic travails of 
Spain.  This  is  because  Spain  is  experiencing  a  balance  of  payments  crisis.  In  the  years 
following monetary union, Spain ran large intra-euro-area current account deficits, funded in 
part by foreign purchases of real estate and inflows to the Spanish banking system. When 
these dried up, domestic activity collapsed. There are few institutional mechanisms within the 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) at present to offset the shock. 
In Alberta’s case, a rising tide has lifted all boats. That is because the Canadian monetary 
union has what Europe does not: a single financial market; a flexible, national labour market; 
and  significant  fiscal  transfers.  These  smooth  the  adjustments  brought  about  by  the  large 
shifts in relative prices. 
Fiscal federalism helps to share risks 
Despite the equilibrating movement of real provincial exchange rates, shocks to our economy 
can still have a more significant impact on some regions than others. Since monetary policy 
works at an aggregate level to support aggregate demand, it cannot easily deal with such 
distributional consequences.  
                                                 
1  M.  Carney,  “Dutch  Disease,”  a  speech  delivered  at  the  Spruce  Meadows  Round  Table,  Calgary,  Alberta, 
7 September 2012. 
Internal trade has been supported by the removal of interprovincial barriers following the implementation of 
Canada’s Agreement on Internal Trade in 1995. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2 
2 
 Fiscal  transfers  are  thus  an  important  element  of  a  successful  monetary  union.  They  are 
sizeable  in  Canada,  representing  8  per  cent  of  GDP  across  all  levels  of  government 
(Charts 6 and 7). 
Canada’s  equalization  program  helps  stabilize  the  impact  of  asymmetric  shocks.  For 
example,  between  2006  and  2011,  federal  support  programs,  including  equalization 
payments and Canadian social and health transfers, grew more rapidly for provinces whose 
economies were hardest hit by the crisis (Chart 8).3  
The Employment Insurance program also shares risk. Through transfers to 2 per cent of the 
working-age  population, 
the  program  particularly  benefits  provinces  with  higher 
unemployment rates (Chart 9).  
In the medium term, one of the building blocks of European fiscal federalism could be a pan-
European employment insurance scheme built on a common European labour market. This 
would reduce impediments for those looking across the continent for work, while providing a 
cross-country automatic stabilizer. 
Labour market flexibility 
For  Canada  and  Canadians  to  work,  workers  must  be  able  to  move  to  different  jobs,  and 
wages must adjust to help maintain full employment. 
By international standards, the Canadian labour market is highly flexible, although there is 
still  room  for  improvement.4  Our  labour  mobility  as  a  whole  is  similar  to  that  in  the  United 
States. By some estimates, the Canadian labour market is almost four times as flexible as 
the European labour market.5  
An obvious example of this flexibility is the way that Canadians have responded to the higher 
wages and employment opportunities in the energy sector. Last year, there was a net inflow 
of  more  than  40,000  people  into  Alberta  from  the  rest  of  Canada,  a  level  of  mobility  that 
approaches its previous peak (Chart 10). 
As  a  consequence,  labour  markets  are  becoming  more  similar  across  the  provinces.  In 
particular,  the  dispersion  of  employment  rates  in  Canada  has  fallen  steadily  over  the  past 
30 years  to  levels  comparable  with  those  in  the  United  States.  Again  the  contrast  with 
Europe, where it has risen substantially, is striking (Chart 11). 
                                                 
3  The  amount  of  transfers  to  Alberta  has  been  adjusted  to  exclude  a  one-time  cash  increase  occurring  in  
2007–08 which resulted from a transitional change toward a per capita cost allocation. The decline in fiscal 
support for Newfoundland and Labrador is due to the fact that the province no longer qualifies for equalization 
payments (as of 2008/9). 
4  D. Amirault, D. de Munnik and S. Miller, “Explaining Canada’s Regional Migration Patterns,” Bank of Canada 
Review (Spring 2013): 16–28. 
5  Based on the 2006 Census, the migration rate in Canada was 4.6 per cent compared with 4.8 per cent for the 
United States. Bayoumi et al. (2006) find that Canadian labour markets respond in a similar manner to their 
U.S. counterparts and are more flexible than those in major euro-area countries, while Partridge and Rickman 
(2009) find little overall evidence to suggest that provincial labour markets are more sluggish or less flexible 
than  U.S.  state  labour  markets.  A  recent  report  by  McKinsey  &  Company  shows  that  cross-border  labour 
mobility  in  the  European  Union  is  low  (0.18  per  cent  in  2008).  See  T.  Bayoumi,  B.  Sutton  and  A.  Swiston, 
“Shocking  Aspects  of  Canadian  Labor  Markets,”  International  Monetary  Fund  Working  Paper  06/83, 
March 2006;  M.  Partridge  and  D.  Rickman,  “Canadian  Regional  Labour  Market  Evolutions:  A  Long-Run 
Restrictions SVAR Analysis,” Applied Economics, Taylor and Francis Journals, vol. 41(15), p. 1855–71, 2009; 
and  F. Mattern,  E.  Windhagen,  M.  Habbel,  J.  Mu?hoff,  H-H.  Kotz  and  W.  Rall, The  Future  of  the  Euro,  An 
Economic Perspective on the Eurozone Crisis, McKinsey & Co., January 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Bank  of  Canada  research  suggests  that  the  main  reason  behind  these  improvements  has 
been the increased sensitivity of provincial population growth to labour market opportunities 
– Canadians are going where the jobs are.6  
Finally,  wages  are  flexible  in  Canada.  Results  from  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  wage  setting 
survey indicate that, while firms are typically reluctant to reduce base wages, incentive pay 
offers a possible source of downward flexibility in total compensation.7 About 90 per cent of 
Canadian private sector firms currently use short-term incentive pay plans.8 Such risk sharing 
is  an  effective  way  to  maintain  employment  and  profitability  during  uncertain  and  volatile 
times. 
A resilient financial system 
An  important  lesson  from  Europe’s  experience  is  the  critical  role  that  a  sound  financial 
system  plays  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  It  helps  to  ensure  that 
changes in central bank policy are transmitted effectively to all regions to support growth and 
employment.  When  a  sizeable  share  of  a  country’s  banking  sector  has  (or  is  perceived  to 
have) deficient capital and liquidity positions, credit doesn’t flow to where it is needed. 
Recent  experience  in  Europe  has  shown  the  particular  problems  a  monetary  union  faces 
when banks become less willing to lend across borders within the union. This fragmentation 
has  reinforced  the  links  between  sovereign  and  bank  solvency.  As  European  leaders  now 
recognise,  without  major  reforms  to  create  a  banking  union,  EMU  is  fundamentally 
weakened. 
In Canada, the existence of largely centralized prudential regulation and deposit insurance 
pools  risk  across  the  country.  When  combined  with  a  large  number  of  national  banking 
institutions,  this  greatly  reduces  the  risk  that  localized  economic  and  financial  disruptions 
impair provincial solvency. 
Since  the  strength  of  the  Canadian  banking  system  has  been  well  documented,  I  will 
concentrate on Canada’s sound regulatory framework. Its key elements are:  
First,  supervision  is  focused  and  proactive.  Consolidated  prudential  supervision  is  not 
burdened  by  other  objectives  such  as  the  promotion  of  home  ownership  or  community 
reinvestment.  The  staged  intervention  approach  of  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of 
Financial Institutions (OSFI) means it works with institutions to correct problems at an early 
stage, while they are still manageable. 
Second, efforts to promote financial stability are coordinated. Federal authorities consistently 
share information, coordinate actions, and pool advice to the federal government on financial 
sector  policy.  Most  notable  in  this  regard  has  been  a  series  of  actions  to  slow  the  rate  of 
increase  in  household  debt.  The  Bank  of  Canada  also  works  with  provincial  authorities  to 
implement a number of global initiatives. 
Third, Canada has clear and credible recovery and resolution mechanisms, including lender-
of-last-resort policies, a deposit insurance scheme with risk-weighted premiums, and bridge-
banking powers that enable the rapid closure of failing institutions and the swift re-opening of 
their viable operations. In its most recent budget, the federal government announced it will 
consult  stakeholders  on  how  best  to  implement  a  bail-in  regime  to  recapitalize  failing 
                                                 
6  D. Leung and S. Cao, “The Changing Pace of Labour Reallocation in Canada: Causes and Consequences,” 
Bank of Canada Review (Summer 2009): 31–41. 
7  D.  Amirault,  P.  Fenton  and  T.  Laflèche,  “Asking  About  Wages:  Results  from  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  Wage 
Setting Survey of Canadian Companies,” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper 2013-1, February 2013. 
8  Conference Board of Canada, Compensation Planning Outlook 2013, October 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Canadian banks that are systemically important to our domestic economy through the very 
rapid conversion of certain bank liabilities into regulatory capital.  
Fourth, bank capital regulation is prudent. Prior to the crisis, Canadian capital requirements 
were higher than international norms thanks to OSFI’s insistence that common equity form a 
large share of required capital. Since the crisis, Canadian banks have become considerably 
stronger. Their common equity capital has increased by 80 per cent, or $77 billion, and they 
already meet the new Basel III capital requirements six full years ahead of schedule. 
Finally, the entire financial framework is regularly reviewed and updated, in accord with the 
statutory  requirement  to  renew  the  federal  legislative  and  regulatory  framework  for  the 
financial system every five years. This has proven invaluable given the pace of change in the 
financial  system.  In  addition,  Canada’s  regulatory  system  is  subject  to  regular,  rigorous 
external examinations.  
A massive and disciplined policy response 
Allow  me  to  review.  The  structure  of  the  Canadian  economy,  the  risk  sharing  across  the 
federation, labour market flexibility and financial stability together meant that Canada could 
adjust quickly to the shock of the global financial crisis. 
It also meant that when Canadian policy-makers responded, they were able to do so swiftly 
and massively.  
During the crisis, the Bank of Canada aggressively cut our policy rate until it reached one-
quarter  of  one  per  cent,  the  lowest  it  can  effectively  go.  The  Bank  then  provided 
extraordinary guidance on the likely path of interest rates necessary to achieve the inflation 
target in order to maximise the monetary stimulus from its policy rate. 
Canada’s inflation-targeting regime was a critical anchor during those turbulent times. It gave 
the Bank a simple, unwavering goal to guide its policy actions. It provided financial markets 
and  Canadians  with  a  clear  means  to  understand  why  the  Bank  did  what  it  did.  And  that 
understanding  kept  inflation  expectations  well  anchored  around  the  2  per  cent  target 
throughout the period, maximising the stimulative impact of our policies. 
Although  fiscal  policy  is  always  less  nimble  than  monetary  policy,  it  also  responded 
aggressively. Government expenditures rose by almost 3 percentage points of GDP within a 
year, with government contributing about one-third of GDP growth in 2010 (Chart 12). 
The effectiveness of fiscal policy was underpinned by Canada’s strong fiscal position. 
From  the  mid-1990s  onwards,  successive  governments  ran  more  than  a  decade  of 
surpluses,  cutting  the  government  debt-to-GDP  ratio  from  almost  70  per  cent  in  1995  to 
22 per  cent  in  2008.  As  a  result,  Canada’s  net  debt  relative  to  GDP  went  from  being  the 
second-highest ratio among the G-7 countries in 1995 to the lowest (Chart 13). 
This fiscal flexibility provided leeway for governments to respond while maintaining our credit 
standing at the highest levels. 
Having clear policy frameworks has disciplined the post-crisis response. Fiscal consolidation 
has begun, with the combined deficits of all levels of government falling from 4.8 per cent in 
2009 to an expected 2.8 per cent this year.9  
Disciplined by its inflation target and reflecting the relative strength of the economy, the Bank 
of Canada was the only G-7 central bank not to engage in quantitative easing, and we have 
been  the  only  one  to  move  away  from  emergency  settings  of  interest  rates.  In  addition, 
mindful of the risks to financial stability arising from rapid increases in household debt, the 
                                                 
9 
International Monetary Fund, Fiscal Monitor, Statistical Table 1, April 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Bank  has  maintained  a  tightening  bias  on  interest  rates  over  the  past  year,  in  part  to 
complement efforts of the federal government and OSFI to achieve a constructive evolution 
of household debt. 
Conclusion 
In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, the broad economic strategy in Canada has been to 
grow domestic demand and to encourage Canadian businesses to retool and reorient to the 
new global economy. 
Stimulative monetary and fiscal policies proved highly effective in supporting robust growth in 
domestic demand, particularly household expenditures, which grew to record levels. 
As effective as it has been, the limits of this growth model have been clear for some time. We 
cannot  grow  indefinitely  by  relying  on  Canadian  households  increasing  their  borrowing 
relative to income (Chart 14). Nor can residential investment remain near a record share of 
GDP, particularly given signs of overbuilding and overvaluation in segments of the real estate 
market. 
Domestic  demand,  which  pulled  Canada  out  of  the  recession,  is  now  slowing.  Consumer 
spending is expected to grow at a moderate pace over the next few years. The Bank expects 
residential investment to decline further from historically high levels. The contribution of direct 
government expenditures should be modest for some time, consistent with the ongoing need 
to consolidate budgetary positions. 
Thus,  the  challenge  for  Canada  is to  rotate  the  sources  of  growth  toward  net  exports  and 
business investment.  
Exports are currently more than $130 billion less than they would have been had this been a 
“typical” postwar recovery (Chart 15). 
In the short term, the  Bank forecasts some rebalancing and a pickup in real GDP growth. 
However, relative to previous cycles, investment is expected to remain below average and 
the contribution of net exports to be very weak (Chart 16). 
Is that really the best we can do? 
Yes, there are immense uncertainties in the world economy, but we need to focus on what 
we can control. We cannot save the euro or fix America’s fiscal challenges.  
Should we just wait out a decade-long deleveraging process in the rest of the G-7? Or should 
we control our destiny by building on our strengths in the new global environment? 
To find and compete in new markets will require a concerted, multi-year effort by workers, 
firms and governments. These efforts should be guided by three principles. 
Openness is better than protectionism. Trade brings innovation, growth and jobs. That is 
why Canada is pursuing a series of bilateral trade discussions with economies such as the 
European Union and India, and will participate in the multilateral negotiations of the Trans-
Pacific Partnership involving a number of Asian countries. Emerging-market economies do 
not just account for one-half of all of global import growth, they also are essential to securing 
Canada’s positions in global supply chains. 
Economic  flexibility  is  essential.  Markets  change,  industries  rise  and  fall,  exciting  new 
products emerge and then become commoditized. In a rapidly shifting world, only sustained 
education,  ingenuity  and  investment  can  maintain  competitiveness.  This  means  we  must 
continuously invest in our workforce. With technology and trade transforming the workplace, 
the need to improve skills across the spectrum of work has never been greater. 
Sound macroeconomic policy is the cornerstone of prosperity. Fiscal profligacy erodes 
economic sovereignty; price stability is paramount. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The advantages I have discussed today are self-reinforcing. Our monetary union  – with its 
resilient, national financial system at its core – gives monetary and fiscal policy traction. A 
strong fiscal position means that Canadian governments have had the flexibility to respond 
as  needed.  Our  principles-based  macroeconomic  policy  frameworks  help  ensure  that 
extraordinary  actions  do  not  give  rise  to  extraordinary  fears.  And  the  discipline  they  instil 
means that stimulus will be withdrawn appropriately as threats diminish. 
All of this has meant that, unlike the rest of the G-7, Canada does not need to repair.  
To keep Canada working, we need to build. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
      10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  14 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
