Anselmo Teng: The ascent of new currencies in a multipolar world 
Address by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the Central 
Bank  of  Brazil  –  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF)  inaugural 
meeting  in  Latin  America  “Latin  America’s  place  in  the  new  international  financial  and 
monetary architecture”, Central Bank of Brasil, Brasilia, 18 June 2013. 
 Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions 
Forum  (OMFIF)  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil  (BCB)  for  their  invitation  and 
hospitality. It is indeed an honour for me to participate in the Inaugural Meeting of 
OMFIF in Latin America. I am especially pleased to have the opportunity to share 
with you my thoughts about The Ascent of New Currencies in a Multicurrency World, 
through a perspective from the other side of the globe. 
Traditional reserve currencies and alternative currencies 
2. 
Recent  financial  crises  in  advanced  economies  have  wrecked  havoc  in  financial 
markets of emerging-market economies (EMEs), including those of Asia with strong 
economic  fundamentals.  The  extensive  use  of  traditional  reserve  currencies  in 
merchandise-trade  invoicing  and  settlement  has  created  uncertainty  in  bilateral 
trade  between  EMEs,  even  though  this  sort  of  trade  does  not  involve  advanced-
economy  partners.  Wild  fluctuations  of  cross  rates  among  non-reserve  currencies 
have  inhibited  normal  trade  flows  among  EMEs,  hampering  the  comparative 
advantage  of  their  exporting  sector.  Also,  the  vulnerability  towards  the  access  to 
funding  of  reserve  currencies  during  stress  periods  has  generated  pressure  on 
offshore  interbank  markets,  which  proves  to  be  contagious  and  spread  to  trade 
finance  activities.  This  sequence  of  events  underscores  the  practical  need  to 
promote  the  use  of  regional  currencies  in  intra-regional  trade  and  to  facilitate 
increased  use  of  non-traditional  reserve  currencies  in  international  trade  and 
finance. 
According to a recent World Trade Organisation paper on the use of currencies in 
international  trade,  almost  all  non-reserve  currencies  are  viewed  as  underutilised, 
i.e.  their  shares  in  world  payments  are  far  less  than  their  shares  in  international 
trade.  On  the  contrary,  the  use  of  major  reserve  currencies  disproportionately 
exceeds  their  shares  in  international  trade.  It  is  also  observed  that  reserve 
currencies  are  widely  used  in  third-party  trade,  i.e.  trade  actually  not  involving 
reserve currency-issuing countries. Therefore, there is plenty of room for alternative 
currencies  to  grow,  especially  in  terms  of  use  in  bilateral  trade  between  EMEs 
themselves. 
Currencies  of  major  EMEs,  in  particular  the  renminbi  (RMB),  the  currency  of  the 
second largest economy in the world by GDP and international trade, have exhibited 
their  potential  to  broaden  their  use  in  international  transactions.  Such  a  lasting 
phenomenon of re-balancing not only allows the international circulation of regional 
currencies to better reflect their countries’ increasing proportion to international trade 
and  economic  gravity,  but  also  lessen  monetary  shocks  spilt  over  from  advanced 
economies to EMEs. 
According to global economic statistics, the US is the biggest economy in the world. 
Its GDP in 2012 amounted to USD15.7 trillion. China ranked second as the GDP in 
2012 went up to USD8.2 trillion, equivalent to 52.2% of that of the US while Japan 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
6. 
7. 
the  other  hand, 
ranked  third.  An  analysis  of  the  import/export  value  of  these  three  nations  will 
produce another set of more convincing data. The US imports about USD2.3 trillion 
annually  while  China’s  import  has  risen  to  USD1.8 trillion  yearly.  It  is  worth 
mentioning  that  China  has  all  along  been  a  big  export  country.  The  increase  in 
import  purports  enhancement  of  its  national  might  and  increasing  demand  arising 
from its consumer market. The third biggest global economy Japan has an annual 
import  of  only  USD880 billion,  less  than  half  of  China’s  figure.  The  country  which 
closely  follows  China  in  this  respect  is  Germany  with  an  annual  import  of 
USD1.2 trillion. 
From  the  above,  we  can  see  that  China,  as  one  of  the  emerging  markets,  is 
gradually  changing  its  role  in  the  international  trade  from  “world  factory”  of 
manufactured goods for export to an important import country in the world. It was 
announced in a recent international forum that in the next five years, China would 
import  goods  valued  at  about  USD10 trillion,  while  overseas  investment  would 
amount  to  USD500 billion.  Outbound  visitors  from  China  would  reach  400 million. 
On 
reached 
USD241.5 billion in 2011, twenty times that of the year 2000. It is forecasted that it 
will reach USD400 billion in five years’ time. Being the number one trading partner of 
Brazil,  China’s  export  to  Brazil  reached  USD33.4 billion,  while  import  from  Brazil 
reached  USD52 billion,  making  a  total  turnover  of  USD85.4 billion  in  2012.  The 
economic  development  forecast  reflects  the  commitment  of  China  in  global 
economic  development,  which  has  injected  vitality  to  motivate  the  growth  of  the 
world economy. 
As  aforementioned,  China  has  transformed  into  a  significant  importing  country.  In 
the  process  of  trade  activities,  it  should  have  more  say  in  picking  the  settlement 
currency  for  the  transactions,  through  which  more  frequent  use  of  RMB  in  cross-
border transaction can be facilitated. The process of the internationalization of the 
RMB can thus be enhanced. In July 2009, the People’s Bank of China and relevant 
ministries  of  the  State  Council  of  China  jointly  promulgated  the  “Management  of 
Cross-Border RMB Trade Settlement Pilot Programme”, which was a pivotal step of 
the  endeavour  to  promote  the  internationalization  of  the  RMB. With  the  incessant 
expansion of the pilot units, virtually all Mainland enterprises which are qualified to 
import and export can have a free hand in using the RMB to settle all transactions 
with their trade partners globally. 
trade  between  China  and  Latin  America 
The Macau Special Administrative Region (MSAR) and its banking system 
8. 
Macau is a special administrative region of China. Since its return to the Motherland 
on  20  December  1999,  the  overall  economy  of  Macao  has  been  expanding  at  a 
compound  rate  of  12.4%  p.a.  In  2012,  per  capita  income  exceeded  USD76,000. 
Macao is always an advocate of free market system, there is no exchange control; 
the financial markets and institutions operate freely; there is free flow of funds into 
and  out  of the  MSAR,  which  together  laid  down  the foundation  of  its fine  system. 
There are 29 banks operating in the Macao banking system. They are of different 
origins: Mainland China, Chinese Taiwan, HKSAR, Singapore, the US, the UK and 
Portugal. 
As of April 2013, RMB deposits in Macao accounts for about 10% of the deposits in 
the  banking  system.  There  is  a  marked  progress  in  the  RMB  cross-border  trade 
settlement  despite  a  slow  start.  Cross-border  trade  settlement  transacted  in  2011 
increased substantially by 10 times from 2010 and the value in 2012 continued to 
record an increase of over 60%. In the first quarter this year, the substantial growth 
continued;  the  value  of  cross-border  trade  settlement  rose  by  almost  80%  and 
already reached 40% that of last year. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
9. 
 
10. 
• 
  its 
RMB services and products in the Macao banking system 
RMB business only covered individuals and selected sectors when it first started in 
Macau  in  2004. With  years  of  development  and  policy  support,  Macao  banks can 
provide  overseas  corporations  a  variety  of  RMB  services  and  products,  including 
deposit-taking, currency exchange, remittance, financing, and wealth management 
etc. All corporations including overseas companies can open RMB deposit account 
and  exchange  RMB  with  banks  in  Macao.  Banks  operating  in  Macao  can  offer 
foreign  corporations  diversified  trade  settlement  services  and  products,  such  as 
RMB trade settlement account; RMB exchange and remittance for trade settlement 
purpose etc., as well as tailor-made RMB import and export trade finance. Banks in 
Macao can also offer corporations a full range of RMB commercial financing as well 
as RMB non-deliverable forward (NDF) and RMB deliverable forward (DF) to help 
corporations  hedge  against  RMB  exposures.  Commercial  entities  and  financial 
institutions can issue RMB bonds in Macao. They can also apply RMB funds directly 
in  the  investment  products  offered  by  the  banks  in  Macao,  or  via  Macao  in  the 
offshore RMB market in Hong Kong. 
Reasons to consider doing RMB business through Macao 
Macao has been exploiting its special geographical and historical condition in 
performing 
liaison  platform  function  between  Mainland  China  and 
Portuguese-speaking countries – Macao is the only city in China to maintain such 
special  relationship  with  Portuguese  speaking  countries  (including  Angola,  Brazil, 
Cape  Verde,  East  Timor,  Guinea  Bissau,  Mozambique,  Portugal  and  St  Tomé  e 
Principe).  The  Central  Government  of  China  attaches  much  importance  to  it.  As 
early  as  in  2003,  the  standing  secretariat  of  the  “Forum  for  Cooperation  and 
Development  between  China  and  Portuguese  Speaking  Countries”  was  set  up  in 
Macao. In November 2010, the then Premier of the State Council, Mr. Wen Jiabao, 
visited  Macao  for  the  3rd  Ministerial  Meeting  of  the  “Forum  for  Economic 
Cooperation between China and Portuguese Speaking Countries”. He announced a 
series  of  policy  measures  to  promote  Macao  to  be  the  platform  for  economic 
cooperation  between  the  countries.  He  hoped  that  Macao  would  perform  “core 
function”  in  promoting  RMB  trade  settlement  in  the  process,  which  would  further 
embody Macao’s position as platform for economic cooperation between China and 
Lusophone  countries.  In  fact,  Macao  is  also  in  a  good  position  to  extend  this 
platform function to countries in Latin America. 
Recently,  there  is  an  increasing  rise  in  economic  activities  between  China  and 
Lusophone  countries.  Trade  volume  with  the  8  Lusophone  countries  amounted  to 
USD128.8 billion  in  2012,  which  was  a  10.1%  increase  year-on-year.  There  is  a 
great demand in the market for related financial services. Macao can fully embody 
its platform function by providing solid financial support services for trade. With this 
competitive edge and as platform, the aforementioned RMB banking services and 
products can be targeted towards Lusophone countries. They can also be extended 
to countries in Latin America. 
The financial cooperation between Macao and Portuguese-speaking countries 
has  gained  remarkable  achievements  –  Some  Chinese-based  banks  in  Macao 
have executed business cooperation agreements with financial institutions in some 
Portuguese-speaking  countries.  For  instance,  the  Bank  of  China  (Macao  Branch) 
has  signed  protocols  with  Banco  de  Fomento  Angola  S.A.R.L.,  Moza  Banco,S.A. 
and  Banco  BPI  S.A.  Also,  ICBC  Macao  has  signed  cooperation  agreements  with 
Banco Espírito Santo and Millennium BCP. Meanwhile, the parent banking groups of 
branches  of  Portuguese  banks  in  Macao  have  extensive  banking  networks  in 
Lusophone  countries.  On  the  other  hand,  through  the  branches  or  subsidiaries 
established in Macao, Mainland banks have also strengthened their interaction with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
RMB as an investment instrument 
11. 
overseas  counterparts. The  interaction  and  cooperation  between  Chinese  banking 
groups  and  Portuguese  banking  groups  through  Macao  as  the  platform  can  be 
extended and utilized. The network can also be very much extended. 
The development of the RMB as an investment instrument has increasingly drawn 
global  attention.  Only  within  a  few  years,  billions  of  “Dim-Sum”  bonds,  CDs  and 
investment funds have been developed in the offshore RMB market of Hong Kong. 
The extensions of the QFII and RQFII scheme also allow elegible investors different 
choices of investment products onshore and offshore. The city of Shanghai is now 
busy in setting up all necessary financial architecture and facilities, as it is on its way 
to  be  the  onshore  RMB  centre.  Such  facilities  include  RMB  Asset  Management 
Centre,  RMB  Cross  Border  Settlement  Centre  and  RMB  Financial  Products 
Innovation Centre etc. On the other hand, the Guangdong Province, the pioneering 
region for China’s economic reforms, has formulated major development projects in 
Qianhai  and  Hengqing  for  RMB  businesses,  both  are  regarded  as  pioneering 
regions for financial businesses developments amongst others. 
The Monetary Authority of Macao, in the course of managing the fiscal reserve of 
the government, has invested in the onshore market through the CIBM quota (i.e. 
China Interbank Bond Market quota) approved by the People’s Bank of China. We 
also  invest  in  the  RMB  offshore  market  in  Hong  Kong  as  a  supplement  to  the 
onshore RMB portfolio. From a more global perspective and looking ahead, along 
with  an  increasing  weight  in  the  RMB  in  global  trade  settlement  and  a  rising 
investment interests from abroad, the internationalization path of the currency would 
lead  to  more  market  opportunities,  both  for  the  domestic  mainland  investors  and 
offshore international investors. 
For  currencies  of  major  EMEs  such  as  the  RMB  to  gain  shares  being  occupied 
disproportionately  by  traditional  reserve  currencies,  their  financial  markets  would 
need to be further reformed to make them large, liquid and internationalised, against 
the backdrop of a consistent relaxation in foreign exchange control policies. These 
markets  should  be  made  accessible  to  non-residents  on  demand  and  be  able  to 
supply the currencies in sufficient quantities. 
At the moment, there is a clear division of labour between the two leading financial 
centres of China; Shanghai is the onshore RMB Centre and is in good progress in 
developing as an international financial center while Hong Kong focuses on offshore 
activities.  The  development  of  other  offshore  RMB  center  such  as  London, 
Singapore and Chinese Taiwan are also picking up speed. 
Macao’s  strong  relationship  with  Hong  Kong,  Shanghai  and  the  Guangdong 
province,  coupled  with  its  unique  ties  with  Portuguese-speaking  countries,  clearly 
facilitate  the  SAR’s  development  into  a  service  platform for  the fast-growing  trade 
and  investment  activities  between  Mainland  China  and  Portuguese-speaking 
countries,  as  well  as  other  countries  including countries  in  Latin  America. With  its 
open and stable financial system, Macao is well-prepared to actively engage in the 
next step of the internationalisation of RMB and the apparent ascent of the RMB in a 
multicurrency world. 
Finally, I am glad that I have the opportunity to share your experiences and thoughts 
on  this  subject.  May  I  also  wish  every  success  for  this  inaugural  Main  Meeting. 
Thank you!  
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
