Josef Bonnici: The changing nature of economic and financial 
governance following the euro area crisis 
Introductory remarks by Professor Josef Bonnici, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at 
the Malta Financial Services Authority, Attard, 17 January 2013. 
 the  European  monetary  union  was  always  contingent  on 
The  success  of 
three 
considerations.  The  first  requirement  is  the  maintenance  of  fiscal  discipline;  the  second  is 
effective financial regulation and the third condition is the management and minimization of 
macroeconomic imbalances. In reality, these requirements were often not met. In fact, there 
was a general lack of awareness of their importance.  
For the past several years, the headlines have been dominated by the ramifications of the 
European crisis, which was first manifested in the banking system and then in sovereign debt 
markets, and subsequently in the economic slowdown and related problems that followed the 
introduction of fiscal consolidation.  
The European Central Bank has engaged in a wide range of policy measures that seek to 
expand  liquidity  and  restore  normal  conditions  in  the  banking  sector  and  in  the  financial 
markets.  These  monetary  policy  measures  include  conventional  or  standard  measures, 
which have reduced policy rates to very low levels.  
In addition the ECB has adopted various non-standard measures, which have included long 
term refinancing operations that inject ample liquidity into the financial system. The ECB has 
gone  a  step further  by  announcing  an  Outright Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  programme. 
This is designed to repair the link between policy rate cuts and ample liquidity provision, on 
the one hand, and lower borrowing costs, on the other. It is also meant to counter the so-
called redenomination or convertibility premium that compensates investors for the perceived 
risk  of  a  breakup  of  the  monetary  union.  OMT  are  actually  equivalent  to  traditional  open 
market operations that central banks have long resorted to in order to provide stability and a 
better  functioning  of  the  monetary  transmission  process  that  can  get  impaired  in  certain 
circumstances.  
The  unfolding  of  the  crisis  has  revealed  various  intertwined  dimensions  of  the  existing 
fragilities and a broad range of imbalances. In various ways, the problems that are evident in 
the euro area are of a structural nature, resulting in a number of governance reforms that are 
currently  underway.  Inappropriate  banking  practices,  weak  regulatory  frameworks,  fiscal 
slippage and deterioration in competitiveness are now recognised as the main sources of the 
crisis. 
A fundamental aspect of the banking crisis is the failure of regulation, which allowed financial 
institutions to engage in excessive risk that was not matched by adequate capital protection. 
Systemic risk was exacerbated via strong linkages between financial institutions.  
Economic fragilities were worsened by the burden imposed on government budgets by bank 
bail-outs,  the  lack  of  market  funding  available  to  sovereigns,  and  the  negative  impact  of 
sovereign debt downgrades on bank balance sheets. Lack of trust spread across the euro 
area, with this contagion creating a mutually reinforcing loop between weak sovereigns and 
bank credit conditions. Although policies have now been in crisis management mode for five 
years, the interbank market has yet to return to its normal state, reflecting the extent of the 
lingering damage within the financial sector.  
To a considerable extent, the common currency masked vulnerabilities related to the build-up 
of various imbalances, since such imbalances could no longer be addressed by exchange 
rate corrections.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
These factors have raised questions on the viability of the European single currency model 
as  this  has  perhaps  failed  to  achieve  the  targets  it  was  primarily  set-up  for. The  extent  of 
these fragilities is reflected in Chart 1, which shows a convergence in sovereign yields in the 
run-up to the formation of the monetary union, followed by a decade-long stability.  
In retrospect the low yields were clearly not consistent with the underlying fiscal positions or 
economic fundamentals at the national level. Indeed, low interest rates enabled governments 
to  pile  on  additional  debt  at  relatively  cheap  interest  costs.  This  period  coincided  with 
deterioration  in  competitiveness  and  wider  current  account  deficits  as  peripheral  countries 
continued to finance such deficits via capital inflows. Eventually, when markets switched their 
focus to economic sustainability, the flow of capital reversed direction, sovereign debt was 
downgraded and yield spreads widened dramatically, as seen in Chart 1.  
 
Chart  2  provides  a  contrast  between  two  groups  of  countries.  It  focuses  on  the  current 
accounts  of  euro  area  countries  (as  per  cent  of  GDP)  and  shows  the  difference  between 
various countries running generally current account surpluses, and selected countries in the 
periphery  with  a  negative  balance.  These  deficits  are  financed  by  a  corresponding  capital 
flow in the opposite direction.  
For each year, the upper band depicts the range of current account surpluses for a group of 
countries that include Germany, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. Similarly, the lower range 
depicts  the  corresponding  range  of  deficits  for  Cyprus,  Greece,  Italy,  Portugal  and  Spain. 
The divide between the groups is notable and it is not surprising that those countries in the 
lower part of the chart featured prominently in the unfolding crisis. Eventually, when markets 
reoriented  their  focus  towards  economic  unsustainability,  the  flow  of  capital  reversed 
direction; market discipline now took the form of capital flight.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
Governance problems are perhaps better understood by looking more closely at the origins 
of  the  Greek  situation.  On  the  fiscal  side,  Greece  was  not  adhering  with  the  Maastricht 
criteria  while  its  competitiveness  was  being  eroded.  This  situation  was  aggravated  since 
government spending was underreported.  
Writing  in  2011,  Ioannis  Sarmas,  my  former  colleague  at  the  European  Court  of  Auditors, 
presented three dimensions of the Greek governance problem: “[first] the lack of an internal 
control  system  allowing  the  government  to  pilot  the  country  out  of  turbulence  zone; 
[secondly]  the  absence  of  a  culture  of  accountability  requiring  public  fund  managers  to 
demonstrate  the  results  achieved  and  finally  …  the  inadequate  powers  for  the  auditing 
mechanisms preventing them from focusing on the waste of public money.”1
  
Governance reforms  
I  will  now  move  on  to  major  reforms  at  the  European  level  that  are  addressed  to  correct 
weaknesses in governance.  
On the fiscal side, governance has been enhanced by the strengthening of the Stability and 
Growth Pact. There appears to be broad consensus that to avert the recurrence of the crisis, 
fiscal consolidation should be enshrined in the governance structure of every country.  
Surveillance  is  enhanced  and  the  monitoring  of  economic  policies  is  becoming  more 
comprehensive.  To  this  end,  the  Fiscal  Compact  obliges  all  euro  area  countries  to  run  a 
structurally  balanced  budget.  In  particular,  the  problem  of  sustainable  budget  planning  is 
addressed  by  introducing  a  country-specific  medium-term  budgetary  objective,  which 
involves a cap on growth of public expenditure that is in line with the medium-term rate of 
                                                
1  
Ioannis  Sarmas  “The  Greek  financial  crisis  from  an  auditor’s  point  of  view”  Cour  des  comptes  européenne 
Journal July–August 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the macro-prudential mandate of national authorities;  
lending in foreign currencies;  
US dollar-denominated funding of credit institutions.  
growth.  The  Fiscal  Compact  also  accelerates  the  application  of  the  excessive  deficit 
procedure by introducing sanctions when the debt and deficit to GDP ratios are excessive.  
Fiscal surveillance has been extended to a broader excessive imbalances procedure, which 
goes  beyond  fiscal  imbalances  and  seeks  to  identify  and  correct  a  range  of  macro 
imbalances and shortcomings in competitiveness. In fact, various euro area member states 
ran  into  problems  despite  of  their  adherence  to  the  SGP  criteria,  to  the  extent  that  they 
nonetheless manifested other types of imbalances, such as excessive private indebtedness. 
Preventive  recommendations  are  provided  to  member  countries  at  an  early  stage  in  the 
formation of imbalances.  
The severity of the financial crisis has also exposed the inadequacy of the current financial-
sector  regulation  and  supervision.  As  already  indicated,  macro-prudential  risks  were 
overlooked and the link between sovereigns and banks was underestimated. In reaction to 
this,  European  institutions  and  member  states  have  engaged  in  a  major  overhaul  of  bank 
regulation and supervision with the objective of creating safer, sounder and more transparent 
financial institutions.  
One of the major initiatives to strengthen the governance framework was the establishment 
of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). In its first year of operation, the ESRB tackled 
key issues relating to the interaction between three factors: the creditworthiness of European 
sovereigns,  the  increasing  difficulty  of  banks  in  raising  funds,  and  weakening  economic 
growth. Furthermore, the ESRB adopted three public recommendations on:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
It is important to note that the voting members of the General Board of the ESRB include the 
Governors  of  National  Central  Banks.  Indeed,  ESRB  activities  are  based  on  strong 
cooperation between its members. A key part of the ESRB’s work is to combine the analysis 
produced  by  the  micro-supervisors  and  central  banks.  Clearly,  the  central  bank’s  role  of 
ensuring  financial  stability  has  extended  to  the  international  level,  implying  further 
responsibility in decision-making.  
In Malta, the cooperation between micro- and macro-supervision is embodied in the setting 
up  of the  Joint  Financial  Stability  Board.  The  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  in  its  capacity  as  the 
macro-prudential  authority,  has  agreed  with  the  MFSA  to  set  up  a  Joint  Financial  Stability 
Board  which  will  be  formally  constituted  in  a  few  weeks.  The  objective  is  to  enhance  the 
cooperation between the two bodies for the assurance of the stability of the financial system. 
The intention is to strengthen the resilience of the financial system and to mitigate the build-
up  of  systemic  risks.  To  these  ends,  the  Board’s  mandate  includes  the  development  of 
mechanisms  that  would  identify  risks  to  financial  stability,  and  the  establishment  of  the 
necessary macro-prudential policy tools. The Joint Financial Stability Board will also be able 
to make recommendations to the CBM or MFSA boards on macro or micro prudential issues, 
as  the  case  may  be.  The  board  is  also  responsible  for  the  follow-up  of  recommendations 
made by the ESRB.  
A further euro area governance reform relates to the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
which involves the establishment of effective and early intervention mechanisms. The SSM 
endows the ECB with the ultimate responsibility for specific supervisory tasks related to the 
financial  stability  of  Euro  area  banks.  The  rationale  for  a  single  supervisory  mechanism 
comes  from  the  increasing  interconnectedness  between  financial  institutions  and  markets 
across the euro area.  
In addition, the proposed banking union does not only provide for the shifting of supervision 
of  banks  to  the  European  level,  as  in  SSM,  but  also  brings  up  for  consideration  the 
introduction  of  an  integrated  system  of  bank  crisis  management  and  deposit  protection. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Various  recent  reports,  such  as  those  authored  by  Liikanen,  Volcker  and  Vickers, 
recommend a structural reform of the banking sector. The proposed reforms are designed to 
limit  the  likelihood  of  banking  crisis,  improve  the  resolvability  of  banks  and  safeguard 
taxpayer interests. Furthermore, the Liikanen Group concludes “that it is necessary to require 
legal  separation  of  certain  particularly  risky  financial  activities  from  deposit-taking  banks 
within a banking group.”  
Conclusion  
Regardless  of  the  particulars  of  the  eventual  governance  changes,  it  is  clear  that  the 
economic  and  financial  crisis  has  been  the  spark  for  reforms  that  may  reshape  economic 
institutions and financial supervision at both the national and international levels. These high-
level governance reform changes will also filter down to the corporate level, especially at the 
level of financial institutions, affecting also borrowers and lenders across the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
