Andrew Bailey: The new approach to financial regulation 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  at  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Chartered 
Banker Dinner 2013, Edinburgh, 1 May 2013. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here this evening for the Chartered Banker Dinner. President, in 
the description of tonight’s dinner you made the important point that the Chartered Institute 
supports “ordinary” bankers providing a vital service to their customers at a very difficult time. 
I want to speak tonight about the importance of those vital services. 
The fact of the matter is that banks are in the dog house, and for reasons that are very well 
documented  I  am  afraid.  But,  in  saying  that,  it  would  be  wrong  to  believe  that  this  makes 
banks  irrelevant  and  unwanted.  On  the  contrary,  the  financial  crisis  has  through  adversity 
reminded us of the importance of banks to the functioning and health of the economy and 
their  role  as  providers  of  critical  financial  services.  Going  back  in  history,  it  was  Walter 
Bagehot  in  the  1870s  who  argued  that  the  development  of  joint  stock  banks  played  an 
important part in the growth of the mid-nineteenth century British economy with its very high 
degree  of  openness  to  world  trade.  Scotland  played  a  very  major  part  in  that  period  of 
economic  development,  and  in  the  first  official  history  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Sir  John 
Clapham recorded that the Scots loved their banks. 
Banks were then important institutions supporting the industrialisation of the British economy 
and the trading system that fostered this growth. There is no difference today as the purpose 
of banks remains to support activity in the real economy, most obviously by intermediating 
between  savers  and  borrowers  to  enable  credit  creation.  Now  an  observer  could  easily 
intervene and say “yes, but, what I observe is that they have developed funny ways of going 
about it” – complicated products, likewise impenetrable slicing and dicing and re-packaging, 
all with the end of supporting bankers’ remuneration on a vast scale. There is some truth of 
course  in  that  observation,  but  let’s  not  forget  that  there  is  a  permanent  interest  of  public 
policy to ensure the continuous provision of critical financial services to the real economy of 
this  country,  that  is  protecting  savings,  enabling  payments,  credit  creation  etc. What  goes 
with this is a very sharp public policy interest in the state of the banking system. This will not 
change  and  nor  should  it  –  banks  are  too  important  to  lose  sight  of  them  in  ways  that 
happened in the past. 
The  job  of  prudential  regulators  is  to  maintain  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking 
system to ensure the continuity of those critical services to the economy and to the public. 
The  crisis  has  been  a  searing  experience  for  banks  and  regulators,  precisely  because  at 
times they have both failed to fulfil this central objective of maintaining safety and soundness 
and hence the continuous supply of critical services to the public. 
For what is now not far short of three years we have been working to change the approach to 
financial regulation in the UK. We are still working to do that of course, but the difference is 
that  for  the  last  four  and  half  weeks  we  have  been  doing  so  within  the  new  regulatory 
framework of regulation – we are doing it now as the Prudential Regulation Authority and the 
Financial Conduct Authority. The prompt for this change of approach has been the severity of 
the financial crisis, a crisis that has been through a searing phase of prudential problems – 
failing  banks  –  and  more  recently  a  conduct  phase  as  the  misdeeds  and  unacceptable 
behaviours of the past have been revealed. 
On  a  personal  note,  recently  when  my  appointment  was  announced,  I  was  described  a 
number of times as a veteran of the Bank of England. It was for me a moment of home truth; 
28 years is quite a long time in one place, even if the term veteran sits uncomfortably. But it 
reminded me that the UK is on its fourth system of financial regulation during that time. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to  Parliament  and 
serious message from this is that institutional structures do matter for the success of public 
policy goals and objectives. 
The last major reform of the institutional structure in this field was  in 1997, when the then 
Government reformed monetary policymaking and financial regulation. The results of these 
changes were very different. The MPC has in my view been a good example of a successful 
institutional structure. You can argue with what the MPC decides month-by month, you can 
debate how the framework of policymaking should put into effect the mandate in statute, but 
the test of a successful institutional structure of policymaking is that these debates can be 
had without undermining the credibility of that institutional framework. As a close observer, I 
would say that the MPC has passed this test very well. 
I make this point because the same cannot be said over the last fifteen years or so for the 
institutional structure around financial stability and supervision. In the 1990s in the UK there 
was a very determined effort to build a lasting structure of monetary policy in the wake of the 
difficult  experiences  before  that.  That  institution  building  effort  was  about  enabling  good 
policy-making,  supported  by  strong  accountability 
the  public,  a 
determination to be transparent in making policy, and as part of that a commitment to engage 
with all the regions of the country. Today, we face the same challenge with financial stability 
and supervision. 
One thing I should emphasise is that this is a reform of the whole of financial regulation. I say 
that because it is easy to conclude from observation of the issues we face as regulators, and 
the public debate, that we are just dealing with reforming the regulation of banks. That is not 
the  case,  and  what  we  are  doing  is  not  about  dragging  the  rest  of  the  financial  services 
industry into reform to solve a problem that is in essence only about the banks. We have to 
design a system that works effectively for all sectors of the industry. 
The 1997 reforms created the FSA as an integrated regulator – by which I mean regulation 
which  combined  Prudential  and  Conduct  of  Business  in  one  regulatory  body  covering  the 
broad sweep of the financial services industry. The record now shows that this approach did 
not work as effectively as it needed to do. 
I think there are a number of closely related reasons for this. First, on a rather practical point, 
I think it is hard for a single organisation to balance, particularly during a period of crisis, a 
wide range of very demanding issues which are individually rightly of great concern to the 
public  and  can  come  from  anywhere  in  a  landscape  of  around  25,000  authorised  firms. 
Second, I think the evidence suggests that over the last 15 years there have been periods 
when  either  conduct  or  prudential  supervision  has  been  more  in  the  ascendancy  to  the 
detriment of the other. In the years leading up to the start of the crisis there was a dearth of 
prudential supervision, but I am quite prepared to acknowledge that there have been periods 
where the opposite has been true. My point here is that I don’t think the system of integrated 
regulation demonstrated the ability to deliver a stable equilibrium of conduct and prudential 
supervision. 
Third, there was something of an inbuilt tendency within integrated regulation to play down 
the active debate of issues where conduct and prudential regulators found themselves with 
potentially conflicting objectives. 
There are several important reasons why reform of financial regulation will in my view be an 
important  step  forward.  It  starts  with  establishing  very  clear  public  policy  objectives  for 
financial regulation to which we, as the regulators, are fully committed. 
For both banks and insurance companies, the PRA will have the objective of promoting the 
safety  and  soundness  of  firms.  Consistent  with  this  objective,  it  will  focus  on  the  potential 
harm  that  firms  can  cause  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  in  the  UK.  We  define  a 
stable financial system as one that is resilient in providing the critical financial services that 
the economy needs. And this supply of services is a necessary condition for a healthy and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
successful  economy,  as  demonstrated  by  the  costs  imposed  by  the  financial  crisis  on  the 
public and society at large. 
For insurance companies, the PRA will have the second objective of contributing to securing 
an appropriate degree of protection for policyholders. Why do we need a second objective for 
insurance? One reason is that in taking out some forms of insurance policies, the public can 
become locked into very long-term contracts, much longer often than is the case in banking 
with  deposit  contracts.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  the  public  interest  I  think  justifies  a  second 
objective  for  insurance,  which  is  more  directly  targeted  at  the  situation  of  individual 
policyholders. 
There are a number of important points in this description of the PRA’s objectives. First, the 
emphasis on economic well-being as an ultimate goal aligns the supervision of banks and 
insurers more closely to the field of macroeconomic policy. This is in line with the definition of 
financial  stability  in  terms  of the  continuity  of supply  of  critical financial  services  which  are 
important to the functioning of the economy. Four services stand out here: the protection of 
savings; the provision of payment services including access to funds; credit extension; and 
risk  transfer.  This  definition  is  critical  to  clarifying  the  public  interest-objective  in  a  stable 
financial system, and that this public interest can diverge from the private interest of a firm in 
profit maximisation without reference to the public interest. 
One  of  the  biggest  lessons  I  take  from  the  financial  crisis  is  the  need  to  ensure  that  the 
boards and management of firms appreciate and act consistent with the public interest. To 
achieve this end, we need a much better definition of the public interest, which I believe we 
now have in the new legislation. 
The second important point in terms of the meaning of the PRA’s objectives is that it will not 
be the PRA’s role to ensure that no firm fails. Rather, the PRA will seek to ensure that any 
firm it regulates that does fail should do so in a way that avoids significant disruption to the 
supply of critical financial services. Nevertheless, failure is not costless and there is inherent 
uncertainty  about  whether  a  firm  can  fail  without  damaging  the  financial  system  and  the 
supply of critical services. Consequently, the PRA will expect a given level of resilience to 
failure from all firms. 
There is another major public interest in the banking system, namely that by becoming too 
big  to  fail,  the  largest  banks  have  developed  an  implicit,  and  in  some  cases  explicit, 
dependence  on  public  money.  This  is  unwelcome,  for  the  public,  and  for  the  banks,  the 
former  because  of  the  unwanted  cost,  and  the  latter  because  of  the  intense  scrutiny  and 
oversight of the banks, which must be more intense as long as this state of affairs lasts. 
Now, I recognise that we have a lot to do still on resolution planning to be comfortable about 
our objective of avoiding a no failure regime and thus solving the Too Big To Fail problem. 
For large banks, we are making progress on resolution planning, and this world is different to 
five  years  ago,  but  we  are  not  there  yet  by  any  means.  I  have  a  background  in  resolving 
banks, and I regard having the capacity to resolve failed large banks – including the largest – 
as the holy grail of resolution. Unlike the legendary Holy Grail, I think there is a good reason 
to believe that the objective of being able to resolve large banks that fail can be within our 
grasp. 
I am very clear that when firms mess up, they should be allowed to fail, and by doing so they 
are  putting  at  risk  the  money  of  their  shareholders  and  if  necessary  after  that  those  who 
provide  debt  funding  according  to  levels  of  seniority.  But  I  am  also  very  clear  that  really 
achieving  the  objective  of  avoiding  a  no  failure  regime  requires  a  fundamental  change  of 
mindset both inside firms, the authorities and in society more broadly. 
Fear of failure is an important conditioner of behaviour in a financial regulator, and achieving 
a  change  on  this  front  depends  on  establishing  a  wide  acceptance  of  our  approach  that 
orderly  failure  which  does  not  compromise  our  public  policy  objectives  is  an  acceptable 
outcome. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
To  be  clear,  we  should  be  criticised  where  failure  compromises  those  objectives  and  we 
could  have  taken  steps  to  avoid  it.  But  if  failure  is  orderly,  and  does  not  compromise  our 
public  policy  objectives,  the  responsibility  should  rest  with  the  board  and  management  for 
failing to serve the private interest of their shareholders and creditors. 
Last on the theme of failure, having firms that are either too big or too important to fail is bad 
for competition in the industries that we regulate. An industry where exit is too difficult is one 
where  entry  is  likewise  inhibited.  This  is  what  we  see  in  the  banking  industry.  Embedding 
resolution  into  the  public  policy  objectives  of  financial  regulation  matters  for  two  reasons 
relevant to competition: first, because, to repeat, exit enables entry; and, second, because if, 
as  we  will,  we  require  new  entrants  to  satisfy  us  on  their  resolvability  in  order  to  be 
authorised, we will lower the barriers and costs of opening for business. 
Put  simply,  if  we  don’t  know  how  to  deal  with  a  failed  firm,  we  will  inevitably  set  a  higher 
barrier to entry. We have already started to put this new approach into operation. 
Resolution of failed firms consistent with the public policy objectives is one key plank of the 
new  approach  to  financial  regulation.  Another  key  plank  concerns  the  macro  prudential 
approach  to  regulation.  The  legislation  has  formally  established  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee  (FPC)  charged  with  the  primary  objective  of  identifying,  monitoring  and  taking 
action  to  remove  or  reduce  systemic  risks  with  a  view  to  protecting  and  enhancing  the 
resilience of the UK financial system. 
The FPC also has a secondary objective, to support the economic policy of the Government, 
including its objectives for growth and employment. 
The root of the introduction of macro-prudential regulation sounds quite obvious, which is to 
take into account the impact of financial regulation on the functioning of the real economy. 
Obvious you might say – yes, but it wasn’t done in the past. 
Macro-prudential  regulation  is  focused  on  protecting  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  It  is 
quite simply about ensuring that financial regulation is conducted with an eye on the state of 
the  economy.  In  a  very  big  picture  sense,  there  is  nothing  new  about  this  activity.  The 
problems  of  the  last  five  years  have  emphasised  the  close  links  between  the  health  and 
behaviour of banks and the condition of the economy. This is a lesson of history, and one 
that should not have been forgotten. But, forgotten it was. 
A clear objective of macro-prudential policy is to act in a countercyclical fashion – to restrain 
booms  by  acting  to  tighten  regulation,  and  to  seek  to  dampen  the  impact  of  busts. 
Unfortunately,  the  record  of  the  past  shows  that  the  behaviour  of  regulators  has  not  been 
consistent with these objectives. 
The crisis illustrates the dangers of not applying restraint in what appeared to be good times. 
But it requires a very strong culture to allow this type of restraining to happen. The record of 
the past indicates that the temptation to “let the good times roll” is deeply embedded in the 
political economy of regulation. 
Macro-prudential regulation can also lean against the tendency otherwise of micro-prudential 
regulators  to  toughen  up  their  regime  in  the  teeth  of  the  storm.  At  the  heart  of  this  new 
approach to making policy is a very simple observation, namely that changes in regulatory 
intensity in this area can have an impact on credit availability and thus the performance of 
the economy. There are two legs to this argument, and it is important to understand both. 
The first leg involves the simple proposition that a well capitalised banking system is more 
likely to support credit creation in the economy. We see evidence today of better capitalised 
banks tending to see more rapid growth in lending. 
It is with this objective in mind that the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee has 
recommended  that  the  major  UK  banks  as  a  group  should  increase  their  equity  capital 
resources. The whole point of this action is to enable forward-looking judgemental regulation 
to take effect in a system where balance sheet strength 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is  a  necessary  pre-condition  of  stronger  lending  to  the  economy  as  a  whole.  In  the  same 
vein,  last  summer  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  FSA  took  steps  to  implement  a  clearly 
counter cyclical response to a situation which was a problem to for the economy as a whole. 
It was an occasion on which responsibilities were well-defined and thus the accountability for 
the  actions  was  clear;  for  the  Bank,  to  introduce  the  FLS  to  support  lending  by  bank  and 
likewise  to  introduce  the  extended  repo  operations  for  the  FSA,  to  loosen  liquidity 
requirements and adjust capital buffers to incentivise net new lending. 
The key message here is that if the banking system is sufficiently capitalised against future 
losses, it can play a full role in counter-cyclical  policy  which seeks to respond to and lean 
against  the  conditions  of  the  day.  That  is  the  essential  use  of  forward-looking  judgement, 
done with the explicit objective in mind of using financial regulation as a counter-cyclical tool. 
At present the Bank of England is pursuing two important objectives: seeking to increase the 
resilience  of  the  UK  banking  system,  and,  supporting  the  creation  of  credit  in  the  UK 
economy. 
Let me say a few words therefore about the announcement last week to extend the Funding 
for Lending Scheme and modify its terms. It is almost a year since we designed and began 
the implementation of the current FLS. 
That was done against the backdrop of a much more febrile environment in the euro area in 
terms of sentiment and a real concern that the risks arising from the euro area situation were 
affecting  the  costs  of  funding  for  UK  banks  and  therefore  their  lending  and  the  economy 
more broadly. 
Alongside that evidence, we could see that the sum of the projections for lending in the two 
years ahead for the UK banks was substantially negative. The case for acting was therefore 
strong,  but  the  challenge  was  also  that  in  its  first  year,  success  for  the  FLS  was  in  some 
ways to prevent the most negative outcome for lending, which in an absolute sense would 
not look great. 
What we have seen over the last year is quite a substantial change in the funding costs of 
banks which has fed through into lower lending costs, but more so in terms of the amount of 
lending in the mortgage market than for small firms. Funding for the major banks have also 
become less disposed, which has probably increased the willingness of banks to compete on 
lending. But the uneven pattern of lending meant that we thought it was sensible to increase 
the incentives for banks to lend to small firms. 
We cannot say that this will conclusively deal with the question of whether the problem is a 
lack of loan supply or demand, but we can say that we have used our toolkit to create a big 
incentive for banks to lend to small firms. 
In summary, there is a strong public interest in the banks, which has been sharpened by the 
crisis. One element of that public interest is permanent – the role of banks in supporting the 
real economy. Another is permanent, and like the first should be in the category of a given – 
namely, good conduct by banks. But the third – the dependence on public money – should 
not survive, hence the strong focus on developing bank resolution and ending too big to fail. 
President,  we  all  have  our  work  cut-out.  You  can  take  pride  in  the  role  of  the  Institute  in 
supporting  the  establishment  of  the  Professional  Standards  Board  and  their  work  on  the 
Code  of  Professional  Conduct  and  the  Professional  Standards  initiative.  As  a  start,  I 
understand that at least 70,000 bank staff will go through the Foundation Standard by the 
beginning  of  July  this  year. This  is  a  big  achievement, for  which  those  involved  should  be 
proud. There is a lot more to do I know, but let me congratulate Susan Rice, who has led the 
work, and everyone else involved.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
