Ardian Fullani: The financial future of the region 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  summit  of  finance 
ministers  and  governors  “The 
the  region”,  Becici,  Montenegro, 
14 June 2013. 
future  of 
financial 
 Dear Ministers of Finance, 
Dear Governors, 
The  crisis  we  are  going  through,  being  so  profound  and  lasting,  will  leave  its  mark  on 
economics  in  general,  and  central  banking  in  particular.  Up  until  the  Great  Recession, 
monetary policy was living in a world that we may call “the inflation targeting era”. To anyone 
that  has  followed  the  discussions  regarding  the  optimal  central  bank  policy  ever  since  the 
onset  of  the  crisis,  it  is  clear  that  the  validity  of  the  previous  approach  has  been  heavily 
questioned. 
In many ways inflation targeting made the central bank’s job simple, as long as it followed the 
policy correctly. The Central Bank, seen by the public as an independent institution, had to 
credibly  commit  to  an  explicit  inflation  target,  in  order  to  anchor  mid-term  inflation 
expectations.  Self-fulfilling  expectations  from  economic  agents  and  price  setters  would,  in 
turn, help deliver the objectives of monetary policy. 
Unfortunately,  as  shown  recently,  this  strict  approach  to  monetary  policy  has  some 
shortcomings. What this approach missed, due to its focus in consumer prices, was the drift 
in  prices  of  assets  in  general.  Escalating  asset  prices  and  their  sudden  burst  affected 
significantly the behaviour and balance sheets of the economic agents and challenged the 
stability of the financial system. In this respect, the concept of financial stability was seen as 
a by product of monetary stability. 
Economists believed that by stabilizing consumer prices, financial assets would also behave 
in a stable and predictable way. The crisis painfully reminds us that: this is not necessarily 
true.  Behaviour  in  financial  markets  is  not  always  rational  and  lack  of  confidence  in  the 
markets can spiral out of control, sending shockwaves throughout the economy. 
Fortunately,  the  Bank  of  Albania  adopted  a  more  conservative  approach  considering 
monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  issues  simultaneously,  conditioning  either  decision-
making  process  by  the  other  one.  Due  to  this  behaviour,  the  crisis  had  a  direct  but  trivial 
impact on the financial system. 
Despite  this,  the  banking  system  faced  immediate  difficulties  in  the  form  of  deposit 
withdrawals, emerging as indirect effects of fear contagion and irrational expectations. The 
liquidity  problems  that  emerged  spilled  over  to  the  credit  market  and  later  to  the  real 
economy and foreign sector. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  reacted  quickly  to  this  changing  economic  climate.  Liquidity  was 
abundantly injected to our banks and more stringent regulations were applied in regard to the 
transfer of funds. However, unlike in most other countries where monetary policy was used 
initially to boost aggregate demand, in Albania, monetary policy stayed in its course giving 
way to expansionary fiscal policy. 
Due  to  a  relatively  long  period  of  consolidation,  fiscal  policy  at  the  outburst  of  crises  had 
abundant  room  for  manoeuvre  and  has  a  more  direct  impact  on  the  economy.  Our  policy 
response was conditioned by the concerns of financial stability, assuming that interest rate 
cuts would speed up deposit withdrawals from the banking system. 
Bank  of  Albania  took  bold  and  decisive  steps  to  control  these  problems  and  restore  the 
credibility  in  banking  system.  As  the  effects  of the  fiscal  stimulus  began  to  phase  out  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
confidence was restored in the banking system, we reduced our policy rate to its historic low 
in order to provide further stimulus for the economy. More importantly, our supervision of the 
banking  system  has  been  enhanced  by  establishing  a  thoroughly  new  Department  of 
Financial Stability and by bringing financial stability issues in the decision-making process of 
monetary policy. 
As a result, the set of tools available to the Bank of Albania has extended to include several 
macro-prudential measures, which aim to address simultaneously both economic growth and 
financial stability concerns. 
I believe that similar steps have been taken by most central banks around the world. Willingly 
or not, the objective of financial stability is now seen as the central duty of our institutions. It 
does not matter whether the legal mandate of the central bank is amended to include this 
new  objective  or  not.  What  matters  is  that  financial  stability  is  a  prerequisite  to  overall 
macroeconomic stability and monetary stability. The challenge that lies ahead of us is how 
to  include  this  new  objective  in  our  policy  making;  whether  inflation  targeting  and 
financial stability can be combined or whether a new regime altogether is needed. 
Various  new  radical  approaches  have  been  mentioned  so  far.  However,  I  believe  that  we 
should  not  discard  all  the  hard-learned  lessons  and  the  successes  of  the  past.  Stabilizing 
inflation  should  be  something  that  central  bankers  may  be  proud  of,  something  that  we 
should cherish and continue to strive for. 
Incorporating financial stability objectives with the inflation targeting regime should be seen 
as an opportunity to understand economic developments and potential macro-financial risks, 
to  achieve  both  these  objectives  and  preserve  long-run  economic  stability.  I  believe  the 
course  of  the  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  be  extensively  discussed  in  the  future, 
including  our  improved  understanding  of  the  role  of  asset  prices  and  financial  frictions. 
 
Under the current conditions, the largest central banks in developed countries have stretched 
central banking theory and practice beyond traditional activities. 
Their balance sheets have increased beyond imagination and, in some cases, include private 
assets; they have accepted a much broader role and have assumed more responsibility. This 
all new and untested type of central banking will have a strong impact not only on the nature 
of  monetary  policy  and  its  interaction  with  other  central  bank  objectives  but  also  on  the 
independence and credibility of the central bank itself. The nature of future monetary policy 
will largely depend on the success of the largest central banks to get out of this situation in a 
controlled and timely manner, without causing excess inflation and damaging central banks 
hard-earned credibility. 
These developments will affect monetary policy in the emerging markets through interest and 
exchange rates, but most importantly in the way central banks conduct their monetary policy. 
Influenced  by  current  practices  of  leading  central  banks,  some  other  central  banks 
have  reoriented  their  objectives  and  engaged  in  activities  which  are  traditional  for 
development  banks  and  governments.  We  have  been  careful  to  stay  away  from 
adopting  and  targeting  such  objectives  not  only  in  monetary  policy  but  also  in  our 
macro-prudential policy. 
The Bank of Albania has traditionally based its policy on two important pillars. Our first focus 
has been to achieve our inflation target and manage inflation expectations to preserve the 
purchasing  power  of  our  currency.  This  policy  has  simultaneously  provided  necessary 
stimulus  to  economic  activity.  Second,  our  focus  on  banking  supervision  and  financial 
stability has enhanced the confidence on our financial system and therefore increased the 
efficiency and credibility of our monetary policy. 
As  I  have  said  in  April  of  2008,  during  the  annual  conference  with  the  banking  system  in 
Albania, “every investment we make today in financial stability yields increased efficiency in 
our monetary policy”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Recently, the Bank of Albania has introduced financial literacy as a third pillar of our policy 
and  independence.  This  objective  is  founded  on  my  belief  that  the  first  two  pillars  gain 
sustainability only if the public understand the role of the central bank, its independence and 
its policy. 
Last  but  equally  important,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  need  of  cooperation  and 
coordination with the fiscal policy. Fiscal policy and its impact are facts of life which can’t be 
ignored.  Therefore,  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policies  have  to  be  designed  and 
implemented in full awareness of its existence. 
A Central Bank does not live in an isolated island; its success will, among others, depend on 
its  ability  to  act  in  coordination  and  cooperation  with  the  fiscal  policy,  without  losing  its 
independence. 
Incorporating  this  understanding  in  the  central  bank  theory  and  practice  requires  some 
adjustments and flexibility but, at the same time, requires that central banks preserve their 
focus and independence and acknowledge their limitations. 
Altogether  these  changes  will  allow  the  central  bank  and  its  inflation  targeting  regime  to 
become  a  useful  tool  at  the  hand  of  the  monetary  authorities  to  preserve  economic  and 
financial stability in the post-Global Financial Crisis period. 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
