Matthew Elderfield: Central Bank of Ireland’s progress in improving 
financial regulation and supervision 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Matthew  Elderfield,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland, to the Public Accounts Committee, Dublin, 13 June 2013. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Committee  for  inviting  me  back  to  discuss  the  progress  that  has 
been  made  in  improving  financial  regulation  and  supervision  since  I  was  last  here  in  May 
2010,  at  which  time  we  discussed  the  Comptroller  and  Auditor  General’s  report  on  the 
lessons of the financial crisis. There is a lot of ground we could cover, but I think that is best 
done through our discussion, so let me be extremely brief in my opening remarks. 
I would like to spend just a few minutes to describe the progress that has been made in three 
key  areas:  supervisory  capability  and  approach,  regulatory  standards  and  powers  and, 
finally, regulatory philosophy, including the role of enforcement. And then let me just mention 
one final loose end from the CAG’s Special Report 72, which relates to auditor assurance 
statements.  But  can I just  sound  a  note  of  caution  at  the  outset:  while  good  progress  has 
been made in improving financial regulation and supervision in Ireland, we are by no means 
all the way there yet. Indeed, as a supervisor you are almost always playing catch up with 
industry and it is dangerous to think you will get to a point when you can rest on your laurels. 
So,  it  is  important  to  maintain  the  momentum  of  improvements,  to  keep  the  regulatory 
framework up to date and to ensure supervisory capabilities are always at their best. It’s also 
especially  important  to  be  vigilant  against  backsliding  and  attempts  to  compromise  the 
independence or dilute the diligence of regulation, especially when times start to get good. 
In  terms  of  supervisory  capability  and  approach,  it  was  clear  that  supervision  was  under-
resourced in a range of areas and therefore staffing levels have necessarily increased in the 
last few  years.  My  original  estimation  was  that the  regulatory function  of  the  Central  Bank 
would  need 
to  be  some  725  persons-strong,  but  based  on  experience,  process 
improvements and efficiencies, I would think that a target level of around 600 is sensible for 
the  end  of  the  current  three  year  Central  Bank  Strategy  in  2015.  Continually  striving  to 
improve  quality  is  also  important,  by  ensuring  the  right  mix  of  experience  and  investing  in 
training, so that your supervisors have the skills to challenge firms effectively. Ensuring that 
the  Central  Bank  can  attract  and  retain  the  skills  it  needs  will  no  doubt  become  an 
increasingly demanding challenge as the market for the relevant specialised skills improves. 
Six  hundred  supervisors  into  more  than  ten  thousand  regulated  entities  requires  some 
strategic choices about resource allocation, which we do through the new risk-assessment 
framework  we  have  developed  called  PRISM  (probability  risk  and  impact  system).  This 
involves an implicit exercise is setting risk appetite, in terms of ensuring adequate resource 
levels  for  those  firms  that  pose  the  biggest  potential  impact  on  customers  and  financial 
stability  should  they  fail.  Our  PRISM  system  also  provides  a  framework  for  systematically 
scoring  firms  on  the  risk  they  pose  against  particular  categories  (like  credit  risk  or  market 
risk),  then  communicating  these  along  with  a  risk  mitigation  plan  –  a  “to  do  list”  in  plain 
English – for firms to address. This system is new to the Central Bank in the past couple of 
years  and  reflects  best  international  practice  in  how  to  assess  risks  in  an  organised, 
consistent  and  systematic  manner.  This  framework  does  not  provide  a  guarantee  that 
failures will never occur – indeed we should expect that they will continue to do so in smaller 
firms – but it does mean that we will closely “man mark” the largest firms in order to reduce 
the risk of their failure. 
If  supervision  is  about  how  you  police  the  rules,  regulation  is  about  setting  the  rules 
themselves. There is a very busy international agenda of regulatory change which is feeding 
into  Ireland  via  the  European  Union.  I  do  have  some  sympathy  with  industry  about  the 
volume of change that is taking place and the challenges that poses for implementation. At a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
domestic  level,  the  Central  Bank  has  been  focused  in  the  initiatives  it  has  taken,  with  the 
statutory Code on corporate governance and the new framework for fitness and probity the 
major changes that impact most sectors. These have helped fill important gaps in regulation. 
I am also very grateful to successive governments and to the members of this house for the 
support they have provided in upgrading the supervisory and enforcement powers available 
to the Central Bank, with legislation in this area close to final adoption. This is a welcome 
step  to  improve  the  regulatory  framework.  Going  forward,  it  will  be  important  to  keep  fine 
tuning the rules based on emerging international best practice. 
Finally,  in  this  very  brief  survey,  a  word  about  regulatory  philosophy.  The  lessons  of  the 
financial crisis are clear, in that supervision and regulation was too light touch. As the IMF 
says,  good  supervision  is  in  fact  intrusive.  And  as  Patrick  Honohan  said  in  his  review, 
supervisors  need  to  be  decisive  in  following  through  on  issues.  Our  PRISM  system  is 
designed  to  provide  a  framework  that  prompts  such  action;  for  example  we  closely  track 
progress against risk mitigation plans. But at the heart of the approach there needs to be a 
robust  regulatory  philosophy  that  encourages  challenge:  we  have  described  this  as 
“assertive risk based supervision underpinned by a credible enforcement deterrent”. This is 
designed  to  put  a  few  concepts  front  and  centre:  that  we  operate  a  risk-based  approach, 
differentiating  based  on 
there  are  consequences  and 
accountability  for  non-compliance;  and  that  our  supervisors  are  empowered  to  insist  upon 
actions  to  mitigate  risk  where  we  are  not  satisfied  by  the  explanation  from  a  firm’s 
management. 
As  today’s  session  is,  I  understand,  formally  designed  to  help  close  off  the  Committee’s 
review of the CAG’s report into the lessons of the financial crisis, Special Report 72, let me 
note  that there  is  one  loose  end  in the  recommendations  that  still  needs  to  be  concluded, 
relating  to  the  introduction  of  auditor  assurance  statements.  We  have  conducted  some 
preliminary consultation with stakeholders and believe that a risk-based framework, with the 
obligation applied to the highest impact firms only, is the best and most proportionate way 
forward.  The  Central  Bank  Supervision  and  Enforcement  Bill  provides  a  clear  mandate  to 
introduce  such  assurance  requirements,  so  when  the  legislation  is  adopted  this  can  be 
progressed to a conclusion. 
There is a lot more ground that we could cover and I am sure more areas the Committee is 
interested in discussing. This short introduction was by way of highlighting some of the key 
areas from my perspective. I thank the Committee for its attention and look forward to our 
discussion and to answering your questions.  
impact  and  probability; 
that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
