William C Dudley: Opening remarks for the Transatlantic Economic 
Interdependence and Policy Challenges Conference 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial 
System  (CGFS),  at  the  Transatlantic  Economic  Interdependence  and  Policy  Challenges 
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 22 April 2013. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  today’s  conference  on  transatlantic  economic 
interdependence  and  policy  challenges.  We  have  a  great  program  today  with  many 
distinguished  speakers  from  academia,  and  the  private  and  public  sectors.  In  particular,  I 
would  highlight  the keynote  speech following  lunch  by  Olli  Rehn,  the  vice  president  of the 
European Commission. 
We live in a global economy with a global financial system, yet macroeconomic policy and 
regulation and supervision have a decidedly national orientation. This creates a challenge for 
all  of  us  as  we  seek  to  balance  our  domestic  needs  against  the  benefits  from  having  a 
harmonized  and  integrated  global  system.  We  can  do  better  through  international 
cooperation and coordination both on macro policy and on regulation and supervision, rather 
than trying to “go it alone.” 
As the two largest economies in the world, the United States and the European Union have a 
shared stake in the vitality of the global economy. Without growth in both our regions, the 
global  economy  will  not  prosper  and  we  will  not  be  able  to  satisfy  the  aspirations  of  our 
citizens. 
Today I want to focus on some of the challenges that we both face. As I see it, significant 
progress  has  been  made  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  in  recovering  from  the  worst 
financial crisis since the Great Depression and the deep recession that followed, but more 
still needs to be done. 
On  the  regulatory  side,  there  is  considerable  good  news  worth  highlighting.  In  particular, 
substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  strengthening  the  global  capital  and  liquidity 
standards for internationally active banks. This should make the failure of large firms much 
less likely. Also, the financial system is being rebuilt to make it more resilient and robust. For 
example,  the  requirement  that  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  be  standardized  and 
centrally cleared whenever possible should strengthen the global financial system. Similarly, 
the  global  set  of  principles  for  financial  market  infrastructures  has  been  updated  and 
strengthened. 
Moreover, some tentative steps have also been made so we can better deal with the failure 
of systemically important financial firms on a cross-border basis. Key attributes for resolution 
regimes  have  been  promulgated  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  Efforts  are  underway  to 
implement national regimes consistent with these standards and that can work together in a 
coordinated way on a global basis. 
But more needs to be done. The impediments to an orderly cross-border resolution still need 
to be fully identified and dismantled. This is necessary to eliminate the so-called “too big to 
fail” problem. The Basel III capital and liquidity requirements need to be fully implemented. 
Also,  cross-border  regulatory  cooperation  needs  to  be  further  enhanced.  This  includes 
greater exchange of confidential supervisory information so that national regulators can be 
fully  informed  about  the  conditions  of  the  banks  that  operate  within  their  borders.  It  also 
requires  efforts  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  across  jurisdictions  so  that  the  focus  is  on 
promoting  safety  and  stability  rather  than  trying  to  protect,  favor,  or  shield  national 
champions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In terms of the macroeconomy, there is both good and bad news. In the United States, the 
good news is that the economic outlook appears to be gradually improving. The household 
sector is far along in the deleveraging process, the housing sector is recovering, the banking 
system is healthier and credit conditions are easing, the corporate sector is highly profitable 
and awash in cash. 
Monetary policy has been effective at fostering easier financial market conditions, even with 
short-term  rates  pinned  at  the  zero  bound.  To  provide  the  appropriate  degree  of 
accommodation, the Federal Reserve has recently moved to an outcome-based approach in 
which the use of our tools is explicitly tied to developments in the economy and economic 
outlook.  Currently,  as  part  of  this  strategy,  we  are  purchasing  $85  billion  of  longer-term 
Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities each month. After reviewing the efficacy 
and  costs  of this  program, I  have  concluded  that  that  efficacy  has  been  as  high  or  higher 
than I expected at the onset of the program and costs the same or lower. 
Nevertheless,  the  United  States  could  be  doing  better.  The  U.S.  fiscal  policy  program,  for 
example, does not appear well-calibrated to the current set of economic circumstances. We 
have too much fiscal restraint in the short term, and too little consolidation in the long term. 
The degree of fiscal restraint this year (about 1¾ percent of gross domestic product [GDP] in 
2013) is quite large relative to the forward momentum of the economy. Thus, we have a tug-
of-war between the improving economy and the current large negative fiscal impulse. How 
this tug-of-war gets resolved –  which force dominates – won’t be known for some time. In 
other words, the level of uncertainty about the near-term outlook in the United States remains 
quite high. 
Meanwhile, the long-term fiscal outlook for the United States is still troubling. So far, partisan 
divisions in Washington have limited progress in reaching the type of “grand bargain” needed 
to  put  the  United  States  on  a  sustainable  long-term fiscal  path,  though  of  late  we  have  at 
least seen some renewed talk about this. Nor have we yet deployed a comprehensive set of 
policies to support the rebalancing of the U.S. economy toward a growth path based more on 
business investment, trade and broad-based income gains than the type of asset price gains 
and credit-fuelled consumption, which dominated the last business cycle. 
For Europe, the near term macroeconomic outlook seems less bright. The good news is that 
the peripheral countries have made substantial efforts to bring down their structural budget 
deficits.  They  have  also  made  some  progress 
international 
competitiveness, though there remains an opportunity for further structural reforms in labor 
and product markets – and not just in the periphery – to increase productivity and strengthen 
long term growth prospects. 
The  European  Central  Bank’s  (ECB)  introduction  of  the  outright  monetary  transactions 
(OMT)  program  has  reduced  financial  market  tensions  considerably  in  the  peripheral 
countries,  so  that  sovereign  debt  funding  costs  in  those  countries  are  at  more  reasonable 
levels. The risk that interest rates in the periphery could spiral upward has been significantly 
diminished. Also, the commitment to European integration remains strong, a factor that U.S.-
based analysts and investors do not always sufficiently appreciate. Over the past few years, 
when the situation has been the most bleak, the choice in favor of the Union with the euro at 
its core has always won out. 
The bad news is that the eurozone is still in a recession and the political support for further 
rounds  of  budget-tightening  has  clearly  lessened.  The  eurozone  financial  system  is  being 
fragmented and the partial easing of pressure on peripheral sovereign debt markets has not 
translated into a corresponding easing in private-sector borrowing costs in these nations. If 
growth  does  not  resume  relatively  soon,  then  the  political  support  for  continued  fiscal  and 
structural adjustment could further erode. 
In Europe, a key challenge is to strengthen the economic foundations of monetary union at 
the system level. This needs to be done in a way that combines deeper integration with good 
incentives  and  governance  so  that  it  can  be  broadly  supported  by  both  the  core  and 
improving 
their 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
peripheral countries. In this respect, it is important to recall that the architects of EMU from 
the outset defined it as a project of Economic and Monetary Union. 
I view the task of transitioning to a pan-European banking union with the ECB as the primary 
overseer  of  the  European  banking  system  as  a  critically  important  next  step.  Successfully 
moving to a pan-European banking union would generate a large number of benefits: 
• 
It would demonstrate a commitment toward greater integration that would enhance 
the credibility that monetary union is indeed irreversible. 
It would help to sever the link between the fiscal position of individual governments 
and the health of their banks. 
By  eliminating  the  scope  for  national  bias,  it  would  strengthen  market  confidence 
that large hidden losses are not likely to be buried within the banking system. 
It  would  move  against  fragmentation  and  promote  re-integration  of  the  European 
banking system. 
It  would  help  to  make  monetary  policy  more  effective  in  supporting  activity  in  the 
peripheral countries. A critical problem in Europe right now is that private borrowing 
costs are very low in countries like Germany where the economy is operating close 
to full capacity, but quite high in countries like Italy and Spain – which are struggling 
in  terms  of  economic  performance.  The  monetary  policy  transmission  channels  in 
Europe are impaired. Banking union would make them work better. 
It would underscore the fact that a euro is a euro and will remain a euro throughout 
Europe,  reducing  perceptions  of  redenomination  risk. This  would  make  depositors 
less  prone  to  move  their funds from  the  periphery  to  the  core  and  strengthen  the 
resiliency of the system against shocks. 
It  would  help  foster  greater  integration  of  the  European  economy,  with  potentially 
significant macroeconomic benefits. 
      In short, banking union has the potential to make a powerful contribution to eurozone stability 
and growth, both in the short term and in the long term. 
Now, will moving to a pan-European banking system be easy? Of course not. It will require a 
common  set  of  standards  to  be  applied  across  the  whole  system.  This  may  well  reveal 
shortcomings among particular banks and the burden is not likely to fall evenly across the 
European Union. It will be important to identify the sources of capital that will fill any such 
holes in order to ensure ongoing stability and to avoid constraining the availability of credit. 
The  process  of  banking  union  appropriately  begins  with  a  single  supervisory  mechanism. 
But, a common resolution authority and integrated deposit insurance framework that is both 
credible and consistent with good incentives are likely to be required, as well. The task at 
hand will likely require each country to give up a small amount of sovereignty with respect to 
banking oversight so that the outcome is viewed as fully credible. In my view, this is a critical 
next step in the “one money, one market” project underlying the EU agenda. 
I’d now like to introduce Ambassador Vale de Almeida as our next speaker. The ambassador 
has  been  here  in  his  current  role  since  August  2010.  Prior  to  his  current  appointment,  he 
worked  as  a  director  general  at  the  European  Commission  (EC)  and  has  had  a  long  and 
distinguished career at the EC dating back to 1982. So he is extraordinarily well-versed to 
speak  on  the  issues  of  interdependence  and  the  policy  challenges  we  face.  Welcome 
Ambassador Vale de Almeida. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
