Peter Pang: Islamic capital and money markets 
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Peter  Pang,  Deputy  Chief  Executive,  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  at the  workshop  on  “Islamic  capital  and  money  markets”,  Hong  Kong,  19  March 
2013. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
1.  It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  Islamic  finance  workshop.  We  are 
particularly  grateful  to  Mr.  Mohd.  Radzuan,  Mr.  Azidy  and  Mr.  Azahari,  the  experts  from 
Malaysia,  who  have  flown  all  the  way  to  Hong  Kong  to  share  with  us  their  knowledge  on 
Islamic capital and money markets and their valuable experience in developing these critical 
components  of  Islamic  finance.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  Mr.  Najmuddin  of  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia for bringing the Malaysian delegation here. 
Two fast developing asset classes in the global markets 
2. This workshop comes at a very opportune time as Hong Kong is looking to develop Islamic 
finance as a way to diversify our financial platform and further enhance our capability as an 
international  financial  centre.  In  my  view,  to  be  a  truly  international  financial  centre,  one 
needs to develop a conducive platform for the two fast developing asset classes in the global 
markets – Islamic financial products and RMB-denominated investment assets.  
3.  The  development  of  Islamic  financial  markets  has  been  phenomenal  in  the  past  two 
decades.  The  size  of  global  Islamic  finance  assets  made  a  quantum  leap  from  only 
US$150 billion  in  the  mid-1990s  to  US$1.3  trillion  at  the  end  of  2011.1  Although  the 
investment  climate  has  been  clouded  by  the  US  sub-prime  crisis  and  the  European 
sovereign debt problems in recent years, the global sukuk market is powering ahead. Indeed, 
last  year  was  the  best  year  for  the  global  sukuk  market  on  record,  with  sukuk  issuances 
growing  by  more  than  60%  year-on-year,  taking  the  outstanding  sukuk  amount  to  a  new 
height of US$240 billion.2 According to some market estimates, the size of the global Islamic 
finance  industry  has  the  potential  to  increase  five-fold  from  the  current  level  to  some 
US$6.5 trillion by 2020.3 
4.  The  development  of  RMB-denominated  investment  products  is  equally  impressive.  In  a 
short space of 6 years, the size of the RMB dim sum bond market in Hong Kong has grown 
from  a  modest  amount  of  10  billion  yuan  in  2007  to  237  billion  yuan  at  the  end  of  2012. 
Offshore  RMB  financial  products  have  also  become  more  diversified,  expanding  from  only 
RMB bonds to RMB equities, RMB investment funds, RMB A-share exchange-traded funds 
(ETFs)  as  well  as  RMB  insurance  products.  The  growth  momentum  of  the  offshore  RMB 
financial markets is expected to pick up further, as more and more financing and investment 
activities  can  now  be  conducted  in  RMB,  especially  following  the  introduction  by  the 
Mainland authorities of the arrangements for inward and outward direct investments in RMB 
and the RMB Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors (i.e. RQFII) scheme. 
5. Hong Kong is fortunate to have made a good start in offshore RMB business. Since the 
introduction of offshore RMB business in 2004, we have developed a wide variety of RMB-
denominated financial products. In particular, the offshore RMB bond market in Hong Kong is 
by  far  the  largest  in  the  world. We  also  possess  the  largest  RMB  liquidity  pool  outside  of 
                                                
1   KFH Research. 
2   Zawya. 
3   KFH Research. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Mainland  China.  As  at  the  end  of  2012, the  aggregate  amount  of  RMB  customer  deposits 
and certificates of deposits has reached a high of 720 billion yuan. Notwithstanding these, 
when  it  comes  to  Islamic  finance,  Hong  Kong  is  a  relative  newcomer  and  would  need  to 
catch up in this area.  
Legislative exercise to promote the development of sukuk market 
6. In developing Islamic finance, we are taking a step by step approach. As a first step, our 
current focus is to put in place the supporting legal infrastructure. Specifically, the HKSAR 
Government is set to change the tax laws in Hong Kong to facilitate the development of the 
sukuk  market.  In  terms  of  economic  substance,  sukuk  are  no  different  from  conventional 
bonds. However, since Islamic law prohibits the payment and receipt of interest, sukuk are 
often structured with the use of special purpose vehicles and multiple transfers of underlying 
assets. This may result in additional tax liabilities and hence higher issuance costs for sukuk 
when compared with conventional bonds under the existing tax regime.   
7. It is therefore necessary to refine our tax laws to provide a tax framework for sukuk that is 
comparable to the one applying to conventional bonds. But this does not mean that we are 
going to confer special tax favours on the Islamic finance sector; rather, our aim is to level 
the  playing  field  so  that  financial  instruments  of  similar  economic  substance  will  be  given 
similar tax treatments. 
8. On this, I am very pleased to see that an amendment bill has been introduced into the 
Legislative  Council  earlier  this  year.  The  bill  adopts  a  prescriptive  and  religion-neutral 
approach, and covers five of the most common types of sukuk globally. Products that can 
meet  the  key  features  and  qualifying  conditions  specified  in  the  bill  will  be  given  tax 
treatments similar to those currently afforded to conventional bonds. This means that sukuk 
issuers and investors alike will no longer be subject to additional tax and stamp duty charges 
over and above what they would need to pay for conventional bonds. So, passage of the bill 
will  be  a  very  positive  step  forward  in  furthering  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  in 
Hong Kong.  
Synergy between Hong Kong and Malaysia 
9. With the legal infrastructure to be in place soon, the next important step will be to develop 
the Islamic financial markets here. We definitely have a lot to learn from Malaysia in respect 
of product development and market operation. As I see it, Hong Kong and Malaysia each has 
different edges in the financial services industry, and the potential synergy between the two 
places in developing the Islamic financial markets is tremendous.   
10. Malaysia is undoubtedly an important leading centre in the global Islamic finance industry 
that  has  accumulated  vast  experiences  and  invaluable  expertise  over  the  past  three 
decades. It has developed a well-diversified Islamic financial market, offering a full suite of 
products covering sukuk, Islamic equities, Islamic funds, Islamic ETFs, etc. Its sukuk market 
is by far the largest in the world, accounting for more than 70% of global sukuk issuances 
last year.4 It has also put in place well-developed financial infrastructure which can facilitate 
local and overseas market players alike in conducting Islamic financial transactions. 
11. On the other hand, Hong Kong as an international financial centre has developed a deep 
and highly liquid capital market with a diverse base of investors coming from all around the 
world. More importantly, with Hong Kong’s unique role as a gateway to Mainland China and 
a  leading  hub  for  offshore  RMB  business,  Hong  Kong  can  offer  an  ideal  platform  to  link 
Islamic  and  RMB  financing  together  by  developing  financial  products  that  are  Shariah-
                                                
4   Zawya. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
compliant  and,  at  the  same  time,  denominated  in  RMB.  Through  Hong  Kong’s  platform, 
international investors in the Islamic world can easily tap the appealing growth story of the 
Mainland. This is especially given the fact that many investors are now actively looking for 
investment  opportunities  in  Asia,  particularly  Mainland  China,  to  diversify  their  investment 
portfolios. At the same time, Mainland issuers can also make use of our platform to reach out 
to the increasingly wealthy investor base in the Islamic world.  
12. Clearly, there is a strong foundation for both sides to work together to complement each 
other, grow the pie bigger and achieve a win-win proposition in developing Islamic finance. 
For this important reason, the HKMA entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
with Bank Negara Malaysia in 2009 to strengthen mutual co-operation in the area of Islamic 
finance.  We  are  very  pleased  to  have  worked  closely  with  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  to  put 
together and bring this workshop to Hong Kong under the framework of the MoU. Building a 
deep talent pool is crucial for further development of the Islamic finance industry. Workshops 
of  this  kind  will  undoubtedly  help  to  promote  market  awareness  and  knowledge  of  Islamic 
finance, while also providing an excellent forum for market players to exchange views and 
business contacts. We will continue to work closely with the Treasury Markets Association to 
raise the expertise in Islamic finance in Hong Kong.  
13. Apart from our continuous efforts to put in place a conducive platform, it is also crucial for 
market  players  to  maximize  their  readiness  to  grasp  the  opportunities  brought  by  the 
development of Islamic finance in Hong Kong. After all, market players will be the ones who 
drive the growth of the market ultimately. So, I highly encourage you all to gear up for the 
new opportunities ahead of us. On this, I am pleased to note that some financial institutions 
have already started to get ready by mobilizing their staff in the Middle East or Malaysia to 
Hong Kong, as well as providing training to their staff in Hong Kong. The fact that you are 
here  today  is  also  a  good  indication  that  you  are  keen  to  prepare  yourselves.  I  hope  you 
would take the most out of this workshop. 
14. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
