Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation 
and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas – continuing a partnership for 
stability 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Signing of the Memorandum of Agreement on Bank 
Examination between the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and the Philippine Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (PDIC), Manila, 27 August 2013. 
 through,  among  others,  … 
the  conduct  of  on-site  examinations, 
Thank you for joining us this afternoon to witness the signing of this Amended Memorandum 
of Agreement on Bank Examination between the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation 
and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. 
Our signing ceremony is brief and simple … but also significant and meaningful. The MOA 
we  have  signed  today  underscores  the  continuing  efforts  of  the  PDIC  and  the  BSP  to 
enhance our respective regulatory and policy frameworks. Equally important, this amended 
MOA reflects our continuing cooperation to ensure that our joint working arrangements are 
responsive to the changes taking place in the operating environment of our supervised and 
regulated institutions. 
Indeed, the PDIC and the BSP have a long history of partnership and cooperation to achieve 
and maintain a sound and stable banking system. 
In  particular,  the  PDIC  and  the  BSP  signed  the  original  MOA  on  Bank  Examination  on 
October  11,  2005…  which  created  the  overall  framework  for  our  institutions  to  supervise 
banks 
jointly  or 
independently. 
While the original MOA has served us well, we recognized the need to align it with current 
supervisory procedures, practices and requirements. The joint review committee created for 
this  purpose  was  headed  by  PDIC  Executive  Vice  President  Imelda  Singzon  and  BSP 
Managing Director Chuchi Fonacier with support from their respective groups. And so today, 
we have this amended MOA. Let us give our review committee a big hand. 
As  amended,  the  MOA  harmonizes  our  examination  procedures  to  avoid  overlapping  of 
functions and efforts, enhances data-sharing arrangement, and maximizes the use of reports 
and  resources.  The  amended  MOA  also  provides  the  PDIC  more  flexibility  in  terms  of  the 
types of banks it can jointly examine with the BSP, defines the specific findings/information 
that  the  BSP  examiners  can  share  with  PDIC  examiners,  and  considers  the  provisions  as 
well as rules and regulations of Republic Act No. 9576 which amended the PDIC Charter. 
With these amendments, we look forward to the PDIC and the BSP being able to address 
examination findings and violations with expediency… especially those involving unsafe and 
unsound  banking  activities.  This  is  consistent  with  the  thrust  of  the  BSP  and  the  PDIC  to 
promote  and  strengthen  good  governance  practices  in  supervised  banks  to  ensure  the 
stability of the banking system at all times. 
We look forward therefore to exploring new projects and expanding existing initiatives with 
the PDIC to realize our shared goal of delivering a better quality of life to Filipinos through a 
sound and responsive banking system. 
Mabuhay ang BSP at ang PDIC! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! Maraming 
salamat sa inyong lahat! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
