G Gopalakrishna: Reserve Bank of India – Federal Reserve System 
Market Risk Analysis Seminar 
Inaugural speech by Mr G Gopalakrishna, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Reserve Bank of India – Federal Reserve System Market Risk Analysis Seminar, New 
Delhi, 21 January 2013. 
 I  acknowledge  the  contribution  of  Mr  N  Suganandh,  Dy.General  Manager,  Dept.  of  Banking  Supervision,  in 
preparing this speech. 
1) 
I  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  the  faculty  from  the  Federal  Reserve  and  all  the 
participants  of  this  programme.  I  am  happy  to  inaugurate  the  Market  Risk  Analysis 
Programme.  The  periodic  programmes  involving  the  Fed  Reserve  experts  have  been 
welcomed wholeheartedly by the participants and we are glad to have another edition of the 
training programme, with focus on market risk. I hope the participants would be immensely 
benefited  by  this  programme,  just  like  the  participants  in  the  earlier  programmes.  The 
programme also comes in the context of the proposed seminal change in the RBI’s banking 
supervision methodology and process this year. I refer to the introduction of the risk based 
supervision covering nearly half of the commercial banks in the first phase from the ensuing 
cycle  onwards.  Focus  on  risks  and  tailoring  our  supervisory  stance  based  on  the  specific 
risks in a financial institution would be the cornerstone of the new approach towards banking 
supervision. In this milieu, there is a need for an enhanced understanding of the major risk 
categories  individually  as  well  from  a  collective  perspective  in  terms  of  the  interactions 
among the major risks. 
2) 
It has now come to be accepted that the inter-connected world has ensured that the 
uncertainties in the advanced economies find their way to developing nations through various 
channels  like  the  trade,  finance,  commodity  price  and  confidence  channels.  Critically,  the 
uncertainties are reflected in the volatility of capital flows to emerging market which in turn 
reflects  on  the  volatility  of  domestic  financial  market  variables.  To  understand  some 
indicators  of  the  linkages,  we  can  see  that  the  ratio  of  India’s  external  trade  to  GDP  has 
increased four-fold – from 8 per cent of GDP in 1972 to nearly 40 per cent now while the ratio 
of two- way flow of goods and finance in and out of India to its GDP which incorporates non 
trade related flows, has increased eight fold over last four decades, from 14 per cent in 1972 
to well over 100 per cent now. Apart from linkages with the global developments, there are 
several  domestic  factors  which  are  also  important  in  the  context  of  increasing  trend  of 
volatility  in  domestic  financial  markets  such  as  widening  current  account  deficit,  growth 
slowdown, growing fiscal deficit and sticky inflation, to name just a few. The uncertainty and 
volatility  associated  with  the  financial  markets  are  expected  to  continue  at  least  for  the 
foreseeable future, as the “new normal”. Managing the market risks in this context is a major 
challenge for the corporates and the banks alike. 
3)  Market risk is the most dynamic among the major risks, positions and hence the risks 
can change much more frequently in quick time in comparison to other risks. The Financial 
Stability Reports of the Reserve Bank have presented the results of coordinated stress tests 
of scheduled commercial banks in respect of, inter alia, market risk. These tests conducted 
on balance sheet and off balance sheet positions show that banks are indeed vulnerable to 
sharp movements in market prices. Market risk is a risk practitioners delight at least from the 
perspective  of  quantifying  them  while  it  is  not  so  straightforward  for  credit  risk  and  would 
border  on  the  difficult  in  respect  of  operational  risk.  Of  course,  there  are  major  issues  in 
respect of statistical methodologies in measuring market risk and VaR based measures have 
been  derided  for  underestimating  risks.  The  issue  is  about  the  lack  of  having  acceptable 
alternatives vis-à-vis accepting the imperfections and supplementing with other measures. I 
will further elaborate later in my speech. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
4)  With  a  view  to  adopting  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS) 
framework  on  capital  adequacy  which  takes  into  account  the  elements  of  credit  risk  in 
various types of assets in the balance sheet as well as off-balance sheet business and also 
to  strengthen  the  capital  base  of  banks,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  decided  in  April  1992  to 
introduce a risk asset ratio system for banks (including foreign banks) in India as a capital 
adequacy  measure.  Reserve  Bank  had  issued  guidelines  to  banks  in  June  2004  on 
maintenance  of  capital  charge  for  market  risks  on  the  lines  of  “Amendment  to  the  Capital 
Accord to incorporate market risks” issued by the BCBS in 1996. The market risk positions 
subject  to  capital  charge  requirement  are:  (i)  The  risks  pertaining  to  interest  rate  related 
instruments and equities in the trading book; and (ii) Foreign exchange risk (including open 
position in precious metals) throughout the bank (both banking and trading books). With the 
introduction of CDS, calculation of capital charge has been specified for banks using CDS as 
a protection buyer or seller. 
5) 
A major action as part of Basel III framework is the introduction of the incremental risk 
charge  for  the  trading  book.  In  2005,  the  Basel  Committee  became  concerned  that  banks 
were reducing their capital requirements by shifting exposures from the banking book to the 
trading  book.  Structured  products  whose  values  depended  on  the  credit  worthiness  of 
companies  were  increasingly  put  under  trading  book.  The  products  were  less  liquid  than 
other instruments in the trading book. Regulators had proposed an “incremental default risk 
capital charge”(IDRC) that would be calculated with a 99.9% confidence level and a one year 
time  horizon  for  instruments  in  the  trading  book  that  were  sensitive  to  default  risk.  These 
instruments would therefore be treated in much the same way as similar instruments in the 
banking book. In 2008, Basel Committee recognised that most of the losses sustained in the 
credit  market  turmoil  of  2007  and  2008  were  from  changes  in  credit  ratings,  widening  of 
credit  spreads  and  loss  of  liquidity,  rather  than  solely  as  a  result  of  defaults.  It  therefore 
amended  its  previous  proposals  so  that  these  risks  were  included.  The  IDRC  became 
generalised as “Incremental Capital Charge” (ICC). These measures are expected to reduce 
the incentive for regulatory arbitrage between the banking and trading books. 
6) 
An  additional  response  to  the  crisis  is  the  introduction  of  a  stressed  value-at-risk 
requirement.  Losses  in  most  banks’  trading  books  during  the  financial  crisis  have  been 
significantly higher than the minimum capital requirements under the former Pillar 1 market 
risk  rules.  The  Committee  therefore  requires  banks  to  calculate  a  stressed  value-at-risk 
taking into account a one-year observation period relating to significant losses, which must 
be calculated in addition to the value-at-risk based on the most recent one-year observation 
period.  The  additional  stressed  value-at-risk  requirement  will  also  help  reduce  the 
procyclicality  of  the  minimum  capital  requirements  for  market  risk.  This  is  expected  to 
possibly  double  or  triple  the  capital  that  banks  would  have  to  keep  for  market  risks, 
particularly for international banks. Perhaps this is the main reason for lukewarm response in 
applying for advanced Internal Models Approach for calculating market risk capital in India. 
As  the  recent  Financial  Stability  Report  of  RBI  issued  last  month  points  out,  only  three 
commercial banks have applied for the advanced approach for market risk as opposed to 15 
banks  who  have  applied for migrating  to IRB  approach for  calculation  of  credit risk  capital 
and  9  banks  for  migrating  to  AMA  for  calculation  of  operational  risk  capital  charge.  Under 
Basel III, even under Standardised approach banks are required to specifically consider the 
various valuation adjustments while valuing their derivatives portfolios like – (i) incurred CVA 
losses, (ii) closeout costs, (iii) operational risks, (iv) early termination, investing and funding 
costs, and (v) future administrative costs and where appropriate, model risk. 
7)  RBI has indicated that the capital requirement under IMA would be a function of three 
components: (i) Normal VaR Measure (for general market risk and specific risk) (ii) Stressed 
VaR Measure (for general market risk and specific risk) (iii) Incremental Risk Charge (IRC) 
(for  positions  subject  to  interest  rate  specific-risk  capital  charge).  General  market  risk  and 
specific risk can be modelled together or separately for normal VaR measure and stressed 
VaR measure. In other words, a bank could calculate either a combined VaR measure for the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
two  risk  categories  (general  market  risk  and  specific  risk)  or  separate  VaR  measures  for 
each  of  them.  For  example,  the  most  extensive  approach  to  model  equity  risk  would  be 
having risk factors corresponding to the volatility of individual equity issues. In such a case, 
bank would have modelled both general market risk and specific risk together. However, in 
cases  where  a  bank calculates  a  combined  VaR  measure,  it  should  be  able  to  isolate  the 
VaR  for  each  component  so  as  to  enable  its  backtesting  and  use  in  the  day-to-day  risk 
management. In addition, in the case of interest rate-sensitive positions, which have credit 
risk, the banks will also have to compute incremental risk charge for default and migration 
risks, which are generally not captured by the VaR model. To start with, banks in India are 
required  to  model  general  market  risk  and  use  the  present  Standardised  Measurement 
Method for specific risk. 
8)  On measurement of market risks, VaR methodology has proved to be the main method 
of assessing the overall market risk of trading positions over a short horizon, such as a 10 
day period, and under “normal” market conditions. The mechanics of VaR has been variously 
described at one end of spectrum as “a benchmark for managing financial risk” and at the 
other end of the spectrum as an “intellectual fraud” along with various shades of opinions in 
between  the  two  extremes.  In  effect,  the  methodology  allows  us  to  capture  in  a  single 
number the multiple components of market risk such as curve risk, basis risk and volatility 
risk. However, each time there is a turmoil in the worlds markets, the limitations of it as a 
market risk measure are revealed. 
9) 
VaR  has  proved  unreliable  as  a  measure  of  risk  over  long  time  periods  or  under 
abnormal market conditions. The danger posed by exceptional market shocks such as the 
2007–08 financial crisis or the LTCM crisis in the world markets in 1998 – shocks that are 
often accompanied by a drying up of market liquidity – can be captured only by means of 
supplemental methodologies. The potential of VaR to exacerbate market volatility has also 
been acknowledged. The herd mentality that is so typical of the financial industry means that 
market sensitive risk management systems, such as VaR, actually make markets less stable 
and more prone to crisis. This is because financial institutions may have to sell assets in the 
affected classes when markets become volatile in order to keep within the VaR limits set by 
senior  management;  this  depresses market  prices  even  further  and  increases  the  volatility 
and correlation of the risk factors for these assets. This in turn might cause another set of 
financial  institutions  to  exceed  their  VaR  limits,  forcing  them  to  reduce  their  exposure  by 
selling still more of the same assets – perpetuating a vicious cycle. 
10)  Thus the VaR measure works well as a risk measure only for markets operating under 
normal conditions and only over a short period, such as one trading day. Potentially, it’s a 
very poor and misleading measure of risk in abnormal markets, over longer time periods, or 
for illiquid portfolios. Also, VaR, like all risk measures, depends for its integrity on a robust 
control  environment.  In  many  instances  of  rogue-trading  cases,  hundreds  of  millions  of 
dollars of losses have been suffered by trading desks that had orders not to assume VaR 
exposures of more than a few million dollars. The reason for the discrepancy is reportedly 
due to trading desks finding some way of circumventing trading controls and suppressing risk 
measures.  For  example,  a  trader  might  falsify  transaction  details  entered  into  the  trade 
reporting  systems,  by  using  fictitious  trades  to  balance  out  the  risk  of  real  trades,  or  by 
tampering  with  the  inputs  to  risk  models,  such  as  volatility  estimates  that  determine  the 
valuation  and  risk  estimation  for  an  options  portfolio.  As  you  would  agree,  opportunity  to 
carry out such tasks is facilitated by inadequate management oversight arising from lack of 
appreciation of the importance of the internal controls in trading environment. Further, there 
were instances reported in recent years about management deliberately turning a blind eye 
to risk measures or to the apprehension of the risk managers. 
11)  For  a  good  risk  measure,  some  properties  have  been  propounded.  These  include 
monotonicity,  translation  invariance,  homogeneity  and  sub-additivity.  The  risk  measures 
satisfying all the conditions are referred to as coherent. It has been observed that while VaR 
satisfies  the  first  three  conditions,  it  does  not  always  satisfy  the  fourth  condition  of  “sub 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
additivity” which requires that the risk measure of two portfolios after they have been merged 
should  be  no  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  their  risk  measure  before  they  were  merged. 
However,  given  the  simplicity  and  want  of  better  alternative,  VaR  continues  to  be  used 
supplemented with many other aspects like back testing to check the accuracy of the VaR 
model,  stress  testing  and  scenario  analysis  to  assess  the  potential  impact  of  plausible 
adverse market conditions among other measures. 
12)  For  the  advanced  market  risk  approach,  a  bank  will  need  to  classify  its  back-testing 
outcomes  into  three  zones  depending  on  the  number  of  exceptions  arising  from  back-
testing.The  extreme  zone  is  the  red  zone  if  the  back-testing  results  produce  ten  or  more 
exceptions  in  which  case  the  multiplication  factors  for  both  VaR  and  stressed  VaR  will  be 
increased  from  three  to  four.  RBI  will  allow  10  or  more  exceptions  under  the  most 
extraordinary circumstances. RBI may require banks whose model for market risk fall in Red 
Zone to either discontinue the model or begin work on improving the model immediately. RBI 
may  also  consider  further  increase  in  the  capital  requirements  if  the  bank  is  not  able  to 
demonstrate that its models are capturing all market (general market risk and specific risk, if 
any) risks it is exposed to. 
13)  Banks  that  use  the  internal  models  approach  for  meeting  market  risk  capital 
requirements must have in place a rigorous and comprehensive stress testing programme to 
capture  such  potential  stresses.  The  stress  testing  programme  must  particularly  address: 
(i) concentration  risk;  (ii)  illiquidity  of  markets  in  stressed  market  conditions;  (iii)  one  way 
markets; (iv) event and jump to default risks; (v) non linearity of products; (vi) deep out of the 
money positions; (vii) positions subject to the gapping of prices; and (viii) other risks that may 
not  be  captured  appropriately  in  the  VaR  model  (for  example,  recovery  rate  uncertainty, 
implied correlations and skew risk). 
14) 
In the aftermath of the financial crisis, model risk has come under intense scrutiny, and 
the  governance  of  risk  model  supervision,  assessment  and  validation  has  taken  on  ever 
greater  importance  for  the  risk  function  and  the  financial  industry  as  a  whole.  A  bank  is 
required  to  l  have  a  model  validation  process  which  addresses  three  components  of  the 
model:  (a)  a model  inputs  component,  which  delivers  data  and  assumptions  to  the model; 
(b) a  model  processing  component,  which  encompasses  the  theoretical  model  and  the 
computer  codes  which  transform  the  model  inputs  into  mathematical  estimates;  and  (c)  a 
reporting  component,  which  translates  the  mathematical  estimates  into  useful  business 
information. 
15)  An interesting perspective is the interaction between credit risks and market risks. For 
many reasons, both historical and practical, market and credit risk have often been treated 
as  if  they  are  unrelated  sources  of  risk:  the  risk  types  have  been  measured  separately, 
managed  separately,  and  economic  capital  against  each  risk  type  has  been  assessed 
separately. The development of credit risk transfer markets and the moves to mark-to-market 
accounting  for  portions  of  held-to-maturity  banking  book  positions,  however,  have  blurred 
distinctions between them and raise questions regarding approaches that treat the two types 
of risks separately. Market participants have argued that there are significant diversification 
benefits  to  be  reaped  from  the  integrated  measurement  and  management  of  market  and 
credit  risks.  The  recent  financial  crisis,  however,  has  illustrated  how  the  two  risks  may 
reinforce each other and that in such stress situations illiquidity can worsen losses further. 
16)  Market risk and credit risk are often distinguished by identifying the latter with (actual or 
expected)  default. We  define  default  as  the  failure  to  meet  a  contractually  pre-determined 
obligation. As the same economic factors tend to affect both types of risk, drawing a clear 
distinction between them in practical risk measurement and management is, however, very 
difficult. Even if distinct factors could be separately associated with the two types of risk, the 
factors  often 
therefore  risk 
measurement  and  management  needs  to  explicitly  account  for  their  joint  influence.  In 
practice, market and credit risk are often distinguished in relatively simple ways on the basis 
in  determining  asset  values,  and 
interact  significantly 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of  instruments,  market  liquidity,  accounting  treatments  or  holding  periods.  It  is  being 
increasingly  acknowledged  that  care  should  be  exercised  to  ensure  that  such  pragmatic 
distinctions  do  not  lead  risk  managers  to  ignore  important  risks  that  emanate  from  the 
interactions  between  market  and  credit  risk.  Examples  of  positions  in  which  such 
compounding  effects  may  be  present  include  foreign  currency  loans,  floating  rate  loans 
(including  sub-prime  mortgage  loans)  or  matching  long  and  short  positions  in  OTC 
derivatives. 
17)  As a BIS study states, Non-linear interaction emerges when losses from default on an 
instrument depend on movements in market risk factors, or conversely, when changes in the 
values of instruments due to movements of market risk factors depend on whether there is a 
default  or  rating  migration.  In  these  circumstances,  the  two  types  of  risk  are  inextricably 
linked,  and  attempts  to  measure  them  separately  and  then  combine  them  can  lead  to 
substantial  biases.  In  fact,  research  shows  cases  in  which  the  combined  risk  is  actually 
higher  than  the  sum  of  the  components  leading  to  “compounding  effects”  as  opposed  to 
diversification effects. A particularly clear example is foreign currency loans, which constitute 
a sizable part of lending in certain countries. Consider a bank lending in foreign currency to 
domestic borrowers. These positions contain market risk (exchange rate risk) and credit risk 
(default  risk  of  borrowers).  Now  assess  the  two  risks  separately.  When  for  example  the 
domestic  economy  slows,  ceteris  paribus,  the  probability  of  domestic  borrowers  defaulting 
increases. When the domestic currency depreciates, ceteris paribus, the value of the loan in 
domestic currency increases as it is denominated in foreign currency. So, on the surface one 
could think that the two effects offset each other. But this reasoning would neglect the strong 
relationship  between  exchange  rate  changes  and  default  risk  in  this  type  of  contract.  The 
ability of a domestic borrower to repay a loan in foreign currency depends in a non-linear way 
on fluctuations in the exchange rate (unless the domestic borrower has other revenues in the 
foreign  currency  in  which  the  loan  is  denominated).  A  home  currency  depreciation  has  a 
particularly major effect on the repayment amount and therefore repayment probability of a 
foreign currency loan by an unhedged domestic borrower, which tends to be stronger than 
the valuation effect mentioned above. 
18)  Similarly, floating or adjustable rate loans have coupons that change as interest rates 
change. Therefore, if the coupons on the loans adjust frequently (or in the limit continuously), 
then the interest rate risk of the loan is passed on to borrowers, and therefore, assuming the 
loans  do  not  default,  they  have  no  market  risk  for  the  bank.  If  credit  risk  is  computed 
separately  from  market  risk,  then  the  credit  risk  of  the  loans  is  computed  while  holding 
interest  rates  constant.  This  treatment  of  credit  risk  can  miss  an  important  interaction 
between  market  and  credit  risk.  For  example,  if  probabilities  of  default  are  increasing  in 
interest rates, then holding rates constant can easily lead to an understatement of the true 
probability  of  default  and  hence  the  sum  of  market  and  credit  risk,  when  computed 
separately,  would  lead  to  an  understatement  of  total  risk.  The  same  is  the  case  with 
matching long and short positions in OTC derivatives . The practical challenges of moving to 
a fully  integrated measurement  and management  of  economic  risk,  however,  are  currently 
substantial.  A  first  major  obstacle  to  integrating  market  and  credit  risk  measurement  and 
management is that the metrics typically used for each of them are not fully comparable, with 
market risk models capturing a full distribution of returns and credit risk models focusing on 
losses from default and neglecting gains. 
19)  Successful  management  of  market  and  credit  risk  often  relies  on  liquid  markets  to 
hedge risks and unwind positions, as the ongoing financial crisis has abundantly illustrated. 
Liquidity conditions interact with market risk and credit risk through the horizon over which 
assets  can  be  liquidated.  In  particular,  deteriorating  market  liquidity  often  forces  banks  to 
lengthen the horizon over which they can execute their risk management strategies. As this 
time horizon lengthens, overall risk exposures increase, as does the contribution of credit risk 
relative to market risk. The liquidity of traded products can vary substantially over time and in 
unpredictable  ways.  Theoretical  research  indicates  that  such  liquidity  fluctuations,  all  else 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
equal, should have a larger impact on prices of products with greater credit risk. Conversely, 
as the financial crisis illustrated, valuation uncertainties or other shocks that enhance actual 
or perceived credit risks can have adverse effects on liquidity and put in motion a downward 
spiral between market prices and liquidity of traded credit products (see for example the case 
of tranches from collateralised debt obligations based on sub-prime loans). 
20)  As regards securitisation, the securitisation market is primarily intended to redistribute 
the credit risk away from the originators to a wide spectrum of investors who can bear the 
risk,  thus  aiding  financial  stability  and  provide  an  additional  source  of  funding.  The  recent 
crisis  in  the  credit  markets  has  called  into  question  the  desirability  of  certain  aspects  of 
securitisation  activity  as  well  as  of  many  elements  of  the  “originate  to  distribute”  business 
model,  because  of  their  possible  influence  on  originators'  incentives  and  the  potential 
misalignment of interests of the originators and investors. For example, if the incentives of 
originators  are  not  sufficiently  aligned  with  those  of  the  holders  of  risk  then  banks’ 
intermediation  function,  including  screening  and  monitoring  of  borrowers,  can  be  severely 
impaired. Once these problems become apparent to the wider market, risk sharing markets 
become dysfunctional or even disappear. If securitisation markets become illiquid, banks can 
be exposed to heightened risk from exposures to both credit risk (defaults), for example as 
loans can no longer be securitised, and to market risk from changes in the mark-to-market 
value  of  the  securitised assets.  In  addition,  when  risk-sharing  markets  become  illiquid, the 
signals  from  prices  can  become  distorted  or  even  disappear,  rendering  risk  measurement 
especially challenging. A further requirement for well-functioning markets is that investors in 
securitisation instruments should have a firm understanding of the associated risks. Recent 
events exposed deficits in this understanding that were partly related to problems with the 
availability  of  information  and  to  the  complexity  of  certain  securitisation  structures  that 
obscured the  links  between  the  performance  of the  underlying  assets  and  the  price  of the 
instruments. 
21)  While  the  securitisation  framework  in  India  has  been  reasonably  prudent,  certain 
imprudent practices have reportedly developed like origination of loans with the sole intention 
of  immediate  securitisation  and  securitisation  of  tranches  of  project  loans  even  before  the 
total  disbursement  is  complete,  thereby  passing  on  the  project  implementation  risk  to 
investors. With a view to developing an orderly and healthy securitisation market, to ensure 
greater alignment of the interests of the originators and the investors as also to encourage 
the  development  of  the  securitisation  activity  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  aforesaid 
objectives,  several  proposals  for  post-crisis  reform  were  being  considered  internationally. 
Central  to  this  is  the  idea  that  originators  should  retain  a  portion  of  each  securitisation 
originated, as a mechanism to better align incentives and ensure more effective screening of 
loans.  In  addition,  a  minimum  period  of  retention  of  loans  prior  to  securitisation  is  also 
considered desirable, to give comfort to the investors regarding the due diligence exercised 
by the originators. Keeping in view the above objectives and the international work, RBI had 
framed  guidelines  regarding 
the  Minimum  Holding  Period  and  Minimum  Retention 
Requirement  among  other  measures  and  the  revision  in  its  securitisation  guidelines  was 
issued in May, 2012. 
In the context of banks applying for moving over to advanced approaches, there is a 
22) 
need to clearly distinguish between different Pillar I risks. For example, we need to be clear 
as to under which risk category the following events would be classified – under market risk 
or  under  operational  risk?  –  (i)  Incorrect  mark-to-market  valuations  and  VaR,  due  to,  for 
instance,  erroneous  booking  of  a  trade  into  the  trading  system  and  the  market  moves  in 
negative  direction  resulting  in  losses  (ii)  incorrect  specification  of  deals  in  the  term-sheet 
(errors related to the transaction amount, maturities and financial features) (iii) unauthorised 
trading in excess of risk limits (iv) failures in properly executing a stop loss. Those of you who 
have answered as operational risk perhaps could be proud of having some level of detailed 
understanding of the major risk categories. It is important to remember that with reference to 
the interaction between operational risk and the other Pillar 1 risk types, for banks intending 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to follow  AMA  for  operational  risk,  the  boundaries  between  operational  risk  and credit  and 
market  risks  involve  different  treatments.  While  credit-related  operational  risk  losses  are 
excluded from the operational risk capital requirement (as long as they continue to be treated 
as  credit  risk  for  the  purpose  of  calculating  minimum  regulatory  capital),  operational 
risk/market  risk  boundary  events  are  included  in  the  scope  of  operational  risk  rather  than 
under market risk for regulatory capital calculation. 
23)  When  distinguishing  between  operational  risk  (events  or  losses)  and  market  risk 
(events  or  losses)  the  following  criteria  should  be  applied:  The  events  (and  the  related 
losses)  which  should  be  included  in  the  “scope  of  operational  risk”  are:  (a)  Events  due  to 
operational  errors;  (b)  Events  due  to  failures  in  internal  controls;  (c)  Events  due  to  wrong 
selection of the model, made outside a defined business process/formalised procedure and 
without  a  formalized,  conscious  risk-taking  process;  and  (d) Events  due  to  wrong 
implementation  of  the  model.  In  all  these  cases,  the  whole  amount  of  the  loss  incurred 
should be included in the “scope of operational risk loss”, unless the position is intentionally 
kept open after the operational risk event is recognized. In the latter case any portion of the 
loss due to adverse market conditions after the decision to keep the position open should be 
ascribed to market risk. The events (and the related losses) which should be excluded from 
the “scope of operational risk” include those arising from wrong selection of a model, made 
through  a  formalized  corporate  process  where  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  model  itself  are 
carefully weighed up. 
24)  Participants would recall that a few days back the FED and OCC applied enforcement 
action  against  JP  Morgan  after  they  found  weaknesses  in  internal  controls  in  its  London 
office  which  lost  about  $6  billion  in  early  2012  on  derivatives  bets  through  synthetic  credit 
portfolio  which  looked  more  like  speculation  than  hedging.  Some  of  the  key  requirements 
forming part of the enforcement order included implementing risk management programme 
effectively  and  consistently  across  the  firms  with  respect  to  trading  activities,  measures  to 
ensure that controls for trading activities across lines of business are consistent, enhanced 
model risk governance, measures to ensure that material risk management issues relating to 
trading activities are escalated in a timely manner to senior management and the BoD or a 
committee  thereof,  as  appropriate.  In  respect  of  internal  audit,  the  requirements  included 
enhanced  escalation  procedures  for  timely  resolution  if  material  audit  exceptions  and 
recommendations and measures to strengthen the ongoing quality assurance review of audit 
practices. Similarly, in respect to a $2 billion loss at UBS, FSA while penalising the bank last 
year had observed that risk management of the desk was not effective in controlling the risk 
of unauthorised trading. The trade capture and processing system also had weakness which 
were  exploited  in  order  to  conceal  unauthorised  trading.  The  system  allowed  trades  to  be 
booked to an internal counterparty without sufficient details, there were no effective methods 
in  place  to  detect  trades  at  material  off-market  prices  and  there  was  a  lack  of  integration 
between systems. There was an understanding among personnel supporting the desk that 
the operation divisions main role was that of facilitation. Their main focus was on efficiency 
as opposed to risk control and they did not adequately challenge the front-office. All these 
are  instances  are  indicative  of  what  is  missing  in  terms  of  management  and  control 
processes that  lead  to  such  instances  and  are  instructive  to  us.  However,  notwithstanding 
plethora of similar historical cases with perhaps slightly different modus operandi, new cases 
keep coming now and then. Perhaps, the underlying causative factors arise from the system 
of  incentives  and  disincentives,  which  have  also  been  factored  in  as  part  of  measures  to 
address the issues causing the financial crisis of 2007–08. 
25) 
I am happy to note that the course coverage is comprehensive covering various areas 
like sound internal controls and risk management systems for a bank’s trading book, tools to 
measure,  monitor  and  control  market  risks,  discussion  on  emerging  issues  in  derivatives 
markets, discussion on securitisation and basic accounting aspects relating to derivatives. I 
hope the participants use the opportunity to further clarify their doubts relating to the subject 
area of this programme from the Fed Reserve experts. I thank the Federal Reserve System 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
for their continuing support in training our officials on various supervisory areas. I am certain 
that  the  inputs  received  from  this  programme  would  assist  in  improving  knowledge  and 
understanding  of  the  relevant  subject  areas  both  for  the  relatively  new  as  well  as 
experienced inspecting officials who have gathered here, which is of particular significance in 
the present context of moving to a risk based approach to supervision coupled with proposed 
migration  of  some  of  the  banks  to  advanced  approaches  for  computation  of  capital  in  the 
near  future.  I  wish  the  programme  a  great  success  and  wish  the  participants  a  fruitful 
learning experience.  
References 
Bank for International Settlements (2011), ‘Revisions to the Basel II Market Risk Framework’, 
February 
Reserve Bank of India (2012), ‘Financial Stability Report’, December 
RBI Guidelines on Implementation of Internal Models Approach (IMA) for market risk (2010) 
Philippe  Jorion  (2009),  ‘Value  at  Risk-  The  New  Benchmark  for  managing  Financial  Risk’, 
Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Ltd 
Board  of  Governors  of  Federal  Reserve  System  (2013),  Consent  Order  with  JPMorgan 
Chase and Co, January 
FSA (2012), Notice to UBS AG, November 
Reserve Bank of India ‘Guidelines on implementation of Basel III Capital Regulations in India’ 
(2012) 
Nassim  Nicholas  Taleb  (2010),  ‘The  Black  Swan-  The  impact  of  the  Highly  Improbable’, 
Penguin Books 
Bank for International Settlements (2009), ‘Findings on the interaction of market and credit 
risk’, Working Paper No 16, May 
RBI Guidelines on Advanced Measurement Approach (AMA) for Calculating Operational Risk 
Capital Charge (2011) 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
