Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, for the 
Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, 
Brussels, 23 September 2013. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a pleasure for me to be back with your committee, shortly after the important vote of your 
assembly on the SSM regulation. This vote has been preceded by intense interaction on the 
interinstitutional  agreement  on  accountability  and  transparency,  and  I  would  like  to  thank 
President  Schulz,  your  Committee  and  the  negotiating  team  for  the  commitment  to  a 
successful establishment of the SSM. Our two institutions share a common interest in a swift 
and  effective  implementation  of  banking  union.  The  draft  inter-institutional  agreement 
ensures high standards of transparency and accountability, while safeguarding the protection 
of confidential information. We will continue working with a similar constructive spirit in the 
months ahead and hope that this will allow a swift set-up of the Supervisory Board.  
Today, I will first review recent economic and monetary developments in the euro area. I will 
then address the two topics that you have selected for our discussion: the impact of our non-
standard measures; and the new tasks of the ECB in the reformed EMU architecture. 
Economic and monetary developments  
Since  our  meeting  in  July  we  have  received  positive  data  for  the  euro  area  economy. 
Following six quarters of negative output growth, euro area real GDP rose by 0.3%, quarter 
on quarter, in the second quarter of 2013. Measures of confidence and surveys of production 
have  given  some  support  to  the  view  that  euro  area  economic  activity  should  continue  its 
slow recovery in the current quarter, despite weak production data for July. Looking forward, 
economic activity should benefit from a gradual improvement in domestic demand, supported 
by the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy stance and strengthening external demand for 
euro area exports. However, unemployment in the euro area remains far too high, and the 
recovery will need to be firmly established. 
Annual  euro  area  inflation  declined  to  1.3%  in  August  2013,  down  from  1.6%  in  July. 
Underlying  price  pressures  are  expected  to  remain  subdued,  reflecting  the  broad-based 
weakness in aggregate demand and the modest pace of the recovery. Medium to long-term 
inflation expectations continue to be firmly anchored in line with price stability. The risks to 
the outlook for price developments are expected to be still broadly balanced over the medium 
term.  
Monetary and, in particular, credit dynamics remain subdued. The annual rate of change of 
loans  to  the  private  sector  and,  notably,  to  firms  weakened  further  in  July.  Weak  loan 
dynamics  continue  to  reflect  the  current  stage  of  the  business  cycle  but  also  heightened 
credit risk and the ongoing adjustments in the balance sheets of borrowers and lenders. The 
significant improvement in the funding situation of banks since the summer of 2012 has not 
yet fed through into higher credit provision.  
Review of recent monetary policy decisions  
Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  has  pledged  to  maintain  monetary  policy 
accommodative  for  as  long  as  necessary.  In  order  to  re-affirm  and  clarify  this  conditional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
pledge, in a context of volatile money market interest rates, the ECB has introduced forward 
guidance in July, stating that it expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or 
lower levels for an extended period of time. This expectation, which has been reconfirmed in 
August  and  September,  is  based  on  a  subdued  outlook  for  inflation  extending  into  the 
medium  term,  given  the  broad-based  weakness  in  the  economy  and  subdued  monetary 
dynamics. We will maintain the degree of monetary accommodation warranted by the outlook 
for price stability and aim at promoting stable money market conditions. 
To  ensure  an  adequate  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  financing  conditions  in  the 
broader  economy,  it  is  essential  that  effective  measures  be  taken  to  further  reduce 
fragmentation of euro area credit markets and to strengthen the resilience of banks where 
needed. Monetary policy contributes to these objectives, but it can only address impairments 
in transmission insofar as they are not related to more structural barriers. 
By giving unlimited access to central bank refinancing against adequate collateral, our non-
standard  measures  have  been  pivotal  in  relieving  bank  funding  stress.  The  collateral 
framework has been adjusted as necessary to ensure continued adequate risk protection for 
the  ECB’s  balance  sheet,  while  at  the  same  time  promoting  transparency,  for  example  in 
markets  for  structured  finance  products.  Ensuring  that  solvent  banks  remain  liquid  has 
contributed  to  avoiding  an  abrupt  deleveraging  which  would  have  deeply  damaged  the 
economy.  
The Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) announced a year ago have prevented risks of 
destructive scenarios with potentially severe challenges for price stability in the euro area. 
OMTs  serve  as  a  fully  effective  backstop,  within  the  ECB’s  mandate,  and  under  formal 
conditionality so as to preserve the appropriate incentives for governments to ensure fiscal 
solvency and adopt those structural policies that can put the economy on a sustainable path.  
Over the past twelve months, confidence in the euro area has returned. As a consequence, 
fragmentation in euro area funding markets has been receding. This improvement owes not 
only to the ECB’s non-standard measures, but also to progress by governments in improving 
the euro area governance and in pursuing reform agendas. Deposit outflows from stressed 
countries  have  been  reversed.  Market  access  for  banks  has  improved.  Reliance  on  ECB 
funding support has been steadily declining. These improvements are reflected primarily in 
the on-going advance repayments of funds by several banks which had borrowed from the 
ECB under the two three-year longer-term refinancing operations. While repayment of central 
bank credit is certainly a sign of normalisation, the resulting reduction in excess liquidity can 
reinforce upward pressures on term money market rates. We will remain particularly attentive 
to the implications that these developments may have for the stance of monetary policy. 
The tasks of the ECB in the reformed EMU architecture  
Let  me  finally  address  the  tasks  of  the  ECB  in  the  reformed  EMU  architecture.  The 
Maastricht  set-up  has  been  substantially  strengthened  since  the  start  of  the  crisis.  Europe 
has  reinforced 
fiscal  and  macroeconomic  surveillance,  created  a  permanent  crisis 
management  mechanism,  the  ESM,  and  has  improved  its  institutional  framework.  It  is 
moving swiftly towards the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) for banks in the euro area. 
A  key  priority  of  the  agenda  for  the  last  quarter  of  2013  is  to  complement  it  by  a  Single 
Resolution Authority and Single Resolution Fund as proposed by the European Commission. 
The  ECB  strongly  supports  the  envisaged  timeline  for  the  establishment  of  the  SRM  by 
1 January 2015, which adequately reflects the urgency.  
Let me make a few remarks on the specific role of the ECB in the progress towards a fully-
fledged banking union. Already in 2010, with the decisive contribution of your institution, the 
ESRB was created to oversee macro-prudential risks in the financial system as a whole. The 
ECB ensures the Secretariat and thereby provides support to the ESRB. This year, a further-
reaching step is being made with the imminent launch of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
The ECB is fully committed to assume its new responsibilities and to discharge accountability 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
accordingly.  Preparatory  work  has  started  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  new  tasks  are 
performed at the highest level of effectiveness and professionalism.  
While synergies between the new supervisory and existing monetary policy functions exist, 
the ECB will strictly respect the principle of separation between monetary policy and banking 
supervision, as foreseen in the SSM Regulation. Such separation will ensure that the ECB 
will continue to fulfil its primary mandate of price stability in complete independence, in line 
with the Treaty.  
The  effective  separation  of  monetary  policy  and  bank  supervision  decisions  will  be 
implemented  both  at  the  decision making  level  and  at  the  technical staff  level.  A separate 
Supervisory Board will be created to draft and enforce decisions. Furthermore, deliberations 
of  the  Governing  Council  on  supervisory  matters  will  be  strictly  separated  from  monetary 
policy  decisions.  This  separation  between  the  two  tasks  will  be  underpinned  by  separated 
agendas and meetings.  
Finally, let me say a few words on the involvement of the ECB in the troika. Back in 2010, we 
were asked by the Council to provide our technical expertise to the design and monitoring of 
EU/IMF financial assistance programmes. In the meantime, the ECB has been allocated a 
number of specific tasks by the ESM Treaty and EU secondary legislation. We act in liaison 
with the Commission to provide technical advice, based on our expertise. As we have done 
in the past, we remain ready to share our views on the situation in programme countries with 
the European Parliament and to explain the advice provided as part of the troika. However, it 
is important to recall that the Eurogroup is the body which actually decides whether to grant 
financial assistance and under which terms.  
Thank you for your attention. I am now looking forward to your questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
