Peter Praet: Forward guidance and the European Central Bank 
Column by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
published on VoxEU.org, 6 August 2013. 
 The Introductory Statement to the Press Conference following the ECB’s Governing Council 
meeting of 4 July contained the following two sentences: 
The  Governing  Council  expects  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  to  remain  at  present  or  lower 
levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  This  expectation  is  based  on  the  overall  subdued 
outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, given the broad-based weakness in the 
real economy and subdued monetary dynamics. 
This statement, in particular the formulation “for an extended period of time”, marks a change 
in  the  ECB’s  communication  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  a  form  of  forward  guidance,  a 
communication instrument by  which central banks convey their monetary policy orientation 
going forward, conditional on their assessment of the economic outlook. 
The  standard  view  is  that  monetary  policy  influences  the  economy  and,  ultimately,  price 
setting  primarily  by  affecting  interest  rates  at  intermediate  and  medium-term  maturities. 
Indeed, longer-term interest rates determine the borrowing conditions that are most relevant 
for a large component of aggregate spending: first and foremost, durable consumption and 
investment.  The  expectations  theory  of  the  term  structure  of  interest  rates  suggests  that 
longer-term interest rates reflect the expected path of the very short-term interest rates which 
the  central  bank  controls.  This  is  because  trading  in  financial  markets  removes  persisting 
arbitrage  opportunities  across  securities  with  similar  risk  characteristics  and  different 
maturities.  As  a  consequence,  returns  are  equalised  across  the  term  structure,  except  for 
premia that remunerate investors holding relatively longer term securities. Therefore, it is not 
so much by changing their very short-term interest rate instruments that central banks can 
impact  the  decisions  that  matter  most  for  the  economy.  It  is  rather  by  influencing 
expectations about the evolution of those short-term interest rates in the predictable future.  
When  a  central  bank  changes  its  short-term  interest  rate,  interest  rates  at  intermediate  to 
medium-term maturities tend to shift in the same direction, if there is a signal that the new 
level of the short-term interest rate is likely to persist1. In general, this puts a premium on the 
way  central  banks  communicate  about,  or  at  least  are  perceived  to  reveal  their  policy 
orientation. 
Is  there  evidence  supporting  the  contention  that  central  banks’  perceived  orientation  is  as 
important  as  their  actions?  Answering  this  question  is  difficult.  First,  when  a  central  bank 
communicates a decision, it is difficult to disentangle the impact on market rates which can 
be associated to its immediate decision to change its policy instrument from the effect that its 
action may exert via signalling and expectations of future policy. Second, there is of course 
no obvious counterfactual against which any impact can evaluated. And the term structure of 
interest  rates  always  also  reflects  news  and  expectations  that  are  not  related  to  monetary 
policy. Subject to all these caveats, evidence indeed supports the view that the way in which 
a  central  bank  communicates  decisions  is  perhaps  as  important  as  the decision  itself.  For 
example,  using  an  event  study  methodology  and  high-frequency  data  around  official 
communications, Gürkaynak et al. (2005) show that the impact of Fed monetary policy works 
through  two  distinct  channels,  the  signalling  one  being  very  effective  in  influencing 
                                                
1  For  an  exposition  of  this  standard  view,  see  for  example  Woodford  (2003)  or,  for  a  focused  discussion  of 
central bank communication in this context, see Blinder et al. (2008). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
expectations and the yield curve. Brand et al. (2010) tend to reach similar conclusions using 
euro area data.  
But, how do economic actors form their expectations about future policy? The simple answer 
is: by trying to gain an understanding about the way the central bank systematically responds 
to  economic  developments.  Indeed,  monetary  policy  decisions  are  not  isolated,  ad  hoc 
reactions  to  ever  new  constellations  of  circumstances.  Instead,  they  tend  to  display  a 
recognisable pattern. This pattern is a reflection of a strategy by which a central bank – faced 
with ever new shocks – modifies monetary conditions so as to bring the economy back to a 
steady path of price stability and balanced growth. 
In light of this mechanism, the expectations channel by which economic actors anticipate the 
path  of  future  policy  consists  of  two  interlinked  parts.  The  first  part  is  an  interpretation  by 
economic  actors  of  the  strategy  governing  central  bank  actions  in  response  to  economic 
conditions. The second part is related to their perceptions about the central bank’s present 
assessment of current and future economic conditions.2 
A taxonomy 
Not surprisingly, forward guidance – a form of advance communication about future policy 
orientations  –  intervenes  on  both  components  of  the  expectations  channel.  In  modern 
parlance, one could say that forward guidance has both an Odyssean and a Delphic element 
in it (this evocative taxonomy has been proposed in a recent paper by Campbell et al, 2012).  
The  Odyssean  element  has  to  do  with  the  central  bank’s  disclosure  or  clarification  of  its 
monetary  policy  strategy.  In  contemporary  quantitative  economics  terms,  one  could  say: 
through  the  Odyssean  element  of  forward  guidance,  the  central  bank  communicates  the 
parameters of its reaction function and its policy goals. It is Odyssean to the extent that a 
reaction function,  or  a  strategy,  is  a  reflection  of the  central  bank’s  mandate  and  statutes, 
and therefore is binding for central bank actions. Not unlike Odysseus who tied himself to the 
mast  of  his  vessel  to  resist  temptations,  by  anchoring  itself  to  a  strategy  a  central  bank 
commits to never lose sight of its general purpose as spelled out in its mandate and statutes.  
Through  its  Delphic  element,  forward  guidance  gives  information  about  the  central  bank’s 
perceptions of macroeconomic fundamentals. Like the utterings of the Delphic oracle, such 
communication reveals expectations of future events, given the current state of knowledge. 
To the extent that the future course of monetary policy is motivated by the underlying path of 
the economy, and is contingent on the direction that the economy is expected to take, the 
Delphic component of forward guidance discloses a conditional expected path of policy. In 
fact,  the  conditionality  of  forward  guidance  statements  by  central  banks  is  mainly  an 
implication of their Delphic element.  
Two examples of forward guidance 
In  one  way  or  another,  various  forms  of  indications  –  more  Delphic  in  nature  –  about  the 
conditional direction of policy have implicitly been part of central bank communication for a 
while, increasingly so since the mid of the 1990s. Around that time, a small number of central 
banks  pioneered  the  publication  of  numerical  forecasts  for  the  future  path  of  their  policy 
rates. For example, since 1997, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) has provided a 
numerical  projection  of  future  policy  rates.  In  2005  the  Norges  Bank  took  such  explicit 
forward  guidance  a  step  further  by  communicating  not  only  a  forecast  of  the  short-term 
interest rate path, but also a confidence interval around it. These two – and many other – 
examples  of  explicit 
importance  of 
forward  guidance,  once  more,  underscore 
the 
                                                
2  There are some intermediate steps missing in this simple view. A description of the (likely) transmission of 
monetary policy via the real and, importantly, the financial sector is outside the scope of this text. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
conditionality.  By  stressing  that  the  forward  guidance  is  a  forecast  based  on  current 
information,  and  consistent  with  the  central  bank’s  broad-based  projections  about  the 
underlying  economic  conditions  looking  forward,  there  is  no  commitment  to  future  actions. 
When  new  information  is  available,  the  forecast  is  updated.  This  point  is  reinforced  by 
publishing  the  confidence  intervals,  i.e.,  the  probability  distribution  over  possible  future 
interest rates. 
More recently, forms of forward guidance with a distinct (and extreme) Odyssean character 
have gained some prominence in the academic debate over monetary policy in a very low 
interest  rate  environment.  Here,  the  main  idea  is  the  following:  when  the  central  bank  is 
constrained in its capacity to reduce the short-term interest rate further by the lower bound 
on nominal rates, it could resort to communication about its intention to keep the short-term 
interest  rate  at  the  current  level  for  some  time  in  the  future.  This  would  help  steer 
expectations in the desired direction, and thereby exert downward pressure on longer-term 
interest rates. It is therefore an indirect channel to engineer an easing of credit conditions, 
broadly  defined,  even  though  the  level  of  the  short-term  interest  rate  remains  constant. 
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), among others, go as far as suggesting that a promise by 
the central bank to maintain a zero interest rate policy for some time in the future, and even 
in  the  face  of  conditions  that  would  otherwise  dictate  a  firming  of  the  stance,  would  be  a 
powerful  instrument  to  stimulate  the  economy  already  at  present.  In  this  line  of  thinking, 
forward  guidance  is  a  communication  campaign  by  which  a  central  bank  advertises  its 
intention to depart from its usual strategy, if only temporarily. It is a promise to suspend its 
strategy  and  become  “irresponsible”,  as  in  Krugman  (1998),  meaning:  unreactive  to  the 
cyclical conditions – at some point in the future, when the cycle will turn, inflation will start 
rising and the usual pattern of central bank reaction would dictate a resolute firming of the 
stance. Its promise not to follow that usual pattern of reaction will be painful to fulfil, when 
that time comes, because the central bank will have to watch inflation rising while remaining 
atypically  passive.  But  that  promise  has  a  value  today,  as  it  generates  optimistic 
expectations, supports spending and thus facilitates the central bank’s job at present.3  
The ECB’s forward guidance 
As I wrote at the start, the ECB Governing Council has recently provided forward guidance, 
and  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  major  central  banks  have  done  so  before  on  various 
occasions. What interpretation should one assign to it in current circumstances? 
To be sure, our forward guidance does not promise irresponsibility! Our purpose was not to 
communicate a suspension – even temporarily – of our strategy. Quite the opposite: it was a 
sharp  and  definite  pronouncement  to  reassert  it.  Why  did  we  feel  it  was  necessary  to 
reassert our strategy? Because, starting in May and with increased intensity in the month of 
June,  we  perceived  that  expectations  regarding  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  and  its 
evolution had become somehow detached from our assessment of the state of the economy 
and  our  monetary  policy  inclinations,  given  that  assessment.  A  sustained  upward  trend  in 
money  market  interest  rates  had  led  to  a  restriction  in  money  market  credit  conditions,  so 
that  a  large  portion  of  the  amount  of  monetary  accommodation  that  we  had  introduced  in 
early May had been de facto withdrawn.  
This  called  for  a  clarification  of  our  assessment  and  a  more  precise  description  of  our 
strategy.  So,  the  ECB’s  formulation  of  forward  guidance  includes  a  Delphic  component 
clarifying the assessment, and an Odyssean element reasserting the strategy.  
                                                
3  One  way  to  signal  commitment  is  to  purchase  long-term  bonds  (see  Clouse  et  al.,  2000).  More  recently, 
Woodford (2012) discusses refinements to his version of forward guidance, by which the central bank would 
adopt targets for expected inflation over the medium term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
It is Delphic because it is clearly conditional on the Governing Council’s current assessment 
of the outlook for price stability. The Governing Council believes that the ECB interest rates 
will remain at current or lower levels for “an extended period of time” because it anticipates 
that  economic  conditions  will  remain  such  as  to  justify  an  exceptional  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation over the same horizon (that is, for as long as it is meaningful today for the 
Governing  Council  to  project  future  economic  developments  on  the  basis  of  current 
information). Such economic conditions can be described by an overall subdued outlook for 
inflation  expected  to  extend  into  the  medium  term,  and  associated  with  broad-based 
weakness in the real economy and subdued monetary dynamics. The cross-checking of the 
inflation  outlook  through  monetary  indicators  is  particularly  important.  Optimal  monetary 
policy  in  response  to  a  given  inflation  outlook  depends  on  the  shocks  that  drive  inflation. 
Monetary  developments  help  identify  these  underlying  shocks  explaining  inflation  in  the 
medium term. In this way, monetary developments support a correct calibration of monetary 
policy. In current conditions, the underlying weakness in monetary dynamics – slow growth of 
broad monetary aggregates and very weak credit – suggests that inflation pressures, beyond 
the  ups  and  downs  of  short-term  price  adjustments,  will  likely  remain  subdued  for  an 
extended period of time.  
Some  Odyssean  elements  are  evident  as  well  in  the  ECB’s  statement.  But,  again,  in  the 
following sense: with forward guidance the Governing Council has meant to re-assert – not to 
suspend – its strategy. We have clarified how our strategy is going to guide us in the difficult 
conditions that we expect to prevail going forward. We will be guided by two elements of our 
strategy, in particular. First, our primary objective. By its objective, the ECB is mandated to 
the pursuit of a positive inflation rate below 2%. In accordance with our strategy, this means 
aiming for inflation rates below but close to 2% over the medium term. The 4 July forward 
guidance is an expression of commitment to this objective and of determination to apply the 
policy  prescriptions  which  descend  from  it.  The  second  element  of  our  strategy  which  will 
give us a sense of direction is the strategy’s binary analytical framework. As I said, inflation 
and the economy need to be interpreted: falling inflation in conditions of surging productivity 
and  a  booming  economy  is  not  bad  news.  Falling  inflation  when  aggregate  demand  is 
persistently  dragging,  and  credit  and  money  are  consistently  unsupportive  of  households’ 
consumption and firms’ investment can be a problem for a central bank that is devoted to 
price  stability.  The  monetary  part  of  our  analysis  is  there  –  in  our  forward  guidance 
formulation – to robustify our assessment of the inflation outlook and convey the appropriate 
monetary policy implications that derive from that assessment according to our strategy. 
Against  the  conditions  that  we  see  prevailing  over  a  meaningful  horizon,  our  guidance 
includes an easing bias. This conveys the notion that we have not reached the lower bound 
on  our key  interest rates. We  have  not  run  out of  ammunition.  Further cuts  in  policy  rates 
remain an option for the ECB if the outlook on price stability so warrants. 
The  ECB’s  forward  guidance  has  contributed  to  more  clarity  over  our  assessment  of  the 
outlook  and  our  reaction  function.  Our  forward  guidance  has  contributed  to  more  stable 
money market conditions and has helped to anchor market expectations more firmly. It also 
ensures  that  our  monetary  policy  stance  is  not  excessively  vulnerable  to  shocks  that  are 
disconnected from the underlying economic and monetary conditions in the euro area. 
References 
Blinder, A., M. Ehrmann, M. Fratzscher, J. De Haan and D.-J. Jansen, (2008). “Central Bank 
Communication  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Theory  and  Evidence”,  Journal  of 
Economic Literature, 46 (4), 910–945. 
Brand, C., D. Buncic and J. Turunen, (2010). “The Impact of ECB Monetary Policy Decisions 
and  Communication  on  the  Yield  Curve”,  Journal  of  the  European  Economic  Association, 
8 (6), 1266–1298. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Campbell,  J.,  C.  Evans,  J.  Fisher  and  A.  Justiniano,  (2012).  “Macroeconomic  Effects  of 
Federal Reserve Forward Guidance”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2012. 
Clouse, J., D. Henderson, A. Orphanides, D. Small and P. Tinsley, (2000). “Monetary Policy 
When the Nominal Short-Term Interest Rate is Zero”, BE Press Journal of Macroeconomics: 
Topic in Macroeconomics, 3 (1): article 12. 
Eggertsson, G. and M. Woodford, (2003). “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal 
Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003 (1). 
Gürkaynak, R. B. Sack and E. Swanson, (2005). “Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? 
The  Response  of  Asset  Prices  to  Monetary  Policy  Actions  and  Statements”,  International 
Journal of Central Banking, 1 (1), 55–93. 
Krugman,  P.  (1998).  “It’s  Baaack:  Japan’s  Slump  and  the  Return  of  the  Liquidity  Trap,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998 (2). 
Woodford,  M.  (2003).  Interest  and  Prices:  Foundations  of  a  Theory  of  Monetary  Policy, 
Princeton University Press. 
Woodford, M. (2012). “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound”, 
speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, held in 
Jackson Hole, WY, August 30 – September 1, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
