K C Chakrabarty: Financial inclusion of urban poor in India 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Annual  National  Seminar  titled  “Financial  inclusion  of  urban  poor”  conducted  by  the 
American India Foundation, New Delhi, 28 January 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Smt. Sushma Vij in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Ms. Lata Krishnan, Chair, American India Foundation (AIF); Mr. M. A. Ravi Kumar, CEO, AIF; 
Prof.  Sanghmitra  S.  Acharya,  Jawaharlal  Nehru  University;  Mr.  Pradeep  Kashyap,  Vice 
Chair, AIF; Mr. Michael Markels from the World Bank; Ms. Kavita N. Ramdas, Ms. Madhu P. 
Kishwar,  Mr.  Mathew  Titus  and  Ms.  Sujata  Lamba,  the  panelists  for  today’s  discussion, 
Mr. Hanumant Rawat, Director, AIF; delegates at the seminar, ladies and gentlemen. It is a 
pleasure to be here today at the fifth Annual National Seminar being conducted by the AIF in 
New Delhi. I am happy to see that Dr. Pradip Sarmah from Guwahati, who is a pioneer in the 
design of light weight rickshaws and organizing Joint Liability Group for rickshaw pullers, is 
present here today. 
I am very glad to note that from a very humble beginning in 2001, AIF has emerged as the 
leading non-profit organization in the country, involving Indian-Americans, dedicated not only 
to the task of upliftment of India’s poor but also to development of a vibrant social ecosystem. 
In collaboration with grassroot NGOs and government agencies, AIF has been successfully 
running several projects related to education, livelihood, and public health, with emphases on 
elementary  education,  women’s  empowerment,  and  HIV/AIDS,  respectively.  I  understand 
that  AIF  has  so  far  reached  out  to  more  than  1.7  million  of  India’s  less  fortunate  and 
successfully  transformed  their  lives  by  providing  them  a  sustainable  means  of  livelihood. 
Though on a standalone basis, number of lives touched by AIF is very impressive, it simply 
dwarfs in comparison to the sheer enormity of the challenge that we, as a nation, face i.e. of 
reaching out to a population of 1.2 billion. Even to reach remotely close to the target number, 
we would not only need scaling up of efforts by institutions like AIF, but also the involvement 
of many more such governmental and non-governmental organizations. Our experience with 
the  Financial  Inclusion  programs  has  highlighted  that  unless  the  intermediaries  involved 
develop sustainable delivery models and are able to run these activities as a viable business 
proposition,  success  would  remain  elusive.  Therefore,  apart  from  a  sense  of  commitment, 
what we really need for these drives to succeed is a sustainable delivery model, which other 
institutions could imbibe from AIF and emulate. 
It  is,  indeed,  very  heartening  to  note  that  the  AIF  has  chosen  to  focus  on  the  subject  of 
Financial Inclusion of Urban Poor for its Annual Seminar and I compliment the Foundation for 
this. As you all know, financial inclusion has been a key area of focus for the Reserve Bank 
of  India  and  I  firmly  believe  that  forums  such  as  this  provide  us  an  opportunity  to  put  our 
minds together to introspect on what more needs to be done to meet the ambitious goals we 
have set for ourselves. I, therefore, thank the organizers for inviting me and providing me the 
opportunity to present my views on the topic. 
Though the Indian  economy  has  witnessed  tremendous growth  lately,  vast  sections  of  our 
society have remained excluded from the India growth story due to various socio-economic 
factors.  It  is  ironic  that  despite  our  cities  seeing  widespread  affluence,  large  pockets  of 
financial  exclusion  should  exist  right  at  the  very  heart  of  these  cities.  Every  year,  a  large 
number of people migrate from villages to cities in search of a better life for themselves and 
their  families.  They  take  up  non-contractual  and  non-permanent  jobs  of  vendors,  porters, 
hawkers, construction workers, domestic workers, rickshaw pullers, etc. These people need 
fast, low cost, convenient and safe avenues of savings, credit and remittances to meet their 
needs. However, in view of the non-permanent nature of their occupations, they frequently 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
shift base within city or even across cities. Bankers are generally found to be shy in providing 
them banking services, for obvious reasons. 
What do we mean by Financial Inclusion? 
Before I turn to the specifics of Financial Inclusion of urban poor, let us spend a minute in 
understanding  the  meaning  of  the  term  itself. We  have  defined  Financial  Inclusion  as  “the 
process  of  ensuring  access  to  appropriate  financial  products  and  services  needed  by  all 
sections of the society in general and vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low 
income  groups  in  particular,  at  an  affordable  cost,  in  a  fair  and  transparent  manner,  by 
regulated, mainstream institutional players”. Financial Inclusion is important not only from the 
perspective  of  the  benefit  it  provides  to  the  poor  but  also  from  the  perspective  of  overall 
stability of the social and economic system of the country. Financial Inclusion of the poor has 
a multiplier effect on the economy as a whole, through higher savings pooled from the vast 
segments  of  the  population  present  at  the  bottom  of  the  pyramid.  There  is  a  potential  for 
transforming  the  lives  of  these  excluded  groups  by  providing  access  to  formal  savings 
arrangements and extension of credit by banks for emergency and entrepreneurial purposes, 
thereby enabling the poor to create assets, generate stable income, build resilience to meet 
macro-economic  and  livelihood  shocks  and  bring  about  an  improvement  in  their  financial 
condition and living standards. 
Our strategy for Financial Inclusion 
Financial Inclusion is an integral part of policy making at Reserve Bank of India. We have 
taken  significant  steps  in  the  form  of  regulatory  relaxations,  introduction  of  innovative 
products,  and  various  supportive  measures  towards  this  objective.  We  have  adopted  a 
bank-led  approach  for  financial  inclusion  in  the  country  and  encouraged  the  leveraging  of 
technology while remaining neutral to the technology choice made by individual banks. The 
effort  made  by  all  stakeholders  has  resulted  in  increased  reach  of  banking  services  to 
hitherto  excluded  remote  locations.  Today,  banking  connectivity  has  reached  nearly 
204800 villages  through  brick  and  mortar  branches,  Business  Correspondents  (BCs)  and 
other modes.  During the  last  3  years,  96.25 million  Basic  Savings  Bank Deposit  Accounts 
(including erstwhile No Frill Accounts) have been opened. 
Exclusion of the urban poor 
The rural inhabitants have largely remained the focus of our financial inclusion efforts since a 
large proportion of our villages are still unbanked. This has also been under the premise that 
the  reach  of  banking  network  in  urban  areas  is  already  quite  high  and,  hence,  access  to 
banking services should be available to all. The ground reality, however, is quite shocking. 
The  problem  of  exclusion  is  widespread  even  in  urban  areas,  especially,  for  the 
disadvantaged and low-income groups, despite there being no dearth of bank branches. As 
part  of  the  financial  inclusion  drive,  while  banks  have  opened  13434  BC  outlets  in  urban 
localities during the last 3 years, the progress is far from what was hoped for. Many of the 
urban poor still have no access to formal financial products and services like savings, credit, 
remittance and insurance, forcing them to depend on usurious informal sources to meet their 
personal, health, and livelihood-related needs. Not surprisingly, they struggle to repay such 
borrowings, which further impede their ability to escape the vicious circle of poverty. 
Migrant workers 
One  important  section  of  the  urban  poor,  which  is  adversely  impacted  by  the  problem  of 
financial exclusion in urban areas, is the migrant workers’ group. Migrant workers in urban 
areas mostly comprise people from low-income households who generally leave their village 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
homes in search of better income and employment opportunities. Many of these people work 
and live at their work sites and are paid daily wages. They need a secure place to keep their 
savings and the facility to remit small amounts of money at frequent intervals. In most of the 
migration  corridors, the migrants  have  outstanding  loans  at their  origin points, mainly  from 
informal sources, and the remittances are the major source of loan repayment. 
Rickshaw pullers  
Before we delve into the issues that plague the financial inclusion efforts for the urban poor 
and the migrant workers, let me spend some time talking about one important sub-section of 
this population, the rickshaw pullers – a group which is the focus of the initiatives made by 
the AIF under the Rickshaw Sangh programme. Rickshaw Pullers provide a much needed 
and  valuable  public  service,  especially  for  the  low  income  groups  in  cities,  at  very  cheap 
rates. In areas where lanes and by-lanes are too small for vehicular traffic, cycle rickshaws 
are the only practical means of transport. In most cities, in the absence of any feeder service 
between  the  major  transport  network  stations  like  railways,  metro  rail,  bus,  etc.,  there  is 
always a demand for cycle-rickshaws. 
While no pan-India study on rickshaw pullers is available, it is estimated that there are about 
8  million  rickshaw  pullers  in  the  country,  with  only  about  1.1  million  being  registered  at 
various municipalities. With an average of five persons dependent on each rickshaw puller, 
close  to  about  40  million  people  are  dependent  on  rickshaw  pullers  for  their  subsistence, 
making it an important livelihood source for a sizeable section of our population. 
Typical  of  the  migrant  labour  communities,  the  rickshaw  pullers  also  seldom  possess 
dependable  identities,  references  or  contacts.  They,  usually,  do  not  have  access  to 
institutional finance and, hence, find it difficult to raise funds to purchase their own rickshaws. 
According to available data, 90–95% of rickshaw pullers rent rickshaws on a daily basis and 
pay rentals as high as ₹.25 – 50 per day, which could, thus, add up to ₹1500 per month, for a 
rickshaw costing ₹10000 – 12000. They pay such usurious rents for years but never become 
owners of the rickshaw. On days when the rickshaw puller does not take up the activity due 
to illness, social events, or other reasons, he does not have any income. Moreover, during 
the  cropping  season,  the  rickshaw  pullers  often  return  to  their  home  towns,  resulting  in 
disruption  of  their  regular  occupation.  All  this  results  in  them  have  irregular  and  unstable 
income,  which  is  vulnerable  to  disruption  by  a  multitude  of  factors.  Having  their  own 
rickshaws would encourage them to continue with their occupation all through the year, and 
help  in  bringing  consistency  in  their  income  streams,  which  is  essential  for  any  kind  of 
financial planning. 
It is, therefore, important that there is an effort to extend support to these groups so as to 
make their livelihoods sustainable. The initiative taken by the AIF in bringing together various 
stakeholder  groups  to  improve  the  economic  prospects  of  the  rickshaw  pullers  is,  indeed, 
commendable  and  I  hope  that  the  Rickshaw  Sangh  programme  is  extended  all  over  the 
country and that it succeeds in bringing about a credible improvement in the quality of lives of 
this hard working group. 
Some experiments have already been done by adopting a Joint Liability Group (JLG) model 
for delivery of rickshaw loans. For instance, under the Punjab National Bank’s “JANMITRA 
RICKSHAW FINANCING SCHEME”, need based loans are provided to desirous persons on 
easy  terms  and  conditions  so  that  these  people  can  come  out  of  the  clutches  of  money 
lenders. The financing is done under tie-up arrangement with NGOs sponsored by American 
India  Foundation  Trust  (AIFT)  as  well  as  other  local  NGOs.  The  NGO  arranges  for 
completing the formalities like registration with the local Municipal body. The extent of loan 
includes the cost of the rickshaw, cost of uniform, license fee for two years and three years’ 
premium for life and health insurance of the rickshaw puller. In this instance, a special design 
of  rickshaw  was  created  in  association  with  IIT  Guwahati,  which  resulted  in  a  light  weight 
rickshaw  that  ensured  an  all-weather  comfortable  seating  for  passengers  and  sufficient 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
space for storage of luggage. This also ensured a unique identity of the rickshaw financed 
under the scheme. The design of the rickshaw had sufficient space for advertisement on the 
back.  The  guarantee  of  partnering  NGOs  is  an  assurance  to  the  bank  as  well  as  the 
manufacturers. The banks have lesser risk to deal with; the individuals are supported by the 
quality check of the rickshaws; and the manufacturers are assured of their payment by the 
bank. 
There  are  scores  of  success  stories  under  this  scheme,  which  has  resulted  in  providing 
employment  to  several  poor  people  and  helping  them  live  a  dignified  life.  Their 
collectivization  and  empowerment  through  the  instrument  of  credit  and  the  consequent 
means  of  livelihood  –  the  rickshaw,  seems  to  be  a  turning  point  in  their  lives.  In  this 
experiment, change in the income levels is evident, supplemented by the improvement in the 
perception of self. A large number of homeless and identity-less migrant labourers became 
rickshaw owners and got integrated with financial services of the banks. 
The Rickshaw Sangh programme has, currently, been rolled out in 18 cities in 6 states. As 
per  data  provided  to  me,  more  than  40000  rickshaws  have  been  covered  under  the 
programme with total credit extended being ₹140 million. One important feature of note in the 
Rickshaw  Sangh  programme  is  that  it  is  not  just  restricted  to  providing  a  rickshaw  to  the 
target group, but also includes providing necessary municipal permit, insurance (both on the 
asset and on the life), bank account, photo ID and a uniform. This bundled approach greatly 
improves the impact the programme is likely to have on the beneficiaries. At this stage of the 
Rickshaw Sangh programme, it is heartening to note that an assessment of the programme 
has  been  carried  out  with  the  objective  of  understanding  the  impact  it  has  had  on  the 
beneficiaries  and  other  stakeholders  involved  in  the  programme.  Besides,  it  also  seeks  to 
ascertain the non-economic impact that the programme would have had on the beneficiaries. 
I  do  hope  that  the  outcome  of  the  study  provides  valuable  guidance  on  how  to  take  the 
programme further in terms of both its penetration across the country and the impact it has 
on the social and economic lives of the beneficiaries. 
In my opinion, a major issue that projects focusing on the economic upliftment of the poor 
often face is the lack of adequate emphasis on proper training and capacity building, which 
seriously debilitates the ability of the beneficiaries to manage their assets and income without 
adequate  handholding.  A  major  challenge  to  the  success  of  projects  focusing  on 
improvement  of  living  standards  of  the  rickshaw  pullers  is  the  non-availability  of  a 
standardized  and  comfortable  rickshaw  model.  In  a  country  which  has  a  booming  cycle 
industry with an impressive export pedigree, there are no organized manufacturers of cycle 
rickshaws. In the absence of standard designs, the local manufactures waste much time and 
effort in building a rickshaw. I hope AIF would look into this aspect, tie up with some major 
manufactures,  urge them to  build  on  existing research,  such  as the  one  carried out  by  IIT 
Guwahati, and design standardized, modular, cost-effective machines, which can be easily 
dismantled and reassembled at locations away from manufacturing bases. 
Impediments in Financial Inclusion of urban poor 
Let me now return to the key impediments in achieving Financial Inclusion of the urban poor. 
Among the factors keeping the urban poor and the migrant workers out of the formal financial 
system  are  their  low  and  irregular  earnings,  migrant  nature  of  the  population,  inability  to 
produce  adequate  documentation,  bigger  family  size  with  single  earning  member  and 
financial  illiteracy  leading  to  poor  money  management  skills.  They  are  also  deterred  by 
problems  in  understanding  language,  inconveniences  related  to travelling  and  waiting  time 
and other conditions that come with the formal financial system. It is, indeed, sad that many 
migrant workers do not have adequate information about the remittance facilities offered by 
banks,  and  even  those  who  have  accounts  with  banks,  do  not  use  them  effectively. 
Furthermore, only a few migrants and their families are insured against the risks they face 
every day. As a result of lack of financial literacy and general apathy, even those who have 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
money  continue  to  keep  their  savings  either  at  home  or  prefer  to  participate  in  informal 
savings schemes like chit fund. 
There is no denying the fact that the informal sources are attractive and pervasive in cities 
due to the speed and ease and the multiplicity of services they can give. That is why the poor 
prefer to borrow from informal sources even at exorbitant interest rates of 5–8 per cent per 
month as  the  lender  understands  their financial  situation  and constraints.  Hence,  any  time 
(24x7x365)  availability  of  credit,  especially  in  times  of  emergency,  is  preferred  by  the 
borrowers  despite  the  exploitative  interest  rates.  The  most  crucial  challenge  in  case  of 
migrant workers is proof of identity. The migrant nature of their job does not allow them to 
have  dependable  identities,  references  or  contacts  and,  therefore,  very  often,  they  are 
denied  the  financial  access  due  to  lack  of  adequate  KYC  documents.  Besides,  the 
indifference  of  the  urban  poor  to  the  formal  sources  of  finance,  despite  these  being  less 
costly, is also attributable to the attitude and mindset of the service providers, which needs to 
be facilitating and supportive Experience suggests that the financially excluded population is 
more comfortable tapping the informal sources to finance their needs, which are much more 
“flexible” and “convenient”. 
The need, therefore, is for the formal financial institutions to adapt their product offerings and 
delivery  platforms  to  meet  the  specific  needs  of  the  urban  poor.  The  reasons  why  the 
informal  systems  are  so  popular  needs  to  be  studied  and  their  strong  points  need  to  be 
incorporated into the practices of the formal service providers to the extent possible. Besides, 
in  order  to  meet  the  remittance  requirements  of  migrants,  banks  should  identify  major 
inter-state migration corridors in the country and explore partnership with NGOs in different 
sets of origin-destination pairs. 
Adopt a functional cluster based approach 
literacy 
The challenge  is to  convert  poverty  into  prosperity for  the  people,  while  at the  same time, 
implementing it as a viable business opportunity for banks. For that purpose, we must adopt 
a functional cluster based approach, well suited to the specific needs of different segments 
like  Household  workers,  Construction  workers,  Weavers,  Hawkers,  Rickshaw  pullers,  Auto 
Drivers, etc. There has to be a multi-pronged, holistic approach that could include enhancing 
financial 
to  build  up  demand,  capacity  building  and  mindset  changes  of 
bank staff/ BCs, development of need based innovative products, alternate delivery channels 
through BCs and tie-ups with NGOs to ensure socially responsible delivery of services with 
consumer protection. 
In fact, product innovation in financial services, keeping in view the life cycle needs of the 
urban poor, should form the basis of banks’ strategy to bring these groups into the financial 
system.  Banks  should  innovate  to  create  demand-oriented  savings,  credit  and  remittance 
products that are customized to the lifestyle patterns and income streams of the urban poor. 
Offering micro-saving products, per se, to meet the savings needs of these groups, might not 
be enough. Innovative financial products offering possible investment opportunities, besides 
catering  to  the  savings  needs,  have  to  be  thought  of  for  bringing  the  urban  poor  into  the 
banking system. Insurance offers protection to assets created under credit programmes and 
protects savings from being wiped out by shocks arising out of sickness, death, accidents or 
asset loss caused by fire, drought, floods and riots. The section of the urban poor, who are 
determined to save regularly, even with their low earnings, should be provided an investment 
option  that  fetches  reasonable  rate  of  return  on  their  savings,  without  exposing  them  to 
significant risks. Mutual funds and pension schemes for the unorganized sector, customized 
to the financial needs of the poor, have to be developed. 
As  noted  above,  in  case  of  rickshaw  pullers,  the  organization  of  functional  clusters  into 
groups is central to their linkage to the banking system. Formation of JLGs of the urban poor 
for provision of bank credit, with collective obligations for interest and loan repayments, is an 
option.  Banks  can  also  explore  avenues  for  individual  loans  to  select  JLG  members  who 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
the 
track 
record 
requisite 
through  group  borrowings,  possess 
establish  a  good 
entrepreneurship skills and who want larger loans for productive purposes. 
Linking  with  existing  Urban  Development  Projects:  Training  and  capacity  building 
workshops  can  be  arranged  under  urban  development  projects  like  the  Jawaharlal  Nehru 
National  Urban  Renewal  Mission  (JNNURM).  There  will  be  a  possibility  of  growth  of  more 
homogenous  groups  required  for  forming  JLG/SHGs  in  such  areas.  NGOs  can  play  a 
meaningful role in this direction. 
Today’s seminar must result into concrete actions. As an immediate measure, in order to link 
the urban poor with the formal financial system, it is necessary that the banks take initiatives 
in close coordination with local NGOs, state government and municipal authorities, to launch 
campaigns to open bank accounts of urban poor in camp mode. 
The  problem  of  proof  of  identity  for  the  migrant  workers  can  be  efficiently  handled  by 
leveraging technology. Aadhaar cards issued by the UIDAI have the potential to be a game 
changer.  Aadhaar  would  serve  not  only  as  a  clean,  accessible  identification  to  meet  KYC 
requirements,  but  would  also  facilitate  Electronic  Benefit  Transfer  of  their  benefits  and 
entitlements.  The  recent  KYC  relaxations  permitted  by  RBI  also  allow  for  Aadhaar 
documents to be accepted as both identity and address proof, provided the address given on 
the account opening form is the same as the one on the Aadhaar document. Persons with a 
valid Aadhaar Card would, thus, be able to transact at any bank, at any place. Hence, it is 
also important to launch a one-time campaign to enroll everyone into Aadhaar, which would 
remove the major barriers to inclusion of migrant workers. 
Another  major  area  that  needs  due  attention  is  the  task  of  making  the  urban  poor 
creditworthy. We cannot blame the banks alone for lack of credit penetration to this segment 
of the society. Banks are into the business of lending, but at the same time, they also need to 
factor in the repayment capacity of the borrower. Unless they firmly believe that the borrower 
has the ability to build productive assets with the credit received, they would eschew taking 
that credit risk. The NGOs have a very crucial role to play in this regard. They must lead a 
mission to impart financial education, training and capacity building for this functional group 
(rickshaw pullers, vegetable vendors, plumbers, masons, etc.) and prepare them to avail of 
the  entire  suite  of  financial  products  and  services  i.e.,  savings,  remittance,  insurance  and 
pension from the banking sector, in addition to credit. 
Another linkage for these functional groups with the formal financial system could be through 
an intermediary who could possibly be a management expert. This person could engage with 
a group of such individuals on a regular basis and professionally manage their affairs (say for 
example,  arranging  for  health  insurance)  for  a  fee.  Accordingly,  management  institutions 
could develop basic courses for preparing such managers who truly understand the needs 
and  deeds  of  these  functional  groups.  All  the  above  issues  would  require  co-ordinated 
response from all stakeholders. 
Way forward 
There is a need to create greater awareness about the banking services in order to bring the 
urban poor under the banking network. Proper management of money by the urban poor is 
critically important for meeting their life cycle as well as investment needs. There is scope to 
plug  non  essential  expenses  and  increase  their savings  behavior. The key  strategies  here 
would  be  to  educate,  motivate  and  encourage.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  as  part  of  its 
Financial  Literacy  programme,  is  issuing  a  Financial  Literacy  Guide  which  answers  basic 
questions related to managing money. Responses to certain basic queries such as Why to 
save, how to save,  why save in banks, When to borrow, Where to borrow from, etc. have 
been provided in very simple and lucid language, through pictorial representation. This guide 
can  be  used  by  all  stakeholders  as  a  standard  curriculum  for  educating  the  financially 
excluded poor people. Along with the Guide, we are also coming out with a Financial Diary 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
with  basic  messages  in  pictorial  form  for  distribution  to  the  participants  in  the  Financial 
Literacy Camps so that they can better plan their finances by keeping record of their income 
and expenses on a regular basis. The easy-to-understand posters, with appealing pictures, 
explain the importance of savings and the basic banking services. It is time for banks to play 
a major role in the financial emancipation of the urban poor by conducting financial literacy 
camps and providing door step user friendly access to services. 
From  the  perspective  of  improving  the  living  standards  of  the  rickshaw  pullers,  we  need 
many more initiatives like the Rickshaw Sangh programme. The improvement in the financial 
status of the urban poor, including the rickshaw pullers would be possible only if it is pursued 
as  an  integral  part  of  our  financial  inclusion  initiatives.  Providing  access  to  finance  for  the 
rickshaw  pullers  to  own  rickshaws  should  necessarily  be  at  the  core  of  these  initiatives. 
However,  emphasis  need  also  be  on  providing  a  holistic  package,  which  supports  the 
rickshaw puller in leveraging his asset (the rickshaw) to pull himself and his dependents out 
of poverty. Besides, technology needs to be used to facilitate the task of rickshaw pulling, so 
that it becomes less physically demanding. 
An appropriate, customized delivery channel is equally crucial in urban areas. South Africa’s 
E-Bank  Plan  demonstrates  how  a  commercial  bank  can  bundle  services  for  low-income 
clients.  Its  uniqueness  lies  in  its  focus  on  sensitivity  to  the  needs  of  the  basic  banking 
customer,  which  led  to  creation  of  a  new  product  providing  a  cost  efficient  delivery 
mechanism.  The  idea  was  to  offer  an  integrated  combination  of  product  and  delivery 
features, including user friendly, conveniently located branches, by leveraging on technology. 
E-banks  are  conveniently 
in  colourful,  well-designed, 
user-friendly kiosks. Instead of relying on traditional advertising methods, E-Bank has used 
market  presence,  life  insurance  and  prizes  to  generate  word-of-mouth  advertising.  The 
approach  is  providing  product  and  delivery  features  that  are  valuable  enough to  make  the 
low-income clients willing to pay ATM transaction fees slightly above the market norm and 
high enough to cover banking costs. 
in  high-traffic  areas 
located 
Conclusion 
Bringing the urban poor into the mainstream of the financial system can act as an important 
gateway  for  financial  inclusion.  Rolling  out  of  an  innovative  financial  product,  delivered 
through  a  user  friendly  channel,  is  central  to  achieving  financial  inclusion.  This  has  to  be 
seamlessly integrated with a strategy to improve the financial literacy of the targeted groups. 
Only  then  will  we  be  able  to  avoid  the  problem  of  low  level  of  transactions  in  the  newly 
opened accounts, which we are currently facing in our financial inclusion efforts in the rural 
areas.  As  I  have  always  maintained,  technology  has  to  be  the  bulwark  around  which  our 
financial  inclusion  efforts  have  to  be  developed.  Innovative  ICT  solutions  have  to  be 
leveraged to provide door step services of specifically designed products at place and time 
convenient to the targeted population group. Disbursement of bank loans in association with 
well  meaning  NGOs  and  also  involving  them  in  proper  monitoring/  hand  holding  of 
beneficiaries can result in poverty alleviation for a large number of people. 
Most importantly, society has to radically change its attitude towards labour and the people 
providing us manual services. Every task has its dignity and we must respect the efforts put 
in  by  these  groups  of  people  and  their  contribution  in  making  our  lives  comfortable  and 
hassle-free. This will encourage us to appreciate the genuine problems of these groups and 
work towards finding solutions for them. As I mentioned at the beginning, this is required not 
just for the well-being of these vulnerable groups, but also for the stability and sustainability 
of  the  social  and  economic  system.  I  hope,  we  are,  collectively,  able  to  bring  about  this 
change  in  our  attitude,  which  would  be  a  vital  first  step  in  the  integration  of  these 
marginalized groups. 
I  commend  the  initiative  taken  by  the  AIF  along  with  all  other  stakeholders  including  the 
commercial  banks/  financial  institution  and  NGOs  towards  the  social  and  economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
emancipation  of  the  rickshaw  pullers  through  the  Rickshaw  Sangh  programme.  The  task 
before us is very challenging considering the large number of rickshaw pullers that are yet to 
be  touched  by  the  programme.  I  hope  the  inputs  from  the  assessment  study  help  in 
recalibrating the programme towards better meeting the goals set for it. 
I  once  again  thank  the  AIF  for  providing  me  the  opportunity  to  present  my  views  in  this 
seminar and do hope that the panel discussion to follow would throw up valuable ideas on 
how  to  take  the  financial  inclusion  mission  forward,  particularly  for  the  urban  poor.  I  also 
congratulate the recipients of the Awards for Outstanding Contribution to Financial Inclusion, 
being given today and hope that not only do they continue with their good work, but they also 
succeed in encouraging others to rededicate themselves to the goal of making our society a 
truly inclusive one. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
