Christian Noyer: New Year’s wishes to the Paris financial community 
Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board of Directors 
of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  presents  his  New  Year’s  wishes  to  the  Paris 
financial community, Paris, 21 January 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  start  by  extending  my  warmest  wishes  to  you,  your  colleagues  and  your 
institutions for 2013. 
Admittedly, 2012 was a difficult year, but it was above all a fruitful year that marked a turning 
point  in  the  euro  area  crisis.  Crucial  decisions  were  taken,  providing  lasting  solutions  to 
enhance and safeguard the  functioning  of  our  monetary  union:  the  implementation  of  the 
European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM); 
the  Treaty  on  Stability,  Coordination  and 
Governance; the new agreement on Greek debt; and lastly, the banking union agreement, on 
which I will speak in greater depth. 
This progress was achieved through a collective effort: the ECB and the Eurosystem played 
a  decisive  role  in  restoring  confidence,  thanks  especially  to  a  new  and  particularly 
powerful  tool:  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs).Today,  there  are  no  longer  any 
doubts  about  the  irreversibility  of  the euro.  At  the  national  level,  countries  have  shown 
that  they  were  capable  of taking  all  possible measures  to  reduce  their  deficits  and  to 
put  their  public  finances  on  a  sustainable  footing  while undertaking the structural reforms 
necessary for a return to growth. 
I hope that 2013 will be the year in which this progress is consolidated and built upon. 
Today, I would like to give my views on the challenges that lie ahead this year. I believe that 
the four main challenges are to: 
• 
• 
Adapt to an environment that is still changing rapidly; 
Resolutely  pursue  efforts  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  by 
preparing for and implementing new regulations; 
Further improve the competitiveness of the Paris financial centre; 
Continue to support the economy by ensuring the best possible financing conditions. 
 A rapidly changing legislative and regulatory environment 
1. 
First,  your  working  environment  will  continue 
international financial regulation and France’s legislative framework. 
to  evolve  rapidly, 
in  terms  of  both 
A few words on the draft banking reform law in France 
1.1 
The  financial  crisis  highlighted  some  major  shortcomings  of  international  banking  and 
financial  sector  regulation  as  well  as  the  inadequacy  of  the  tools  at  the  supervisory 
authorities’ disposal to reduce and address risks. 
The  draft  banking  reform  law  reflects  the  commitment  of  the  President  of  the  French 
Republic  to  separate  activities  that  are  useful  for  the  financing  of  the  economy  from 
speculative  activities,  which  will  either  be  ring-fenced  or  banned.  This  law  sets  out  to 
enhance  the  protection  of  deposits  and  the  security  of  market  activities  while  –  and  I 
believe  that  this  is  also  particularly  important  –  striving  to ensure that  you  are  still able to 
offer a broad range of financial services that allow economic agents to hedge risk, borrow or 
invest. The same is  also true for  market making activities that  play  a  vital role  in  ensuring 
financial market liquidity and thus in convincing investors to finance the real economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This  will  therefore  mean  a  new  organisation  for  banks  and  greater  powers  for  the  ACP, 
including  notably  banking  crisis  resolution  powers.  The  ACP  will  then  become  the 
ACPR.  In  exceptional circumstances, the ACP could call on support from the failing entity’s 
shareholders and subordinated bondholders. It could then, if necessary, request intervention 
by the Deposit Insurance and Resolution Fund, which is currently only required to intervene 
in  the  framework  of  its  depositor  compensation arrangements, even  though  it  has  already 
voluntarily  participated  in  restructuring  operations.  In  this  respect,  in  line  with  the  Paris 
financial  centre’s  wishes,  the  draft  law  provides  that  the  possibility  of  calling  on  support 
from the Fund will be capped at a ceiling set by decree in order to ensure that the Fund’s 
intervention does not result in contagion. 
A few words on the banking union 
1.2 
Distinct progress was made in 2012 in the area of European banking supervision. The euro 
area  crisis  required  particularly  ambitious  measures  to  be  adopted  and  these  steps  have 
now been taken. Thanks to the determination of European leaders, at the end of 2012, an 
agreement  was  reached  on  two  draft  regulations  establishing  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  under  the  auspices  of  the  ECB.  These  two  regulations  must  naturally  be 
enhanced  by  proposals  on 
the  crisis  resolution 
mechanism, which are the two other essential pillars of the banking union. The ECB, and all 
the  other  national  authorities  concerned,  must  now  continue  the  preparatory  work  so  that 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism can become operational as soon as possible. 
The  Banque  de  France and  the  ACP  provide  an  important contribution and  intend  to  play 
an  active role  in  the  new  mechanism.  This  is  particularly  the  case  given  that  around  a 
dozen  major  French banking groups will be subject, according to the criteria set out in the 
regulation, to direct supervision by the ECB, even though the ACP will remain responsible for 
day-to-day supervision. 
the  deposit  guarantee 
fund  and 
2. 
Resolutely pursuing efforts to strengthen the resilience of the financial 
system by preparing for and implementing new regulations 
The  international  financial  regulatory  framework  evolved  substantially  in  2012,  and  will 
continue to do so in 2013. It is therefore particularly important to adapt to these changes. 
2.1 
The insurance sector must continue, in France and Europe, to prepare itself 
for the application of the new prudential regime, Solvency II 
Admittedly, 2012  was  marked  by  tough  discussions about  the Omnibus II  Directive and  in 
particular  the  question  of  the  treatment  of  insurance  products  with  long-term  guarantees. 
These  discussions  were  unfruitful  and  will  delay  the  entry  into  force  of  Solvency  II. 
However,  a  positive  signal  was  sent  thanks  to  the  agreement  reached  between  the 
EU Council,  the  European  Parliament  and  the  European  Commission  at  the  end  of 
December  on  the  terms  of  reference  of  the  impact  study  on  long-term guarantees.  This 
study  will  give  impetus  to  the  discussions  and  I  count  on  the  contribution  of  the 
institutions chosen by the ACP. 
Insurance companies must take advantage of the extra time before Solvency II comes into 
force:  in  coordination  with  EIOPA  at  the  European  level,  we  consider  that  it  is  already 
possible  and  necessary  to  make  use  of  certain  definitive  elements  in  the  Solvency II 
directive,  in particular  concerning governance and the ORSA (Pillar 2), and reporting to the 
supervisory authority (Pillar 3). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2.2 
In  the  banking  sector,  credit  institutions  must  continue  strengthening  their 
solvency  – a process  that  is  already  well  underway –  and  they  must 
intensify  their  initiatives  to  adapt  to future regulations concerning liquidity. 
The  Prudential  Supervisory  Authority  has  organised  a  series  of  meetings  designed  to 
familiarise the French financial sector with the changes resulting from the implementation of 
the Basel 3 reforms. In terms of  liquidity, the coverage ratio (LCR) is  now stabilised. In  my 
New  Year  address  of  January  2011,  I  said  that  the  work  on  liquidity  ratios  was 
unsatisfactory  and  that  it  clearly  needed  to  be  reviewed.  This  has  now  been  done.  In 
order  to  counter  the  fears  of  the  recessionary  impact  on  loan  distribution  that  the  first 
version  of the text might  have  prompted,  a transition  phase  has been introduced  to  give 
banks  more  time  to  conduct  their  adaptations.  Moreover,  the  calibration  of  the  liquidity 
requirements  has  been  refined  to  better  reflect  experiences  of  the  crisis,  while  the  list  of 
assets  that  can  be  held  to  satisfy  the  liquidity  requirements  has  been  extended.  Even  if 
adjustments  are  still  possible  in  the  framework  of  the  European  observation  period,  the 
banks  need  to  integrate  this  new  standard  into  their  liquidity  management  policies  as  of 
today. This means that as we now have clear rules, the necessary structural changes must 
be undertaken. 
In 2013 we will pursue our efforts on the 1-year liquidity ratio, but also on the links between 
monetary policy and the liquidity ratio. 
2.3 
In the field of savings, the reallocation of household’s financial investments 
towards bank savings products in 2011 continued in 2012. 
the 
the  Paris 
I  call  upon 
institutions  of 
financial  centre 
The  raising  of  the  ceiling  of  the  “A”  passbook  savings  account  and  of  the  sustainable 
development account led to two months of significant inflows for these products in October 
and November, and the ceiling of the “A” passbook savings was again raised on 1 January 
of  this  year.  I  am  perfectly  aware that  these  adjustments  to  France’s  regulated  savings 
generate  tensions  for  the  collection  of  bank  resources  and  life  insurance  premiums. 
However, 
to  continue 
demonstrating prudence and responsibility in  their search for client resources. The Banque 
de France and the Prudential Supervisory Authority will be vigilant in this respect. It is vital 
that  market  conditions  be  fully  accounted  for  in  setting  the  level  of  interest  on  financial 
products, whether offered by banks or life insurers. It is also best if preference is given to the 
collection of long-term  savings  that  are  indispensable  for  financing  the  economy.  Indeed, 
I  am  actively  seeking  the support of the government with regard to this objective. 
The  Bank  will  seek  to  ease  the  individual  adaptations  required  by  these  numerous  new 
regulatory  frameworks.  In  particular  we  will  strive  to  facilitate  the  management  of 
liquidity  and  collateral,  notably  by  continuing to  support the  mobilisation of  lending to  the 
economy  via  refinancing  operations  with  the  central  bank,  but  also  via  markets.  In  this 
perspective, and at the initiative of the Banque de France,  a Paris  financial  centre  working 
group  has  been  set  up  to  develop  innovative  and  safe  securitisation  mechanisms  that 
should allow banks to make better use of the pool of claims on their balance sheets and to 
strengthen  their  financing  capacities.  The  Bank  will  also  continue  to  mobilise  all  parties 
concerned,  and 
to  accelerate  and  successfully 
implement France’s  migration  to  SEPA  payment  instruments  that  should  be  finalised  by 
1 February 2014  for credit transfers  and direct debits. When the system  is operational,  all 
parties  will  benefit  from  advantages  in  terms  of  cost,  efficiency,  payment  security  and 
management  of  the  associated  liquidity  in  the  context  of  an  integrated,  competitive  and 
innovative market for all cashless payments in euro. 
in  particular  companies, 
in  order 
Improving the attractiveness and competitiveness of the Paris financial centre 
3. 
The competitiveness of the Paris financial centre is an advantage in our crisis exit strategy 
and one that is  important  to  continue  developing  –  particularly  after  the  announcement  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
ICE’s  takeover bid  for NYSE  Euronext,  which  could  substantially  change  the  role  of  the 
financial  centre’s  players  and generate new opportunities. 
It  is  essential  that  efforts  undertaken  to  consolidate  and  develop  market  infrastructures 
as  well  as market and post-trade services be intensified.  From this point of view, 2013 will 
represent an important  step forward  with the full deployment  of the offer  of clearing  and 
triparty  collateral  management  services  for  repo  transactions  in  euro  that  has  been 
developed  with  Paris’s  principal  financial  operators,  banks,  clearing  and  settlement 
infrastructures  and  the  Banque  de  France.  We  will  also  strive  to  take  advantage  of  new 
opportunities as they emerge, particularly in the areas of services for financing, investment 
and  settlement  in  increasingly  international  currencies  (such  as  the  renminbi)  and 
infrastructures for  enhancing  market  transparency  (such  as  data  warehouses  for  the  repo 
market for example). 
4. 
Supporting the economy by offering financing under the best possible conditions 
The  last  point  I  would  like  to  make  is  also  crucial  for  economic  recovery:  it  concerns 
lending  to  the economy.  The  downward  trend  that  has  been  observed  for  some  time  is 
primarily  due  to  a  fall  in demand. But we must of course ensure that the offer of financing 
remains  sufficiently  broad  so  that SMEs  and  MTEs,  who  rarely  have  access  to  market 
financing,  can  weather  the  current  difficult economic period without encountering additional 
difficulties. In particular cash facilities must remain sufficiently  available  and  the  conditions 
under  which  they  are  offered  should  not  be  systematically tightened. In  fact,  our quarterly 
survey  of  several  thousand  SMEs  show  a  regular  contraction  of  the rate  at  which  SMEs’ 
requests for  cash facilities are fully  granted. In  the  last  quarter of  2012, this  rate was only 
slightly  higher  than  50%.  The  same  is  true,  although  to  a  lesser  extent,  for  mid-tier 
enterprises (MTEs). I therefore enjoin you, in general terms, to avoid reducing lending to the 
economy,  which  would  aggravate  the  situation  of companies  and  make  the  necessary 
economic recovery more difficult. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  have  no  doubt  that  you  are  ready  to  meet  these  challenges  –  particularly  as  you  are 
already substantially prepared for them. 
It  only  remains for  me, once again, to  wish you  a  prosperous new year, and, by  way  of a 
conclusion, to express my hope that in 2013 the French financial system will be even more 
useful  to  the  economy,  stronger,  more  competitive  and  oriented  towards  the  future, 
supported  by  a  vigilant  and  efficient central bank and supervisory authority. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
