Jens Weidmann: Crisis economics – the crisis as a challenge for 
economists 
Lecture by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Annual Gala 
Meeting of the Munich Volkswirte Alumni, Munich, 13 June 2013. 
 Welcome 
1.  
Mr Baader 
Members of the Munich Volkswirte Alumni-Club 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  would  like  to  extend  a  very  warm  welcome  to  you  here  at  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  in 
Munich. 
At the same time, I wish to thank the Volkswirte Alumni-Club for inviting me to give this year’s 
lecture. Even at the Bundesbank, it is not every day that so many economists are gathered 
together, and the Bundesbank employs a large number of economists. 
I would therefore like to take this as an opportunity to talk about economists and their role in 
the  crisis.  Before  that,  however,  I  would  like  to  offer  my  sincere  congratulations  to  this 
evening’s prize winners on receiving their awards. 
Have economists failed? 
2.  
On 6 April 2009, a severe earthquake occurred in the central Italian town of L’Aquila with the 
tragic  loss  of  more  than  300  lives.  Only  six  days  earlier,  there  had  been  a  meeting  of  a 
national commission for the forecast and prevention of major risks. Afterwards, the experts 
made  a  public  declaration  that,  despite  a  few  tremors  over  the  past  few  days,  there  was 
currently no heightened risk of an earthquake in the region. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am telling you about this incident because it is possible to draw instructive parallels with the 
role played by economists in the crisis. In much the same way as seismologists are accused 
of not giving ample warning about the possibility of an earthquake, economists are accused 
of not giving ample warning about the looming financial and debt crisis. 
And much as engineers are accused of making buildings that are not earthquake-resistant, 
economists are accused of building design flaws into the financial and economic system, with 
whole nations now suffering under the consequences. 
Economists have never had the best of reputations, even in the academic world. Many may 
feel that the topics which occupy economists are too common or vulgar – such as money. 
As Silvio Gesell wrote in 1911, “Lofty idealists can easily find subjects of investigation more 
attractive than money. Religion, biology, astronomy, for example, are infinitely more edifying 
than an investigation of the nature of money.” 
By  the  way,  Silvio  Gesell  himself  found  this  object  of  investigation  interesting  enough  to 
develop his own theory of money, even though, from today’s perspective, it cannot exactly be 
classed as part of the mainstream. Fortunately, there have been a sufficient number of other 
“lofty idealists” in the ensuing 100 years who have found it attractive and edifying to study 
money and the economy. 
Over the course of time, economists have gained a fair amount of influence in policymaking, 
too,  while  the  opponents  of  this  development  have  long  been  branding  it  as  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
“economisation” of politics and society. With the 2007 financial crisis and the ensuing critical 
developments, unease about economists clearly grew, however. 
It  has  become  fashionable  to  berate  economists.  For  instance,  Philip  Stephens,  the 
associate editor of the Financial Times, recently wrote that “The economy is too important to 
be left to economists”. 
In  my  view,  the  accusations  levelled  against  economists  are,  at  best,  only  partly  justified, 
however. Allow me to use the events at L’Aquila again by way of illustration. 
The global financial crisis has often been described as a “quake on the financial markets”. 
But  that  is  an  unsatisfactory  metaphor.  And  that  is  because  the  financial  crisis,  unlike  an 
earthquake, is not a natural disaster. On the contrary, the crisis is 100% man-made. 
Economics is not an exact science: it is a social science. The laws of economics are not laws 
of nature. Earthquakes can be explained as natural phenomena. When, where and with what 
force  an  earthquake  strikes  cannot  be  predicted  with  any  accuracy,  however.  It  is 
nevertheless possible to say in advance which regions are at severe risk from earthquakes 
and which are less exposed. 
Certainly, financial stability reviews and other economic studies prior to the crisis contained 
some hints at shifts in the financial system. BIS, for example, gave repeated warnings about 
the setback potential stemming from the rapid growth in the credit securitisation and credit 
derivatives segments. Just to refresh your memory: between 2001 and 2007, the volume of 
credit default swaps grew by the factor of 100. 
The  macroeconomic  risks  arising  from  this  development  on  the  financial  markets  were 
scarcely perceived, if they were perceived at all, however. One key reason for this is likely to 
be the fact that the financial markets were modelled, at best, in a rudimentary manner in the 
macro models that serve as an important basis for economic projections. 
Looking back, it is possible to say that financial economics and macro economics have made 
impressive progress over the past few decades – but unfortunately more in parallel than in 
cooperation with each other. It is only recently that research has switched to focusing more 
strongly on the interactions between the financial sector and the real economy. 
Talking  of  progress:  The  ongoing  refinement  of  statistical-econometric  methods  and  their 
application in economic research have brought to light significant insights. Nevertheless, the 
crisis  has  aroused  some  doubts  about  the  triumphal  progress  of  mathematics  in  the 
economic  sciences.  By  contrast,  economic  historians,  who  were  already  thought  to  be  in 
something of a backwater, are now attracting more attention again. 
Having  said  that,  modern  economic  historians  do  indeed  also  make  use  of  methods  of 
empirical economic research, but look back further into the past than is customary. The book 
“This Time is Different” by Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff is not only one of the 
best-selling books in the crisis literature; it has also been a reminder that financial and debt 
crises have been a constantly recurring phenomenon for centuries. 
One classic of financial history, “Manias, Panics and Crashes” by Charles P. Kindleberger, is 
rediscovered  in  every  crisis.  In  it,  Kindleberger  shows  in  numerous  episodes  that  earlier 
centuries  repeatedly  witnessed  speculative  bubbles  and  exaggerations  on  asset  markets: 
tulip  mania  in  17th  century  Holland,  for  example,  or  the  South  Sea  Bubble  and  the 
Mississippi Bubble in the 18th century, which perhaps triggered the first international financial 
crisis. 
Kindleberger cites one banker who invested in shares of the South Sea Company in 1720 as 
saying that, if the rest of the world takes leave of its senses, one must join in to a certain 
extent. That is very reminiscent of Chuck Prince, the former CEO of Citigroup, who, in 2007, 
came up with the legendary remark that “As long as the music is playing, you’ve got to get up 
and dance”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There’s nothing new under the sun, one might say in summary. 
3.  
Do economists have to rethink? 
Financial market regulation 
3.1  
Yet,  the  crisis  has  also  called  into  question  a  number  of  economic  policy  paradigms.  First 
and  foremost,  the  financial  and  debt  crisis  has  revealed  design  flaws  in  the  financial  and 
monetary systems. 
The liberalisation of the financial markets is now viewed much more critically than before the 
crisis. Confidence in the efficiency of the markets has been severely shaken by the financial 
crisis  and  many  financial  market  products  have  failed  to  demonstrate  that  they  promote 
macroeconomic  welfare.  Now,  financial  market  regulation  is  being  tightened  because  the 
negative  macroeconomic  consequences  of  financial  crises  have  moved  into  the  spotlight 
again. 
Lord  Turner,  the  former  Chairman  of  the  British  Financial  Services  Authority  (FSA)  came 
straight to the point in 2010 when talking about financial innovations and regulation, admitting 
self-critically  “We  were  philosophically  inclined  to  accept  that  if  innovation  created  new 
markets and products that must be beneficial and that if regulation stymied innovation that 
must be bad. We are now more aware of the instability risks which might offset the benefits 
of such innovation.” 
Role of the central banks 
3.2  
Since  the  financial  crisis,  there  has  also  been  more  discussion  about  the  role  played  by 
central banks. First, experience of the financial crisis has again raised the question of how 
monetary policymakers should deal with asset price bubbles. 
The  prevailing  opinion  before  the  crisis  was  that  monetary  policy  is  a  blunt  sword  when 
dealing  with  exaggerations  in  the  asset  markets.  To  “prick  a  bubble”,  interest  rates  would 
have  to  be  increased  so  sharply  that  it  would  entail  severe  macroeconomic  collateral 
damage. 
As  a  further  argument  against  pricking  bubbles,  it  was  claimed  that  central  banks  were 
unable  to  identify  the  emergence  of  such  bubbles  any  better  or  earlier  than  other  well-
informed market players. Instead, the central banks should clear up the mess, so to speak, 
after the bubble had burst by means of massive interest rate cuts and injections of liquidity. 
However, this approach, or as it is also known the Jackson Hole consensus, the Greenspan 
doctrine or simply the “mop-up strategy” was discredited by the crisis. Even though those in 
favour of bursting speculative bubbles are few and far between, a policy of actively leaning 
against the wind is now gaining more widespread support. This approach is often referred to 
as “more symmetrical monetary policy". However, this does not mean that monetary policy 
should  assume  responsibility  for  financial  stability.  Macroprudential  policymakers  have  a 
more appropriate toolkit for safeguarding financial stability. 
In  this  context,  the  Act  on  Monitoring  Financial  Stability  (Gesetz  zur  Überwachung  der 
Finanzstabilität)  assigns  the  Bundesbank  important  tasks  in  the  field  of  macroprudential 
oversight. The Bank is responsible, in particular, for analysing factors that are key to financial 
stability,  identifying  risks,  making  proposals  to  the  Financial  Stability  Committee  regarding 
the  issuing  of  warnings  and  recommendations,  and  evaluating  the  implementation  of  such 
warnings and recommendations. 
Nonetheless,  in  keeping  with  their  mandate  of  safeguarding  price  stability,  the  monetary 
policymakers  can  also  contribute  towards  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  by  not 
encouraging financial market excesses. Monitoring the effect of credit aggregates on long-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
framework  and 
the  Eurosystem’s  collateral 
term price developments regularly and meticulously, as the Eurosystem does as part of its 
monetary analysis, brings forth valuable information. 
It is a well-known fact that financial crises are typically preceded by excessive credit growth, 
or to quote Charles Kindleberger once again, “Most increases in the supply of credit do not 
lead  to  a  mania  –  but  nearly  every  mania  has  been  associated  with  rapid  growth  in  the 
supply of credit to a particular group of borrowers.” 
The extremely low interest rates we are currently seeing in many economies are associated 
with  risks  over  the  long  term.  The  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  Ben  Bernanke, 
highlighted this not long ago. Thus, all central banks are faced with the challenge of timing 
the tightening of the extremely loose monetary policy currently in place, should any risks to 
price stability emerge. 
Against the backdrop of low price pressures and weak economic growth in the euro area, the 
ECB Governing Council loosened its monetary policy stance once again in May, cutting the 
key interest rate to a new record low. 
It is not only in the euro area that monetary policy has buttressed the economy and financial 
system so greatly and on such an unprecedented scale since the outbreak of the crisis. As 
well  as  cutting  interest  rates  to  a  record  low,  the  Eurosystem  has  also  adopted  some 
unconventional  measures,  the  most  significant  being  a  virtually  unrestricted  allotment  of 
central bank liquidity, extending the maturities on central bank refinancing operations to three 
years,  broadening 
introducing  outright 
transactions, which include sovereign bond purchases. 
In the course of the crisis, central banks were entrusted with ever more responsibility – both 
officially  and  unofficially.  ESCB  central  banks  play  a  central  role  in  macroprudential 
supervision, ie as part of the European Systemic Risk Board, and the Bundesbank forms an 
integral  part  of  the  German  Financial  Stability  Committee  (Ausschuss  für  Finanzstabilität). 
The  European  single  supervisory  mechanism  is  to  be  placed  under  the  aegis  of  the 
European Central Bank (ECB). 
Furthermore, in the wake of the crisis, policymakers, the markets and the media have talked 
up the Eurosystem as the only body capable of taking action. 
However, this entails the risk of overloading central banks with too many tasks and too much 
responsibility. 
The crisis management measures taken by central banks have set a debate in motion, both 
in the euro area and in other economic areas. It is a debate which is anything but pleasant, 
and, above all, one that seemed to be long since over. Following the inflation shocks in the 
1970s,  the  1980s  saw  a  consensus  gradually  emerging  that  central  banks  should  be 
primarily  responsible  for  safeguarding  price  stability  and  need  to  be  as  independent  as 
possible to perform this task. 
Independent central banks such as the Bundesbank or the Swiss National Bank proved to be 
more successful  in  combating  inflation  than  other  central  banks  which  were  under  political 
direction.  As  a  result,  central  banks  around  the  world  were  granted  independence  so  that 
they could credibly carry out the task of fighting inflation. 
However, of late, central banks’ independence and their price stability orientation have been 
called into question again. Indeed, central banks are not completely innocent with regard to 
this issue. They, too, have greatly stretched the boundaries of their mandate at times in the 
crisis. 
Otmar Issing fittingly commented on this problem recently, saying, “It is clear that the more 
tasks central banks take on which go beyond the policy framework established to safeguard 
price stability, the more they come into the firing line of political disputes. Central banks also 
endanger their independence when they promise more than what they are actually capable 
of delivering with the monetary policy instruments available to them”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
European monetary union 
3.3  
The roots of the current crisis in the euro area notably include excessive lending fostered by 
insufficient  financial  market  regulation,  inadequate  compliance  with  fiscal  rules,  inefficient 
use  of  capital  inflows  and  a  cumulative  loss  of  competitiveness  in  several  euro-area 
countries. 
Much like an earthquake exposes design flaws in a building’s construction, the financial crisis 
has clearly brought to light the dangerous cracks lurking in the structural framework of the 
monetary union. 
The cornerstones of the Maastricht framework include the concept of an independent central 
bank  with  the  primary  objective  of  safeguarding  price  stability,  and  national  sovereignty  in 
fiscal policy matters. The framework assigns liability for and control over national finances to 
national governments. 
The framework  sets  out fundamental  principles  to  ensure compliance  with  this  agreement. 
Member  states  commit  themselves  to  maintaining  sound  public  finances;  they  are  strictly 
prohibited  from  providing  each  other  with  financial  assistance  (no-bail-out  rule),  although 
some exceptions were allowed; and central banks are not permitted to finance governments. 
However, the crisis management measures have seriously called into question the binding 
force of these rules. 
When monetary policy is called upon to carry out fiscal tasks, it will sooner or later lose its 
ability  to  maintain  stable  prices.  Furthermore,  we  should  only  go  down  the  avenue  of 
comprehensively  mutualising  liability  if  the  shift  in  liability  to  the  European  level  is 
accompanied by the transfer of control. However, there are no signs that member states are 
willing to hand over veritable control and intervention rights to Brussels. 
It  is  impossible  to  say  with  absolute  certainty  whether  a  monetary  union  is  crisis-proof. 
Economists had identified design flaws and pointed them out beforehand. In many respects, 
however, policymakers at the time ignored the advice given by economists. 
In  his  book  “Making  the  European  Monetary  Union”  the  economic  historian  Harold  James 
also made use of an engineering analogy. He stressed that “the monetary union without a 
well-established base in fiscal regime and without a stable financial system had a very high 
centre of gravity that made for vulnerability and instability”. 
Before  the  Maastricht  framework  was  established,  the  Bundesbank,  too,  pointed  out  that 
monetary  integration  would  not  be  sustainable  in  the  long  term  without  bringing  about 
political integration. In its statement of 19 September 1990 on the establishment of economic 
and  monetary  union,  the  Bundesbank  made  its  position  clear  by  saying  that  a  “monetary 
union is an irrevocable community of solidarity which, on the basis of experience, needs a 
more  far-reaching  commitment  in  the  form  of  a  comprehensive  political  union  for  it  to  be 
permanent”. However, instead of political union, the above-mentioned Maastricht framework 
was established, which since has proven to be vulnerable. 
As  long  as  political  union  does  not  enjoy  the  backing  of  the  European  general  public  and 
their  governments,  however,  then  strengthening  the  Maastricht  framework  by  introducing 
something like “Maastricht 2.0” is the right approach to return stability to monetary union. 
So what does “Maastricht 2.0” mean for me? 
• 
It  means  strengthening  the  principle  of  national  responsibility  by  reinforcing  the 
regulatory framework and, in doing so, realigning liability and control. 
It  means  keeping  the  crisis  mechanism  as  a  last  resort  for  staving  off  threats  to 
financial  stability  in  the  euro  area.  Nonetheless,  sovereign  default  and  bank 
insolvencies must be possible in future without posing too large a risk to financial 
stability; this includes, I believe, bringing an end to the regulatory privileges enjoyed 
by sovereign debt. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 It also means establishing a banking union, encompassing both a single supervisory 
mechanism for systemically important financial institutions and a clear-cut resolution 
and restructuring regime. 
The necessity to recognise and acknowledge a banking union is without a doubt one of the 
greatest  lessons  learned  from  the  euro-area  crisis.  Therefore,  the  establishment  of  a 
European banking union, which is already beginning to take form, is a key component in a 
stable monetary union. Combined with efficient regulation, it would lessen the burden placed 
on  the  single  monetary  policy  and  reduce  the  interdependencies  between  banks  and 
sovereigns which have escalated the effects of the crisis. 
Conclusion 
4.  
I would like to conclude with a few remarks. 
The crisis which we have experienced in various forms since 2007 poses a huge challenge 
to economists. It has cast doubt on so many issues which were beyond debate before the 
crisis. It has also raised many new questions. 
Economists  need  to  face  up  to  these  questions  and  critically  assess  their  own  roles  and 
responsibilities. And they need to adopt a new mindset in many fields. 
• 
• 
• 
Yet,  at  the  same  time,  there  are  areas  where  a  paradigm  shift  would  not  be  appropriate. 
Independent  monetary  policy  that  is  geared  to  safeguarding  price  stability  and  is  clearly 
segregated  from  fiscal  policy,  has  not  been  rendered  obsolete  by  the  crisis  –  quite  the 
opposite, in fact, it is more important than ever before. 
So there is no need for economists to call everything into question as it were. Even Philip 
Stephens,  FT  associate  editor,  who  I  already  cited  above,  offers  some  comfort  in  his 
Financial Times opinion piece when he remarks, “Economists are not always wrong”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
We need an intelligent financial market regulation. 
We need to keep a closer eye on the stability of the financial system and 
We need a crisis-proof framework for monetary union. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
