Stefan Ingves: The role of the central bank after the financial crisis – the 
challenges ahead 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  Swedish  Economics  Association,  Stockholm, 
12 June 2013. 
 The  last  five  years  have  been  an  extraordinary  period  for  the  global  economy,  with  crisis 
management  and  major  fluctuations  in  growth  and  economic  development.  For  politicians 
and authorities in many countries, it has been – and still is – a complex world that is hard to 
navigate. Five years after the financial crisis broke out, many countries are still in the process 
of  cleaning  up  after  it.  It  can  be  ascertained  that  financial  crises  are  expensive,  time-
consuming processes, and that far too little has been done previously to prevent them from 
occurring.  
The  financial  crisis  has  made  it  clear  that  the  monetary  policy  framework  needs  to  be 
developed so that it takes greater account of the importance of financial stability. While the 
crisis was indeed not caused by monetary policy, a lesson nevertheless learned is that price 
stability  does  not  suffice  to  ensure  financial  stability  and  a  stable  development  in  the  real 
economy.  
The  financial  crisis  has also  brought  to  light  deficiencies in financial  stability  policy,  in  that 
microprudential policy does not guarantee financial stability. Hence, financial stability policy 
must also be developed. It needs a clearer mandate as well as tools for managing systemic 
risks. In response to this, macroprudential policy is now emerging as a new policy area. 
Finally, the financial crisis has shown that monetary policy and financial stability policy must 
be  coordinated  to  an  even  greater  extent  than  before.  There  is  thus  a  great  international 
consensus that the roles and responsibilities of the central banks and other authorities are in 
need of review. Today, I intend to discuss how I view the future role of the Riksbank. I will 
focus on the interaction between monetary policy and financial stability policy and the new 
policy area macroprudential policy. 
The central bank’s tasks and objectives may come into conflict with each other 
In most countries, the central bank has a responsibility for price stability, while at the same 
time  supporting  a  sustainable  economic  development.  In  practice,  this  involves  stabilising 
inflation and some measure of resource utilisation. In addition, the central banks usually have 
a responsibility for financial stability.   
This means that the central banks often face various conflicting objectives or trade-offs. For 
instance, it can be a case of striking a balance between achieving the inflation target and a 
sustainable level of resource utilisation when inflation and resource utilisation are moving in 
different  directions.  When  productivity  increases,  inflation  usually  falls  while  resource 
utilisation rises. So, in the short term, it is not possible to simultaneously stabilise inflation 
around its target, and resource utilisation around its sustainable or long-term level. 
It  can  also  be  a  trade-off  between  a  stable  financial  system  and  a  sustainable  level  of 
resource  utilisation.  Overly  stringent  regulation  normally  leads  to  more  expensive  financial 
services,  which  affects  resource  utilisation.  The  stringent  regulation  of  financial  markets  in 
the  1960s  and  1970s  gave  us  a  relatively  stable  financial  system,  but  at  the  expense  of 
efficiency. On the other hand, deregulation brought about developments on financial markets 
which created a “seemingly efficient” system, but which gave rise to major risks to stability.  
The development over recent years has shown just how closely interlinked the tasks of the 
central banks are. For example, the emergence of a situation of financial instability also has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
repercussions for both inflation and resource utilisation. This illustrates that it is not possible 
to conduct monetary policy and financial stability policy completely separately.  
Differences in time horizons give rise to trade-offs 
We  can  also  describe  the  central  banks’  conflicting  objectives  in  terms  of  different  time 
horizons.  For  monetary  policy,  the  time  horizon  is  usually  two  to  three  years,  which  is 
reasonable  in  light  of  how  the  business  cycle  usually  varies.  However,  we  know  from 
experience  that  financial  imbalances  and  risks  in  the  financial  system  are  built  up  over  a 
much longer period of time, which can include several business cycles. These longer periods 
are usually described in terms of so-called financial cycles. There is no established method 
of measuring the financial cycle, but lending rates, credit terms and asset prices are common 
indicators.1   
So, the financial cycle has its up- and downturns just like the regular business cycle, but is 
often more protracted. In the upward phase, obtaining financing is easy and cheap, while it is 
harder and more expensive in the downward phase. Sometimes, the upturn in the financial 
cycle results in a financial crisis, but not always.  
The difference in the time horizon between the regular business cycle and the financial cycle 
gives  rise  to  conflicting  objectives  for  the  central  bank.  When  the  cycles  head  in  different 
directions,  there  may  be  a  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  resource  utilisation  in  the 
short term, and financial stability in the longer term.  
If a financial crisis actually occurs it will of course have repercussions on both inflation and 
resource utilization. The trade-off is particularly severe if the central bank only has the policy 
rate at its disposal.  
In the Swedish economy, we currently have a low inflation rate and relatively weak resource 
utilisation, while at the same time credit volumes have been increasing relatively sharply for a 
long  time.  There  is  therefore  a  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  normal  resource 
utilisation  in  the  short  term,  and  financial  stability  in  the  slightly  longer  term.  For  a  central 
bank with only the policy rate at its disposal it is a case of balancing a poorer inflation and 
resource utilisation outcome in the short term against uncertain but very severe outcomes in 
the  longer  term.  In  such  a  situation,  more  expansive  monetary  policy  can  provide  better 
fulfilment  of  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  objectives  in  the  short  term.  However,  more 
expansive monetary policy can also increase the risk of a financial crisis, and thus of very 
severe outcomes in the longer term. 
The way central banks work is changing 
The financial crisis has led to a change in how central banks should approach the trade-off 
between price stability and financial stability. Before the crisis, the general perception was 
that  the  policy  rate  should  be  used  to  achieve  price  stability  and  to  support  the  economic 
development.  If  a  crisis  nevertheless  occurred,  cleaning  up  afterwards  would  be  relatively 
painless.  With  this  approach,  it  was  fairly  simple  to  manage  the  trade-off  between  the 
objectives of monetary policy in the short term, and risks to financial stability in the slightly 
longer term, because the trade-off was negligible.  
Recently, the pendulum has swung over to the view that monetary policy should lean against 
the wind to a greater extent, and take greater account of financial stability.2 In the autumn of 
                                                 
1   This  rationale  is  based  on  Drehmann,  M.,  C.  Borio  and  K.  Tsatsaronis  (2012)  Characterising  the  financial 
cycle: don’t lose sight of the medium term! BIS Working Papers No 380. 
2   See e.g. King, M. (2012) Twenty years of inflation targeting, The Stamp Memorial Lecture, London School of 
Economics,  9  October  2012  and  Eichengren,  B.  et  al.  (2011)  Rethinking  Central  Banking,  Committee  on 
International Economic Policy Reform, September 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2007, I took part in a panel debate in Jackson Hole, and indicated then that it is better to 
attempt  to  prevent  the  risk  of  a  financial  crisis  than  to  clean  up  afterwards.  The  main 
argument as I see it – now as it was then – is that cleaning up is extremely costly and takes a 
long time. Experiences in Sweden from the crisis of the 1990s are an example of just how 
painful it can be. Because, reducing major debts often takes a long time, and during that time 
possibilities  of  stimulating  demand  through  monetary  policy  are  limited.  It  doesn’t  matter 
much if the debts are in the private sector, i.e. among households and companies, or in the 
public  sector.  In  both  cases,  a  trend  build-up  of  debt  in  relation  to  income  is  always 
unsustainable in the long term.  
A question is then how  central banks more tangibly can lean against the wind. The policy 
rate is a tool that can be used. We therefore need to develop the monetary policy framework 
so that it takes greater account of financial stability. At the same time, financial stability policy 
is changing, and a new policy area, macroprudential policy, is emerging which also aims to 
lean  against  the  wind.  Hence,  we  are  facing  two  changes  in  the  areas  of  responsibility  of 
central banks, both of which create new possibilities to manage the trade-offs between price 
stability, resource utilisation and financial stability. I will start to discuss monetary policy and 
then move on to macroprudential policy. 
The monetary policy framework is in need of review  
As I have mentioned, monetary policy of the 1990s and up to the financial crisis was viewed 
as  successful  by  many.  It  was  considered  that  this  played  an  important  role  in  both  the 
relatively low and stable inflation, and the relatively stable GDP growth during those years.  
During the global financial crisis, it came to light, however, that major financial imbalances 
had  been  built  up  despite  the  seeming  stability  of  many  macroeconomic  indicators.  An 
important lesson from the financial crisis is therefore that low and stable inflation does not 
always guarantee financial stability or sustainable economic growth.  
The huge costs of the financial crisis to the real economy have led central banks around the 
world to start thinking about the current monetary policy framework. The challenge ahead is 
to  create  a  framework  which  continues  to  safeguard  stable  prices,  but  which  at  the  same 
time  is  consistent  with  a  sustainable  development  in  the  financial  system.  Financial 
circumstances therefore need to be accounted for in the monetary policy decision-making.  
Taking account of financial factors in monetary policy decisions  
Different  approaches  can  be  used  to  formally  take  greater  account  of  financial  stability  in 
monetary policy decisions. For instance, how much a change in the policy rate affects the 
probability  of  a  financial  crisis  can  be  calculated.  The  trade-off  is  subsequently  performed 
between objective fulfilment in terms of inflation and resource utilisation during the forecast 
period, and the risk of very poor objective fulfilment further ahead due to a financial crisis. A 
consequence  of  this  approach  is  that  it  has  to  be  based  on  longer  time  horizons  than 
currently  since  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  occurs  over  longer  periods  of 
time. Norges Bank has chosen a different approach in which an explicit term is incorporated 
into the loss function of the monetary authority. The purpose of this term is to capture that, in 
addition  to  the  price  stability  and  sustainable  resource  utilisation  targets,  financial  stability 
should also be accounted for.  
Whatever approach chosen, in order to give financial stability a greater role in the monetary 
policy  decisions,  the  use  of  financial  variables  as  indicators  in  monetary  policy  decision-
making will increase.  
Measuring financial stability is often difficult 
To  measure  the  extent  of  financial  stability  requires  a  broad  approach  which  can  often 
resemble detective work. The stability report which we publish twice a year is an example of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  type  of  comprehensive  analysis  that  is  needed.  It  describes  a  series  of  indicators,  for 
example credit growth, risk premiums, and the development on various asset markets. From 
this year, we have also introduced an annual report of our assessment of Sweden’s financial 
infrastructure.  Taken  together  these  indicators  often  give  a  good  picture  of  the  financial 
situation.  Hence,  the  extent  of  financial  stability  cannot  be  summarised  in  a  single,  simple 
financial variable.  
This  type  of  measurement  problem  is  in  fact  also  apparent  in  the  inflation  rate  and  the 
resource utilisation. The formal inflation target for the Riksbank is measured using CPI, but 
we  also  use  various  measures  of  underlying  inflation.  In  order  to  measure  resource 
utilisation, we look at a series of different measures such as the GDP gap, unemployment 
gap and the employment gap. For inflation and resource utilisation, we have long learned to 
use  different  measures  even  though  we  know  they  are  inherently  uncertain.  Applying  that 
experience  will  be  useful  when  it  now  comes  to  evaluating  different  measures  of  financial 
stability.   
Financial  stability  cannot  be  assessed  by  relying  on  various  indicators  alone,  though.  The 
reasons for the development must also be understood. It can be compared to the reasoning 
of central banks in assessing inflation. An increase in inflation does not in itself constitute a 
reason for increasing the policy rate. Appropriate monetary policy depends on the reason for 
the change. If the rise is due to price pressure from increased demand, the monetary policy 
will  not  be  the  same  as  it  would  have  been  had  the  rise  been  due  to  lower  productivity. 
Similarly, rapid credit growth is not necessarily always a sign of lending being unsustainable 
and posing a threat to financial stability. 
A hot topic on that subject is how much house prices and the debt build-up of households 
should weigh in monetary policy assessment. In general, central banks do not have targets 
either  for  house  prices  or  household  debt.  A  rapid  surge  in  house  prices  or  rising  lending 
may,  however,  signal  an  imminent  financial  crisis  which  could  affect  future  inflation  and 
resource utilisation. Hence, under certain circumstances, also taking account of house prices 
and household indebtedness in monetary policy decisions is necessary. The extent to which 
this  should  be  done  is,  of  course,  a  matter  of  judgement  affected  by  several  factors.  For 
instance,  it  depends  on  the  other  variables  currently  being  taken  into  account,  and  the 
shocks expected ahead. The housing market is also an important part of the monetary policy 
transmission mechanism. The house prices thus also contribute important information about 
which shocks are driving the economic development.   
On  the  whole,  I  do  not  believe  that  the  flexible  inflation  target  policy  conducted  by  the 
Riksbank since the mid-1990s, with price stability as the overriding target, needs changing. 
However, monetary policy must to a greater extent lean against the wind and take greater 
account of financial stability. 
Macroprudential policy provides financial stability policy with a new focus 
The  emergence  of  macroprudential  policy  as  a  new  policy  area  involves  a  far-reaching 
change  in  the  preventive  work  of  financial  stability  policy.3  Macroprudential  policy  is  about 
limiting systemic risks from a systemic perspective. It is about analysing the links between 
the  various  agents  in  the  financial  system  and  the  relationship  over  time  between  the 
financial system and the macro economy. Macroprudential policy affects the resilience of the 
financial system, but one (more or less pronounced) effect of this is also that lending rates 
are affected, which is of consequence to the trade-off between price stability and financial 
                                                 
3  
It should also be mentioned that macroprudential supervision is not the only change to better prevent future 
crises. Many of the regulatory deficiencies prevailing before the crisis are being addressed by the new capital 
and  liquidity  regulations  of  the  Basel  III  accord.  Work  on  improving  the  regulations  is,  however,  far  from 
complete and intense efforts are under way in various international forums. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
stability.  To  highlight  this  in  more  detail,  I  will  provide  a  general  picture  of  how  I  view 
macroprudential policy. As a starting point, I will take the interest rate which households and 
). Put rather simply, this can be defined as the central bank’s 
companies pay for loans ( lending
policy rate (cid:4666)(cid:1861)(cid:3047)(cid:4667) plus an interest rate margin (
ti
t ): 
i
t
i
lending
t

t
 The interest rate margin depends on the banks’ compensation for administrative expenses 
and capital and funding costs, risk premiums and the banks’ profit margin. Credit terms such 
as the loan-to-value ratio and amortisation requirements are not directly visible in the interest 
rate  encountered  by  borrowers,  but  in  order  to  illustrate  their  effect  at  an  aggregate  level, 
they can be restated into interest rate terms. In order to obtain a simple formula, I therefore 
include the credit terms in the “interest rate margin”. 
Interest rate margins and credit terms tend to vary over time with the financial cycle. When 
the  future  outlook  is  bright  and  financial  agents,  households  and  companies  alike  are 
optimistic, risk premiums are usually low, which leads to lower lending rates and generous 
credit  terms.  This  contributes  to  a  rise  in  credit  growth  and  asset  prices.  When  outlook 
deteriorates, banks’ lending becomes riskier, or is at least perceived as such, which can be 
noticed in higher risk premiums and tougher credit terms. The banks, quite simply, become 
more  restrictive  in  their  lending  in  bad  times  and  we  will  have  a  downturn  in  the  financial 
cycle.  
So, why should central banks take account of fluctuations in interest rate margins and credit 
terms? Well, because there is a series of so-called external effects associated with financial 
activity which lead to the banks (and other financial agents) intensifying these fluctuations. 
The  majority  of  the  external  effects  are  due  to  the  fact  that  the  social  costs  of  financial 
instability are greater than the costs borne by the banks.  
Put simply, financial stability can be equated to stable interest rate margins and credit terms 
over time.4 In other words, interest rate margins which are not too low in good times or too 
high  in  bad  times,  and  credit  terms  which  are  not  too  generous  in  good  times  or  too 
restrictive  in  bad  times.  Lending  and  the  building  up  buffers  among  both  lenders  and 
borrowers then stabilises over time. I would like to emphasise that this is a highly simplified 
description of financial stability, which to a certain extent disregards the structural aspects of 
systemic  risk  such  as  resilience  and  risks  in  financial  infrastructure  on  the  one  hand,  and 
such factors that trigger financial crises on the other. However, even the simplified picture 
gives important insights. 
The new tools being developed and the old tools which can be used for a new purpose are 
crucial 
to  discuss 
macroprudential policy tools and how they are intended to function. 
the  success  of  macroprudential  policy.  Allow  me 
therefore 
to 
Macroprudential policy tools and how they fit in with monetary policy 
Typical macroprudential policy tools are capital and liquidity requirements chiefly focused on 
banks and the supply of credit. However, it’s also about measures to limit demand, such as 
the mortgage cap, or the regulation of exposures and haircuts with the purpose of limiting the 
contagion risk in the financial infrastructure. The various tools can be divided into static and 
time-varying  tools.  Using  my  simple  lending  rate  formula,  I  will  illustrate  how,  in  different 
ways, these tools affect lending rates and credit terms. That is, after all, partly their purpose. 
However, this also has consequences for monetary policy. 
                                                 
4   A fuller definition of financial stability is that the financial system shall fulfil its fundamental functions and be 
resilient to various shocks occurring, see the Riksbank (2013) The Riksbank and financial stability, Stockholm 
February 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The static tools can be illustrated by adding a variable ( z ) denoting how regulation affects 
interest rate margins and credit terms in the simple definition of the lending rate: 
i
lending
t

t
i
t
)(z
 The  primary  purpose  of  static  regulation  is  to  adapt  resilience  according  to  the  structural 
factors  which  give  rise  to  systemic  risk,  such  as  the  size,  concentration  and  degree  of 
maturity transformation of the banks. The introduction of static regulation involves a one-time 
shift in the interest rate margin. Monetary policy may need to take account of this. Monetary 
policy must naturally also take account of the extent to which the measure affects the risks of 
financial instability ahead. 
However,  variations  in  the  view  of  risk-taking  and  credit  growth  also  involve  variations  in 
systemic risk over time. A time-varying macroprudential policy tool is therefore also needed. 
This is also a way of attempting to make the regulation slightly cheaper, i.e. managing the 
balance  between  stability  and  efficiency.  An  example  of  time-varying  regulation  is  the 
countercyclical capital buffer. It aims to induce banks and other financial institutions to build 
up capital buffers in good times, which they can then reduce in bad times. However, such 
time-varying regulation also contributes to stability by increasing the costs of borrowing when 
credit  growth  and  other  financial  variables  suggest  that  systemic  risk  has  increased,  and 
reducing the interest rate margin in financial crisis situations when the buffer can be used. 
We  can  illustrate  the  time-varying  part  by  adding  a  time  index  also  for  the  regulation 
variable ( z ): 
i
lending
t

t
i
t
z
( t
  If  time-varying  regulation  is  introduced,  the  variations  of  the  interest  rate  margin  will  be 
different  over  time,  which  can  affect  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  At  the 
same time, a central bank must, irrespective of macroprudential policy, understand how the 
financial  sector  determines  various  financial  prices  in  order  to  understand  how  monetary 
policy affects the economy through the lending rate.  
Credit markets are often not entirely homogeneous, but consist of several different segments 
or sectors. The development within different sectors can vary tremendously. Although many 
other  factors  affecting  the  lending  rate  and  other  credit  terms  are  of  an  aggregate  nature, 
sector-specific  factors  are  often  important  too.  It  is  therefore  important  to  have  a 
macroprudential  policy  tool  focusing  on  individual  sectors.  This  is  not  least  important  in 
attempting to reduce the costs of leaning into the wind. If for instance lending to households 
is weak while lending to companies is strong, and we only have a broad tool such as the 
policy rate or the countercyclical capital requirements, it will be hard to achieve a policy rate 
or interest rate margin which is optimal for both sectors. Sector-specific capital requirements 
would enable increasing the interest rate margin only for the corporate sector, thus avoiding 
a contraction for households. We can illustrate sector-specific tools by adding an index (S) 
for sector-specific tools: 
i
lending
St
,

St
,
i
t
 z
St
,
  It  might  be  assumed  that  macroprudential  policy  ought  to  reduce  the  need  for  monetary 
policy  to  lean  into  the  wind.  This  is  true  to  a  certain  extent.  Macroprudential  policy  is 
important in offloading monetary policy. If the macroprudential policy tools can increase the 
interest rate margin, the policy rate can be put at a lower level than would otherwise have 
been possible without an increase in credit growth. Monetary policy can thereby stimulate a 
faster  economic  recovery  through  other  channels,  like  the  exchange  rate  channel,  without 
risking  the  financial  stability.  However,  in  practice  there  is  a  limit  to  how  much  prices  on 
different credit markets can be affected through regulation, and how much lending rates can 
thus  diverge  from  the  monetary  policy  rate.  If  the  divergence  is  too  wide,  incentives  to 
circumvent  the  regulations  are  also  great,  i.e.  conducting  regulation  arbitrage.  Throughout 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
history, we have seen countless examples of regulation arbitrage undermining the efficiency 
of financial regulation. This was the case in Sweden not least in the 1970s and 1980s, when 
the combination of a loan cap and a negative real interest rate gave rise to great incentives 
for regulation arbitrage, which led to the emergence of a “grey” credit market.  
Macroprudential and microprudential policy also need to be coordinated 
Macroprudential policy is also linked to other policy areas, not least to microprudential policy. 
Unlike macroprudential policy, which focuses on stability in the financial system as a whole, 
microprudential  policy  focuses  on  the  stability  of  individual  financial  institutions  and  on 
consumer  protection.  Decisions  in  microprudential  and  macroprudential  policy  thus  differ; 
they derive from different motives and are based on different types of analysis.  
To a certain extent, however, the tools for microprudential and macroprudential policy can 
complement  each  other.  Microprudential  policy  establishes  certain  minimum  requirements 
aimed  at  ensuring  that  individual  institutions  are  sufficiently  resilient  to  the  risks  they 
encounter. On top of these are then placed the macroprudential requirements, which aim to 
counteract risks at systemic level and which can also be time-varying. Often, the same tools 
are used for both purposes, and in this case it is fairly clear that the tools can complement 
each  other.  However  there  are  also  situations  where  microprudential  and  macroprudential 
policy can come into conflict with each other. A typical example is a financial crisis situation 
in which a macroprudential policy authority wishes to reduce the capital buffers of banks in 
order  to  stimulate  lending  while,  from  a  microprudential  perspective,  it  would  instead  be 
desirable to see the banks strengthening their balance sheets with more equity. So, there is 
a need to coordinate these policy areas too. Also, the knowledge about individual institutions 
generated in microprudential supervision work is important to understanding risk build-up at 
systemic level.  
Wind strength is also affected by other policy areas 
Not only is there a strong link between monetary and macroprudential policy and a need to 
coordinate macroprudential and microprudential supervision – the need to lean against the 
wind  is  also  affected  by  other  policy  areas.  Fiscal  policy  has  a  significant  influence  on 
borrowing and lending incentives. However, other policy areas can also come into play, such 
as housing policy when it comes to household indebtedness. There is thus a limit to what can 
be achieved by macroprudential policy, or monetary policy for that matter, which depends on 
other policy areas.  
The opportunities and limitations of macroprudential policy – the example of the 
Swedish household sector 
I will now be much more specific about the opportunities and limitations of macroprudential 
policy  by  focusing  on  a  concrete  example.  By  now,  it  is  well  known  that,  for  a  number  of 
years,  the  Riksbank  has  seen  substantial  risks  associated  with  household  indebtedness. 
Also,  a  number  of  external  experts  have  indicated  the  housing  market  and  private 
indebtedness as a risk factor.5 In other words, this matter is highly suited to the discussion 
about  what  macroprudential  supervision  can  and  cannot  do  or, 
like,  how 
macroprudential policy can contribute to managing the trade-off between price stability and 
financial stability we are facing.  
if  you 
                                                 
5   See  OECD  (2012)  OECD  Economic  Surveys:  Sweden,  OECD  Publishing,  doi:  10.1787/eco_surveys-swe-
2012-en,  IMF  (2013)  Sweden—2013  Article  IV  Consultation:  Concluding  Statement  of  the  Mission,  
Stock-holm:  31  May  2013  and  European  Commission  (2013)  Recommendation 
for  a  COUNCIL 
RECOMMENDATION  on  Sweden’s  2013  national  reform  programme  and  delivering  a  Council  opinion  on 
Sweden’s convergence programme for 2012-2016, Brussels: 29 May 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The countercyclical capital requirement would have been activated 
One  way  of  illustrating  the  possibilities  of  macroprudential  policy  to  limit  the  risks  ensuing 
from the debt build-up of the household sector is to consider how the countercyclical capital 
requirement  would  have  been  used  if  it  had  been  in  place.  This  requirement  involves  the 
banks  building  up  an  extra  capital  buffer  when  aggregate  lending  is  high.  In  a  crisis,  the 
banks  are  then  able  to  use  this  buffer  to  stimulate  lending.  Although  this  tool  is  not  yet  in 
place, we can assess fairly well how it would have been used historically, thanks to the fact 
that the Basel Committee has provided guidelines regarding when it is appropriate to activate 
the requirement. The most important indicator in this assessment is the credit gap, which is a 
measure  of  how  much  credit  growth  deviates  from  its  long-term  trend.  The  reason  for  the 
credit gap having gained a key role in the assessment is that it has proven to be the indicator 
that warns of an impending crisis best and sufficiently early. A pure mechanical application of 
the credit gap can provide a certain guide to when the capital requirement would have been 
activated (see figure 1).6  
Time periods when countercyclical capital buffers should have been activated 
based on historical measures of the credit gap (per cent).  
Figure 1. 
3
2,5
2
1,5
1
0,5
0
81
83
85
87
89
91
93
95
97
99
01
03
05
07
09
11
Countercyclical buffer
Households
Non-financial corporations
 Note: The calculations are based on a mechanical application of the credit gap approach. 
We can see that the requirement would have been activated on two occasions. The first time 
would have been a few years before the banking crisis of the 1990s, and the second time 
around  2005,  that  is  just  before  the  global  financial  crisis.  We  can  also  see  which  lending 
makes  the  credit  gap  grow  by  applying  the  approach  separately  to  different  sectors.  The 
driver of activation of the capital requirements in the 2000s is mainly the household sector. 
So, during this period, the credit gap was not an early warning of the global financial crisis or 
the recession in the Baltic countries. Instead, it warned of an unsustainable development in 
Sweden, due primarily to credit growth in the Swedish household sector.  
                                                 
6   The  mechanical  application  is  called  the  BIS  standardised  approach  and  is  described  in  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements,  2010,  “Guidance  for  national  authorities  operating  the  countercyclical  buffer” 
December. See also Juks, Reimo & Melander O. (2012), Countercyclical Capital Buffers as a Macroprudential 
Instrument, Riksbank Studies, December. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  housing  market 
the  developments  on 
Targeted capital requirements and measures to strengthen the buffers of households 
A  number  of  measures  have  already  been  taken  due  to  the  increased  indebtedness  of 
households.  The  Riksbank  has  taken  account  of  the  risks  associated  with  household 
indebtedness  and 
in  monetary  policy. 
Finansinspektionen  recently  decided  to  introduce  a  risk  weight  floor  of  15  per  cent  for 
Swedish mortgages, which can be seen as a sector-specific capital requirement. Measures 
have  also  been  taken more  directly  targeting  the  demand  side  of  the mortgage  market.  In 
October 2010, Finansinspektionen introduced a mortgage cap, restricting mortgaging a home 
to  a  maximum  of  85  per  cent  of  its  value.  The  Swedish  Bankers’  Association  has  also 
established principles according to which new mortgages exceeding 75 per cent of the value 
of the home should be amortised.  
However,  household  indebtedness  is  still  high  in  both  a  historical  and  an  international 
perspective,  and  more  needs  to  be  done.  The  15  per  cent  risk  weight  floor  is  a  welcome 
initial step in partly compensating for the higher loan-to-value ratios of households in relation 
to disposable income and lower amortisation levels, which could lead to high credit losses 
ahead. In my opinion, however, risk weights for mortgages need to be raised even further. 
Not least to better internalise the external effects associated with such lending – for example, 
the  risks  to  financial  stability  which  may  ensue  from  the  drop  in  consumption  of  highly 
indebted households in the event of a decline in house prices.   
We  also  need  measures  which  strengthen  the  buffers  of  households  and  contribute  to 
curbing credit growth in the household sector more permanently. It would be preferable if the 
banks themselves took the responsibility for sounder lending practices. But, if this does not 
happen soon enough, and forcefully enough, then the authorities must intervene.There are 
many  so-called  quantitative  regulations  which  can  be  used  for  this.  The  mortgage  cap 
introduced by Finansinspektionen can be adjusted, and limitations can be introduced on the 
size  of  a  loan  in  relation  to  the  household’s  income.  Another  tool  is  introducing  an 
amortisation requirement, which directly reduces household indebtedness. I believe that, in 
the  current  situation,  separate  amortisation  requirements  should  be  considered 
to 
supplement the existing measures.  
Stricter credit terms can also be achieved with so-called qualitative measures which affect 
borrowing  capacity.  It  would  then  be  a  matter  of  tightening  banks’  credit  assessment 
procedures, which can be done in several ways. For instance, a review can be performed of 
the way the banks calculate borrowing capacity using discretionary income calculations, and 
the  scenarios  a  borrower  can  withstand.  As  part  of  their  credit  assessment  procedures, 
banks  should  also  ensure  that  all  mortgage  customers  can  cope  with  amortising  their 
mortgages at a certain rate. One way of influencing amortisation behaviour could also be to 
clearly inform customers about the long-term consequences of different rates of amortisation. 
The  government  has  commissioned  Finansinspektionen  to  investigate  the  conditions  for 
placing  requirements  on  banks  to  provide  mortgage  customers  with  tailored  advice  about 
suitable rates of amortisation, which is a step in the right direction.  
In terms of the possibilities of macroprudential policy, we can, with different types of capital 
requirements,  increase  the  banks’  buffers  and,  with  various  supplementary  measures, 
increase the buffers of borrowers (households in this case). The higher buffer requirements 
will  affect  the  costs  of  borrowing,  and  could  thus  also  contribute  to  curbing  credit  growth. 
Because all of these measures ultimately affect the cost of borrowing in one way or another, 
it might be appropriate to use a little of several tools rather than a lot of one, since different 
tools  affect various  groups  in  society  slightly  differently.  Also,  the  use  of  several  tools  can 
reduce the possibilities of regulation arbitrage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Macroprudential policy does not resolve the structural problems on the housing 
market 
It  is  important  to  emphasise  that  the  macroprudential  tools  will  not  be  able  to  prevent  all 
types  of  risk  associated  with  household  indebtedness  and  developments  on  the  housing 
market. The structural problems of low housing construction and an inefficient rental market, 
which  lead  to  a  housing  shortage  in  major  cities  and  university  regions,  are  an  important 
reason  for  rising  house  prices  and  thus  also  credit  growth.  However,  these  structural 
problems  are  beyond  the  area  of  macroprudential  policy  and  must  be  addressed  by  other 
policy areas. The housing shortage in itself is also a social problem with more dimensions 
than  household  indebtedness.  For  example,  the  housing  shortage  also  risks  affecting 
geographic  mobility,  which  is  fundamental  to,  for  instance,  efficient  matching  of  vacant 
positions with job seekers. Efficient matching is important to achieving low unemployment. 
In  a  broader  socioeconomic  sense,  it  is  therefore  desirable  to  achieve  a  more  smoothly 
functioning housing and mortgage market. To this end, measures are needed which promote 
a  more  flexible  offering  of  homes  which  better  respond  to  price  changes  and  reduce 
construction costs. Reforms are therefore needed which would lead to a further softening of 
rent regulation and increased competition in the construction sector. In the fiscal policy area, 
the possibilities of tax relief on interest can be phased out, and real estate tax reintroduced. 
These measures would increase neutrality between different types of investment alternatives 
and  make  building  up  debt  less  profitable  in  terms  of  tax  policy.  Both  the  IMF  and  the 
European Commission proposes similar measures in their recommendations for Sweden.7 
Organisational structure of macroprudential policy in Sweden  
Developing macroprudential tools strengthens the possibilities of preventing systemic risks. 
However,  creating  an  organisational  structure  for  macroprudential  policy  that  ensures  the 
right tools are used at the right time is at least equally important. Both decisive action and 
sound analytical capability are required here.    
Decisive action is important because acting against systemic risks is generally difficult and 
unpopular. It must therefore be clear where the responsibility of counteracting systemic risk 
lies, which in turn requires a clear mandate.  
Analytical capability is important because the interaction between the financial system and 
the real sector, and the risks generated in this interaction, are complex matters. Neither is it 
easy  to  determine  which  effects  can  be  achieved  with  different  tools.  This  requires  expert 
knowledge.  However,  it  is  also  important  that  this  analytical  capability  is  enduring.  In  the 
often fairly long periods of calm, the temptation to cut back or reallocate resources to other 
areas can be substantial. 
Many  countries  have  recently  created  organisations  for  macroprudential  policy  and  have 
more  comprehensively  enhanced  the  efficiency  of  financial  stability  efforts.  New  structures 
have  emerged  in,  for  instance,  the  UK,  Germany  and  Denmark.  In  Sweden,  the  Financial 
Crisis  Commission  proposed, 
the  Riksbank  and 
Finansinspektionen together bear responsibility for macroprudential policy in Sweden.8 This 
is to occur through the formation of a macroprudential council, in which both authorities work 
together  with  independent  experts,  entailing  in  principle  that  the  existing  Council  for 
interim 
report, 
that 
first 
its 
in 
                                                 
7   See  IMF  (2013)  Sweden—2013  Article  IV  Consultation:  Concluding  Statement  of  the  Mission,  Stock-holm: 
31 May 2013 and European Commission (2013) Recommendation for a COUNCIL RECOMMENDATION on 
Sweden’s  2013  national  reform  programme  and  delivering  a  Council  opinion  on  Sweden’s  convergence 
programme for 2012-2016, Brussels: 29 May 2013. 
8   SOU 2013:6 Att förebygga och hantera finansiella kriser, Delbetänkande av Finanskriskommittén, Stockholm: 
2013. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Cooperation between the Riksbank and Finansinspektionen is confirmed in law. The Council 
is  to  seek  to  promote  greater  knowledge  about  systemic  risks  and  the  development  of 
macroprudential tools, and discuss appropriate measures.  
In our consultation response, we gave our view on the commission report and also added our 
own  proposals.9  We  believe  that  the  Financial  Crisis  Commission’s  proposal  for  shared 
responsibility  between  two  authorities  risks  giving  rise  to  ambiguity  about  who  should  act. 
This  ambiguity  could  result  in  indecisive  action.  In  order  to  ensure  decisive  action, 
responsibility for macroprudential policy should be placed on one body. Placing responsibility 
on one body is well in line with international recommendations and proposals starting to take 
shape in other EU countries.10  
fundamentals 
the  Riksbank  has  solid 
to  shoulder  responsibility 
The Riksbank should have an influential role in macroprudential policy 
In  my  view, 
for 
macroprudential  policy  in  Sweden.  Over  the  last  15  years,  we  have  built  up  extensive 
systemic  risks  analysis  capabilities.  As  I  briefly  mentioned  before,  we  also  have  in-depth 
knowledge in terms of studying the relationships between the financial and real sector, for 
instance,  as  a  result  of  the  monetary  policy  analysis  apparatus.  Placing  responsibility  for 
macroprudential policy on the Riksbank would also involve synergies with monetary policy. 
Because  coordination  with  microprudential  policy  is  also  important,  in  our  consultation 
response  we  propose  the  establishment  of  well-defined  ways  of  cooperation  between  the 
Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen.  The  central  bank  having  a  key  role  in  macroprudential 
policy is also recommended by the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).  
The  Riksbank  is  an  authority  with  a  high  degree  of  autonomy,  which  raises  the  question 
about how autonomous macroprudential policy should be. A high degree of autonomy can be 
beneficial when it comes to preventing financial instability, more or less for the same reasons 
as in monetary policy. On the one hand, the decisions can be unpopular politically, and on 
the other hand expert knowledge is important.  
However, there is a crucial difference between monetary policy and macroprudential policy in 
one  respect.  While  monetary  policy  is  guided  by  a  quantified  inflation  target,  the  target  of 
macroprudential  policy 
several  different  dimensions.  For  example, 
macroprudential  policies  can  be  about  reducing  and  preventing  excessive  credit  growth, 
reducing liquidity risks and maturity mismatches in the banking system, and increasing the 
financial infrastructure’s resilience to shocks. In all cases, it is hard to formulate a simple and 
clear target. Evaluating macroprudential policy decisions and holding the decision makers to 
account is therefore harder. It is therefore important to make sure the democratic control of 
macroprudential policy is guaranteed and regularly safeguarded. However, this can occur by 
developing  the  structures  of  democratic  follow-up  and  control  of  the  Riksbank  that  are 
already in place, chiefly through the General Council of the Riksbank. We can also benefit 
from what we have learned from how monetary policy is monitored, for instance through the 
publication of  reports, minutes  and  regular  questioning in  the  Parliamentary  Committee  on 
Finance. 
comprises 
                                                 
9   Riksbanken  (2013)  Remissyttrande  om  betänkandet  Att  förebygga  och  hantera  finansiella  kriser  (SOU 
2013:6), DNR 2013-234-STA. 
10   The recommendation regarding national macroprudential policy mandates issued by the European Systemic 
Risk Board (ESRB) in December 2011 states that the EU countries should give one authority or one council 
the responsibility of implementing macroprudential policies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
The future role of the central bank is taking shape 
Allow me to conclude by highlighting certain aspects that are important to central banks in 
terms of creating a framework that continues to safeguard stable prices while at the same 
time being consistent with sustainable development in the financial system.  
First, monetary policy should continue to be conducted in the framework of flexible inflation 
target  policy,  with  price  stability  as  the  overriding  target.  However,  the  financial  crisis  has 
brought to light the importance of monetary policy taking greater account of financial stability. 
It can be a case of extending the time horizon of the monetary policy analysis, and focusing 
on price stability over a longer period than just the next few years. 
Second,  financial  stability  policy  requires  a  new  focus,  and  macroprudential  policy  is 
emerging  as  a  new  policy  area.  Macroprudential  tools  provide  better  opportunities  to 
strengthen  the  resilience  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  to  various  shocks.  They 
also provide better possibilities of influencing bank lending rates and thus macroprudential 
policy becomes closely interconnected with monetary policy. Overall, this enables us to work 
to  a  greater  extent  towards  achieving  a  sustainable  development  in  both  lending  and 
economic  development.  Having  more  tools  also  facilitates  managing  the  conflicting 
objectives encountered by central banks, even though there will always be difficult trade-offs.  
So, there is good reason to give central banks an influential role in macroprudential policy. It 
will  better  equip  us  to  contribute  to  price  stability  while  financial  stability  and  a  stable 
economic  development  are  secured.  At  the  same  time,  it  should  be  emphasised  that 
macroprudential policy does not resolve all the problems associated with the financial sector. 
Also,  we  do  not  know  how  efficient the  new  macroprudential  tools  will  be;  we  will  need  to 
analyse and evaluate them afterwards.  
 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
