Daniel K Tarullo: Dodd-Frank implementation 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington, DC, 11 July 2013. 
 Chairman  Johnson,  Ranking  Member  Crapo,  and  other  members  of the  Committee,  thank 
you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve’s activities in mitigating systemic risk 
and implementing the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 
(Dodd-Frank Act). 
With the third anniversary of the Dodd-Frank Act upon us, it is a good time to reflect on what 
has been accomplished, what still needs to be done, and how the work on the Dodd-Frank 
Act fits with other regulatory reform projects. Indeed, the deliberate pace and multi-pronged 
nature  of  the  implementation  of  the  act  –  occasioned  as  it  is  by  complicated  issues  and 
decisionmaking  processes  –  may  be  obscuring  what  will  be  far-reaching  changes  in  the 
regulation  of  financial  firms  and  markets.  Indeed,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  banking 
supervisors  have  already  created  a  very  different  supervisory  environment  than  what  was 
prevalent just a few years ago. 
Today, I will review recent progress in key areas of financial regulatory reform, with special – 
though not exclusive – attention to implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act, including how that 
law affects the regulation of community banks. I will also highlight areas in which proposals 
are still outstanding and, in a few cases, in which we intend to make new proposals in the 
relatively near future. 
Implementation of Basel III capital rules 
Let  me  begin  by  noting  the  completion  of  our  major  rulemakings  on  capital  regulation. 
Although  most  of  the  provisions  in  these  rules  do  not  directly  implement  provisions  of  the 
Dodd-Frank  Act,  implementation  of  that  law  is  occurring  against  the  backdrop  of 
implementation of the Basel III framework. 
This  month,  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  and  the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) approved final rules implementing the Basel 
III  capital framework,  as  well  as  certain  related  changes required  by  the  Dodd-Frank  Act.1 
The rules establish an integrated regulatory capital framework designed to ensure that U.S. 
banking organizations maintain strong capital positions, enabling them to absorb substantial 
losses  on  a  going-concern  basis  and  to  continue  lending  to  creditworthy  households  and 
businesses even during economic downturns. 
The  rules  increase  the  quantity  and  improve  the  quality  of  regulatory  capital  of  the  U.S. 
banking system by setting strict eligibility criteria for regulatory capital instruments, by raising 
the minimum tier 1 capital ratio from 4 percent to 6 percent of risk-weighted assets, and by 
establishing a new minimum common equity tier 1 capital ratio of 4.5 percent of risk-weighted 
assets. The rules also require a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted 
assets to ensure that banking organizations build capital during benign economic periods so 
that  they  can  withstand  serious  economic  downturns  and  still  remain  above  the  minimum 
capital  levels.  In  addition,  the  rules  improve  the  methodology  for  calculating  risk-weighted 
assets to enhance risk sensitivity and incorporate certain provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, 
                                                
1  See www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20130702a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
such  as  sections  171  and  939A.2  The  rules  also  contain  certain  provisions,  including  a 
supplementary leverage ratio and a countercyclical capital buffer, that apply only to large and 
internationally  active  banking  organizations,  consistent  with  their  systemic  importance  and 
their complexity. The rules will have several important consequences. 
First, they consolidate the progress made by banks and regulators over the past four years in 
improving  the  quality  and  quantity  of  capital  held  by  banking  organizations.  Second,  they 
remedy  shortcomings  in  our  existing  generally  applicable  risk-weighted  asset  calculations 
that  became  apparent  during  the  financial  crisis.  In  so  doing,  they  also  enhance  the 
effectiveness of the Collins Amendment, the scope of which we have extended through these 
rules  by  applying  standardized  floors  to  capital  buffer,  as  well  as  minimum  requirements. 
Third, adoption of these rules meets international expectations for U.S. implementation of the 
Basel III capital framework. This gives us a firm position from which to press our expectations 
that other countries implement Basel III fully and faithfully. 
In  crafting  these  rules,  the  banking  agencies  made  a  number  of  changes  to  the  2012 
proposals,  mostly  to  address  concerns  by  community  banks.  For  example,  the  new  rules 
maintain  current  practice  on  risk  weighting  residential  mortgages  and  provide  community 
banking organizations the option of maintaining existing standards on the regulatory capital 
treatment  of  “accumulated  other  comprehensive  income”  (AOCI)  and  pre-existing  trust 
preferred securities. These changes from the proposed rule are meant to reduce the burden 
and  complexity  of  the  rules  for  community  banks  while  preserving  the  benefits  of  more 
rigorous  capital  standards.  Most  banking  organizations  already  meet  the  higher  capital 
standards,  and  the  rules  will  help  preserve  the  benefits  of  the  stronger  capital  positions 
banks have built under the oversight of regulators since the financial crisis. 
The capital rules also apply risk-based and leverage capital requirements to certain savings 
and loan holding companies for the first time. In another change from the proposal, savings 
and loan holding companies with significant commercial and insurance underwriting activities 
will  not  be  subject  to  the  final  rules  at  this  time.  During  the  comment  period,  these  firms 
raised significant concerns regarding the appropriateness of the proposed regulatory capital 
framework for their business models. To address these concerns, the Federal Reserve will 
take  additional  time  to  evaluate  the  appropriate  regulatory  capital  framework  for  these 
entities. 
All  financial  institutions  subject  to  the  new  rules  will  have  a  significant  transition  period  to 
meet the requirements. The phase-in period for smaller, less complex banking organizations 
will not begin until January 2015, while the phase-in period for larger institutions begins in 
January 2014. 
Stress testing and capital planning requirements for large banking firms 
Important as higher capital requirements and a better quality of capital are to the safety and 
soundness  of  financial  institutions,  conventional  capital  requirements  are  by  their  nature 
somewhat backward-looking. First, they reflect loss expectations based on past experience. 
Second,  losses  that  actually  reduce  reported  capital  levels  are  often  formally  taken  by 
institutions well after the likelihood of losses has become clear. Rigorous stress testing helps 
compensate for these shortcomings through a forward-looking assessment of the losses that 
                                                
2  Section  171  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  commonly  referred  to  as  the  Collins  Amendment,  requires  the  federal 
banking  agencies  to  establish  minimum  risk-based  and  leverage  capital  requirements  for  bank  holding 
companies,  savings  and  loan  holding  companies,  insured  depository  institutions,  and  nonbank  financial 
holding  companies  designated  by  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  for  supervision  by  the  Federal 
Reserve. Under section 171, among other things, these minimum capital requirements may not be less than, 
nor  quantitatively  lower  than,  the  generally  applicable  capital  requirements  that  were  in  effect  for  insured 
depository  institutions  on  the  date  of  enactment  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act.  Section  939A  requires  all  federal 
agencies to remove references to credit ratings in their regulations, including the capital rules. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
would be suffered under stipulated adverse economic scenarios, so that capital can be built 
and maintained at levels high enough for the firms to withstand such losses and still remain 
viable  financial  intermediaries.  In  the  middle  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve 
created  and  applied  a  stress  test  to  the  nation’s  largest  financial  firms.  The  next  year, 
Congress mandated stress tests for a larger group of firms in the Dodd-Frank Act. This fall, 
we  will  extend  the  full  set  of  stress  testing  requirements  to  the  dozen  or  so  banking 
organizations with greater than $50 billion in assets covered in the Dodd-Frank Act but not 
fully covered in our previous stress tests. 
Regular,  comprehensive  stress  testing,  with  published  results,  has  already  become  a  key 
part  of  both  capital  regulation  and  overall  prudential  supervision. 
the  annual 
Comprehensive  Capital  Analysis  and  Review  (CCAR),  the  Federal  Reserve  requires  each 
large  bank  holding  company  to  demonstrate  that  it  has  rigorous,  forward-looking  capital 
planning  processes  that  effectively  account  for  the  unique  risks  of  the  firm  and  maintains 
sufficient  capital  to  continue  to  operate  through  times  of  extreme  economic  and  financial 
stress. CCAR and Dodd-Frank Act stress tests have shown the significant supervisory value 
of conducting coordinated cross-firm analysis of the major risks facing large banks. 
The Federal Reserve has used stress testing and its broader supervisory authority to prompt 
a doubling over the past four years of the common equity capital of the nation’s 18 largest 
bank holding companies, which collectively hold more than 70 percent of the total assets of 
all  U.S.  bank  holding  companies.  Specifically,  the  aggregate  tier  1  common  equity  ratio  – 
which is based on the strongest form of loss-absorbing capital – at the 18 firms covered by 
the stress test has more than doubled, from 5.6 percent at the end of 2008 to 11.3 percent at 
the  end  of  2012.  That  reflects  an  increase  in  tier  1  common  equity  from  $393  billion  to 
$792 billion during the same period. 
In 
Enhanced prudential requirements for large banking firms 
Sections  165  and  166  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  require  the  Federal  Reserve  to  establish  a 
broad  set  of  enhanced  prudential  standards,  both  for  bank  holding  companies  with  total 
consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and for nonbank financial companies designated 
by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (Council) as systemically important. The required 
standards  include  capital  requirements,  liquidity  requirements,  stress  testing,  single-
counterparty credit limits, an early remediation regime, and risk-management and resolution-
planning  requirements.  The  sections  also  require  that  these  prudential  standards  become 
more stringent as the systemic footprint of a firm increases. 
The Federal Reserve has issued proposed rules to implement sections 165 and 166 for both 
large U.S. banking firms and foreign banks operating in the United States. In addition, earlier 
this  week  the  federal  banking  agencies  jointly  issued  a  proposal  to  implement  higher 
leverage  ratio  standards  for  the  largest,  most  systemically  important  U.S.  banking 
organizations. We have already finalized the rules on resolution planning and stress testing, 
and we are working diligently this year toward finalization of the remaining standards. 
On liquidity, we will also be implementing the Basel III quantitative liquidity requirements for 
large U.S. banking firms. We expect that the federal banking agencies will issue a proposal 
later this year to implement the Basel Committee’s Liquidity Coverage Ratio for large U.S. 
banking firms. These quantitative liquidity requirements would complement the stricter set of 
qualitative  liquidity  standards  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  already  proposed  pursuant  to 
section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act. 
On  capital,  we  will  be  proposing  risk-based  capital  surcharges  on  the  most  systemically 
important U.S. banking firms. The proposal will be based on the risk-based capital surcharge 
framework developed by the Basel Committee for global systemically important banks, under 
which  the  size  of  the  surcharge  will  increase  with  a  banking  firm’s  systemic  importance. 
These surcharges are a critical element of the Federal Reserve’s efforts to force the most 
systemic financial firms to internalize the externalities caused by their potential failure and to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
reduce any residual subsidies such firms may enjoy as a result of market perceptions that 
they  may  be  too  big  to  fail.  We  anticipate  issuing  a  proposed  regulation  on  these  capital 
surcharges around the end of this year. 
With  one  exception,  we  expect  to  finalize  the  remaining  proposed  enhanced  prudential 
standards around the end of the year as well. The one exception is single-counterparty credit 
limits. We are conducting a quantitative impact study (QIS) on the effects of the counterparty 
credit  limits  included  in  the  proposed  rule.  Based  on  the  comments  received  and  ongoing 
internal  staff  analysis,  we  concluded  that  a  QIS  was  needed  to  help  us  better  assess  the 
optimal  structure  of  the  rule.  Moreover,  since  the  Federal  Reserve  issued  its  single-
counterparty  credit  limit  proposal,  the  Basel  Committee  began  developing  a  similar  large 
exposure  regime  that  would  apply  to  all  global  banks.  We  are  coordinating  our  single-
counterparty credit limit rule with this effort. 
A core element of the Federal Reserve’s proposed enhanced prudential standards for large 
banking  firms  is  our  December  2012  foreign  bank  proposal.  The  foreign  bank  proposal 
responds to fundamental changes over the last 15 years in the scope and scale of the U.S. 
operations  of  foreign  banking  organizations,  many  of  which  have  moved  beyond  their 
traditional lending activities to engage in substantial capital markets activities and, in some 
cases, have become more reliant on short-term wholesale U.S. dollar funding. The proposed 
rule would increase the resiliency of the U.S. operations of foreign banks and help protect 
U.S.  financial  stability.  The  proposal  would  also  promote  competitive  equality  for  all  large 
banking firms – domestic and foreign – operating in the United States and would, in many 
respects,  result  in  greater  harmony  between  how  the  U.S.  operations  of  foreign  banking 
organizations and the foreign operations of U.S. bank holding companies are regulated. 
The foreign bank proposal generally would require foreign banks with a large U.S. presence 
to  organize  their  U.S.  subsidiaries  under  a  single  U.S.  intermediate  holding  company  that 
would serve as a platform for consistent supervision and regulation. The U.S. intermediate 
holding  companies  of  foreign  banks  would  be  subject  to  the  same  risk-based  capital  and 
leverage  requirements  as  U.S.  bank  holding  companies.  In  addition,  U.S.  intermediate 
holding companies and the U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks with a large U.S. 
presence would be required to meet liquidity requirements similar to those applicable to large 
U.S.  bank  holding  companies.  Importantly,  however,  the  foreign  bank  proposal  does  not 
entail  full  subsidiarization  –  foreign  banks  generally  will  continue  to  be  allowed  to  directly 
branch into the United States on the basis of their consolidated capital. The comment period 
for this proposal closed at the end of April, and we are now carefully reviewing comments. 
Improving resolvability of large banking firms 
An  important  reform  included  in  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  was  the  creation  of  the  Orderly 
Liquidation Authority (OLA). Under OLA, the FDIC can resolve a systemic financial firm by 
imposing losses on the shareholders and creditors of the firm and replacing its management, 
while  preserving  the  operations  of  the  sound,  functioning  parts  of  the  firm.  This  authority 
gives  the  government  a  real  alternative  to  the  Hobson’s  choice  of  bailout  or  disorderly 
bankruptcy  that  authorities  faced  in  2008.  Similar  resolution  mechanisms  are  under 
development in other countries, and the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board 
have devoted considerable attention to developing new international standards for statutory 
resolution frameworks. Although much work remains to be done by all countries, the Dodd-
Frank Act reforms have paved the way for the United States to be a leader in shaping the 
development  of  international  policy  on  effective  resolution  regimes  for  systemic  financial 
firms. 
In  implementing  OLA,  the  FDIC  is  developing  the  single-point-of-entry  (SPOE)  resolution 
approach. SPOE is designed to focus losses on the shareholders and long-term unsecured 
debt  holders  of  the  parent  holding  company  of  the  failed  firm.  It  aims  to  produce  a  well-
capitalized bridge holding company in place of the failed parent by converting long-term debt 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
holders of the parent into equity holders of the bridge. The critical operating subsidiaries of 
the  failed  firm  would  be  re-capitalized  by  the  parent,  to  the  extent  necessary,  and  would 
remain open for business. The SPOE approach should reduce incentives for creditors and 
customers  of  the  operating  subsidiaries to  run  and,  as financial  stress  increases, for  host-
country  regulators  to  engage  in  ring-fencing  or  other  measures  disruptive  to  an  orderly, 
global resolution of the failed firm. 
Successful execution by the FDIC of its preferred SPOE approach in OLA depends on the 
availability of a sufficient combined amount of equity and loss-absorbing debt at the parent 
holding company of the failed firm. Accordingly, in consultation with the FDIC, the Federal 
Reserve  is  working  on  a  regulatory  proposal  that  requires  the  largest,  most  complex  U.S. 
banking firms to maintain a minimum amount of outstanding long-term unsecured debt on top 
of their regulatory capital requirements. Such a requirement could have a number of public 
policy benefits. Most notably, it would increase the prospects for an orderly resolution under 
OLA by ensuring that shareholders and long-term debt holders of a systemic financial firm 
can  bear  potential  future  losses  at  the  firm  and  sufficiently  capitalize  a  bridge  holding 
company in resolution. In addition, by increasing the credibility of OLA, a minimum long-term 
debt requirement could help counteract the moral hazard arising from taxpayer bailouts and 
improve market discipline of systemic firms. 
The Dodd-Frank Act also requires that all large bank holding companies develop, and submit 
to  supervisors,  resolution  plans.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  working  with  the  FDIC  to 
review  resolution  plans  submitted  by  the  largest  U.S.  bank  holding companies  and foreign 
banks. The largest firms – generally those with $250 billion or more in total nonbank assets – 
submitted their first annual resolution plans to the Federal Reserve and the FDIC in the third 
quarter of 2012. These “first-wave” resolution plans yielded valuable information that is being 
used to identify, assess, and mitigate key challenges to resolvability under the Bankruptcy 
Code and to support the FDIC’s development of backup resolution plans under OLA. These 
plans also are very useful supervisory tools that have helped the Federal Reserve and the 
subject 
improve 
management systems in ways that will help the firms be more resilient and efficient, as well 
as easier to resolve. 
Further work is being done on resolution plans this year. On July 1, bank holding companies 
in  the  second  group  –  generally  those  with  between  $100  billion  and  $250  billion  in  total 
nonbank assets – submitted their initial plans to the Federal Reserve. The public portions of 
these resolution plans were made available on the FDIC and Federal Reserve websites on 
July 2.3 The first-wave filers will submit updated plans in October that reflect further guidance 
from the FDIC and the Federal Reserve. 
to  simplify  corporate  structures  and 
focus  on  opportunities 
firms 
Structural reform of banking firms 
The Dodd-Frank Act also includes provisions calling for structural reform of the U.S. banking 
system.  Key  elements  are  the  Volcker  Rule  in  section  619  of  the  act  and  the  derivatives 
push-out provision in section 716 of the act. 
The Volcker Rule generally prohibits a banking entity from engaging in proprietary trading or 
acquiring an ownership interest in, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with a hedge 
fund or private equity fund. The federal banking agencies and the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) jointly proposed a rule to implement the Volcker Rule in October 2011. 
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission issued a substantially similar proposal a few 
months later. 
                                                
3  See www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20130702b.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The rulemaking agencies have carefully analyzed the nearly 19,000 public comments on the 
proposal  and  have  made  steady  and  significant  progress  toward  crafting  a  final  rule  that 
attempts to maximize bank safety and soundness and financial stability while minimizing cost 
to  the  liquidity  of  the  financial  markets,  credit  availability,  and  economic  growth.  The 
implementation  of  the  Volcker  Rule  has taken  a  significant  amount  of time for  a  variety  of 
reasons  –  the  interpretive  and  policy  issues  implicated  by  the  rule  are  complex,  the 
completion of the Volcker Rule requires negotiations among a variety of banking and market 
regulators,  and  the  potential  costs  of  getting  the  Volcker  Rule  wrong  are  high.  But  I  think 
most observers would agree that the agencies need to provide firms, markets, and the public 
with the product of all this work, so that they can begin to adjust their plans and expectations 
accordingly.  During  this  Committee’s  last  oversight  hearing  in  February,  I  expressed  the 
hope that we would complete the Volcker Rule by the end of this year. Since that time, there 
has been good interagency progress, and I maintain both the hope and expectation of five 
months ago. 
The derivatives push-out provision in section 716 of the Dodd-Frank Act generally prohibits 
the  provision  of  federal  assistance,  such  as  FDIC  deposit  insurance  or  Federal  Reserve 
discount  window  credit,  to  swap  dealers  and  major  swap  participants.  The  provision 
becomes  effective  on  July  16,  2013,  although  the  statute  provides  insured  depository 
institutions  the  right  to  request  a  two-year  extension  from  their  primary  federal  supervisor. 
Last month, the Federal Reserve issued an interim final rule that clarified that uninsured U.S. 
branches  and  agencies  of  foreign  banks  will  be  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  insured 
depository  institutions  under  section  716  and,  as  a  result,  will  qualify  for  the  same 
exemptions  and  two-year  transition  period  available  by  statute  to  U.S.  insured  depository 
institutions. The interim final rule also establishes the process for state member banks and 
uninsured state branches or agencies of foreign banks to apply to the Federal Reserve for 
transition relief.4 Although the rule is already effective, we are seeking comments on it and 
will revise the rule, as necessary, in light of comments received. 
Oversight of community banks 
In addition to overseeing large banking firms, the Federal Reserve supervises approximately 
800  state-chartered  community  banks  that  are  members  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System.5 
Community banks play an important role in extending credit in local economies across the 
country – particularly, though by no means only, in their lending to small and medium-sized 
businesses. Recognizing the disproportionate burden that regulatory compliance can impose 
on  smaller  institutions,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  put  in  place  special  processes  for  taking 
account of the circumstances and more limited compliance resources of community banks, 
while still achieving safety-and-soundness aims. We created a special subcommittee of our 
regulatory and supervisory oversight committee to review all proposals with an eye to their 
effects on community banks. We have also established a Community Depository Institutions 
Advisory  Council  to  enable  community  bankers  to  comment  on  the  economy,  lending 
conditions, supervisory policies, and other matters of interest. 
The changes we will be seeing in the financial regulatory architecture as a result of the Dodd-
Frank  Act  and  Basel  III  are  principally  directed  at  our  largest  and  most  complex  financial 
firms.  Many  of  the  Basel  III  requirements  will  not  apply  to  smaller  banks  –  including  the 
countercyclical capital buffer, supplementary leverage ratio, trading book reforms, AOCI flow 
through,  higher  capital  requirements  for  counterparty  credit  risk  on  derivatives,  and 
                                                
4  For 
approvals 
granted 
by 
www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/716f-requests.htm. 
the 
Board 
for 
the 
two-year 
transition 
period, 
see 
5  For  supervisory  purposes,  community  banks  are  generally  defined  as  those  with  less  than  $10  billion  in 
assets. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
disclosure requirements. In fact, most of the significant changes from the proposed capital 
rules published by the three banking agencies last year that we made in the final version of 
the  rules  issued  earlier  this  month  were  in  response  to  concerns  expressed  by  smaller 
banks. Community banking organizations also will not be subject to the Federal Reserve’s 
additional enhanced prudential standards that larger banking firms face or will face, such as 
capital  plans,  stress  testing,  resolution  plans,  single-counterparty  credit  limits,  and  capital 
surcharges for systemically important financial firms. In addition, most of the major systemic 
risk and prudential provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act – such as the Volcker Rule, derivatives 
push-out, derivatives central clearing requirements, and the Collins Amendment – will have a 
far smaller impact on community banks than on large banking firms. 
Constraining systemic risk outside the banking sector 
While  strengthening  the  regulation  and  improving  the  resolvability  of  banking  firms  is  of 
paramount  importance,  we  should  not  forget  that  one  of  the  key  elements  of  the  recent 
financial  crisis  was  the  precipitous  unwinding  of  large  amounts  of  short-term  wholesale 
funding that had been made available to highly leveraged and maturity-transforming financial 
firms, many of which were clearly outside of the traditional banking sector. Nonbank financial 
intermediaries  can  provide  substantial  benefits  to  an  economy,  but  a  complete  financial 
reform program must address financial stability risks that emanate from the shadow banking 
system.  Particularly  as  we  tighten  the  oversight  of  the  regulated  banking  system,  it  will 
become more and more essential that we are able to monitor and constrain the build-up of 
systemic risks in the nonbank financial sector. 
Among  other  things,  financial  stability  depends  on  strong  consolidated  supervision  and 
regulation  of  all  financial  firms  whose  failure  could  pose  a  threat  to  the financial  system  – 
whether  or  not  they  own  a  bank.  One  of  the  key  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis  was  the 
prodigious amount of systemic risk that was concentrated in several nonbank financial firms. 
To mitigate these risks, the Dodd-Frank Act gave the Council authority to bring systemically 
important financial firms that are not already bank holding companies within the perimeter of 
Federal Reserve supervision and regulation. Last month, the Council made three proposed 
designations  of  nonbank  financial  firms,  and  earlier  this  week  the  Council  made  final 
designations of two of these firms. The Federal Reserve already supervises these two firms 
as  savings  and  loan  holding  companies  and  we  will  now  begin  the  process  of  applying 
relevant enhanced prudential regulatory and supervisory standards. We remain committed to 
applying  a  supervisory  and  regulatory  framework  to  such  firms  that  is  tailored  to  their 
business  mix,  risk  profile,  and  systemic  footprint  –  consistent  with  the  Collins  Amendment 
and other legal requirements under the Dodd-Frank Act. 
The threats to financial stability from the shadow banking system do not reside solely in a 
few  individual  nonbank  financial  firms  with  large  systemic  footprints.  Significant  threats  to 
financial  stability  emanate  from  systemic  classes  of  nonbank  financial  firms  and  from 
vulnerabilities intrinsic to short-term wholesale funding markets. Many of the key problems 
related to shadow banking and their potential solutions are still being debated domestically 
and internationally, but some of the necessary steps are already clear. 
First, we need to increase the transparency of shadow banking markets so that authorities 
can  monitor  for  signs  of  excessive  leverage  and  unstable  maturity  transformation  outside 
regulated  banks.  Since  the  financial  crisis,  the  ability  of  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other 
regulators to track the types of transactions that are core to shadow banking activities has 
improved markedly. But there remain several areas, notably involving transactions organized 
around  an  exchange  of  cash  and  securities,  where  gaps  still  exist.  For  example,  many 
repurchase  agreements  and  securities  lending  transactions  can  still  only  be  monitored 
indirectly.  Improved  reporting  in  these  areas  would  better  enable  regulators  to  detect 
emerging risks in the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Second, we need to reduce further the risk of runs on money market mutual funds. Late last 
year,  the  Council  issued  a  proposed  recommendation  on  this  subject  that  offered  three 
reform options. Last month, the SEC issued a proposal that includes a form of the floating 
net asset value (NAV) option recommended by the Council. 
Third, we need to be sure that initiatives to enhance the resilience of the triparty repo market 
are  successfully  completed. These  marketwide  efforts  have  been  underway  for  some  time 
and  have  already  reduced  discretionary  intraday  credit  extended  by  the  clearing  banks  by 
approximately 25 percent. Market participants, with the active encouragement of the Federal 
Reserve and other supervisors, are on track to achieve the practical elimination of all such 
intraday credit in the triparty settlement process by the end of 2014. 
Completing  these  three  reforms  would  represent  a  strong  start  to  the  job  of  reducing 
systemic risk in the short-term wholesale funding markets that are key to the functioning of 
securities  markets.  Still,  important  work  would  remain.  For  example,  a  major  source  of 
unaddressed  risk  emanates  from  the  large  volume  of  short-term  securities  financing 
transactions  (SFTs)  in  our  financial  system,  including  repos,  reverse  repos,  securities 
borrowing,  and  lending  transactions.  Regulatory  reform  has  mostly  passed  over  these 
transactions  because  SFTs  appear  to  involve  minimal  risks  from  a  microprudential 
perspective.  But  SFTs,  particularly 
large  matched  books  of  SFTs,  create  sizable 
macroprudential  risks,  including  vulnerabilities  to  runs  and  asset  fire  sales.  Although  the 
Dodd-Frank Act provides additional tools to address the failure of a systemically important 
broker-dealer,  the  existing  bank  and  broker-dealer  regulatory  regimes  have  not  been 
designed to materially  mitigate these systemic risks. Continued attention to these potential 
vulnerabilities is needed, both here in the United States and abroad. 
Conclusion 
As  I  hope  is  apparent  from  this  review  of  progress  on  the  implementation  of  regulatory 
reforms, we are at the beginning of the end of the rulemaking process for most of the major 
Dodd-Frank  Act  provisions.  Some  regulations  already  finalized  are  now  in  effect.  Others 
provide a transition period for firms and markets to prepare for the new rules of the road. Still 
others will be completed in the coming months. With respect to all three sets of regulations, 
the  emphasis  will  soon  be  shifting  from  rule-writing  to  rule  compliance,  interpretation,  and 
enforcement. Here, the benchmarks for progress and performance are less visible, at least 
until something goes wrong. For that reason, it is all the more important that the regulatory 
agencies  put  in  place  institutional  mechanisms  to  assure  strong,  sensible  oversight  of  the 
new regulatory framework. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have. 
List of Rules, Notices, and Reports of the Federal Reserve Board under the Dodd-Frank Act 
as of July 2, 2013 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
