Vítor Constâncio: The nature and significance of Banking Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference “Financial regulation – towards a global regulatory framework?”, Chatham House 
City Series, London, 11 March 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you at Chatham House today. The topic of my address 
is  the  nature  and  significance  of  establishing  a  Banking  Union  in  Europe.  To  many  this 
seems like a new initiative borne out of the experience of the crisis. But it is in fact based on 
an older debate. During the preparations for the Maastricht Treaty in the early 1990s, there 
was already the strong conviction that a single system of banking supervision was as a key 
element  in  the  construction  of  monetary  union.  Indeed,  one  of  the foremost  proponents  of 
this  view  was  a  Bank  of  England  official,  Brian  Quinn,  who  chaired  the  preparatory  sub-
committee on banking supervision.1 
This conviction was based on the relatively logical observation that the single currency would 
deepen  financial  interdependence  in  Europe  and  so  require  an  integrated  system  of 
supervision. It was also in line with the prevailing model at the time of banking supervision 
being entrusted to the central bank. And although in the end a different approach prevailed, 
the  force  of  this  conviction  explains  why  the  EU  Treaty  left  open  the  possibility  –  through 
Article 127(6) – to give supervisory powers to the ECB based on a unanimous decision of the 
Member States.  
At least to clear-sighted observers, it was evident that at some point this article would have to 
be activated. The late Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, who preceded me as the member of the 
ECB´s Board responsible for financial stability, wrote in 1999 that:  
“I am convinced that in the future the needs will change and the multilateral mode 
will  have  to  deepen  substantially.  Over  time  such  a  mode  will  have  to  be 
structured to the point of providing the banking industry with a true and effective 
collective  euro  area  supervisor.  It  will  have  to  be  enhanced  to  the  full  extent 
required for banking supervision in the euro area to be as prompt and effective as 
it is within a single nation”.2 
That said, those like Padoa-Schioppa could not have complete foresight about how monetary 
union would evolve. We have meanwhile learned a lot that is new from the crisis. The events 
of  recent  years  have  revealed  a  variety  of  weaknesses  in  the  governance  of  the  financial 
sector  that  were  not  foreseen  before  1999  –  and  that  also  need  to  be  addressed  through 
common solutions. Hence, the Banking Union we are aiming for today goes beyond purely 
banking supervision: in my view it must comprise five elements. 
First, a single rulebook for banks. 
Second, a single framework for banking supervision. 
Third, a single mechanism for resolving banks, funded by levies on the sector itself. 
Fourth, a common backstop in case temporary fiscal support is needed. 
Fifth, a common system for deposit protection. 
                                                
1  Harold James, Making the European Monetary Union, pp. 313–315. 
2  Padoa-Schioppa,  T.,  “EMU  and  banking  supervision”  Lecture  in  the  London  School  of  Economics,  on  
24 Feb 1999. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
How would Banking Union have helped during the crisis? 
To illustrate why these elements are so important, it is helpful to think through how a genuine 
Banking Union in Europe could have helped both prevent and mitigate the crisis. 
Preventing the crisis 
Turning first to prevention, one of the key causes of the crisis was the unacknowledged build-
up  of  large  private  financial  imbalances  in  the  period  from  1999  to  2008.  They  were 
unacknowledged  because  the  governance  framework  that  existed  in  Europe  was  focused 
exclusively on fiscal policies via the Stability and Growth Pact. This reflected the prevailing 
belief  at  the  time  that  the  private  sector  was  composed  of  fully  rational  agents  and  was 
essentially stable and self-correcting – hence only the public sector could create instability.  
This was of course a fiction: the private sector was where some of the largest imbalances 
were concentrated. Between 1999 and 2007, the ratio of public sector debt to GDP in EMU 
declined on average by around 6 percentage points – while the ratio of private sector debt to 
GDP increased by almost 27 percentage points. To give just one example, in Spain the ratio 
of private sector debt to GDP increased by around 75 per cent, while the ratio of public debt 
to GDP fell by around 35 per cent. 
The key point for this discussion was that all of these private flows were being intermediated 
by  the  banking  sector,  which  had  become  much  more  integrated  as  a  result  of  monetary 
union.  Hence  the  official  bodies  best  placed  to  identify  these  growing  risks,  and  act  to 
prevent  them,  were  national  bank  supervisors  both  in  lending  and  borrowing  countries. 
However, they lacked both the cross-border perspective and also the instruments to do so. 
After all, their mandates were national and did not extend to systemic risks building up for the 
euro area as a whole. European financial integration went far ahead any European oversight 
and financial stability and as a result financial stability was unwittingly sacrificed.3 
How would Banking Union have helped? By moving supervision and other national financial 
policies to the European level, the problem can be solved. Supervisors can take a euro area-
wide  view  of  financial  developments,  identify  early  the  build-up  of  systemic  risks,  and  use 
appropriate  macro-prudential  tools  to  counteract  them.  Had  a  single  European  supervisor 
existed  prior  to  the  crisis,  it  could  have  spotted  the  unsustainable  growth  in  private  sector 
debt  and  the  excessive  leveraging  of  banks’  balance  sheets  associated  with  it  –  and 
hopefully taken early preventative measures. 
Mitigating the crisis 
What about the role of Banking Union in mitigating the crisis? Here I can see two key ways in 
which it would have been instrumental.  
First, it would have lessened the so-called “bank-sovereign loop” that drags down the fiscal 
sustainability of sovereigns. This loop is driven by bank bailouts or just by the expectation 
that sovereigns will have to bail-out struggling banks, which then increases borrowing costs 
for sovereigns and further drives up funding costs for banks. A Single Resolution Mechanism 
would avoid this by resolving banks rather than saving them and by making the private sector 
rather than the taxpayer pick up the bill. Moreover, any residual fiscal burden on sovereigns 
would be distributed across the euro area through the common fiscal backstop. 
Second,  a  Banking  Union  would  have  reduced  the  fragmentation  in  financial  markets  that 
holds back bank lending and economic growth. At present, market fragmentation is severely 
disrupting the transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy. In some countries, changes in our 
main  interest rate  are  being  passed  on fully  by  banks;  in  others,  because  bank funding  is 
                                                
3  Schoenmaker, Dirk (2011): “The Financial Trilemma”, in Economics Letters, 111 pages 57–59. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
tight, interest rate changes are being passed on hardly at all. This is making credit very hard 
to come by or unduly expensive in some parts of the euro area. 
Banking  Union  would  limit  financial  fragmentation  in  a  number  of  ways.  An  impartial 
supervisor  conducting  credible  stress  tests  would  lessen  fears  that  banks  are  hiding  bad 
assets in some countries. Depositors’ confidence would be mitigated by harmonising deposit 
guarantee  schemes.  And  a  supervisor  with  a  truly  European  focus  would  never  undertake 
actions  that  can  encourage  fragmentation,  like  insisting  on  national  asset  and  liability 
matching. 
So we can see that there is a strong case that a genuine Banking Union would have made a 
big difference both before and during this crisis. But while one might accept this in theory, it 
of course begs the question, is this what is happening in practice? Is the Banking Union we 
are building truly effective? Or are we just seeing a new label placed on what will remain an 
essentially unchanged and nationally driven process? These are the questions I want to take 
up in what follows. 
How far are we towards completing Banking Union in Europe? 
On the five elements of a genuine Banking union that I mentioned at the beginning, progress 
is currently positive on all fronts – but it is also uneven. 
First, the single rulebook to a large extent already exists, and will be complemented by the 
agreement on the Capital Requirements Directive IV expected in the next months. This will 
contribute  significantly  towards  making  the  banking  sector  in  Europe  more  robust  and 
creating a level playing field.  
Second,  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  will  hopefully  be  proposed  by  the  Commission  in 
the second half of this year. In the meantime, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive 
should  be  adopted  by  the  middle  of  this  year,  which  will  provide  a  better  framework  for 
coordinating  resolution  of  cross-border  banks  and  provide  national  authorities  with  new 
resolution powers. These new powers – like writing down capital instruments and bailing-in 
creditors  –  should  help  ensure  that  the  financial  sector,  rather  than  taxpayers,  bears  the 
burden in future bank resolution. 
Third, the creation of a common backstop is already underway with the on-going discussions 
on  direct  bank  recapitalisation  by  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM).  This  is  an 
important tool for the near term to help break the bank-sovereign loop and exit the crisis. In 
the  longer  term,  the  fiscal  backstop  to  the  Banking  Union  could  perhaps  replicate  the 
successful arrangements we see in the U.S. where the Treasury provides a credit line to the 
FDIC, which is repaid over time through additional levies on the financial sector. 
Fourth,  the  establishment  of  a  common  system  of  deposit  protection  will  begin  with  the 
adoption  of  the  Commission’s  proposal  on  deposit  guarantee  schemes,  expected  by  mid-
2013.  This  provides  a  harmonised  framework  and  should  help  shore  up  confidence  in 
national  schemes  –  particularly,  in  my  view,  if  there  is  a  “depositor  preference”  rule  in 
situations where banks are resolved. This means that a single European scheme is not an 
essential component of Banking Union in the short term.  
Key features of the SSM 
Finally,  there  is  of  course  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  or  SSM.  As  you  know, 
progress here is already well advanced: the Regulation setting up the SSM has already been 
approved by Council and is now being discussed by the European Parliament. So what are 
its key features? 
Above all, the SSM will be one system. Some commentators have claimed that, because the 
SSM  is  decentralised,  nothing  will  change  and supervision  will  remain  essentially  national. 
This  is  not  correct.  The  ECB  will  be  the  legally  competent  supervisor  for  all  banks  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
participating  countries.  It  will  have  direct  supervisory  powers  over  large,  systemic  banks, 
which  we  estimate  to  number  around  140. We will  not  directly  supervise  the thousands of 
remaining  smaller  banks,  because  this  would  be  inefficient  when  national  supervisors  are 
already  in  place  with  the  necessary  knowledge  and  technical  skills.  But  the  ECB  and  the 
national supervisors will act as a single system. 
To  ensure  cohesiveness,  all  the  components  of the  system  will  have  to  act  in  accordance 
with guidelines, ECB specific regulations and manuals of supervisory practices that will be 
approved by the Supervisory Board. Moreover, the ECB will receive supervisory data on all 
banks in the SSM allowing it to keep track of developments across the system. On this basis, 
it  can  decide  to  transfer  to  direct  supervision  any  bank  or  group  of  banks  that  may  be 
considered relevant or the origin of systemic risk. This incorporates the lesson of the crisis 
that not only big banks can be the source of general financial instability.  
The  SSM’s  micro-prudential  role  will  also  be  complemented  by  extensive  macro-prudential 
powers. Unifying micro- and macro-prudential powers within the central bank aligns practice 
in  the  euro  area  with  that  in  most  other  advanced  economies.  The  Bank  of  England,  for 
instance,  will  have  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  for  micro-  and  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee for macro-prudential issues. And there are in fact additional reasons for doing this 
in a multi-country monetary union like the euro area, as the level of the main interest rate 
may not be appropriate for all countries at all times, meaning macro-prudential tools play an 
important role as a “counter-weight”. 
A  final  point  to  note  about  the  SSM,  according  to  its  Regulation,  is  that  its  launch  will  be 
associated  with  a  comprehensive  review  of  participating  banks’  balance  sheets.  The 
objective  of  this  review  is  to  identify  legacy  problems  and  start  with  a  system  that  avoids 
reputational risks for the SSM down the line. This process may have financial implications if 
impaired assets have to be written down. And this is a further reason why having a Single 
Resolution Mechanism in place for participating countries is a matter of urgency. 
Benefits for the non-participating Member States 
The SSM is open to the participation of all EU member States, including those that have not 
adopted the euro and perhaps many will do so. How will those states that do not participate 
in the SSM be affected by Banking Union? 
It  is  important  to  stress  here  that  the  playing  field  really  will  be  level.  There  will  be  no 
disadvantage for banks in countries like Britain that stay out of the SSM. Banking Union will 
benefit  all  Member  States  that  are  part  of  the  single  financial  market.  And  as  the  leading 
provider  of  financial  services  in  Europe,  I  can  see  only  advantages  for  Britain  from  its 
creation. 
First, Banking Union will facilitate the completion of the single financial market by simplifying 
supervisory and regulatory practices, which will facilitate wider market access for banks and 
investors across Europe. 
Second,  Banking  Union  will  reduce  the  scope  for  coordination  failures  between  national 
supervisors, which will in turn allow for more effective implementation of the single rulebook 
and convergence of supervisory practices. In this way, the presence of the SSM can be seen 
as  reinforcing  the  coordination  function  of  the  European  Banking  Authority.  The  SSM  will 
operate in full compliance with EBA guidance and actively contribute to its work. 
Third,  Banking  Union  will  enhance  financial  stability  in  the  Europe  –  and  this,  more  than 
anything, is what is required for the single market in financial services to thrive. This would 
bring huge potential benefits for all Member States in terms of enhancing financing for the 
real  economy,  managing  risks  and  pooling  the  resources  of  investors  from  European  and 
elsewhere. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
What we are aiming for in Banking Union is to create a system that is truly European and not 
just an inter-governmental framework for national authorities. We have seen that a Banking 
Union would have made a real difference during the crisis – and for this reason, there is no 
pressing reason to carry on with national arrangements that have not functioned effectively. 
I  believe  that  this  message  has  made  its  way  into  the  SSM  legislation.  The  elements  are 
there for a truly European approach to supervision. And I hope that it will also translate into a 
strong Single Resolution Mechanism, to be launched as soon as possible. The SSM and the 
Single Resolution Mechanism are complements and we need progress on both these fronts. 
As Victor Hugo once remarked, “you can resist an invading army; you cannot resist an idea 
whose time is come.” I believe that Banking Union is just such an idea. But it now depends 
on us – as policymakers, as commentators, as citizens – how it is turned into reality. If we 
are anything less than wholly ambitious, then we will have learned nothing from this crisis.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
