Yves Mersch: Financial stability policies in central banks 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  seminar:  “Financial  stability  policies  in  a  post-crisis  world”,  Czech  National  Bank, 
Prague, 4 March 2013. 
 Financial cycles and the real economy 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  resulted  in  enormous  losses  for  the  real  economy  and 
taxpayers in many countries. For policy-makers it has triggered a re-discovery of the analysis 
of financial cycles and their impact on macroeconomic dynamics. 
Although  important  steps  have  been  taken  to  improve  the  prevailing  analytical  framework, 
e.g.  by  incorporating  financial  frictions  in  general  equilibrium  models,  these  models  are  in 
most cases not yet capable of properly taking into account the relationship between the real 
economy and the financial markets. 
I  fully  agree  in  this  regard  with  Claudio  Borio,  who  has  published  (together  with  his 
colleagues at the BIS) a range of analytical papers on this topic in the last few  years and 
stated that a proper understanding of financial and leverage cycles is essential for effective 
policy-making. 
Indeed, we are aware of the shortcomings of our analytical capacity and attach high priority 
to enhancing our knowledge of the interactions between financial and real economic cycles. 
This  will  be  key  to  helping  decision-makers  find  the  appropriate  policy  responses  to  the 
build-up of excessive systemic risks and thus to prevent the real economy, and ultimately the 
taxpayers, from the potential adverse impacts of unsustainable financial imbalances. 
The institutional framework and instruments of macro-prudential policy 
Systemic  risks  require  a  comprehensive,  systemic  policy  response.  A  number  of  concrete 
measures  have  already  been  taken  around  the world  to  set  up  an  appropriate  institutional 
framework  for  systemic  risk  analysis  and  macro-prudential  policy-making.  Given,  however, 
that  we  are  currently  in  the  “infancy”  of  macro-prudential  policy-making,  the  evolving 
institutional framework still varies quite substantially across jurisdictions. 
We  have  models  of  single  institutions  (typically  central  banks),  or,  alternatively,  financial 
stability  boards  or  committees  that  are  designated  to  carry  out  macro-prudential  policies. 
From  a  financial  stability  perspective,  it  is  important  that  the  authorities  responsible  for 
macro-prudential  policies  should  have  (i)  a  well-defined  mandate,  (ii)  clearly  established 
long-term  and  intermediate  objectives,  and  (iii)  sufficient  control  over  macro-prudential 
instruments that can be activated (or de-activated) in periods when risks to financial stability 
have been identified. 
Macro-prudential policy framework in Europe 
In Europe, the institutional response to these policy challenges was the establishment of the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  which  has  a  clearly  defined  mandate  and 
responsibility in macro-prudential policy-making and coordination at EU level. Having issued 
its recommendation on the mandate of national macro-prudential authorities, the ESRB also 
plays a key role in facilitating the establishment of a macro-prudential policy framework at the 
level of individual Member States. 
However, the ESRB does not have direct control over the instruments that are to be used to 
address systemic risks. While the ESRB can issue recommendations on the application of 
policy  tools,  the  macro-prudential  instruments  are  ultimately  in  the  hands  of  national 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
authorities.  Therefore,  close  cooperation  between  Member  States  is  unavoidable  both  as 
regards the assessment of systemic risk and the implementation of macro-prudential policy. 
This  framework  will  in  the  future  be  complemented  by  the  macro-prudential  tasks  and 
responsibilities  conferred  upon  the  ECB  as  envisaged  in  the  upcoming  Regulation  on  the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). 
Relationship with monetary policy 
Given the key role that central banks play in financial stability analysis and macro-prudential 
policy-making,  the  question  on  the  relationship  with  monetary  policy  naturally  arises.  The 
ECB has a clear mandate to preserve price stability over the medium term. However, it may 
be  desirable  to  incorporate  in  the  decision-making  process  of  monetary  policy  certain 
financial  variables,  which,  over  the  medium  to  longer  term,  may  influence  inflationary 
developments (e.g. excessive credit growth, asset bubbles etc.). 
At  the  same  time,  it  has  to  be  acknowledged  that  monetary  policy  may  have  its  limits  in 
periods when the banking system and the non-bank private sector are busy repairing their 
balance  sheets,  i.e.  correcting  the  excessive  leverage  that  they  built  up  in  good  times. 
Properly  designed  and  calibrated  macro-prudential  policies  may  help  to  avoid  these 
situations and may thus support the repair of the monetary transmission mechanism. 
Furthermore,  there  is  growing  evidence  that  monetary  policy  itself  may  contribute  to  the 
fluctuation of risk aversion and risk taking in the banking system over time. Concretely, banks 
can react to the actual stance of monetary policy by changing the composition and the risk 
profile of their portfolio (“risk-taking channel” of monetary policy). This is another example of 
how macro-prudential policies can contribute to the effective conduct of monetary policy by 
addressing cyclical swings in risk taking in a timely manner. 
Overall, being responsible for monetary policy means that central banks have an intrinsic and 
deep interest in a stable financial system. It is therefore desirable that central banks also play 
a role in financial stability policies, both at the micro and macro levels. The reasons for this 
are manifold. Let me mention three. First, there are substantial information-related synergies 
between monetary policy, the supervision of banks and the oversight of payment systems. 
Second, central banks have already built up expertise on the financial sector as part of the 
financial stability analysis which could serve as a solid basis for policy actions as well. Third, 
the operational and institutional independence of central banks, with clearly defined rules of 
accountability,  are  important  assets  that  can  also  contribute  to  the  effective  conduct  of 
financial stability policies. 
Establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
Monetary policy has clear limitations in addressing macroeconomic imbalances in individual 
countries within a monetary union. To overcome these limitations and to achieve systemic 
stability in an integrated financial market, national financial policies should be complemented 
by  a  mechanism  that  enhances  coordination  and  centralises  decision-making  as  well  as 
policy action in certain key areas of micro- and macro-prudential policy. This is the underlying 
reason for the establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), with the ECB at 
its  core.  There  are  strong  arguments  in  favour  of  a  central  authority  that  can  have  a 
comprehensive, well-informed and unbiased view of the entire euro area banking sector and 
that is not held hostage by national interests and potential inaction bias. 
The  establishment  of  the  SSM  also  helps  to  break  the  negative  feedback  loops  between 
sovereigns and banks. The importance of preventing sovereign problems from spreading to 
banks  (e.g.  Greece)  or  preventing  problems  from  banks  spreading  to  sovereigns  (e.g. 
Ireland) are key lessons drawn from the current crisis. 
Furthermore,  once  the SSM  is  established,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  may 
directly  recapitalise  banks,  thus  de-linking  banks  from  their  sovereigns.  This  is  key 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
particularly in view of the much observed correlation between the cost of funding of euro area 
banks  and  that  of  their  respective  sovereigns  and  the  subsequent  fragmentation  of  the 
European banking system. 
Macro-prudential aspects of the SSM 
The  SSM  Regulation  will  charge  the  ECB  with  specific  tasks  concerning  financial  stability 
policies. The Regulation explicitly states that the tasks will be conferred on the ECB “with a 
view to contributing to the safety and soundness of credit institutions and the stability of the 
financial  system  within  the  EU  and  each  Member  State”.  The  emphasis  on  the  systemic 
perspective is further strengthened by a reference to “the unity and integrity of the internal 
market”. 
The micro-prudential tasks of the ECB will also have a systemic dimension. Namely, the ECB 
will take decisions regarding all “significant” banking groups (around 150 banks in the euro 
area  countries).  Since  these  institutions  have  systemic  relevance,  prudential  measures 
applied will also have consequences on the stability of the financial system as a whole. 
Regarding  the  macro-prudential  tasks  conferred  on  the  ECB,  the  power  to  initiate  and 
implement  macro-prudential  measures  will  primarily  remain  with  the  national  authorities, 
subject  to  a  notification  mechanism  vis-à-vis  the  ECB.  The  ECB  may  object  to  these 
measures  and  the  national  authorities  should  duly  consider  the  ECB’s  reasons  prior  to 
proceeding with any decision. Moreover, any national competent or designated authority may 
propose to the ECB to act in order to address the specific situation of the financial system 
and the economy in its Member State. 
An important feature of the SSM Regulation is that the ECB may, if deemed necessary, also 
apply macro-prudential measures. These measures include higher requirements for capital 
buffers as well as more stringent measures to address systemic or macro-prudential risks at 
the level of credit institutions. The application of these measures is however subject to the 
conditions  and  procedures  specifically  set  out  in  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive 
(CRD IV) and the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR). 
The toolbox that is envisaged to be at the disposal of macro-prudential authorities, including 
the ECB, is rather broad. The set of available instruments defined by the CRD IV includes 
(i) counter-cyclical  capital  buffers,  (ii)  a  systemic  risk  buffer,  (iii)  a  capital  surcharge  for 
systemically important financial institutions as well as (iv) Pillar 2 measures applied to groups 
of institutions. The prudential measures that are falling under the remit of the CRR and that 
can be used for macro-prudential purposes include (i) capital requirements, (ii) sectoral risk 
weights,  (iii)  large  exposure  limits,  (iv)  leverage  ratio  and  liquidity  requirements,  once 
implemented, and (v) public disclosure requirements. 
Additional features of the SSM 
When carrying out the tasks conferred upon it, the ECB should act independently and should 
be accountable to the European Parliament and to the Council. The ECB should submit each 
year to the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission and the Eurogroup a report 
on the execution of the tasks conferred upon it. 
Furthermore, the ECB will also be accountable to national parliaments. 
As  concerns  the  separation  from  the  monetary  policy  function,  the  ECB  will  carry  out  the 
supervisory  tasks  without  prejudice  to,  and  separately  from,  its  tasks  relating  to  monetary 
policy and from any other tasks. The staff involved in carrying out the tasks conferred on the 
ECB  by  the  Regulation  should  be  organisationally  separated  and  subject  to  separate 
reporting lines. 
Finally, let me underline that the effective conduct of financial stability policy requires a well-
defined decision-making process as well. In this regard, the planning and execution of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
tasks  will  be  fully  undertaken  by  the  Supervisory  Board  which  will  be  an  internal  body 
composed of a Chair and Vice Chair, four representatives appointed by the ECB, and one 
representative of the national competent authority in each participating Member State. It is 
important  to  highlight  from  a  macro-prudential  policy  perspective  that  in  cases  where  the 
competent authority is not a central bank, the member of the Supervisory Board may decide 
to  bring  a  representative  from  the  Member  State’s  central  bank.  Thus,  central  banks  may 
also have a word in the decision-making process. Note that, for the purposes of the voting 
procedure, the representatives of the authorities of any one Member State should together 
be considered as one member. 
The  Supervisory  Board  will  carry  out  preparatory  work  regarding  the  supervisory  tasks 
conferred upon the ECB and propose to the Governing Council of the ECB complete draft 
decisions to be adopted by the latter, pursuant to a procedure to be established by the ECB. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
