Yves Mersch: The Banking Union – a European perspective: reasons, 
benefits and challenges of the Banking Union 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  seminar  “Auf  dem  Weg  zu  mehr  Stabilität  –  Ein  Dialog  über  die  Ausgestaltung  der 
Bankenunion  zwischen  Wissenschaft  und  Praxis”,  organised  by  Europolis  and 
Wirtschaftswoche, Berlin, 5 April 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me focus on three specific reasons for the establishment of a European Banking Union: 
first,  delinking  sovereigns  and  banks  and  fostering  the  reintegration  of  financial  markets, 
second, avoiding national bias in supervision, and third, restoring the proper transmission of 
monetary policy. 
The importance of preventing sovereign problems from spreading to banks (e.g. Greece) and 
preventing  banking  problems  from  spreading  to  sovereigns  (e.g.  Ireland,  Cyprus)  is  a  key 
lesson  drawn  from  the  crisis.  Actual  or  expected  bank  bail-outs  by  national  governments 
increase  borrowing  costs  for  sovereigns,  while  also  driving  up  banks’  funding  costs  even 
further. This “doom loop” undermines national efforts to re-establish fiscal sustainability. 
Moreover, growing pressures in funding and lending markets have led to a fragmentation of 
the  euro  area  banking  system  along  national  lines.  The  funding  costs  of  banks  and  the 
correlated borrowing costs for their respective sovereigns have increased, particularly in the 
peripheral  economies.  Countries  that  lose  market  confidence  become  progressively 
dependent  on  domestic  sources  of  funding,  more  prone  to  capital  outflows  and  less 
responsive to monetary policy. The divergence in bank funding conditions at national level in 
turn  gives  rise  to  cross-country  differences  in  lending  conditions.  Lending  conditions  for 
households  and firms  in  the  periphery  have  become  tighter than they  should  be  given  the 
prevailing monetary policy stance. This results in an inefficient allocation of funding across 
the euro area and hence has a negative impact on growth and employment. 
The  establishment  of  a  Banking  Union  would  help  to  break  this  negative  feedback  loop 
between sovereigns and banks. 
A  single  supervisor  with  a  truly  European  focus  could  rebuild  depositor  and  investor 
confidence. A central supervisor will not be suspected of allowing banks to hide bad assets in 
some  countries.  Neither  would  a  European  supervisor  insist  on  national  asset  and  liability 
matching, which increases fragmentation. 
A  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  –  the  necessary  complement  of  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  –  would  avoid  rising  funding  costs  amid  the  risk  of  bank  
bail-outs by national governments, because it would become more common to resolve banks 
rather  than  save  them.  Hence,  the  private  sector  would  bear  the  cost  rather  than  the 
taxpayer.  Any  residual  fiscal  burden  on  sovereigns  would  be  contained  through  a  federal 
fiscal backstop. 
The  shift  of  supervision  from  the  domestic  to  the  European  level,  at  which  supranational 
interests  are  pursued,  should  also  eliminate  national  bias  and  the  associated  supervisory 
forbearance  that  the  financial  crisis  has  brought  to  the  fore.  With  hindsight,  in  the  past 
supervisors  were  often  lenient  towards  “national  champions”,  constrained  either  by  their 
mandates or by other national pressures, or perhaps both. Supervisors should be free from 
local pressures and interests; they should be able to independently assess the situation of 
individual banks in a systemic context. 
From a monetary policy perspective, the Banking Union can relieve monetary policy of some 
of the tasks undertaken during this crisis, notably that of repairing and bypassing a clogged 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
transmission channel. Early supervisory action limits the necessity to access central banks’ 
financing, including non-standard measures. 
Reasons and benefits for entrusting the ECB with the SSM 
All of these reasons were the driving forces behind the establishment of the SSM. Let me 
now spend a moment on the reasons why the ECB is being entrusted with these centralised 
supervisory tasks. 
First  of  all,  there  are  legal  reasons. Given  the  need  to  establish the  SSM  quickly,  a treaty 
change, which would take several years, was not really an option. Article 127(6) of the Treaty 
on the Functioning of the European Union provides that the Council by unanimous vote may 
“confer  specific  tasks  upon  the  European  Central  Bank  concerning  policies  relating  to  the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions.” But a treaty change in the future should not be 
ruled out. 
Second, the decision was guided by practical reasons. Over the years, the ECB has built up 
a unique expertise in analysing financial institutions and markets. In other words, the ECB 
has the means and, in conjunction with the national authorities, in most cases coinciding with 
the national central banks, the technical capability to carry out this complex task. Moreover, 
most of the national central banks already have prudential competence. 
Key principles for the implementation of the SSM 
Let me now describe how the SSM will function. 
One  of  the  conditions  for  the  success  of  the  SSM  is  that  it  ensures  a  truly  European 
perspective.  It  is  a  myth  that  politically  protected  banks  or  banking  structures  or  “national 
champions”  were  in  the  interest  of  the  respective  taxpayers.  The  elimination  of  potential 
national bias is therefore key. 
Implementation  of  the  European  dimension  depends  on  several  elements.  The  first  is  the 
appropriate scoping of participating jurisdictions. The establishment of the SSM will bring all 
banks established in the euro area, and the credit institutions established in those Member 
States which have entered into a close cooperation with the ECB, under the supervision of 
the ECB. This creates a level playing field. 
Whereas only the most significant banks will fall under the direct supervision of the ECB, less 
significant banks, while remaining under national supervision, will not be excluded from the 
ECB’s supervisory reach. 
1. 
National authorities will  have to abide by ECB regulations, guidelines and general 
instructions  and  be  subject  to  the  ECB’s  broad  oversight  mandate  over  the 
functioning of the SSM. 
To ensure the consistent application of supervisory standards, the ECB may decide 
at any time to exercise direct supervision on less significant credit institutions. 
The  possibility  for  non-euro  area  Member  States  to join  the  SSM  emphasises  the 
EU-wide dimension. This also implies that they will have to adhere to the guidelines 
and instructions issued by the ECB. 
2. 
3. 
The  design  envisaged for  the  SSM  is  based  on  building  a  strong  centre,  supported  by  an 
adequate allocation of tasks between centre and periphery. 
The responsibility and decision-making power for the overall functioning of the system will be 
held  by  the  ECB.  Its  efficient  operationalisation,  however,  will  depend  on  the  national 
competent authorities, whose expertise and proximity to the supervised entities are essential 
in ensuring that no aspect is overlooked. Even in the case of banks directly supervised by the 
ECB,  experts  from  national  authorities  will  be  involved  in  on-site  inspections.  These  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
other  operations  should be  conducted  in the  context  of  joint  supervisory  teams  headed  by 
ECB experts. 
The  conferral  of  supervisory  tasks  to  the  central  bank  mirrors  the  prevailing  consensus  in 
many  jurisdictions.  The  crisis  has  actually  reinforced  this  trend  of  central  banks  acquiring 
supervisory  responsibilities,  benefiting  from  the  synergies  between  monetary  policy  and 
supervision. These first include potential benefits from the sharing of information with regard 
to monetary policy, the supervision of banks and the oversight of payment systems. Second, 
central  banks  can  draw  on  expertise  in  the  field  of  financial  stability  analysis.  Third,  the 
institutional independence of central banks, with clearly defined rules of accountability, can 
positively  contribute  to  the  effective  conduct  of  financial  stability  policies.  International 
institutions and fora like the International Monetary Fund or the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision  in  its  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision  clearly  stress  the 
advantages of an independent supervisor. 
Although the conduct of supervision will be a new task for the ECB, a wealth of experience is 
at hand in macroeconomic and financial stability matters. While safeguarding any potential 
conflicts  of  interest  between  the  monetary  and  supervisory  function,  the  benefits  of 
combining these two tasks in one institution are evident and should be reaped. 
Accessing the  existing  analytical  expertise  will  insure  high quality  input for  the  supervisory 
decision-making  process  and  will  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the  SSM.  Effective 
supervision  is  no  free  lunch;  fees  will  have  to  be  levied  on  banks.  However,  there  will  be 
efficiency gains from avoiding the duplication of services that provide input to both tasks, so 
the cost burden for the financial industry will be contained. 
Despite the potential synergies, the dual role of central bank and supervisor is assumed to 
involve  potential  conflicts  of  interests.  Although,  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability 
measures are mostly in accordance, we must take these concerns seriously to stay credible. 
Specifically, people have warned against (i) the risk of supervisory forbearance associated 
with the central bank being the liquidity provider, (ii) the reputational risk that may arise from 
the potential conflict of interest between the ECB’s two areas of activity, and (iii) legal risks, 
which warrant particular scrutiny and which I will discuss more intensively. 
From an institutional perspective, the SSM Regulation provides specific safeguards against 
any conflict of interests by enshrining the principle of separation of the monetary policy and 
the supervisory function. This is reflected in the important role given to the Supervisory Board 
vis-à-vis  the  Governing  Council.  Additionally,  deliberations  of  the  Governing  Council  on 
supervisory  matters  will  be  strictly  separated,  with  separate  agendas  and  meetings.  The 
envisaged  decision-making  process  for  supervisory  decisions  should  mitigate  any  risk  of 
supervisory  forbearance:  actual  supervisory  decision-making  power  rests  within  the 
Supervisory Board, and the Governing Council should ultimately be empowered to reject the 
decisions agreed upon. 
The  combination  of  the  supervisory  and  central  bank  function  in  one  institution  warrants 
safeguards to mitigate reputational risk. It is sometimes inevitable that mistakes are made in 
the  exercise  of  supervisory  tasks,  e.g.  when  the  supervisor  is  dealing  with  fraudulent 
behaviour. From a reputational risk perspective, the aforementioned appropriate separation 
of the two functions is hence particularly important. It is critical, for instance, to couple the 
internal separation between supervisory and monetary functions with an external dimension, 
reinforcing  the  outside  perception  of  clear  separation  in  terms  of  operations  and 
accountability. 
These  risks  might  be  contained  successfully  with  the  appropriate  institutional  and 
organisational set-up. More caution is warranted amid the legal risks stemming from the draft 
regulation that is currently on the table. 
Let me give some examples: under the trialogue compromise, the appointment of the Vice-
Chair of the Supervisory Board requires approval by the European Parliament as well as an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
implementing decision by the European Council. While the Chair of the Supervisory Board 
does not necessarily belong to an independent EU body, the SSM draft regulation provides 
for the selection of the Vice-Chair by the Governing Council from among the members of the 
ECB’s  Executive  Board.  The  same  applies  to  the  dismissal  procedures  for  the  Chair  and 
Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board. 
As this provision may be beyond the red line of the ECB’s statutory independence, and that 
of  the  Executive  Board  and  of  its  members,  it  might  be  legally  challenged  and  create  a 
reputational risk should the SSM become subject to litigation. 
The foreseen de facto veto right of the European Parliament to a nomination proposal of an 
ECB  Executive  Board  member  seems  inappropriate,  as  a  veto  could  be  based  on  the 
following considerations. 
1. 
The  member’s  past  track-record  on  monetary  policy  or  on  other  ECB  basic  tasks. 
This would be tantamount to a political interference on exclusive and independent 
ECB tasks. 
The  member’s  prospective  supervisory  policy  views.  This  would  condition  the 
member’s use of discretion in his or her supervisory activity, against the principle of 
supervisory operational independence. 
Any  reason  entailing  a  discrimination  prohibited  under  the  Treaty  and  the  EU 
Charter of Fundamental Rights. 
2. 
3. 
Moreover,  there  is  already  an  institutional  balance  in  the  appointment  procedure  for 
Executive  Board  members,  in  which  the  European  Parliament  opines  on  nominated 
candidates. Such an institutional balance could be disturbed by the new veto right. Strangely 
enough, for the primary ECB tasks the Parliament “merely” opines, while it has a veto power 
for  the  secondary  task  –  relating  to  a  person  already  scrutinised  by  the  Parliament  when 
appointed  to  the  Board (and  thus to  the Governing  Council)  and  who  is  nominated  by  the 
Governing Council to an additional position in an internal ECB body. 
In  addition,  a  parliamentary  rejection  or  dismissal  of  an  ECB’s  Executive  Board  member 
nominated by the Governing Council for the Supervisory Board, would in practice affect that 
member’s  stance  in  the  ECB  decision-making  bodies,  thereby  institutionalising  potential 
conflicts between the ECB and the Parliament. This could lead to political interference with 
the ECB, in contradiction with the concept of central bank independence framed under the 
Maastricht  Treaty.  It  would  also  create  a  reputational  and  credibility  issue  for  the  affected 
Executive Board member and the Executive Board as a whole. 
An  external  veto  right  would  affect  the  autonomous  capacity  of  the  Executive  Board  to 
organise  its  internal  allocation  of  tasks.  It  thus  seriously  jeopardizes  the  independent 
functioning  of  the  Executive  Board.  Article  130  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the 
European  Union  and  Article  7  of  the  Statute  of  the  ESCB  and  the  ECB  requires  EU 
institutions to undertake “not to seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies 
of  the  European  Central  Bank.”  It  may  also  create  competitive  dynamics  between  the 
Executive Board members, internally and externally, affecting collegiality. 
Complementing the SSM: the Single Resolution Mechanism 
In  order  for  it  to  function  effectively,  the  SSM  needs  to  be  complemented  with  a  Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  to  deal  with  non-viable  banks.  It  is  crucial  that  the  SRM 
framework  is  in  place  once  the  SSM  is  operational.  If  not,  there  is  a  risk  of  encouraging 
supervisory  forbearance  based  on  the  expectation  of  the  central  bank  granting  liquidity.  It 
would be a mistake to assume that there will be no more troubled banks once the SSM is in 
force  and  supervisory  responsibility  is  transferred  to  the  ECB.  Therefore  a  resolution 
mechanism needs to be put in place to ensure that non-viable banks are closed down and 
resolved. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As in the case of supervision, a European dimension is of paramount relevance for effective 
resolution. It should shield timely and impartial decision-making from national bias. The SRM 
institutional mandate should ensure that banks are not preserved at the taxpayers’ expense. 
The era in which the privatisation of profits and socialisation of losses was possible should 
belong  to  the  past.  In  a  private  market  economy,  institutions  cannot  be  shielded  from  a 
market exit. In view of unintended consequences, this must however be done in an orderly 
way and free of national bias. 
The set-up of the SRM depends on the swift adoption of the Bank Recovery and Resolution 
Directive, containing a harmonised toolkit of resolution powers. The SRM could then rely on 
the resolution measures set forth in this directive, which will provide a robust framework for 
prompt  and  coordinated  resolution  action,  in  particular  where  cross-border  banks  are 
concerned. 
The  framework  of  the  SRM  has  yet  to  be  defined  and  a  proposal  by  the  Commission  is 
expected to be submitted later this year. I would like to outline what the main features of the 
future SRM should be. 
In  order  to  prevent  any  potential  conflict  of  objectives,  this  mechanism  should  under  no 
circumstances  be  placed  with  the  ECB.  Its  institutional  and  geographical  scope,  however, 
should replicate that of the SSM. The SRM’s ultimate responsibility would rest with a Single 
Resolution  Authority,  charged  with  governing  the  resolution  of  banks  and  coordinating  the 
application  of  resolution  tools.  As  regards  the  jurisdictional  scope,  the  SRM  should  in 
principle have the power and the authority to resolve all banks within the SSM. 
Funding is one of the most critical aspects of resolution. To be credible, the new framework 
should count on sufficient financial resources. I am not talking about bail-outs with taxpayers’ 
money, rather minimising the expenditure of public money. To attain this goal, the following 
mechanisms should be put in place. 
1. 
The  write-down  of  capital  instruments  and  bail-in  of  creditors  should  be  fully 
exploited. 
A  European  Resolution  Fund  should  be  set  up  to  provide  additional  funding  if 
needed. It should be financed by ex-ante risk-based contributions by all the banks 
falling within the SRM jurisdiction. 
As a last resort, if the resources of the European Resolution Fund are not enough, 
funds could be drawn from a EU back-stop mechanism. However, any fiscal support 
to the SRM should be in the form of credit to the European Resolution Fund to be 
repaid  ex  post.  For  this  purpose,  the  European  Resolution  Fund  should  have  the 
authority to impose additional levies on the banks under the jurisdiction of the SRM. 
This  should  ensure  that  the  mechanism  is  fiscally  neutral  over  the  medium  term. 
Resolution activity would possibly require the temporary use of public money if the 
Resolution Fund did not have enough resources, for instance, to capitalise a bridge 
bank that is later sold to the private sector, thus recovering the capital involved. The 
existence of this financial backstop can be considered an integral part of a complete 
Banking  Union,  also  taking  into  account  the  possibility  for  the  ESM  to  directly 
recapitalise  banks.  A  loose  network  for  the  coordination  of  national  funds  would 
weaken the SSM; its remit must go beyond that of the European Banking Authority, 
which coordinates national supervisors. 
2. 
3. 
The timetable for implementation 
The  ECB  has  stepped  up  the  preparatory  work  for  the  establishment  of  the  SSM  in  close 
cooperation with national supervisors. The preparations are steered by a High-Level Group, 
chaired  by  the  ECB  President,  which  discusses  the  main  strategic  lines.  On  the  technical 
level, a Task Force on Supervision is conducting the preparatory work. Both of these groups 
include representatives of each National Competent Authority (NCA). Moreover, a restricted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Project Team, composed of managers from the supervisory and financial stability areas, has 
been created between the ECB and the national authorities to foster the communication and 
cooperation within the system. The technical work is organized in five work streams, focusing 
on an initial mapping of the euro area banking system, legal issues, the development of a 
supervisory  model,  the  coordination  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  credit 
institutions and the preparation of a future supervisory reporting template for the SSM. 
The  formal  establishment  of  the  Supervisory  Board  will  take  place  shortly  after  these 
preparations  and  mark  the  start  of  a  transition  period  of  approximately  one  year  until  the 
SSM  becomes  operational.  During  this  transition  period,  the  Supervisory  Board  will  adopt 
draft decisions on a number of legal acts and also decide about key organisational matters. 
Given that most of these processes can only start formally once the SSM Regulation enters 
into  force,  a  delay  of  its  adoption  would  constitute  a  risk  to  the  timely  start  of  the  SSM’s 
operations in mid-2014. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The establishment of the SSM must be seen in a broader perspective. The 
SSM  is  a  key  element  of  the  European  Banking  Union  which  itself  is  embedded  in  the 
process  of  further  European  integration.  Among  the  achievements  on  the  path  towards  a 
fiscal and economic union in Europe, we should reap the benefits from the recent dynamics 
of institutional reforms by building the Banking Union rather than stepping on the brake. The 
corresponding  tightening  of  economic  links  will  ultimately  require  institutional  adjustments 
with a view to democratic accountability regarding the transfer of sovereignty; this concerns 
the European Parliament and the European Commission and will require treaty adjustments. 
This is the price for a well-functioning Monetary Union, in which the ECB focuses on price 
stability  while  ensuring  that  financial  stability  does  not  stand  in  the  way  of  its  primary 
objective. 
For the ECB, and for the more seasoned authorities that carry out supervision in the Member 
States,  the  new  supervision  mechanism  will  represent  a  sea-change,  a  “new  frontier”, 
comparable  in  many  ways  with  that  of  creating  a  new  currency  and  a  new  central  bank 
before the start of this century. 
The ECB is keenly aware of this and consequently puts an enormous focus on the careful, 
yet efficient, execution of the preparatory work, drawing on all available sources of expertise, 
both internal and external. 
However, as the preliminary agreement between the European Parliament, the Commission 
and the Council from 19 March is now being renegotiated further to a new request, a delay in 
the final adoption of the SSM Regulation cannot be excluded. This would constitute a risk to 
the timely start of the SSM’s operations in mid-2014 and generate legal uncertainty. A policy 
of procrastination, however, would send the wrong signals. Both the SSM and the SRM are 
elementary building blocks for the reintegration of Europe’s banking landscape. So they must 
be implemented swiftly and decisively. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
