Anand Sinha: Governance in banks and financial institutions 
Address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, delivered on his 
behalf, at the L & T Management Development Centre, Lonavla, 19 March 2013. 
 Inputs provided by Thomas Mathew, Ms. Sindhu Pancholy and Jayakumar Yarasi are gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri Deosthalee and senior management of L & T. A very good evening. I deem it a privilege 
to address you this evening on “Governance in banks and financial institutions”. 
Governance issues have been engaging the attention of policy makers, more intensely in the 
aftermath of the global financial crisis. Many instances of governance failures have come to 
the fore as the contributory factors that had exacerbated the crisis. With lessons learnt from 
the crisis, the framework is being revisited so as to strengthen the governance standards. 
What is governance? 
What exactly is Governance? Governance, in general terms, means the process of decision 
making  and  the  process  by  which  decisions  are  implemented  (or  not  implemented),1 
involving  multiple  actors.  Good  governance  is  one  which  is  accountable,  transparent, 
responsive,  equitable  and  inclusive,  effective  and  efficient,  participatory  and  which  is 
consensus oriented and which follows the rule of law. 
The  1992  Report  of  the  Committee  on  the  Financial  Aspects  of  Corporate  Governance 
(Cadbury  Report)  describes  corporate governance  as  the  system  by  which  companies  are 
directed  and  controlled.  As  per  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development 
(OECD),  Corporate  Governance  involves2  “a  set  of  relationships  between  a  company’s 
management,  its  board,  its  shareholders,  and  other  stake  holders.  Corporate  Governance 
also  provides  the  structure  through  which  the  objectives  of  the  company  are  set,  and  the 
means  of  attaining  those  objectives  and  monitoring  performance  are  determined.  Good 
corporate  governance  should  provide  proper  incentives  for  the  board  and  management  to 
pursue objectives that are in the interests of the company and its shareholders and should 
facilitate  effective  monitoring.  The  presence  of  an  effective  corporate  governance  system, 
within an individual company or group and across an economy as a whole, helps to provide a 
degree of confidence that is necessary for the proper functioning of a market economy”. 
The  whole  gamut  of  corporate  governance  could  be  considered  as  a  blend  of  various 
segments3  namely,  regulatory  governance,  market  governance,  stake  holder  governance 
and internal governance. For an economy to perform well and for the financial system to be 
stable, good corporate governance would be required across all these segments. Regulatory 
governance refers to control exercised by regulators over firms through statutes, policies and 
regulations. Market governance denotes the use of market based controls which discipline 
the  corporate  behaviour.  While  stakeholder  governance  alludes  to  the  direct  or  indirect 
control  by  various  stakeholder  groups  having  direct  or  indirect  interest  in  the  corporations, 
internal governance refers to the institutional arrangement of checks and balances within the 
corporation. 
                                                
1  United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, “What is good governance” 
2  OECD Principles of Corporate Governance(2004) 
3  Sun, Willian, Stewart, Jim and Pollard, David; “A systemic failure of corporate governance: Lessons from the 
on-going financial crisis” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Why is corporate governance important for financial institutions? 
While  good  governance  is  essential  for  any  entity,  it  has  deeper  significance  for  financial 
institutions. There are many compelling reasons, some of which are: 
a. 
Financial institutions are central to economic activity – banks and a large part of the 
non-banking  financial  system  (the  shadow  banking  system)  undertake  credit 
intermediation.  Failures  of  financial  institutions  would  thus  impede  the  economic 
growth and would cause serious damage to the system. Economies take longer time 
to rebound from financial crisis than the business cycle recessions. 
Financial institutions operate on a higher leverage. As per a study by the Bank for 
International Settlement (BIS) for the period 1995–2009, compared to non-financial 
institutions  that  had  a  leverage  of  about  3,  banks  operated  at  a  leverage  of 
18.3 while non-bank financial firms had a leverage of 12.1. Higher leverage makes 
financial  intermediaries  more  vulnerable  to  shocks.  From  a  systemic  perspective, 
the  inheren  procyclicality  of  the  financial  system  leads  to  the  build  up  of  high 
leverage  during  upturn  phase  of  the  economy  which  amplifies  booms  and  busts. 
Therefore,  while  the  procyclicality  issues  need  to  be  dealt  with  from  a  financial 
stability  perspective,  it  is  apparent  that  these  financial  institutions  must  be  well 
governed for achieving financial stability. 
Financial  institutions,  especially  banks,  deal  in  people’s  savings  and  trust  of 
customers forms the cornerstone of their existence. Any breach of trust leading to 
loss  of  confidence  is  bound  to  lead  to  a  run,  not  just  on  a  particular  bank  but  on 
others too who are perceived to have weakness or even similar business models. 
The non bank financial intermediaries who lose the trust of their lenders would not 
be able to raise resources at a reasonable cost making it hard for them to operate 
efficiently  and  profitably.  All  these  can  lead  to  snowballing  effect  impairing  the 
functioning  of  the  entire  financial  system  due  to  interconnectedness.  Good 
governance  ensures  customers’  and  other  stakeholders’  trust  in  banks  and 
non-banking financial intermediaries. 
Among  the  financial  intermediaries,  banks  occupy  a  special  place  due  to  their 
centrality in the transmission of monetary policy and the functioning of the payment 
and settlement systems. They also are the beneficiaries of deposit insurance which 
may weaken their incentive for strong management monitoring as well as monitoring 
by  other  stakeholders  including  depositors.  Good  corporate  governance  would 
ensure  strong  internal  controls  which  would  offset  the  weakened  incentive  for 
monitoring. A robust and stable banking system is an absolute necessity for a well 
functioning economy. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Corporate governance – international experience 
Academic  literature  suggests  that  post  2000,  significant  developments  happened  in  the 
corporate  governance  framework  internationally.  For  e.g.,  in  the  US,  corporate  scandals 
including  Enron  and  World  Com  resulting  from  failure  in  corporate  governance,  led  to 
Sarbanes–Oxley  Act  with  an  aim  to  improving  the  accuracy  and  reliability  of  corporate 
disclosures  by  way  of  enhanced  oversight  role  of  Boards,  corporate  responsibility, 
certification of accuracy of financial transactions by Top Management, setting standards for 
auditor independence etc. 
However, it is widely acknowledged that even the enhanced framework could not mitigate the 
weaknesses which played a significant role in contributing to the global financial crisis (GFC). 
There  are  ongoing  debates  regarding  the  manner  in  which  flawed  governance  practices 
played their part in the crisis. While poor implementation is blamed by some, systemic failure 
of  corporate  governance  is  attributed  by  others  as  the  cause.  OECD  and  UK  Financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Regulatory  Council  share  the  view  that  the  shortcomings  were  not  with  the  Corporate 
Governance codes / principles per se, but were in their implementation. 
Governance and ethics 
Lack  of  ethics  too  played  a  significant  part  in  the  erosion  of  governance  standards  in 
institutions.  Values  and  culture  define  ethics.  Ethics  are  principles  that  recommend  proper 
conduct, help distinguish right from wrong and drive people to do the right thing even when 
no  one  is  looking.  While  ethical  behaviour  is  a  minimum  requirement  for  any  dealing  or 
transaction, it becomes all the more essential for financial intermediaries, and particularly for 
banks, for whom trust is the cornerstone. Honest and prudent behaviour by banks and other 
financial intermediaries is integral to their reputation and public confidence in the system. 
However,  the  conduct  of  financial  institutions  that  caused  the  crisis  does  not  suggest  any 
measure of enduring interaction between ethics and banking. In fact, financial markets and 
entities displayed significant moral bankruptcy through the period spanning pre-crisis, crisis 
year and beyond. 
Some  of  the  recent  high  profile  events  have  emphatically  highlighted  the  complete  lack of 
ethics in some financial institutions. London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) rigging episode 
wherein  a  few  financial  institutions  colluded  in  rigging  the  LIBOR  so  as  to  profit  from  the 
trades or to give an inflated impression about their creditworthiness shook the world. LIBOR 
is one of the most important interest rates and is used for pricing of about USD 800 trillion 
worth of financial instruments (reportedly 11 times the GDPs of all nations on earth). There 
are several such episodes. 
Closer home too, in India, we have witnessed a few high profile cases which have shaken 
the  public  trust  in  the  financial  system.  Satyam,  once  regarded  as  having  good  corporate 
governance,  was  found  to  have  been  deeply  involved  in  one  of  India’s  biggest  corporate 
frauds. The 1992 securities scam which brought out the nexus between bankers and brokers 
led to massive overhaul of the financial system in India. The unethical practices adopted by 
some banks in recent past in selling inappropriate financial products (exotic derivatives) to 
their  corporate  customers  and  the  unfair  and  unscrupulous  methods  adopted  by  some 
microfinance institutions (MFIs) in their operations are some recent reminders of erosion of 
ethics in the financial system. 
Causes of governance failure 
A systemic failure of corporate governance means the failure of the whole set of regulatory, 
market, stakeholder and internal governance, which has largely contributed to the on-going 
financial crisis.4 
a. 
Regulatory  governance  failure:  The  regulatory  framework  in  the  pre-crisis  period 
was  veering  more  towards  deregulation  and  liberalization.  The  Chinese  wall  that 
separated investment banking from retail banking was brought down with the repeal 
of Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 which led to the proliferation of universal banks. While 
this enabled the institutions to achieve economies of scale and scope, it also led to 
transmission of risks of investment banking into retail banking. The exemption from 
regulation  of  OTC  derivatives  enabled  by  the  passage  of  Commodity  Futures 
Modernisation Act 2000 is alleged to have encouraged excessive trading in Credit 
Default Swaps which were an important feature of the global crisis. Other regulatory 
dispensations  such  as  permitting  banks  to  move  massive  amounts  of  assets  and 
liabilities off balance sheet through structured investment vehicles also fuelled the 
                                                
4  Sun, Willian, Stewart, Jim and Pollard, David; “A systemic failure of corporate governance: Lessons from the 
on-going financial crisis” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
crisis.  Further,  the  regulatory  gaps  which  led  to  proliferation  of  shadow  banking 
entities  have  also  been  significantly  instrumental  in  exacerbating  the  crisis.  There 
were  lapses  in  the  supervisory  framework  also.  In  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  it  was 
observed  that  the  supervisors  were  staying  on  the  sidelines  and  not  intruding 
sufficiently into the affairs of participants. They were not being proactive in dealing 
with the emerging risks and in adapting to changing environment. There was a lack 
of capacity to identify, or to act on identification. For example, supervisors could not 
see the risks building up  when banks started dealing in  very complex  products or 
when  banks  started  relying  excessively  on  short  term  funding  sources  for  their 
operations. Supervision was not comprehensive and even when supervisors found 
some anomaly, it was not taken to conclusion. 
Market  Governance  failure:  The  prevailing  dogma  prior  to  the  crisis  was  that 
markets were always right and will find their own balance, left to themselves. There 
was unflinching faith in the invisible hand of markets, despite the well known fat tails 
in  statistical  distributions  representing  herd  behaviour  of  markets  signifying 
irrationality  driven  by  excessive  optimism  or  pessimism.  However,  the  crisis 
established  that  markets  are  indeed  fallible.  As  observed  by  Joseph  E.  Stiglitz,  a 
Nobel  laureate  in  economics,  when  information  is  imperfect,  markets  do  not  often 
work well and information imperfections are central in finance. 
Stakeholder  governance  failure:  The  crisis  has  also  highlighted  the  failure  on  the 
part  of  various  stakeholders  who  did  not  have  active  involvement  in  corporate 
governance. 
Internal Governance failure: It is observed that the lapses in internal systems and 
controls such as Board oversight, managerial competence, compensation policies, 
audit etc. were instrumental in exacerbating the crisis 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Let  me  now  briefly  touch  upon  some  of  the  specific  internal  governance  failures  in  the 
financial institutions that have contributed to and/or exacerbated the crisis. 
a. 
Complex and opaque organizational structures: There was a massive growth in the 
complexity of organizational structures in the pre-crisis period, with a view to taking 
advantage of regulatory arbitrage and also of gaps in regulations. Regulators found 
it  difficult  to  look  through  the  structures  and  enforce  regulation.  Many  times,  such 
complex  structures  fell  in  the  gaps  between  regulatory  jurisdictions  and  escaped 
regulations. 
Inadequate  Oversight  by  Board:  Boards  were  found  to  be  not  actively  involved  in 
formulating risk appetite framework of firms. Incomplete risk information due to gaps 
in  MIS coupled  with inadequate understanding of risk due to the lack of expertise 
among  the  directors,  hampered  effective  and  timely  decision  making.  Improper 
pricing of risk led to suboptimal allocation of capital and inadequate preparation for 
the tail events eventually leading to the precipitation of the crisis. 
Weaknesses  in  the  Senior  Management:  Senior  management  failed  to  adopt  and 
integrate necessary systems to identify, manage and report risk. The misalignment 
of incentives also resulted in the management pursuing objectives which, at times, 
were at cross purposes to those of the firm. 
Proliferation of complex products: There was a significant spurt in the complexity of 
financial products in the run-up to the crisis. Abundance of cheap liquidity prodded 
the participants to innovate ways to deploy the funds and earn a return. Complexity 
and opacity led to inadequate understanding and mispricing of risk. The long chain 
of transactions also obfuscated the true risks inherent in the transactions and led to 
a false sense of comfort. 
Flawed remuneration policies: Compensation structures which focussed excessively 
on short term performance incentivised managers to take excessive risks in order to 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
risk  management  systems  and 
meet the short term objectives at the expense of long term sustainability of the firm. 
Further, the framework where the participants get to keep the gains while the losses 
are  assured  to  be  borne  by  the  society  (either  explicitly  by  the  government 
guarantee or implicitly due to the inevitable governments’ intervention to bail out due 
to  systemic  concerns), was  an  incentive  for  participants to  take-up risky  activities. 
Equity incentives, put in place with the objective to align managers’ incentives with 
those of shareholders, may also have induced managers to take excessive risks. 
internal  controls:  With  significant 
Weak 
developments  in  technology,  risk  management  in  the  run  up  to  the  crisis  became 
highly quantitative on the lines of an exact science. Models proliferated with a false 
assurance  to  capture  and  measure  every  kind  of  risk.  It  is  said  that  economists 
suffered from a syndrome of Physics envy. The models tried to anticipate the future 
based  on  assumptions  of  normality  and  on  the  basis  of  past  data.  In  their 
exuberance,  quants,  however,  forgot  that  the  assumption  of  normality  does  not 
correspond  to  reality,  particularly,  in  highly  stressed  situations.  For  example,  the 
probability of a 5-sigma loss on any given day would mean that such an occurrence 
should happen once in about 14,000 years (assuming 250 trading days in a year) 
that  is  much  longer  than  the  period  of  time  that  has  elapsed  since  civilisation 
evolved.5 During the crisis the Wall Street Journal (2007) reported that events that 
models predicted would happen only once in 10,000 years, happened every day for 
3 days. Further, the assumption, or rather the dogma, which was the basis of many 
models, that future could be predicted on the basis of past data, led to disastrous 
outcomes.  With  the  rapid  development  of  technology,  increased  integration  of 
markets  and  entry  of  sophisticated  players,  the  present  and  the  future  are  much 
different from the past and it would be very naïve to predict the future based on the 
past data. 
Inadequate  emphasis  on  financial  literacy  and  consumer  protection:  While  the 
complexity  of  financial  products  was  increasing,  inadequate  attention  was  paid  to 
imparting  financial  education  to  the  public.  Financial  literacy  would  not  only  to 
enable customers to make use of the available products but, more importantly, help 
them understand the inherent risks in the products and to guard themselves if the 
financial institutions indulged in mis-selling and other unfair practices. 
f. 
g. 
International initiatives in strengthening corporate governance 
Global crisis has highlighted the significance of good corporate governance for the survival 
and  well  functioning  of  financial  institutions.  The  Senior  Supervisors’  Group’s  Report 
“Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence” (March 
2008) confirms that the financial institutions which survived the crisis better were those who 
had,  among  others,  informative  and  responsive  risk  measurement  and  management 
reporting  and  practices.  The  blend  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  analysis  provided  a  high 
level  of  insight  and  consistent  communication  to  management  of  evolving  conditions, 
enabling the firm to respond effectively to emerging opportunities and risks. 
With  lessons  drawn  from  the  crisis,  policy  makers  have  revisited  the  extant  corporate 
governance  framework  and  have  issued  guidance  with  a  view  to  addressing  the  gaps 
witnessed  and  strengthening  the  governance  framework.  The  OECD  Steering  Group  on 
Corporate  Governance,  which  examined  the  governance  failures,  observed  that  while  the 
corporate governance weaknesses in remuneration, risk management, board practices and 
the exercise of shareholder rights had played an important role in the development of global 
crisis, the OECD Principles of Corporate Governance issued in 2004, nevertheless, provided 
                                                
5  Dowd, Kevin and Hutchinson, Martin, “Alchemists of Loss”, Times Group Books 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
a good basis to adequately address the key concerns that have been raised and that there 
was  no  urgent  need  for  them  to  be  revisited.  The  Group  opined  that  the  more  urgent 
challenge was to encourage and support the implementation of already agreed international 
and  national  standards  including  the  OECD  Principles  of  Corporate  Governance.  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  has  revisited  its  2006  guidance  on  corporate 
governance and brought out Principles for enhancing corporate governance (Oct 2010). The 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  has,  in  its  progress  report  to  the  G20  Ministers  and 
Governors  (Nov  2012)  also  made  recommendations  relating  to  the  corporate  governance 
issues of systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs). 
Risk governance 
There is an enhanced realisation that the risk governance demands a holistic approach and 
that  risk  appreciation  should  start  at  the  top.  A  strengthened  management  information 
system  (MIS)  supported  by  robust  information  technology  platform  is  a  necessary 
pre-condition  for  enhancing  Board  efficiency  in  oversight  and  decision  making.  Similarly, 
augmented skill sets and experience at the level of independent directors would go a long 
way in enhancing the Board capacity. Strong MIS facilitates risk reporting to the boards in an 
effective  and  comprehensive  manner,  which  in  turn  enhances  transparency  and  causes 
informed decision taking. Robust information technology systems are a necessary condition 
for supporting the MIS framework as the quality of risk information that the Boards and the 
top management receive depends largely on the quality and robustness of the information 
technology systems.6 
In addition to prescribing the risk appetite for the institution, the board also needs to lay down 
appropriate risk strategy and ensure that this is institutionalised throughout the organization. 
This  would  entail,  aligning  risk  management  processes  with  the  overall  business  strategy, 
clearly defining the roles and responsibilities down the hierarchy, establishing accountability 
and  reinforcing  change  with  communication  and  training.  The  Board  and  the  senior 
management oversight must be supplemented with effective leadership by the Chairman and 
the  chief  executive  officer  (CEO),  and  informed  non-executive  directors.  The  Boards  must 
get much more intimately involved in risk matters and have a firmer understanding of the key 
risks faced by the business. 
Effective risk governance also demands that each director is aware of the breadth of risks 
faced by the bank. Directors add value to the Board when they have financial expertise, are 
aware  of  risk  fundamentals  and  techniques,  and  are  able  to  manage  dynamics  with 
executives. 
Board  level  risk  committees  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  the  overall  risk  governance 
framework. Apart from monitoring the firm’s strategic-risk profile on an on-going basis, such 
committees would also be responsible for defining the firm’s overall risk appetite; approving 
major  transactions  above  a  firm’s  risk  threshold,  and;  establishing  limit  structures  and  risk 
policies for use within individual businesses. 
Presence  of  a  Chief  Risk  Officer  (CRO)  is  expected  to  strengthen  the  risk  management 
framework.  However,  independence  of  the  CRO,  with  necessary  stature  to  influence 
decisions,  would  be  a  critical  element  in  ensuring  the  effectiveness  of  the  post  in  risk 
management  process  as  also  the  strategic  risk  management  related  decisions.  The  CRO 
must  report  directly  to  the  CEO  and  the  Board  and  be  responsible  for  all  risks,  risk 
management  and  control  functions.  Another  important  requirement  is  integrating  risk  with 
business strategy and compensation. Risk – and return on risk – need to be core component 
of  any  performance  measure,  and  should  be  explicitly  factored  into  incentive  and 
                                                
6  Group of Thirty, “Toward Effective Governance of Financial Institutions” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
compensation  schemes.  Compensation  must  be  formally  aligned  with  actual  performance, 
such as through adding more rigorous risk-based measures to scorecards. This would also 
involve moving to longer vesting periods, and increasing deferred compensation. 
The fragmented organisation of risk data into separate silos slows down risk management 
process and hinders the capability to respond to new regulatory requirements. The financial 
crisis  has  pushed  both  supervisors  and  market  players  to  move  towards  an  integrated 
approach  to  risk  data  that  brings  down  the  silos  in  organisation.  Only  by  integrating  data 
models, processes and methodologies can a bank achieve higher performance in terms of 
data quality. 
The  risk  management  systems  must  take  into  account  the  technical  limitations  of  risk 
models,  such  as  Value  at  Risk  (VaR).  Stress  testing  and  scenario  analysis  need  to  be 
established as truly effective management tools and should be integrated and standardized 
across business lines, types of risk and asset classes. 
Financial Stability Board (FSB)’s thematic review on risk governance 
The  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  in  its  Thematic  Review  on  Risk  Governance7  has 
observed  that  since  crisis,  national  authorities  have  taken  several  measures  to  improve 
regulatory  and  supervisory  oversight  of  risk  governance  at  financial  institutions  such  as 
developing or strengthening existing regulation or guidance, raising supervisory expectations 
for  the  risk  management  function,  engaging  more  frequently  with  the  board  and  the 
management, and assessing the accuracy and usefulness of the information provided to the 
Board  to  enable  effective  discharge  of  responsibilities.  The  evaluation  also  found  that  in 
many jurisdictions, the governance practices are more advanced that those prescribed under 
national guidance. This, the report opined, may have been motivated by firms’ need to regain 
market  confidence  rather  than  regulatory  requirements.  The  results  of  the  Review  support 
the finding that the firms in the regions hardest hit by the financial crisis have made the most 
progress. 
However,  there  are  significant  gaps  relative  to  the  criteria  developed,  particularly  in  risk 
management. The report points to the differences in progress across regions. While firms in 
advanced economies have adopted more of the desirable risk governance practices, nearly 
65 per cent of the firms that reside in emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs) 
did not meet all of the criteria for the risk management function. The report notes that more 
work needs to be done in the areas such as elevation of CRO position, establishment of an 
effective risk appetite framework (RAF), improving the chief audit executive (CAE)’s access 
to directors beyond those on the audit committee, etc. 
Indian scenario 
Corporate governance of banks 
Banking regulation in India shifted from prescriptive mode to prudential mode in 1990s, which 
implied  a  shift  in  balance  away  from regulation  and  towards  corporate governance.  Banks 
are  accorded  greater  freedom  and  flexibility  to  draw  up  their  own  business  plans  and 
implementation  strategies  consistent  with  their  comparative  advantage.  This  freedom 
necessitated  tighter  governance  standards  requiring  bank  boards  to  assume  the  primary 
responsibility  and  the  directors  to  be  more  knowledgeable  and  aware  and  also  exercise 
informed  judgement  on  various  strategies  and  policy  choices.  With  a  view  to  strengthen 
corporate governance, over a period of time, various guidelines have been issued in matters 
                                                
7  8 Financial Stability Board (Feb 2013), Thematic Review on Risk Governance, Peer Review Report 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
relating to the role to be played by the Board, fit and proper criteria for the directors of banks, 
bifurcation of the post of Chairman and Managing Director (CMD), remuneration etc. 
Recognising that ownership of banks by one or few individuals could be detrimental to the 
public  interest,  especially,  depositors’  interests,  it  is  stipulated  that,  in  India,  banks  should 
have a diversified ownership model. To ensure that ownership and control of banks are well 
diversified, guidelines on ownership and governance in private sector banks were issued by 
the Reserve Bank in February 2005. Another important regulatory prescription in this regard 
is the requirement of Reserve Bank’s prior approval for any acquisition of shares in private 
sector banks resulting in a shareholding of 5 per cent or more of the total paid up capital of 
the bank. 
The importance of diversified ownership is also underlined in the recent guidelines on new 
bank  licenses  wherein  it  is  stipulated  that  Non-Operative  Financial  Holding  Companies 
(NOFHC) which set up new banks should, after the initial lock in period of five years, bring 
down their equity capital of the bank from the minimum 40% while setting up to 15% within 
12 years. To ensure “Fit and Proper” status of the groups that would set up new banks, it is 
also  stipulated  that  entities  /  groups  should  have  a  past  record  of  sound  credentials  and 
integrity, be financially sound with a successful track record of 10 years. 
Corporate governance of Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs) 
Traditionally,  Non-Banking  Finance  Companies  (NBFCs)  in  India  were  small  family  run 
businesses  some  of  which  accepted  deposits  and  engaged  mainly  in  activities  such  as 
lending.  Over  the  years,  the  NBFC  sector  has  not  only  grown  in  size  but  also  in  terms  of 
interconnectedness  and  systemic  importance.  Today,  even  though  the  sector  has  a  total 
asset size constituting just above 12% of that of scheduled commercial banks, some of the 
NBFCs  have  grown  very  big  and  are  operating  as  conglomerates  with  business  interests 
spread across insurance, broking, mutual fund, real estate etc. 
Keeping in consideration the growing significance of NBFCs in the financial system and their 
interconnectedness  with  the  banking  sector  there  is  a  strong  case  for  strengthening  their 
governance  framework  so  as  to  not  only  protect  the  individual  institutions  and  their 
depositors,  but  also  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  entire  financial  system.  Further,  NBFCs 
have exposures to sensitive sectors such as real estate and capital markets and they also 
rely on wholesale funding, all of which point to the requirement of robust internal controls and 
governance framework to ensure their stability. 
During  the  crisis,  while  none  of  the  shortcomings  as  observed  globally  during  the  GFC 
manifested in any significant way in the Indian NBFC sector, a temporary crisis of confidence 
did  emanate  which  affected  some  of  the  NBFCs.  The  lack  of  confidence  exposed  the 
shortcomings in the funding model and consequent problems in the overall risk management 
framework of these NBFCs which were relying heavily on short term wholesale sources such 
as mutual funds to fund long term assets. 
Further,  certain  shortcomings  in  the  corporate  governance  were  observed  in  a  section  of 
NBFCs viz; those in the microfinance institutions (MFI) sector, leading to near collapse of the 
sector.  Distorted  financial  incentives  such  as  short  term  profit  maximization  /  undue 
profiteering  and  excessive  managerial  compensation  that  were  the  hallmarks  of  the  GFC 
were the leading contributors to the MFI crisis. The corporate governance issues in the MFI 
sector  were  exacerbated  by  some  of  the  “for  profit”  MFIs,  dominated  and  controlled  by 
promoter shareholders which led to inadequate internal checks and balances over executive 
decision making and conflict of interests at various levels. Other undesirable practices such 
as  connected  lending,  excessively  generous  compensation  for  senior  management  and 
founders/  directors  and  the  failure  of  internal  controls  leading  to  frauds,  precipitated  the 
crisis.  Some  of  the  MFIs  are  also  alleged  to  have  chased  high  growth  trajectory  at  the 
expense of corporate best practices. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
While  drawing  comparisons  between  the  US  subprime  crisis  and  Indian  MFI  crisis,  in  an 
article  titled  “Microfinance  Industry  in  India:  Some  thoughts”  in  Economic  and  Political 
Weekly (EPW) (October 8, 2011), Dr. Y.V.Reddy, former Governor, RBI, had observed that 
opaque practices, high salaries and commissions including unethical business and leverage 
were prevalent in MFIs. 
Recognizing  the  significance  of  NBFCs  in  the  overall  financial  system,  measures  were 
undertaken to strengthen the regulatory framework in terms of stipulation of capital adequacy 
and exposure norms in 2006. Subsequentlyin2007, guidelines on corporate governance for 
NBFCs were issued by the Reserve Bank of India. The listed NBFCs were already required 
to comply with the provisions of the Listing Agreement of the Securities and Exchange Board 
of  India  (SEBI),  others  being  governed  by  the  relevant  provisions  in  the  Companies  Act, 
1956. 
While  the  frameworks  laid  down  by  the  various  regulators  /  Companies  Act  may  appear 
similar and over lapping in some areas, there are a few differences. Companies Act does not 
differentiate between financial, non-financial companies and SEBI Guidelines are generally 
from  the  perspective  of  investor  protection  with  emphasis  on  disclosure  and  transparency. 
Therefore, RBI being the prudential regulator of NBFCs, additionally lays emphasis on risk 
management framework and the business practices etc. and its framework is mainly from the 
angle  of  depositor  /  customer  protection.  Reserve  Bank’s  guidelines  on  corporate 
governance  are  applicable  to  only  NBFCs  with  certain  threshold  of  business  i.e.  with  a 
certain deposit base or asset size. 
Recent developments in NBFC sector 
Reserve Bank has recently issued draft guidelines on corporate governance of NBFCs based 
on  the  recommendations  of  the  Working  Group  on  the  issues  and  concerns  in  the  NBFC 
sector (Chair: Ms. Usha Thorat). The guidelines aim to fine tune the framework for NBFCs by 
aligning  the  same  with  the  businesses  that  they  deal  in  and  the  growth  in  size, 
interconnectedness and systemic importance of the sector. The Guidelines address issues 
such as multiple directorships, continuing due diligence process with a reporting requirement 
to  RBI,  self  certified  “fit  and  proper”  criteria  and  disclosures  that  are  specific  to  NBFCs’ 
business, such as disclosures on provision coverage ratio, Asset Liability profile, movement 
of  NPAs,  off-balance  sheet  exposures,  structured  products  issued  by  them  etc.  Other 
requirements include prior approval of RBI for change in control of any registered NBFCs. It 
is indicated that big NBFCs with asset size of Rs. 1000 crore and above would require prior 
approval of RBI for appointment of CEO and would need to comply with Clause 49 provisions 
(of  SEBI  listing  agreement)  even  if  unlisted.  NBFCs  with  asset  size  of  Rs.  100  crore  and 
above would be required to comply with the disclosure requirements specified in Clause 49 
and of certain financial indicators. 
Given the recent episodes in the MFI sector, the corporate governance guidelines for MFIs 
have also been revamped. Measures are aimed at checking undesirable business practices 
like  multiple  lending,  alleged  coercive  practices  and  charging  excessive  interest  rates,  etc. 
The  guidelines  are  aimed  at  enhancing  the  “self  discipline  principle”  in  these  NBFCs. 
Measures  include  pricing  of  credit,  restricting  lending  to  a  borrower  by  not  more  than  two 
MFIs,  sharing  credit  information  with  a  Credit  Information  Bureau,  review  of  Fair  Practices 
Code (FPC) etc. A Self Regulatory Organisation (SRO) also is envisaged for the sector as a 
watchdog. While the final framework is still being evolved, the role envisaged for the present, 
inter  alia,  is  to  ensure  good  governance  in  the  industry  by  way  of  client  protection  with 
enforcement powers to check violations to codes of conduct / regulations. 
Conclusion 
Governance, like regulation, is an evolving concept and is continuously fine tuned to suit the 
dynamic  economic  and  business  environment.  Global  financial  crisis  has  given  us  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
opportunity  for  strengthening  both  the  regulatory  as  well  as  governance  frameworks,  by 
highlighting  gaps  that  exacerbated  the  crisis.  There  is  an  interesting  debate  over  whether 
and how much regulation can substitute board level governance. While regulation is imposed 
from  outside,  corporate governance  is  internal  and  is  more  in  the  nature  of  self regulation 
which  ensures  that  the  principles  and  rules  laid  down  by  the  regulations  are  scrupulously 
adhered  to.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  the  emphasis  was  increasingly  on  self  regulation  through 
robust corporate governance so that the regulation could remain largely principle based and 
less  prescriptive.  However,  serious  lapses  observed  in  governance  framework  during  the 
crisis,  tilted  the  balance  in  favour  of  more  rigorous  regulation.  I  am  of  the  view  that  both 
regulation  and  corporate  governance  have  to  complement  each  other.  Effective  regulation 
furthers  corporate  governance  and  effective  corporate  governance  ensures  that  the 
objectives of the regulation are met, with minimal regulatory intervention. 
Thank you 
References 
Dowd, Kevin and Hutchinson, Martin, “Alchemists of Loss”, Times Group Books 
Financial  Stability  Board  (Feb  2013),  Thematic  Review  on  Risk  Governance,  Peer  Review 
Report 
Group of Thirty, “Toward Effective Governance of Financial Institution” 
Organisation  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  (2004);  OECD  Principles  of 
Corporate Governance 
——— (Feb,  2010),  “Corporate  Governance  and  the  Financial  Crisis,  Conclusion  and 
emerging good practices to enhance implementation of the Principles” 
Reddy,  Y.V  (Oct,  2011),  “Microfinance  Industry  in  India:  Some  thoughts”,  Economic  & 
Political Weekly vol XLVI No. 41 
Senior Supervisors’ Group (Mar, 2008), “Observations on Risk Management Practices during 
the Recent Market Turbulence” 
Sinha, Anand (Aug, 2012); “Perspectives on Risk and Governance” 
——— (Apr,  2012);  “Strengthening  Governance  in  Microfinance  Institutions  (MFI)  –  Some 
Random Thoughts” 
Sun, Willian, Stewart, Jim and Pollard, David; “A systemic failure of corporate governance: 
Lessons from the on-going financial crisis”; The European Financial Review 
United  Nations  Economic  and  Social  Commission  for  Asia  and  the  Pacific,  “What  is  good 
governance” 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
