Rundheersing Bheenick: Strong regulatory measures… the prerequisites 
for banks to do business, stay in business, thrive in business 
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Annual 
Dinner of the Mauritius Bankers Association, Port Louis, 6 June 2013. 
 I am delighted to be in your midst this evening. Thank you for your kind invitation to say a few 
words on the occasion of the Annual Dinner of the Mauritius Bankers Association (MBA). It is 
indeed  a  great  honour  for  me.  Those  of  you  who  were  present,  the  week  before,  at  the 
function during which I granted Barclays Bank Mauritius Limited its banking licence, would 
remember that I had highlighted that there was a gap of two generations between the Bank 
of  Mauritius  (Bank)  and  Barclays.  Tonight  we  are  on  an  equal  footing  –  the  MBA  and  the 
Bank are both 46 years old – and the occasion is very auspicious for a man-to-man chat. 
Tonight’s function demands that I touch upon the relationship between the central bank and 
commercial  banks.  Almost  two  decades  ago,  a  Fed  Governor1  observed  that  the  relation 
between commercial banks and the central bank is an important and far-reaching one, with 
potentially  significant  implications  for  a  country's  economic  performance.  I  quote  from  his 
address: “…a nation's commercial banks and central bank are reflections of each other. They 
are likely to succeed or fail together. A healthy, efficient banking system goes hand-in-hand 
with  a  dependable,  independent  central  bank.  The  activities  of  both  are  inextricably 
intertwined, and the institutions undeniably share a commonality of interests.” How relevant 
such a statement is in our current environment! 
Tonight we are here to celebrate the strong bond of partnership that exists between the MBA 
and the Bank and for which we have every reason to rejoice. In 2007, a month after I had 
joined the Bank, I chaired my first Banking Committee Meeting. At the time, there were the 
CEO’s of 17 banks sitting around the table and of course, our Chief Executive of the MBA. 
Since then, four banks have joined in, AfrAsia Bank, ABC Bank, Century Bank and Banyan 
Tree Bank. So far we have held nearly 25 meetings of the Banking Committee, and since 
2008, in between the quarterly meetings of the Banking Committee, we have had in all nine 
meetings of the Bureau of the MBA. A strong regulator and regulatee bond has thus been 
nurtured. However strong our bond is, our relationship is not an easy one to manage. Our 
perspective does not necessarily converge at all times. Tension arises between us from time 
and time. 
There are times when the regulator takes measures that banks may believe to be wrong or 
misconceived. We understand your fears that the proposed regulations may be too complex, 
inappropriate  in  geographical  scope,  or  not  conducive  to  level  playing  fields.  We,  as 
regulator, may not only see strong regulatory measures as the prerequisites for banks to do 
business, stay in business and thrive in business, but essential for the stability of the financial 
system  as  a  whole.  Sometimes,  banks may  decide  not  to challenge  or  criticise  existing  or 
new regulatory requirements in order not to upset the regulator – of this also we are aware. 
But  it  is  important that  you  understand  that  criticisms  of  regulations  which  you  believe  are 
going to impact the sector, are wholly  welcome as part of the constructive dialogue to get 
regulation  right.  Nonetheless,  together  we  have  been  able  to  take  forward  the  banking 
sector.  The  banking  industry  in  Mauritius  has  traversed  a  long  way  to  assume  its  present 
stature. 
                                                
1   Governor Gary Stern of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis at the International Conference on Russian 
Banking, 1994. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Following  the  biggest financial  tremor  in  the  history  of  banking  in  Mauritius  in  2003,  many 
efforts have been made by banks to step up their internal control systems. Despite all care 
and diligence, banks are not totally shielded from fraud risks or financial crimes. Recently the 
banking sector has been shaken again out of its comfort zone. It was not a moment of glory 
for bankers and the central bank to realize that they have been outwitted by scammers using 
the loop holes in the regulatory framework. As of date, the total amount reported at our help 
desk has crossed Rs769 million, with 2,031 victims and if you take into account those who 
did not come forward, the total amount of the scam may be estimated as being quite close to 
the billion. It was certainly not flattering to any of you to learn that a number of your bankers 
may have fallen prey to the Ponzi Schemes – we cannot put this on their financial illiteracy, 
can we? It is rather a worrisome fact. 
It is my duty as regulator to remind you of the importance of stepping up your compliance 
functions  to  protect  your  institutions  from  being  used  as  conduit  for  illicit  activities.  It  is  a 
matter  of  focusing  on  the  “Know  Your  Customer”  principles  and  applying  them  to  your 
internal customers as well. It should not be just a ‘tick-box’ approach but rather a ‘judgment-
based’ approach. Most of the time, it is at the level of the front-liners that the application of 
this ‘judgment-based’ approach starts. The front-liners need to be well-versed in compliance 
legislation, manuals and procedures and be able to detect suspicious transactions at an early 
stage,  thus  minimising  the  risks  of  fraud.  It  is  important  that  ongoing  reviews  of  bank 
personnel  are  conducted  at  all  levels  as  bank  officers  may  be  involved  in  promoting  such 
schemes.  Our  investigation  has  revealed  that  some  banks  have  not  been  abiding 
scrupulously by anti-money laundering laws and guidelines. Five of them would be imposed 
hefty fines with the concurrence of the Director of Public Prosecutions. 
Recently four of our banks made a very bad deal with Indian corporates. Rs2.7 billion out of 
total  facilities  of  Rs3.5  billion  turned  out  to  be  impaired.  They  represent  0.9%  of  the  total 
assets  of  the  four  banks  and  if  we  take  into  account  provisioning  already  made,  this  ratio 
comes  down  to  0.3%  only.  This  is  only  a  drop  in  the  bucket  and  there  is  no  need  for  the 
public to be alarmed. Depositors’ money is not at risk. 
This bad deal sends a warning signal to the banking sector about the level of non-performing 
loans (NPL). Historically the NPL of the Segment B business has been low, dragging down 
the overall NPL of the banking sector. Banks need to be extra careful when extending cross-
border  credit.  They  need  to  have  a  proper  understanding  of  the  legal  infrastructure,  the 
banking and regulatory landscape and the debt recovery processes of the country with which 
they intend to do business. In India, the cumbersome process of crystallizing collateral led 
some banks to resort to naming and shaming their non-performing corporate customers. In 
the midst of growing protest, the Central Information Commission of India “is convinced that 
the  benefits  accruing  to  the  economic  and  moral  fabric  of  the  country  far  outweigh  any 
damage to the fiduciary relationship of bankers and their customers if the details of the top 
defaulters  are  disclosed”.  The  naming  and  shaming  of  bad  borrowers  apply  to  wilful 
defaulters of public sector banks, who, according to the Reserve Bank of India Guidelines, 
are those who do not repay deliberately despite having sufficient funds and a solid net worth. 
The  public  sector  banks  have  even  started  publishing  photographs  of  the  borrowers  in 
newspapers. Maybe it is high time that we start considering to bring amendments to our own 
law to disclose the name of the top defaulters. Or even consider the coordinated efforts of 
the four banks, with or without the blessing of the central bank so as to ensure a favourable 
and rapid outcome. 
The bad experience of our bankers sheds light on the fact that however meticulous they may 
have  been,  banking  remains  a  risky  business.  The  Bank  has  lately  been  considering  a 
system of information-sharing on cross-border loans although we do recognize the difficulty 
of accessing information on foreign clients. 
A  good  reputation  requires  conscientious  regulatory  compliance.  The  rapidly  evolving 
financial landscape is keeping the regulator on its toes to ensure that we are up to the mark 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
when  it  comes  to  international  best  practice.  We  champion  a  proactive  and  thorough 
approach to fraud  risk management  which  includes  among  other things,  putting  in  place  a 
whistleblowing procedure and where it already exists to review it, and educating staff about 
fraud. We need to be alert to the growing impact of the prevalence of gambling in our country 
for  it  is  l’appât  du  gain  which  motivated  the  public  to  invest  in  placements  that  offered 
unrealistically high returns. 
Over the years, the Bank of Mauritius and the Mauritius Bankers Association have developed 
a strong partnership. More than ever, we need to consolidate this partnership and live up to 
the four Rs of a sound banking sector – Regulation, Reputation, Results and Resilience. 
Together we can continue facing the daunting challenges that await the financial sector when 
it comes to the next-generation regulation. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
