William C Dudley: Fixing wholesale funding to build a more stable 
financial system 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS), at the New York Bankers Association’s 2013 Annual Meeting and Economic Forum, 
New York City, 1 February 2013. 
 in  modern  economies.  Because 
As prepared for delivery. 
Thank you for having me here to speak today. As you all know from daily experience, the 
financial  system  plays  an  essential  role 
financial 
intermediation is critical to economic activity, disruption to it can cause severe damage to the 
economy.  The  experience  of  recent  years  revealed  serious  flaws  in  the  system.  Risk  was 
mispriced and there was a build-up of excesses before the crisis. Structural weaknesses in 
the  financial  system  then  amplified  the  effect  of  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  in  U.S.  house 
prices, and the result was a widespread financial crisis. 
One critical factor was the extensive use of short-term wholesale funding in the years leading 
up to the crisis. Not only did this aspect of our financial system create the potential for a firm 
to fail in an extraordinarily rapid manner when faced with a loss of market confidence, but it 
also served as a channel through which the effects of those failures were widely propagated 
throughout the broader financial system. 
Although much has been done over the past few years to mitigate the structural flaws that 
make wholesale funding a point of weakness in the global financial system, some important 
issues  and  vulnerabilities  remain.  I  will  focus  my  remarks  today  on  some  of  those 
vulnerabilities – including the areas of tri-party repo and money market mutual funds markets 
– and discuss what could be done to make wholesale funding markets more stable.1  
I  will  also  consider  the  larger  issue  of  the  appropriate  role  of  wholesale  funding  in  the 
financial  system.  How  comfortable  should  we  be  with  a  system  in  which  critical  financial 
activities continue to be financed with short-term wholesale funding without the safeguards 
necessary to reduce the risk of runs and the fire sales of assets that can threaten the stability 
of the entire financial system? 
As  always,  my  remarks  reflect  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System. 
Wholesale funding as a structural vulnerability 
As this audience knows, in the two decades before the financial crisis, the global financial 
system  underwent  rapid  transformation.  During  this  period,  there  was  a  shift  from 
bank-based  financial  intermediation  to  capital  markets-based  financial  intermediation,2  and 
an increase in the scale and complexity of securitization activities. 
In the pre-crisis period the growth of securitization was accompanied by a growing reliance 
on short-term funds raised in wholesale markets to finance securities and activities essential 
                                                
1  
I note that the set of issues relating to wholesale funding are closely related to the challenge of ending “too big 
to  fail”  I  discussed  in  a  November  15,  2012,  speech  (see  www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/ 
2012/dud121115.html). The more stable the sources of funding, the more resilient each firm would be, and the 
less the failure of any one firm would disrupt the provision of credit to the economy. 
2   Banking groups retained a prominent role in credit supply via nonbank affiliates outside the commercial bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to securitization. This ranged from the use of repo3 funding to finance inventories of securities 
held  for  market-making4  purposes  to  the  issuance  of  asset-backed  commercial  paper  by 
conduits5 created to acquire and hold securities. 
The increased use of short-term wholesale finance was driven both by demand and supply 
factors.  On  the  demand  side,  it  was  more  profitable  to  use  shorter-term  funds  to  finance 
longer-term assets. On the supply side, such funding was plentiful because it was viewed as 
safe  and  because  of  the  growing  institutionalization  of  savings  with  corporations  and 
institutional investors in need of deposit-like products in which to place their cash balances. 
After  all,  the funds  were  only  exposed  for  a  short  period  of time,  and  in  the  case  of  repo, 
secured by collateral. 
The  growing  reliance  on  short-term  wholesale  funding  to  finance  longer-term  assets 
increased  liquidity  and  maturity  mismatch  risk.  This  was  particularly  dangerous  because 
many  of  the  assets  being  financed  were  structured-credit  products,  some  of  which  were 
opaque, difficult to value and illiquid. 
Short-term funding of longer-term assets is inherently unstable particularly in the presence of 
information  and  coordination  problems.  It  can  be  rational  for  a  provider  of  funds  to  supply 
funds  on  a  short-term  basis,  reasoning  that  it  can  exit  if  there  is  any  uncertainty  over  the 
firm’s continued ability to roll over its funding from other sources. But if the use of short-term 
funding becomes sufficiently widespread, the firm’s roll-over risk increases. In this situation, 
there  is  a  strong  incentive  for  each  lender  to  “run”  if  there  is  any  uncertainty  that  could 
undermine the borrower’s ability to continue to roll over its funding from other sources. This is 
the  case  even  if the  provider  of funds  believes  that  the  borrower  would  remain  solvent  as 
long as it retained access to funding on normal terms. 
Of course, this insight is not a new one. Prior to the establishment of a lender of last resort 
and  retail  deposit  insurance  for  banks  –  which  came  with  the  quid  pro  quo  of  prudential 
regulation – bank runs were a regular and disruptive feature of our financial system. These 
innovations solved the coordination problem and stabilized this source of funding. 
What was new prior to the crisis was the extent to which maturity transformation and financial 
intermediation  began  to  take  place  outside  of  commercial  banks.  This  activity  occurred 
largely  without  the  types  of  safeguards  –  robust  prudential  regulation,  deposit  insurance, 
lender of last resort – that have safeguarded the commercial banking system from the types 
of widespread panics and runs that are capable of destabilizing the entire financial system. 
The risk created by this gap in coverage was not well recognized by regulators or the private 
sector. Market participants had little incentive to internalize the negative externality of run-risk 
created  by  their  collective  choice  of  finance  and  made  erroneous  assumptions  about  the 
liquidity of asset markets and the capacity and willingness of banks to distribute central bank 
liquidity to the wider financial system during periods of stress. 
                                                
3   A repo is a sale of securities coupled with an agreement to repurchase the securities at a specified price on a 
later date. 
4   Market makers are institutions such as securities brokers and dealers that buy and sell securities on behalf of 
customers.  Market  making  accommodates  the  asynchronous  arrival  of  sellers  and  buyers,  thus  providing 
liquidity to financial markets. 
5   Conduits are bankruptcy-remote, special purpose vehicles that fund pools of securities in short-term funding 
markets.  The  securities  might  consist  of  loans,  mortgages,  receivables  and  securitized  products  such  as 
asset-backed securities (ABS). The securities in asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) conduits serve as 
collateral  for  the  issuance of asset-backed commercial  paper,  while  repo conduits fund  in  the  repo  market. 
Most  conduits  are  so-called  single-seller  conduits  that  only  serve  individual  banks  or  finance  companies. 
Multi-seller conduits provide funding for asset pools of multiple institutions. Conduits are backed by credit lines 
from  commercial  banks,  which  allow  the  conduits  to  have  a  credit  rating.  Asset-backed  commercial  paper 
conduits  are  also  defined  in  “Shadow  Banking:  A  Review  of  the  Literature”.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
York Staff Reports, no. 580, (October) 2011. www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr580.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Because  the  boom  years  resulted  in  strong  earnings,  low  price  volatility  and  few  credit 
losses, firms were able to operate at extreme levels of leverage. When the housing bubble 
started to deflate, the vulnerabilities of this type of business model soon became apparent. 
Heavy  reliance  on  short-term  wholesale  funding  exposed  the  system  to  a  series  of 
intertwined downward spirals in asset and funding markets. This spread in waves, beginning 
in  the  market  for  asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP)  issued  by  off-balance-sheet 
conduits, and spreading via auction-rate securities, to the repo, money market and financial 
commercial  paper  markets  that  formed  the  core  financing  for  market-based  financial 
intermediation. 
Initial  declines  in  asset  prices  forced  leveraged  holders  with  maturity  mismatches  to  sell 
assets. This increased price volatility and reduced the value of the assets that collateralized 
other  firms’  borrowings.  Higher  volatility  led  banks  and  secured  lenders  to  raise  margins, 
while concern about counterparty risk and their own funding needs made banks reluctant to 
on-lend liquidity. 
Higher  margins  on  repo  and  increased  collateral  calls  due  to  credit  ratings  downgrades 
reduced  the  quantity  of  assets  that  could  be  financed  in  repo  markets  and  elsewhere, 
prompting further asset sales.6 As wholesale investors started to exit, this set in motion a bad 
dynamic  –  a  fire  sale  of  assets  that  cut  into  earnings  and  capital.  This  just  increased  the 
incentives of investors to run and for banks to hoard liquidity against the risk that they could 
themselves face a run. This downward spiral of fire sales and funding runs was a key feature 
of the financial crisis. 
Specific institutional weaknesses 
The  fragility  of  short-term  wholesale  funding  was  greatly  aggravated  by  certain  critical 
institutional shortcomings in these markets, particularly in the structure of the tri-party repo 
system and the U.S. money market mutual fund business. 
Through  the  tri-party  repo  market,  the  two  large  clearing  banks  were  providing  a  large 
amount of intraday credit to securities firms each day to facilitate the daily “unwind” of the 
prior day’s transactions.7 In the run-up to the crisis, the daily “unwind” practice helped make 
tri-party repo look like a very liquid investment while still being an apparently highly durable 
source  of  funding.  This  masked  the  underlying  risks  and  contributed  to  weak  risk 
management practices. 
As the concerns about the U.S. housing market escalated in 2007, participants in the tri-party 
repo  market  became  increasingly  concerned  about  the  liquidity  and  credit  risks  that  they 
faced. The clearing banks became uncomfortable with their large intraday exposures to their 
tri-party  securities  firm  customers.  After  all,  if  a  securities  firm  were  to  fail  suddenly,  the 
clearing banks could be stuck with huge loans to these counterparties, secured by securities 
that were not necessarily high quality and liquid. Thus, as the condition of the most troubled 
securities firms deteriorated, there was a risk that one morning a clearing bank might decide 
not to unwind a firm’s tri-party transactions in order to avoid a large intraday exposure. 
                                                
6   The problem was particularly acute for those firms with large securities trading and over-the-counter derivative 
businesses operated outside of depository institutions. In the United States, even those securities firms that 
were  part  of  bank  holding  companies  were  vulnerable  because  Section  23A  restrictions  in  the  Federal 
Reserve Act that govern transactions between the bank and the nonbank affiliates as part of a bank holding 
company complex sharply limited what assets the securities firm could pass through to the bank and on to the 
Fed’s discount window facility. 
In  the  unwind,  cash  was  transmitted  back  from  securities  firms  to  wholesale  investors  each  morning,  to 
hopefully  be  reinvested  and  returned  back  to  the  securities  firms  by  the  end  of  the  day  to  finance  their 
inventories of securities. 
7  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
This risk faced by the clearing banks, in turn, unnerved the tri-party repo investors. After all, if 
the unwind did not occur, they would be stuck with the collateral securing their loans from the 
night before. Most of these investors were not prepared to take possession of and liquidate 
such collateral, and had no interest in doing so. The incentives for these investors were to 
run at the first sign of trouble to avoid getting stuck with the dealer’s collateral. 
This  incentive  to  run  was  reinforced  by  the  fact  that  if  the  investors  were  stuck  with  the 
collateral, they would have strong incentives to sell it quickly in order to generate the liquidity 
needed to meet redemption calls or to keep their portfolios in line with regulatory guidelines. 
Such  “fire  sales”  of  assets  could  result  in  losses  and  could  be  extremely  destabilizing  to 
markets. 
The crisis also made it clear that the monies provided to the money market mutual funds by 
their  own  investors  were  also  inherently  unstable.  This  made  such  funds,  in  turn,  an 
unreliable  source  of  finance  in  repo,  commercial  paper  and  other  markets.  Investors  in  a 
fixed net asset value (NAV) money market fund could take their money out on a daily basis 
at par value, with no redemption penalty. This could occur even if the money market fund did 
not  have  sufficient  cash  or  liquid  assets  that  it  could  easily  sell  to  meet  all  potential 
redemptions. This created an incentive for investors to be the first to get out whenever there 
was any uncertainty over the underlying value of the assets in the fund. By being first in line, 
they could exit while the fund could still repay at par, leaving others to bear any losses. The 
longer the investor waited, the greater the risk that the fund would be forced into the fire sale 
of assets to meet redemptions and end up “breaking the buck”. 
As the crisis unfolded, the Federal Reserve, the U.S. Treasury and others took a series of 
actions to contain the spiral of funding runs and asset fire sales. First, the traditional lender of 
last  resort  function  was  strengthened  through  the  introduction  of  the  Term  Auction  Facility 
(TAF) and foreign exchange swaps with foreign central banks. 
Then, as the crisis intensified, lender of last resort liquidity provision was extended to directly 
backstop key wholesale funding markets and opened to certain nonbank firms. The Federal 
Reserve created a direct backstop to the tri-party repo system through the Primary Dealer 
Credit Facility (PDCF). When the Reserve Fund broke the buck after the failure of Lehman 
Brothers, precipitating a run on money market mutual funds, the Treasury guaranteed money 
market  fund  assets  and  the  Fed  introduced  the  Asset-Backed  Commercial  Paper  Money 
Market Fund Liquidation Facility (AMLF). The Fed also backstopped the commercial paper 
market  (formerly  funded  in  large  part  by  money  market  mutual  funds)  by  introducing  the 
Commercial  Paper  Funding  Facility  (CPFF).  When  wholesale  funding  for  non-residential 
mortgage  securitizations  evaporated,  the  Fed  rolled  out  the  Term  Asset-Backed  Lending 
Facility (TALF). 
These actions ultimately stabilized funding markets and crowded back in private funds. But, 
they were an emergency response, not a sustainable, long-term solution. After all, because 
most of the special Fed liquidity facilities were authorized under Section 13.3 of the Federal 
Reserve  Act  they  were  required  to  be  temporary  in  nature  and  end  when  times  were  no 
longer “unusual and exigent”. 
Status of reforms 
Since  the  crisis,  a  number  of  steps  have  been  taken  that  reduce  the  vulnerability  of  the 
system to funding runs in short-term wholesale markets. Capital and liquidity requirements 
for large complex financial institutions have been raised sharply, the largest broker-dealers 
have  become  part  of  bank  holding  companies  subject  to  additional  regulation,  and 
risk-weights on assets have been adjusted to better capture risks and to reduce the scope for 
regulatory capital arbitrage by banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Higher capital levels for bank holding companies reduce the incentive for providers of funds 
to run from these firms at the first sign of trouble. Higher liquidity buffers8 also help so that 
banks do not have to sell illiquid assets at the first signs of funding difficulties. This reduces 
the fire sale risk: that the sale of illiquid assets will depress asset values, potentially turning a 
solvent firm into an insolvent one. 
Meanwhile,  the  New  York  Fed  has  led  a  Federal  Reserve  effort  to  make  the  tri-party  repo 
system more resilient to stress. In particular, the Fed has pressed the two large clearing banks 
to make changes to their settlement processes that will diminish their own intraday exposure 
and enable the market to operate with much less reliance on intraday credit.9 These efforts are 
starting  to  bear  fruit:  the  share  of  trading  activity  that  requires  intraday  credit  extensions  by 
clearing  banks  has  declined  from  100  percent  before  November  2012  to  approximately 
80 percent currently, and is expected to fall to 10 percent by the end of next year.10 
(Chart) 
Reducing the market’s dependency on intraday credit will make the market more resilient to 
future stress events, by forcing all participants to consider the credit and liquidity risks they 
are exposed to. 
                                                 
8   The new global liquidity standards adopted by the Basel Committee provide a global minimum standard. 
9   At the end of 2011, the New York Fed disbanded a private-sector taskforce that had generated some good 
ideas but was running into trouble on implementation, and adopted a supervisory approach to pushing forward 
further reform. 
10   These estimates are based on data from the clearing banks with analysis by New York Fed Staff. See chart at 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/banking/riskreduction_020113.gif 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Meanwhile,  in  2010,  the  Securities  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  tightened  the  liquidity 
requirements  and  concentration  limit  rules  for  2a-7  money  market  mutual  funds  and 
increased the fund manager disclosure requirements. These changes, which were intended 
as a first step, make money funds somewhat less risky. But, they do little to reduce investors’ 
incentives to run at the first sign of trouble. 
Worthwhile  as  the  steps  taken  thus  far  are,  we  have  not  come  close  to  fixing  all  the 
institutional flaws in our wholesale funding markets. The tri-party repo system and the money 
fund industry that plays a crucial role financing collateral through it are both still exposed to 
runs. In fact, in each of these areas, one could argue that the risks have increased compared 
to prior to the crisis. That is because the Dodd-Frank Act raised the hurdle for the Federal 
Reserve  to  exercise  its  Section  13.3  emergency  lending  authority  and  because  Congress 
has  explicitly  precluded  the  U.S.  Treasury  from  guaranteeing  money  market  mutual  fund 
assets in the future. With extraordinary interventions ruled out or made much more difficult, 
this may cause investors to be even more skittish in the future. This is why it is essential to 
make the system more stable. 
Turning  first  to  the  issue  of  tri-party  repo  reform,  there  is  still  considerable  work  to  do.  In 
particular, the risk that investors will run at the first sign of trouble persists. That is because 
the costs of running are very low relative to the potential costs of staying put. The potential 
costs of staying are elevated in part because investors often don’t have the capacity to take 
possession of the collateral or liquidate the collateral in an orderly way should a large dealer 
fail. Both aspects result in run risk, fire sale risk and potential financial instability. 
Let me be clear. We must deal with the fire sale issue in tri-party repo and the heightened 
run risk it creates. I believe there are three potential ways forward, all of which are superior to 
the status quo. First, tri-party repo transactions could be restricted to open market operations 
(OMO)  eligible  collateral.11  Such  collateral  would  likely  remain  quite  liquid  during  a  time  of 
crisis.12  In  addition,  such  collateral  could,  in  a  crisis,  potentially  be  passed  directly  by  a 
broker-dealer to the discount window under Section 13.13 authority, or, because of beneficial 
treatment under Section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act, be financed by a banking affiliate 
that would then itself borrow at the discount window. Thus, one could construct an effective 
lender of last resort backstop for an OMO-eligible- only tri-party repo system. 
However, there are also some significant disadvantages to such an approach. The less liquid 
collateral could just migrate to be financed elsewhere, with associated run and fire sale risks. 
Also,  given  that  housing  finance  reform  could  cause  the  agency  debt  and  agency 
mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS)  of  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  to  be  replaced  by 
something different that was not OMO eligible under the Federal Reserve Act, the share of 
assets that are OMO eligible could diminish over time. Finally, this approach would do little to 
mitigate the risk of fire sales of a defaulted dealer’s collateral by its investors once a dealer is 
bankrupt. 
The second option is to have a mechanism or process to facilitate the orderly liquidation of a 
defaulted  dealer’s  collateral. One  could  imagine  a  mechanism that  was funded  by  tri-party 
repo market participants and potentially backstopped by the central bank. This would have 
the advantage of dealing with the entire tri-party repo market and not artificially favoring one 
type  of  collateral  over  another.  It  would  also  push  against the  underpricing  of  liquidity  and 
credit  risk  during  good  times  by  forcing  market  participants  to  pay  for  the  costs  of  a 
liquidation facility up front. 
                                                
11   OMO eligible is collateral that the Fed can purchase or repo in its open market operations. 
12   In addition, because the Federal Reserve is authorized to intervene in the Treasury, agency debt, and agency 
MBS  markets,  it  could  act  to  stabilize  these  markets  during  times  of  stress.  This  would  make  it  easier  to 
liquidate such collateral without unduly depressing prices. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Because no single market participant has a strong incentive to develop such a mechanism, 
however, sustained regulatory pressure may be required to reach such a solution. From the 
perspective  of  the  tri-party  repo  borrowers  and  investors,  the  status  quo  undoubtedly  is 
viewed as superior because neither group is forced to fully bear the externalities associated 
with their actions. Instead they anticipate that emergency liquidity would be made available in 
the event of a future systemic crisis. 
Third, if borrowers and investors did not embrace an orderly collateral liquidation mechanism, 
supervisory oversight could be brought to bear to limit the use of tri-party repo funding on the 
grounds  that  it  is  still  an  unstable  source  of  funds.  For  example,  the  use  of  tri-party  repo 
could  be  restricted  unless  borrowers  demonstrated  that  there  was  an  adequate  means  of 
orderly collateral liquidation upon the failure of a major dealer. 
Turning next to the issue of money market mutual funds, further reform to directly address 
the incentive for investors to run is essential for financial stability. 
In  November,  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  (FSOC)  put  out  for  comment  three 
alternative paths forward:13  
1. Moving to a floating net asset value (NAV). 
2. Retaining  a  stable  NAV,  but  adding  a  new  NAV  buffer  and  a  minimum  balance 
requirement. The minimum balance would be at risk for 30 days following withdrawals. If the 
fund  subsequently  “broke  the  buck”  during  this period  by  suffering  losses  greater  than the 
size of its NAV buffer, the minimum balance would be first in line to absorb these losses. 
3. A larger NAV buffer than in the second alternative, but without a minimum balance at risk 
buffer. 
I have stated my views on money fund reform before.14 Although any of these proposals – 
depending on the fine print of course – would likely be an improvement over the status quo, 
the first and third proposals don’t fully eliminate the incentives to run. In the case of a floating 
rate NAV, fund managers faced with large redemption requests typically sell their most liquid 
assets first, leaving the remaining investors with a riskier, less-liquid portfolio and a greater 
risk of loss. Similarly, with a stable NAV and a capital buffer, unless the capital buffer were 
very large, there would still be an incentive to run because the buffer might not prove large 
enough to shield the investor from loss. 
Because the second option is the only one that actually creates a disincentive to run, as I 
stated before the FSOC proposal, I view it as the best one for financial stability purposes. 
The requirement that investors who withdraw funds must maintain a small balance for a short 
period to absorb near-term losses would deter investors from pulling out at the first glimpse 
of  trouble  and  make  the  system  safer.  The modest  withdrawal  restrictions,  which  create  a 
“minimum  balance  at risk”,  might  be set  at  5  cents  on  the  dollar,  based  on  the  high-water 
mark of recent holdings, with more favorable treatment for small retail investors.15  
A minimum balance at risk of loss would also increase market discipline. Corporations and 
other sophisticated investors would have an incentive to monitor risk-taking more carefully, 
                                                
13   Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council.  2012.  “Proposed  Recommendations  Regarding  Money  Market  Mutual 
http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/fsoc/Documents/Proposed% 
Fund 
20Recommendations%20Regarding%20Money%20Market%20Mutual%20Fund%20Reform%20-
%20November%2013,%202012.pdf 
(November). 
Reform”. 
14  See William C. Dudley. 2012. “For Stability’s Sake, Reform Money Funds”. www.bloomberg.com, August 14. 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-08-14/for-stability-s-sake-reform-money-funds.html. 
15  For a more detailed discussion, see “The Minimum Balance at Risk: A Proposal to Mitigate the Systemic Risks 
Posed by Money Market”. www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr564.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
rather  than  rely  on  their  ability  to  get  out  ahead  of  small  retail  investors  when  trouble 
materializes. 
The larger question 
Reforming the tri-party repo system and the money market mutual fund industry is essential 
and would make the financial system significantly more stable. But even after such reforms, 
we  would  still  have  a  system  in  which  a  very  significant  share  of  financial  intermediation 
activity  vital  to  the  economy  takes  place  in  markets  and  through  institutions  that  have  no 
direct access to an effective lender of last resort backstop.16  
The  financial  crisis  clearly  demonstrated  that  we  can  no  longer  assume  that  in  periods  of 
stress banks will be willing to access lender of last resort loans and on-lend to the nonbank 
financial  sector  at  sufficient  scale  to  stabilize  the  system  of  market-based  financial 
intermediation,  as  happened  in  earlier  periods  such  as  the  commercial  paper  crisis  in  the 
mid-1970s. 
The financing needs outside the commercial banks may be too large relative to the capacity 
of the banking system, banks may be reluctant to lend to competitors, be concerned about 
their own liquidity and funding needs, or simply be deterred by elevated counterparty risk. 
We need to consider whether our current architecture is satisfactory. If we  were to decide 
that  the  existing  state  of  affairs  is  not  acceptable  in  financial  stability  terms,  there  are  two 
broad paths we could follow. 
The first option would be to take steps to curtail the extent of short-term wholesale finance in 
the  system.  In  principle,  regulators  across  a  broader  set  of  institutions  and  markets  could 
take  steps  to  directly  limit  the  use  of  short-term  wholesale  funding  to  finance  longer-term 
assets, and take actions that reduced the amount of maturity transformation associated with 
securitization markets. In other words, regulators could require that a greater proportion of 
market-based finance be funded by longer-term debt. Alternatively, additional legislation or 
regulatory changes could be implemented to reduce the volume of wholesale-funded, capital 
markets activities. 
It is also true that some of the measures under debate in the area of limiting the scope of 
activity  or  the  scale  of  certain  financial  institutions,  three  of  which  were  explored  by  my 
colleague Federal Reserve Governor Dan Tarullo in a recent speech, would likely have the 
effect of reducing the use of short-term wholesale funding relative to the current status quo.17 
For example, if regulators were to cap the size of a bank’s overall liabilities relative to gross 
domestic product (GDP) not only would this have the effect of capping the size of individual 
firms,  but  it  also  would  likely  limit  the  use  of  short-term  wholesale  funding  by  the  largest 
institutions. 
The  other  path  would  be  to  expand  the  range  of  financial  intermediation  activity  that  is 
directly backstopped by the central bank’s lender of last resort function. This expanded range 
                                                
16   Although the largest stand-alone securities firms adopted bank holding company status during the crisis, their 
non-depository institution arms do not have access to the discount window backstop because Section 23A of 
the Federal Reserve Act restricts the ability of the holding company to transfer assets from the non-depository 
institution to the commercial bank affiliate that has access to the discount window. 
17   See  Daniel  K.  Tarullo.  2012.  “Industry  Structure  and  Systemic  Risk  Regulation”.  December  4. 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/tarullo20121204a.htm.  In  this  speech,  he  explores  three 
policy  proposals:  (1)  breaking  up  large  financial  institutions  by  reinstating  Glass-Steagall  restrictions  or  by 
imposing other prohibitions on affiliations of commercial banks with certain business lines; (2) placing a cap on 
the nondeposit liabilities of financial institutions; and (3) requiring financial institutions above a specified size to 
hold minimum  amounts  of long-term  debt  available  for conversion  to  equity  to  avoid  or facilitate  an  orderly 
resolution of a troubled firm 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
could  be  defined  either  in  terms  of  access  by  the  types  of  firms  that  are  systemically 
important in market-based finance, or by types of activity or assets. 
It is worth pausing here to review in a little more detail the two key functions performed by a 
lender of last resort. The first function is to provide a precautionary backstop: to reduce the 
risk of a financial panic beginning in the first place by ensuring that collateral can always be 
financed.18  The  first  function  is  important  because  it  makes  it  less  likely  that  investors  will 
back  away  from  firms  because  they  think  others  perceive  an  elevated  risk  of  insolvency, 
even  if  they  themselves  do  not  share  this  view.  Thus,  a  lender  of  last  resort  facility  can 
reduce the risk of financial instability due to coordination problems even if the lender of last 
resort is not utilized.19 In contrast, an emergency facility is unlikely to be as effective. There 
will be uncertainty around whether it will be deployed, whether it will arrive in time, and how 
broad it will be. 
The second function of a lender of last resort is to prevent the fire sale of assets by firms 
facing a sudden loss of funding from spreading contagion across the system and disrupting 
the provision of credit to the economy. This is particularly important during a financial panic, 
when the demand for liquidity increases sharply. Only the central bank has the ability to meet 
this increased demand under any potential circumstances. 
We have banking activity – maturity transformation – taking place today outside commercial 
banks.  If  we  believe  these  activities  provide  essential  credit  intermediation  services  to  the 
real  economy  that  could  not  be  easily  replaced  by  other  forms  of  intermediation,  then  the 
same logic that leads us to backstop commercial banking with a lender of last resort might 
lead us to backstop the banking activity taking place in the markets in a similar way. 
However, any expansion of access to a lender of last resort would require legislation and it 
would  be  essential  to  have  the  right  quid  pro  quo  –  the  commensurate  expansion  in  the 
scope  of  prudential  oversight.  Substantial  prudential  regulation  of  entities  –  such  as 
broker-dealers20  –  that  might  gain  access  to  an  expanded  lender  of  last  resort  would  be 
required  to  mitigate  moral  hazard  problems.  For  example,  firms  might  take  less  care  in 
managing liquidity and capital if they know they have a lender of last resort backstop and be 
subject to less counterparty and creditor discipline. In addition, the fact that an institution has 
access  to  a  lender  of  last  resort  facility  has  value  to  the  institution,  even  if  that  institution 
never taps the facility. Thus, without a corresponding imposition of offsetting obligations and 
costs, the granting of access would create a significant competitive advantage. 
Extension of discount window-type access to a  set of nonbank institutions would therefore 
have to go hand-in-hand with prudential regulation of these institutions. Many thorny issues 
would have to be resolved. For example, who  would have access and on what terms and 
conditions? How would foreign-owned broker-dealers be treated? Would an insurance-type 
payment be appropriate for firms that enjoyed lender of last resort access but did not have 
insured deposits? How would the Fed’s role, as the lender of last resort, be coordinated with 
the oversight responsibilities of the primary regulators? 
Conclusion 
Which path to go down – limit wholesale funding or backstop it more broadly – would depend 
in  large  part  on  the  social  value  of  the  capital  markets-based  activities  presently  being 
                                                
18   A lender of last resort finances with an appropriate haircut. 
19   This was demonstrated recently by the European Central Bank’s Outright Monetary Transactions program 
20   Several of the largest broker-dealers adopted bank holding company status in recent years, but Section 23A 
rules restrict the capacity of their banking subsidiaries to channel liquidity to their broker-dealer operations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
financed  in  unstable  short-term  wholesale  markets  and  the  utility  of  short-term  wholesale 
funding for lenders. 
Of course, the choice might not be as black and white as this. Some activities undertaken by 
securities  firms  or  other  nonbank  entities  presumably  are  much  more  socially  useful  than 
others. In this case, legislators might deem that certain classes of securities firms should be 
granted access to a lender of last resort facility, but restricted in the scope of their permitted 
activities to those that do clearly create social value. 
The sheer size of banking functions undertaken outside commercial banking entities – even 
now, after the crisis – suggests that this issue must not be ignored. I don’t think we should be 
comfortable  with  a  situation  in  which  extensive  maturity  transformation  continues  to  take 
place without the appropriate safeguards against runs and fire sales. Pretending the problem 
does  not  exist,  or  dealing  with  it  only  ex  post  through  emergency  facilities  cannot  be 
consistent with our financial stability objectives. 
The  issue  of  the  social  value  created  by  market-based  financial  intermediation  and 
appropriate  scope  and  terms  associated  with  a  lender  of  last  resort  function  are  complex 
ones that require further study and analysis. However, regardless of where we come out on 
these questions, we must make the basic structure of the wholesale funding market as sound 
as possible. Thus, we must push ahead with tri-party and money fund reform. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
