Benoît Coeuré: Adjustment and growth in the euro area economies 
Speech by Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Nova  School  of  Business  and  Economics  and  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  Lisbon, 
22 February 2013. 
 Introduction1 
Dear Governor Costa, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here today and share with you my thoughts on the adjustment 
under  way  in  the  euro  area.  This  is  a  challenging  issue,  especially  here  in  Lisbon,  as 
Portugal is at the heart of this process. 
Taking the Lehman collapse as a starting point, the economic and financial crisis has now 
lasted four and a half years, almost one-third the age of the euro. For the stressed countries, 
this has been a tough time. It saw a sharp decline in GDP and a sharp rise in unemployment, 
with  young  people  particularly  affected.  People’s  daily  lives  have  not  yet  visibly  improved. 
This is why it is important to focus on the progress made during the past five years and on 
why and how reforms can create income and jobs. 
I have in mind three questions: (i) How much adjustment is still needed? (ii) Why have the 
costs been so high? (iii) Are conditions in place to restore growth? The public would probably 
formulate these questions differently: can we hope that things will get better? Will the policies 
work? And will we see an improvement in our daily lives? 
To answer these questions I will organise my talk in three parts. 
First, I will briefly recall how the imbalances and structural problems came about and how 
deep they were before the steps towards reform were taken. This is critical to understand the 
subsequent adjustment process, the costs involved and the way forward. I will then describe 
the  progress  to  date.  The  adjustment  process  is  not  yet  complete  but  it  has  already  been 
significant,  and  some  countries,  including  Portugal,  have  taken  important  steps  towards 
sustainability. 
Second, I will reflect on the factors that have made the adjustment more painful than it would 
have been otherwise. My main point will be that a number of rigidities have been preventing 
a more significant and swift downward nominal adjustment, thereby causing a sharp fall in 
production  and  employment.  On  top  of  these  rigidities,  the  interplay  of  an  impaired  credit 
channel, fiscal consolidation and falling confidence has deepened the recession. 
Third, I will argue that there are good reasons to be cautiously optimistic, if reforms continue 
as  planned.  European  solidarity  has  helped  to  smooth  the  adjustment  and  prevented 
sudden-stop  scenarios. It  is  also  giving  national  governments  an  opportunity  to  strengthen 
the  conditions  for  growth,  productivity  and  employment  and  reap  the  full  benefits  of  the 
monetary union. 
Let me now turn to the first part of the talk. 
Tangible progress on correcting imbalances 
(1) 
Since the start of Economic and Monetary Union, the key macro and structural variables of 
euro area countries have diverged greatly. While ex ante expectations of a fast convergence 
                                                 
1  
I  wish  to  thank  Beatrice  Pierluigi  for  her  contributions  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the 
opinions contained herein. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
across  euro  area  countries  might  initially  have  been  reasonable,  given  the  favourable 
environment created by the monetary union, the degree of sustainable convergence ex post 
turned out to be very limited. In many countries, excessive private/public consumption and 
residential  investment  spending,  partly  resulting  from  excessive  debt  accumulation,  led  to 
persistently higher HICP and unit labour costs with respect to the euro area average. At the 
same  time,  the  supply  side  was  not  able  to  catch  up  with  demand,  due  to  the  fact  that 
investment  spending  was  not  channelled  towards  activities  able  to  generate  high  future 
returns  and  due  to  important  structural  rigidities  in  the  labour  and  product  markets,  which 
policy-makers  largely  neglected  to  tackle  in  the  years  before  2009.  This  process  was 
aggravated by weak fiscal institutions and prudential supervision. All this contributed to the 
accumulation of large imbalances and vulnerabilities. In this environment, the EU framework 
for economic governance proved to be unable to enforce an early implementation of critical 
reforms or to prevent imbalances. 
Let me make the point with a few figures. The charts that I will show today focus on the three 
programme countries as well as Spain. Of course, the adjustment process is in fact taking 
place in a larger number of countries, some of which joined the euro area after 2007. 
[Slide 1] A property worth 100 in 1998 would have sold at 280 in 2007 in Spain and Ireland 
and at 230 in Greece. Between 1998 and 2007 bank lending for house purchases increased 
by more than 400% in Spain, 500% in Ireland and 800% in Greece. The credit boom led to a 
sharp  increase  in  private  sector  indebtedness.  But  such  imbalances have  not  only  been  a 
private sector story. Between 1998 and 2007 the compensation of employees in the public 
sector (that is the number of employees times their per capita wages) increased cumulatively 
by close to 180% in Ireland (i.e. five times the euro area average) and by close to 110% in 
Greece (i.e. three times the euro area average). Public spending growth has systematically 
exceeded  nominal  GDP  growth  also  in  Portugal  (about  double  the  average  for  the  area). 
Fiscal  discipline  had  been  clearly  insufficient.  Even  when  the  headline  fiscal  deficit  was 
suggesting  a  healthy  situation  until  around  2008,  that  was  misleading  as  GDP  was  above 
potential and strong tax revenues resulting from housing booms were not sustainable. 
During  the  2008–09  crisis,  the  sharp  drop  in  domestic  demand  caused  a  significant  fall  in 
revenues,  which  in  some  previously  booming  countries  were  based  on  very  cyclically 
sensitive taxes, such as corporate taxes, stamp duties and capital gains taxes. At the same 
time,  government  spending  was  increased  by  crisis-related  measures.  Moreover,  rescue 
operations  for  banks,  especially  in  Ireland,  strongly  contributed  to  a  deterioration  of  public 
finances,  while  bank  guarantees 
liabilities  of  euro  area 
governments. 
[Slide 2] The mathematics of all these developments is very simple. By mid-2010 a number 
of  euro  area  countries,  even  some  that  did  not  see  such  an  accumulation  of  imbalances, 
began  to  be  affected  by  an  unprecedented  sovereign  debt  crisis;  financial  markets  were 
starting  to  perceive  debt  levels  as  unsustainable.  From  this  point  on,  governments  under 
close scrutiny by those markets had to take action to regain their confidence. They were not 
left to their own devices. A fully-fledged EU and IMF financing package – known formally as 
the Economic Adjustment Programmes – came to the aid of Greece, Ireland and Portugal 
between 2010 and 2012. These programmes involved far-reaching economic and financial 
policy adjustments, including in the area of structural reforms. Spain, meanwhile, launched a 
financial  sector  adjustment  programme  supported  by  its  European  partners.  Moreover,  a 
permanent solidarity framework – the European Stability Mechanism – is now in place. It can 
provide  financial  assistance  to  Member  States  in  difficulty,  thereby  reducing  threats  to 
financial stability in the euro area. 
And from an early stage onwards, the Eurosystem provided very substantial liquidity support 
to the banking sector, which had been severely affected by the seizing-up of the interbank 
market. The ECB’s non-standard measures played a critical role in preventing a deflationary 
scenario,  especially  as  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  escalated  from  mid-2010  onwards.  For 
the  contingent 
increased 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
instance,  it  provided  banks  with  all  the  liquidity  they  were  seeking  by  adopting  fixed  rate 
tender procedures with full allotment, against an expanded list of eligible collateral, and for 
extended periods. This helped to stabilise the funding situations of banks in Greece, Ireland 
and Portugal, and later on in Spain and Italy2. According to the Banco de Portugal, the ECB’s 
liquidity  provision  to  Portuguese  banks  reached  €60.5  billion  in  June  2012,  representing 
more than a third of the country’s GDP. In August last year the ECB announced the Outright 
Monetary  Transactions  programme  to  counteract  unjustified  speculation  about  a  euro 
break-up and to rectify the resulting distortions in the transmission mechanism of monetary 
policy. As a result of these actions, and against the background of a renewed commitment by 
governments to ensure the integrity of the euro area, financial conditions have substantially 
improved over time and across market segments. Banks have been able to decrease their 
reliance  on  ECB  funding,  including  by  repaying  (parts  of  the)  amounts  received  under  its 
longer-term refinancing operations. In Portugal, central bank funding is now back to around 
€50 billion, more than 15 percent below its peak. Euro area financial markets are gradually 
returning to normal. 
[Slide  3]  So  to  what  extent  have  the  imbalances  been  corrected?  The  current  account 
balances  clearly  show  a  strong  correction.  In  the  three  programme  countries  the  current 
account balances in percent of GDP improved by more than 9 percentage points between 
2008  and  2012.  In  Spain  the  current  account  deficit  improved  by  more  than  7  percentage 
points  over  the  same  period.  Most  of  the  adjustment  has  been  driven  by  a  contraction  in 
domestic  demand.  However,  in  Ireland,  Spain  and  Portugal  export  performance  has  been 
very  strong  compared  with  the  pre-crisis  period.  Portugal’s  exports  of  goods  and  services 
grew on average by nearly 7% between 2010 and 2012, compared with 4.4% between 1999 
and 2008. In particular, gains in markets outside the euro area have been large and there are 
early indications that the export specialisation of these countries has been shifting in a way 
that may support further structural export expansion.3 
[Slide 4] We have seen a significant improvement in cost competitiveness as measured by 
unit  labour  costs  (ULC).  Between  2008  and  2012,  in  the  three  programme  countries 
cumulated  ULC  growth  was  about  12  percentage  points  below  the  euro  area  average. 
Ireland  saw  by  far  the  largest  adjustment,  with  a  cumulated  ULC  gain  of  18  percentage 
points vis-à-vis the euro area. Greece, Portugal and Spain saw a ten-percentage-point ULC 
gain vis-à-vis the euro area average. As shown by Buti and Turrini (2012),4 this development 
was not fully associated with gains in productivity from lay-offs but rather, at least in part, with 
slower wage growth dynamics. In addition, such a decline in deficit countries seems to have 
occurred  mostly  in  non-tradable  sectors,  which  is  consistent  with  internal  rebalancing.  In 
other countries, such as Italy, where competitiveness fell sharply prior to the crisis, there has 
so far been no evident correction of competitiveness. In other words, the pace of adjustment 
has been different across countries; imbalances have not been corrected everywhere to the 
same extent. 
[Slide  5]  Finally,  we  have  observed  a  very  strong  improvement  in  structural  primary  fiscal 
balances – that is, fiscal balances adjusted for the economic cycle and for one-off factors. In 
Greece, the structural primary balance in percent of GDP, which had reached extremely high 
levels  in  2009,  is  estimated  to  have  improved  by  more  than  13  percentage  points 
cumulatively  between  2009  and  2012.  In  Portugal,  the  structural  improvement  has  been 
                                                 
2   See ECB Monthly Bulletin Article (2011), The ECB’s non-standard measures – impact and phasing out, July 
2011, pages 55-69. 
3   Cheptea, Fontagne and Zignago (2012), European Exports Performance, Banque de France WP 393. 
4   Buti, M, and A. Turrini (2012), Slow but steady? Achievements and shortcomings of competitive disinflation 
within the euro area, ECFIN economic brief, Issue 16, November. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
about 6 percentage points of GDP. These improvements give an idea of the real adjustment 
effort made by these countries. 
[Slide 6] But being cautiously optimistic does not mean that there are no major challenges or 
tasks  ahead  of  us.  Indeed,  the  economic  and  social  priority  is  to  reduce  the  very  high 
unemployment level. In particular, the delayed downward adjustment of prices and nominal 
wages has sharply increased the real cost of adjustment and the burden borne by the more 
vulnerable  members  of  society.  Private  sector  wage  costs  saw  barely  any  downward 
correction  in  some  countries,  even  when  unemployment  was  starting  to  rise  substantially 
(especially in Spain, but initially in Greece as well). Among the programme countries, Ireland 
is the only one where the downward adjustment of relative prices has been sizeable, a factor 
which  has  helped  it  to  avoid  an  even  stronger  decline  in  output  and  employment.  The 
disconnect  between  the  adjustment  in  unit  labour  costs  and  the  adjustment  in  the 
harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) reflects the lack of competition in the domestic 
economy. It also reflects other cost factors affecting the evolution of prices, including fiscal 
consolidation being partly achieved through higher indirect taxes and administrative prices.5 It 
calls  for  great  determination  in  reducing  the  excessive  profit  margins  that  result  from 
monopolistic  competition,  in  particular  in  sectors  sheltered  from  international  competition.6 
Reducing rents is not only a matter of efficiency in the adjustment process: it is also a matter 
of equity in sharing the burden of adjustment. And this point leads me to the second part of 
my talk. 
The aggravating factors 
(2) 
[Slide 7] The adjustment has been costly, in some cases very costly. Some of the costs in 
terms of falling output and employment were, unfortunately, unavoidable. In particular, some 
of the job losses in the non-tradable sector are the outcome of the necessary rebalancing 
towards  tradables  and  away  from  previously  unsustainable  domestic  demand  growth. 
However, the rise in unemployment in a number of countries has been aggravated by delays 
in structural reforms and, as I said, by a lack of downward flexibility in prices and wages after 
2008.  Job  losses  were  largest  among  low-skilled,  temporary  workers  in  Spain  and  in  the 
non-manufacturing sectors.7 As employment fell, unemployment – particularly of the young – 
jumped, especially in Greece and Spain, where more than a quarter of the total labour force 
is currently without a job. 
There was also a sharp increase in unemployment in the Baltic states – it rose from 5% in 
2007 to 18% in 2010 on average in Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia. However, since 2010 in all 
three  countries  unemployment  has  fallen  relatively  quickly.  By  the  end  of  2012  it  had 
improved by about 10 percentage points.8 In the most stressed euro area countries, there are 
no  signs  of  a  reversal  yet.  This  is  the  result  of  the  inherited  very  rigid  product  and  labour 
markets, which have started to change and need to continue to do so vigorously to prevent 
further job losses. Again, this is not only a matter of efficiency, but also a matter of equity. 
Europe cannot afford a lost generation. 
                                                 
5   See  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin  Box  (2012),  Rebalancing  of  competitiveness  within  the  euro  area  and  its 
implications for inflation, June 2012, pages 64–66. 
6   The higher profit margins of the past two years need to be interpreted carefully as they in part represent a 
rebound  after  the  contraction  in  2008-09,  and  are  related  to  composition  effects  and  capital  deepening  via 
labour shedding. 
7   See ECB Structural Issues Report (2012), Euro area labour markets and the crisis, ECB Occasional Paper 
No 138, October 2012. 
8   On average in the three Baltic states compensation per employee fell by 10.4 pp cumulatively between 2009 
and 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
[Slide 8] What about output? Per capita GDP has been falling steeply in Greece. In Ireland 
the turning point was reached in 2011; in Spain, Portugal and Greece that point is expected 
to  come  in  2013  or  early  2014.  Is  this  expectation  credible?  Controlling  for  exogenous 
variables, such as world demand, term-of-trade or oil shocks, the expectation depends on a 
resolute pursuit of the reform and consolidation policies as well as on three key interrelated 
aspects:  the  impact  of  fiscal  consolidation;  the  access  to  finance  for  corporates  and 
households; and the restoration of confidence. Let me consider these in turn. 
Since  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  escalated  in  mid-2010,  in  the  stressed  countries  the  fiscal 
stance  has  become  very  restrictive,  access  to  finance  has  become  very  limited  and 
confidence very low. In such an environment it is not possible to isolate the short-term impact 
of these three elements while private and public sector balance-sheet adjustment is under 
way.  Fiscal  multipliers  were  large  at  the  start  of  the  adjustment  process,  as  the  IMF  has 
shown.9  But  analytical  work  also  shows  that  an  increase  in  the  estimated  short-term  fiscal 
multiplier can be triggered by an impaired credit channel, high spreads and a non-credible 
fiscal  policy.10  Moreover,  increased  political  uncertainties  and  a  lack  of  implementation  of 
structural  reforms  can  lead  to  a  loss  of  confidence,  undermining  demand  and  investment. 
The related output losses should not be attributed to fiscal consolidation. 
Let  me  elaborate  further  on  the  credibility  issue.  The  improvement  in  structural  fiscal 
balances that I talked about earlier needs to continue so as to ensure that the debt dynamics 
remain sustainable. This is part of the fight against the loss of market confidence. Progress in 
fiscal adjustment has already boosted market confidence, as successful bond issuance by 
Portugal and Ireland indicates. There is no credible alternative to this, as imbalances need to 
be  unwound,  access  to  market  restored,  and  debt  made  sustainable  in  order  to  return  to 
robust and sustainable growth in the medium term. High debt is bad for growth.11 The output 
losses we have seen in recent years are also caused by excessive public and private debt 
accumulated until 2009. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  credit  channel  now.  We  have  evidence  of  a  further  significant 
fragmentation of the credit supply since mid-2010; this has been shown by the ECB’s Bank 
Lending Survey as well as its biannual survey on the access to finance of SMEs in the euro 
area  (SAFE).  In  countries  where  the  banking  sector  has  experienced  large  balance  sheet 
shocks  related  to  deteriorating  sovereign  debt,  access  to  bank  credit  has  tightened 
substantially. Elevated risk premia in the stressed countries have in turn had repercussions 
on  access  to  finance,  in  particular  for  SMEs.  In  contrast,  large  corporations  can  resort  to 
corporate debt instead of bank loans, especially during financial crises, or to foreign loans 
instead of domestic loans in the case of large multinationals, as happened, for instance, in 
Ireland.12  SMEs  employ  around  three-quarters  of  the  euro  area’s  workforce  and  they 
generate around 60% of its value added. Their restricted access to finance in a number of 
euro  area  countries  is  clearly  a  threat  to  economic  recovery.  A  number  of  governments, 
including Portugal’s, are implementing measures to support the financing of SMEs. We see 
these  measures  together  with  the  use  of  EU  financial  instruments  (EIB  and  EU  structural 
funds) as very important in unlocking access to funding and investment growth. The ECB has 
                                                 
9   See Blanchard O., D. Leigh (2012), Global Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers, IMF Working Paper No 13/1. 
10   See  Roeger  W.,  in  ‘t  Veld  J.(2009),  Fiscal  Policy  with  Credit  Constrained  Households,  European  Economy 
Economic Paper No 357 and ECB Monthly Bulletin Box (2012), Fiscal multipliers based on the ECB’s New 
Area-Wide Model, December 2012, pages 83–85 
11   See Reinhart C., V. Reinhart, K. Rogoff (2012), Public Debt Overhangs: Advanced-Economy Episodes since 
1800, Journal of Economic Perspective, 26(3), pages 69–86, and Checherita-Westphal C., P. Rother (2012), 
The impact of high government debt on economic growth and its channels: an empirical investigation for the 
euro area, European Economic Review, 56, pages 1392–1405. 
12   See De Fiore F., H. Uhlig, 2011, Bank Finance versus Bond Finance, Journal of Money Credit and Banking 
43, pages 1399–1421. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
alleviated the funding constraints of banks extending loans to SMEs by accepting such loans, 
and  asset-backed  securities  (ABS)  backed  by  pools  of  loans,  as  collateral  in  its  monetary 
policy  operations.  The  Banco  de  Portugal  has  been  proactive  in  implementing  these 
measures.  Additional  credit  claims  alone  account  for  around  15  percent  of  total  collateral 
posted by Portuguese banks with the ECB, and help to generate a large collateral buffer. The 
ECB will support a revival of the ABS market in the euro area, which would help SMEs to 
benefit from the improving financing conditions. Let me also point out that the restructuring 
and strong capitalisation of banks is an important condition for restoring the smooth provision 
of credit to euro area corporates and households. 
I turn now to the issue of confidence and this allows me to close the circle and go back to the 
high  unemployment  costs  observed  so  far.  High  uncertainty  related  to  falling  disposable 
income  and  increased  unemployment  has  pushed  up  the  precautionary  savings  of 
households. High uncertainty has also kept household confidence low, despite government 
actions  going  in  the  right  direction.  In  this  environment,  lower  prices  would  improve  the 
purchasing  power  of  households  and  reduce  uncertainty.  Confidence  will  be  boosted  if 
governments make sure that the burden of the adjustment is equally shared and not distorted 
by privileged groups and vested interests. 
The way forward: going structural 
(3) 
Thanks to the actions of the EU governments and the ECB, and with IMF support, signs of 
stabilisation  in  the  euro  area  have  been  increasing  in  recent  months.  This  provides  an 
opportunity to make further decisive steps forwards. In stressed countries, governments have 
initiated reforms which are unprecedented in their ambition and scope. There has been an 
increase in the implementation of politically sensitive reforms in many areas, including public 
administration,  health  and  pension  systems,  education,  judicial  systems,  competition 
frameworks, industrial relations, labour markets, energy markets, network industries, service 
sectors  and  in  the  regulated  professions.  This  list  will  sound  very  familiar  to  you  as  the 
Portuguese adjustment programme is covering all these areas. The reforms are consistent 
with the goals set by the European Union in 2000 in its Lisbon Strategy, but at the time there 
were  no  incentives  to  act  on  these  commitments.  Such  reforms,  if  well  designed  and  fully 
implemented,  will  reorient  the  engines  of  growth  towards  high-productivity  sectors  and 
enable companies to thrive in the Single Market and in the global economy. Studies based 
on  general  equilibrium  models  have  confirmed  that  the  long-run  growth  effects  of  such 
reforms are indeed positive and potentially very high.13 
[Slide  9]  This  is  my  last  chart.  It  shows  model-based  simulations  carried  out  for  the 
Portuguese  economy  by  using  a  large-scale  new-Keynesian  dynamic  general  equilibrium 
model of the euro area and the world economy.14 In the model simulations shown, the wage 
mark-up  is  reduced  by  10  percentage  points  over  a  period  of  five  years.  The  size  of  the 
reduction mimics the cumulated gross wage differential between Germany and the rest of the 
euro area countries between 2005 and 2010, that is, in the five years after Hartz IV reform. 
To obtain a comparable set of results, the price mark-up is also reduced by 10 percentage 
points over five years. These simulations show clearly that to maximise the impact of reforms 
on GDP and employment it is important that those reforms have to reduce both wage and 
price mark-ups. The simulations also show that the impact of reforms is positive already in 
the  second  year  and  increases  progressively  afterwards.  All  this  is  consistent  with  other 
                                                 
13   See Gomes S., P. Jacquinot, M. Mohr, M. Pisani (2011), Structural reforms and macroeconomic performance 
in  the  euro  area  countries.  A  model-based  assessment,  ECB  working  paper  no.  1323;  and  Angelini  E., 
A. Dieppe, B. Pierluigi (2013), Learning about wage and price mark-ups in euro area countries, ECB Working 
Paper No 1512. 
14   See Gomes S., P. Jacquinot, M. Pisani (2010), The EAGLE. A model for policy analysis of macroeconomic 
interdependence in the euro area. ECB Working Paper No 1195. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
studies  done  for  other  countries.15  The  simulations  exclude  the  reforms  that  enhance  total 
factor productivity, which I mentioned earlier. These would further add to the impact on GDP 
and employment. 
To conclude, Portugal can already count on key achievements in labour and product markets 
that were thought impossible only a few years ago. The support of its European partners has 
been  and  will  remain  instrumental  in  this  process.  Structural  reforms  always  take  time  to 
have  their  full  beneficial  impact  on  the  economy.  Having  entered  the  second  half  of  the 
adjustment  programme,  these  benefits  should  increasingly  become  tangible.  I  do  not 
underestimate the pain that these changes inflict. But they are necessary in order to lay the 
foundations for robust and sustainable growth. Growth-oriented policies are no substitutes for 
fiscal and external adjustment: they are mutually reinforcing. 
If designed in a way that reduces rents and fights vested interests, they will not only improve 
the efficiency of the adjustment process but also its equity, to the benefit of the poorest, the 
youngest,  and  of  future  generations.  They  will  support  medium  to  long-term  growth  and 
therefore  employment  and  fiscal  sustainability.  They  will  help  economies  to  reap  the  full 
benefits of belonging to the Single Market and to the Economic and Monetary Union. They 
will  help  societies  to  sustain  social  models  which  would  otherwise  be  debased  by  the 
permanent output loss caused by the crisis, and the related loss of tax revenues.16 
I should add that there is a need for reforms in all euro area countries, including the larger 
ones, albeit to varying degrees and in different areas. Even if a euro area country doesn’t 
feel the pressure of financial markets and programme conditionality, its government should 
take  seriously  the  responsibility  to  carry  out  necessary  reforms  that  will  ultimately  support 
growth  elsewhere  in  the  region.  And  it  is  the  responsibility  of  all  euro  area  governments, 
jointly,  to  advance  the  reforms  outlined  last  December  by  the  President  of  the  European 
Council  that  will  give  stable  foundations  to  the  single  currency.  The  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism is an important first step, to be complemented as soon as possible by a Single 
Resolution Authority and Fund; further steps towards an economic, fiscal and political union 
should follow, completing our Economic and Monetary Union. If there is a lesson to be learnt 
for all euro area countries, it will be to make sure that in the future they make the necessary 
changes pro-actively and not in response to a crisis. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
15   A coordinated reduction of mark-ups would lead to a similar impact on GDP growth in the adjusting countries. 
International spillovers of reforms are generally found to be limited. For a review, see Dieppe A. et al. (2012), 
Competitiveness and external imbalances within the euro area, ECB Occasional Paper No 139. 
16   See Coeuré B. (2013), The three dimensions of the euro area crisis, speech at the Asia-Europe Economic 
Forum conference on “European troubles, Asian worries”, Brussels, 21 January. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Slide 1 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 8 
 Slide 2 
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Slide 3 
Slide 4 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Slide 5 
 Slide 6 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
Slide 7 
Slide 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 12 
 Slide 9 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
