Jean-Pierre Danthine: Swiss banks from a financial stability perspective 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the Swiss National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 
20 June 2013. 
 As my colleague Thomas Jordan has explained, economic and financial conditions for the 
Swiss  banking  sector  continue  to  be  challenging.  Against  this  background,  I  would  like  to 
examine the situation at Swiss banks from a financial stability perspective, looking first at the 
big banks and then moving on to a discussion of domestically focused banks. 
Big banks: strengthening resilience 
Over the past year, the Swiss big banks have substantially improved their capital situation. 
Risk-weighted capital ratios have been raised markedly, and both banks are now very well 
placed  in  an  international  peer  comparison.  Moreover,  with  its  capital-building,  Credit  
Suisse has also raised its leverage ratio considerably. Measured in terms of loss-absorbing 
capital  –  defined  as  Common  Equity  Tier  1  capital  plus  high-trigger  contingent  capital 
instruments – leverage ratios at the big banks are now at roughly the same level.  
However, given the prevailing risks in the environment and the losses incurred in the recent 
crisis,  the  SNB  still  considers  current  leverage  ratios  at  the  Swiss  big  banks  to  be  low.  In 
addition, a number of comparative studies imply that, in terms of leverage ratios, UBS and 
Credit Suisse are currently below the international average. 
The  big  banks’  published  plans  on  strategy  and  capital-building  envisage  a  further 
improvement in their capital situation. According to these plans, and measured in terms of 
loss-absorbing capital, by the end of 2014, Credit Suisse and UBS are likely to have already 
met  the  risk-weighted  capital  requirement  of  13%  which  will  apply  from  2019.  Moreover, 
these plans will lead to a substantial increase in their leverage ratios by the end of 2014. The 
SNB acknowledges the big banks’ progress to date and recommends that they consistently 
and  fully  implement  their  plans,  in  order  to  further  strengthen  their  resilience  and,  in 
particular, to improve their leverage ratios. Improving the leverage ratio is all the more crucial 
given the growing importance of this indicator as a measure of banks’ resilience. 
Credibility of model-based risk-weighted assets 
The  risk  weighting  of  assets  plays  a  key  role  in  determining  the  capital  requirement  for  a 
bank. All of the bank’s on and off-balance-sheet positions are multiplied by a risk weight. The 
riskier  the  position,  the  higher  the  weight.  The  figure  for  risk-weighted  assets  (RWA) 
represents the sum of these risk-weighted positions. Required capital, in turn, is defined as a 
percentage of RWA. There are two different approaches for setting risk weights. Under the 
standardised  approach,  risk  weights  are  prescribed  for  broad  asset  classes.  Under  the 
model-based approach, by contrast, banks can use their own internal models to determine 
the risk weights for different assets. 
The  credibility  of  RWA  based  on  banks’  internal  models  is  increasingly  being  called  into 
question by market participants, analysts and authorities worldwide. It is widely accepted that 
a  bank’s  risks  can,  in  principle,  be  more  accurately  quantified  using  the  model-based 
approach than using the standardised approach. Yet banks’ internal models are extremely 
complex  and  can  vary  widely  between  banks,  owing  to  the  use  of  different  model  choices 
and  model  parameters.  This  can  result  in  different  capital  requirements  for  banks  with  a 
similar asset structure. This makes it difficult to accurately assess a bank’s resilience, and to 
compare one bank with another. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
To increase the usefulness and credibility of the model-based approach, in-depth analyses 
need to be carried out to determine whether and to what extent the model-based approach 
and the standardised approach lead to differences in RWA. The standardised approach does 
have  shortcomings.  Yet,  since  it  is  independent  of  bank-specific  modelling  assumptions,  it 
provides market participants with an additional point of reference for assessing both the level 
of and changes in model-based RWA. Differences between the two approaches must be well 
explained  and  have  a  sound  economic  rationale.  If  the  analysis  does  not  reveal  any 
substantial  inexplicable  differences,  this  will  strengthen  market  confidence  in  the  model-
based  approach.  Otherwise,  appropriate  measures  should  be  considered.  This  could,  for 
instance, entail setting a floor for some model-based RWA, such as that recently introduced 
for banks in the US. Another option would be to introduce a multiplier on model-based risk 
weights  for  specific  positions,  as  already  imposed  by  FINMA  for  some  mortgage  loans. 
Efforts  are  underway  at  FINMA,  supported  by  the  SNB,  to  analyse  potential  differences 
between the two approaches. 
In this context, the SNB recommends that the big banks increase transparency with regard to 
their risks. This includes, among other things, publishing their internal measures of total risk. 
Disclosing  RWA  according  to  the  standardised  approach  in  addition  to  model-based  RWA 
would likewise lead to greater transparency with regard to risks. Greater transparency would 
help to make changes in model-based RWA easier to understand, and thereby increase the 
credibility of the model-based approach. 
Domestically focused banks: resilience and lending policies 
I would now like to turn to our assessment of domestically focused commercial banks. 
At present, the risks for these banks are primarily linked to the situation and momentum on 
mortgage and real estate markets. 
In an environment of historically low interest rates, there has been a build-up of imbalances 
on these markets. On the one hand, the ratio of mortgage loans to GDP has increased to 
very  high  levels  in  a  historical  comparison.  On  the  other,  growth  in  real  estate  prices  has 
been  persistently  stronger  than  what  can  be  explained  by  fundamental  factors.  Owing  to 
these developments, measures were announced in June 2012 to reduce risks in the Swiss 
mortgage  market.  These  measures  include  a  revision  of  the  self-regulation  rules  for 
mortgage lending and stricter capital requirements for mortgage loans. Despite the measures 
taken,  however,  imbalances  continued  to  build  up  in  2012.  Against  this  background,  the 
Federal Council decided in February 2013 to activate the countercyclical capital buffer, at the 
proposal of the SNB. 
In the light of this risk situation, the fact that the capitalisation of domestically focused banks 
is  significantly  above  the  regulatory  minimum  requirements  is  a  welcome  development. 
Indeed,  compared  to  the  previous  year,  these  banks  have  even  improved  their  regulatory 
capitalisation  slightly.  Moreover,  most  domestically  focused  banks  already  meet  FINMA’s 
capital buffer requirements, which go beyond Basel III. 
However, figures on regulatory capital may overestimate the true resilience of these banks. 
For one thing, the risks in the real estate market in particular are not or only partly taken into 
account in the regulatory capital requirements. For another, neither interest rate risk nor the 
low diversification of these banks – whose activities are centred on the domestic mortgage 
market – are fully reflected in the capital requirements. 
These  aspects  are  currently  of  particular  importance  for  three  reasons.  First,  as  already 
mentioned,  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets  have  seen  a  further  build-up  of  risks  since 
June  2012.  Second,  there  has  been  further  significant  growth  in  mortgage  lending  at 
domestically  focused  banks.  Although  growth  momentum  has  declined  year-on-year,  the 
volume of mortgage claims at these banks has increased by around 5%. Third, banks’ risk 
appetite in lending has remained persistently high. For instance, a large proportion of new 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
mortgages granted for owner-occupied residential property still have a loan-to-value ratio of 
over 80%. Furthermore, the share of new loans with stretched affordability has also remained 
at  a  high  level.  At  the  same  time,  the  interest  rate  margin  of  domestically  focused  banks 
narrowed further in 2012, while interest rate risk remained historically high. 
In  view  of  the  persistently  low  level  of  interest  rates,  there  is  the  risk  that,  despite  the 
measures already implemented, imbalances on the Swiss mortgage and real estate markets 
will continue to build up. This would increase both the likelihood and the consequences of a 
price correction in the medium term. Such a price correction could be triggered, for example, 
by a sharp increase in interest rates. Against this background, domestically focused banks 
should therefore continue to ensure that their resilience is sufficiently high, irrespective of the 
regulatory  requirements,  and  make  adjustments  where  necessary.  They  should  be  able  to 
maintain their economically important functions, even if real estate prices were to fall sharply 
and interest rates were to simultaneously rise. 
In  particular,  domestically  focused  banks  should  make  sure  that  the  currently  high  direct 
interest rate risk is assessed and managed using conservative assumptions. In this context, 
the assumptions applied by banks with regard to savings and sight deposits are especially 
important. In an environment of historically low interest rates, these deposits have proven to 
be very stable sources of financing in recent years. This does not mean, however, that the 
situation will remain stable in the future. Were the general level of interest rates to rise, these 
funds  could  quickly  flow  elsewhere.  Banks  should  therefore  include  these  assumptions  in 
their assessment and management of their interest rate risk. 
Furthermore,  domestically  focused  banks  should  exercise  greater  caution  in  residential 
mortgage lending. When determining and applying their lending criteria with respect to loan-
to-value  ratios,  banks  should  bear  in  mind  that  the  risks  in  the  real  estate  market  have 
increased. Moreover, when assessing the affordability for their borrowers, banks should be 
aware that mortgage rates can rise rapidly. The application of conservative lending criteria is 
important, on the one hand, as a precautionary measure for the banks themselves, in view of 
the prevailing risks in the market. On the other, a more prudent lending policy would help to 
counter a further build-up of imbalances. 
From a financial stability perspective, in the event of a further build-up of risks in the Swiss 
mortgage  and  real  estate  markets,  it  might  prove  necessary  to  take  further  regulatory 
measures.  The  SNB,  for  its  part,  will  regularly  assess  whether  an  adjustment  of  the 
countercyclical capital buffer is necessary. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
