C Chakrabarty: Infrastructure financing by banks in India – myths and 
realities 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Annual Infrastructure Finance Conclave, organised by SBI Capital markets Limited, Agra, 
9 August 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Ms. Sangita Misra is gratefully acknowledged. 
Mr.  B.  Sreeram,  Managing  Director,  State  Bank  of  Bikaner  &  Jaipur;  Mr  M.  Bhagavantha 
Rao, MD, State Bank of Hyderabad; my fellow panelists, Mr. V. G. Kannan, MD, SBI Capital 
Markets Limited; Mr. Partha Bhattacharya, Ex- CMD, Coal India Limited; Mr. Seshagiri Rao, 
Joint Managing Director, JSW Steel Limited and CFO of JSW Group, Ms. Zarin Daruwala, 
President, ICICI Bank Ltd.; delegates to the Conclave; ladies and gentlemen. It is, indeed, a 
great pleasure to be here amidst you in this historic city of Agra to deliberate on an issue that 
touches the daily lives of all of us present here – Infrastructure. I am grateful to SBI Capital 
Markets  Limited  (SBI  Caps)  and  especially  to  Mrs.  Arundhati  Bhattacharya,  ex-MD,  SBI 
Caps, in absentia, for inviting me to this Conclave. In my address today, I intend to respond 
to some of the issues raised by my fellow panelists by putting across RBI’s views and, in the 
process, also try to dispel a few myths surrounding the subject of infrastructure financing. 
improve  governance.  The  projected 
Background 
2. Large infrastructure investment by all sectors- public, private and foreign- during the last 
decade, has catapulted India to the league of one of the fastest growing economies in the 
world.  Yet,  over  the  past  year  or  two,  infrastructure  sector  has  reached  a  critical  point  of 
entanglement.  To  stimulate  growth,  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  step  up  infrastructure 
investment  as  well  as  to  improve  the  productivity  and  quality  of  infrastructure  spending, 
remove  procedural  bottlenecks  and 
investment 
requirements for infrastructure are placed at $ 1 trillion in the 12th plan and the funding gap 
is estimated to be above Rs. 5000 billion. While the financing needs are huge in the coming 
years, given the limited fiscal space available, raising such resources would be a formidable 
challenge. The Approach Paper for the 12th Plan envisages that about half of the investment 
requirements of infrastructure would have to be met through funding from the private sector. 
For  this  purpose,  the  share  of  private  sector  in  infrastructure  investment  will  have  to  rise 
substantially from about 37 per cent in the 11th Plan to about 48 per cent in the 12th Plan. 
The private sector’s interest in the infrastructure sector has, however, been badly hit because 
of the delays due to certain policy formulations and implementation aspects relating to land 
acquisition, rehabilitation, environment etc. At present, more than 50 per cent of projects are 
stuck  at  various  stages  of  implementation  due  to  variety  of  regulatory  hurdles  and  sector 
specific bottlenecks leading to significant time and cost overruns. 
Role of infrastructure in inclusive development 
3. Before we turn to examining the role of Infrastructure; let us first look at what is meant by 
infrastructure.  Investopedia  defines  infrastructure  as  the  basic  physical  and  organizational 
structures needed for the operation of a society or enterprise, or the services and facilities 
necessary for an economy to function. Thus, infrastructure can be understood as the support 
structures that facilitate production of goods and services, distribution of finished products to 
markets,  as  also  the  basic  social  services  such  as  schools  and  hospitals.  In  a  sense, 
infrastructure  is  a  catalytic  agent  for  the  economy.  The  structures  which  can  be  counted 
among  infrastructure  are  roads,  bridges,  power,  water  supply,  sewers,  electrical  grids, 
telecommunications, ports and so forth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
4.  Post  the  advent  of  the  global  crisis,  we  live  in  uncertain  times.  The  growth  rate  of  the 
Indian Economy is diminishing by the quarter and a recovery continues to elude. But amidst 
this scenario of persistent gloom, high inflation, political uncertainties, etc., if one looks for a 
catalyst  that  can  revive  the  economy,  put  the  domestic  growth  engine  back  on  track  and 
ensure  an  inclusive  growth,  the  most  potent  option  available  is  investment  in  creation  of 
better  all  round  infrastructure.  Provision  of  better  infrastructural facilities  such  as  irrigation, 
electrification,  roads,  drinking  water,  sanitation,  housing,  community  IT  service,  etc.  to  the 
rural  centres  would  enable  mainstreaming  of  a  vast  majority  of  the  rural  population  and 
helping them to positively contribute to domestic growth through their entrepreneurial or farm 
based activities. 
5. The fast paced urbanisation during the recent years of heady economic growth has also 
necessitated the availability of new infrastructural facilities as well as upgrading the quality of 
existing infrastructure. Infrastructure development in new townships is also a priority so as to 
redistribute  the  influx  of  growing  population.  All  these  developments  have  opened  up 
numerous employment opportunities and, hence, potential accretion to domestic growth. 
Stalled progress 
6. Let me, however, admit that there has been no lack of appreciation of this fact from any 
quarter- be it the highest echelons of political hierarchy, the bureaucratic setup, the economic 
and planning think tank, the academia, the financial wizards- some of whom are present in 
this gathering here. There has been no dearth of policy pronouncements and reengineering 
of  processes  aimed  at  improvement  in  the  investment  climate  for  infrastructural  projects. 
However, there seems to be little headway insofar as achievement on ground is concerned. 
Let me highlight some disconcerting facts: 
• 
• 
Out of 576 SEZs that have received formal approval, only 172 are operational 
Against a target of awarding road projects aggregating 50621 kms during 2008–13, 
only 10690 kms have been awarded. Many of the projects awarded have yet to see 
commencement  of  work  due  to  problems  in  achieving  financial  closure,  delays  in 
land acquisition and obtaining environmental clearances 
Out of 16 Ultra Mega Power Projects planned, contracts for only 4 were awarded. 
Out of this only one has become operational and another is nearing completion and 
that  too  much  beyond  the  scheduled  dates.  Even  the  one  project  that  has 
commenced  operations  is  running  much  below  capacity.  Lack  of  clarity  on  coal 
import, forest clearances and land acquisition delays are creating impediments. 
Under  the  New  Exploration  and  Licensing  Policy  for  exploration  of  crude  oil  and 
natural gas, of the 251 blocks allotted, 110 have reported discoveries but only 6 are 
actually operational. 
  7. Having set the backdrop, let me begin by responding to an issue which has been made 
out to be a very crucial challenge insofar as financing of infrastructure projects go. 
Has bank finance been a constraining factor for infrastructure development? 
8.  Has flow  of  bank  credit  been  a  constraining factor for  infrastructure development  in  the 
country? Let me acknowledge that this issue has not come up for debate for the first time 
today. It is pertinent to note that outside of budgetary support, that accounts for about 45 per 
cent of the total infrastructure spending, commercial banks are the second largest source of 
finance for infrastructure (about 24 per cent). Historically, contrary to popular perception, it is 
the  commercial,  more  particularly,  the  public  sector  banks  that  have  supported  the 
infrastructure  requirements  of  a  growing  Indian  economy.  It  is  worth  highlighting  that 
outstanding  bank  credit  to  the  infrastructure  sector,  which  stood  at  Rs.  72.43  billion  in  
1999–2000,  has  increased  steadily  to  Rs.  7860.45  bn  in  2012–13,  a  compounded  annual 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
growth rate (CAGR) of 43.41 per cent over the last thirteen years (Table 1) against an overall 
CAGR of bank finance to all industries at 20.38 per cent during the same period. The share 
of  bank  finance  to  infrastructure  in  gross  bank  credit  has  increased  from  1.63  per  cent  in 
2001 to 13.37 per cent in 2013. Between March 2008 and 2013 alone, banks’ exposure to 
infrastructure  has  grown  by  more  than  3  times.  This  apart,  credit  has  also  flown  into 
infrastructure  sector  via  NBFCs,  Mutual  Funds  and  capital  markets,  the  source  of  bulk  of 
which  is  bank  finance.  It  may  not,  therefore,  be  correct  to  argue  that  lack  of  finance  from 
banks has constrained the development of the infrastructure sector. 
9. In fact, recognizing the importance of infrastructural development in the country, RBI has 
provided  certain  concessions/relaxations  in  lending  to  infrastructure  sector,  such  as, 
enhancement in single/group borrower limits, permission to issue guarantees favoring other 
lending  institutions  in  respect  of  infrastructure  projects,  asset  classification  benefits  under 
restructuring  guidelines  and  permission  to  extend  finance  for  funding  promoter’s  equity, 
subject  to  certain  conditions.  In  order  to  encourage  lending  by  banks  to  the  infrastructure 
sector, banks are permitted to finance SPVs registered under the Companies Act, set up for 
financing infrastructure projects, after ensuring that these loans / investments are not used 
for financing the budget of State Governments.1 RBI, in a recent circular (March 18, 2013), 
has allowed the debts due to the lenders in case of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) projects 
to be considered as secured to the extent assured by the project authority in terms of the 
Concession Agreement, subject to certain conditions. 
Impaired assets in infrastructure sector 
10.  The  evidence,  thus,  clearly  suggests  that  banks  have  been  substantially  financing 
infrastructure  projects  in  the  country  notwithstanding  the  inadequate  commercialization  of 
projects due to regulatory, political and legal constraints and total absence or insufficiency of 
user charges in many sectors. Of course, this has not been without a fair share of pain for 
them.  The  NPAs  and  the  restructured  assets  in  this  segment  have  increased  quite 
substantially  of  late.  The  Gross  NPAs  and  restructured  standard  advances  for  the 
infrastructure sector, together as a percentage of total advances to the sector, has increased 
considerably  from  Rs.  121.90  bn  (4.66%)  as  at  the  end  of  March  2009  to  Rs.1369.70  bn 
(17.43%)  as  at  the  end  of  March  2013.  There  is  enough  evidence  to  suggest  that  a 
substantial portion of the rise in impaired assets in the sector is attributable to non-adherence 
to the basic appraisal standards by the banks. 
11. In spite of higher percentage of impaired assets in the infrastructure sector, we need not 
be terribly despondent. Though there may be some haircut on the portfolio for the banking 
sector, one can draw comfort from the fact that at least some assets have been created. The 
need of the hour for the Central Government, State Governments and the project developers 
is  to  ensure  that  the  minor  impediments  that  ail  the  operationalisation  of  these  assets  are 
immediately  removed  so  that  they  can  be  put  to  productive  use  and  start  generating 
revenues. Meanwhile, the banks must draw appropriate lessons from the past failures and be 
very discerning with the credit appraisal of the projects that come up for their consideration. 
12.  In  sum,  any  criticism  of  the  banks  for  not  meeting  the  financing  requirements  of  the 
infrastructure sector has to be viewed in the backdrop of lack of availability of bankable and 
commercially viable projects. 
                                                
1   Further,  the  promoters’  shares  in  the  SPV  of  an  infrastructure  project  pledged  to  the  lending  bank  are 
permitted to be excluded from the banks’ capital market exposure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Separate asset classification norm for infrastructure projects 
13.  While  there  have  been  some  requests  for  a  separate  asset  classification  regimen  for 
infrastructure  projects,  I do  not  see  any  merit  in  these  arguments. The evidence  suggests 
that the higher NPA in the sector is not an industry wide issue, it is rather bank specific. For 
the umpteenth time, I reiterate that the reason for NPA is non-performing administration. In 
the case of infrastructure, this could also be on account of non-performance beyond that of 
the bank management – that of policy makers, bureaucracy etc. But what is really puzzling is 
why  this  affects  the  Public  sector  banks  the  most.  The  answer  lies  squarely  in  the  poor 
project  appraisal  techniques,  lack  of  accountability,  post–disbursal  supervision,  etc.  In  our 
assessment, the project appraisal and the decision making in public sector banks has been 
more  impressionistic  rather  than  being  information  based.  How  else  does  one  defend  the 
eagerness of some banks to fund power distribution companies with negative net worth! 
14. Any infrastructure project typically has five phases: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
It  is  fair  to  expect,  therefore,  that  any  infrastructure  project  proposal  would  have  detailed 
analysis  of  all  the  above  stages  including research,  planning  and  implementation  strategy. 
While  appraising  the  infrastructure  projects,  it  is  imperative  to  consider  as  to  what  extent 
have 
in  developing/managing 
infrastructure facilities would be unavoidable in a country like India where various bottlenecks 
crop up due to supply side factors. 
Research and Development 
Planning 
Production 
Servicing, distribution and dissemination 
Maintenance of structure/facilities created 
these  objectives  been  achieved;  otherwise,  problems 
Recent revisions in the restructuring guidelines 
15.  There  has  been  a  lot  of  commentary  on  whether  the  tightening  of  the  provision 
requirements upon restructuring of advances at this point in the economic cycle is prudent. 
While I would not per se comment on the specifics, I would like to clarify that RBI has never 
stated  that  restructuring  is  wrong.  All  of  us,  the  society,  must  realise  that  despite  all 
precautions,  there  could  be  failures.  We  must  learn  to  accept  failure.  We,  in  RBI,  have 
maintained that restructuring is a perfectly legitimate business instrument, but this has to be 
approached with a bit of caution. When people talk about higher provision requirements that 
would  kick  in,  I  would  only  like  to  say  that  provision  is  not  a  loss.  We  require  banks  to 
maintain  provision  for  standard  assets  as  well,  so  why  should  there  be  any  discomfort  in 
maintaining slightly higher provision on restructured accounts. It can always be written back 
when  the  account  turns  around. The question  that  I  would  like  to  pose  is  that  why  should 
banks only restructure advances that are about to turn non-performing? Instead, they could 
also restructure advances that are already NPA if they feel that additional bit of support and 
resources can bring the defaulted company back on rails. 
16.  Another  point  that  I would  like  to  make  in  the  context  of  restructuring  is  regarding  the 
initial pricing of loans for infrastructure projects. Very often, we observe that the banks are 
willing  to  significantly  pare  down  the  interest  rate  charged  on  the  loan  post  restructuring. 
Basic economic sense suggests that the pricing should mirror the risk in the loan. Therefore, 
let us assume that if a project was initially funded by a bank at 16%, what makes it willing to 
restructure  the  loan  and  agree  for  a  much  lower  interest  rate  when  the  very  fact  of 
restructuring  indicates  greater  credit  risk  in  the  account.  This  reflects  that  if  the  bank 
considers the project viable even at a reduced rate of interest, the initial pricing of loan was 
arbitrary and not risk-based. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Asset-liability mismatch as a constraint for long-term bank finance to infrastructure 
17. A related issue that has been highlighted is the inherent constraint that the banks face in 
funding infrastructure projects – risk of asset-liability mismatches. We all recognize that the 
long  term  nature  of  infrastructure  financing,  mostly  beyond  the  normal  loan  tenor  of 
commercial  banks,  is  bound  to  lead  to  asset-liability  mismatches.  Having  conceded  that,  I 
would argue that Asset-Liability mismatch has not, in any way, been a constraint in financing 
of infrastructure projects thus far and the stress in the infrastructure portfolio in banks has 
been on account of other factors. Let me put across some points. Banks are in the business 
of maturity and risk transformation. Almost all banks rely exclusively on retail deposits to fund 
their  advances  portfolio.  The  individual  retail  deposits  may  not  have  an  average  tenor  of 
more than one year, whereas most of the big advances of the banks are long tenor, in the 
range  of  8–10  years.  While  on  an  individual  basis,  the  retail  deposit  may  be  considered 
volatile,  on  a  portfolio  level,  these  deposits  are  stable,  which  enables  banks’  maturity 
transformation action. Hence, my point is that if, as going concerns, banks can rely on retail 
deposit to fund projects for 8–10 years, they might as well do so for 13–15 years. 
18. As a part of management of their asset-liability mismatches and the interest rate risks, 
the banks can develop long-tenor fixed rate products to reduce their deposit base and also 
develop interbank interest rate swap market for hedging their interest rate risks. It would be 
in  the fitness  of  things,  if  the  public  sector  banks,  which  hold  substantial  rupee  resources, 
inculcate appropriate treasury skills and introduce such products in the market. We cannot 
expect the foreign banks or few of the private sector banks that have little rupee resources to 
develop this market. 
Issues in take out financing 
19. Recognizing the constraints in incremental financing by banks to the infrastructure sector, 
the  banks  have  been  permitted  to  enter  into  take  out  financing  arrangement.  To  augment 
debt  resources  for  financing  infrastructure,  Infrastructure  Debt  Funds  (IDFs)  have  been 
launched to refinance projects after completion of the construction work and stabilization of 
the operations. By refinancing bank loans of existing projects, the IDFs are expected to take 
over a significant volume of the existing bank debt and this will release an equivalent volume 
of fresh lending for infrastructure projects. Three IDFs – one NBFC by ICICI Bank Ltd. and 
two mutual funds by IL&FS and IIFCL have been launched in 2013, of which the first one has 
already started refinancing operations. 
20.  But  a  common  refrain  that  I  get  to  hear  across  various  fora  is  that  take  out  financing 
model is not working successfully. With all due respect to the proponents of this measure, I 
have a fundamental issue with the take out financing model. As we discussed earlier, being 
long-gestation projects, the financiers of infrastructure projects need to pay a lot of attention 
to the project at the nascent stage. Having assumed the risk till the project comes on stream 
and  starts  generating  stable  revenues,  I  don’t  understand  why  a  bank  would  be  willing  to 
trade a good credit risk for the risk of funding another greenfield project! 
21. I would rather wish that the entities such as Infrastructure Debt Funds / IIFCL etc., which 
are set up to provide take out financing, in view of their expertise in assessing, appraising 
and financing infrastructure projects, should assume the initial credit risk in such projects and 
then sell the same to the banks. 
External commercial borrowing (ECB) norms for infrastructure funding 
22.  Under  the  extant  ECB  guidelines,  there  are  several  concessions  given  to  the 
infrastructure  sector  related  to  credit  enhancements,  import  of  capital  goods,  availment  of 
trade credit, etc. RBI has recently taken several measures to boost infrastructure financing, 
especially for the projects in roads and power sector, such as relaxing the ECB norms and 
treating  debt  due  to  lenders  in  PPP  projects  as  secured  finance.  The  definition  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
infrastructure under the extant ECB guidelines is currently being further expanded to bring it 
in line with the Government of India’s harmonized list. This would expand the list to include 
some  of  the  urban  infrastructure  items:  (a)  urban  public  transport  and  (b)  water  and 
sanitation,  which  will  include  (i)  water  supply  pipelines,  (ii)  solid  waste  management,  (iii) 
water  treatment  plants,  (iv)  sewage  projects  (sewage  collection,  treatment  and  disposal 
system), and (v) storm water drainage system. 
23. While I do appreciate the recent measures by GoI and RBI, I wish  to sound a note of 
caution here due to couple of reasons. First and foremost, as finance professionals, we must 
realise  that  in  efficient  markets,  cost  of  borrowing  in  any  currency,  when  adjusted  for 
exchange  rate  differential,  should  be  the  same.  Therefore,  if  one  finds  an  arbitrage 
opportunity, it can only be for a short term. Adjusted for hedge cost, the external borrowing 
cannot  be  cheaper.  Only  way  a  firm  can  potentially  benefit  from  borrowing  in  overseas 
markets is by gambling on the exchange rate and retaining an unhedged forex exposure. It 
is,  therefore,  important  to  conduct  a  cost-benefit  analysis  in  running  an  unhedged/partially 
hedged exposure before accessing external finance. Secondly, infrastructure in general and, 
urban infrastructure in particular, do not generate matching foreign exchange earnings and, 
hence, there is a need to exercise abundant caution while the country is experiencing high 
CAD. 
Acquisition of equity by banks in infrastructure projects 
24. Some of my fellow panellists have also made requests for allowing the lenders to take a 
higher share of equity in the defaulting companies. In this context, it is pertinent to highlight 
that the Banking Regulation Act places a limit on maximum equity stake that a bank can hold 
in any company and the requirement is not without good reason. Banks are supposed to do 
banking business and not run companies. The depositors forego the lure of higher returns in 
the equity markets and place their deposits in banks for safety of their capital and, therefore, 
it is logical that the depositors’ funds should not get channelized into equity through indirect 
means. 
25. Let me now turn to some other aspects of infrastructure development in India and the 
recent initiatives taken by the Government to facilitate the success of infra projects. 
total 
implemented  43  new  projects,  which  attracted 
Public private partnership 
26. The Public-Private Partnership has been actively pursued in India to meet the gaps in the 
provision  of  basic  infrastructure  services.  According  to  a  World  Bank  Report  on  Private 
Participation  in  Infrastructure  (PPI),  India  has  been  the  top  recipient  of  PPI  activity  since 
2006  and  has 
investment  of 
US$20.7 billion in 2011. By end December 2012, there were over 900 PPP projects in the 
infrastructure  sector  with  total  project  cost  (TPC)  of  Rs.5430.45  bn  as  compared  to  over 
600 projects  with  TPC  of  Rs.3330.83  bn  on  March  31,  2010  at  different  stages  of 
implementation, i.e. bidding, construction, and operational. 
27. Global experience indicates that PPPs work well when they combine the efficiency and 
risk  assessment  of  the  private  sector  with  the  public  purpose  of  the  government  sector. 
However,  they  work  poorly  when  they  rely  on  the  efficiency  and  risk  assessment  of  the 
government  sector  and  the  public  purpose  of  the  private  sector.  The  development  finance 
model has to be characterized by good planning, strong commitment of the parties, effective 
monitoring, regulation and enforcement by the government. 
28. The Government has tried to address some major impediments like lack of transparency 
and  accountability  in  procurement  in  order  to  ensure  that  PPP  projects  are  procured  and 
implemented by observing principles of transparency, competitive bid process, affordability, 
and value for money. But, the impact of these efforts on the ground level implementation is 
yet to show. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
29. While there has been a lot of debate around the lack of a vibrant corporate debt market 
and constraints faced by the banking sector in financing infrastructure requirements, it needs 
to be highlighted that there has been an over reliance on debt. The infrastructure companies 
are highly leveraged and the flow of equity in the infrastructure project funding has been very 
minimal. In my view, the ‘Public-Private partnership’ has, in effect, remained a ‘Public only’ 
venture.  Lack  of  equity  investment  in  the  project  means  that  the  promoter-  developer  has 
little ‘skin in the game’ and the motivation for the success of the venture is that much limited. 
Pricing of infrastructure services 
30. A major underlying factor in the success of such partnerships is the pricing aspect. The 
issue of pricing is crucial in view of the political sensitivity, while also simultaneously ensuring 
the viability of the project. Managing the transition from state-subsidized services to market 
based pricing is crucial as the prices cannot be raised suddenly and indiscriminately, but the 
realizations have to be remunerative and based on commercial considerations. Further, as 
the  infrastructure  projects  are  long  duration  projects,  it  is  important  to  have  an  inbuilt 
mechanism  in the  services/pricing  contract for  a  hike  in  pass-through  of  price  hikes  to  the 
end  users  on  account  of  increase  in  input  prices.  I  would  like  to  highlight  a  disquieting 
practice  that  has  come to  characterize  the  usage  of  infrastructure  services.  Very  often  we 
find that VIPs and influential people are allowed to enjoy these facilities free of charge. This 
not only creates a moral hazard, but simultaneously also leads to leakage and distortion of 
the whole pricing structure. If we allow such a situation to prolong, whereby even those who 
can afford to pay the usage charges do not do so, this would eventually degenerate into a 
situation  where  the  society  in  general  would  be  reluctant  to  pay  for  the  use  of  better 
infrastructural  facilities/services. We  must  realize  that  creation  of  world  class  infrastructure 
and  its  sustainable  maintenance  cannot  be  achieved  if  everyone,  at  least  those  who  can 
afford to pay, do not do so. Subsidisation of services, if any, has to be restricted solely to the 
most vulnerable people in the society and that too, in a transparent manner. It is high time 
the society collectively opposed and abolished such feudalistic practices. 
Conclusion 
31.  It  is  a  well  known  fact  that  most  infrastructure  projects  are  stalled  not  because  of 
financing issues, but other administrative and regulatory hurdles. More than half of the bank 
credit to infrastructure goes to the power sector. Notwithstanding some deceleration in recent 
years, bank credit to power sector has been growing at a rate higher than overall bank credit 
to infrastructure. Power projects today are stalled not because of lack of credit but because 
of  lack  of  supply  of  fuel  and  uncertainties  with  regard  to  coal  pricing  and  power  tariffs, 
towards which Government has recently taken some measures. After power, banks have the 
most  exposure  to  roads,  where  projects  are  stuck  because  of  delays  in  land  acquisition, 
environment  and  forest  clearances.  The  sector  which  has  seen  the  maximum  dip  in  bank 
credit within infrastructure is telecom, particularly since January 2012 when 2G licenses were 
cancelled.  Thus,  credit  moderation  to  infrastructure  sector  is  a  consequence  of  sector-
specific issues/bottlenecks. Let me remind that banks are public entities and carry out their 
operations using depositors’ money. It is, therefore, reasonable to expect banks to look for 
viability of projects and the safety of their money before committing to funding new projects. 
32.  Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  for  India  to  return  to  the  higher  growth  trajectory, 
infrastructure problems need to be sorted out with utmost priority. There is a need to make 
infrastructure  projects  commercially  viable, 
through 
continuance of reforms and effective governance on the part of the Government with regard 
to  implementation  of  projects.  Let  us,  however,  not  wait  for  others  to  take  action,  but  we 
ourselves begin to contribute our might in the right earnest. All the stakeholders in this area 
have  to  diligently  work  towards  improving  their  productivity  and  efficiency.  As  regards 
financing, I would like to say that there is no dearth of finance for infrastructure development 
and, especially, for commercially viable projects. However, concomitantly, it is important that 
the  market  sentiment 
improve 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
banks in general and public sector banks in particular, shift to an information based project 
appraisal  system  so  as  to  ensure  that  the  precious  funds  are  not  stuck  in  unproductive 
projects.  Some  other  issues  like  creating  a  mechanism  for  recovery  of  the  cost  through 
appropriate pricing regime, simplification of project clearance by a centralized authority, etc. 
need to be worked upon on a priority basis. 
33. Given the long term nature of infrastructure financing, which is beyond the normal 5–8 
year loan tenors of commercial banks, and the decreasing scope for incremental financing by 
banks, there may be a case for relaxing norms for pension/insurance/provident funds so that 
they  can  fill  in  some  of  the  gap  in  debt  financing.  But  nothing  will  work  if  the  general 
sentiment with regard to progress of infrastructure projects remains bleak. Until and unless 
economic activity revives and various roadblocks to infra-projects get cleared, sentiment is 
likely  to  remain  subdued  for  the  sector,  making  its  financing,  whether  from  banks  or  non-
banks,  equally  difficult.  It  is  in  this  context  that  the  role  of  SBI  Caps,  which  acts  as  an 
intermediary between the project developers and the finance, is very critical. As the country’s 
leading  project  advisor  in  the  infrastructure  sector,  SBI  Caps  has  to  adhere  to  the  highest 
standards  in  project  appraisal  and  thus,  help  in  recreating  a  positive  atmosphere  for 
investment  in  the  country’s  infrastructure  sector.  I  hope  that  the  ideas  and  suggestions 
generated in this Conclave through active participation of various stakeholders including the 
Government,  Planning  Commission,  International  Financiers  like  ADB  and  IFC,  Corporate 
sector  and  the  banks,  would  go  a  long  way  in  addressing  the  roadblocks  that  the  sector 
faces. I firmly believe that once these barriers are removed, the pall of gloom that envelopes 
the sector would be lifted and investment in the sector will start flowing back. 
I  once  again  thank  SBI Caps for giving me  this opportunity  to  share  my  thoughts  with  the 
delegates. 
Thank You! 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 