Yves Mersch: “Built to last” – the new euro area framework 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Barclays Research Conference, London, 17 May 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The building we are in was bought by the Drapers’ Company from King Henry VIII in 1543. It 
has  lived  through  turbulent  times,  from  fires  to  conflicts  –  and,  I  should  also  say,  various 
financial crises. But Drapers’ Hall has always recovered from the calamities it has faced. It 
has been rebuilt, renovated, enlarged and embellished. Thus, it was built to last – but has 
changed over the centuries. Today, I’d like to speak about a quite different building: the “new 
euro area framework”. 
The euro area has been facing insufficiencies on several fronts, all at the same time. Let me 
be  blunt:  it  has  had  governance  shortcomings,  stretched  states,  fragile  banks,  shrinking 
economies,  sinking  confidence  in  institutions  and  doubts  about  its  integrity.  Each  of  these 
difficulties  has  exacerbated  the  others;  it  has  been  a  vicious  circle.  The  crisis  did  not 
originate in the euro area, nor is it limited to it. But inside the euro area it has inflicted severe 
losses and pain, particularly on the younger generation. 
Yet, in the euro area an unsuspected amount of repair is under way. The threat of a break-up 
has vanished since last summer. A new political economy is within reach. The foundations of 
a virtuous circle are already here. My message today is that the euro area is being rebuilt to 
last. Its foundations are being strengthened and new pillars and floors are being added. The 
euro area will remain both viable and beneficial to its citizens. 
In the light of these testing circumstances, I would like to give some tentative answers – to 
four questions: Where do we stand? What are the strengths of the euro area? What’s next? 
What remains to be done? I will then offer some final remarks, and answer your questions. 
Where do we stand? 
The European Central Bank has been in “crisis mode” for almost six years. The challenges 
for us have escalated in various stages. Allow me to recall them very briefly. 
• 
The first stage was the financial turmoil that erupted in August 2007 when the US sub-
prime  mortgage  crisis  started  to  unravel.1  Globally,  counterparty  risks  rose  and 
confidence  among  market  participants  plummeted.  This  led  to  a  drying-up  of 
liquidity, and a sharp increase in risk premia. 
The second stage of the crisis started in September 2008 after Lehman collapsed. 
Money markets froze, financial losses soared, bank deleveraging accelerated, and 
financial stress spilled over to the real economy. Trade and growth were hit hard. 
The  ensuing  global  financial  crisis  gave  rise  to  the  great  recession,  which  affected 
European countries disproportionately due to their high degree of openness. 
The even more serious third stage came in May 2010 when the euro area sovereign 
debt crisis erupted in Greece and spread to other countries. 
  What  happened?  After  the  launch  of  the  euro,  various  cracks  in  the  currency  edifice 
emerged. Public finances were weak in several euro area countries; macro imbalances were 
                                                
1   For a chronology of the crisis see also Drudi, Durre and Mongelli (2012) “The interplay of economic reforms 
the  euro  area”,  ECB  Working  Paper  No.  1467  at 
the  case  of 
and  monetary  policy: 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1467.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
persistent in others. Some countries experienced a boom in housing and construction and 
productivity growth was slow in others. The triggering event of the turmoil, on the other side 
of  the  Atlantic  combined  with  the  disappearance  of  “abundant  money”  exposed  and 
deepened those fault lines. Several European economies became steadily weaker. 
The underlying reasons were several: there were shortcomings in governance (both national 
and supranational), flaws in the design of the euro area, misjudgements by regulators and 
supervisors, and also insufficient scrutiny by financial market participants as well as by credit 
rating agencies. They did not sufficiently differentiate between borrowers. And I should not 
omit from this list the many economists who failed to see the systemic risks building up. The 
ensuing  dysfunctional  policy  debate  and  the  discordant  national  responses  were  also 
harmful. Understandably, national disaffection rose, as did scepticism about the euro area2 – 
this is a phenomenon I know you are rather familiar with. 
Various  doom-loops  followed.  The  fates  of  governments  and  banks  became  ever  more 
intertwined.  Sovereigns  had  to  recapitalise  impaired  domestic  banks  and  support  feeble 
domestic  economies.  In  doing  so,  they  accumulated  extra  debt.  Perversely,  even  sound 
banks  have  been  affected  by  the  weakness  of  their  home  governments  and  domestic 
economies.  Then,  lower  credit  ratings  and  higher  interest  spreads  of  both  banks  and 
sovereigns pulled each other further down. This hurt the real economy and started a vicious 
circle that has been very difficult to stop and reverse.3 
Banks across the euro area are now deleveraging and recapitalising, and the flow of credit is 
still  hampered  in  several  countries,  mainly  those  in  which  households  and  firms  are  also 
trying to deleverage, while budget consolidation is under way. The functioning of the money 
market  is  severely  impaired,  credit  is  squeezed  and  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy is clogged. 
The sovereign debt crisis came to a climax in mid-2012 when the risk of break-up seemed 
acute. Investors began shifting deposits away from banks in stressed jurisdictions, often to 
banks in countries where conditions were calmer. The deposit base fell in stressed countries. 
Correspondingly loan growth deviated greatly across the euro area. Small and medium-sized 
enterprises were, and still are, affected the most. 
What  has  the  ECB  done?  Over  the  last  six  years  it  has  eased  the  credit  squeeze,  fought 
back  against  the  economic  slowdown,  and  countered  financial  fragmentation  by  slashing 
interest rates, flooding the banking sector with liquidity and lending widely. It took large scale 
conventional  monetary  policy  measures  to  prevent  deflation.  Its  unconventional  measures 
prevented a meltdown of the financial system and aimed to restore the impaired transmission 
of monetary policy. Yet, credit flows remain weak and growth is still anaemic. 
To sum up where we stand: the sovereign debt crises of the euro area is a multi-layered 
affair:  economic  and  financial  imbalances  plus  failings  of  governance  and  flaws  in 
institutional  design,  plus  an  erosion  of  trust  and  confidence.  It’s  an  exceptionally  complex 
situation.  Five  euro  area  countries  are  now  undertaking  EU/IMF  adjustment  programmes, 
while a few others are addressing imbalances outside a programme. 
                                                
2  
]Mongelli (2013) “The mutating euro area crisis: is the balance between “sceptics” and “advocates” shifting?”, 
ECB Occasional Paper No. 144, at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbocp144.pdf 
3   See  also:  Shambaugh,  J.C.  (2012),  “The  Euro’s  Three  Crises”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity, 
Spring. And Schoenmaker, D. (2011), “The financial trilemma”, Economic Letters, 111 (2011), pp. 57–59. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What are the strengths? 
Despite the depth of the crisis, the exceptional “flow and stock adjustments” under way, and 
ongoing  financial  market  tensions,  there  are  still  some  strong  components  supporting  the 
building of the new euro area framework and holding things together. 
The first strength is the resilience of the single market, which has steadily transformed the 
now deeply interconnected euro area economies. Companies and banks have a European 
perspective and reach. We are each other’s stakeholders. Economic integration is a diffuse 
process. It is the true engine of European integration and is generating largely benign effects. 
The single market represents the intrinsic value of the euro area. It is a common good. It is 
an  asset  shared  by  all  its  citizens  –  a  fact  which  is  not  given  enough  recognition  as  a 
stabiliser during these difficult times. 
The second strength lies in the solidity of our financial infrastructures: they have withstood 
the  full  force  of  the  crisis.  The  Trans-European  Automated  Real-Time  Gross  Settlement 
Express Transfer (TARGET2), has enabled money market access throughout the crisis and 
for  all  countries: the  cumulated  imbalances  are  now  steadily  receding. In  1998  there  were 
18 large-value  payment  systems:  that  number  fell  to  six  in  1999  and  now  there  are  two, 
which means that both efficiency and financial stability have been enhanced. Central clearing 
counterparties (CCPs) for securities and derivatives declined from 13 in 1999 to nine in 2012. 
This entails greater efficiency gains by pooling activities. And more is coming. In 2008, the 
Single  Euro  Payments  Area  started  to  take  effect  due  to  time-lags.  And  the  securities 
settlement  systems  will  change  radically  once  TARGET2-Securities  becomes  operational. 
This project is fully on track. 
The  third  strength  lies  in  the  widespread  acceptance  of  the  need  for  adjustments  and 
reforms in all dimensions of the crisis. The political authorities have taken action. They are 
already overhauling the political economy of the euro area, and establishing new governance 
to  restore  fiscal  sustainability  and  prevent  and  correct  macroeconomic  imbalances.  The 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  has  been  tightened  up  by  the  so-called  “six-pack”  of  economic 
governance measures, including the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP), and they 
in  turn  have  been  complemented  by  the  “two-pack”.  Moreover,  euro  area  countries  are 
summoning up the courage to change – although it is painful in some regions. To quote Jean 
Monnet, one of the founding fathers of the European Union: “People will only accept changes 
under  the  pressure  of  necessity.”  Indeed,  change  is  under  way  in  Europe.  And  the 
impressive political determination to reform together is not stopping at the national level. 
Also a fourth strength is that as a result of the crisis, a “crisis management and resolution 
framework” has emerged at the European level– and it is  working. The initial stage was a 
fiscal  backstop,  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility,  and  then  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism. Confidence is slowly returning to both financial markets and high streets, even if 
growth  and  job  prospects  remain  weak  –  the  latter  two  being  lagging  indicators  of  the 
recovery under way. All this shows that European countries can turn themselves around. 
To  sum  up  the  strengths:  the  “repair  work”  on  the  euro  area  foundations  is  under  way. 
Imbalances are slowly receding. Also there is the wide international circulation and relative 
strength of the euro as well as a stable demand for the euro as a reserve currency. 
Yet, we are aware that deep reforms throughout the new framework are only as effective as 
they are completed, transposed, well explained, understood, adhered to, and given the time 
to display their effects. We know that we are not completely out of the woods. 
So what’s next? 
With the establishment of the ECB in June 1998 and the launch of the euro on 1 January 
1999 monetary policy was centralised. Responsibility for the euro was entrusted to a strong 
and independent central bank. The ECB has fulfilled its primary objective of price stability. 
Fiscal policy, economic policies and supervision, however, have remained at national level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
As  this  architecture  has  proved  to  be  flawed,  the  respective  Presidents  of  the  European 
Council  (Herman  Van  Rompuy),  the  European  Commission  (José  Manuel  Barroso),  the 
Eurogroup (then Jean-Claude Juncker) and the ECB (Mario Draghi) drew up what is known 
as the “Four Presidents’ Report”. It advocates the completion of monetary union by way of an 
additional “four unions”. 
These “four unions” are envisaged to mesh with each other, like cogwheels. The spin of one 
sets  the  others  in  motion.  Conversely,  when  the  momentum  of  one  decreases  the  others 
follow suit. The banking union, the fiscal union, the economic union, and the political union4 
can transmit and reinforce the dynamics of European integration. 
Let  me  elaborate  on  some  key  features  of  the  banking  union  –  a  project  with  which  I  am 
closely associated. The fragmentation of the banking system along national lines has posed 
a  direct  threat  to  the  integrity  of  the  single  currency.  We  need  to  break  the  doom-loop 
between sovereigns and banks, restore the confidence of depositors and investors – in fact 
rebuild  trust  in  the  whole  financial  system  –  as  well  as  ease  the  reintegration  of  financial 
markets. The banking union will help to restore the proper transmission of monetary policy 
and relieve the ECB of some of the tasks undertaken during the crisis. Its importance and 
urgency cannot be overemphasised. 
The  banking  union  comprises  two  main  parts.  One  is  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM),  which  is  scheduled  to  start  operating  at  the  ECB  in  Frankfurt,  at  the  earliest 
12 months  after  the  adoption  of  the  regulation.  The  second  part  is  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism  (SRM),  which  is  a  Siamese  twin.  The  ECB  cannot  exercise  this  task  as  it  will 
undertake the analytical part of supervision. A separate authority is needed; perhaps one that 
is  attached  to  the  ESM,  for  the  resolution  task  as  it  implies  a  distributional  impact  which 
belongs to the Executive prerogative. Still, close cooperation is warranted with the SSM and 
DG Competition. 
What  is  also  clear  is  that  the  resolution  body  needs  to  operate  at  the  same  level  as  the 
supervisor,  i.e.  the  European  level.  This  becomes  even  more  obvious  amid  the  potential 
need to deal with cross-border operating banks. 
The SSM  will be a single supervisor for all banks established in the euro area, plus those 
banks established in the EU countries which have entered into a close cooperation with the 
ECB. So it will have a truly European focus. 
It  should  create  a  level  playing  field  for  the  European  banking  industry  and  remove  any 
national biases or supervisory forbearance, and prevent the hiding of bad assets – or even 
leniency – towards so-called “national champions”, a phenomenon that might have become 
more acute during the crisis. It is a myth that such champions were in the interests either of 
domestic  economies  or of  national taxpayers.  But  the  SSM  will  go  well  beyond  that:  it  will 
result in the elimination of asset and liability matching on a national level that has done so 
much harm. 
How will the Single Supervisory Mechanism function in practice? There will be a two-
tier system of banks. 
The  banks  considered  to  be  systemically  important,  about  130  of  them,  will  fall  under  the 
direct  supervision  of  the  ECB.  But  all  other  banks,  while  remaining  under  national 
supervision,  will  not  be  excluded  from  the  ECB’s  supervisory  reach.  In  fact,  national 
authorities will have to abide by ECB regulations, guidelines and general instructions. Hence, 
they will be subject to the ECB’s broad oversight mandate. 
                                                
4   Four Presidents” of the European Council, European Commission, Eurogroup and the ECB. European Council 
(2012),  “Towards  a  Genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”,  June  http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/ 
cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/131201.pdf 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Yet the boundaries between the two tiers can also be adjusted if the need arises5 The ECB 
may decide at any time to exercise direct supervision over any other credit institutions. This 
will ensure the consistent application of supervisory standards as well as adherence to the 
guidelines and instructions issued by the ECB. 
The  ECB  will  be  responsible  for  the functioning of  the  SSM.  In  practice,  the  ECB  will  rely 
heavily  on  existing  national  supervisors:  their  expertise  and  “proximity”  to  the  supervised 
banks  are  essential  for  the  SSM  to  be  effective.  No  domestic  aspect  or  concern  must  be 
overlooked. Even in the case of the systemic banks that will be directly supervised by the 
ECB, national supervisors will still be involved in on-site inspections. In fact, there will be joint 
supervisory teams. 
The  assignment  of  supervisory  responsibilities  to  central  banks  mirrors  the  prevailing 
consensus  among  experts  and  academics6.  There  are  many  synergies  between  monetary 
policy and banking supervision, and in our case there are benefits from sharing micro and 
macro-information  on  monetary  policy,  bank  supervision,  and  the  oversight  of  payment 
systems. 
Moreover, an important lesson from the crisis is that there can be no price stability without 
financial stability. Most of the time, monetary policy and financial stability measures work in 
harmony. Still, there are concerns. There are several things we need to do, notably, steer 
clear of the risks, as the ECB will be the prime liquidity provider for these banks; establish 
clear  safeguards  against  any  potential  conflicts  of  interest  between  the  various  ECB 
functions  as  they  could  give  rise  to  reputational  risks.  And  at  the  same  time  we  need  to 
reduce costs. 
The SSM also represents a huge logistical challenge for the ECB. We are working hard on 
this  and  are  well  aware  that  the  rewards  may  be  considerable.  It  is  requiring  a  lot  of 
preparation at many levels including: 
• 
selecting  highly  skilled  staff  –  many  experts  are  already  coming  from  national 
supervisory bodies; 
drawing  up  the  final  list  of  systemically  important  banks  that  will  be  directly 
supervised; 
harmonising  reporting  requirements;  working  out  procedures  that  will  govern  the 
SSM’s relationship with national supervisors; and 
preparing to review the quality of banks' assets, including legacy assets. 
• 
Let me add on the last point: Such a comprehensive assessment is needed before the SSM 
becomes  operational.  This  could  be  organised  in  a  coordinated  endeavour  where  the 
workload is shared between by the centre and the national authorities. Calling upon external 
experts, under the strict control of the SSM, will increase the credibility of the balance sheet 
exercise because of the impartiality of third parties. Moreover, their expertise in certain areas 
will add great value. The scope of their involvement might not extent the significant banks, 
however. 
First coordination has already started with the European Banking Authority (EBA) which  in 
the  past  looked  upon  the  resilience  of  banks  under  stress  scenarios.  The  SSM  could 
                                                  
5   See  also  “The  Banking  Union  –  a  European  perspective:  reasons,  benefits  and  challenges  of  the  Banking 
Union”,  a  speech  that  I  delivered  at  the  seminar  “Auf  dem  Weg  zu  mehr  Stabilität  –  Ein  Dialog  über  die 
Ausgestaltung  der  Bankenunion  zwischen  Wissenschaft  und  Praxis”  organised  by  Europolis  and 
Wirtschaftswoche, in Berlin on 5 April 2013. 
International institutions and fora such as the International Monetary Fund or the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision  (in  its  Core  principles  for  effective  banking  supervision)  clearly  stress  the  advantages  of  an 
independent supervisor. 
6  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
undertake the asset quality review in the third quarter of this year until the first quarter of next 
year, and then in close cooperation with the EBA, conduct a stress test. This along with the 
balance  sheet  assessment  will  be  a  major  component  of  the  comprehensive  assessment. 
The outcomes of the balance sheet assessment will also be an important input for the stress 
tests. The combined results of both exercises could be published by mid-2014, just before 
the SSM is scheduled to become operational. 
As always in life, there is no such thing as a free lunch. The question arises: who will pay for 
financial stability and, above all, who will pay in the event of a banking resolution? There are 
two types of “costs”: operating costs incurred in normal times and losses sustained in times 
of  crisis.  As  for  the  operating  costs,  European  supervision  will  be  financed  by  fees  to  be 
levied  on  banks.  However,  there  will  be  efficiency  gains  from  avoiding  the  duplication  of 
services (national and European), so additional cost burdens for the financial industry will be 
contained. 
What happens if a viable bank lacks capital? Such a bank, wherever it is based in the euro 
area, should first try to raise fresh capital from its shareholders or in the market. If it is unable 
to  do  so  –  for  example  due  to  unfavourable  market  conditions  –  fresh  funding  should  be 
provided from a European recovery and resolution fund that is financed by all banks. 
Such a fund should also help with resolution, for instance, to capitalise a bridge bank that is 
later sold on the market. Bailing-in of stakeholders will also play an increasing role to cover 
the cost of resolution. During the crisis we have seen the full spectre from mainly bailing-out 
banks with taxpayers’ money and bailing-in even depositors. A reliable framework is needed 
to  guide  investors  and  savers.  Therefore,  the  pecking  order  of  a  broad  scope  of  bail-in 
instruments needs to be defined. The list of exclusion should be limited. The Bank Recovery 
and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  currently  being  negotiated  should  clarify  in  particular  the 
positioning  of  unsecured  depositors  in  the  cascade.  It  is  of  crucial  importance  that  an 
agreement on the BRRD is reached in a timely manner to have a resolution and recovery 
framework in place before the SSM starts operating. 
Only  as  a  last  resort  should  rescue funds  be temporarily  drawn  from the  ESM.  To  ensure 
fiscal neutrality, a loan to the European recovery and resolution fund should then be repaid 
ex post via levies on viable banks, and of course, the proceeds from the re-privatisation. 
Another rationale for the SRM as a separate entity is that a supervisor cannot give objective 
verdicts on the viability of banks if then these banks can only be closed in a disorderly way. 
That, in turn, could trigger contagion and endanger financial stability. In other words, if banks 
cannot be resolved in a disciplined manner – known in advance and agreed upon – we could 
drift into supervisory forbearance, evergreening and zombification of companies as well as 
the banks themselves. 
Hence, a resolution mechanism is essential for repairing financial markets. The capacity of 
the  banking  sector  to  absorb  risks  will  increase,  which  is  currently  the  bottleneck  of  loan 
provision to the real economy. 
To  sum  up  what’s  next:  the  banking  union  consisting  of  the  SSM  and  the  SRM  will 
contribute to financial soundness, stability and resilience. All this would help to restore the 
proper  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  The  current  very  accommodative  monetary  policy 
stance  could  reach  those  it  needs  to  reach  unhampered.  Correspondingly,  the  need  for 
unconventional measures would diminish rather than increase. A single supervisor without a 
resolution  counterpart,  however,  would  push  the  central  bank  into  ever more risk-taking  to 
ensure financial stability, thus even threatening the independence of monetary policy. 
What remains to be done? 
The crisis has been – and still is – a wake-up call for the euro area. Initially, some stressed 
countries were largely in denial about the need to tackle their imbalances. Precious time was 
wasted, and that exacerbated the doom-loops. Then, things started turning around in mid-
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2010. A new political economy is within reach. But in the longer-term, what else do we need 
for the viability and prosperity of the euro area? 
We need  to firm  up the  progress  on  the fiscal union,  the  political  union  and  the  economic 
union. Several elements of the fiscal union are ready. I listed them a few minutes ago: they 
need to be transposed into national law, and adhered to at every level of government (i.e., 
national, regional, provincial and so on). 
Concerning “genuine political union”, our institutions also need to adjust to the higher level of 
integration  that  constitutes  the  monetary  union.  While  on  the  intergovernmental  EU  wide 
level the Council has a counterpart on the euro area level, namely the euro group and the 
Euro Working Group, the executive arm of the supranational EU level, the Commission, and 
the legislator, the EU parliament, still lack an equivalent for the euro area. 
Yet, the principal building ground of the new euro area framework is the economic union. In 
the  long  term,  we  need  euro  area  countries  to  become  more flexible,  open  and  to  remain 
relatively synchronised. This would increase shock absorption, improve resource allocation, 
remedy  the  current  heterogeneities,  harmonise  the  transmission  of  monetary  policies,  and 
boost  growth  potential,  thus  enhancing  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  This 
implies a need for deep changes in our societies. 
Allow me to point out that over the last few years the ECB has not only been a guardian of 
stability  and  among  the  most  interested  observers  of  the  various  deficit  and  imbalances 
procedures, but we have also raised awareness of the need for profound transformations in 
our political economy and in our societies. We have been advocates of change. In my view, 
this is our most important unconventional measure, but it will never be able to replace 
the self-responsibility of countries. 
In  one  respect,  solving  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  of  the  euro  area  remains  a  supremely 
national  affair:  namely,  finding  a  consensus  on,  and  domestic  support  for,  new  social 
contracts among all national constituencies. The new political economy of the euro area and 
the  “four  unions”,  i.e.,  what  we  are  calling  the  new  euro  area  framework,  can  provide  a 
sheltered environment for reforms and sustainable domestic social contracts. 
In  most  of  the  stressed  euro  area  countries  this  still  requires  tough  choices  across  the 
generations and over time: e.g. education versus pension entitlements, infrastructure versus 
healthcare,  research  and  development  versus  defence,  and  so  on.  Strengthening  of  tax 
administrations and treasury systems, expenditure control, privatisation will also be crucial. 
Reducing the costs of bureaucracy will matter more than ever across the euro area. There 
are varying needs for true innovation clusters à-la-Silicon Valley, as well as investments in 
scientific  and  technical  education,  research  and  development,  encouragement  of  “angel 
investments”,  and  grassroots  and  sustainable  banking.  Labour  markets  need  to  become 
inclusive  and  fair  in  every  country,  while  encouraging  labour  mobility,  in  particular  in  a 
monetary union. Greater competitiveness and sustainable growth of the whole euro area will 
then follow. 
To  sum  up  what  still  needs  to  be  done:  each  euro  area  country  needs  to  find  its  own 
trade-offs and support from its national constituencies. There might not be a single approach 
fitting all. No “pact” can force such transformation through, and no monetary policy measure 
–  however  unconventional  –  can  replace  it.  Such  “holistic”  national  therapies  are 
inescapable: without them, no change in the euro area’s political economy and governance, 
or financing facility can be sustainable. 
The tensions and inequalities are clear for everyone to see: we can no longer postpone what 
should already have been addressed. The new euro area framework is an opportunity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Some final remarks 
All  currency  unions  evolve  in  their  early  years.  Their  institutions  adapt  to  changing 
circumstances, as we saw for example in the US, and several federal states in Europe and 
even  in  the  UK.  The  idea  of  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  has  evolved 
over decades. The euro area envisaged in the Werner Report of 1970 was ahead of its time, 
but  planted  important  seeds.  The  Maastricht  Treaty  was  a  milestone  and  the  most  that 
Europe could have achieved 20–25 years ago, but that was not enough. There were various 
flaws  in  EMU’s  design  and  governance.  In  retrospect,  systemic  risks  were  partly 
endogenous. We have learnt the hard way from our errors, and fortunately there are still a lot 
of strengths in Europe/euro area. 
The euro – and thus price stability and the future banking union – can provide a shield from 
outside  shocks,  secure  the  benefits  of  a  credible  world  currency,  and  contribute  to 
strengthening  the  single  market  and  fostering  internal  stability.  This  structure  would  have 
been unimaginable only five or six years ago: yet it might not suffice unless it is accompanied 
by national reforms and new social contracts that in some cases have been postponed for 
decades. The new euro area framework is being rebuilt to be viable and to last. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
