Hiroshi Nakaso: Basic idea underlying “Quantitative and qualitative 
easing” 
Speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the International 
Conference,  organised  by  the  Economic  and  Social  Research  Institute,  Cabinet  Office, 
Government of Japan, Tokyo, 31 May 2013. 
 Introduction  
Thank  you  for  giving  me  an  opportunity  today  to  speak  at  the  international  conference 
organized  by  the  Economic  and  Social  Research  Institute,  the  Cabinet  Office,  the 
Government of Japan.  
Introduction of “quantitative and qualitative monetary easing”  
I. 
Japan’s economy has been in a state of deflation for nearly 15 years. During the period, the 
economy  has  been  trapped  in  a  vicious  cycle.  Amid  the  continued  decline  in  prices, 
corporate  profits  and  wages  were  squeezed.  Those  induced  business  fixed  investment, 
private consumption, and other economic activity to plunge. As a result, prices fell again. For 
Japan’s economy to get out of the vicious cycle and recover sustainably, it is critical first to 
overcome  deflation,  thereby  turning  the  behavior  of  economic  entities,  such  as  firms  and 
households, positive. In that regard, the biggest challenge Japan’s economy is faced with is 
to overcome deflation promptly. The Bank of Japan recognizes that its role is critical.  
With such recognition, the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing at 
the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  at  the  beginning  of  April.  It  aims  to  achieve  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  consumer  price 
index  at  the  earliest  possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years.  With  a view  to 
pursuing  quantitative  monetary  easing,  the  main  operating  target  for  money  market 
operations was changed to the monetary base. On that basis, the monetary base and the 
Bank’s  outstanding  amount  of  JGB  and  ETF  holdings  will  be  doubled  in  two  years.  The 
average  remaining  maturity  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases  has  been  extended  more  than 
twice  as  long.  The  policy  clearly  differentiates  itself  from  the  gradualism  or  incremental 
approach adopted in the past. Besides, the Bank is committed to continuing with quantitative 
and  qualitative  monetary  easing,  aiming  to  achieve  the  2  percent  price  stability  target,  as 
long as it is necessary in maintaining that target in a stable manner.  
As quantitative and qualitative monetary easing requires a massive purchase of JGBs, we 
need to conduct purchases while monitoring the effects in the bond market. After quantitative 
and qualitative monetary easing was introduced and in the process of the market digesting 
its contents, there have been rises in the volatility of government bond yields. The Bank has 
been having close dialogue more than ever with market participants and taking firm action, 
including an adjustment of the “parameters” of the JGB purchase operations. Yesterday, the 
Bank released the outline of the outright purchases of JGBs for the time being. Specifically, it 
decided to increase the frequency of JGB purchases. While the amount to be purchased was 
left  at  approximately  7+  trillion  yen per  month  in  principle, it  also  decided  to  conduct  such 
purchases in a flexible manner by taking account of market conditions in order to ensure that 
the  effects  of  monetary  policy  permeate  the  economy.  The  Bank  expects  that  these 
measures  will  lead  to  the  stable  formation  of  long-term  interest  rates  by  suppressing 
excessive rise in interest rates and heightened volatility.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Outlook for economic activity and prices and the importance of expectations  
II. 
Let me next explain how the Bank considers economic activity and prices will develop under 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. I will explain in line with the baseline scenario 
of the “Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices” released by the Bank at end-April.  
First, the real economy. Japan’s economy has started picking up. As for the outlook, Japan’s 
economy is expected to return to the moderate recovery path around the middle of the year. 
On the back of that, domestic demand is expected to remain resilient and growth rates of 
overseas economies will gradually pick up. Thereafter, the economy will be influenced by a 
last  minute  surge  in  demand  and  its  reversal  decline  at  two  scheduled  consumption  tax 
hikes. Despite that, with a virtuous cycle of production, income, and spending expected to be 
maintained,  the  economy  is  likely  to  continue  growing  above  the  potential  growth  rate  of 
around 0.5 percent as a trend. Let me quote specific figures from the median of the Policy 
Board  members’  forecasts.  The  growth  rate  is  projected  to  be  2.9  percent  for  fiscal  2013, 
1.4 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.6 percent for fiscal 2015. On such growth rate projection, 
the output gap, which illustrates aggregate supply and demand balance, will gradually turn 
positive  from  the  current  level  of  about  negative  2  percent.  It  will  further  widen  to  about 
2 percent in the latter half of the projection period up to fiscal 2015.  
As  for  prices,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (for  all  items 
excluding  fresh  food)  has  been  negative.  Based  on  the  economic  projection  I  have  just 
mentioned, it is expected to be on an uptrend. Main factors behind that are an improvement 
in  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  and  a  rise  in  the  expected  rate  of  inflation.  It  is 
likely  to  reach  the  “price  stability  target”  of  about  2  percent  through  the  latter  half  of  the 
projection  period  up  to  fiscal  2015.  Specifically,  the  median  of  Policy  Board  members’ 
forecasts  was  0.7  percent  for  fiscal  2013,  1.4  percent  for  fiscal  2014,  and  1.9  percent  for 
fiscal 2015.  
The  Bank’s  clear  commitment  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  and  quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing that underpins the commitment are expected to lead to a rise in 
prices through three routes. First, an improvement in aggregate supply and demand balance. 
When growth beyond the potential growth rate is achieved, aggregate supply and demand 
balance will improve and the positive output gap will widen. Second, a rise in the medium- to 
long-term expected rate of inflation. The expected rate of inflation will be on an uptrend under 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and will gradually converge on the price stability 
target  of  about  2  percent.  Third,  an  increase  in  import  prices.  Foreign  exchange  rate 
developments  will  put  upward  pressure  on  those  prices  for  the  time  being.  And  on  the 
assumption that international commodity prices will be on a moderate uptrend in tandem with 
the growth of the global economy, import prices are likely to continue rising.  
Of the three, the important key to achieving the price stability target under the current policy 
is the second route, namely, to raise the medium- to long-term expected rate of inflation. Let 
me  explain  the  reason  by  using  the  so-called  Phillips  curve,  which  shows  the  relationship 
between aggregate supply and demand balance and the inflation rate. As mentioned, when 
growth beyond the potential growth rate is achieved, the positive output gap widens. As the 
gap  widens,  the  inflation  rate  will  rise  along  the  positive  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve.  As 
deflation has continued for nearly  15 years, the Phillips curve itself has shifted downward. 
And  its  slope  has  become  moderate,  due  partly  to  a  decline  in  firms’  pricing  power  amid 
globalization.  Given  such  shape  of  the  current  Phillips  curve,  the  2 percent  price  stability 
target cannot be achieved only by achieving a 2 percent positive output gap. One reason for 
the  difference  in  the  outlook  for  prices  between  the  Bank  and  private  institutions might  be 
that many private institutions have based their outlook on the Phillips curve during the period 
of deflation. Therefore, to achieve the 2 percent price stability target at the earliest possible 
time, the Phillips curve needs to be shifted upward by an increase in the expected rate of 
inflation. Namely, it is necessary not only to improve aggregate supply and demand balance 
but  also  to  firmly  raise  the  expected  rate  of  inflation  by  significantly  changing  “deflationary 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
expectations”  of  economic  agents,  such  as  firms  and  households.  A  combination  of  those 
two will lead to the achievement of the price stability target at the earliest possible time.  
The  Bank  made  a  clear  commitment  to  achieve  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  at  the 
earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. As a means of underpinning 
the  commitment,  the  Bank  has  embarked  on  a  new  monetary  easing  policy,  that  is, 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. We believe that the Bank’s strong commitment 
and decisive actions will significantly change the expectations among firms and households. 
Looking  at  the  financial  markets,  market  expectations  appear  to  have  started  changing. 
Looking  also  at  indicators  that  show  the  expected  rate  of  inflation  of  the  market  and 
economic entities, some have suggested an increase. Positive moves have started to take 
place, driven by the Bank’s quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. In further pursuing 
the  policy,  we  expect  such  moves  to  spread  to  firms  and  households,  and  deflationary 
expectations  to  be  reversed.  Those  firms  and  households  released  from  deflationary 
expectations  are  expected  to  make  active  investment  and  consumption  by  fully  utilizing 
accommodative  financial  conditions.  Such  positive  economic  activity  and  a  change  in 
expectations will induce an improvement in the real economy and a rise in the expected rate 
of inflation, paving the way to the achievement of the 2 percent price stability target.  
Final remarks  
The  government  has  set  its  economic  policy  with  a  combination  of  three-pronged  strategy 
(three arrows). Namely, bold monetary easing, flexible fiscal policy, and a growth strategy to 
promote private investment. As for the first arrow of bold monetary easing, the Bank, aiming 
to  achieve  the  price  stability  target,  has  introduced  a  new  monetary  easing  policy  of 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. Naturally, in meeting our price stability target, 
we do not want to see only consumer prices climbing to 2 percent. The price stability target 
we aim at should be achieved in a virtuous cycle in which the real economy improves in a 
balanced  manner,  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  corporate  profits,  employment,  and 
wages. If the government can effectively deliver two other arrows and create real demand, 
that would underpin the virtuous cycle. It would enable the Bank to achieve the price stability 
target  more  smoothly.  The  government  has  already  started  various  initiatives,  and  I  have 
high hopes for more to follow.  
At the same time, to continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, it needs to 
be recognized by the public that the Bank’s purchase of JGBs is carried out solely to achieve 
the  price  stability  target  and  not  in  any  way  to  finance  the  fiscal  deficit.  To  that  end,  it  is 
critical to maintain fiscal credibility. The government and the Bank released a joint statement 
in January. The government clearly stated that it would steadily promote measures aimed at 
establishing  a  sustainable  fiscal  structure  with  a  view  to  ensuring  the  credibility  of  fiscal 
management. We strongly expect the government to move on that front.  
The  Bank  of  Japan  Act  stipulates  that  the  principle  of  monetary  policy  conduct  should  “be 
aimed  at  achieving  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound  development  of  the 
national  economy.”  Overcoming  the  longstanding  challenge  of  deflation  and  achieving 
sustainable  growth  with  price  stability  conform  with  the  principle.  Japan’s  economy  has 
started  picking  up,  and  now  is  a  great  opportunity  to  overcome  the  challenge.  I  believe 
seizing the opportunity is our manifest mission.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
