Duvvuri Subbarao: India’s macroeconomic challenges – some Reserve 
Bank perspectives 
Text  of  the  Fifth  I.G.  Patel  Memorial  Lecture  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the 
Reserve Bank of India, at the London School of Economics, London, 13 March 2013. 
 First of all many thanks to the London School of Economics for inviting me to deliver the fifth I.G. Patel Memorial 
Lecture. It is an honour to which I attach immense value. 
Dr. I.G. Patel 
2. Dr. I.G. Patel represents a special bond between our two institutions – the Reserve Bank 
which  I  represent  and  the  LSE  where  this  lecture  is  instituted.  Dr.  Patel  led  both  these 
institutions  with  great  dignity  and  distinction,  and  is  loved  and  respected  by  both  our 
institutions. 
3.  Because  the  occasion  demands  it,  I  must  repeat  what  I  said  at  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
Platinum Jubilee celebrations in 2010. 
4.  Those  of  you  who  have  an  interest  in  the  history  of  science  would  know  that  Sir  Isaac 
Newton was known, among other things, also for his intellectual arrogance. When his friend 
and  rival,  Robert  Hooke  wrote  to  him,  lauding  his  theory  of  gravity,  Newton,  for  all  his 
arrogance, wrote back with uncharacteristic humility: 
“If  I  have  been  able  to  see  a  little  farther  than  others,  it  is  because  I  am  standing  on  the 
shoulders of giants.” 
5. That is a statement I can relate to. As the Governor of the Reserve Bank in these exciting 
times, I owe an intellectual debt of gratitude to the extraordinary men who led the Reserve 
Bank through several challenges, and made a mark in the economic history of India. Among 
the most distinguished of them is Dr. I.G. Patel. I am privileged to be in the same lineage as 
him. 
6. During his long and illustrious career in India, Dr. Patel made very significant and lasting 
contribution to economic governance of India. He was Governor of the Reserve Bank at a 
critical time when the Indian economy had to battle a balance of payments crisis triggered by 
the  second  oil  price  shock  in  the  late  1970s.  He  played  an  active  role  in  securing 
accommodation for India from the IMF’s Extended Fund facility, an arrangement that was the 
largest in the Fund’s history at that time. 
7.  Indeed,  Dr.  Patel  was  the  intellectual  force  behind  resolving  some  of  our  biggest 
macroeconomic  challenges  of  his time.  As  the Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank today,  I  am 
involved  in  addressing  some  of  India’s  current macroeconomic  challenges. The  leadership 
that my predecessors provided in confronting these challenges always remains a source of 
motivation and inspiration for me in navigating through these challenges. I thought the best 
way  I  can  honour  the  memory  of  late  Dr.  I.G.  Patel  is  to  talk  about  India’s  current 
macroeconomic challenges from the Reserve Bank’s perspective. 
India – current macroeconomic context 
8. India clocked an average growth of 9.5 per cent in the three year period before the global 
financial  crisis  (2005-08).  For  a  nation  that  once  believed  that  the  “Hindu  Rate  of  Growth” 
was its destiny, this remarkable growth performance was cause for celebration. It was also a 
trigger for setting off an aspiration for double digit growth. 
9.  Today,  there  is  a  sharp  reversal.  Growth  has  decelerated,  inflation  is  still  high  and 
stubborn, the investment rate has declined sharply and the external sector is beset with a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
record  high current  account  deficit. This  downturn  has  caused  widespread  anxiety  that  we 
may  have  got  derailed  from  the  high  growth  trajectory.  It  has  also  raised  a  number  of 
questions. Is our growth story faltering? Has India’s potential growth rate declined? Are the 
growth drivers that worked our way during 2003–08 still intact? Has the world lost confidence 
in India’s growth promise? When will we reach double digit growth, and what indeed should 
we be doing to get there? 
10. My short answer to all these questions is that the India growth story is still credible and 
that the long term growth drivers are still intact. If we do the right things, we can get back on 
a high growth trajectory. Equally, there is nothing inevitable about the India growth story. We 
can  accelerate  growth  and  improve  welfare  only  if  we  effectively  implement  wide  ranging 
economic and governance reforms. Slipping up on this will amount to a costly and potentially 
irreversible squandering away of opportunities. 
11. The Government has to be at the center of this and lead the process of economic revival. 
As  the  central  bank  and  as  the  regulator  of  large  segments  of  the  financial  sector,  the 
Reserve  Bank  too  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  this.  What  I  propose  to  do  today  is  to 
discuss some important macroeconomic challenges from the Reserve Bank’s perspective. 
12. In particular, I will discuss three challenges: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Managing growth-inflation dynamics 
Mitigating the vulnerability of external sector 
Managing the political economy of fiscal consolidation 
First challenge: managing growth-inflation dynamics 
Growth 
13. The global financial crisis affected virtually every economy in the world, and India was no 
exception.  But  we  recovered  from  the  crisis  much  sooner  than  even  other  emerging 
economies. In the crisis year of 2008/09, growth dropped to 6.7 per cent, but it recovered 
smartly  thereafter.  In  fact,  in  the  two  years  after  the  crisis,  2008/09  and  2009/10,  growth 
averaged 9.0 per cent which compares favourably with the average growth of 9.5 per cent in 
the three years before the crisis. However, last year, 2011/12, growth moderated to 6.2 per 
cent,  and  the  first  advance  estimates  suggest  that  growth  this  year  may  drop  further  to 
5.0 per cent, the lowest in a decade (Chart-1). 
14.  To  understand  the  latest  downtrend,  it  is  important  first  to  understand  the  pre-crisis 
growth  surge.  Several  explanations  are  offered  for  India’s  growth  acceleration  in  the  pre-
crisis period: the impact of economic reforms of the 1990s; India’s rapid integration with the 
global economy; rise of entrepreneurism; and increase in productivity. 
15. Underlying all these factors was the massive increase in capacity as investment jumped 
from 26.9 per cent of GDP in 2003/04 to 38.1 per cent in 2007/08 (Chart-2). This increase in 
investment was financed by growing domestic saving, and was accompanied by an increase 
in  productivity  driven  by  improvements  in  technology,  organization, financial  intermediation 
and  external  and  domestic  competitiveness.  The  current  account  deficit  (CAD)  during  this 
period averaged just 0.3 per cent of GDP suggesting that the contribution of foreign savings 
to domestic investment was relatively modest. But to the extent foreign saving came by way 
of foreign direct investment (FDI), it raised the productivity of overall investment and resulted 
in higher exports. 
16.  In  the  immediate  post-crisis  period,  even  as  investment  slowed,  private  consumption 
demand,  which  accounts  for  about  57  per  cent  of  GDP,  held  up  as  rural  incomes  grew 
robustly  on  the  back  of  the  crisis  driven  stimulus  as  well  as  the  expanded  safety-net 
programmes  of  the  government.  This  kept  growth  up  but  also  fuelled  inflation  reflecting 
excess of demand over supply. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
17. So, what explains the downturn in growth over the last two years? The answer would be 
a  slowing  of  demand  across  the  board.  Private  investment  decelerated  sharply,  in  part 
reflecting  the  global  downturn,  but  largely  owing  to  domestic  factors.  Business  profitability 
was  dented  by  tightening  infrastructure  constraints  and  increasing  input  prices  stemming 
from  high  food  and  fuel  inflation.  Business  confidence  was  hit  by  a  rising  fiscal  deficit, 
vacillating commitment to reforms and governance concerns, all of which dampened investor 
perceptions on returns to investment. 
18. On top of the decline in private investment, private consumption demand, which was the 
bulwark of the quick recovery from the crisis, too started slowing in recent years exacerbating 
the  growth  slowdown  (Chart-3).  It  is  estimated  to  have  slowed  to  4.1  per  cent  during  the 
current year, down from an average of 8.3 per cent in the previous two years. 
Inflation 
19. Just as India recovered from the crisis sooner than other countries, inflation too caught 
up  with  us  sooner  than  elsewhere.  Inflation,  as  measured  by  the  wholesale  price  index 
(WPI), went briefly into negative territory for a few months in 2009 but started rising sharply 
thereafter,  clocking  a  peak  rate  of  10.9  per  cent  in  April  2010.  Average  WPI  inflation  was 
9.6 per cent in fiscal year 2010/11, 8.9 per cent in 2011/12 and 7.5 per cent during the first 
ten  months  of  2012/13  (Chart-4).  The  story  therefore  is  that  at  8.7  per  cent,  the  average 
inflation over the last three years has been higher than the average inflation of 5.4 per cent 
during the previous decade (2000–10) 
What is driving inflation? 
20. Both supply side and demand side factors have contributed to the buildup of inflationary 
pressures. 
21. A major driver from the supply side has been food inflation, which has both structural and 
cyclical components. The structural component arises from rising incomes, especially in rural 
areas, which is leading to a shift in dietary habits from cereals to protein foods. Inflation of 
protein food prices remained in double digits for much of the last three years barring a few 
months (Chart-5). The cyclical component of food inflation arises from the monsoon related 
spike  in  prices  of  food  items  such  as  vegetables.  Notwithstanding  all  the  talk  of  drought 
proofing  the  economy,  the  timely  onset  of  the  monsoon  and  its  spatial  and  temporal 
distribution continue to influence the inflation outlook in India. 
22.  The  second  major  factor  driving  the  current  episode  of  inflation  has  been  global 
commodity  prices,  especially  the  price  of  crude  oil.  India  imports  80  per  cent  of  its  oil 
demand. The global price of oil is therefore an important variable in determining the inflation 
outlook.  The  depreciation  of  the  rupee,  starting  October  2011,  has  compounded  the 
inflationary impact of oil prices. 
23. If the domestic petroleum sector was a free market and if global prices passed through to 
domestic prices, demand would arguably have declined in response to rising prices. But such 
a  demand  adjustment  was  blocked  by  the  administered  (subsidized)  pricing  regime  of 
petroleum products. 
24. Subsidization did not, however, protect us from inflation pressures – the cost of subsidies 
raised the fiscal deficit which fuelled inflation. So, any softening of inflation that we gained 
through subsidization was offset by a larger fiscal deficit. 
25. There is a debate in India about the macroeconomic and welfare dimensions of subsidies 
financed, not by government surpluses, but by government borrowing. An argument against 
de-subsidization is that it will be inflationary. Sure, it will be inflationary in the short-term, but 
price pressures will even out over the medium term. Also, the inflation impact should not be 
overstated. To the extent lower subsidies result in a lower fiscal deficit, there would be some 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
disinflationary impact even in the short-term. Finally, reduction in subsidies will remove price 
distortions, improve efficiency and provide a much better investment environment. 
26. The third major factor fuelling inflation has been wage pressures. Nominal rural wages 
increased at double digit rates over the last five years. Indeed, they increased so rapidly that, 
despite high retail inflation, real wage growth surged close to double digits in the last three 
years  (Table-1).  The  Government’s  social  safety-net  programmes  contributed  to,  and 
sustained, the wage-price spiral. In an economy with a per capita income of about US $1500, 
any increase in income quickly translates into increase in consumption demand and that is 
exactly what was witnessed in India. Producers were able, until very recently, to pass on the 
higher input prices in the form of higher output prices without sacrificing their margins. 
Growth-inflation dynamics 
27. India’s growth-inflation dynamics pre-crisis and post-crisis present a study in contrast. In 
the three year period before the crisis, the economy expanded by 9.5 per cent on average, 
aided by growth in fixed investment above 15 per cent per year. This expanded production 
capacity  to  match  growing  demand  and  kept  core  inflation  in  check.  Post-crisis,  the  story 
reversed.  Investment  declined  to  half  its  pre-crisis  rate  whereas  consumption  demand 
remained at the pre-crisis level until last year, owing partly to the government’s entitlement 
and welfare programmes, opening up a positive output gap during 2009–11 and stoking core 
inflation. 
Two questions about growth-inflation dynamics 
28. The growth-inflation dynamics of recent years that I briefly summarized above raise two 
interesting and related policy questions. The first is about India’s potential growth rate and 
the second is about why inflation is persisting at an elevated level even in the face of steeply 
moderating output growth. Let me briefly address them. 
What is India’s potential growth rate? 
29.  There  is  considerable  evidence  from  research  done  at  the  IMF  and  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS) that potential growth rates may have declined significantly in 
both  advanced  and  emerging  economies.  India  too,  despite  being  less  integrated  with  the 
global economy than other EMEs, has seen a drop in its potential growth rate. Reserve Bank 
estimates  show  that  the  potential growth  before  the  crisis  was  in  the range  of  8.0–8.5  per 
cent. This estimate was scaled down to 7.0 per cent after the crisis owing to a host of factors 
–  decline  in  the  pace  of  capital  formation,  supply  constraints,  especially  of  infrastructure, 
pressure on factor productivity because of tepid progress on reforms and a high fiscal deficit. 
30. Some analysts contend that the potential growth rate may have dipped even below the 
Reserve Bank’s post-crisis estimate of 7 per cent. The argument is that with growth dipping 
below 7 per cent last year and projected to dip even lower this year, we should have seen 
inflation  and  current  account  deficit  soften.  On  the  other  hand,  inflation  persists  at  an 
elevated level and the current account deficit is likely to be the highest ever, suggesting that 
the economy is growing beyond its capacity and that the potential growth may be lower than 
even 7 per cent. 
Why are India’s growth-inflation dynamics contrarian? 
31.  The  second  and  related  question  is  about  why  India’s  macroeconomic  dynamics  are 
contrarian.  In  particular,  over  the  last  two  years,  many  of  our  peer  EMEs  have  also 
experienced  a  growth  deceleration,  but  in  line  with  standard  theory,  several  of  them  have 
also seen a moderation in their inflation rates. In India, however, inflation has not come down 
in line with growth deceleration. Several idiosyncratic factors are put forward to explain this 
uniqueness of our macroeconomic situation: supply bottlenecks, particularly in infrastructure, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sectoral imbalances, rise in wages without a corresponding increase in productivity, higher 
fiscal deficit and larger depreciation of the exchange rate than in the case of our peers. 
Reserve Bank’s action to curb inflation 
32.  To  control  inflation,  the  Reserve  Bank  reversed  the  crisis  period’s  accommodative 
monetary  stance  in  quick  order.  We  raised  the  policy  interest  rate  (repo  rate)  13  times, 
cumulatively by 375 basis points (bps) – from 4.75 per cent to 8.5 per cent. Also we raised 
the reserve requirement on banks – the cash reserve ratio (CRR) – by 100 bps from 5 per 
cent to 6 per cent. Monetary policy is known to work with lags, and as a consequence of the 
tight monetary policy, WPI inflation which peaked at 10.9 per cent in April 2010, has come 
down to 6.6 per cent in January 2013. 
33. In response to deceleration in growth and decline in inflation, the Reserve Bank eased 
the monetary policy stance starting January 2012 cutting both the repo rate (by 75 bps) and 
the CRR (by 200 bps). 
Criticism against Reserve Bank’s monetary policy stance 
34.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  criticized  for  its  anti-inflationary  stance.  Let  me  address 
some of the main strands of that criticism if only to illustrate the dilemmas that we face in 
managing the growth-inflation trade-off. 
Monetary policy has only stifled growth, but has not tamed inflation 
35. By far the most common criticism has been that tight monetary policy has stifled growth 
but has not tamed inflation. My response to this criticism is the following. First, inflation has 
come  off  from  its  peak  by  over  about  4  percentage  points.  Admittedly,  growth  too  has 
moderated. However, the Reserve Bank’s anti-inflation stance is motivated by the dictum that 
inflation is inimical to growth and that only in a situation of price stability can consumers and 
investors make informed choices. 
36. It is important also to note that in order to contain inflation, monetary policy seeks to curb 
demand which, in turn, restrains growth. As per this logic, reduction in growth is an inevitable 
outcome of tight monetary policy. But this sacrifice is only in the short-term. In the medium 
term, there is no growth-inflation trade off; on the contrary, low and stable inflation secures 
sustained high medium term growth. And this is what the Reserve Bank is aiming at. 
37. It is important to note in this context that the relationship between growth and inflation is 
non-linear.  At  low  levels  of  inflation  and  stable  inflation  expectations,  there  is  a  trade-off 
between  growth  and  inflation  –  some  inflation  can  be  tolerated  to  grease  the  wheels  of 
growth.  But  above  a  certain  threshold  level  of  inflation,  this  relationship  reverses,  the 
conventional  trade-off  disappears,  and  high  inflation  actually  starts  taking  a  toll  on  growth. 
Estimates  by  the  Reserve  Bank  using  different  methodologies  put  the  threshold  level  of 
inflation  in  the  range  of 4  to  6  per  cent.  Inflation  above  6  per  cent  would  therefore  justify, 
indeed  demand,  tightening  of  the  monetary  policy  stance.  It  is  this  understanding  that 
informed the Reserve Bank’s monetary policy stance. 
Monetary policy tightening is inappropriate to combat supply shock driven inflation 
38.  A  second  and  related  criticism  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  anti-inflationary  monetary  policy 
stance has been that India’s recent inflation is driven by supply shocks in food and fuel items 
and that monetary tightening does not help restrain inflation in such a case. It only results in 
avoidable sacrifice of growth. 
39. I have several responses to this criticism. The first is that inflation was driven not just by 
supply shocks but by demand pressures as well, as evidenced by output expanding faster 
than the potential growth rate in the immediate post-crisis years of 2009/10 and 2010/11, the 
large and growing current account deficit and rapid growth in consumption demand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
40.  Admittedly,  there  were  supply  shocks  too,  in  addition  to  demand  pressures  that  were 
stoking  inflation  pressures.  Monetary  policy  response  to  supply  shocks  is  a  deliberate 
balancing act because errors can be costly in terms of lost growth. If the judgement is that 
the supply shock is transitory (such as cyclical increase in vegetable prices), the preferred 
policy response should be to not respond by monetary tightening. If on the other hand, the 
judgement is that the supply shock is structural in nature and will persist, monetary policy has 
to respond since persistent inflation, no matter what the driver, stokes inflation expectations. 
Monetary  policy  is  inevitably  the  first  line  of  defence  to  guard  against  inflation  getting 
generalized  through  unhinged  inflation  expectations.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  response 
has been guided by the above consideration. 
41. To sum up, the surmise from the challenge posed by the growth-inflation dynamics is the 
following.  Today’s  investment  is  tomorrow’s  production  capacity.  India  needs  to  not  only 
reverse the investment downturn but also increase it significantly to raise production to match 
the  growing  consumption  demand.  Increase  in  investment  is  necessary  also  to  raise 
production  for  exports  and  thereby  create  jobs  at  home.  Making  this  happen  requires  a 
supply  response  from  the  government  by  way  of  providing  public  goods  and  creating  a 
conducive environment for private investment. Meanwhile, the Reserve Bank has to ensure 
that inflation is brought down to the threshold level and is maintained there. 
Second challenge: mitigating the vulnerability of the external sector 
42.  Over  the  last  two  years,  India’s  balance  of  payments  (BoP)  has  come  under  growing 
pressure as evidenced most clearly by a large and increasing current account deficit (CAD). 
The  CAD  last  year  (2011/12)  was  4.2  per  cent  of  GDP,  historically  the  highest;  the  CAD 
during the current year is expected to be even higher. 
43. Many will recall that India went through a balance of payments crisis in 1991 which, in 
fact, triggered wide ranging structural reforms that gave a market orientation to the economy. 
Despite  India’s  growing  integration  with  the  global  economy,  the  external  sector  remained 
robust for over 15 years after that. The current episode of BoP pressures, when the CAD is 
higher  than  it  was  at  the  peak  of  the  1991  BoP  crisis  (3  per  cent  of  GDP)  is,  therefore, 
causing  apprehensions  about  whether  we  have  the  capacity  to  stem  the  pressures  and 
restore the BoP to a sustainable path. 
44.  The  increase  in  CAD  is  quite  evidently  a  consequence  of  imports  growing  faster  than 
exports. (Table-2) 
45. The increase in imports is largely accounted for by oil and gold imports. To understand 
the pressure these two items have put on the BoP, it is instructive to note the following. Net 
of oil and gold imports, CAD last year would have been in surplus of 3.8 per cent of GDP in 
contrast to a deficit of 4.2 per cent of GDP. The surge in gold imports is explained largely by 
the  erosion  in  real  returns  on  other  assets  owing  to  inflation.  The  reason  oil  imports  have 
been  price  inelastic  is  due  to  the  fact  that  nearly  60  per  cent  of  petroleum  products  pass 
through  an  administered  price  regime;  oil  demand  to  that  extent  does  not  adjust  to  price 
increases. On the other hand, exports were not helped even though the real exchange rate 
depreciated, reflecting the fact that in a subdued global economy, exports are more sensitive 
to income (i.e. global demand) than to price. 
46.  Reflecting  the  current  and  capital  accounts in  the  BoP,  the  exchange  rate  depreciated 
both in nominal and real terms (Table-3) 
Three concerns about CAD 
47.  There  are  mainly  three  concerns  about  the  CAD  in  the  balance  of  payments:  (i)  the 
quantum of CAD; (ii) the quality of CAD; and (iii) the financing of CAD. Let me briefly address 
each of these. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Quantum of CAD 
48.  Reserve  Bank’s  estimates  show  that  the  sustainable  CAD  for  India  is  2.5  per  cent  of 
GDP. A CAD above the sustainable level, year after year, is a clear macroeconomic risk as it 
raises concerns about our ability to meet our external payment obligations and erodes the 
confidence of potential lenders and investors. 
49.  An  additional  concern  is  that  we  are  having  a  large  CAD  even  in  the  face  of  slowing 
growth. This is perplexing because economic logic suggests that the CAD should improve in 
a  slowing  economy  due  to  a  decline  in  import  demand.  Cross  country  evidence  in  fact 
supports this hypothesis. Such an adjustment has not manifested in India though because: 
(i) oil  and  gold  imports  are  relatively  inelastic  to  income  changes;  (ii)  on  non-oil  imports, 
domestic  supply  is  still  unable  to  compete  with  imports,  and  (iii)  supply  constraints  and 
subdued external demand are impeding exports. 
Quality of CAD 
50. The concern about the quality of CAD arises from the composition of imports. If we were 
importing capital goods, we can maybe countenance a higher CAD because investment in 
capital goods implies building production capacity for tomorrow. On the other hand, import of 
gold, largely as a hedge against inflation, is a deadweight burden, especially at a time when 
the CAD is beyond the sustainable level. 
Financing of CAD 
51.  Even  as  the  CAD  has  been  high,  we  have  been  able  to  finance  it  because  of  a 
combination of “push” and “pull” factors. On the push side is the amount of surplus liquidity in 
the  global  system  consequent  upon  the  extraordinary  monetary  stimulus  provided  by 
advanced economy central banks. On the pull side are the measures taken by us to attract 
capital flows such as liberalizing FDI, expanding the limits for foreign investment in corporate 
and  government  debt  and  easing  restrictions  on  external  commercial  borrowing  by 
corporates. 
52. In trying to finance such a large CAD, we are exposing the economy to the risk of sudden 
stop and exit of capital flows. This will be the case to the extent capital flows in in pursuit of 
short-term profits. Should the risk of capital exit materialize, the exchange rate will become 
volatile causing knock-on macroeconomic disruptions. 
Monetary easing in the context of a large CAD 
53. While the external sector vulnerability is a cause for concern on a number of counts as I 
indicated above, it also poses a special challenge for calibrating the monetary policy stance. 
54. In our quarterly policy review at the end of January this year, the Reserve Bank cut the 
benchmark repo rate by 25 bps in response to the growth-inflation dynamics that I outlined 
earlier.  Several  analysts  and  commentators  have  questioned  the  wisdom  and  logic  of 
monetary easing at a time when the CAD is rising. There are two elements to this argument: 
(i)  an  interest  rate  cut  raises  aggregate  demand,  and  hence  demand  for  imports,  and  will 
aggravate  an  already  elevated  CAD;  and  (ii)  an  interest  rate  cut  will  narrow  the  interest 
differential between India and the advanced economies which are the source of capital, and 
could potentially lead to capital exit. 
55. Let me respond to both these strands of criticism: 
56. The risk of the CAD widening further because of the stimulus offered by the rate cut is 
much less than apprehended for a host of reasons. First, when growth is sluggish as is the 
case now, the rate cut is unlikely to translate into import demand. Second, the rate cut was a 
response  to  softening  inflation.  Lower  inflation  will  improve  the  competitiveness  of  our 
exports.  Third,  the  rate  cut  was  effected  during  a  phase  of  easing  commodity  prices  – 
particularly of oil – which will reduce the pressure on the CAD. Finally,  empirical evidence 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
shows that in emerging economies such as India, import demand is less a function of lower 
interest rate than of increased income. In other words, the marginal propensity to import by 
borrowing money is small. 
57. On the other criticism about the impact of capital flows required to finance the CAD, it 
must be noted that interest rate differential is only one of the several push and pull factors 
that  influence  capital  flows.  Moreover,  debt  and  equity  flows  have  traditionally  responded 
differently to a rate cut. While debt flows may be more sensitive to a narrowing of the interest 
rate differential, equity flows may actually increase because they see in this a signal of lower 
inflation and better investment environment. This has been the experience of India leading 
some analysis to all this, the “Indian exceptionalism”. 
58. The last thought I want to leave with you on the issue of managing the external sector 
vulnerability is that gone are the days when monetary policy could be calibrated on entirely 
domestic  macroeconomic  considerations.  As  India  integrates  rapidly  with  the  world  in  the 
years ahead, it will perforce have to take into account the spillover from global situation in 
determining its monetary policy stance. 
Third challenge: managing the political economy of fiscal consolidation 
59. The large fiscal deficit of the government remains one of India’s biggest macroeconomic 
challenges.  Received  wisdom  today  is  that  it  was  the  fiscal  profligacy  of  the  1980s  that 
spilled over into the external sector and fuelled the balance of payments crisis of 1991. In 
2011/12, the combined fiscal deficit of the centre and state governments was 8.1 per cent, 
quite  close to  the figure  of  9.1  per  cent  in  the BoP  crisis  year  of  1990/91  (Chart-6).  Quite 
understandably, there are concerns about the adverse macroeconomic consequences of the 
twin deficit problem – a large and persistent fiscal deficit along with a high CAD. 
60. There has been some very welcome, although much delayed, action on correcting both 
the CAD and the fiscal deficit over the last six months. The Government has raised customs 
duty on gold imports in an effort to restrain gold imports. More notably, the recent budget has 
firmly embraced fiscal responsibility by restraining the fiscal deficit next year consistent with 
the road map recommended by the Kelkar Committee. 
61. In the pre-crisis period, India’s fiscal consolidation was largely on track, consistent with 
the  targets  adopted  under  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management (FRBM)  Act, 
2003.  However,  this  consolidation  got  interrupted  by  the  crisis  induced  fiscal  stimulus. 
Thereafter, the government adopted a revised road map for getting fiscal consolidation back 
on track, and adhered to the target in 2012/13. Nevertheless, the combined fiscal debit of the 
centre  and  states,  budgeted  at  7.2  per  cent  of  GDP  during  2012/13  is  still  high. 
Notwithstanding  political  economy  compulsions,  credible 
fiscal  adjustment  along  a 
transparent, predictable road map is an imperative for growth and macroeconomic stability. 
Why is fiscal deficit bad? 
62. Fiscal deficit is bad for a number of reasons. Large and persistent fiscal deficit threatens 
the  government’s  debt  sustainability.  The  growing  interest  burden  eats  into  the  resources 
available for discretionary expenditure. Importantly, it crowds out the private sector from the 
debt market, inhibits private investment and affects future production capacity. Fiscal deficit 
can also spill over and trigger balance of payments pressures as indeed happened in India in 
1991. 
63.  By  far  the  biggest  concern  stemming  from  a  large  fiscal  deficit,  especially  from  the 
Reserve  Bank’s  perspective,  is  that  it  adds  to  aggregate  demand  and  thereby  to  inflation 
pressures. By crowding out the private sector, fiscal deficit could also inhibit, if not impair, 
monetary policy transmission to the private sector. Credible fiscal consolidation is, therefore, 
a necessary pre-condition for stabilizing inflation and securing non-inflationary growth. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Fiscal consolidation and growth 
64.  There  are  some  concerns,  admittedly  marginal,  that  fiscal  consolidation  in  a  sluggish 
growth environment will  only dampen growth further thereby adversely impacting revenues 
and  pushing  the  economy  into  a  vicious  downward  spiral.  There  is  some  validity  to  this 
argument.  But  a  growth  slow-down  on  account  of  fiscal  consolidation  is  not  unavoidable. 
Growth slow-down can be mitigated, indeed growth can be aided, provided attention is paid, 
along with the quantum of fiscal adjustment, also to its quality. Experience demonstrates that 
even if total expenditure as a proportion of GDP is curtailed, it need not dampen growth; on 
the  contrary,  if  there  is  switching  from  current  expenditure  to  capital  expenditure,  fiscal 
consolidation can actually stimulate growth by “crowding in” private investment. 
65. Empirical estimates for India validate this finding – even in a context of decline in total 
public  expenditure  as  a  proportion  to  GDP,  fiscal  consolidation  can  improve  medium-term 
growth prospects if government increases capital spending, offsetting the moderating impact 
of  growth  in  the  short-term.  These  results  reflect  the  higher  long-run  fiscal  multipliers  for 
capital expenditure and very low long-run multipliers for current expenditure. 
66. The economics of fiscal consolidation are quite straight forward. The complexity arises 
from the political economy. Tax increases and expenditure compression – the two strands of 
fiscal consolidation – are never politically popular, especially in democracies where political 
executives, virtually everywhere in the world, are characterized by high discount rates. They 
are much more tempted by short-term political pay offs rather than long-term sustainability. 
Fiscal consolidation, by definition, is a long-term game. In the short-term political costs may 
exceed benefits; in the long-term, the economic and political benefits far outweigh any costs. 
It is this congruence of economic and political virtue that must inform fiscal consolidation. 
Managing the growth-inflation dynamics 
Mitigating the vulnerability of the external sector 
Managing the Political Economy of Fiscal Consolidation 
Summing-up: India growth story intact 
67.  Let  me  now  sum  up.  I  have  spoken  to  you  about  the  following  three  macroeconomic 
challenges confronting India and I have given you the Reserve Bank’s perspective on them. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
68.  These  are  formidable  challenges,  but  by  no  means  insurmountable.  For  people  who 
despair, it is important to remember that the drivers of the India growth story – get up and go 
entrepreneurism,  the  demographic  dividend,  a  large  and  growing  middle  class,  the 
opportunity for productivity catch up, democracy and a decent legal system – are all intact. 
69.  The  12th  Five  Year  Plan  aims  at  a  growth  rate  of  8.2  per  cent  for  the  Plan  period  
(2012–17). Growth at this pace is the minimum necessary. Indeed, India needs to grow even 
faster, at a sustained double digit pace, if it has to pull hundreds of millions of people out of 
poverty. The India growth story has all the ingredients to deliver on this promise. 
70.  But  the  India  growth  story  is  not  inevitable.  It  will  not  materialize  in  the  absence  of 
vigorous  and  purposeful  structural  and  governance  reforms.  It  is  those  reforms  that  must 
continue to engage our attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
 14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
