Yves Mersch: The euro and the ECB – perspectives and challenges 
ahead 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, Journée Boursière, Luxembourg, 6 May 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, dear friends and guests, 
It was fifteen years ago, in May 1998, that the first Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank  was  constituted  and  commenced  its  work  in  Frankfurt.  This  anniversary  is  passing 
almost unnoticed. Some may say this is not a good moment for cheerful celebration. Indeed 
we have little room to pause as we are confronting new challenges every day. Nonetheless, I 
would like to take a step back and start off my remarks with a tribute to the founding fathers – 
and founding mother – on the Executive Board of the ECB. They have set us on the right 
course. The ECB, for its part, has delivered on what it has been asked to do. 
The same cannot be said for other policy areas. Partly because of its success in establishing 
itself as a credible institution, the ECB has been in a position to step into the breach during 
the  crisis  as  a  guarantor  of  stability  and  is  now  being  asked  to  shoulder  additional 
responsibilities. As back then, when the first Board prepared for the launch of the euro, today 
the ECB is steering a course into uncharted territory. As it was back then, today we need to 
be guided by firm principles and a clear compass to serve as an anchor of stability.  
Once  again  we  are  engaging  in  a  process  of  institution  building,  like  the  pioneers  fifteen 
years ago – including, in our own modest perimeter, the setting up of the Banque Central du 
Luxembourg.  
Once again the Executive Board and the Governing Council need to be mindful about the 
limits of what can be asked of monetary policy, what can be asked of central banks and what 
must not be asked. This will be a main theme of my remarks tonight on the perspectives and 
challenges that lie ahead for the ECB and the euro. Equally though, other policy areas need 
to be mindful – and be reminded – of their respective responsibilities for the stewardship of 
the euro.  
A sound institutional framework for the euro 
Let me be perfectly clear: the Euro, the promise of a single and stable currency for Europe – 
from its inception – has been both a political and economic project. With the establishment of 
the ECB fifteen years ago and the creation of the euro on 1 January 1999 monetary policy 
was  centralised  and  safeguarding  the  euro’s  stability  was  delegated  to  a  strong  and 
independent central bank. The ECB has delivered on its primary objective of price stability 
and will continue to do so. By contrast, responsibilities for fiscal policy, economic policies and 
supervision  remained  located  at  national  level,  while  being  subject  to  common  rules  and 
procedures. In the end this arrangement has proved insufficient in preventing the build-up of 
financial  and  economic  imbalances  in  the  euro  area,  associated  with  divergence  in 
competitiveness as well  as unsustainable trends in public and private debt and associated 
banking crises. 
For this reason last year the Van Rompuy report by the four presidents put forward the case 
for complementing and completing monetary union with further “four unions” to ensure that 
all  relevant  policy  areas  fully  live  up  to  the  common  responsibility  that  sharing  a  common 
currency implies. These are important steps towards overcoming the “institutional solitude” of 
the ECB, in the words of the late Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa.  
First, banking union was a missing element in the original Maastricht design. It is essential to 
provide a durable foundation for monetary and financial stability and to ensure a level playing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
field.  Counterparties  remaining  under  different  national  regulatory  regimes  can  be  a 
significant  source  of  financial  fragmentation  and  an  impediment  to  the  transmission  of  the 
single monetary policy.  
Second,  we  need  further  steps  towards  fiscal  union  as  well  as  a  strengthening  of  the 
governance  of  economic  union.  Ultimately,  this  should  also  be  reflected  more  broadly  by 
elements of political union. Much progress has been made, namely in the first two domains 
to provide a sound basis for financial integration and financial stability as well as to ensure 
fiscal sustainability.  
Further  efforts  are  clearly  needed  on  structural  reforms  to  restore  competitiveness  and 
promote  lasting  economic  growth  and  employment  creation.  In  the  end,  well-functioning 
institutions at both national and European levels – including, in particular, forceful application 
of the macro-economic imbalances procedure and credible enforcement of the fiscal rules – 
are essential, alongside the ECB as the guarantor of a single and stable currency. Together 
they  provide  the  appropriate  foundation  (“Ordnungsrahmen”)  for  a  genuine  monetary  and 
economic  union  underpinning  durable  wealth  creation  in  the  euro  area,  based  on  a  sound 
financial system, sustainable public finances and a competitive market economy.  
Essential elements of banking union 
Progress on the four unions set out by the four presidents is necessary, first and foremost, 
for  crisis  prevention,  i.e.  they  will  help  to  avoid  the  build-up  of  economic  imbalances  and 
financial vulnerabilities that have led to the present crisis. Setting out a strong commitment 
and a clear framework for improved future governance also facilitates crisis resolution and 
crisis  management.  At  the  same  time  we  should  not  put  the  cart  before  the  horse  in  the 
transition period and responsibilities must be clearly defined. 
This applies in particular to the main elements needed for a banking union. 
A  single  supervisory  mechanism  (SSM)  ensures  effective  supervision  and  a  level  playing 
field  across  the  euro  area,  underpinning  financial  integration  and  safeguarding  financial 
stability.  The  SSM  regulation  is  nearing  adoption  subject  to  the  necessary  parliamentary 
approvals in a number of jurisdictions. 
A single resolution mechanism (SRM) is essential to break the link between banks and their 
respective sovereigns and to ensure that non-viable banks can be wound down in an orderly 
manner. A draft regulation for the SRM is expected from the Commission by the summer. 
SSM and SRM are like Siamese twins, on cannot survive without the other. A supervisor can 
only  credibly  do  his  job  if  liquidation  is  possible  without  undue  risks  to  financial  stability. 
Conversely, the resolution mechanism must be able to rely on the well-founded and impartial 
judgement of the supervisor before putting any funds at his disposal. 
While a common fiscal backstop is needed for the SRM, resolution funds could come from 
the  private  sector,  namely  the  financial  industry  and  the  banks  eligible  for  the  SRM.  To 
achieve fiscal neutrality this could be done via private sector pre-funding or via a mechanism 
that  would  re-reimburse  any  loans  from  the  SRM  ex  post  via  a  bank  levy.  In  this  way 
recourse to taxpayer funds could be limited and remain temporary for the SRM. 
The European Council has decided to entrust the SSM to the ECB. This has been seen by 
some  as  a  testimony  to  the  credibility  that  the  ECB  has  built  up  as  an  institution.  Others 
regard  it  as  a  poisoned  chalice,  which  might  put  into  doubt  the  very  credibility  and 
independence that the ECB has earned itself in the monetary domain. 
With  the  ECB  set  to  assume  supervisory  responsibilities,  indeed  much  has  been  made  of 
possible conflicts of interest between monetary policy and financial stability, and supervisory 
tasks  in  particular.  To  my  mind,  such  conflicts  are  pertinent  and  should  not  be  ignored. 
Hence  it  is  essential  that  the  SSM  and  all  reporting  lines  for  supervisory  functions  to  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Governing  Council  are  clearly  separated  from  other  ECB  tasks.  The  Governing  Council’s 
commitment to deliver on its primary mandate must not be put in doubt. 
At the same time, a successful banking union in the euro area will help crisis prevention in 
future.  It  will  also  be  helpful  for  crisis  resolution  at  present.  On  both  counts  swift 
implementation  of  SSM  and  SRM  would  reduce,  not  increase,  the  risks  of  overburdening 
monetary policy. Over the medium term, and in most circumstances, monetary and financial 
stability are complementary. This also applies to the task of supervision to maintain sound 
financial institutions. Conflicts arise once one or the other objective is put in jeopardy and if 
appropriate instruments are not in place to achieve the respective objectives. Today, most 
countries  have  adopted  arrangements  where  possible  conflicts  are  appropriately  managed 
and internalized inside the central banks.  
What monetary policy can do and cannot do 
This brings me to the role of monetary policy in times of financial crisis.  
We need, again, to distinguish three aspects: crisis prevention, crisis management and crisis 
resolution. 
On crisis prevention, maintaining an environment of price stability is the best contribution that 
monetary policy can make to supporting financial stability. The attention paid to money and 
credit variables in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy also helps to take into consideration 
the build-up of financial imbalances and associated development in asset markets. These in 
turn can imply risks to both financial stability and price stability over the medium term.1 
On crisis management, in a financial panic there is a legitimate and well-established case for 
central  banks  to  step  in  to  provide  liquidity  as  a  lender  of  last  resort.  The  well-known 
principles  established  by  Bagehot  in  the  19th  century  remain  a  valuable  guidepost:  “lend 
freely, to illiquid but solvent institutions, against adequate collateral, at a penalty rate”. While 
this is easier said than done in practice, these principles remain a salutary reminder of the 
need to guard against moral hazard in central bank crisis measures. 
Responsibility  for  crisis  resolution  lies  outside  the  domain  of  monetary  policy  and  is  up  to 
supervisory and fiscal authorities. More precisely, while the SSM is to be entrusted with the 
analytical role performed inside the central bank, the SRM needs to take the financial and 
redistributive  decisions  that  belong to the  political  sphere,  when  it  comes  to  winding  down 
non-viable banks. More broadly, addressing the root causes of the crisis, both economic and 
financial,  is  up  to  other  policy  domains,  it  namely  lies  in  the  hands  of  governments  and 
regulators. 
Against  this  background,  monetary  policy  measures  in  a  crisis  can  serve  a  critical  role  in 
guarding  against  disorderly  self-fulfilling  disruptions.  They  can  buy  time  for  other  policy 
domains to undertake the necessary adjustments and reforms. But they cannot substitute for 
such actions. They must also be mindful of adverse longer-term consequences of short-term 
support provided. 
Here is my “to do” and “not to do” list on monetary policy in crisis times, expanding a little on 
Bagehot. 
• 
Provide liquidity, not solvency support. Recapitalization is the task of shareholders 
and governments. 
                                                
1   For early expositions of the need for a medium-term stability-oriented monetary policy to take into account the 
build-up of financial imbalances, see O. Issing, “Why stable prices and stable markets are important and how 
they  fit  together",  First  Conference  of  the  Monetary  Stability  Foundation,  5  December  2002  and  O.  Issing, 
“Monetary and financial stability: Is there a trade-off?”, Bank for International Settlements, March 2003. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
         Prevent  disorderly  deleveraging  and  fire  sales  of  assets,  do  not  delay  unduly 
necessary balance sheet adjustments. 
Provide  temporary  backstop  to  markets  under  stress,  do  not  replace  market 
functioning for too long. 
Provide short-term liquidity support, do not enter long-term credit allocation to be left 
to financial intermediaries. 
Act  as  lender  of  last  resort to the  banking  system  based  on  the traditional  role  of 
central  bank  refinancing,  do  not  confuse  this  with  LOLR  to  governments  or 
inappropriate fine-tuning of financial markets.  
Support functioning monetary transmission mechanism (via banks and markets), do 
not guarantee uniform financing conditions or suppress fundamentally justified risk 
premia. 
Preserve  singleness  of  monetary  policy,  do  not  compensate  need  for  political 
commitment to keep composition of currency area intact. 
Buy time and pre-empt self-fulfilling dynamics (tail risks), do not distract from need 
by  other  policy  domains  to  undertake  structural  reforms  and  address  underlying 
fundamentals, avoiding wrong incentives and moral hazard. 
Fulfil  the  duty  of  fire-fighting  in  crisis  to  preserve  financial  and  ultimately  price 
stability,  but  keep  a  medium-term  perspective  and  do  not  neglect  unintended 
consequences and adverse side-effects from protracted non-standard measures on 
financial institutions and functioning. 
Take responsibility and credit for averting Armageddon, but do not overstate what 
monetary policy can and cannot do. 
The ECB’s non-standard measures 
In living up to these “ten commandments” sketched out before it is well understood that in 
practice central banks need to perform a balancing act when carefully assessing the costs 
and benefits of unconventional measures. 
Against  this  background  let  me  briefly  review  the  main  characteristics  of  the  non-standard 
measures  adopted  by  the  ECB  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis.  Most  measures  are 
mirrored in the size and composition of the Eurostem balance sheets, reflecting its role as 
liquidity  provider  of  last  resort  in  the  crisis:  to  monetary  counterparties,  to  markets  and 
ultimately to the real economy. 
• 
The  bulk  of  liquidity  support  has  been  via  lending  operations  (against  collateral), 
rather  than  via  outright  purchases.  This  practice  is  closer  in  line  with  the  ECBs 
operational  framework,  limits  balance  sheet  exposure  and  facilitates  endogenous 
exit.  At  the  same  time,  both  modalities  are  in  principle  also  part  of  the  toolkit  of 
traditional instruments for monetary policy operations. 
With the adoption of fixed-rate full allotment in liquidity provision, lending is almost 
done freely against collateral to deal with impaired money markets, while quantities 
respond endogenously to the degree of stress in interbank markets. 
Extension of LTROS maturities up to 1 year in 2009 and to 3 years in 2011/12. This 
lengthening  of  the  maturities  still  remained  broadly  within  the  realm  of  short-term 
liquidity provision while addressing uncertainty on bank funding. 
Covered bond purchase programmes were limited in size and duration. They were 
targeted to malfunctioning markets and are important bank funding instruments. This 
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  was done with a view to act as catalyst for market activity (notably in 2009) rather 
than replacing private market activity. 
The securities market programme in place from 2009-2012 again aimed at specific 
dysfunctional government bond markets, where volatility had increased and liquidity 
diminished.  Purchases  were  not  aimed  at  targeting  specific  yields  and  were  fully 
sterilized to offset impact on the size of the Eurosystem balance sheet. 
The  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  announced  last  September  to  address 
unwarranted  tail  risks,  allow  for  ex  ante  unlimited  interventions,  but  are subject  to 
strict  conditionality  (IMF/EU  programme)  to  address  concerns  over  moral  hazard. 
They are also restricted to maturities up to three years. 
All of the ECB’s non-standard measures seek to balance the benefits and possible adverse 
side effects of what monetary policy can and cannot do. This pertains, for example, to the 
maturity of operations, the duration of liquidity support, the role of conditionality. 
Scope and limits of non-standard measures  
Most  of  the  ECB’s  non-standard  measures  have  been  motivated  by  impairments  in  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy,  in  particular  with  respect  to  impaired  interbank  markets, 
bank funding and bank lending channels as well as financial market segments with particular 
relevance  as  benchmarks  (governments  bonds)  or  as  a  bank  funding  instrument  (covered 
bonds). 
Additional obstacles to the smooth transmission of the ECB’ monetary policy stance across 
the  euro  area  arise  from  financial  fragmentation  that  exacerbates  heterogeneity  across 
countries that may exist in part for fundamentally justified reasons. 
The  objective  of  restoring  a  better  or  more  uniform  transmission  of  a  given  stance  of  the 
single  monetary  policy  is  conceptually  distinct  from  the  objective  of  using  unconventional 
monetary policy to impart additional monetary policy stimulus when standard policy rates are 
constrained by the zero lower bound. In practice this distinction is the more difficult to draw, 
the more widespread transmission impairments become and the closer policy rates are to the 
lower bound. 
In  both  dimensions,  it  is  nonetheless  useful  to  recall  again  the  limits  of  monetary  policy. 
Monetary policy transmission may be hampered at times where banks, in particular, but also 
non-financial sectors need to repair their balance sheets. At times of uncertainty and lack of 
confidence  liquidity  may  be  hoarded  rather  than  be  put  to  use  for  investment.  These  are 
cases where standard monetary policy may be “pushing on a string” (in the words of John 
Maynard Keynes). These are also impediments that need to be fundamentally addressed by 
regulators  and government  entities,  via  the  strengthening financial  balance  sheets  and  via 
confidence-enhancing economic and structural policies. 
One  example  of  the  need  for  action  in  the  respective  domains  to  help  unclog  specific 
transmission  and  funding  channels  concerns  impediments  to  SME  funding  and  possible 
measures to re-activate securitisation markets. The latter may be impaired by a combination 
of unwarranted stigma due to the fall-out form the US subprime crisis, by stringent regulatory 
requirements and by a range of structural and practical factors. These have to be addressed 
primarily outside the realm of monetary policy, even if the latter could potentially perform a 
catalytical role in some circumstances. 
Regulatory impact on financial markets and monetary policy: the financial transaction tax 
Finally,  let  me  turn  briefly  to  the  financial  transaction  tax  (FTT),  as  an  example  where 
government regulation may have adverse consequences on financial markets and monetary 
policy  transmission.  I  would  not  like  to  enter  into  the  case  for  or  against  the  FTT. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Reservations  are  well  known,  while  it  is  appropriate  for  us  to  take  a  neutral  view  on  the 
objectives of this measure.  
Looking  at  the  specific  FTT  proposal  published  by  the  EU  Commission  on  14  February, 
nonetheless  attention  needs  to  be  drawn  to  possible  negative  implications  for  the 
implementation of monetary policy and financial stability: 
• 
Incentives  to  replace  secured  market  funding  (subject  to  FTT)  with  central  bank 
liquidity (exempt from FTT), which may hamper market liquidity and increase banks’ 
recourse to the Eurosystem funding. 
The  possible  distortion  will  be  largest  on  the  shortest  maturities  in  the  secured 
money markets, i.e. repo market (given FTT does not take into account maturity). 
Reduced liquidity in secondary fixed income markets (including government bonds) 
which  may  hamper  smooth  monetary  policy  transmission  and  worsen  market 
fragmentation at a time when many of these markets remain fragile. 
  For  these  reasons  a  careful  impact  assessment  warranted  in  these  respects  and  some 
modifications in the current proposals merit consideration. 
Some decades back, long before the financial crisis, James Tobin gave us four definitions of 
financial market (in)efficiency (in his Fred Hirsch Memorial lecture 1984)2:  
1. 
2. 
information arbitrage efficiency – accepted by Tobin in its weak form. 
fundamental  valuation  efficiency:  do 
expectations of future payment flows? – very much doubted by Tobin. 
full  insurance  efficiency:  do  financial  markets  support  Pareto  efficient,  complete 
markets  Arrow-Debreu  allocations?  –  very  much  questioned  by  Tobin,  since 
incomplete financial markets interact with inefficient goods and labour markets. 
Finally, Tobin proposed a notion of “functional efficiency”, i.e. do financial markets 
and intermediaries provide value to society at large? Do they channel savings to the 
most productive investments, by pooling risk and allocating it to those best placed to 
bear it? 
financial  asset  prices  reflect 
3. 
4. 
rational 
It  is this fourth  notion (not  much found  in  our finance  textbooks)  that  we  need  to revert to 
assess the financial system in the wake of the crisis and its service for the real economy. 
While he was critical of the considerable resources that tended to be devoted to “churning”, 
to “gambling” and endogenous, self-referential activities in financial market, he was a lifelong 
critic of the Tobin tax named after him. 
Concluding remarks 
Fifteen years after the setting up of the ECB, we need to press on with the ongoing relaunch 
of the institutional underpinning to put the euro on a sounder footing. Such a relaunch should 
not  put  into  question  the  achievement  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  the  ECB’s  clear  and 
unequivocal  mandate  and  the  clear  division  of  roles  and  responsibilities  among  different 
policy areas. In particular, a fully-fledged banking union, as complement to monetary union 
supports financial integration and monetary policy transmission and hence ultimately reduces 
the burden on monetary policy. 
At fifteen, the ECB, and the euro, are approaching adolescence. In the crisis the euro area 
had  to  grow  up  very  quickly  amidst  daunting  challenges  to  its  identity,  even  its  very 
                                                
2   James Tobin: “On the Efficiency of the Financial System”, Lloyds Bank Review, No. 153, 1–15, as recalled by 
finance”. 
Willem  Buiter 
http://blogs.ft.com/maverecon/2009/04/useless-finance-harmful-finance-and-useful-finance/#axzz1evYuSi2t. 
in  his  2009  blog  on 
finance  and  useful 
finance,  harmful 
“Useless 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
existence. Further turbulence cannot be ruled out. But I am confident that we, at the ECB, 
will do all that is needed for the euro to have a long and prosperous life. After very difficult 
years  of  adjustment  and  renewed  institution  building,  the  euro  will  stand  on  solid  feet  and 
emerge  stronger,  provided  that  all  in  the  family  of  stakeholders  live  up  to  their  respective 
responsibilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
