Michael Gondwe: Facilitating trade and building economies on the 
African continent 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Michael  Gondwe,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  African 
Trade Insurance Agency Workshop for Bankers, Lusaka, 10 September 2013. 
 The Secretary General of COMESA, H.E Sindiso Ngwenya;  
The Director General of Zambia Development Agency, Mr Andrew Chipwende;  
The ATI Chief Investor Relations Manager, Mr Cyprien Sakubu;  
The Representative for Zambia, Mr Pizzaro Lukhanda;  
Resource Persons;  
Distinguished Invited Guests;  
Members of the Press;  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
It is my honour and privilege to be amongst you all this morning. I wish to express my 
appreciation to the African Trade Insurance Agency for extending an invitation to me to 
deliver a keynote address on this important Workshop.  
Let  me  begin  by  commending  the  African  Trade  and  Insurance  Agency  (ATI)  for  the 
important role they continue to play in facilitating trade not only in this Country but in the 
entire Region and indeed the Continent at large. I am no stranger to the role that ATI 
plays  in  helping  to  build  economies  in  the  countries  that  it  operates  as  I  have  been  a 
client and a supporter of ATI’s products and services in particular in my previous life as 
Head of the PTA Bank.  
I  have  seen  first-hand,  the  impact  that  ATI  has  had  in  many  countries,  including  in 
Zambia, where ATI has facilitated trade and investments worth more than $925 million 
since its inception. I am further informed that ATI has so far this year supported Zambian 
companies and businesses by offering insurance cover to some very large and essential 
projects primarily in the energy, mining, manufacturing and agriculture sectors valued at 
over $726 million. The Agency has also continued to assist many African countries by 
facilitating  foreign  direct  investments  with  its  political  risk  insurance  that  protects 
investors. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  role  that  trade  plays  in  the  economic  growth  and 
development of a Country cannot be emphasised. There are many regions and countries 
of the world that have been able to lift their peoples from poverty to prosperity through 
trade.  However,  although  Africa  in  general  and  Zambia  in  particular  has  an  economy 
which  is  characterized  by  a  relatively  high  degree  of  openness,  trade  has  not  been 
utilized to an extent of achieving rapid and sustainable economic development necessary 
to eliminate poverty.  
This failure for trade to serve as a catalyst for sustainable economic development could 
be attributed in part to the nature of Africa’s export trade which is heavily concentrated 
on primary commodities that are characterized by relatively slow growth, price instability 
and long‐term deterioration of terms of trade. The need for African countries and Zambia 
in particular to participate in the dynamic sectors of global trade such as manufactures 
and  services  cannot  be  over-emphasised.  Some  analysts  have  attributed  this  lack  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
trade in service and manufacturing sectors to lack of competitiveness and products that 
insurer the exporter against any unforeseen losses.  
The  demonstration  by  ATI  of  their  credit  risk  insurance  products  in  this  workshop  will 
therefore,  play a  very important  role in promoting  trade  and exports of  Non-Traditional 
Exports  which  lead  to  a  diversified  economy,  job  creation  and  sustainable  economic 
growth.  The  credit  risk  insurance  products  also  spur  trade  within  Africa  by helping  our 
local  companies  to  become  more  competitive  through  increased  access  to  credit 
facilities. ATI has therefore, truly had a significant impact in Africa, which is reflected in 
the over $10 billion worth of trade and investments it has attracted into the continent over 
the past decade.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, as you are aware, staying competitive 
is  what  all  companies  strive  to  do.  Innovation  plays  a  key  role  in  this  equation.  I  am 
therefore  elated  that  this  morning  ATI  will  speak  about  how  it  is  providing  innovative 
products and services to better suit the needs of banks and financial institutions. I am 
confident  that  the  strategic  partnerships  of  local  banks  and  ATI  will  provide  an 
opportunity for growth in credit particularly to the Small and Medium Enterprises which 
face major challenges in the trade sector. The Bank of Zambia therefore welcomes this 
Workshop as it bodes well with our strategic objective of increasing access to financial 
services to 50% of the population by 2015 from the current level of 37.3%.  
As  I  conclude,  I  want  to  assure  ATI  that  the  proposal  for  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  all 
Central Banks in the COMESA Region to relax the capital reserve rules, by considering 
applying  a  lower  risk  weight  on  transactions  that  banks  and  financial  institutions  have 
insured  with  ATI  is  receiving  active  consideration  within  the  organs  of  the  COMESA 
Central  Bank  Governors.  Let  me  commend  ATI  for  coming  up  with  this  innovative 
initiative which seeks to deepen our financial markets.  
Finally, I challenge all of you this morning, especially participants from commercial banks 
to explore ways on how you can improve your products and services to better serve the 
entire Zambian population with the products that ATI will present to you this morning.  
Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies and  Gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  to  declare  the 
African Trade Insurance Agency’s workshop for bankers officially opened and I wish you 
fruitful deliberations.  
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
