Mugur Isărescu: Overcoming economic problems, the experiences of 
Sweden and Turkey – an inspiration for Romania? 
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 
conference “Overcoming economic problems, the experiences of Sweden and Turkey – an 
inspiration for Romania?”, Bucharest, 23 September 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, Your Excellences, Distinguished Guests  
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  the  National  Bank  of  Romania.  I  salute  the 
presence of such a distinguished audience: Their Excellences, the Ambassadors of Sweden, 
Turkey,  Brazil,  Cyprus,  Germany,  the  Netherlands,  members  of  the  diplomatic  corps, 
economists, bankers, businessmen, journalists.  
We are honored to host this international conference: “Overcoming economic problems, the 
experiences  of  Sweden  and  Turkey:  are  these  an  inspiration  for  Romania?”  The  title  is,  I 
believe,  self-explanatory.  In  today’s  globalized  world,  learning  from  other  countries’ 
experience is of utmost importance. And while it might be true that no one really learns but 
from  his  own  mistakes,  one  can  hope  that  some  other  mistakes  may  be  avoided  when 
learning from other people’s experiences.  
Why  Sweden  and  Turkey?  Before  answering  this  question  I  wish  to  emphasize  that  the 
National Bank of Romania is open and willing to host other conferences with similar topics. 
And  today’s  conference  might  be  considered  the  first  of  a  series,  involving  clusters  of 
countries with relevant interactions. With reference to the question above, I can tell you that 
there have been several reasons to begin with these three countries, but the main reason for 
which we compare today the present situation in Sweden, Turkey and Romania is due to the 
diligent and assiduous activity of the Ambassadors of these two countries in Bucharest. 
Then, I would like to salute their presence here today: His Excellency Mr. Anders Bengtcén, 
Ambassador of the Kingdom of Sweden, and His Excellency Mr. Ömür Şölendil, Ambassador 
of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  and  to  particularly  extend  my  gratitude  to  them  and  to  all  the 
persons involved in the materialization of this conference.  
I  also  thank  Mr.  Klas  Eklund,  Senior  Economist  at  the  Swedish  Bank  SEB  and  Adjunct 
Professor  of  Economics  at  the  Lund  University  and  Mr.  Çağri  Memişoğlu,  Deputy  General 
Manager at Garanti Bank Romania.  
There are, of course, historical links between the three countries. I do take this opportunity to 
highlight a few of them.  
With the Republic of Turkey one could go back to the proclamation of  the new state as a 
republic, last century, and even more, centuries of ties between the Romanian Principalities 
and the Ottoman Empire. I also like to notice the connection between our two central banks. 
In the National Bank of Romania’s archives there are letters, exchanged between Governor 
Mitiță  Constantinescu  and  Governor  Salâhattin  Çam,  regarding  the  organization  of  a 
conference  for  the  governors  of  the  central  banks  in  the  Balkanic  Coalition,  in  November 
1937, in Ankara. Now, both central banks are members of the Club of Governors of the Black 
Sea Area. 
Regarding  Sweden  I  will  grasp  your  attention  with  a  historical  moment  that  incidentally 
connects Sweden with Bucharest and the Ottoman Empire. One of Bucharest’s landmarks, 
the Colţei Tower (part of the Colţei Hospital which you can see across the Boulevard) has 
been built in the early XVIII century by the Swedish soldiers, during King Charles XII retreat 
to Adrianople after his failed campaign in Russia.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I  will  end  now  my  brief  journey  into  history,  which  has  not  been  nor  exhaustive,  not  even 
relevant, and get back to our conference topic.  
During the debate one should not forget that the size of the economies and the development 
level is different in these three countries. For example in a list compiled by the International 
Monetary  Fund  for  the  year  2012,  Turkey  ranks  17th,  with  a  nominal  GDP  of  795  billion 
dollars,  while  Sweden  ranks  22th,  with  a  nominal  GDP  of  525  billion  dollars  (Romania  is 
56th, with 170 billion dollars). GDP/capita is also rather different.  
I do hope that this conference will elicit a lively debate. I believe that we have much to learn 
from  the  Swedish  and  Turkish  experience  since  they  have  been  market  economies  for  a 
longer period of time compared to Romania.  
I  kindly  invite  Their  Excellences  the  Ambassadors  of  Turkey  and  Sweden  to  address  the 
audience  and  to  introduce  their  speakers.  The  debate  will  be  moderated  by  Mr.  Valentin 
Lazea, the National Bank of Romania Chief Economist.  
Thank you for attending this conference, which I do hope will turn out to be a very successful 
one.  
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
