Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Strengthening financial cooperation 
between China and Singapore 
Opening remarks by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore,  at  the  Opening  Ceremony  of  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore’s  Beijing 
Representative Office, Beijing, 28 May 2013. 
 Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
1 
Monetary of Authority of Singapore’s Beijing Representative Office.  
Good  afternoon.  Thank  you  for  taking  the  time  to  witness  the  opening  of  the 
MAS’ first representative office in Asia 
2 
base our first Asian representative office in China.  
This is MAS’ first representative office in Asia. Three factors underpin our choice to 
China’s growth has significant implications for the Asian region and Singapore 
All  of  us  have  an  interest  in  the  successful  transformation  of  the  world’s  most 
3 
dynamic economy. China’s 12th Five-Year Plan marks an important transition, with increased 
emphasis on urbanisation, services and social development, and consequently also greater 
reliance  on  private  consumption  as  a  source  of  economic  growth.  China  is  managing  this 
transition  in  a  pragmatic  and  purposeful  manner.  At  the  same  time,  many  industrial 
enterprises in the coastal provinces are rapidly upgrading in response to rising wages and 
moving up the value chain.  
4 
These  domestic  changes  in  China  are  taking  place  at  a  time  when  other  Asian 
nations  too  are  moving  up  the  curve  of  development.  It  will  lead  to  growing  connectivity 
between Asia and China, and new patterns of connectivity as well, in good and services.  
China and Singapore have strong and comprehensive bilateral ties  
5 
Singapore-China  relations  too  are  growing  and  evolving,  in  step  with  the 
development of our economies and societies. The relations between our two countries began 
a new era after the first official visit to Singapore by late Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping in 
1978. He and Mr Lee Kuan Yew paved the way for stronger diplomatic and economic ties 
between Singapore and China.  
6 
With  regard  to  merchandise  trade,  China  was  Singapore’s  3rd  largest  trading 
partner  last  year.  In  services,  China  has  been  also  our  5th  largest  export  destination. 
Singapore was China’s 13th largest trading partner in terms of merchandise trade in 2012. 
Singapore was also the third largest source of FDI into China last year, after Hong Kong and 
Japan.  
7 
Bilateral  trade  was  further  boosted  with  the  signing  of  the  China-Singapore  Free 
Trade Agreement (CSFTA) in September 2008 in Beijing. This was the first comprehensive 
bilateral FTA that China signed with another Asian country. It has led to greater cross-border 
economic links between our two countries. 
Multiple  Sino-Singapore  economic  projects  are  also  evidence  of  our  deep 
8 
relationship, 
its 
20th Anniversary  in  2014  and  the  Tianjin  Eco-City  which  would  be  celebrating  its 
Industrial  Park  which  would  be  celebrating 
the  Suzhou 
including 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
5th Anniversary this year. Both countries have also established regular dialogues including 
the  Joint  Council  of  Bilateral  Cooperation  (JCBC)  co-chaired  at  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister 
level  and 
in  seven  Chinese 
Provinces/Municipalities. We want to build on what has been achieved, and explore avenues 
to deepen our close partnership.  
level  economic  and 
the  Ministerial 
trade  councils 
There  is  potential  to  further  these  financial  interconnections  as  China  gradually 
Financial cooperation has become an increasingly important pillar of the China-
Singapore relationship. 
9 
Singapore  has  served  as  a  useful  platform  for  Chinese  financial  institutions  to 
participate in regional markets, especially in ASEAN. To-date, six out of the top 10 Chinese 
banks already have a presence in Singapore. Two of them – Bank of China and Industrial 
Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) – were extended Qualifying Full Bank (QFB) privileges as 
part  of  the  enhanced  CSFTA  in  2012.  These  banks  are  now  expanding  their  Singapore 
operations as hubs for Southeast Asia. 
10 
In addition, Singapore financial sector has also served the needs of China’s financial 
markets.  For  instance,  China  is  the  largest  source  of  offshore  reinsurance  business  in 
Singapore in 2011. We welcome this presence. 
11 
At the same time, China has also presented opportunities for Singapore’s financial 
institutions.  Our  three  local  banks  already  have  a  presence  in  15  provinces  in  China.  Our 
sovereign wealth funds and private investors based in Singapore are also important investors 
in China’s financial institutions and markets.  
12 
widens and deepens its financial markets. 
13 
As a central bank, MAS enjoys warm and substantive relations with our counterparts 
in the People’s Bank of China (PBC). We have been in close coordination with PBC over the 
past year to enable cooperation in the RMB business and related arrangements.  
14 
PBC  has  recently  appointed  the  Singapore  branch  of  ICBC  as  the  RMB  clearing 
bank in Singapore earlier this year. ICBC has been working closely with the industry since 
then to prepare for the offering of their RMB clearing and settlement services. I am delighted 
to  share  that  ICBC  has  officially  launched  RMB  clearing  services  yesterday.  Key  banks  in 
Singapore are ready to actively participate in this promising new market.  
15 
MAS also has growing relations with the key sectoral regulators, namely the China 
Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC), China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) 
and China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC). MAS and CBRC currently hold annual 
meetings to exchange views on regulatory cooperation and market developments. MAS also 
plans to step up its engagements with CSRC and CIRC in areas of common interest.  
16 
These initiatives clearly indicate the increasing importance and connectivity between 
the  financial  markets  of  our  two  countries.  Certainly,  we  hope  for  more  of  such  bilateral 
collaborations as China continues the progressive internationalisation of its financial market 
and currency. 
17 
MAS therefore sees great value in establishing a physical presence here to facilitate 
such future cooperation and regular interactions. Similarly, we hope that this MAS office can 
also  cater  to  the  needs  of  the  larger  Chinese  financial  community  by  enhancing 
understanding and contacts with Singapore and the regional markets, as thereby contribute 
in our own small way to the continued development of China’s financial sector. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Concluding Remarks 
18 
On  behalf  of  all  my  colleagues  in  MAS,  I  would  like  to  express  our  strongest 
appreciation  to  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  for  their  approval  and  support  for  MAS’ 
representative office in Beijing.  
19 
our financial and economic cooperation and take our bilateral relations to new heights.  
20 
 
We look forward to taking full advantage of this milestone collaboration to deepen 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
