Deepak Mohanty: Statistics and the Reserve Bank – recent developments 
and perspective 
Opening remarks by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the Annual Statistics Conference 2013 of the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 22 March 
2013. 
 (ISI/ICRIER  Delhi),  Prof.  Pulak  Ghosh 
1. 
Deputy  Governor,  Dr.  Urjit  R.  Patel,  Shri  A.  B.  Chakraborty,  Officer-in-Charge, 
Department of Statistics and Information Management (DSIM); heads of select central office 
departments;  distinguished  statisticians  and  economists  from  the  academia;  and  friends.  I 
extend a warm welcome to you all to the Annual Statistics Conference 2013, organized by 
DSIM. This conference provides a platform to the officers of DSIM to present their research 
work  before  the  experts  and  receive  their  feedback  in  order  to  make  the  analysis  more 
meaningful for policy and research. I thank the distinguished professors who have consented 
to discuss various papers prepared by my colleagues in DSIM: Prof. Manoj Panda (Director, 
Institute  of  Economic  Growth,  Delhi),  Prof.  N.  R.  Bhanumurthy  (NIPFP,  New  Delhi), 
Prof. Tathagata Bandyopadhya (IIM, Ahmedabad), Prof. Rajendra Vaidya (IGIDR, Mumbai), 
Prof.  Chetan  Ghate 
(IIM,  Bangalore), 
Prof. T. V. Ramanathan  (Pune  University).  You  all  bring  together  plenty  of  expertise  and 
experience  in  the  field  of  theory  and  practice  of  statistical  research  for  economic  policy 
making which is of great value to us. 
I  have  said  it  earlier  that  Statistics  is  a  public  good.  As  a  central  bank,  we  are 
2. 
responsible for generating various macro-financial statistics collected both from primary and 
secondary  sources  in  the  process  of  implementing  our  policies.  We  use  statistics  and 
statistical  tools  extensively  to  aid  informed  policy  making.  Therefore,  a  solid  statistical 
grounding and soiling the hands with data are basic prerequisites for the making of a good 
empirical  economist.  This  is  evident  from  the  presence  of  many  eminent  economists 
amongst us in this conference. 
3. 
Let me recapitulate briefly about the outcome of the 2012 conference in the context 
of major developments that took place in the statistical activities during last one year. In the 
last  year’s  conference,  DSIM  researchers  presented  12  technical  papers.  Subsequently 
these papers were revised based on the feedback received from the external experts.I am 
happy  to  note  that  5  papers  have  been  already  submitted  for  publication  in  RBI  Working 
Paper  Series/  RBI  Occasional  Papers/outside  journals  and  others  are  in  various  stages of 
completion. 
4. 
The  research  activities  of  the  Department  encompass  measurement  of  economic 
indicators,  analysis,  modelling  and  forecasting  of  economic  growth,  inflation,  corporate 
performance and capturing economic agents’ response to expected macro developments for 
forward  looking  monetary  policy  formulation.  Based  on  various  univariate  and  multivariate 
models, projected path of growth and inflation is presented in the form of fan charts. In the 
current  economic  scenario,  the  analysis  of  growth-inflation  trade-off,  exchange  rate  pass-
through  and  inflation  persistence  carried  out  by  the  Department  was  particularly  useful  for 
calibrating monetary policy actions. 
Last  year,  the  conference  outlined  several  data  and  dissemination  initiatives  for 
5. 
better  harmonisation  and  synergy  between  data  producers  and  users.  I  am  happy  to  note 
that  the  department  has  released  a  new  user  friendly  interface  of  Database  on  Indian 
Economy (DBIE) and has transformed data warehouse utilities into a major production tool of 
the Bank. All the major statistical publications of the Bank, as well as all the tables of RBI 
Bulletin and Weekly Statistical Supplement (WSS), are now generated directly from DBIE. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
6. 
The  previous  conference  also  emphasised  the  need  for  initiatives  for  improving 
banking  data  with  regard  to  quality,  coverage,  presentation  and  dissemination.  It  was 
deliberated  that  data  quality  and  coverage  issues  require  a  collaborative  effort  across  the 
various regulatory, research as also policy departments so as to harmonize the reporting of 
data. In this connection, the Department had several rounds of interactions during the year 
with RPCD and DBS to address these issues and resolve the same. Regarding harmonizing 
the  reporting  of  deposits  and  credit  data  at  granular  level,  action  has  been  initiated  for 
codification of the input data structure at the data processing and reporting systems of banks 
as per the classification and coding system followed for the BSR system. The main objective 
is to source all these data from the banks’ CBS platforms so that data reported by the banks 
to various departments of the Reserve Bank become consistent with the granular databases 
maintained by the banks. In order to take these initiatives forward, this conference has two 
structured panel discussions with participation of the stakeholder departments of the Bank. 
The  outcome  of  the  discussion  today  and  tomorrow  is  expected  to  pave  the  way  for 
availability of quality banking statistics. 
On the operational front, the department conducted a survey on demand and usage 
7. 
of  coins  across  12  centres,  prepared  a  research  paper  on  estimating  counterfeit  notes  in 
circulation, and provided statistical basis of estimation of agency commission of commercial 
banks undertaking government business. 
8. 
The surveys conducted by the department particularly on macroeconomic changes 
continue  to  provide  valuable  inputs for forward  looking monetary  policy  formulation. These 
include  Industrial  Outlook  Survey  (IOS),  Order  Books,  Inventories  and  Capacity  Utilisation 
Survey  (OBICUS),  Credit  Conditions  Survey  (CrCS),  Inflation  Expectations  Survey  of 
Households  (IESH),  Consumer  Confidence  Survey  (CCS)  and  Survey  of  Professional 
Forecasters  (SPF).  Key  findings  of  most  of  these  surveys  are  now  published  on  the  RBI 
website simultaneously with the Macroeconomic and Monetary Developments every quarter. 
This  has  increased  visibility  of  our  survey  output  and  has  improved  considerably  the 
timeliness  in  dissemination  of  survey  results.  However,  this  has  also  increased  our 
accountability  of  research  outputs  and  responsibility  of  maintaining  good  quality  statistics. 
Technical skills of our survey data analysis is now implicitly under public scrutiny. 
For guidance on technical issues related to surveys, a high level Technical Advisory 
9. 
Committee  on  Survey  (TACS)  has  been  constituted.  During  the  year,  coverage  of  IESH 
survey has been extended to four more centres covering a total of 16 important centres. Pilot 
Survey on Employment of Fresh Graduates from Technical Institutions was conducted during 
June-August,  2012  to  collect  placement  data  for  2010–2011  and  2011–2012  from 
61 engineering and management institutes to assess trends in employment opportunities of 
fresh graduates. House price index compilation has been extended to 4 more cities, covering 
now  total  10  cities.  Further,  in  order  to  complement  this,  the  Department  has  successfully 
introduced  an  Asset  Price  Monitoring  System  (APMS)  based  on  housing  loan  account 
information available with banks. 
10. 
A  dynamic  database  called  “Branch  Locator”  was  released  in  the  Bank’s  website 
providing  detailed  information  (like  location,  type  of  business)  on  branches  of  commercial 
banks. This has helped banks in accessing locational information for branch expansion and 
financial inclusion. Scope of BSR-4 survey, one of the key RBI survey tailored for estimating 
household savings in the form of bank deposits, hitherto conducted on a sample basis, has 
been  widened  to  a  census  from  March  2012.  The  scope  of  BSR-7  was  also  expanded  to 
collect  data  on  deposits  by  type  (current,  savings  and  term)  from  March  2012  quarter.  A 
Standing  Monitoring  Group  has  been  constituted  to  implement  enhancements  to  IBS  as 
recommended by the BIS Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS). 
In India, analysis of monetary policy transmission was constrained due to absence 
11. 
of effective lending rate data of banks. In this context, in a research paper, the department 
provided a comparable annual time series data on weighted average lending rates (WALR) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
for  bank  credit  for  major  sectors  in  India  for  the  period  1992–2010  based  on  the 
comprehensive account level BSR database. This information bridged an important data gap 
for empirical assessment of the bank lending rate channel of monetary transmission. 
12. 
In the current macroeconomic scenario, the issue of wage price spiral and inflation 
has  resurfaced  and  has  been  a  topic  in  public  discourse.  In  this  context,  the  department 
compiled  a  long  time  series  data  on  rural  wage  rate  based  on  the  data  contained  in  the 
Labour Bureau Journal for 18 occupations for all the major states as well as at all India level. 
This  is  a  monthly  data  base  starting  from  July  1995  to  November  2012  (latest)  and  is 
available to the public in a user-friendly format in the data warehouse. 
13. 
Regional market intelligence or statistical intelligence plays a pivotal role in providing 
important  inputs  to  monetary  policy  and  many  central  banks  have  established  statistical 
system for gathering regional information. With its reorganised structure and wider presence 
of  regional  offices  in  major  centres,  the  Department  has  put  in  place  a  similar  system  of 
gathering  relevant  statistics  and  market  intelligence,  particularly  in  the  area  of  prices  of 
essential  commodities.  This  system  is  potentially  useful  to  gauge  an  early  signal  of  price 
pressure  across  commodities  before  the  official  data  release.  Also  this  data  is  useful  in 
validating the price trends as available in official price indices like WPI and CPI. 
14. 
The  reporting  of  purpose  code  under  Foreign  Exchange  Transactions  Electronic 
Reporting System (FET-ERS) was extended to all foreign exchange transactions, including 
small receipt transactions, on a census basis from April 1, 2012, as suggested by the Central 
Board. The resultant transition helped India to become one among the pioneer countries to 
implement  BPM6  standards  for  BoP  reporting.  Information  on  International  Investment 
Position,  Co-ordinated Direct  Investment  Survey  (CDIS),  Co-ordinated Portfolio  Investment 
Survey (CPIS) (for Mutual Funds, Insurance and Private Corporate Sector) are dissemination 
as  a  part  of the  commitment  in  adherence to  the  SDDS  framework  of IMF  and  G-20  data 
gaps initiatives. 
15. 
The XBRL project under the High Level Steering Committee (Chairman: Shri Anand 
Sinha,  Deputy  Governor)  on  standardisation  in  reporting  of  financial  data  has  made 
considerable progress during the year. The second phase of this project has been taken up 
covering 43 returns (22 OSMOS returns, 16 external sector returns of FED and DSIM and 
5 returns of UBD). XBRL reporting is being integrated with the data warehouse and will be 
the only platform for receiving and validating all the incoming data in due course. 
16. 
Central banking today is more challenging than ever and availability of reliable and 
timely information is the key to effective policy making. The statisticians in the Reserve Bank 
perform a multifarious role. While the department has many achievements in the past, let me 
share a few challenges for the Department going forward. 
First, data gaps are an inevitable consequence of the ongoing development of markets and 
institutions.  As  has  been  true  of  previous  international  financial  crises,  these  gaps  are 
highlighted when a  lack of timely, accurate information hinders the ability of policy makers 
and  market  participants  to  develop  effective  responses.  Indeed,  the  recent  crisis  has 
reaffirmed  an  old  lesson  –  good  data  and  good  analysis  are  the  lifeblood  of  effective 
surveillance  and  policy  responses  at  both  the  national  and  international  levels.  In  this 
context,  G-20  data  gaps  initiatives  have  provided  a  statistical  framework  across  nations 
which are consistent and comparable. DSIM, being the nodal department in the Bank, has a 
major role in taking this initiative forward. 
Second, there are some surveys on macroeconomic changes which merit further thrust. We 
have  made  a  beginning  on  collection  of  data  on  employment  opportunities  of  fresh 
graduates. We need to have better understanding of the potential demand pressure in the 
economy.  In  this  context,  an  important  indicator  which  provides  early  signs  of  overall 
economic  activity  is  retail  sales.  Many  central  banks  are  effectively  using  the  retail  sales 
data. A quarterly survey on retail sales across cities may be initiated with the help of regional 
offices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Third,  while  the  Department  has  developed  the  database  on  rural  wage  rate,  there  is  an 
urgent need to understand the wage price development in the urban sector. Towards this, 
quarterly corporate results could be suitably examined in order to provide time series data of 
urban wage. 
Fourth, the Department is involved in various data gap and statistical measurement issues 
through  its  participation  in  various  committees  within  and  outside  the  RBI.  One  particular 
issue that has received renewed attention recently is the development of a Producers Price 
Index (PPI), including services. While this is presumably an institutional effort being made by 
the  Government,  work  relating  to  a  statistical framework  of  PPI  in  Indian  context  could  be 
attempted by the department. 
Fifth,  during  last  5  years  or  so,  statistical  systems  both  for  financial  and  banking,  have 
undergone a major change. New systems are introduced in line with global standard of data 
compilation and dissemination. In this context, efforts should be made to update the “Manual 
on Banking and Financial Statistics”, which was published last in 2007. 
Sixth,  while  the  department  has  made  considerable  inroads  towards  collection  of  forward 
looking information for monetary policy formulation, our effort on financial inclusion surveys 
has been limited. Financial inclusion is policy priority of the Bank. Therefore, it is necessary 
for  the  department  to  engage  itself  in  formulation  and  undertaking  of  surveys  on  financial 
inclusion, particularly assessment of financial inclusion outcomes in the villages following the 
outreach programme of the Bank, in collaboration with RPCD and its regional offices. 
Seventh, the Department has noticeable presence in a number of central office departments, 
like Monetary Policy Department (MPD), Department of External Investment and Operations 
(DEIO), 
Information 
Technology (DIT), Department of Payment and Settlement Systems (DPSS), Department of 
Banking Supervision (DBS) and Financial Stability Unit (FSU). It is desirable that our officers 
in these departments provide analytical inputs for policy and operational issues and come out 
with  research  papers.  These  papers  could  be  presented  in  conferences  and  published 
eventually  in  the  RBI  Working  Paper  Series.  This  will  make  research  more  valuable  in 
furthering our organisational objectives. 
Eighth,  focused  and  determined  approach  to  research  across  various  units,  including  the 
regional  offices,  should  be  pursued  so  that  research  agenda  being  adopted  by  the 
Department is accomplished in a timely manner. For data management and dissemination, 
technology must be harnessed to its fullest extent. There is also a need to strengthen the 
modelling  and  forecasting  capabilities  towards  developing  a  full-fledged  forecasting  suite 
including DSGE models. 
17. 
Finally, I conclude with a quote from the famous statistician John Tukey: “The best 
thing about being a statistician is that you get to play in everyone’s backyard.” I see limitless 
opportunities for a statistician as the demand for statistical skills and statistics in the Bank 
keeps  growing  as  we  grapple  with  many  questions.  I  hope  the  deliberations  of  this 
conference  will  bring  academics  and  policy  makers  closer  and  lead  to  strengthening  our 
statistical analysis and system. I wish the conference all success. 
18. 
Internal  Debt  Management  Department  (IDMD),  Department  of 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
