Yaseen Anwar: Developments of Islamic banking in Pakistan 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
Islamic Finance News Pakistan Roadshow, Karachi, 27 August 2013.  
 Thank You for inviting me to speak at today’s event. I am honored to have this opportunity of 
addressing such a distinguished audience. My appreciation to the organizers for once again 
having assembled a strong list of speakers at this year’s Islamic Finance News Road show 
and  a  warm  welcome  to  the  international  delegates.  With  all  of  us  gathered  here  at  the 
central bank sends a strong signal about commitment and determination of the State Bank of 
Pakistan  and  the  Government  towards  ensuring  sustainable  growth  of  the  Islamic  finance 
industry  in  the  country.  As  I  look  around  I  am  optimistic  that  the  collective  experience  of 
speakers will lead to rich debates that will not only help us in understanding the key issues 
but will also enable us to map out the future of the industry. 
The Islamic finance industry has come a long way to be recognized as a viable alternate to 
conventional  finance.  Islamic  financial  institutions  are  currently  offering  a  wide  range  of 
services catering to both Muslim and non-Muslim communities. The unprecedented growth of 
the Islamic finance industry can be associated to efforts of dedicated regulatory, Shariah and 
academic  institutions  along  with  the  presence  of  diversified  players  in  the  field  i.e.  Islamic 
banks, investment banks, takaful companies, Islamic fund management companies, Islamic 
brokerage companies etc. The Introduction of Sukkuk and Islamic stock market indices have 
also added the necessary depth and breadth to the Islamic financial markets. In particular 
Sukuk; has proved to be a powerful tool in attracting investors and building their confidence 
in Islamic finance while fulfilling financing needs of the public and private sector in a Shariah 
compliant manner. 
Pakistan  is  no  exception  to  this;  rather  the  country  has  remained  at  the  fore  front  in 
promoting Islamic finance by being a key member of International Islamic finance institutions 
established  to  develop  necessary  legal,  regulatory,  supervisory  and  Shariah  compliance 
infrastructure for Islamic finance institutions. Pakistan’s active engagement with the Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB),  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organization  for  Islamic 
Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI)  and  the  International  Islamic  Financial  Market  (IIFM)  and 
collaboration with other central banks has helped the growth of the Islamic banking industry 
both locally and at the global level. 
Islamic banking in Pakistan has witnessed significant growth during the last decade and now 
constitutes  over  10  percent  of  the  country’s  banking  system  with  an  asset  base  of  over 
Rs.900  billion  and  a  network  of  more  than  1,100  branches.  Given  the  interest  of  all 
stakeholders and a relatively high level of financial exclusion in the country, we believe this 
expansionary trend is likely to continue and the industry is well set to double its market share 
by 2020. This success could not have been possible without the leading role of the central 
bank in setting the direction of the industry and providing unusual support for its promotion 
and development. Promoting Islamic finance as a viable and competitive component of the 
financial  system  through  an  enabling  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  environment  has 
remained  an  important  component  of  SBP’s  strategic  goals.  Considering  the  evolutionary 
stage of the industry, we are continuously engaged in refining and improving the legal and 
regulatory framework to ensure: a) its responsiveness to the evolving industry dynamics and 
b) its effectiveness in identifying, measuring and mitigating the risks associated with Islamic 
finance. In the recently concluded fiscal year we issued detailed instructions for Profit & Loss 
Distribution  and  Pool  Management  to  bring  standardization,  improve  transparency  and 
safeguard interests of Investment Account Holders (the savings depositors). The instructions 
developed  through  rigorous  consultations  with  the  industry  have  been  well  received  both 
domestically and globally. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
targeted  programs  and 
that  consists  of  seminars,  conferences, 
Similarly to further improve the Shariah compliance environment in IBIs, our Islamic Banking 
Department  has  completed  industry  consultations  on  the  draft  Shariah  Governance 
framework and will soon be issuing the same. The framework will be another key milestone 
achieved,  which  will  institutionalize  the  Shariah  compliance  function  and  crystallize  the 
Shariah  compliance  related  roles  and  responsibilities  of  all  key  organs  of  IBIs  including 
BODs, executive management and Shariah Boards Moreover, to encourage standardization 
and Shariah harmonization, SBP over time has issued permissible Islamic modes of finance 
model  Islamic  financing  agreements  besides  adapting  AAOIFI  Shariah  Standards  for  the 
Pakistani market in a gradual manner. 
The continuation of growth momentum achieved during last the 4–5 years is contingent on 
making  an  objective  assessment  of  the  successes,  failures  and  future  challenges  and 
developing consensus strategies and action plans to build on the successes and address the 
challenges. We have accordingly developed the five year Strategic Plan for Islamic Banking 
industry again through a rigorous and meaningful consultation with all key stakeholders. The 
plan  to  be  issued  soon  lays  down  the  future  road  map  of  the  industry,  highlight  areas  of 
improvement  in  legal,  regulatory  and  taxation  environments,  emphasize  diversification  of 
products  and  markets  covering  non-traditional  but  strategically  important  sectors  of 
agriculture and SMEs and increasing the Islamic banking market share to over 15% of the 
country’s banking system during the next five years. 
SBP has also played a vital role in raising awareness and building capacity of the industry. 
To  address  the  awareness  and  misconception  issues,  SBP  launched  an  awareness 
campaign 
focused 
discussions  for  the  business  community,  academia,  bankers  and  policy  makers.  A  recent 
significant  milestone  is  the  launch  of  a  Mass  Media  Campaign  where  the  whole  Islamic 
banking  Industry  joined  hands  under  the  ambit  of  SBP  to  target  the  challenge  of 
misconceptions  related  to  the  Islamic  banking  business  model  and  practices.  Similarly  a 
number of initiatives have been taken to build the industry’s human resource capacity and 
enhance its skills mix. In this regard support from international organizations like the Islamic 
Research and Training Institute (IRTI) and Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) is also 
being leveraged. 
One key benefit of the promotion of Islamic finance is its potential to contribute significantly to 
financial inclusion by extending the outreach of the financial system to the masses who are 
out of the system due to faith reasons. Islamic Microfinance, a confluence of two industries; 
Islamic Finance and Microfinance, can not only be an efficient tool for financial inclusion by 
catering  to  both  voluntary  and  involuntary  financially  excluded  but  also  towards  poverty 
reduction  due  to  its  inherent  characteristic  of  being  prudent  and  asset  based.  The  Islamic 
finance industry has so far not done much to tap the potential of Islamic microfinance due to 
its  perceived  high  risk  and  its  preoccupation  in  serving  the  financing  needs  of  the 
government and large corporates. 
I would thus urge the industry to make individual as well as collaborative efforts to develop 
this sector, which would improve their market perception besides enabling them to diversify 
their clientele. The IBIs may also develop partnerships with Islamic microfinance institutions 
to serve the low income population. 
Similarly,  Agriculture  and  SMEs  are  areas  that  have  so  far  been  missed  out  by  both 
conventional  and  Islamic  banks  due  to  the  perception  of  high  risk  despite  their  paramount 
importance  for  the  country’s  economy.  Financial  inclusion  is  one  of  the  key  strategic 
objectives  of  SBP  and  as  most  are  aware,  very  near  to  my  heart;  I  would  thus  strongly 
emphasize the industry to come out of these perception myths and develop capacity to tap 
these strategically important sectors and create value for your shareholders, depositors and 
the  country’s  economy  as  a  whole.  SBP  will  provide  every  support  and  facilitation  to  the 
industry in s efforts to build and expand its portfolio in these sectors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Islamic  capital  markets,  mutual  funds  and  Takaful  industry  are  also  very  important 
components of the Islamic financial system and need to be nurtured and developed along 
with Islamic banking. We are working closely with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
of  Pakistan  (SECP),  regulator  of  capital  markets  to  help  develop  these  non-bank  financial 
institutions. We appreciate and acknowledge the important steps taken by SECP, including 
review  of  Mudaraba  guidelines,  issuance  of  Sukuk  guidelines,  establishment  of  central 
Shariah advisory board etc, and believe that these are likely to help in development of the 
overall Islamic finance industry. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  critical  importance  of  investment  in  research  and 
development particularly for the evolving sectors of Islamic finance. Unfortunately we are not 
making adequate investment in this area, which is limiting our capacity to develop Shariah 
based solutions for various business and economic needs of the real economy. The research 
and  development  is  also  needed  to  develop  solutions  for  bringing  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies and practices in conformity with Shariah principles. The strategic plan for the next 
five years has envisages a number of such initiatives and I hope that the collaborative efforts 
by the regulator and practitioners would be instrumental in improving investment in R&D and 
developing better solutions for serving the financing needs of the real economy. 
In conclusion, I thank all the speakers and participants for coming here and hope that the 
deliberations and discussions during the Road show will help the industry in moving towards 
more inclusive growth and equitable distribution of gains in the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
