Lars Rohde: Recent developments and outlook for the Danish economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Rohde,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting  of  the  Association  of  Danish  Mortgage  Banks  2013,  Copenhagen,  26  September 
2013. 
 The global economy is recovering at a moderate pace. In the 2nd quarter, the euro area saw 
positive growth for the first time in 18 months, and looking ahead, the economy is expected 
to pick up further, albeit slowly. Activity in the US economy is also set to grow, although bond 
yields  are  beginning  to  rise.  Growth  is  supported  by  extremely  accommodative  monetary 
policy, with the Fed funds target rate close to zero and current large-scale asset purchases. 
Activity  in  the  Danish  economy  remains  below  its  potential  level,  but  here,  too,  there  are 
signs that the situation is beginning to improve. GDP grew by 0.5 per cent in the 2nd quarter. 
Private  consumption  was  flat,  as  it  has  basically  been  since  2010.  In  Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s assessment, macroeconomic balances have now more or less been adjusted 
following  the  years  of  overheating  of  the  economy  and  the  subsequent  downturn,  and  the 
foundations  for  renewed  growth  are  in  place.  Signals  from  abroad  are  also  more 
encouraging. Danmarks Nationalbank projects growth at just over 1½ per cent in 2014 and 
2015. That is higher than the average growth rate expected for the euro area, but in line with 
the outlook for Germany. 
Over  the  last  year,  households  have  begun  to  take  a  more  optimistic  view  of  the  housing 
market, and more people now expect prices to rise. But the recovery is unevenly distributed 
across the country. Prices of flats in Copenhagen have risen by more than 10 per cent over 
the last year. 
With the most recent overheating of the Danish housing market in mind, we might now begin 
to ask whether things are moving a bit too fast in Copenhagen. However, the price increases 
should be seen in the light of the preceding strong fall in 2008–09 and the decline in 2011. 
An article in Danmarks Nationalbank’s most recent Monetary Review compares price levels 
for  flats  in  northern  European  capitals.  While  an  average  flat  of  100  square  metres  costs 
kr. 2.3 million in Copenhagen, it would cost about twice as much in Stockholm and Oslo and 
three  times  as  much  in  Paris.  In  Berlin,  on  the  other  hand,  the  price  is  kr.  1.9  million. 
Although these differences can hardly be used as indicators of national price developments, 
they are illustrative and show that the price level in Copenhagen is not particularly high in an 
international  perspective.  Judging  by  the  economic  fundamentals,  prices  are  not  likely  to 
continue  to  rise  at  the  pace  seen  over  the  last  year,  and  nor  should  they.  In  Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s assessment, prices of flats in Copenhagen are not far from their equilibrium  
– although the equilibrium level is difficult to identify precisely. The equilibrium price can be 
expected to increase by 2–3 per cent annually, but experience shows that there may be large 
deviations  from  this  trend.  As  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  previously  pointed  out,  the 
structure of housing taxes contributes to instability in the housing market. 
The outlook that the Danish economy will begin to pick up steam highlights the issue of how 
much  spare  capacity  we  actually  have,  and  when  the  economy  will  begin  to  experience 
capacity problems. Danmarks Nationalbank compiles the output gap at minus 2½ per cent of 
GDP. That is not tremendously large, and the economy is expected to approach its potential 
level  in  the  coming  years.  It  is  estimated  that  employment  can  increase  by  around 
55,000 without creating inflationary pressures in the economy. This is a snapshot. A couple 
of  years  down  the  line,  the  figure  will  be  higher  if  structural  unemployment  falls  and  the 
structural labour force increases as expected. Most of the increase in employment is to be 
achieved  via  a  higher  participation  rate,  while  it  is  estimated  that  there  is  room  for 
unemployment to fall by approximately 15,000. Irrespective of the measure of unemployment 
applied,  unemployment  is  low  viewed  over  the  last  few  decades.  In  fact,  we  are  already 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
seeing the first signs that labour is becoming scarcer. For example, there has been a small 
increase in the number of firms reporting a shortage of labour, and there has also been a 
higher influx of foreign labour into the Danish labour market in the last few years. This does 
not indicate that unemployment is far from its structural level. 
The outlook for the Danish economy does not indicate that fiscal policy should be eased. The 
timing  could  prove  to  be  bad,  by  which  I  mean  that  fiscal  stimulation  of  demand  might 
accelerate  an  upswing,  with  the  risk  that  the  economy  rapidly  experiences  capacity 
problems. 
The new fiscal policy framework does not leave scope for further easing. The budget deficit 
is  close  to  3  per  cent  of  GDP  this  year  and  in  both  2014  and  2015  if  the  expected 
extraordinary revenue from early taxation of capital pensions is disregarded, as it should be. 
When  the  bill  was  passed,  it  was  a  precondition  that revenue  from  such  taxation  that  had 
been  moved  forward  should  be  used  to  reduce  the  government  debt.  This  revenue  is 
extraordinary and temporary, and will entail a shortfall at a later time. The structural budget 
balance will deteriorate in 2014 and is close to the Budget Act’s limit of minus 0.5 per cent of 
GDP. The conclusion is clear. There is neither a need for nor scope for fiscal easing. 
Lending by banks and mortgage banks to the corporate sector has been virtually unchanged 
since 2008. But there has been a redistribution among the credit institutions, so that lending 
by mortgage banks has increased, while lending by banks has declined. This may reflect the 
need  for  some  banks  to  consolidate  after  the  financial  crisis,  encouraging  customers  
– especially firms – to raise mortgage loans rather than bank loans. At the same time, some 
firms  may  have  found  mortgage  loans  more  attractive.  In  addition,  firms  have  increasingly 
sought  alternative  sources  of  funding,  such  as  corporate  bonds,  sector  loans  and  trade 
credits, export guarantees, etc. 
The  mortgage  banks  have  been  able  to  meet  the  demand  for  loans  and  have  thereby 
contributed to a stable supply of credit in the crisis years. This applies not only in relation to 
corporate customers, but also in relation to households. 
The number of families falling behind on their mortgage payments has been low since the 
mid-1990s.  Even  the  financial  crisis  led  to  only  a  small  increase  in  the  arrears  ratio  for 
mortgage debt. The question is whether this is  also likely to be the case in future. Danish 
households have far more debt relative to income than families in other countries. This has 
caused some concern among observers of the Danish economy as to whether the families 
will be able to service their debt, especially if the Danish economy  were to be affected by 
another serious recession . Let me state this very clearly: Danmarks Nationalbank does not 
share the view that the high debt ratio among households is a problem in relation to financial 
stability.  Even  financially  squeezed  households  typically  service  their  mortgages  and  cut 
down on private consumption instead. This affects demand in the economy and hence the 
corporate  sector.  That  has  an  impact  on  macroeconomic  stability  rather  than  financial 
stability, but indirectly the banks may also be affected. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  most  recent  Monetary  Review  evaluates  a  number  of  stress 
scenarios in which interest rates and unemployment soar and house and equity prices dive. 
While the selected stress scenarios would  led to loan impairment charges for the financial 
sector overall, the calculations do not point to the mortgage banks being particularly severely 
affected.  This  is  because  the  mortgage  loan  is  nearly  always  the  last  item  of  debt  that  a 
family with a tight budget defaults on. For most families, even considerable worsening of their 
finances would lead to only a small increase in the probability of falling behind with mortgage 
payments. 
The Danish economy has stabilised. That is also true of the financial sector. For the first time 
since the collapse of Roskilde Bank in the early summer of 2008, the summer has been quiet 
– and even sunny. But there are, nevertheless, a couple of financial summer stories to tell. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  first  one  is  about  F1  loans,  i.e.  mortgage  loans  with  annual  refinancing.  The  current 
debate was triggered by a word of warning from S&P. But the debate on the robustness of 
the  construction  behind  the  F1  loans  is  much  older.  Particularly  after  the  auction  in 
December  2008,  people  began  to  say,  “suppose  that...”.  Suppose  that  the  bonds  had  not 
been sold. At that time it was more the rule than the exception that markets froze. Liquidity 
typically dried up if doubts arose as to the credit risk. 
Households’ long-term loans with annual refinancing are based on bonds with much shorter 
maturities. This has given mortgage banks qualities resembling those of ordinary banks, in 
that there may be “runs” on them. That risk did not exist under the old mortgage credit model 
since all loans were “prefinanced”. 
So the question is, what would happen in practice if a mortgage bank finds itself in a situation 
– due to uncertainty about the credit risk, perhaps – in which it cannot sell short-term bonds 
in connection with refinancing. 
The brief answer is that Danmarks Nationalbank will act as the lender of last resort – as it 
does for other banks – if the mortgage bank is solvent and can pledge adequate collateral. In 
practice, the latter would presumably be all the bonds not sold in the market. 
Mortgage  bonds,  also  bonds  issued  by  the  mortgage  banks  themselves,  are  now  part  of 
Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  collateral  basis,  i.e.  they  may  be  pledged  to  Danmarks 
Nationalbank as collateral. This option will limit the impact of a scenario in which bonds are 
difficult to sell. So the response to S&P and others is that this is not an immediate threat to 
financial stability in Denmark. 
BUT  this  does  not  mean  that  a  business  model  based  on  Danmarks  Nationalbank  as  the 
backstop  is  expedient  for  private-sector  financial  institutions.  That  is  not  a  sustainable 
solution. 
One of the strengths of the Danish mortgage credit model should be that it is, inherently, so 
robust  that  no  subsidisation  whatsoever  is  required.  That  is  exactly  what  the  balance 
principle aims at. To the extent that it is possible, the mortgage bank should take on credit 
risk, but no other types of risk. 
Investor confidence in the creditworthiness and liquidity of mortgage bonds is at the core of 
the  Danish  mortgage  credit  system.  I  have  on  other  occasions  argued  that,  in  order  to 
maintain this confidence, the mortgage banks should take a cautious approach and not go 
too near the statutory limits. The more resilient the mortgage banks are to losses, the greater 
is the probability that they can meet their obligations to investors. And all other things being 
equal, it will take a greater shock to trigger a “run” on the mortgage banks. 
I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the initiatives already taken with a view to 
addressing this issue. Auctions are now spread over the year, business models and product 
ranges  are  being  adjusted,  and  pricing  structures  are  being  changed  in  order  to  give 
borrowers incentives to choose products with lower refinancing risk. All these initiatives make 
positive  contributions  to  the  sustainability  of  Danish  mortgage  credit.  But  the  system  still 
involves considerable refinancing risk. In 2014, bonds linked to adjustable-rate loans totalling 
more than kr. 750 billion are currently set to fall due, and the auctions towards the end of the 
year  will  be  of  more  or  less  the  same  size  –  just  over  kr.  400  billion  –  as  the  auctions  in 
December 2008. 
The Danish mortgage credit system has served us well for many years and proved its worth 
during  the  financial  crisis.  All  the  same  –  and  for  good  reasons  –  it  remains  a  subject  of 
debate. I do not believe that we can or should return to the old mortgage credit model. But it 
is important that you find long-term solutions. 
The  second  summer  topic  has  been  regulation  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  wake  of  the 
financial  crisis.  Both  at  the  international  and  national  level,  politicians  have  taken  action 
during  the  crisis.  A  wide  range  of  measures  have  been  introduced:  increased  capital  and 
liquidity  requirements,  enhanced  governance  requirements  for  financial  institutions,  a  new 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
crisis  management  regime,  to  mention  but  a  few.  In  addition,  the  Danish  Financial 
Supervisory Authority has been given additional resources and powers. The crisis revealed 
various  weaknesses,  and  they  have  been  addressed.  But  as  we  have  seen  previously, 
pressures to ease the rules will emerge at some point. 
Personally, I am rather surprised to see what is happening in Denmark. The Bank Rescue 
Packages enjoyed broad political support and until recently they had a clear aim: a financial 
crisis – never again! The time had come to tidy up and tighten the rules. However, winds of 
change  seem  to  be  sweeping  across  the  political  landscape.  Has  the  Danish  Financial 
Supervisory Authority now been given too much power, and have the requirements imposed 
on  mortgage  banks  become  too  tight?  It  is  as  if  the  financial  crisis  has  already  been 
forgotten.  But  I  would  be  surprised  if  our  collective  political  memory  is  that  short.  If  so,  it 
would be shorter than in other European countries. 
So  I  would  like  to  remind  you  that  in  Denmark  we  provided  massive  support  during  the 
financial crisis, and the government took on huge risks on behalf of the tax-payers. Under 
Bank  Rescue  Package  1,  the  government  provided  guarantees  for  an  astronomical 
kr. 4,200 billion. With Bank Rescue Package 2, the government gave the financial sector a 
capital injection of kr. 46 billion in order to prevent a potential credit crunch, and it guaranteed 
debt issuances of kr. 194 billion. On the fifth anniversary of the introduction of the general 
government guarantee, the government has still injected capital totalling kr. 31 billion into the 
sector. So far, the government has not had any direct costs that have not been covered by 
the sector’s payments for this support, but the risk has been enormous. 
In that perspective there can be no doubt that there was a need for tightening. Yes, we have 
come  a  long  way  in  terms  of  tidying  up,  but  it  would  be  unfortunate  if  the  pendulum  has 
already begun to swing back. 
Thank you for inviting me to speak. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
