Mario Draghi: The policy and the role of the European Central Bank 
during the crisis in the euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Katholische 
Akademie in Bayern, Munich, 27 February 2013. 
 Excellencies, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  in  Munich  at  the  Catholic  Academy  and  thank  you  for  this  kind 
invitation. As befits this setting, I would like to begin my remarks by noting the momentous 
nature  of  the  current  period  for  the  Catholic  Church,  on  the  eve  of  the  last  day  of  the 
pontificate of Benedict XVI. 
Pope  Benedict,  a  great  son  of  Bavaria,  used  his  eight  years  at  the  helm  of  the  Church  to 
address a variety of pressing concerns of the modern world. Among them was an emphasis 
on ethical concerns in the economic relationships of our globalised world. 
Those  concerns  have  become  more  relevant  than  ever  during  the  economic  and  financial 
crisis that now extends into its fifth year. 
The crisis has dented people’s confidence in the capacity of markets to generate prosperity 
for  all.  It  has  strained  Europe’s  social  model.  Alongside  the  accumulation  of  staggering 
wealth  by  some,  there  is  widespread  economic  hardship.  Entire  countries  have  been 
suffering  from  the  consequences  of  misguided  past  actions  –  but  also  from  market  forces 
that are sometimes beyond their control. 
In  a  sense,  the  “social  question”  of  the  19th  century,  which  inspired  the  Catholic  Social 
Doctrine,  has  re-emerged  –  but  today  it  transcends  national  borders:  what  is  the  right 
framework for reconciling free enterprise and individual profit motives with concerns for the 
common good and solidarity with the weak? 
In  recent  decades,  this  question  seemed  to  be  approached  from  a  purely  economic 
perspective.  The  invisible  hand  of  the  market,  if  only  left  unconstrained,  would  eventually 
generate better outcomes for all. The rational actions of “homo oeconomicus” were seen as 
divorced from ethical concerns about compassion, charity and decency. It seemed forgotten 
that Adam Smith, the philosophical father of market economics, saw his “Wealth of Nations” 
as inextricably linked to his “Theory of Moral Sentiments”. 
Thankfully  not  everywhere.  At  the  Jesuit  school  in  Italy  where  I  was  educated,  we  had  a 
fundamental guiding principle: our striving for excellence had to be paired with integrity and a 
moral message – an ultimate sense of purpose in the service of social justice and fairness. 
I  have  previously  noted  that  “without  ethics,  there  cannot be  a  genuine  development”.  We 
cannot  have  an  economic  model  that  allows  excesses  to  go  uncorrected,  which  relies 
exclusively  on  self-regulation  of  markets  and  in  which  individuals  believe  that  “anything 
goes”.1 Ultimately, we must be guided by a higher moral standard and a profound belief in 
creating an economic order that serves every person. 
                                                 
1   M. Draghi “Non c’è vero sviluppo senza etica” – Articolo per “L’Osservatore Romano” del 9 luglio 2009: “La 
crisi attuale conferma la necessità di un rapporto fra etica ed economia, mostra la fragilità di un modello prono 
a  eccessi  che  ne  hanno  determinato  il  fallimento.  Un  modello  in  cui  gli  operatori  considerano  lecita  ogni 
mossa, in cui si crede ciecamente nella capacità del mercato di autoregolamentarsi, in cui divengono comuni 
gravi malversazioni, in cui i regolatori dei mercati sono deboli o prede dei regolati, in cui i compensi degli alti 
dirigenti d’impresa sono ai più eticamente intollerabili, non può essere un modello per la crescita del mondo.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Here I find myself in the company of Marx. Not Karl, but Reinhard. Cardinal Reinhard Marx 
has  rightly  insisted  that  “the  economy  is  not  an  end  in  itself,  but  is  in  the  service  of  all 
mankind.” 
And caring for the welfare of our neighbours is not only an ethical principle of the Christian 
faith: it also makes eminent economic sense. No-one knows this better than the successful 
entrepreneurs of Bavaria. Interdependence is not just a catchword. The economic health of 
the countries around you affects us here and now. 
So  these  are  the  challenges  facing  European  policy-makers  today:  how  do  we  recreate 
confidence in the capacity of our economies to grow and generate prosperity so that they can 
ultimately  serve  the  people?  How  do  we  shape  our  economic  model  so  that  it  reconciles 
individual  freedom  and  social  justice?  And  how,  as  the  European  Union,  do  we  strike  the 
right balance between the responsibilities of individual countries and those of the Union as a 
whole? 
How the ECB plays its part 
Let me begin by focusing on the role of the European Central Bank (ECB). 
We have been given a special responsibility by the people of the euro area to ensure price 
stability. Price stability is the foundation of a functioning economy. It is also the basis for a 
just and fair society. It is a common good for all Europeans. 
As Walter Eucken, the philosophical father of ordoliberalism, noted, “all efforts to establish a 
liberal  order  are  futile  unless  a  certain  monetary  stability  is  guaranteed.  Monetary  policy 
therefore has a primary importance for the liberal order.”2 
Price stability ensures that the market mechanism works properly, which is the best way we 
know to create growth, jobs and prosperity for all. It preserves the purchasing power of our 
money and the value of our savings. 
And it has profound social implications. Stable prices support the weakest members of our 
societies – including pensioners and the unemployed – who depend on fixed incomes to live. 
In that sense, a stability-oriented monetary policy is a key component of the Social Market 
Economy. 
I  do  not  say  this  based  on  theory:  the  history  of  this  country  has  taught  us  that  inflation 
undermines  not  only  economic  wealth  but  also  political  stability.  The  deep-seated  fear  of 
inflation is therefore more than understandable. Your own national experience is at once a 
powerful reminder and steadfast obligation for the central bank. 
The challenges of the crisis 
But preserving price stability today requires different actions than it did in the past. We have 
required new tools to ensure that our monetary policy decisions are able to reach firms and 
households. 
This is because the crisis has severely fragmented the euro area’s financial system. It has 
disrupted the way our interest rate changes are passed on by banks to the wider economy. 
As a result, our low interest rates have simply not been getting through to people in some 
parts of the euro area. 
This may sound like a technical matter. But the transmission of interest rates is fundamental. 
The euro area is a bank-based economy.  Around three quarters of firms’ financing comes 
                                                 
2   Walter  Eucken, 
(1952) 
“Alle  Bemühungen,  eine 
Wettbewerbsordnung  zu  verwirklichen,  sind  umsonst,  solange  eine  gewisse  Stabilität  des  Geldwertes  nicht 
gesichert ist. Die Währungspolitik besitzt daher für die Wettbewerbsordnung ein Primat.” 
“Grundsätze  der  Wirtschaftspolitik”,  p.  265: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
from  banks.  So  if  banks  in  some  countries  will  not  lend  at  reasonable  interest  rates,  the 
consequences are dire. 
Perfectly healthy companies would be forced to close. Credit for new investment would not 
be available. Not because business models are flawed or because investment projects are 
too risky, but because firms happen to be located in the wrong place. 
Worse still, in the first half of last year fragmentation in the euro area had become so serious 
that  some  investors  were  questioning  the  future  of  our  currency.  Fears  of  a  potential 
break-up  were  sending  capital  fleeing  from  the  periphery  to  the  core.  For  some  in  the 
financial markets, the most fundamental notion of confidence in a currency – that a euro is a 
euro regardless of where you are – was no longer a given. 
But a currency whose integrity is in doubt cannot be a stable currency. 
So we had to decide: do we passively let events take their course and accept severe risks for 
price stability? Or do we assume the responsibility, within our mandate, to defend the stability 
of our currency and our monetary union? 
Those  were  difficult  and  existential  decisions.  They  required  deep  reflection,  a  proper 
assessment of risks in the short and long term, and a clear-headed judgement of possible 
alternatives. They also required the courage to face the inevitable criticism and engage with 
those who disagreed. 
But we chose to act – because we judged this to be right and necessary to safeguard price 
stability. 
Defending the transmission of monetary policy 
First,  we  acted  to  remove  blockages  that  were  stopping  banks  from  passing  on  our  low 
interest rates to borrowers. 
We allowed banks to take as much liquidity as they needed from our operations. We allowed 
a wider set of collateral that banks could use to access this liquidity. And we extended the 
maturity of our operations, going up to 3 years. 
Second, we acted to remove the unfounded fears about the future of the euro area that were 
undermining the stability of our currency. 
We  launched  a  new  measure  called  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs)  to  provide  a 
fully effective backstop in the sovereign bond market. 
We focused on this market because it has a “knock-on” effect on other markets. Fears in the 
sovereign  bond  market  were  seeping  into  the  banking  system.  They  were  paralysing  the 
economy, and ultimately threatening price stability. By putting in place a credible backstop, 
we were able to remove those fears at the source. 
Those  fears  were  unjustified  by  economic  fundamentals.  They  were  the  result  of  market 
failure:  a  situation  where  investors  seem  to  act  rationally,  but  collectively  they  create 
destructive outcomes. Countries that were fundamentally adjusting were being driven to the 
wall by panic. And the result would have been unnecessary hardship and suffering. 
Much has been written about this measure, especially in this country, and some fundamental 
questions have been raised: 
 
 
The answer to both these questions is a categorical “yes”. 
First, we always protect our independence. 
Is the ECB still independent? 
And will the ECB stay focused on fighting inflation? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
We take all our monetary policy decisions in full independence. And we have designed the 
OMTs  so  that  these  decisions  could  never  be  dominated  by  fiscal  policies.  This  is  why  a 
pre-condition  for  access  to  the  OMTs  is  a  strong  economic  adjustment  programme.  It 
ensures  that  we  would  only  ever  intervene  in  situations  where  fiscal  discipline  is  firmly 
ensured. 
Second, we keep a permanent watch on inflation. 
We understand and take very seriously people’s concerns about possible inflationary threats. 
But  it  is  a  fallacy  to  make  a  mechanical  connection  between  the  creation  of  central  bank 
liquidity  and  a  rise  in  the  money  supply.  The  liquidity  we  provide  to  banks  is  used  in  the 
markets where banks lend to each other. It does not automatically increase credit or money 
in the economy – and so does not automatically lead to price pressure in the economy. 
Indeed,  money  growth  is  currently  well  below  an  inflationary  level.  Credit  provision  to  the 
private sector is overall weak, and contracting in large parts of the euro area. And inflation 
expectations are firmly anchored. So risks of inflation down the road are firmly in check. 
The euro area dimension to our actions 
It is also important to understand that our measures are designed not only to help the people 
in  countries  under  stress.  In  fact,  in  line  with  our  mandate,  they  serve  the  citizens  of  the 
whole euro area. 
Many of the financial developments that concern people in this country – such as meagre 
returns on their savings or large imbalances in the Target-2 payment system – are really only 
the mirror image of fragmentation in the rest of the euro area. 
As  money  flows  out  of  stressed  countries  and  into  safe-haven  countries  like  Germany,  it 
pushes  up  interest  rates  in  the  stressed  countries,  and  pushes  down  interest  rates  here. 
These flows cause Target-2 imbalances to increase. 
What has not been sufficiently acknowledged, however, is that these imbalances would only 
affect German taxpayers in the event of a break-up of the euro area. This means that actions 
by the ECB that protect the euro area against such outcomes – like the OMTs – also reduce 
hypothetical risks for German taxpayers. 
And  this  is  exactly  what  we  have  seen.  Since  the  announcement  of  the  OMTs,  the 
Bundesbank’s Target-2 exposure has decreased by more than 100 billion euros. 
In sum, the ECB has acted, and will continue to act, to fulfil its mandate. We are committed 
to preserving the integrity of our currency, in the interests of all people of the euro area. 
We do not act to help banks. We do not act to help governments. We act to help maintain the 
flow of credit to real firms and households. We act to preserve price stability. 
Incidentally,  while  some  in  this  country  are  wondering  whether  the  ECB  does  “too  much”, 
elsewhere in the euro area I am asked why the ECB does not “do more”. I just returned from 
the Spanish Parliament in Madrid – and the concerns expressed there are very different from 
what I hear in Germany. People worry that a stagnating economy will lead to the emergence 
of a “lost generation”, where young people have no jobs, and even worse, no hope. 
But our answer – both to those who want us to do less and to those who want us to do more 
– is the same: we will preserve price stability. This is our mandate. 
How governments play their part 
It is important to stress that the ECB’s mandate only extends so far. There are clear limits to 
what monetary policy can and should aim to achieve. 
We cannot repair unsound budgets. We cannot clean up struggling banks. We cannot solve 
deep-rooted problems in the structure of Europe’s economies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Our  monetary  union  was  deliberately  constructed  so  that  these  policies  would  be  the 
preserve of elected governments in each Member State. Sharing a common currency would 
only be sustainable if each country assumed its own responsibility. 
This reflects the subsidiarity principle embedded in our European Treaties. And in that sense, 
it also echoes a central tenet of Catholic Social Doctrine. As Pope Pius XI wrote in 1931, “It 
is a fundamental principle that one should not withdraw from individuals and commit to the 
community what they can accomplish by their own enterprise and industry.”3 
Individuals  have  to  do  what  they  can  to  help  themselves  before  they  seek  help  from  the 
community. The same is true for the countries in the euro area. 
Fortunately, this is what we are seeing across Europe today. 
Governments have already done a lot to tackle the imbalances that accumulated in previous 
years. 
Progress  in  implementing  economic  reforms  has  been  extraordinary.  Deficits  are  being 
reduced.  Current  account  imbalances  are  being  unwound.  Wide-ranging  structural  reforms 
are underway. 
Particularly  impressive  is  the  scale  of  the  adjustment  that  has  taken  place  in  countries 
receiving financial assistance. 
In many countries these efforts have largely removed the underlying drivers of the sovereign 
debt  crisis.  But  while  sovereign  debt  markets  have  improved,  bank  lending  is  still  very 
fragmented  across  the  euro  area.  Credit  in  some  countries  is  still  difficult  to  obtain.  The 
benefits of the painful actions undertaken so far have not yet materialised. 
And this means that economic adjustment is coming at a heavy social cost. Economists often 
speak about “inevitable adjustment costs”, which to some sounds cold, heartless and lacking 
compassion. But we are fully aware of the human dimension that lies behind it. 
Euro  area  GDP  is  currently  lower  than  it  was  in  2008.  Almost  19  million  people  are 
unemployed – more than the population of the Netherlands. 
Unemployment is a tragedy. It squanders the vitality of our workers. It prevents people from 
playing  a  full  and  meaningful  part  in  society.  It  induces  a  sense  of  hopelessness,  which 
drains the inspiration from our young. 
Reform as the path to growth and fairness 
Reducing unemployment is therefore a pressing challenge. 
Governments  need  to  address  the  structural  problems  in  their  economies.  They  need  to 
enact fundamental reforms that boost the potential of their economies to grow. 
We need reforms that make doing business easier. That guarantee that those who owe taxes 
actually pay taxes. That ensure that public services actually serve the public. 
And  these  reforms  should  aim  not  only  to  create  more  growth  and  jobs,  but  also  to  make 
society fairer. 
Fairness starts within countries. 
In one country in the euro area, more than fifty percent of young people cannot currently find 
jobs.  Is  it  fair  that,  as  a  result,  this  generation  has  to  bear  the  bulk  of  the  burden  in  the 
downturn? 
                                                 
3   Pope Pius XI, Quadragesimo Anno, 79. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In another country, an estimated 55 billion euros of tax revenue remains unpaid. Is it fair that, 
as a result, other people who are taxed on their salaries have to make up the difference? 
This is why I say that reforms that make economies work better also make them fairer. 
And fairness also matters between generations. 
Many  countries  have  to  think  hard  about  how  they  can  support  ageing  populations  and 
generous welfare states. The unsustainable option is to keep increasing debt. But this means 
nothing else than passing the burden onto future generations. There is no real equity through 
debt. 
The sustainable option is to generate the higher growth that is needed to maintain Europe’s 
social model. And this is only possible by walking the path of determined reform. 
There is no doubt that this is the hard path. But it is also the courageous path. It is the path 
that will create jobs; that will support our social model in the future; and that, in the end, will 
contribute to a fairer society. 
For this reason, it is wrong to claim that countries are undertaking reforms only to please the 
markets or to satisfy the demands of technocrats in Brussels, Frankfurt or Washington. They 
are doing it for their own benefit. And it is time that this message gets more emphasis. 
The place for mutual support 
But what if countries cannot succeed on their own? 
The ethical imperative when we see others in need is to help. It is to do what we can to limit 
their hardship. 
Should this not also apply within the euro area? Should countries support those in difficulty? 
The answer is yes. Catholic Social Doctrine makes absolutely clear that subsidiarity has to 
be paired with support. But what binds these together is trust. 
Trust that each will put its own house in order – even if it is politically difficult. 
Trust that each will play by the rules – even if this imposes unpopular choices. 
Trust that each will constrain its sovereignty – even if this means making a break with the 
past. 
Such  trust  has  to  be  built  through  actions,  which  is  a  further  reason  why  the  process  of 
reform across the euro area is so important. It shows that countries are ready and willing to 
be full members of the community. And this makes mutual support between them possible. 
Certainly, countries in Europe are already doing a lot to help each other. They are providing 
generous  financial  assistance  on  condition  that  underlying  problems  are  fixed.  But  in  my 
view, once trust is established, we should go further still. 
We  should  take  stronger  collective  responsibility  over  national  economic  and  financial 
policies, to ensure that countries do not get into trouble in the first place. We should make 
better  use  of  common  resources,  to  encourage  reforms  and  restore  the  dynamism  of  our 
economies. 
In  other  words,  we  should  aim  to  build  a  strong  and  deep  economic  and  political  union  in 
Europe, which would be to the benefit of all members of the single currency. 
As I said at the beginning of my remarks, today’s social question is not just a national one. It 
transcends borders. And this path – building a stronger union based on mutual trust – is the 
way to answer that question for Europe. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by returning to the theme of Cardinal Reinhard Marx – that the economy 
should be in the service of humanity. 
Our  common  currency  exists  not  as  an  end,  but  as  a  means.  As  Nobel  Prize  winning 
economist  Amartya  Sen  has  reminded  us,  our  “instrumental  objectives  –  like  the  single 
market  and  monetary  union  –  should  not  overshadow  our  social  commitment  to  the 
well-being and basic freedoms of the people.”4 
The euro is a means to foster peace between nations; and a means to further our collective 
prosperity. 
In  many  ways,  we  have  already  achieved  this.  War  among  the  countries  of  Europe  is 
unthinkable. We have integrated our nations and our markets. The ECB has overseen the 
longest period of price stability in post-war history. 
But there are also important ways in which we have not succeeded. The terrible economic 
hardship in some parts of the euro area is testament to this. 
So what we cannot afford now is to stay where we are. 
Federal President Joachim Gauck recently called upon all of us to have more courage for 
more Europe: “What Europe needs now are not doubters but standard-bearers.”5 
We need to reinvigorate our social models by reforming our economies. 
And we need to harness the market mechanism in the service of humanity. 
In this way we can safeguard our primary capital, which is the human person in his or her 
integrity. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
4   Sen, A. K. (1996), “Social Commitment and Democracy: The Demands of Equity and Financial Conservatism,” 
in P. Barker (ed.), Living as Equals. 
5   Joachim Gauck, Speech on the prospects for the European idea, 22 February 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
