Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Current topics of the economy and monetary 
policy of the Kingdom 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Japanese 
Chamber of Commerce Dinner Talk, Bangkok, 25 March 2013. 
 Good evening, 
Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would  like to thank the Japanese Chamber of Commerce (JCC) for inviting me to give a 
keynote  speech  at  this special  annual  event.  It is  my  honor  to  be  back here  again for the 
prominent institution that has its presence in Thailand over half a century, contributing to the 
development  in  trade  and  investment,  as  well  as  promoting  Japan-Thailand  friendship 
through  cultural  exchanges  and technical  support.  For this  special  evening, I  would  like  to 
reflect  on  recent  developments  in  the  global  and  Thai  economy,  and  the  challenges  for 
monetary policy going forward. 
First of all, let’s look back to what happened last year. In 2012, Thailand faced a series of 
challenges from both domestic and external fronts. The global economy was subject to 
the  main  drag  from  the  Euro  debt  crisis,  while  uncertainties  remained  on  the  recovery 
process  of  the  US  and  Japan.  These  advanced  countries  faced  a  number  of  structural 
problems which would, of course, take time to resolve. However, it was encouraging to see 
the  overall  global  economy  continue  on  a  gradual  recovery  path,  with  improving  outlook 
particularly  in  the  US  and  Japan,  while  China  and  Asia  remained  robust.  The  Chinese 
economy, in particular, was in a sweet spot with rebounding growth and low inflation, with 
room  for  further  public  investment.  Asian  economies  also  performed  well  mainly  due  to 
strong domestic demand. 
Last year, the Thai economy grew robustly at a higher-than-expected rate of 6.4 percent. 
Even though the impact of the still weak global demand became more apparent in the latter 
half of the year, spillovers beyond merchandise exports and export-oriented manufacturing 
production were limited. Factors supporting domestic economy include private reconstruction 
investment  after  the  flood,  while  domestic  consumption  was  supported  by  favorable  wage 
and  employment  condition  as  well  as  government  stimulus  measures.  Inflation  in  2012 
remained low at 3 percent, while core inflation averaged at 2.1 percent which was well within 
the Bank of Thailand’s target range. 
This  year  we  expect  growth  momentum  for  the  Thai  economy  to  continue,  amidst 
remaining uncertainties in the global economy. The  US  has managed  to  avoid  the  so-
called  fiscal cliff,  although  uncertainties  surrounding the  sequestration  process still  remain. 
Structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area  continue  slowly  but  on  course.  Japan  also  has  an 
optimistic outlook, given a series of government stimulus measures to pull the country out of 
deflation. Improving  outlook for  the global  economy  should  underpin  a gradual  recovery  in 
export for Asian economies, including Thailand. 
We  have  forecasted  the  GDP  growth  this  year  at  4.9  percent.  However,  given  a  stronger 
than-expected  GDP  growth  in  2012,  this  forecast  is  likely  to  be  revised  up  for  the  next 
release  in  April.  Inflation  is  expected  to  remain  low,  with  headline  inflation  around 
2.8 percent. The second round minimum wage increase is unlikely to have significant impact 
on inflationary pressure, given that many firms are able to make necessary adjustments in 
reducing costs and increase productivity by shifting to more capital-intensive production. 
Robust domestic demand should continue to be the major driver for Thai economy. 
Private consumption is backed by many supportive factors such as the first-car scheme from 
the previous year and cuts in personal income tax and accommodative monetary and fiscal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
policies. Private investment is also expected to expand well, given the crowding-in effects of 
public infrastructure investment projects. Export sector should pick up pace towards the latter 
half of this year on the back of moderate recovery in the global economy. 
Nevertheless,  there  are  still  many  challenges  lying  ahead  for  the  Thai  economy.  The 
state  of  the  global  economy,  while  improving  somewhat,  remained  fragile.  And  a  firm 
recovery is still subject to risks and uncertainties. Domestically, although inflation seems to 
be benign, there is a possibility of rising inflation pressure from oil prices after global demand 
started to pick up gradually. Supply constraints, mainly from tight labor market, may also add 
on to wage-price inflation in the future. As a central bank, we always have to remain vigilant 
on  price  stability.  Of  more  immediate  concern;  however,  are  potential  threats  to  financial 
stability  stemming  from  developments  in  asset  prices  as  well  as  household  indebtedness. 
Activities are increasingly active in the stock market and real estate market. We see more 
and  more  construction  of  condominium  and  residential  houses  in  Bangkok,  peripheral  and 
major provinces around the country where prices of some of these projects have gone up 
rather fast. We also see household debt trending upward to over 70 percent of GDP. We will 
continue to be watchful and make sure that the situation does not get out of hand to threaten 
financial and economic stability. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This leads us to the second part of my talk this evening. 
Given recent economic and financial development I have mentioned, it is clear that, as 
monetary  policy maker, the  Bank  of  Thailand  is faced with  a  challenge  to  strike the 
right balance between economic growth and macro-economic stability. It is not easy to 
determine  appropriate  policy,  thus  policy  decision  has  always  been  made  with  careful 
considerations, taking into account all economic and stability aspects. 
Last year, our main concern was about ensuring growth recovery from floods. Policy 
interest  rate  was  cut  twice  with  a  view  to  providing  an  accommodative  and  conducive 
environment  to  growth.  This  helped  accelerate  recovery  in  the  aftermath  of  the  flood  and 
support domestic demand in the face of global economic slowdown. 
At the same time, the Bank of Thailand had to make sure that core inflation remains 
within  target  and  concurrently,  ensure  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  There 
has  been  continuous  effort  to  enhance  stability  surveillance  over  the  years.  Last  year,  the 
joint meeting between the  Monetary Policy Committee and the Financial Institutions Policy 
Committee was first held with the purpose of sharing ideas from different perspectives. It set 
a stage for both committees to regularly monitor and exchange views on any systemic risk 
that might occur from the interconnectedness of economic and financial sectors and to form 
policy response, should further measures be necessary. 
For this year, the Bank of Thailand will continue to make sure that overall economic 
conditions stay safe and sound. Yet, balancing among different policy objectives to 
reach the ultimate goal of macroeconomic stability is even more challenging this year, 
given  the  possible  risk  on  financial  stability  while  the  global  environment  is  still 
surrounded with uncertainties. In closing, I would like to outline the key challenges faced by 
the Bank of Thailand this year: 
First,  on  monetary  policy.  Since  the  main  goal  of  conducting  monetary  policy  is  to 
ensure  sustainable  economic  growth,  the MPC’s  decision-making has  always  based 
on the risk to economic growth, inflation, as well as financial stability. This year, the 
challenge would be striking the right balance between economic growth and financial stability 
as inflationary pressure is well contained in the short run. Given buoyant domestic spending, 
keeping the policy interest rate too low for too long could give incentive to private sectors to 
borrow more. Furthermore, low interest rate will encourage depositors to switch to invest in 
riskier asset which could lead to the problem of asset price bubble in the future. Therefore, it 
is  important  for  us  to  take  care  of  financial  system  stability  as  well  when  we  conduct 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
monetary policy. The Bank of Thailand has been closely monitoring the expansion of private 
sector’s loans and assessing ability of debt repayment of the private sectors, especially the 
middle and the low income groups. 
Second, on exchange rate policy, the main challenge is that the Thai baht has been on 
an appreciating trend due to various factors, including capital inflows surge into the 
region, structural change in the world economy, growth differential between advanced 
and  emerging  economies  as  well  as  accommodative  monetary  policy  in  advanced 
economies.  Generally,  allowing  the  exchange  rate  to  be  determined  by  the  market  can 
serve  as  an  automatic  stabilizer  in  the  short-term  and  as  an  important  price  signal  and 
catalyst for structural change in the long term. So, as the first line of defense, the exchange 
rate  should  be  determined  by  market  mechanism  and  from  both  the  market  and  our  own 
assessment,  the  Thai  baht  still  remains  broadly  in  line  with  economic  fundamentals. 
However,  the  BOT  stands  ready  to  use  policy  instruments  at  our  disposal  to  prevent  and 
manage  dysfunctional  market  conditions,  excessive  speculation  or  exchange  rate 
overshooting. 
It  should  be  noted  also  that,  the  baht  appreciation  at  this  juncture  provides  an 
opportunity for businesses to upgrade their technology and productivity. Given scarce 
labor and increasing wages, productions in Thailand need to shift from labor intensive to a 
more capital intensive industries and thus more import of capital goods and machinery are 
made cheaper during this investment up-cycle. 
Third, on capital flows management. In October 2012, the Bank of Thailand launched the 
Capital  Account  Liberalisation  Master  Plan.  This  Master  Plan  aims  to  facilitate  Thai 
companies  to  diversify  their  investments  abroad,  especially  in  neighboring  countries.  This 
would  encourage  private  companies  to  operate  their  businesses  more  efficiently  by 
expanding  their  markets  and  production  bases,  which  in  turn  will  help  strengthen  their 
competitiveness. Facilitating outflows also helps capital flows to be more balanced. The Bank 
of  Thailand,  for  instance,  has  removed  the  limit  for  Thai  individuals’  outward  direct 
investment,  raised  the  limit  per  investor,  and  eased  regulations  for  transfers  of  foreign 
currencies to facilitate investment in foreign securities. 
Recent  surge  of  capital  inflows  to  the  region  is  likely  to  continue  as  long  as  advanced 
countries  continue  their  extra-loose  monetary  policies  and  as  long  as  the  prospect  of  this 
region remains much more positive than advanced economies. There is no one-size-fits-all 
measure  to  deal  with  impact  of  short  term  capital  inflows  on  the  economy.  The  Bank  of 
Thailand thus utilizes policy combinations, namely: allowing exchange rate adjustment as a 
first  buffer;  liberalising  outward  investments  by  residents;  exercising  exchange  rate 
intervention to deal with excessive movements; and should circumstances deem necessary, 
the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  prepared  to  consider  appropriate  measures  in  order  to  prevent 
serious impact on the economy. 
Last  but  not  least,  other  than  the  monetary  policy,  there  is  still  a  concern  over  the 
structural problem of the Thai economy in the medium and the long term.  Given  the 
tight labor market and increasing wage costs, we need to improve the country’s infrastructure 
and productivity. This involves the upgrading of technology and innovation to move Thailand 
up the value chain. The well-being of workforce, as well as quality of education and training 
are also crucial to increase competitiveness ahead of the AEC integration. This cannot be 
done by only one party. Long-term coherent vision and concerted efforts among all agencies, 
both public and private, are needed. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To  close  my  remark  this  evening,  I  believe  that  the  JCC  will  have  a  big  role  in  shaping 
Thailand’s  future  and  I  hope  that  with  the  long  history  of  partnership  between  Japan  and 
Thailand, we will continue our close cooperations in all aspects in the years to come. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
