Peter Praet: Adjustment and growth in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the European Business Summit, Brussels, 16 May 2013. 
I would like to thank José Marín Arcas for his contribution to the preparation of this speech. 
 Introduction 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at this conference of the European Business 
Summit. 
The theme of my address today is “Adjustment and Growth in the Euro Area”. This is a title 
that, to some, may sound contradictory. Many of you will have come across commentators 
who  claim  that  adjustment  is  in  fact  inimical  to  growth;  and  that  consolidating  government 
budgets while introducing structural reforms is the main cause of our current difficulties. 
Yet, in my view, this is a short-sighted assessment. While it is clear that fiscal consolidation 
has affected economic activity in the euro area in the short-term, it does not follow from this 
that adjustment and growth are incompatible. Restoring the sustainability of public finances 
and  implementing  well-designed  structural  reforms  are  key  to  restoring  confidence. 
Measures that are now being undertaken help to lay the foundations for future growth and 
bring back a climate of confidence already in the short-term. 
First,  by  prioritising  fiscal  consolidation,  euro  area  countries  can  anchor  medium-term 
expectations about public debt sustainability, which is essential to support confidence among 
investors and taxpayers. As many euro area countries already have high public debt levels, 
and some have seen their market access threatened, credible fiscal consolidation ensures 
that  debt  can  be  refinanced  at  affordable  rates  in  the  future,  and  fiscal  crises  avoided. 
Moreover,  if  consolidation  is  focused  to  the  greatest  extent  possible  on  unproductive 
expenditure items rather than those, like investment, that are conducive to long-term growth, 
the negative effects on growth can be contained. 
Second,  by  implementing  structural  reforms,  euro  area  countries  should  raise  their  future 
growth potential. Research has shown that a comprehensive package of product and labour 
market  reforms  could  significantly  increase  euro  area  output  –  by  more  than  4.5%  over 
5 years,  according  to  a  recent  IMF  study.  This  improved  outlook,  when  incorporated  into 
medium-term expectations, should encourage forward-looking firms to increase investment, 
and  could  hence  lead  to  higher  growth  also  in  the  short-term.  Such  reforms  should  be 
undertaken with due protection of the most vulnerable members of society. 
The key point is that for adjustment and growth to be mutually supportive, the commitment to 
reform  has  to  be  credible.  Investors,  firms  and  households  have  to  be  convinced  beyond 
doubt that governments will stay the course. If they fear policy commitments may be delayed 
or  reversed  in  the  future,  they  will  neither  be  sufficiently  confident  in  the  sustainability  of 
public finances nor in future growth potential to alter their behaviour today. “Wait-and-see” 
will remain the rational response and short-term growth will lag behind potential. 
In other words, proposing to reverse course on fiscal and structural reforms does not support 
growth.  In  fact,  it  only  weakens  credibility  and  hence  undermines  the  hard  work  that  has 
already been done to put the euro area on a surer footing. 
For  the  remainder  of  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to  first  review  the  ongoing  process  of 
adjustment across the euro area and what has been done by national  authorities, and the 
ECB acting within its price stability mandate, to facilitate that process. Thereafter, I will put 
forward some suggestions for what remains to be done by euro area governments to ensure 
a return to growth as speedily as possible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Restoring growth and employment in the euro area 
1. 
Let me begin by reviewing the economic situation. 
Euro  area  real  GDP  still  remains  about  three  percentage  points  below  its  pre-crisis  peak, 
although this aggregate figure hides some divergence. For the group of countries which are 
still  under  some  financial  stress  (Greece,  Spain,  Ireland,  Italy,  Portugal,  Cyprus  and 
Slovenia), real GDP remains near the trough of the crisis reached in 2009. Other euro area 
countries, however, had by 2011 already recovered the previous maximum level of real GDP. 
The same is true of labour markets. The employment rate in the euro area as a whole is still 
more  than  two  percentage  points  below  its  peak,  according  to  OECD  figures.  However, 
Germany  has  increased  its  employment  rate  by  more  than  three  percentage  points  (to 
73.1%) while, at the other extreme, Greece has seen its employment rate dropping by more 
than ten percentage points (to 50.1%). Youth unemployment rates in a number of stressed 
countries also remain unacceptably high. 
Looking forward, we expect the euro area economy to resume growth at a modest pace later 
in 2013, although it will take more time for this to feed through into higher employment. 
Why is growth not rebounding more quickly and evenly across the euro area? 
A  key  explanation  is  that the  adjustment  process  has  been  hindered  by  adverse feedback 
loops  resulting  from  the  interaction  of  accumulated  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  imbalances, 
weak bank balance sheets and the lack of a genuinely European approach to bank resolution 
and recapitalisation. To give just one example of such interactions, large fiscal imbalances in 
a Member State can lead financial markets to drive up yields on its sovereign debt. This in 
turn  creates  higher  funding  costs  for  its  domestic  banks  and  reduces  their  profitability, 
thereby hampering credit growth to the real economy. Lower credit growth then contributes to 
lower  nominal  GDP,  which  not  only  further  weakens  banks’  balance  sheets  by  increasing 
non-performing loans, but also increases concerns about the sustainability of sovereign debt 
through  the  denominator  effect;  and  thus,  the  feedback  loop  restarts  again.  Without  a 
European  approach  to  banking  sector  repair,  if  the  sovereign  intervenes  to  break  the 
feedback  loop  by  recapitalising  or  resolving  banks,  it  may  only  heighten  market  concerns 
about its debt sustainability and aggravate the situation. 
Actions by governments 
a. 
Addressing such adverse feedback loops between government finances, credit and growth 
implies  a  triple  policy  response  from  governments:  First,  fiscal  consolidation  and  current 
account rebalancing to secure public debt sustainability and lower external financing needs. 
Second,  structural  reforms  to  increase  potential  growth  and  offset  the  potential  negative 
effects  of  fiscal  consolidation.  Third,  comprehensive  banking  sector  repair  to  acknowledge 
impaired assets and strengthen bank balance sheets. Fortunately, in all three areas the euro 
area is heading in the right direction. 
First, fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances have improved significantly: fiscal deficits have 
declined  from  their  2009  peaks  throughout  the  euro  area  based  on  sizeable  consolidation 
efforts  and  despite  strong  economic  headwinds,  while  there  has  been  a  pronounced 
reduction of current account deficits. However, these sizeable flow adjustments have not yet 
fully  translated  into  improvements  in  the  accumulated  stock  of  imbalances  –  public  debt 
ratios on the fiscal side, net international investment positions on the macroeconomic side – 
because of depressed nominal GDP growth. 
Most EU countries made significant progress towards further reducing budgetary imbalances 
in  2012,  in  an  environment  of  weaker  than  expected  output  growth.  The  euro  area 
government  deficit  has  decreased  to  3.7%  of  GDP  (3.1%  of  GDP  excluding  one-off 
government support for financial institutions). In 2013, the Commission expects the euro area 
deficit to reach 2.9% of GDP – i.e. below the Maastricht reference value. This level would be 
less than half the peak reached in 2009 (6.4% of GDP), and it puts the euro area as a whole 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
on track to comply with the commitment made by G-20 leaders in Toronto in 2010 to halve 
fiscal deficits by 2013. It has to be stressed that correcting for the effects of the weak cycle 
the fiscal adjustment has been even larger than suggested by these figures. 
Progress  with  fiscal  consolidation  has  been  particularly  strong  in  countries  subject  to  an 
economic  adjustment  programme.  The  primary  structural  deficit  (cyclically-adjusted  deficit 
net of interest payments and net of one-off factors and temporary measures) as a ratio of 
GDP  over  the  period  2009–2012  has  fallen  by  around  14  percentage  points  in  Greece, 
6 percentage  points  in  Portugal  and  4  percentage  points  in  Ireland.  The  true  adjustment 
effort  is  likely  to  have  been  even  larger  than  these  numbers  suggest  due  to  significant 
revenue shortfalls in a context of rebalancing from (tax-rich) domestic demand towards (tax-
poor)  exports. This  rebalancing  has  also  been  associated  with  significant  improvements  in 
current account positions. Current account deficits fell on average by 10 percentage points of 
GDP in Greece, Ireland and Portugal from 2008–2012, and by 8 percentage points of GDP in 
Spain over the same period. 
Second, the euro area witnessed a renewed momentum to implement structural reforms. It 
has been well-understood by euro area countries that restoring fiscal sustainability must rest 
not only on fiscal adjustment to achieve sizeable primary surpluses, but also on measures to 
revive  growth  to  avoid  adverse  snowball  effects  undoing  the  debt-stabilising  impact  of 
primary surpluses. This requires structural reforms that improve labour market and product 
market  functioning  and  hence  increase  potential  growth.  There  are  numerous  studies,  for 
instance by the OECD and the IMF, showing the significant benefits in terms of employment 
and  growth  that  could  accrue  to  the  euro  area  from  such  measures  –  and  not  only  in  the 
medium-term.  A  credible  commitment  by  euro  area  governments  to  implement  structural 
reforms  could  already  create  a  permanent  upward  shift  in  expectations  of  future  growth, 
improve  labour  market  performance,  and  as  a  welcome  side-effect,  improve  the  health  of 
public finances over the medium-term. And to a certain extent, this is what we are seeing in 
the euro area today. 
As  regards  labour  market  reforms,  several  euro  area  countries  have  moved  towards  a 
negotiating  framework  for  wages  and  working  conditions  based  more  on  firm-level 
agreements.  This  should  enhance  competitiveness  by  promoting  a  closer  link  between 
wages  and  productivity  and,  at  the  same  time,  allow  firms  to  rapidly  adjust  their  internal 
organisation  of  labour  and  production  in  response  to  changing  economic  conditions.  In 
addition, labour market functioning has been strengthened by addressing distortions related 
to the “two-tier” systems that characterise a number of euro area economies – in particular 
Spain  and  Italy. These measures  should  support  social fairness  by  bringing  to  an  end the 
situation  where  vulnerable  temporary  workers,  mainly  young  people,  de  facto  bear  the  full 
burden of the adjustment. Moreover, they should increase potential growth by improving the 
employment conditions of young workers and their relatively lower opportunities for on-the-
job training, which significantly hampers human capital formation; and by reducing inefficient 
labour  turnover,  since  firms  would  be  less  reluctant  to  transform  temporary  jobs  into 
permanent ones. 
At  the  same  time,  to  reduce  unemployment  traps  and  create  incentives  for  job-seeking, 
welfare systems are being reformed so as to shift from a system providing security “on the 
job” to one providing income support “in the market”, while setting up strict eligibility criteria 
and a system of active labour market policies. Together with these labour market measures, 
reform efforts have focused on increasing competition in a number of sectors, including retail 
and  wholesale,  transport,  energy,  and  professional  services;  reducing  the  administrative 
requirements to set up or expand businesses; and improving the efficiency of civil justice and 
public administration. 
Third,  euro  area  countries  have  taken  a  series  of  measures  to  address  balance  sheet 
weaknesses  in  the  banking  sector.  Capital  requirements  are  in  the  process  of  being 
strengthened  following  the  conclusion  of  the  Capital  Requirements  IV  Directive,  which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
transposes the Basel III agreement into EU law. At the same time, a number of banks raised 
new capital to address balance sheet weaknesses. The greatest progress in financial sector 
repair has of course taken place in the countries under EU-IMF programmes, where there 
has  been  a  comprehensive  restructuring  and  recapitalisation  of  the  domestic  banking 
sectors. Spain has also taken decisive measures to address the imbalances of the past via 
its ESM indirect bank recapitalisation programme. 
Actions by the ECB 
b. 
What is the role of the ECB in this process? 
While the ECB has consistently played its part and maintained price stability in the euro area, 
it is important to keep in mind that the role that the central bank can play in terms of crisis 
resolution is limited. The ECB’s monetary policy can only play a crisis mitigation role. Hence, 
our monetary policy approach has focused on providing liquidity support, intended to relieve 
banks of liquidity and funding stress by giving them unlimited access to central bank money 
at a fixed price against adequate collateral. To facilitate this support, we expanded the set of 
eligible assets that can be used as collateral and extended the maturity of our lending. It is 
widely recognised that these measures have been effective in averting a disorderly spiral of 
deleveraging  in  the  banking  system,  which  would  have  taken  place  in  an  environment  of 
severe liquidity constraints and fire sales. This was necessary in order to avoid deflationary 
downward  pressures  that  would  have  prevented  us  from  delivering  on  our  mandate  of 
preserving price stability in the euro area. 
However, to mitigate the crisis we have also had to go beyond liquidity support, in particular 
to counter financial fragmentation in the euro area – created by the adverse feedback loops I 
described above – that was disrupting the transmission of monetary policy across the euro 
area.  Diverging  credit  conditions  by  countries,  by  sectors  and  by  size  of  companies  have 
prevented  the  ECB’s  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  from  being  passed  on 
evenly in the financing conditions faced by euro area firms and households. As the euro area 
economy relies heavily on bank credit, this has serious implications for growth and ultimately 
for our ability to maintain price stability. 
In  particular,  in  the  first  half  of  last  year  we  perceived  a  situation  last  year  where  severe 
upward pressure on sovereign yields was being driven by unfounded fears about the future 
of the euro area. These fears were causing investors to charge risk premia to lend to some 
Member States that could not be justified by economic fundamentals. We therefore decided 
to open the possibility of undertaking Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs), entailing ex 
ante  unlimited  interventions  in  short-  to  medium-term  securities  issued  by  governments 
which have submitted to strict and effective conditionality, in order to eliminate the pricing of 
un-warranted tail  risks  in  the  bond markets. This  has  played  an  important  role  in  reducing 
financial  market  fragmentation,  as  financial  markets  understood  OMTs  as  a  credible 
backstop for countering redenomination risk. 
What remains to be done 
2. 
These  measures  by  the  ECB,  however,  can  only  buy  time;  they  cannot  substitute  for  the 
responsibilities  of  national  governments  to  address  the  unsound  fiscal,  economic  and 
financial policies that are the root causes of the crisis. And while a great deal has already 
been done by euro area authorities to address these root causes, there are three areas in 
which more progress still needs to be made. 
First,  the  euro  area  needs  to  continue  to  deepen  structural  reforms  aimed  at  enhancing 
competition, flexibility, efficiency, and productivity. The reform process takes time, and so a 
medium-term, comprehensive approach is crucial to anchor expectations and maximise the 
positive effects of adjustment in the short-term. The greatest challenge today is to maintain 
reform momentum and implement fully those changes which have already been announced 
or  even  enacted  into  law.  Concretely,  this  means,  for  the  labour  markets,  addressing  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
remaining insider-outsider dualities and enhancing labour mobility, including across borders. 
For  product  markets,  the  key  challenge  is  to  open  up  regulated  professions  and  network 
industries  that  are  sheltered  from  competition  by  government  regulations.  This  requires  a 
simplification  and  streamlining  of  regulations,  a  reduction  of  barriers  to  entry  and  limits  to 
competition, a resolute deepening of the Single Market in Europe. Going forward, structural 
reforms  also  need  to  go  into  the  government  sector  itself.  In  several  euro  area  countries, 
modernisation of public administration is essential to increase efficiency in the provision of 
public goods, like infrastructure, and essential services, like civil justice. This will also support 
fiscal consolidation, by reducing the size of the government sector. 
Second, the euro area needs to persevere in fiscal consolidation efforts and reduce steadily 
the government debt ratio. Despite the important progress on fiscal consolidation, debt ratios 
have yet failed to stabilise in most euro area countries, as improvements in primary balances 
were outweighed by the debt-rising impact of unfavourable developments in interest-growth 
differentials and deficit-debt adjustments. The euro area government debt ratio is projected 
to rise further to above 95% of GDP in 2013 – far above the 60% Maastricht reference value 
–  with  debt  ratios  displaying  large  differences  across  countries.  Further  adjustment  is thus 
inevitable,  and  unfortunately  it  must  take  place  in  an  environment  of  rising  consolidation 
fatigue. Five years into the crisis this rise in consolidation fatigue is understandable. Going 
forward, it will be important for policymakers to communicate effectively both on the need for 
further  adjustment  and  how  this  adjustment  will  be  distributed  in  an  equitable  way  across 
different groups of the population. 
In  this  context,  it  is  necessary  to  review  consolidation  strategies  that  have  relied 
predominantly  on  tax  rate  increases,  exacerbating  the  burden  on  already  compliant 
taxpayers, without much broadening of the tax bases. Such an approach has had substantial 
negative effects on disposable income and demand, at the same time raising resistance and 
negative  reactions  in  the  electorate,  based  on  inter-temporal  uncertainty  and  fairness 
considerations.  Due  protection  of  the most  vulnerable  is  needed  here.  On  the  expenditure 
side,  adjustment  has  relied  disproportionally  on  cuts  in  government  investment,  thereby 
weakening  the  prospects  for  long-term  growth.  Going  forward,  there  is  a  need  to  focus 
adjustment on unproductive expenditure while as far as possible safeguarding government 
expenditure that is conducive to long-term growth. 
Third, the euro area needs to press ahead with constructing a genuine Banking Union. A first 
and  important  step  has  been  made  with  the  decision  to  create  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM), the responsibility for which was assigned to the ECB. Political agreement 
by the ECOFIN Council and the European Parliament was reached on a legislative package 
in  March,  and  technical  agreement  is  expected  very  soon,  so  that  national  parliamentary 
proceedings  can  start,  which  should  be  concluded  by  the  summer.  The  existence  of  the 
SSM, by reducing regulatory capture and increasing supervisory consistency and coherence, 
should  play  an  important  role  in  increasing  confidence  in  the  overall  euro  area  banking 
system, and as a result, reduce fragmentation of interbank and other financial markets. 
However, for the Banking Union to be fully effective, a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) 
to accompany the SSM is essential. This is the case for a number of reasons. First, an SRM 
would  allow  for  the  euro  area  to  complete  the  process  of  banking  sector  repair  without 
aggravating  market  concerns  over  public  debt  sustainability,  which  would  help  break  the 
adverse feedback loop I described above and restore the functioning of the credit channel. 
Second, this confidence in EU level resolution capacity would ensure that the SSM can be a 
credible  supervisor,  as  it  would  be  able  to  push  non-viable  banks  towards  winding  down 
without endangering financial stability. Third, an SRM  would facilitate speedy and effective 
resolution of large and complex cross-border banks, removing the need for drawn-out and 
inefficient cooperation between multiple national authorities. 
To generate these benefits, in our view the SRM must be built around a Single Resolution 
Authority and a European Resolution Fund. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
The ongoing process of adjustment in the euro area, if persevered with, will create a path out 
of the crisis. There is no doubt that this path is a challenging one, as it depends on deep-
rooted reforms to the structure of the euro area’s economies, and these require courage to 
implement and a willingness to confront vested interests. But it is critical that governments 
stay the course, as this will allow the confidence effects of a brighter outlook to start being 
felt already in the short-term. 
For its part, the ECB will continue to fulfil its mandate to maintain price stability, and to use its 
standard and non-standard measures to support the flow of credit to the real economy. But 
one must also recognise the limits to what we as the central bank can achieve. We cannot 
remove  barriers  to  bank  lending  that  stem  from  insufficient  capital  or  lack  of  bank  repair: 
these can only be addressed by governments. This is why establishing a Banking Union with 
a strong Single Resolution Mechanism is a priority. I am glad that the elements of a Banking 
Union are beginning to fall into place. A swift implementation of the remaining elements is 
needed. 
Significant  progress  has  been  made  on  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reform.  Looking 
ahead,  credibility  is  crucial.  Therefore,  I  welcome  the  stronger  rules  for  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic policies like the Fiscal Compact. 
All these ongoing important adjustment efforts in the euro area should restore confidence in 
the short-term and lead steadily back to sustainable growth. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
