Eddie Yue: Investment in infrastructure is crucial to Asia’s growth 
Statement by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority 
and  Head  of  the  Delegation  of  Hong  Kong,  for  the  46th  Asian  Development  Bank  Annual 
Meeting, Delhi, 4 May 2013. 
 improved  since 
the  beginning  of 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Government  of  India  for  hosting  the  46th  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Asian Development Bank (ADB). I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr Haruhiko 
Kuroda  for  his  excellent  work  in  leading  ADB  for  more  than  eight  years. We  welcome  the 
appointment  of  Mr  Takehiko  Nakao  as  the  new  President  of  ADB,  and  look  forward  to 
continue working closely with the Bank under his leadership in furthering the development of 
the region. 
Global  economic  sentiment  has 
this  year.  The 
announcement  of  further  accommodative  monetary  easing  by  major  advanced  economies 
has  reduced  tail  risks  and  stabilised  financial  markets.  But  while  the  accommodative 
monetary  policy  will  help  authorities  buy  time  to  solve  the  problem,  it  is  by  no  means  a 
substitute  for  medium-term  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms  that  are  required  for 
the  economy  to  regain  competitiveness  and  return  to  a  sustainable  path.  Looking  ahead, 
economic  adjustments  and  deleveraging  in  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  are  set  to 
continue in the advanced economies, and regional economies will increasingly have to look 
to themselves for new sources of growth. 
In this regard, a number of developing economies in the region will need to further invest and 
upgrade their infrastructure to fully realise their growth potential. Infrastructure development 
generates  employment,  improves  access  to  basic  services  and  economic  opportunities, 
promotes trade and investment, reduces the cost of doing business and encourages private 
sector development. It raises income and helps reduce poverty by spreading the benefits of 
growth  more  widely.  The  rising  standard  of  living  will  in  turn  generate  domestic  demand, 
providing a new source of growth even as global demand continues to slow. 
ADB estimates that Asia needs as much as US$8.3 trillion in overall infrastructure investment 
between  2010  and  2020,  with  an  average  of  US$750  billion  in  annual  infrastructure 
spending. While the infrastructure needs are huge, Asia also has vast foreign reserves and 
private  domestic  savings.  Traditionally,  these  savings  have  not  been  channelled  to  meet 
Asia’s  own  financing  needs  directly.  Most  of  the  savings  have  been  invested  in  advanced 
economies before they are recycled back into the region. However, the global financial crisis 
has changed the landscape. Investors are increasingly looking to diversify their portfolio to 
this part of the world in the light of the faster growth and stronger fundamentals of the region. 
So there seems to be no lack of appetite to invest in Asia. The question is how to channel 
these  funds  to  finance  Asia’s  infrastructure  investment  needs.  Creating  an  enabling 
environment  to  facilitate  private  sector  investment  in  infrastructure  projects  is  crucial  and 
fundamental. Factors like certainty in government’s sector development plan, clarity in public-
private  partnership 
institutional 
environment,  and  capacity  to  develop  and  implement  projects  are  key  to  attracting  private 
sector  investors.  ADB  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  capacity  building,  and  through  its 
interventions,  catalyse  reforms  and  assist  governments  to  develop  an  environment 
conducive for private sector investment. 
Given  the  high  degree  of  perceived  risk  of  long-term  infrastructure  projects,  public  sector 
support  is  often  needed  to  catalyse  private  sector  investment.  Provision  of  credit 
enhancements  and  guarantees  as  well  as  PPP  are  common  modalities  of  public  sector 
support, and more work should be done to find new and effective ways to catalyse private 
sector investments. We are glad to see ADB’s expanded efforts in mobilising private sector 
framework,  conducive 
regulatory  and 
(PPP) 
legal, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
lending,  particularly 
from  European  banks.  With 
investment under Strategy 2020. With the support of ADB, the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund 
(AIF)  established  by  ASEAN  is  expected  to  help  mobilise  private  capital  as  well  as  the 
region’s  foreign  exchange  reserves  for  financing  infrastructure  projects  in  the  ASEAN 
economies.  While  the  AIF  is  newly  set  up  and  more  time  is  needed  to  observe  the 
effectiveness  of  this  model,  the  AIF  represents  a  meaningful  attempt  by  regional 
governments to cooperate and find new ways to mobilise public and private savings of the 
region to finance Asia’s own infrastructure needs. We encourage further efforts in this regard, 
and ADB, with its expertise and resources, is best placed to support such efforts. 
Private  sector  infrastructure  financing  in  the  region  has  traditionally  relied  on  international 
bank 
the  European  banks  facing 
deleveraging  pressure  and  retreating  from  the  region,  some  Asian  banks  have  stepped  in 
and increased their market share. However, there are questions as to whether Asian banks 
can fully fill the gap. Recent regulatory changes may also reduce banks’ appetite in long-term 
project financing. Given these circumstances, there are benefits to further develop the capital 
markets  to  complement  bank  financing  and  provide  a  channel  to  tap  into  other  long-term 
institutional investors such as pension funds and insurers. Policymakers in the region have 
made steady efforts to develop the local currency bond markets. Along with the faster growth 
and improved fundamentals of the region, there has been a rapid growth of the regional bond 
markets in recent years. Notwithstanding this encouraging development, the capacity of the 
regional bond markets is still limited  when compared with the huge financing needs of the 
region. Much work still needs to be done to develop a deep and liquid regional bond market, 
including but not limited to expanding the issuer and investor types, gradual liberalisation of 
barriers  to  entry  of  non-resident  investors,  promoting  development  of  hedging  tools, 
enhancing financial infrastructure linkages, improving corporate disclosure and transparency, 
and  greater  standardisation  of  legal  and  governance  terms.  Policymakers,  as  market 
regulator and market facilitator, should further their work on these fronts. 
Adequate investment in infrastructure is crucial to promoting the further growth of the region, 
spreading the fruit of economic developments and raising the living standards of people in 
Asia. Given the region’s huge infrastructure needs, mobilising private sector investments is 
important.  Governments  and  ADB  have  a  key  role  to  play  in  promoting  an  enabling 
environment for private investment. Making this right will enable the region’s vast savings to 
be efficiently channelled to fund its own investment needs, thus helping the region to realise 
its full growth potential. 
Thank you. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
