Anand Sinha: Regulation of shadow banking – issues and challenges 
Address  by  Mr  Anand  Sinha,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  an  event 
organized by the Indian Merchants’ Chamber, Mumbai, 7 January 2013. 
 Inputs  provided  by  Ms.  Reena  Banerjee,  Ms  Archana  Mangalagiri,  Ms  Sindhu  Pancholy,  and  Mr.  Jayakumar 
Yarasi are gratefully acknowledged. 
Mr. Hiranandani, President, Indian Merchants’ Chamber (IMC), Mr. Thakkar, Co-Chairman, 
Finance  and  Banking  Committee,  IMC,  Mr.  TT  Srinivasaraghavan,  Managing  Director, 
Sundaram Finance Ltd., Mr. K V Srinivasan, CEO, Reliance Commercial Finance, Ms. Usha 
Thorat, my erstwhile colleague in the Reserve Bank, currently the Director, CAFRAL and the 
Chairperson  of  the  Working  Group  that  examined  the  issues  and  concerns  in  the  Non 
Banking  Financial  Companies  (NBFC)  sector,  and  all  other  distinguished  guests;  It  is  a 
pleasure to be here among you in this seminar on NBFCs, to discuss the recent guidelines 
issued by us based on the recommendations of the Working Group on NBFCs chaired by 
Ms. Usha Thorat. 
The recommendations of the Working Group have generated a lot of debate in the industry, 
and  as  I  observed  from  the  presentations  of  other  speakers,  the  issues  continue  to  elicit 
considerable interest, if not apprehension. My aim during this talk would be to put the issues 
in perspective. As a backdrop to my comments on Indian NBFC sector, I would briefly touch 
upon the global shadow banking sector along with the recent international initiatives in the 
regulation of the sector. Then I would trace the genesis and development of the NBFC sector 
in India as well as the evolution of its regulatory framework, and finally the thought process 
which led to the setting up of the Working Group. I would like to focus on the big picture and 
elaborate the rationale behind the recent guidelines which is the agenda of this seminar. 
All of you must be closely observing the global developments in the context of financial crisis 
which shook the entire world, and the consequent overhaul of the regulatory framework. Both 
the  regular  banking  system  and  the  shadow  banking  system  have  come  under  greater 
regulatory focus on account of gaps in the respective regulatory frameworks and also, most 
importantly,  on  account  of  inter-linkages  between  both  the  systems.  The  shadow  banking 
system that had burgeoned in the run up to the global financial crisis was one of the major 
causes  of  the  global  turmoil  and  quite  understandably,  the  regulators  are  revamping  its 
regulation to ensure financial stability. Before I dwell further on the regulatory developments, 
let me touch upon some underpinnings to the conceptual framework. 
What is shadow banking? 
The term “shadow banking system” was first used in 2007, and gained popularity during and 
after the recent financial crisis, as it highlighted the bank-like functions performed by entities 
outside the regular banking system. The more comprehensive definition, as adopted by the 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  i.e.,  “credit  intermediation  involving  entities  and  activities 
(fully  or  partially)  outside  the  regular  banking  system”  has  been  globally  accepted.  This 
definition has two important components: First, non bank financial entities or entities outside 
the  banking  system  that  engage  in  the  “bank  like”  activities  of  maturity  transformation, 
undertaking  credit  risk  transfer  and  using  direct  or  indirect  financial  leverage.  Second, 
activities such as securitization, securities lending and repo transactions that act as important 
sources  of  funding  for  non  bank  entities.  Thus,  shadow  banks  comprise  entities  which 
conduct financial intermediation directly, such as finance companies or NBFCs, and entities 
which  provide  finance  to  such  entities,  such  as  mutual  funds.  Globally,  shadow  banking 
entities  could  be  covered  under  the  broad  heads  of  (i)  Money  Market  Funds,  (ii)  Credit 
investment Funds, Hedge Funds, etc, (iii) Finance Companies accepting deposits or deposit 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
like  funding,  (iv)  Securities  brokers  dependent  on  wholesale  funding,  (v)  Credit  insurers, 
financial guarantee providers and (vi) Securitisation vehicles. 
Such nonbank intermediation, when appropriately conducted, provides a valuable alternative 
to  bank  funding  and  supports  real  economic  activity.  But  experience  from  the  crisis 
demonstrates  the  capacity  of  some  non-bank  entities  and  transactions  to  operate  on  a 
significantly large scale, in ways that create bank-like risks to financial stability (longer-term 
credit  extension  based  on  short-term  funding  and  leverage).  Such  risk  creation  may  take 
place at an entity level but it can also form part of a complex chain of transactions, in which 
leverage  and  maturity  transformation  occur  in  stages,  creating  multiple  forms  of  feedback 
into the regulated banking system. 
Like  banks,  a  leveraged  and  maturity-transforming  shadow  banking  system  can  also  be 
vulnerable  to  "runs"  and  generate  contagion,  thereby  amplifying  systemic  risk.  Shadow 
banking  can  also  heighten  procyclicality  by  accelerating  credit  supply  and  asset  price 
increases during upswings and exacerbating fall in asset prices during downswings. These 
effects were powerfully revealed during the global financial crisis in the form of dislocation of 
asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP)  markets,  the  failure  of  an  originate-to-distribute 
model employing structured investment vehicles (SIVs) and conduits, "runs" on MMFs and a 
sudden reappraisal of the terms on which securities lending and repos were conducted. 
Traditionally,  regulation  of  banks  has  assumed  greater  importance  than  that  of  their 
non-banking counterparts. One reason, of course, is that protection of depositors has been 
traditionally  an  important  mandate  of  banking  supervisors.  Banks  are  at  the  centre  of 
payment  and  settlement  systems  and  monetary  policy  transmission  takes  place  through 
them.  Banks  play  a  critical  role  in  credit  intermediation  through  maturity  transformation, 
i.e. acceptance of short term liabilities and converting them into long term assets viz. loans 
and advances. Along with economic value, this function also creates potential liquidity risk. 
Moreover, banks also operate on a significantly higher leverage compared to non-financial 
entities which could amplify their vulnerability. For all these reasons, banks are subject to a 
detailed  and  a  rigorous  regulatory  framework.  However,  when  non  bank  financial  entities, 
which  are  subject  to  no  regulation  or  light  touch  regulation,  undertake  bank-like  functions, 
large  risks  are  created  which  could  potentially  be  destabilizing  for  the  entire  system.  The 
global financial crisis demonstrated many ways in which shadow banking can have an impact 
on  the  global  financial  system,  both  directly  and  through  its  interconnectedness  with  the 
regular banking system, prompting the move to overhaul the regulation of shadow banking 
system. 
The importance and benefits of shadow banking 
Shadows  do  not  necessarily  mean  dark  and  sinister.  In  fact,  shadow  banking  activities 
constitute a very useful part of the financial system. The main advantages of shadow banks 
lie in their ability to lower transaction costs of their operations, their quick decision-making 
ability,  customer  orientation  and  prompt  provision  of  services.  In  India,  we  have  always 
maintained  that  Non  Banking  Finance  Companies  (NBFCs),1  a  significant  segment  of 
shadow banking system, play a crucial role in broadening access to financial services, and 
enhancing  competition  and  diversification  of  the  financial  sector.  While  NBFCs  are, 
sometimes,  seen  as  akin  to  banks  in  terms  of  the  products  and  services  offered,  this 
comparison  is  strictly  not  accurate,  as  more  often  NBFCs  play  a  range  of  roles  that 
complement banks. They have carved out niche areas of businesses, such as auto financing, 
which enables them to address specific needs of the people more efficiently. In addition to 
                                                
1  
In  India,  NBFCs  constitute  a  major  segment  of  shadow  banking  system  alongside  other  entities  such  as 
Insurance  companies  and  Mutual  Funds,  both  of  which  are  regulated  by  other  regulators.  In  the  address, 
NBFCs are referred to be largely representing the shadow banking sector. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
complementing  banks,  NBFCs  add  to  economic  strength  to  the  extent  they  enhance  the 
resilience  of  the  financial  system  to  economic  shocks.  They  can  act  as  backup  financial 
institutions should the primary form of intermediation come under stress, thereby constituting 
an  important  avenue  for  risk  diversification  away  from  the  banking  system.  Other 
non banking  finance  entities  such  as  mutual  funds,  insurance  companies,  etc,  provide 
alternatives to bank deposits and constitute alternative funding for the real economy, which is 
particularly useful when traditional banking or market channels become temporarily impaired. 
Risks of shadow banks2 
Notwithstanding  the  complementary  role  played  by  shadow  banks  to  the  banking  system, 
their activities, on the flip side, create risks which can assume a systemic dimension, due to 
their  complexity,  cross  jurisdictional  nature,  as  well  as  their  interconnectedness  with  the 
banking system. The risks emanating from shadow banking could be primarily of four types 
viz., (i) liquidity risk, (ii) leverage risk, (iii) regulatory arbitrage and (iv) contagion risk 
• 
Liquidity risk – This is one of the most common risks faced by shadow banks, as 
these entities undertake maturity transformation i.e., funding long term assets with 
short term liabilities. The risk of ALM mismatch leading to liquidity problems is quite 
high.  In  India,  we  had  a  situation  during  the  height  of  global  crisis  in  2008  when 
some  NBFCs  ran  into  severe  liquidity  problems  as  they  were  using  short  term 
liabilities such as CPs (commercial paper) and NCDs (Non-Convertible Debentures) 
to fund their long term lending or investment. I will be discussing this issue in detail a 
little later. 
Leverage  risk  –  As  shadow  banks  do  not  usually  have  prudential  limits  on 
borrowings,  they  can  become  highly  leveraged.  High  leverage  exacerbates  the 
stress in the financial system and the real economy during the downturn adversely 
affecting financial stability. 
Regulatory  arbitrage  –  Credit  intermediation  is,  traditionally,  a  banking  activity. 
Regulations  applied  to  banks  in  this  regard  can  be  circumvented  by  transferring 
components of the credit intermediation function to shadow banks which are subject 
to  less  stringent  regulation.  Transfer  of  risks  outside  the  purview  of  banking 
supervision played an important role in the build-up to the global financial crisis. 
Contagion  risk  –  Shadow  banking  entities  have  close  interlinkages  with  the 
banking sector both from the asset as well as the liabilities side, and also with other 
segments of the financial system, which can lead to contagion risk in times of loss of 
confidence and uncertainty. 
   Global approach to regulation of shadow banking 
The  developments  during  the  global  crisis  reflected  the  gravitas  of  the  risks  I  have 
highlighted  above. The  light  touch  regulation  enabled  the  shadow  banking system to  have 
high leverage. The liquidity risks faced by the shadow banking system quickly got transferred 
to  the  banking  system  due  to  its  interconnectedness  and  interlinkages  with  the  regular 
banking system, largely through committed liquidity facilities and reputational concerns. The 
contagion that followed, prompted the policy makers to review the regulation of the shadow 
banking  sector  to  ensure  and  preserve  financial  stability.  As  such,  at  the  November  2010 
Seoul Summit, the G20 Leaders highlighted the fact that, after formulation of the new capital 
standards  for  banks  i.e.,  Basel  III,  “strengthening  regulation  and  supervision  of  shadow 
banking”  was  one  of  the  remaining  issues  of  financial  sector  regulation  that  warranted 
                                                
2   Green Paper Shadow Banking European Commission March 2012 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  G20  requested 
financial  stability.  Therefore, 
attention.  As  you  are  aware,  the  FSB  has  the  mandate  to  develop  and  promote  the 
implementation of effective regulatory, supervisory and other financial sector policies in the 
interest  of 
to  develop 
recommendations to strengthen the oversight and regulation of the shadow banking system 
by  mid-2011  in  collaboration  with  other  international  standard  setting  bodies.  The  FSB 
formed a task force to develop initial recommendations for discussion that would: 
• 
• 
• 
clarify what is meant by the “shadow banking system”; 
set out potential approaches for monitoring the shadow banking system; and 
explore  possible  regulatory  measures  to  address  the  systemic  risk  and  regulatory 
arbitrage concerns posed by the shadow banking system. 
the  FSB 
  The FSB felt that the objective of regulation is to ensure that shadow banking is subject to 
appropriate oversight and regulation, to address bank-like risks to financial stability emerging 
outside  the  regular  banking  system,  while  not  inhibiting  sustainable  non-bank  financing 
models that do not pose such risks. Their approach was activity specific rather than entity 
specific, as they focused on identification of those activities that can affect systemic stability, 
particularly  those  that  caused  or  exacerbated  the  crisis.  The  approach  also  included 
monitoring the shadow banking system so that any rapidly growing new activities that pose 
bank-like risks can be identified early and, where needed, those risks are addressed. 
The activities identified by FSB can be divided into 5 broad categories 
• 
management of client cash pools with features that make them susceptible to runs 
(e.g.  credit  investment  funds  with  stable  NAV  features,  leveraged  credit  hedge 
funds); 
loan provision that is dependent on short-term funding (e.g. finance companies with 
short-term funding structure or that accept deposits); 
intermediation  of  market  activities  that  is  dependent  on  short-term  funding  or  on 
secured  funding  of  client  assets  (e.g.  securities  brokers  whose  funding  is  heavily 
dependent on wholesale funding); 
facilitation of credit creation (e.g. credit insurers, financial guarantee insurers); and 
securitisation and funding of financial entities (e.g. securitisation vehicles). 
• 
• 
The FSB advised that monitoring and responses be guided by a two-stage approach. 
• 
Firstly,  authorities  should  cast  the  net  wide,  looking  at  all  non-bank  credit 
intermediation to ensure that data gathering and surveillance cover all the activities 
within which shadow banking-related risks might arise. 
Authorities should then narrow the focus, concentrating on the subset of non-bank 
credit intermediation where maturity/liquidity transformation and/or flawed credit risk 
transfer and/or leverage create important risks. 
 The  FSB,  working  with  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  the 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO),  has,  therefore,  examined 
and  developed  recommendations  in  five  areas  where  financial  stability  risks  from  shadow 
banking have arisen. Work streams were created for analyzing the issues in greater detail 
and developing effective policy recommendations in these areas, viz,: 
• 
to mitigate the spill-over effect between the regular banking system and the shadow 
banking system –( BCBS); 
to reduce the susceptibility of money market funds (MMFs) to “runs” – (IOSCO); 
to  assess  and  mitigate  systemic  risks  posed  by  other  shadow  banking  entities  – 
(FSB sub group) ; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 4 
   to  assess  and  align  the  incentives  associated  with  securitization  –  (IOSCO  and 
BCBS); and 
To  dampen  risks  and  pro-cyclical  incentives  associated  with  secured  financing 
contracts such as repos, and securities lending that may exacerbate funding strains 
in times of “runs” – (FSB sub group). 
The  policy  recommendations  have  been  guided  by  the  following  five  general  principles  for 
regulatory measures: 
• 
Focus: Regulatory measures should be carefully designed to target the externalities 
and risks the shadow banking system creates; 
Proportionality:  Regulatory  measures  should  be  proportionate  to  the  risks  shadow 
banking poses to the financial system; 
Forward-looking  and  adaptable:  Regulatory  measures  should  be  forward-looking 
and adaptable to emerging risks; 
Effectiveness:  Regulatory  measures  should  be  designed  and  implemented  in  an 
effective  manner,  balancing  the  need  for  international  consistency  to  address 
common risks and to avoid creating cross-border arbitrage opportunities against the 
need to take due account of differences between financial structures and systems 
across jurisdictions; and 
Assessment  and  review:  Regulators  should  regularly  assess  the  effectiveness  of 
their  regulatory  measures  after  implementation  and  make  adjustments  to  improve 
them as necessary in the light of experience. 
    Size of the shadow banking sector 
Efficient  oversight  of  any  sector  requires  monitoring  which  involves  data  collection  and 
analysis. Given its growing significance, monitoring of the global shadow banking system is 
being  very  vigorously  pursued.  The  FSB  committed  to  conducting  annual  monitoring 
exercises  to  assess  global  trends  and  risks  in  the  shadow  banking  system  through  its 
Standing  Committee  on  Assessment  of  Vulnerabilities  (SCAV)  and  its  technical  working 
group,  the  Analytical  Group  on  Vulnerabilities  (AGV),  using  quantitative  and  qualitative 
information. The FSB’s second annual monitoring exercise, which  was recently concluded, 
covered 25 jurisdictions and the euro area as a whole, thereby bringing the coverage of the 
monitoring exercise to 86 per cent of global GDP and 90 per cent of global financial system 
assets. The primary focus of the exercise was on a “macro-mapping” based on national Flow 
of Funds and Sector Balance Sheet data, that looks at all non-bank financial intermediation 
to  ensure 
the  areas  where  shadow 
banking-related risks to the financial system might potentially arise. 
The main findings from the 2012 exercise are as follows: 
• 
that  data  gathering  and  surveillance  cover 
According to the “macro-mapping” measure, the global shadow banking system, as 
conservatively  proxied  by  “Other  Financial  Intermediaries”  grew  rapidly  before  the 
crisis, rising from USD 26 trillion in 2002 to USD 62 trillion in 2007. The size of the 
total  system  declined  slightly  in  2008  but  increased  subsequently  to  reach 
USD 67 trillion  in  2011  (equivalent  to  111  per  cent  of  the  aggregated  GDP  of  all 
jurisdictions).  The  global  estimate  for  the  size  of  the  shadow  banking  system  has 
increased by some USD 5 to 6 trillion since last year. 
The shadow banking system’s share of total financial intermediation (which includes 
banks, insurance and pension funds, public financial institutions and central banks) 
has decreased since the onset of the crisis and has remained at around 25 per cent 
in  2009–2011,  after  having  peaked  at  27  per  cent  in  2007.  In  broad  terms,  the 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    aggregate  size  of  the  shadow  banking  system  is  around  half  the  size  of  banking 
system assets. 
There is also a considerable diversity in the relative size, composition and growth of 
the non bank financial intermediaries across jurisdictions. For example, the size of 
the shadow banking system in US and a number of other jurisdictions continues to 
be  large  relative  to  the  regular  banking  system.  The  US  has  the  largest  shadow 
banking system, with assets of USD 23 trillion in 2011, followed by the euro area 
(USD 22 trillion) and the UK (USD 9 trillion). 
There is also considerable divergence among jurisdictions in terms of: (i) the share 
of  non-bank  financial  intermediaries  (NBFIs)  in  the  overall  financial  system; 
(ii) relative size of the shadow banking system to GDP; (iii) the activities undertaken 
by the NBFIs; and (iv) recent growth trends. 
Even during the period immediately following the global financial crisis (2008–11), 
the  shadow  banking  system  continued  to  grow,  although  at  a  slower  pace,  in 
seventeen  jurisdictions  (half  of  them  being  emerging  market  and  developing 
economies  undergoing  financial  deepening)  and  contracted  in  the  remaining  eight 
jurisdictions. 
Among the jurisdictions where data is available, interconnectedness risk tends to be 
higher for shadow banking entities than for banks. Shadow banking entities seem to 
be more dependent on bank funding and are more heavily invested in bank assets, 
than vice versa. 
Shadow banking in India 
Notwithstanding  the  data  constraints  in  actual  evaluation  of  its  size,  the  shadow  banking 
sector in India is still small in size compared to its counterparts in advanced economies. In 
2011,  assets  of  Other  Financial  Institutions  (OFIs)  in  India  were  USD  375  billion  vis-a-vis 
bank assets of USD 1518 billion and GDP of USD 1766 billion. The assets of the shadow 
banking system accounted for 21 percent of GDP as compared to bank assets which were 
86 percent of GDP.3 Apart from the fact that the sector is not significant in terms of size, the 
activities carried out by these entities are also limited. 
In India, the shadow banks have been brought under progressively tighter regulations and 
many  of  the  activities  which  contributed  to  the  global  crisis  are  either  not  allowed,  or,  if 
allowed,  are  allowed  in  a  regulated  environment  with  appropriate  limits.  Illustratively,  the 
concern expressed by the FSB regarding Money Market Funds and Credit Investment Funds 
including ETFs etc. was in the context of the practice in some countries, including the US, 
regarding maintenance of constant NAVs, which led to runs on these funds. On the contrary, 
in India, Money Market Funds, investment funds and ETFs form part of Mutual Funds and 
are regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) under its Mutual Fund 
Regulations. SEBI has been gradually mandating a shift from NAVs valued on amortization 
basis to mark to market. (In February 2012, SEBI reviewed the valuation norms to ensure fair 
treatment  to  all  investors  based  on  the  principles  of  fair  valuation  i.e.  valuation  shall  be 
reflective  of  the  realizable  value  of  the  securities/assets).  The  entire  Assets  under 
Management (AUM) of Mutual Funds stood at ₹. 5872.17 billion as on March 31, 2012 which 
was 6.6 percent of GDP. Of this FIIs had a holding of 0.9 percent and NRIs 6 percent. Thus, 
cross border linkages and the consequential impact are also not seen as very high on such 
funds.4 
                                                
3   Source: RBI data 
4   Source SEBI Annual Report 2011-12 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Hedge  Funds  are  not  significant  players  in  India.  Moreover,  comprehensive  guidelines 
(Alternative  Investment  Fund  Guidelines)  have  been  put  in  place  by  SEBI  to  regulate  all 
funds established in India, which are private pooled investment vehicles raising funds from 
Indian or foreign investors. 
Transferring  of  risk  off  balance  sheet  by  banks  by  using  SIVs/  conduits  is  not  a  model 
adopted in India. Apart from this, complex and synthetic derivative products which were at 
the  core  of  the  global  crisis  are  also  not  presently  permitted  in  India.  Further,  explicit 
regulations have been put in place to ring fence NBFCs from the adverse impact of cross 
border linkages and minimizing the financial contagion.(For example, NBFCs can take equity 
and fund based exposure while investing overseas within a limit liked to NOF). They are not 
permitted to provide implicit support such as guarantees or letters of comfort. 
NBFC sector in India – evolution of regulation 
Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) in India are defined as companies carrying out a 
range  of  financial  activities  such  as  making  loans  and  advances;  investing  in  shares 
/bonds/debentures/and other securities; asset financing including leasing, and hire-purchase 
finance. The recent additions to this sector have been (i) Infrastructure Finance Companies 
(IFC),  (ii)  Infrastructure Debt  Funds  (IDF),  (iii)  Micro  Finance  Institutions  (NBFC-  MFI)  and 
(iv) Factors. In India, NBFCs quintessentially epitomize the shadow banking system as they 
perform bank like credit intermediation outside the purview of banking regulation. Apart from 
this, where the entire OFI assets account for approximately 24 percent of bank assets as on 
March  31,  2012,  assets  of  the  NBFC  sector  alone  account  for  12  percent,  denoting  the 
significance of NBFCs in the Indian shadow banking system. 
As  a  background  to  the  setting  up  of  the Working  Group  on  NBFCs  chaired  by  Ms.  Usha 
Thorat, let me briefly touch upon the evolution of regulation of NBFC sector in India. Steps 
for regulation of NBFCs were initiated as early as in the sixties. Regulation of NBFCs was 
found to be necessary for three reasons viz., ensuring efficacy of credit and monetary policy, 
safeguarding  depositors’  interest  and  ensuring  healthy  growth  of  Non-Banking  Financial 
Intermediaries (NBFIs). Thus, the Banking Laws (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1963 was 
introduced to incorporate a new chapter (i.e., Chapter III B) in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934  to  regulate  the  NBFIs.  Subsequently,  to  enable  the  regulatory  authorities  to  frame 
suitable policy measures, several committees were appointed from time to time, to conduct 
in-depth  study  of  these  institutions  and  make  suitable  recommendations  for  their  healthy 
growth. These include the Bhabatosh Datta Study Group (1971), the James Raj Study Group 
(1974),  and  the  Chakravarty  Committee,  1985.  Thereafter,  the  Narasimham  Committee 
(1991)  outlined  a  framework  for  streamlining  the  functioning  of  the  NBFCs,  which  would 
include, in addition to the existing requirements of gearing and liquidity ratios, norms relating 
to  capital  adequacy,  debt-equity  ratio,  credit-concentration  ratio,  adherence  to  sound 
accounting  practices,  uniform  disclosure  requirements  and  assets  valuation.  The  Joint 
Parliamentary  Committee  (JPC),  appointed  in  connection  with  the  irregularities  in  the 
Securities  Transactions,  had  also  recommended  that  legislative  framework  should  be 
strengthened  to  vest  in  RBI  more  powers  to  effectively  regulate  NBFCs.  The  extant 
regulatory and supervisory framework as it stands today is based on the recommendations of 
the Shah and Khanna Committees (1992 and 1995). 
The  growing  significance  of  NBFCs  was  also  recognized  by  the  second  Narasimham 
Committee  (1998)  as  well  as  by  the  RBI  in  its  Discussion  Paper  on  Harmonisation  of  the 
Role  and  Operations  of  DFIs  and  Banks.  Recognizing  the  increasing  significance  of  the 
sector, the Working Group on Money Supply (Chairman: Dr. Y.V. Reddy) in 1998 proposed a 
new  measure  of 
incorporating  NBFCs  with  public  deposits  of 
₹. 0.20 billion and above. 
There was a significant increase in the nature of NBFC activities in the nineties. NBFCs grew 
sizably both in terms of their numbers as well as the volume of business transactions. The 
liquidity  aggregate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
number  of  NBFCs  grew  more  than  seven-fold  from  7,063  in  1981  to  51,929  in  1996. 
Accordingly,  based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Shah  Committee,  the  RBI  Act  was 
amended in January 1997 to provide a comprehensive legislative framework for regulation of 
NBFCs by effecting changes in the provisions contained in Chapter III-B and Chapter V of 
the Act and vested more powers with the RBI. The regulatory framework was based on the 
three pillars viz., onsite supervision, offsite monitoring and exception reporting by auditors. 
Though the amended Act provided for registration of all NBFCs, the focus continued to be 
the protection of depositors’ interest thus covering the deposit taking NBFCs, while keeping 
the  non-deposit  taking  NBFCs  subject  to  minimal  regulation.  These  measures  resulted  in 
consolidation of the sector, reduction in the number of deposit taking NBFCs, reduction in the 
quantum of public deposits and increase in the number of non-deposit taking NBFCs. The 
number  of  deposit  taking  NBFCs,  including  Residuary  Non-Banking  Finance  Companies 
(RNBCs), decreased from 1,429 in March 1998, to 273 in March 2012. The deposits held by 
these companies (including RNBCs) decreased from ₹. 238 billion to ₹. 101 billion during the 
same period.5 
With  the  consolidation  of  the  sector  and  stabilising  of  deposit  taking  NBFCs,  the  focus  in 
2006 widened to include non-deposit taking NBFCs which were growing in number as well as 
in size. Considering the issue of systemic importance of large NBFCs in view of their size, 
their enhanced risk taking capabilities, growing complexity of their activities, and the financial 
market  interlinkages,  a  comprehensive  regulatory  framework  was  introduced  for  these 
NBFCs. To begin with, non deposit taking companies having asset size of ₹. 1 billion (100 
crore)  and  above  were  classified  as  systemically  important  non  deposit  taking  NBFCs 
(NBFCs-ND-SI)  and  subjected  to  capital  adequacy  and  credit  concentration  norms. 
Subsequently, liquidity and disclosure norms were made applicable to them. Presently, as on 
March 31, 2012, there are 375 NBFCs-ND- SI with a total asset size of ₹. 9213 billion. 
The NBFC sector has been the fastest growing segment in the Indian financial sector today 
with year on year growth higher than that of banking sector as seen from the figures below: 
NBFC sector during the 2008 crisis 
The  NBFC  sector  came  under  pressure  during  the  2008  crisis  due  to  the  funding 
interlinkages  among  NBFCs,  mutual  funds  and  commercial  banks.  NBFCs-ND-SI  relied 
significantly on short term funding sources such as debentures (largely non convertible short 
term debentures), and CPs, which constituted around 56.8 percent of the total borrowings of 
NBFCs-ND-SI as on September 30, 2008. These funds were used to finance assets which 
were reportedly largely a mix of long term assets, including hire purchase and lease assets, 
                                                
5   RBI data 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
long term investments, investment in real estate by few companies, and loans and advances. 
These mismatches were created mainly as a business strategy for gaining from the higher 
spreads.  However,  there  were  no  fall  back  alternatives  in  cases  of  potential  liquidity 
constraints. The ripple effect of the turmoil in American and European markets led to liquidity 
issues  and  heavy  redemption  pressure  on  the  mutual funds  in  India,  as  several  investors, 
especially  institutional  investors,  started  pulling  out  their  investments  in  liquid  and  money 
market funds. Mutual funds being the major subscribers to CPs and debentures issued by 
NBFCs, the redemption pressure on MFs translated into funding issues for NBFCs, as they 
found raising fresh liabilities or rolling over of the maturing liabilities very difficult. Drying up of 
these  sources  of  funds  along  with  the  fact  that  banks  were  increasingly  becoming  risk 
averse, heightened their funding problems, exacerbating the liquidity tightness. 
Measures taken by RBI to enhance availability of liquidity to NBFCs 
RBI  undertook many  measures,  both  conventional  as  well  as  un  conventional,  to  enhance 
availability  of  liquidity  to  NBFCs  such  as  allowing  augmentation  of  capital  funds  of 
NBFCs-ND-SI through issue of Perpetual Debt Instruments (PDIs), enabling, as a temporary 
measure,  access  to  short  term  foreign  currency  borrowings  under  the  approval  route, 
providing liquidity support under Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) to commercial banks to 
meet the funding requirements of NBFCs, Housing Finance Companies(HFCs) and Mutual 
Funds, and relaxing of restrictions on lending and buy-back in respect of the certificates of 
deposit (CDs) held by mutual funds. 
31. In addition to these measures, a Stressed Asset Stabilisation Fund viz., IDBI SASF, was 
set up to provide liquidity to NBFCs through purchase of securities of NBFCs which would in 
turn  be  refinanced  by  RBI  through  purchase  of  Govt.  guaranteed  securities  issued  by  the 
SASF. 
Notwithstanding  the  market  reports,  the  actual  condition  of  NBFCs  was  not  so  alarming 
inasmuch as only one NBFC availed refinance from the SASF and no NBFCs went under. 
However, this dichotomy between perception and reality serves to show how susceptible the 
sector could be to reputational risk. Thus, the significance of the above measures lies also in 
their ability to create confidence in the sector. 
The  crisis  did,  however,  highlight  some  regulatory  issues  concerning  the  non-banking 
financial  sector,  particularly  risks  arising  from  regulatory  gaps,  arbitrage and  systemic 
inter-connectedness.  A  need  was,  therefore,  felt  to  reflect  on the  broad  principles  that 
underpin  the  regulatory  architecture  for  NBFCs  keeping  in  view  the  economic  role  and 
heterogeneity of this sector and the recent international experience. It was felt necessary to 
examine  in  depth,  the  risks  in  the  NBFC  sector  in  the  changed  scenario  and  recommend 
appropriate  regulatory  and  supervisory  measures  to  address  these  risks  with  the  aim  of 
creating a strong and resilient financial sector which is vital for all round economic growth of 
the  country.  Accordingly  a  Working  Group  (Chair:  Ms.  Usha  Thorat)  was  constituted  to 
suggest  reforms  in  various  important  areas  relating  to  NBFC  sector.  The  Working  Group 
comprised representatives from the industry and co-regulators like SEBI. 
Recommendations of the working group 
The Working Group in its report submitted in August 2011 made various recommendations 
both to ensure the resilience of the NBFC sector and also to contain risks emanating from 
the sector in the context of overall financial stability. The recommendations of the Working 
Group  can  broadly  be  divided  into  four  categories,  comprising  issues  relating  to  (i)  Entry 
Point  norms,  Principal  Business  Criteria,  Multiple  and  Captive  NBFCs;  (ii)  Corporate 
Governance including Disclosures, (iii) Liquidity management and (iv) Prudential regulation 
including capital adequacy, asset provisioning, risk weights for certain sensitive exposures, 
and restrictions on deposit acceptance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Working  Group  and  the  subsequent  extensive 
deliberations with all the stakeholders, viz, industry participants as well as the Government of 
India, draft guidelines have been formulated and put in the public domain for comments in 
December 2012. 
As I have stated before, going by Press Reports as well as the responses observed today, 
some  apprehension  has  been  expressed  regarding  the  proposed  guidelines.  However,  let 
me emphasize that our intention is not to restrict the activities or constrain the innovativeness 
of the sector but rather ensure that possible risks to financial stability are addressed, thereby 
creating,  or  should  I  say,  ensuring  continuation  of  a  resilient  system  of  non-bank  credit 
intermediation. To go back to my earlier remarks on shadow banking and global regulatory 
initiatives, I would stress that the setting up of the Working Group and implementation of its 
recommendations was undertaken in line with the international agenda for shadow banks. 
Some  apprehensions  have  been  expressed  that  the  regulation  of  shadow  banking  is 
becoming as rigorous as banking regulation, which is not warranted given the differences in 
the  profiles  of  these  two  segments.  I  agree  with  the  concerns.  While  one  can  argue  that 
identical functions should be regulated in an identical manner irrespective of the nature of the 
legal  entity  in  which  these  functions  are  housed,  we  have  gone  for  differential  regulations 
between banks and NBFCs due to differences in business models, their significance in the 
financial  system  and  varying  risk  profiles.  Regulations  for  banks  are  much  more  stringent 
than that for NBFCs and the proposed new regulatory framework for banks under Basel III 
proposes even more stringent requirements to address the risks of banks. 
However, the distinction between banks and non-banks is more fuzzy now and as the global 
crisis has adequately evidenced, non-banks are increasingly taking up bank-like activities. In 
such a scenario, where both banks and non-banks undertake similar activities, if only bank 
regulation  is  tightened,  there  is  a  very  distinct  possibility  of  risks  migrating  from  the  more 
tightly  regulated  sector  to  a  more  lightly  regulated  sector,  the  way  water  flows  from  high 
pressure  points  to  low  pressure  points.  Therefore,  to  contain  risks  in  the  overall  financial 
system, there  is  a  case for reviewing  the regulations  of the  non-banking  sector  along  with 
that for  banks,  holistically.  In  India,  we  have  been  alive  to  these  issues  as  I  have  already 
mentioned earlier. Setting up of the Working Group on the Issues and Concerns of the NBFC 
Sector in September 2010 is another instance of taking a pro-active stance in dealing with 
regulatory issues and concerns. 
The  overarching  principles  to  the  new  regulatory  framework  revolve  around  some  guiding 
principles: 
• 
appreciating  the  contribution  of  the  NBFC  sector  to  the  financial  system  and  the 
economy and rationalising regulations to preserve the innovativeness of the sector 
recognising  the  need  to  address  systemic  risk  arising  out  of  concentration  and 
exposure of NBFCs to sensitive sectors 
Recognising that the NBFCs have the ability to leverage on the RBI registration and 
therefore, rationalising the scope of regulation to address risks appropriately 
conserving regulatory resources and directing them where required 
dealing  with  regulatory  arbitrage  while  not  recommending  completely  bank-like 
policies and regulation for NBFCs and 
giving adequate transition period to the industry so as to cause minimum dislocation 
to the sector. 
    Let me briefly touch upon some of the significant features of the draft guidelines. 
Principal business criteria 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Under the present dispensation, a company is treated as an NBFC if its financial assets are 
more  than  50  percent  of  its  total  assets  (netted  off  by  intangible  assets)  and  income from 
these  financial  assets  is  more  than  50  percent  of  its  gross  income.  Both  these  tests  are 
required  to  be  satisfied.  There  is  a  problem  with  this  definition.  As  a  financial  regulator, 
Reserve  Bank  primarily  regulates  the  financial  activities  of  NBFCs,  while  they  can  also 
engage  in  non  financial  activities  of  comparable  magnitude.  It  is,  therefore,  important  to 
insulate the sector from the spillover of possible risks from non-financial activities. The most 
preferred solution, therefore, from a regulatory perspective, would be the one in  which the 
NBFCs  do  not  undertake  any  activity  other  than  financial  activities  on  the  same  lines  as 
banks are permitted to undertake only those activities which are enumerated in Section 6(1) 
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. However, that is not possible for the NBFC sector given 
the structure of the sector. As ensuring 100 percent financial activity is not feasible, the next 
best  alternative  would  be  to  raise  the  threshold  for  principal  business.  Accordingly,  the 
threshold has been raised from 50 percent to 75 percent of total assets/income, to ensure 
that the regulation focuses on predominantly financial entities. However, raising the threshold 
could  result  in  keeping out  of  purview  of  regulations,  certain  non  banking financial  entities 
having financial activities of significant scale which could adversely impact financial stability. 
This could happen in the following two situations: 
• 
The  financial  activities  of  these  entities  are  a  significant  proportion  of  the  total 
activities and of significant magnitude; and 
The  financial  activities  of  these  entities  are  not  a  significant  proportion  of  total 
activities but are of large magnitude. 
 To cover (a) above, the definition of principal business has been expanded to cover those 
non-bank  financial  entities  whose  financial  assets  or  income  from  financial  assets  are 
50 percent  or  more  of  total  assets  or  gross  income  respectively  and  total  assets  are 
₹. 10 billion or more. However, entities covered by (b) cannot be possibly subjected to entity 
specific regulation as the scale of non financial activities would be much larger than that of 
financial activities. Regulatory approach in such a situation will have to evolve over time. One 
approach  could  be  to  subject  their  financial  activities  to  prudential  regulations  for  those 
activities. The other alternative would be, as envisaged in FSB’s approach, to build up a data 
base, identify vulnerabilities, and take suitable regulatory action where vulnerabilities could 
acquire systemic proportions. 
Exemption from requirement of registration: 
In formulating the threshold for registration of NBFCs, we were guided by considerations of 
conserving limited regulatory resources and issues of materiality of the risk profile of NBFCs. 
Accordingly, we have proposed to exempt two categories of NBFCs from registration – one, 
all non-deposit taking NBFCs with asset size below ₹. 0.25 billion and two, NBFCs with asset 
size below ₹. 5 billion and not accessing public funds. These NBFCs would also be exempt 
from  regulation.  Small  NBFCs  having  asset  size  of  less  than  ₹  0.25  billion  or  NBFCs  with 
asset size below ₹ 0.5 billion and not accessing public funds are not likely to create systemic 
risk in view of their small size and absence of leverage respectively. This is consistent with 
the recommendations of the Geneva Report6 which suggested that such small companies, 
which it termed “Tinies”, should have minimal conduct of business regulations especially  if 
they are unlevered. It is possible that some of these companies may pose insignificant risks 
as  individual  entities  but  their  correlated  behaviour  may  create  risks  when  they  move 
together as part of a larger group or “herd” and these may not be adequately captured. To 
address this risk, we have propounded the group concept, in which all NBFCs in a group will 
be  individually  treated  as  Systemically  Important  (NBFCs-ND-SI)  if  their  aggregate  assets 
                                                
6   The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation –Geneva Reports on the World Economy 11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
total ₹ 1 billion and above. This is not to deny that there may be valid reasons for creation of 
multiple NBFCs, but the possible risks from their activities need to be addressed. 
A lot of apprehension has been expressed in some quarters that NBFCs (i.e., non banking 
financial entities meeting the Principal Business criteria) having assets below the threshold 
will  be  forced  out  of  business.  I  would  like  to  clarify  that  this  is  not  the  intention  of  the 
proposed regulations. All  we are saying is that from a materiality perspective such entities 
need not be the focus of RBI’s regulatory oversight and, therefore, should be exempted from 
registration and regulation. We also do not feel that this will have an adverse impact on their 
activities  because  after  all,  there  must  be  many  entities  doing  business  even  under  the 
current regime, which have significant financial activities but below the 50/50 threshold and, 
therefore are not NBFCs and not registered with RBI. 
Captive NBFCs 
There  are  some  regulatory  concerns  regarding  the  business  model  of  captive  finance 
companies.  As  captives  provide  finance  for  purchase  of  products  of  the  parent,  their 
business  is  inextricably  linked  to  the  parent’s  fortunes.  It  is  likely  that  credit  underwriting 
standards in such companies may be weaker. Hence, while setting up of captive NBFCs is a 
commercial decision, the risks arising out of the business model of such captives need to be 
adequately addressed and hence the review of guidelines, requiring a higher Tier I Capital. 
Prudential norms 
Apprehensions have also been expressed that tightening of prudential norms as proposed in 
the draft regulations may affect the profits of the NBFCs and increase their lending cost. You 
would observe that changes have been proposed only in areas where there is a heightened 
risk perception. While the intention is not to mimic bank regulation completely, I am sure, you 
all  would  agree  that  we  should  take  some  of  the  relevant  best  practices  of  the  bank 
regulation which are well developed and tested and adapt them to other sectors where the 
benefits  of  such  approach  outweigh  the  costs.  The  proposed  increase  in  the  capital 
requirements  for  NBFCs  is  to  ensure  that  the  risks  in  the  financial  system  which  surfaced 
during the crisis are addressed and the regulatory gap between banks and NBFCs does not 
widen, especially when the capital requirements for banks have increased significantly under 
Basel III. The proposed measures address regulatory arbitrage between banks and NBFCs 
in  areas  such  as  capital  market  or  real-estate  exposure  through  the  calibrated  use  of 
prudential  measures  such  as  higher  capital  requirements,  and  risk  weights  for  sensitive 
sectors, wherever greater risks are perceived. Accordingly, we have proposed to raise the 
minimum  Tier  l  capital  requirement,  for  captive  NBFCs,  NBFCs  with  major  exposure  to 
sensitive  sectors  such  as  capital  market,  commodities  and  real  estate,  and  NBFCs 
predominantly  engaged  in  lending  against  gold  jewellery.  For  NBFCs  that  are  part  of  a 
banking group, risk weights for capital market exposure (CME) and Commercial Real Estate 
(CRE) would be the same as that for banks; for others these would be revised upwards. 
Convergence in regulation between banks and NBFCs is thought to be required in the areas 
of asset classification and provisioning norms. This is because both banks and NBFCs are 
financing similar assets and there is no logical reason for prudential norms to be different. In 
fact, initially when the 180 day norm was introduced for NBFCs, for assets other than lease 
and  hire  purchase  transactions,  for  whom  the  norms  were  even  more  relaxed,  the  norms 
were similar to those of banks at that time. However, while banks migrated to 90 day norm, 
NBFCs  continue  to  be  on  180  days  norm.,  As  regards  the  proposed  90  day  norm  for 
classification of assets, it has been argued that the clientele of NBFCs is very different from 
that of banks and hence a longer collection period is needed. I would like to emphasise that 
once an amount becomes due there is no reason why it should not be paid within 90 days 
irrespective of the nature of business and clientele. As regards fixing the payment schedules, 
there are no regulatory prescriptions or constraints. As lenders, NBFCs have the option of 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
fixing the repayment schedule suiting the credit cycle of the borrowers. However, to ensure 
minimal  dislocation,  this  convergence  of  time  norms  will  be  brought  about  in  a  phased 
manner,  and  a  one-time  adjustment  of the  repayment  schedule  which  shall  not  amount  to 
restructuring, is proposed to be permitted. Similarly, in the case of provisioning for standard 
assets, convergence with the banking sector is envisaged and sufficient transition time will 
be given for compliance. 
Deposit acceptance 
Since  2004–2005,  we  have  maintained  that,  as  a  policy,  only  banks  should  be  allowed  to 
accept public deposits. Deposit acceptance in the NBFC sector is a legacy of the past but no 
new  NBFC  has  been  given  a  license  for  acceptance  of  deposits.  Initially,  the  concept  of 
rating  had  been  introduced  for  NBFCs  accepting  public  deposits,  but,  as  an  exception, 
unrated AFCs were allowed to accept deposits up to ₹ 0.10 billion. You would all agree that 
depositor protection is not a function of the amount of deposit. It is, therefore, proposed to 
make  it  compulsory  for  all  existing  deposit  accepting  NBFCs  to  obtain  credit  ratings  from 
credit rating agencies. In future, unrated NBFCs will not be permitted to accept deposits and 
existing unrated deposit taking NBFCs will be given a period of one year to get themselves 
rated if they wish to continue to accept deposits. Further, to bring parity in the sector, the limit 
for  acceptance  of  deposits  for  rated  AFCs  is  proposed  to  be  reduced  in  line  with  other 
deposit taking NBFCs. 
Liquidity management 
I have spoken in detail about the liquidity risk due to maturity transformation during the credit 
intermediation  process  and  how  this  affected  NBFCs  in  2008.  As  seen  during  the  crisis, 
liquidity risks can rapidly translate into solvency risks. Taking lessons from the global crisis, 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has stipulated that a banking institution should 
maintain adequate levels of high quality liquid assets which can be converted into cash at 
very short notice and at small discount to enable it to survive a stress situation over a 30 day 
time  horizon.  The  Committee  has  also  looked  at  a  longer  time  horizon  by  expecting 
institutions to fund their activities with more stable sources of financing on an on-going basis. 
These  are  prudential  practices  and  need  to  be  adopted  by  all  financial  entities. 
Consequently, it is proposed that all registered NBFCs would be required to maintain high 
quality  liquid  assets  in  cash,  bank  deposits  available  within  30  days,  money  market 
instruments maturing within 30 days, actively traded debt securities (valued at 90 per cent of 
the  quoted  price  and  carrying  a  rating  not  lower  than  AA  or  equivalent),  equal  to  the  gap 
between  total  cash  inflows  and  outflows  over  the  1  to  30  day  time  bucket  as  a  liquidity 
coverage requirement. For deposit taking NBFCs, the extant requirement of maintenance of 
liquid assets will continue. I would like to clarify that the proposed requirement is much less 
onerous than that for banks inasmuch as the holding of liquid assets is not calibrated to a 
stress scenario and holding of financial sector liabilities as liquid assets is permitted which is 
not the case for banks. 
Corporate governance 
The  global  financial  crisis  exposed  major  weaknesses  in  corporate  governance  systems, 
particularly  in  risk  management  policies  and  procedures.  Internationally,  the  emphasis  on 
good  governance  is  increasing  and  it  is  firmly  believed  that  improving  corporate  and  risk 
governance could prevent, or at least mitigate, systemic crises. In 2007, the OECD lauded 
Asian  countries  for  substantially  revamping  their  corporate  governance  frameworks,  but 
warned  that  enforcement  remained  the  most  significant  challenge  and  an  “unfinished 
agenda”. CLSA and the Asian Corporate Governance Association echo the same conclusion 
in  their  2010  Corporate  Governance  Watch  Report  for  Asia.  A  key  observation  is  that 
“regulators make it too easy for companies to get away with box-ticking,” which keeps even 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
the best Asian markets far from international best practices. As per BCBS principles (October 
2010)  for  enhancing  corporate  governance,  effective  corporate  governance  practices  are 
essential to achieve and maintain public trust and confidence in the banking system, which 
are critical to the proper functioning of the banking sector and economy as a whole. 
The  above  arguments  apply  to  the  NBFC  sector  also,  especially,  in  view  of  their  growing 
size,  multiplicity  of  stakeholders  and  the  increasing  complexity  of  operations.  For  the 
purposes  of  corporate  governance,  we  have  felt  it  necessary  to  increase  the  focus  on 
companies with asset size of more than ₹ 10 billion, i.e., the really large companies. Again, 
the  proposed  prescriptions  in  this  regard  centre  around  materiality,  whether  in  ensuring  fit 
and  proper  shareholders  and  management  or  the  quality  of  disclosures.  The  proposed 
prescriptions  are  aimed  at  enhancing  governance  standards  in  NBFCs  by,  inter  alia, 
stipulating that all registered NBFCs will require prior approval whenever these is a change in 
control,  or  a  significant  increase  in  shareholding;  requiring  RBI’s  approval  for  appointing 
CEOs of large NBFCs. Other measures are: restricting the number of directorships a director 
can accept; putting in place a system of due diligence to ensure fit and proper criteria; and 
requiring enhanced disclosure requirements, including those mandated under Clause 49 of 
the SEBI listing agreement, etc. 
to 
the 
impact  on 
financial  system  due 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, let me reiterate a few points. The NBFC sector is a very important segment of 
the  financial  system  warranting  encouragement  for  further  development,  but  at  the  same 
time,  would  also  require  to  be  watched  and  regulated  more  closely  given  its  growth, 
increasing  complexity  and 
increased 
interconnectedness. Said differently, the very factors which would require the NBFC sector to 
be actively promoted would also require the sector to be actively regulated. In India, we have 
always been cognizant of the fact that NBFCs play a significant role in the financial system 
and in the economic growth. The regulatory framework has been designed and is reviewed 
from  time  to  time  keeping  in  mind  the  requirement  of  the  sector  as  well  as  the  changing 
dynamics in the financial system due to increased interconnectedness. It may be said that 
while the shadow banking sector in India did come under stress during the global financial 
crisis, the stress levels were comparatively modest which did not threaten their solvency. The 
sector  has  been  largely  sound,  mainly  due  to  the  kind  of  regulation  that  has  been  put  in 
place. Nevertheless, continuing fine tuning of regulation is required to monitor the growth of 
this sector as it can take unexpected and unforeseen turns and mutations. That is ultimately 
the  objective  of  the  proposed  Guidelines.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  have  elaborated  on  the 
rationale  behind  the  proposed  guidelines  so  that  there  is  a  better  understanding  of  the 
revised regulations. I am sanguine that the new regulatory framework would address risks 
and help build a more resilient and robust NBFC sector. 
References: 
Corporate Governance Watch 2010; CLSA 
Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2012; Financial Stability Board 
Principles  for  enhancing  corporate  governance;  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
(October 2010), 
Report of the Working Group on the issues and concerns in the NBFC Sector (August 2011) 
Shadow Banking: Scoping the Issues; Financial Stability Board (April 2011) 
Strengthening  Oversight  and  Regulation  of  Shadow  Banking:  An  Integrated  overview  of 
Policy Recommendations: Financial Stability Board (November 2012) 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Strengthening  Oversight  and  Regulation  of  Shadow  Banking:  A  Policy  Framework  for 
Strengthening  Oversight  and  Regulation  of  Shadow  Banking  Entities:  Financial  Stability 
Board (November 2012) 
The  Fundamental  Principles  of  Financial  Regulation:  Geneva  Reports  on  the  World 
Economy; Centre for Economic Policy Research (August 2009) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
