Bwalya K E Ng’andu: Benefits, problems and challenges associated with 
credit cards 
Remarks by Dr Bwalya K E Ng’andu, Deputy Governor (Operations) of the Bank of Zambia, 
at  the  launch  of  the  Access  Bank  Zambia  Limited  Visa  International  Credit  Card,  Lusaka, 
19 June 2013. 
 The Board Chairman, Access Bank Zambia Limited, Mr. Caleb Mulenga; 
Access Bank PLC Executive Director – Subsidiaries, Mr. Tek Koroye; 
Access Bank Zambia Limited Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Jekwu Ozoemene; 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps; 
Government Officials; 
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is indeed a pleasure for me to be here this evening to join Access Bank on this important 
and  auspicious  occasion  marking  the  launching  of  the  Access  Zambia  Limited  Visa 
International Credit Card. Through you Chairman, I wish to extend our congratulations to the 
Bank for  this  commendable  addition  to  your  range  of  products  and  services.  Undoubtedly, 
this  will  go  some  distance  in  responding  to  demands  and  needs  of  customers  who  are 
looking  to  benefit  from  this  product  with  its  combination  of  credit  and  the  application  of 
technology in payment for goods and services. 
While acknowledging this initiative, I will fall short of presenting the introduction of a credit 
card  service  as  cutting edge  technology,  because  it  is  not.  As  you  are  aware  credit  cards 
have  a  long  established  history  of  extensive  usage  in  many  countries  around  the  world, 
including a number of African countries. But credit cards are not common in Zambia as only 
a few banks issue them while most cards held by residents have been issued offshore. 
This initiative taken by Access Bank should directly contribute to an increase in the number 
of  people  holding  such  cards  and  taking  advantage  of  the  range  of  benefits  that  can  be 
derived from their use. 
In countries where credit cards are used extensively, their benefits for users are commonly 
recognized and include: 
• 
Elimination of the risk associated with carrying large amounts of cash as it may be 
lost  or  stolen.  Credit  card  companies  have  over  the  years  developed  a  variety  of 
anti-theft practices which protect the cardholder in the event of theft of the card. In 
any  case,  the  cardholder  is  protected  from  fraud  on  the  card  except  in  event  of 
negligence on his/her part; 
Cards make it easier to buy things as one can pay for a range of goods and services 
from  small  items  to  airline  tickets,  hotels,  car-rentals  etc.  They  are  particularly 
appropriate for online purchases; 
Cards  offer  you  additional  protection  if  what  you  purchased  is  lost,  damaged  or 
stolen as the credit card statement can vouch for the fact that you bought the item 
even in the absence of the original receipt; 
It helps you build a credit line which can be used by the credit reference company to 
support your creditworthiness when applying for a loan; and 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 In the case of emergencies, a card can become handy in paying for requirements 
which may be completely outside your budget. 
These are some of the basic conveniences of credit cards which  will come about with the 
extensive use of this instrument in this country. 
Apart from the cardholders, credit cards have other wider advantages which impact on the 
greater economy. From our perspective as a Central Bank, we are keen to promote the use 
of non-cash and more efficient payment systems for its convenience, flexibility and security. 
We  consider  it  as  one  of  the  instruments  that  can  contribute  to  the  promotion  of  financial 
inclusion  as  has  been clearly  demonstrated  in  other  countries  where  cards  are  a  common 
tool  for  the  settlement  of  financial  transactions.  In  the  United  States,  for  instance,  80%  of 
households  have  at  least  one  credit  card.  In  Zambia,  with  the  growing  emphasis  on  trade 
within the regional economic groupings like SADC and COMESA, plastic money in the form 
of credit cards, is a very practical way of facilitating settlement of cross border transactions. 
Another  benefit  which  may  be  associated,  with  the  more  extensive  use  of  e-money  is  the 
potential  increase  in  tax  compliance  among  the  retail  and  wholesale  sectors.  The  use  of 
credit cards generates accurate records of purchases which currently may not be captured 
by the Zambia Revenue Authority because business houses may declare false figures. With 
the use of a credit card there is no provision to cheat the taxman by refraining from issuing a 
receipt as the record of the transaction will speak for itself. 
Whilst  on  the  subject  of  greater  tax  compliance,  I  would  want  to  see  some  form  of 
requirement for most businesses to use points of sale terminals and other non-cash forms of 
payment  in  our  shopping  malls  and  central  business  district  businesses  where  we  see  a 
resistance from businesses to embrace this technology in favour of cash. 
But  let  me  end  my  remarks  this  evening  by  pointing  out  a  number  of  problems  and 
challenges that might be associated with the use of credit cards. 
The biggest disadvantage of credit cards is that they encourage the holders to spend money 
they don’t have. If the credit card does not require that you pay off your balance each month, 
this  balance  will  accumulate.  The  longer  you  wait  to  settle,  the  more  money  you  will  owe 
since interest will be charged each month on the unsettled balance. Cardholders therefore 
need to be careful not use the card liberally. If you think, the card makes you throw caution to 
the wind as you spend; you might consider leaving the card alone. 
The  possibility  of  falling  into  a  debt  trap  is  another  real  danger  that  cardholders  need  to 
watch out for. Interest rates on credit cards can be high. In some countries interest rates on 
credit cards can be as high as ten times what banks are willing to give on deposit balances. 
We will keep our sight on what rates apply in the market as a central bank and may even 
intervene if necessary. But the responsibility of avoiding falling into a debt trap lies primarily 
with  the  cardholder. It  is  prudent to remember that  whilst  a  credit  card can  make  your  life 
easier and can be a wonderful tool for facilitating payments, if you do not use it wisely, it will 
become a massive financial burden for you. We must learn some lessons from how failure to 
keep track of purchases and the uncontrollable propensity to spend outside budget, has led 
to the financial ruin of many people in the developed economies. 
The last risk, I want to talk about is pertinent to both cardholders and issuers of cards – and 
that is the risk of credit card frauds. Cards can be physically stolen or credit card numbers 
can be acquired by thieves over the phone, internet or website and then used illegally to rack 
up debts. Access Bank must therefore, develop adequate security measures that can protect 
it  and  its  clients  from  the  crimes  which  seem  to  pervade  the  electronic  based  payment 
platforms. To fight this crime, you will need to educate your customers on how to safely and 
securely conduct transaction using their cards. You will help prevent fraud by educating your 
customers on what to do when they lose their card or wallet, how to secure their card by, for 
instance,  not giving  out credit  card  information  anyhow  or  on  the  website  and  the  need to 
check statements closely. On their part, cardholders must also do their part as responsible 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
cardholders,  including  paying  off  balances  on  credit  cards  as  required,  not  loaning  credit 
cards to others or divulging credit card information to anyone not entitled to it. 
Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me reiterate my words of commendation to Access 
Bank  for  introducing  this  product  on  the  market.  It  is  a  great  product  which  when  used 
properly will benefit both the bank and its customers. This outcome is however, predicted on 
customers  using  the  card  wisely  and  responsibly  and  on  the  bank  issuing  cards  to  clients 
after a careful vetting and scrutiny and charging fair interest on the product. Failure to choose 
creditworthy customers will lead to defaults which may trigger excessive charges. 
Allow me again to congratulate the Board, Management and Staff of Access Bank Zambia 
Limited on this important initiative. 
I thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
