Erdem Başçi: Global finance in transition 
Keynote speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, 
at the conference on “Global finance in transition”, Istanbul, 7 May 2013. 
 Esteemed participants, distinguished guests, 
Welcome to the conference on “Global Finance in Transition”, held under the Russian G20 
presidency and hosted jointly by the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee (RBC) and the 
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT). In this conference, we will be analysing and 
discussing with experts, the structural changes in global finance experienced as of 2008. In 
these  opening  remarks,  I  would  like  to  briefly  point  out  the  impact  of  these  changes  on 
emerging market economies. 
Three fields  have  undergone  significant  changes  in  the  aftermath  of the  2008  crisis:  fiscal 
policies, monetary policies and financial sector policies. These changes have had significant 
subsequent impacts on global finance. 
As for the fiscal policies; those of the emerging market economies differ considerably from 
the  fiscal  policies  of  the  advanced  economies.  Automatic  stabilizers  did  cause  emerging 
market economies to have wider budget deficits temporarily in 2009. Yet, EME’s sovereign 
debt has been very low compared to that of advanced economies, and still on a downward 
trend since 2010. 
Emerging  market  and  advanced  economies  diverge  in  terms  of  monetary  policies  as  well. 
Since there has been no deterioration in their money multipliers, central banks of emerging 
market  economies  have  not felt the  urge  –  experienced  by  their  counterparts  in  advanced 
economies – for an unconventional broadening in their money bases. 
Esteemed participants, distinguished guests, 
In emerging market economies, the gradual alleviation of the pressure on financing sources 
– caused by public sector demand – has provided significant room for the private sector to 
invest  in  physical  capital.  These  investments  have  enabled  –  via  capital  markets  and  the 
banking system – the use of both domestic as well as foreign savings. These shed light on 
the  importance  and  prominence  of  institutional  capacity  and  financial  infrastructure  for 
financial stability. 
Smoothly  functioning  payment  and  settlement  systems  is  the  first  and  foremost  significant 
requisite for strengthening financial infrastructure in emerging market economies. 
The  existence  of  both  a  stock  market  backed  by  a  strong  capital  market  and  also  a  bond 
market in local currency is also essential. 
Another  important  structural  factor  is  a  sound  banking  system.  An  adequate  legal 
infrastructure,  strong  capital  structure  and  confidence-based  management  are 
the 
prerequisites for such a system. 
Distinguished guests, 
A  strong  infrastructure  is  a  “necessary-but-not  sufficient”  component  of  financial  stability. 
Another “sine qua non” for more stable global capital flows is developing and implementing a 
macroprudential  policy  framework,  and  emerging  market  economies  have  taken  important 
steps in this direction in the post-2008 period. 
Benefits and likely risks brought by this major transition in global finance will be discussed in 
length over the next two days by academicians and policymakers in six different sessions. I 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
believe that this conference will produce fruitful and beneficial outcomes for global financial 
stability. 
I would like to thank our participants and distinguished guests for their contributions and for 
being here with us. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
