Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Promoting good governance and corporate 
social responsibility in the Philippines 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  for  the  opening  ceremony  of  the  29th  Biennial  Convention  of  the 
Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Inc. (FFCCCII), Manila, 
22 March 2013. 
 Introduction 
Officers  and  Members  of  the  Federation  of  Filipino-Chinese  Chambers  of  Commerce  and 
Industry  Incorporated  (FFCCCII),  led  by  its  President,  Mr.  Tan  Ching  and  Chairman 
Emeritus,  Mr.  Lucio  Tan,  distinguished  leaders  and  members  of  the  business  community, 
honored guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  grace  the  29th  Biennial  Convention  of  the  FFCCCII  and  address  an 
audience representing the largest organization of Filipino-Chinese businessmen. 
The theme of today’s event, “Tuwid na Daan Towards Peace, Unity and Prosperity”, is very 
much  aligned  to  the  thrust  of  government  which  is  centered  on  good  governance  –  a 
governance  environment  marked  by  transparency,  accountability  and  enhanced  citizens’ 
participation to attain sustainable and inclusive growth. 
The BSP also shares this vision. Good corporate governance encourages investments which 
allow  the  expansion  of  the  economy  with  minimal  inflation  pressures. Good  governance  is 
also the foundation of a safe, stable, and sound financial system. 
It is most welcome that the private sector, like the FFCCCII, fully supports the government’s 
programs and thrust on good governance. 
Indeed it is easier to reach a destination by passing a “tuwid na daan” rather than “daan na 
madaming  liko  at  baku-bako”.  This  means,  time  and  resources  well  spent,  especially  for 
businessmen like you. Di po ba? 
Favorable economic growth prospects by multilateral institutions 
2012 was an auspicious year for the Philippine economy. Notwithstanding the risks arising 
from  a  volatile  global  economic  environment,  the  Philippines  emerged  stronger-than-
expected. 
With  the  continued  resilience  demonstrated  in  recent  years,  some  are  even  beginning  to 
consider  the  Philippines  as  an  emerging  tiger  economy  in  Asia.  A  decisive  transformation 
from being once tagged as “The sick man in Asia”. 
The  complimentary  reviews  are  reflected  in  the  upward  revisions  made  by  multilateral 
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank (WB) as well as 
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) on the Philippines’ GDP growth forecasts for 2013.  
All  these  favorable  assessments  and  bright  growth  prospects  were  driven  by  the  solid 
performance of the Philippine economy across various indicators. 
Let me cite four: 
Robust and broad-based economic growth. 
(1) 
The  stronger-than-expected  growth  performance  in  2012  was  supported  by  broadening 
growth drivers. All major economic sectors advanced during the year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
On the supply side, transportation, telecommunication, real estate, and construction business 
activities pushed the economy forward. Meanwhile, on the demand side, growth was boosted 
by consumer expenditure and government spending. 
(2) 
Favorable inflation environment and well-anchored inflation expectations. 
I should point out that the increased activity has not caused the general price level to rise. 
Inflation has generally remained low, and prospects appear to be equally subdued in terms of 
price. 
Indeed, we expect this scenario of high growth-low inflation to be sustained going forward. 
Sound and stable banking system. 
(3) 
The strong economic performance is itself anchored on a sound and stable banking system. 
Deposits  continue  to  build  up,  allowing  loans  to  similarly  expand.  Much  like  inflation,  our 
banks’ Capital Adequacy Ratio shows no sign of vulnerability. 
This  encouraging  situation  supports  our  assessment  that  our  banks  are  ready  for  the 
implementation  of  Basel  3.  We  will  roll  out  the  capital  adequacy  framework  of  Basel  3  in 
about nine months from today. 
Robust external payments position. 
(4) 
A robust external position completes our position of strength. 
Whether  we  look  at  the  overall  BOP  position  or  its  sub  components,  we  see  positive 
balances. Remittances from OFs continue to bolster domestic liquidity while BPO estimated 
receipts continue to be a positive factor. 
All these eventually led us to a GIR level that is just below US$84B. 
2013 Macroeconomic outlook 
The macro financial numbers provide us some momentum. 
Nothing in the first quarter gives us reason to take pause. Instead, the outlook continues to 
be encouraging. 
Given  available  data,  we  expect  growth  to  further  accelerate  but  this  time  aside  from  the 
growth drivers in 2012, we anticipate a more pronounced contribution from the external trade 
sector. 
In addition, remittances from our OFs will continue to be a steadying factor. 
The BOP is also seen to remain in surplus, which in turn will support an even higher level of 
international reserves. At end 2013, the GIR is projected to reach $86.0B. 
Challenges to the economic outlook 
But while  we expect the Philippine economy to  continue to show resilience, given its solid 
macroeconomic fundamentals so far and the ample policy space these provide us, we are 
not immune to the continuing volatilities in the external front. 
The risks that we are currently monitoring closely include the following: 
1. 
Intensification  of  the  euro-area  debt  crisis.  Just  when  we  thought  the  European 
authorities are on the way to a resolution, the problem in Cyprus crops up. 
Any further delay in the resolution of fiscal issues in the US. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2. 
2 
 3. 
Continued  surge  in  capital  flows  to  the  EMEs,  including  the  Philippines,  resulting 
from the continued low interest rates and weak economic prospects in Europe and 
the US. 
Friends, let me assure you that the BSP stands ready to pursue policy measures to deal with 
these downside risks from external sources. But the BSP and the Government cannot do this 
alone. 
The  Government  needs  the  support  of  the  private  sector  of  an  organization  such  as  this 
Federation. 
FFCCCII and the Government: Forging stronger ties toward sustaining growth 
momentum 
How can the FFCCCII help? Just as I have mentioned four major sustainability factors that 
support economic growth in the country, let me mention four key areas where the members 
of your Federation can help in sustaining the momentum of high growth-low inflation. 
1. 
Participation in the infrastructure program of the government, particularly the 
Public-Private Partnership (PPP). 
Given  the  relatively  wide  scope  of  industry  sectors  that  FFCCCII  members  belong  to,  the 
FFCCCII could encourage more of its members to engage with the government in pursuing 
vital infrastructure projects for the country. 
Enhanced infrastructure would boost the country’s business climate, which in turn would help 
generate more jobs. 
More jobs mean improved spending capacity for more Filipinos which would lead to higher 
consumption. 
Indeed, a win-win situation for both the private and the public sectors. 
Investments in the export sector. 
2. 
There  have  been  concerns  that  the  Philippines  may  be  over-reliant  on  remittances  from 
overseas  Filipinos  in  terms  of  financing  its  foreign  exchange  needs.  One  of  the  strategies 
that  is  needed  for  this  country  to  promote  a  sustainable  external  position  is  through 
increasing  investments  in  the  export  sector  and  enhancing  competitiveness  as  well  as 
innovativeness in this sector. 
Given the widely diversified and geographically dispersed profile of FFCCCII members, the 
Federation  could  definitely  encourage  more  of  its  members  to  invest  in  developing  new 
export-viable products. 
Development of a strong industrial base. 
3. 
Another  project  that  the  FFCCCII  could  further  promote  is  the  development  of  a  strong 
industrial base in the country. With a well-represented industry sector, FFCCCII could easily 
push for  a roadmap toward  a stronger  and more  diversified  industry  sector  across  various 
lines  and  regions  nationwide.  This  project  could  certainly  lend  support  to  one  of  the 
government’s key concerns: employment generation in the domestic economy. 
Investment in human capital. 
4. 
I  know  that  the  FFCCCII  has  been  keen  on  pursuing  programs  and  projects  aimed  at 
promoting  education.  These  include  construction  of  barrio  schools  and  provision  of 
scholarship programs to elementary and high school students in Chinese-Filipino schools. 
I encourage you to expand existing programs in this area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
These are only a few of what I have in mind, but I am sure that the FFCCCII could contribute 
a lot more in terms of programs and projects geared toward nation-building, on top of what 
the Federation has already been doing in the past. 
BSP’s policy directions going forward 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  We  are  seeing  many  positive  developments  but  the  agenda  is 
definitely not done yet. 
We need to take a holistic view and pursue the prudential path towards financial stability. I 
realize that to many of you, financial stability may sound to be such a high-level objective that 
is detached from the ground. In reality, this prudential objective has a direct bearing on all of 
us. 
Financial stability means that we will continue to set monetary policy with an inflation anchor 
that is consistent with the needs of the broader macroeconomy. In particular, the BSP sees 
interest rates remaining low  over  the  policy  horizon,  given  a  manageable  inflation  outlook. 
Foreign exchange inflows are expected to continue, although we see flows coming in at a 
slower pace than before. Therefore we expect the peso to remain well-supported. 
Financial  stability  also  means  a  stable  and  sound  banking  sector  that  actively  promotes 
inclusion, provides for non-traditional delivery channels of financial services, and protects the 
interests  of  the  saving  public.  In  particular,  the  BSP  will  continue  with  the  banking  reform 
agenda, including the adoption of Basel 3 capital adequacy standards in January 2014. 
Finally, financial stability must then mean that we have an efficient payments system that is 
responsive  to  the  business  needs  of  the  community  as  well  as  in  providing  the  needed 
market infrastructure for investors. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, the 2012 macroeconomic performance of the Philippine economy has 
set a significant standard for the country. 
While challenges remain and continue to pose risks to the economy, the BSP is optimistic 
that with an even stronger partnership between the private sector represented by business 
organizations like the FFCCCII, the Philippines could do a repeat, if not better, performance 
this year. 
With stronger partnership with the private sector, the government will also be able to facilitate 
smoothly  its  pursuit  of  sustaining  good  governance  reforms  to  ensure  a  sustainable  and 
inclusive growth for the Philippines. 
I salute the FFCCCII for its almost six decades of uniting the Chinese-Filipino community to 
promote the growth of business and implement social welfare projects that help bring about 
economic development and progress for the country. 
In the next decade and beyond, may you continue to inspire more leaders in the business 
community to share your “tradition of service” to the Filipino people. 
As  we  embark  on  another  journey  this  2013,  it  is  my  hope  that  there  will  be  more 
partnerships forged and bounded with the same mission as the FFCCCII. That is, “to devote 
time, talent  and  resources  to  projects  that  will  contribute  to the  country’s  economic,  social 
and cultural development”. 
This  for  me,  is  the  true  essence  of  corporate  social  responsibility  and  nation-building  a 
business  organization  which  commits  itself  as  a  partner  of  the  government  in  alleviating 
poverty and promoting economic prosperity for the entire nation. 
Thank you and good afternoon. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
