Gill Marcus: Celebrating what is good about South Africa and its 
economy 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  the  FM  Top 
Companies awards function, Johannesburg, 26 June 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to address the FM Top Companies awards function. It is an honour 
to be part of a tribute to the best companies in our country. It is appropriate that, at a time 
when much of the economic news is gloomy, we hold our heads high and celebrate what is 
good  about  our  country  and  our economy.  South  Africa  has  a  sound  economic foundation 
and  hundreds,  if  not  thousands,  of firms  and  business  leaders  that  are outstanding  in  any 
context. It is a major source of strength that South Africa has a large number of companies 
that continue to grow, innovate, employ people and generate revenue and export earnings 
for our country. 
It is even more impressive that in times of very difficult and uncertain economic conditions, 
both  globally  and  locally,  many  firms  are  performing  so  well.  You  and  your  firms  are  a 
significant reason why we can proudly say that while our economy faces many challenges, it 
is also highly resilient. We are here today to recognise these firms and their achievements. 
The economic environment is a difficult one. The world is in its sixth year of crisis: a crisis 
that  has  repeatedly  mutated,  shifting  its  epicentre  from  a  sub-prime  crisis  to  systemic 
banking crisis; a liquidity, fiscal deficit and sovereign debt crisis. Measures taken to address 
each  of  these  elements  have  had  unintended  consequences.  Austerity  measures  have 
contributed  to  an  unemployment  crisis  of  immense  proportions,  particularly  for  the  young. 
There will probably be at least one or two more forms of the crisis before we can safely say 
that recovery is sustainable. And even then, as we can see in the United States where there 
are signs of recovery, the measures that are outlined to be taken very cautiously and with 
considerable  conditionality,  such  as  a  tapering  off  of  Quantitative  Easing,  have  also  had 
unintended consequences. 
As we have seen in recent days and weeks, the exchange rates of many emerging market 
economies have been impacted negatively by an outflow of capital. This development could 
well mark the start of a new mutation of the ongoing global crisis. 
If things do not get any worse it will probably still take a number of years before the world is 
back  to  more  normal  growth  and  output  gaps  are  fully  closed.  Even  then,  there  is  debate 
about whether that new normal would be at a lower rate of growth than in the past. All in all, it 
is a very uncertain and difficult decade for individuals, companies and countries. 
South Africa’s weak first quarter annualised growth rate of 0,9 per cent is, to some extent, 
consistent  with  what  we  see  happening globally  and  in  other  emerging markets  and  these 
developments have, in part, contributed towards a weaker rand exchange rate. But domestic 
factors  have  also  contributed.  These  have  to  do  with  lost  production  in  the  mining  sector, 
instability caused by violent and often illegal strike action and persistent capacity constraints 
in infrastructure, electricity in particular. 
The  source  of  this  vulnerability  is  primarily  a  large  current  account  deficit,  a  high  budget 
deficit,  rising  public  debt  and  relatively  low  foreign  exchange  reserves  as  well  as  high 
household  indebtedness  and  inflation  close  to  the  top  of  the  target  range  –  all  suggesting 
limited room for fiscal or monetary support. 
South Africa is actively taking measures to stabilise the labour relations environment led by 
President  Zuma  who,  in  his  budget  vote  speech,  set  out  concrete  steps  to  diffuse  labour 
tension  and  ensure  that  labour  disputes  are  conducted  peacefully  and  within  our  legal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
framework.  President  Zuma  also  focused  on  the  structural  reforms  that  are  being 
implemented, within the framework of the National Development Plan, to ensure higher and 
more inclusive growth going forward. 
Currently  the  financial  markets  appear  to  be  confused  about  the  monetary  policy  reaction 
function. This is not altogether surprising, as monetary policy is facing an extremely difficult 
dilemma. On the  one  hand,  slowing  growth  with  a  downside  risk,  and the  widening  output 
gap  should  signal  the  need  for  further  monetary  accommodation,  given  the  absence  of 
significant demand pressures in the economy. These conditions have already resulted in the 
Bank being more tolerant of inflation at the upper end of the target range than would normally 
have been the case. This is consistent with a flexible inflation targeting framework. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  are  seeing  increasingly  strong  upside  risks to  the  inflation  outlook, 
primarily  coming  from  exchange  rate  developments.  Had  these  pressures  been  simply  a 
result  of  excess  demand  pressures,  the  response  would  have  been  relatively  straight-
forward. But this is not the case. 
There are a number of issues that we have to consider in our decision making: to what extent 
is the depreciation going to be sustained? Will the currency continue to depreciate, settle at 
current levels or has it overshot in which case it will strengthen at some stage? This is critical 
in  terms  of  the  extent  of  the  pass-through  to  inflation.  We  have  observed  that  the  pass-
through thus far has been far more muted than has been the case in previous episodes of 
currency weakness, possibly also a reflection of the weak state of the economy. We have to 
assess whether the pass-through remains as low as  it has been, or will we reach a stage 
where the margins of importers can no longer be squeezed? Furthermore, if there is a spike 
in inflation as a result of the depreciation, is it a one-off increase that will pass through the 
numbers by next year, or will it generate a depreciation-inflation spiral? Most importantly, will 
inflation expectations remain relatively contained at current levels? 
These are not easy issues to determine with confidence, and have been complicated by the 
strong market reaction to the suggestion that the US Fed may begin slowing the pace of its 
bond-buying programme. 
Our core mandate remains price stability, so our primary objective is to keep inflation within 
the  target  range.  Currently  our  forecasts  (and  those  of  nearly  all  private  sector  analysts) 
suggest that inflation is likely to remain at the top of the band or slightly above, and then to 
return to within the target range. The downside risks to the growth outlook would suggest that 
we should tolerate inflation at these levels. 
However, the upside risks to the inflation outlook make further accommodation more difficult, 
but do not automatically imply a tightening of the monetary policy stance. This will be highly 
dependent  on  how  we  see  the  inflation  trajectory  unfolding  in  this  very  uncertain 
environment. In other words, it has become even more data dependent. There is of course 
always the danger that we are “behind the curve” and that we leave it too late (and this we 
will only know ex post). But at the same time, a sustained breach of the inflation target is not 
our central forecast, and the downside risks to growth imply that we  would not want to be 
unnecessarily pre-emptive. This is the essence of the monetary policy dilemma, and requires 
a fine balancing act. 
As already mentioned, South Africa’s high quality firms are a key source of strength for the 
South  African  economy.  South  Africa  is  a  vibrant,  robust  democracy  with  a  sound 
Constitution that protects the rights of all citizens. This is essential for long term economic 
growth and for the fruits of that growth to be shared more equitably. There are several other 
economic foundation-stones which will help us navigate through these difficult times. 
South  Africa’s  macroeconomic  policies  are  sound,  clear  and 
transparent.  Our 
macroeconomic institutions enjoy a high degree of credibility and respect, both globally and 
locally. Flexible inflation targeting has helped anchor inflation expectations and has provided 
the Reserve Bank with some scope to support economic growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Allow  me  to  list  at  least  five  additional  strengths  and  opportunities  for  the  South  African 
economy: 
• 
South Africa’s emerging middle class is a source of strength, contributing to rising 
consumption, the creation of new firms and greater social stability. 
Our proximity to high growth African countries is already having a positive impact on 
our exports. 
Our natural resources, both mineral and natural beauty, provide huge potential for 
investment in mining, agriculture, tourism and niche manufacturing sectors. 
South  Africa’s  financial  services  sector  is  a  recognised  strength,  with  the  country 
ranked  in  the  top  three  in  the  world  in  the  regulation  of  securities  exchanges, 
soundness  of  our  banking  sector  and  access  to  financial  services  as  part  of  a 
considered policy of financial inclusion. 
The efficacy of our legal framework and the strength of our auditing and accounting 
capacity provide a conducive environment for the private sector to operate in. 
    I  can  list  many  more  areas  where  steady  progress  is  being  made.  These  strengths  are  a 
cause  for  optimism  for  our  economy  and  reflect  the  significant  potential  for  growth, 
employment creation and shared economic prosperity for all in our country. 
South  Africa’s  infrastructure  programme  has the  potential  to  crowd  in  the  private  sector to 
expand  investment  and  employment.  Investments  in  electricity,  renewable  energy,  freight 
rail, ports, water, roads and telecommunications will enhance the capacity of the economy, 
enabling faster growth as well as improve the efficiency of private firms. 
Two examples are worth mentioning here. 
First, adequate electricity provision is critical. We know that at present we cannot grow at a 
rate much in excess of 3 per cent without hitting against electricity supply constraints. We are 
also  aware  that  certain  investment  projects  do  not  get  off  the  ground  because  of  lack  of 
certainty of electricity supply. Thus new energy capacity must be brought on stream as soon 
as possible, and on-going investment in sustainable energy capacity remains an imperative. 
Second, we have invested in a world-class road infrastructure in Gauteng which has already 
had a major impact on economic efficiencies. According to an independent study, the overall 
average  travel  time  on  the  N1  north  road  section  between  Buccleuch  and  the  Old 
Johannesburg highway has been reduced by 50 per cent to 13 minutes. The improved travel 
time  and  travel  speeds  come  despite  a  28  per  cent  increase  in  traffic  volumes  since  the 
implementation  of  the  Gauteng  Freeway  Improvement  Programme.  Furthermore,  petrol 
consumption has also declined as less time is spent idling on the highways, not to mention 
improved road safety and reduced vehicle running costs. The need for and benefit of such 
economic efficiencies brought about through an expanded infrastructure programme cannot 
be overestimated. 
Investment  in  infrastructure  is  for  the  benefit  of  both  current  and  future  generations,  and 
should  provide  the  private  sector  with  a  longer  term  time  horizon,  encouraging  private 
investment,  which  has  been  very  weak  over  the  past few  years. We  hope  that the  private 
sector will respond appropriately, and public-private partnerships should be promoted in the 
process. Growth in gross fixed capital formation is currently led by state owned enterprises, 
but  for  South  Africa  to  reach  its  growth  potential  the  private  sector’s  role  is  essential.  In 
general,  the  private  sector  contributes  around  two  thirds  of  such  investment.  Gross  fixed 
capital  formation  as  a  ratio  to  GDP  presently  stands  at  19  per  cent,  down  from  a  high  of 
23 per  cent  in  2008,  and  compared  for  instance  with  that  of  Indonesia,  a  fast-growing 
emerging market, where it stands at over 30 per cent. 
South Africa’s infrastructure programme will have benefits for many sectors in the economy. 
Going  beyond  South  Africa,  Africa’s  infrastructure  investment  increased  from  about 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
US$10 billion in 2000 to about US$45 billion in  2010, and is set to rise to US$93 billion  a 
year by 2020. South African construction firms are well placed to be an integral part of these 
opportunities in our region. 
In  the  1960s,  Korean  construction  firms  won  large  contracts  to  build  roads  in  South  East 
Asia. These firms sourced their inputs from South Korean manufacturers, providing the first 
growth  stimulus  for  them.  Similarly,  South  African  construction  firms  can  grow  their  order 
books  globally  and  use  a  proportion  of  South  Africa  material  and  capital  equipment, 
stimulating our manufacturing sector. 
Long  term  growth  requires  a  partnership  between  the  public  and  private  sectors,  which 
requires  a  much  longer  horizon.  Too  often  we  are  caught  up  in  the  paralysis  of  short-
termism. A long term perspective requires policy certainty, trust in institutions and confidence 
in  the  longer  term  growth  outlook.  There  is  increased  recognition  within  the  private  sector 
that sustainable earnings growth requires such a longer term horizon and the chase for short 
term returns is not always consistent with longer term sustainable growth. 
At least some of our woes in the mining sector arise from a degree of short termism amongst 
all  stakeholders  in  the  sector.  Before  the  era  of  global  capital  markets,  mining  companies 
were able to adjust to the volatility of commodity prices. When prices were high, they were 
able  to  accumulate  cash  on  their  balance  sheets.  They  saved  this  money  for  times  when 
prices would fall. More recently, shareholders penalised companies for keeping large piles of 
cash on their balance sheets. This resulted in large dividend payments. In turn, management 
took large bonuses when prices were high. Workers too demanded higher salary increases 
when  commodity  prices  were  high.  When  prices  fell,  mining  companies  made  losses  and 
there was no cushion. It becomes much more difficult for a company to raise capital when 
they are making losses. Similarly, management bonuses and workers’ salaries are sticky. 
The necessity of taking a longer term perspective does not just apply to shareholders and 
fixed capital investment. It also applies to human resource management. South African firms 
spend a lower proportion of their revenue training their staff than comparable firms in other 
countries. For all firms globally, staff development is a win-win investment helping to raise 
productivity  and  make  work  more  meaningful  and  interesting  for  individuals.  In  a  country 
such as ours where so many were denied adequate education, firms play a crucial role in 
training their  staff. We  need  to  remember  that  lack  of  education,  or  poor  education,  is  the 
greatest exclusion there can be. 
In many cases, it is not the absolute salary that workers feel aggrieved about. It is the lack of 
a career-path and opportunities to move up the ladder that is the source of frustration. Peter 
Drucker, one of the fathers of theories on management, wrote in The New Realities (1989): 
“Management’s  fundamental  task  is  to  make  people  capable  of  joint  performance  through 
common goals, common values, the right structure, and the training and development they 
need to perform and to respond to change”. 
To bring several strands of my talk together, I refer to two studies, one by the IMF and the 
other by the OECD, into how countries can avoid the middle income trap, which is defined as 
a  period  of  slower  growth  or  even  stagnation  when  countries  reach  a  GDP  per  capita  of 
between US$5,000 and US$10,000 (in PPP terms). 
These studies suggest that to break out of this middle income trap, countries need to move 
from being adapters of technology to being producers of technology. Countries that move up 
the value chain to capture a larger share of the intellectual property or innovation succeed in 
breaking the trap. 
While South Africa’s expenditure on Research and Development (R&D) has increased in the 
past  decade,  the  country  still  lags  its  peers.  R&D  expenditure  in  South  Africa  amounts  to 
about 0,9 per cent of GDP, well below the 2,3 per cent average for OECD countries. In most 
countries,  about  two  thirds  of  R&D  spending  is  undertaken  by  the  private  sector,  but  in 
almost  all  cases  there  are  strong  institutional  links  between  firms,  higher  education 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
institutions and science councils contributing to both higher levels of research spending and 
more domestic commercialisation of the ideas and innovations. 
South Africa has many innovative firms that are able to compete with the best in the world. 
The  most  successful  firms  take  a  long  term  perspective,  invest  in  their  people  and  take 
innovation seriously. Allow me to quote Sipho Nkosi, the CEO of Exxaro: “We spend money 
on innovation and research and development because we believe that companies focusing 
on this will survive in the future and will have an advantage over those that don’t innovate.” 
The  studies  referred  to  also  suggest  that  the  presence  of  local  firms  that  have  a  global 
footprint are critical to this process. Countries that have firms with strong global brands are 
more likely to move up the value chain. This is partly because so much of the value addition 
in  the  world  economy  today  rests  in  research  and  development,  innovation,  branding  and 
marketing, and logistics and distribution. 
How relevant is such a strategy for South Africa? On the one hand, South Africa has large 
numbers  of  poorly  skilled  people  either  unemployed  or  employed  doing  relatively  low 
productivity jobs. On the other hand, we have sophisticated firms who operate at the cutting 
edge of global innovation with highly skilled staff. 
South  Africa  needs  to  pursue  both  strategies.  We  must  grow  our  mining,  agriculture, 
manufacturing and tourism sectors where we have significant comparative advantage. Parts 
of these sectors are also labour intensive and require relatively low skilled workers. Growth in 
these sectors has the potential to create millions of jobs. 
At the same time, South Africa needs its firms to develop brands and technologies that it can 
export. We are already well placed in many respects in telecommunications, banking, retail, 
brewing, construction and mining and we have firms with a significant global presence and 
strong brands. These firms generate significant export earnings for South Africa through the 
provision of knowledge services. For example, in 2011, South Africa exported US$7 billion 
worth of mining equipment and had a trade surplus of US$472 million in mining equipment. 
Such exports have strong backward linkages to our own manufacturing sector. 
By 2050, the world will need to produce about 80 per cent more food than today to satisfy 
growing  populations  and  rising  food  consumption.  Africa  contains  the  largest  proportion  of 
underutilised arable land on the planet. 
This  provides  a  huge  opportunity  for  investment,  not  just  in  agriculture  but  in  agro-
processing,  in  water  management,  in  roads  and  ports  and  in  cold  storage  facilities.  South 
African firms in the agricultural and agro-processing sector have the expertise, the knowhow 
and the capital to invest in food production and processing on the continent. Again, there are 
strong backward linkages between such investments abroad and jobs back home. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  yes  these  are  difficult  economic  times.  We  have  strong  firms  that 
significantly contribute to South Africa’s economic development. From our perspective at the 
Bank, we will endeavour to maintain a sound and predictable macroeconomic framework and 
enhance our economic environment. South Africa’s progress requires firms and businesses 
to become partners in development. Growing firms mean a growing economy and a growing 
economy is essential for firms to grow. These are mutually reinforcing developments. 
I am inspired by the successes of South African firms domestically, on the African continent 
and globally. 
We have high calibre business leaders who are smart, professional and innovative. We need 
closer ties and partnerships across our economy to raise our growth level and to make our 
growth more inclusive. Our appeal to you is to continue with your good work, take a longer 
term  perspective  and  invest  in  people  and  technology  to  drive  higher  and  more  inclusive 
growth  and  reduce the unacceptably  high  income  differentials. I  am  confident that through 
such  partnership,  drawing  on  our  many  strengths  as  a  nation,  South  Africa  will  grow  and 
continue to prosper. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Again, congratulations to all the winners of the awards. 
Thank you. 
References 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2013).  Asia  and  Pacific.  Shifting  risks,  new  foundations  for 
growth. Regional Economic Outlook, April. 
Jankowska, A, A Nagengast and J Ramon Perea (2012). The product space and the middle-
income trap: comparing Asian and Latin American experiences. OECD Development Centre, 
Working Paper No.311. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
