Mario Draghi: G20 priorities under the Russian Presidency 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the G20 Ministers 
and Central Bank Governors’ Meeting, Moscow, 15 February 2013. 
 Dear President Putin, ladies and gentlemen, 
First,  on  behalf  of  all  my  G20  colleagues,  I  would  like  to  thank  you,  President  Putin,  for 
hosting us today in Moscow and in the Kremlin this afternoon. I feel honoured to be able to 
speak here on behalf of my colleagues. 
The main objective set out by Russia when it assumed its G20 Presidency for this year was 
to “stimulate economic growth and create jobs”. As premier forum for international economic 
cooperation,  the  G20  indeed  plays  a  central  role  in  supporting  policies  aimed  at  strong, 
sustainable and balanced growth globally. 
The overall G20 agenda, proposed by Russia for this year, spans much wider, and is fully in 
line  with  the  original  mandate  of  the  G20  to  cover  both  financial  stability  as  well  as 
longer-term growth-related issues. As President Putin has just outlined, we have a lot of hard 
work ahead of us. I am looking forward to making progress in all of the areas earmarked. 
At  today’s  and  tomorrow’s  meeting  of  G20  Ministers  and  Governors  we  will  have  a  fruitful 
exchange of views on the global economy, on the progress in our financial regulatory reform 
agenda,  on  further  reforms  of  the  international  financial  architecture,  and  on  investment 
financing, among other things. These are all issues which the Russian Presidency has given 
due importance as they address key questions currently occupying economic policy makers 
all over the globe: 
 
 
 
How can we create jobs? 
How can we get back to strong, sustainable and balanced growth? 
How  can  we  progress  on  financial  regulation,  so  as  to  further  strengthen  our 
financial systems? 
What  are  the  further  steps  to  complete  our  international  financial  architecture  to 
support stability and growth? 
And  how  can  long-term  investment  financing  be  better  geared  towards  delivering 
long-term global growth, development and job creation? 
  The first three issues – the agendas for growth, financial regulation and financial architecture 
–  have  been  occupying  us  ever  since  the  global  crisis  emerged  and  G20  Leaders  met  in 
November  2008.  The  Russian  Presidency  has  given  special  attention  to  the  fourth  issue, 
long-term  investment  financing  for  growth  and  development.  And  rightly  so  in  my  view, 
considering the key role played by investment not only in increasing output in the short term, 
but also boosting potential output over the medium term. 
Policy actions, notably by G20 members, have been able to bolster confidence and improve 
financial market sentiment. 
Conditions in the banking sector, and in financial markets more generally, have significantly 
improved since the summer of last year. This is manifested by rising global equity prices and 
a  decline  in  financial  market  volatility  and  global  risk  aversion.  Global  capital  flows  have 
picked up again. Spreads on sovereign and corporate bonds are narrowing. 
But we have to remain prudent. We should continue to press ahead with reforms to avoid 
abrupt changes in financial market sentiment. And we can only acknowledge that for some of 
the G20 members this improvement in financial markets has not yet found its way through to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  real  economy.  The  key  responsibility  for  us,  economic  policy  makers  in  the  G20,  is 
therefore to continue our action based on the three pillars: 
 
 
commitment to the policy goals that we have set out 
consistency in their implementation, across time, across countries and across policy 
domains 
and collaboration among all of our constituencies. 
 
I  have  no  doubt  that  the  G20  will,  under  the  Russian  Presidency,  contribute  to  restoring 
growth and job creation for the global economy. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
