Luis M Linde: The changing role of central banks 
Speech by  Mr Luis  M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 4th Future of Banking 
Summit, organised by Economist Conferences, Paris, 26 February 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  an  honour,  and  a  pleasure,  to  address such  a  distinguished  audience  as  is  gathering 
today in this conference. I would like to thank The Economist for giving me the opportunity to 
analyse some of the changes affecting central banks policies. 
I will organize my talk around the two main areas of Central Banking: monetary policy and 
banking regulation. 
Firstly, I will address the changing role of central banks in monetary policy, before the crisis 
and after the crisis. 
Up  until  August  2007  –  before  the  global  financial  crisis  –,  the  general  mood  prevailing 
among  academics  and  policymakers  was  that  there  existed  a  well-defined,  so  to  say, 
“science  or  model  of  monetary  policy”.  There  was  a  kind  of  consensus  among  central 
bankers  about  most  elements  of  monetary  policy  strategy;  and  monetary  policy  was 
perceived  as  being  highly  successful  in  developed  countries,  with  low  inflation  and  low 
variability of inflation and output. 
According  to  this  consensus,  macroeconomic  stability  was  achieved  through  rule-based 
monetary policy, delegated to an independent central bank with an implicit or explicit inflation 
target and with very little role for discretionary fiscal policy. 
Conducting monetary policy was considered to be relatively straightforward: the central bank 
controlled the short-term interest rate with effects on the real economy, mainly through three 
channels: long-term interest rates, inflation expectations and asset prices. 
The  credit  channel  of  monetary  policy  was  deemed  weak;  and  the  banking  sector  was 
ignored by most macroeconomic models used in Central Banks: banks were believed to work 
well and most market failures were attributed to product and factor markets. 
Financial  markets  were  assumed  to  be  efficient  at  distributing  and  pricing  risk.  Financial 
innovation was welcomed as it promoted gains in efficiency and welfare, leaving a reduced 
role for central banks on this area. 
One of the main implications of this consensus was that price stability was considered to be 
sufficient for macroeconomic stability. This led most Central Banks to limit themselves to a 
predominantly  micro-prudential  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision,  focused  mainly  on 
the soundness of individual institutions. There was a certain neglect of the importance of the 
stability of the system as a whole. 
After the crisis 
In 2007, and especially after September 2008, the world was hit by a global financial crisis 
which not only produced the most severe worldwide economic contraction since the Great 
Depression, but also put into question our confidence on the “science of monetary policy”. 
It is probably still premature to identify the new model that will emerge from the crisis. It is 
clear that some of the old beliefs will remain more or less intact: for instance, the idea that 
fiscal policy is limited as a stabilization tool. 
There are, however, two areas where I see more changes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
First,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  through  the  implementation  of  non-conventional 
monetary policies; and, second, the monitoring of the efficiency of financial markets and the 
banking sector, and their interaction with macroeconomic stability. Let me comment on these 
two issues. 
Non-conventional monetary policies 
At  the  outset  of  the  crisis,  all  central  banks  reacted  using  conventional  monetary  policies. 
First,  they  reduced  interest  rates  in  a  rather  aggressive  way  to  prevent  the  disinflationary 
process from translating into deflation. The outcome of these decisions is that official rates in 
the main developed economies (Euro area, United States, Japan and United Kingdom) stand 
now at values very close to zero. 
At  the  same  time,  faced  with  the  freeze  of  interbank  markets,  the  main  central  banks, 
including the Fed and the ECB, had to take on, directly, the task of redistributing liquidity. In 
the  early  stages,  the  Fed  and  the  ECB  provided  a  generous  monetary  base  to  meet  the 
gross needs of banks. The ECB used its flexible array of financial instruments, while the Fed 
was forced to adapt its operational framework to introduce new forms of intervention. 
However, when the crisis worsened after the Lehman Brothers crisis, it became necessary to 
take  stronger  action.  This  required  the  use  of  new,  non-conventional,  monetary  policy 
measures. 
According to the academic literature, when interest rates are close to zero, non-conventional 
monetary policy may come in three different forms: first, management of agents expectations 
through a commitment by central banks to keep interest rates low for a long period of time; 
second,  increasing  the  balance  sheet  of  the  central  bank;  and,  third,  changing  the 
composition of assets in the balance sheet of the central bank. 
The FED, the Bank of Japan and the Bank of Canada, have made use of the first kind of 
instruments  aimed  at  managing  expectations.  Therefore,  they  have  made  announcements 
about  the  future  path  of  interest  rates  to  affect  the  agents’  expectations  about  long-term 
rates. 
However, the non-conventional monetary policies more widely used since 2008 have been of 
the second and third kind, that is, the ones affecting the size and composition of the central 
bank’s balance sheet. 
In the euro area, the ECB changed its liquidity tenders to a fixed-rate system, with unlimited 
amount. In order to remove uncertainty, it increased their maturity up to three years. It also 
set up a program to purchase covered bonds and introduced the Securities Market Program 
and  the  Outright  Market  Transactions  Program  to  ensure  proper  transmission  of  monetary 
policy during the shocks of the sovereign debt crisis. The Securities Market Program was not 
a  quantitative  easing  instrument,  since  purchases  were  later  sterilized.  In  the  US,  by 
contrast, the Fed’s asset purchases reached a significant scale with the successive rounds of 
quantitative easing, aiming at lowering the cost of financing over the whole of the yield curve. 
These  divergences  in  the  use  of  non-conventional  tools  reflected  not  only  the  specific 
characteristics of the respective financial systems – the banks predominant role in the euro 
area compared with a greater importance of capital markets in Anglo Saxon countries – but 
also the institutional framework and the differing perceptions and assessments of the risks 
that may be assumed by central banks. 
Thus, I would say that the Euro system’s response has been more complex, adapting itself to 
the difficulties that have arisen at the different stages of the euro area crisis, seeking to act 
on the segments of the transmission monetary policy mechanism that were seen to be most 
impaired. On the other hand, the US strategy involved some blurring of the boundary which 
separates  monetary  policy  from fiscal  and financial  stability  policies.  This  entailed  risks for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the monetary authority’s independence that the ECB, as the central bank of 17 countries with 
full sovereignty in other non-monetary policy areas, could not assume. 
In  short,  the  financial  crisis  compelled  central  banks  to  adopt,  along  with  robust  monetary 
policy  responses,  exceptional  measures  and  an  unprecedented  expansion  in  their  balance 
sheets. Their joint, coordinated action stopped the dangerous spiral of financial deterioration 
and economic contraction in which the world economy found itself at the end of 2008 and in 
the first few months of 2009. 
However, whatever the changes in implementation, there is one main principle that remains. 
I  refer  to the  belief that monetary  policy  –  conventional  or  not  –  cannot  solve  the  ultimate 
causes  behind  the  loss  in  investors’  confidence  or  the  tensions  in  financial  or  banking 
markets. In fact, its main role is to provide time to adopt the necessary measures to reform 
and/or adjust. 
Macroprudential policy 
The other area in which I see more changes for the role of central banks is in the oversight of 
efficiency of financial markets and their interaction with macroeconomic stability. 
One of the main lessons of the crisis is that price stability, without financial stability, does not 
guarantee macroeconomic stability. Therefore, there is an emerging consensus on the need 
to develop a specific new area of economic policy, with a preventive focus and the explicit 
objective of ensuring the stability of the financial system as a whole. This has been named 
“macroprudential policy” and together with monetary policy, is bound to become one of the 
main elements in the policy set in the foreseeable future. 
Macroprudential policy is articulated around two dimensions. 
The first one, looks at how risk is distributed in the financial system at a given point in time. It 
requires  instruments  that  impose  tighter  standards  for  individual  institutions  whose 
contribution  to  system-wide  risk  is  larger,  the  so  called  Global  Systemically  Important 
Financial Institutions (G-SiFis), whose list was last updated by the Financial Stability Board 
(FSB) in November 2012. 
The  second  one,  looks  at  how  aggregate  risk  evolves  over  time.  This  requires  the  use  of 
instruments that contribute to moderate the typical pro-cyclicality of the financial system. I will 
come to that later on, when commenting on the new Basel III capital framework. 
Before  this,  allow  me  to  mention  the  Spanish  experience  with  the  so-called  “dynamic”  or 
“statistical provisions” which were introduced in 2000. This can be considered a pioneering 
case  of  a  macroprudential  response.  The  tool  proved  to  be  useful  in  Spain  during  the 
financial crisis in the two dimensions identified earlier: mitigating the build-up of risks – even 
if to a limited extent – and providing capacity of loss absorption to the banks. But the Spanish 
experience also showed that “dynamic provisions”, although, in my opinion, well targeted and 
designed, should have been complemented with other instruments. 
In  order  to  develop  and  implement  this  new  policy,  the  main  developed  economies  have 
created  new  authorities  in  charge  of  macro-prudential  supervision,  such  as  the  Financial 
Stability  Oversight  Council  in  the  United  States  or  the  Bank  of  England’s  Financial  Policy 
Committee.  In  France,  in  December  2012,  the  Government  approved  a  draft  Law  on  the 
reform  of  the  banking  sector  that,  among  other  things,  envisages  the  establishment  of  an 
equivalent authority, the “Conseil de la Stabilité Finacière” (CSF). At the Bank of Spain we 
are also currently looking at the way a Spanish Macroprudential Authority should be set up. 
Changes in bank regulation 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  turn  now  to  the  changes  that  have  occurred  in  the 
regulatory field 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  crisis  we  are  still  going  through  was  triggered,  on  the  one  hand,  by  the  extraordinary 
loose  monetary  and  financial  conditions  –  and  the  expansion  of  credit  –  of  the  period 
between  2000  and  2007.  On  the  other  hand,  inadequate  rules  –  result  of  two  decades  of 
deregulation,  and  sometimes  bad  deregulation  –  compounded  the  problem  and  facilitated 
high leverage. 
The  Basel  capital  ratios  of  the  time  were  low  or,  in  some  cases,  not  applied.  There  was 
excessive reliance on internal bank models. The way VaR models were defined by Basel and 
applied by banks underestimated what we call tail risks, that is, risks associated to events 
with low probability of occurrence but extremely high cost. 
Therefore,  there  was  a  need  for  a  regulatory  response  after  the  crisis.  Since  the  main 
elements of this response are well known, I will limit myself to a few remarks. 
First, the response took a predictable pattern: the strengthening of capital requirements, both 
as regards levels and quality of capital. Basel III is first of all about this. 
Second, as already mentioned, the crisis highlighted the need to introduce a macroprudential 
perspective in financial regulation. The new counter-cyclical capital buffer in Basel III is an 
important  step  in  this  direction.  However,  the  implementation  of  this  instrument  will  not  be 
easy. The right time for its activation will be difficult to determine and there is uncertainty on 
the appropriate size of the buffer. 
Third, another important element of the new regulation is the introduction of a new leverage 
ratio. The result is that two different approaches, one risk-weighted based and the other one 
non  risk-weighted,  will  coexist  under  the  roof  of  Basel  III. This,  I  believe,  introduces  some 
tension in the regulation. 
Fourth,  it  is  worth  noting  that,  while  Basel  III  brings  in  convergence  in  the  numerator  of 
capital  ratios  –  which  is  a  positive  development  –  improvements  will  be  needed  in  the 
calculation  of  its  denominator.  Available  evidence  –  that  is  now  being  considered  by  the 
Basel Committee – points to differences in the measurement of risk weighted assets across 
jurisdictions, which are not always easy to justify on the basis of differences in the nature of 
risks. 
And,  fifth,  Basel  III  introduces  liquidity  standards  aimed  at  addressing  the  deficiencies  in 
liquidity  risk  management  that  became  evident  during  the  crisis.  Even  though  maturity 
transformation is indeed intrinsic to banking activity, an excessive mismatch between assets 
and liabilities increases the vulnerability of banks to negative liquidity shocks. However, this 
is the first global regulation of liquidity, and our experience in this area is limited. 
Recovery and resolution frameworks 
The last component of this regulatory overhaul is the treatment of the systemic institutions. 
Much attention has been paid to the capital surcharge that will be imposed, as mentioned 
earlier, on the so-called Global Systemically Important Banks. However, key to dealing with 
problems posed by systemic – and non-systemic – banks will be the setting up of effective 
recovery and resolution frameworks as recommended by the Financial Stability Board (FSB). 
In  this  connection,  let  me  note  that  Spain  has  just  established  a  new  resolution  regime, 
strengthening the powers of our resolution agency, the Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring 
(FROB), which was set up in 2009. 
Are further measures needed? 
Summing up, on the whole, capital requirements have been considerably strengthened. The 
largest banks, for instance, will have to hold at least seven times as much capital as before 
the crisis. These measures have undoubtedly strengthened the whole banking system. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However,  it  is  to  be  noted,  and  regretted  to  some  extent,  that  while  Basel  III  capital 
requirements  had  been  carefully  planned  to  be  implemented  gradually  until  2019,  markets 
and,  in  some  cases,  regulators  have  accelerated  this  process.  In  Europe,  banks  are 
generally already recording ratios of Common Equity Tier 1 of 9%. Banks have achieved this 
not only by raising capital in the markets but also by contracting credit and deleveraging. This 
raises  a  concern  about  the  impact  the  regulatory  “overhaul”  may  be  having  on  credit  and 
growth. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  we  are  engaging  in  the  discussion  of  a  possible  “structural 
reform” of the banking sector which might come on top of all the regulatory changes. 
It is argued that the measures adopted so far do not deal with the risky trading activities of 
banks profiting from financing with favorable conditions on the basis of the implicit subsidy 
associated to deposit insurance. These concerns have led to different responses worldwide, 
such as the Volcker rule in the United States, the proposals of Sir John Vickers in the United 
Kingdom  and,  more  recently,  the  draft  banking  reforms  in  France  and  in  Germany.  At  the 
European  Union  level,  a  high-level  group  chaired  by  my  colleague  Erkki  Liikanen  has 
prepared a report on the convenience of implementing structural reforms in Europe. 
The most relevant  proposal  of the  Liikanen  report  is  to separate  into  a  distinct  legal  entity 
risky  trading  activities  of  banks  where  such  activities  are  significant.  However,  the  two 
entities – the retail bank and the trading bank – may form part of the same banking group, 
hence preserving the universal banking model. 
I believe that this proposal is well oriented, as it addresses an issue that is not tackled by the 
current regulation, although its effectiveness will depend on the details of its implementation. 
There  might  be  scope  for  improving  or  further  specifying  some  technical  aspects  of  the 
proposal. For instance, a distinction should be introduced between “proprietary trading” and 
“market  making”  in  line,  by  the  way,  with  the  draft  banking  sector  reform  that  is  being 
currently discussed in France. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me conclude. 
Central  Banks  have  played  a  crucial  role  in  the  economic  and  political  response  to  the 
financial crisis of 2007/2008. Their use of new and non-conventional tools was decisive to 
control the financial deterioration and economic contraction that the world was confronting at 
the beginning of 2009. In so doing, central banks have moved away, to a certain extent, from 
the old monetary policy  model. It might be said that a new one is emerging where central 
banks will use two sets of policies – monetary and macroprudential policies – to ensure a 
broadly defined financial stability objective. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
