Jörg Asmussen: Reintegrating financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the General Assembly of the European Savings Banks Group, Berlin, 14 June 2013. 
 Gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak today. 
Let  me  start  by  reviewing  briefly  the  overall  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area.  We  are 
currently projecting a gradual recovery in economic activity, with the economy expected to 
stabilise this year and then grow by 1.1 per cent in 2014.  
Underpinning  this  outlook  are,  first,  receding  tensions  in  financial  markets,  notably  the 
disappearance of the debate about the reversibility of the euro. And second, a more robust 
global recovery, mostly fuelled by emerging markets, but also by promising signs from across 
the Atlantic. 
Our projections for inflation show an increase of prices of 1.4 per cent in this year and 1.3 per 
cent next year. Most importantly, inflation expectations as securely anchored. Hence, we see 
no upside risks to price stability at the moment. 
However, this overall picture conceals considerable divergence within the euro area. This is 
visible in the very different economic and employment situation between Member States, but 
also – as you know well – in financial market conditions. Financial markets are still showing a 
considerable  degree  of  fragmentation  creating  very  heterogeneous  financing  conditions 
across the euro area. 
This means that, as savings banks from across Europe, you will probably have quite different 
concerns. For some, I expect the main concern is constrained access to funding and too high 
interest rates. For others, it may be excess liquidity and too low interest rates. And both sets 
of concerns are valid: tight money is constraining growth in peripheral countries, while easy 
money could eventually pose long-term risks in core ones.  
I therefore want to focus my remarks today on how we can deal with this problem of financial 
fragmentation, because it is a key issue in all parts of the euro area. I would like to approach 
the topic from three angles: 
First, the role of governments. 
Second, the role of the ECB. 
Third, the role of Banking Union. 
Dealing with financial fragmentation: the role of governments 
1. 
I begin with the role of governments because it is important to stress that they have the first 
responsibility  for  dealing  for  financial  fragmentation.  While  there  is  much  media  focus  on 
ECB  actions  and  Banking  Union,  it  is  only  really  governments  that  can  deal  with  the  root 
causes of the current situation. 
There are three channels where this is particularly relevant. 
First, one cause of financial fragmentation is the high public debt levels in some euro area 
countries, which, as domestic banks are heavily exposed to their own governments, harms 
banks’  asset  quality.  In  Italy,  for  instance,  65%  of  bonds  were  held  domestically  in  early 
2012,  and  in  Spain  70%.  Clearly,  governments  have  a  central  role  in  dealing  with  this 
problem  by  ensuring  that  their  debt  is  safe  and  sustainable.  This  requires  credible  fiscal 
consolidation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Second, another cause of fragmentation is low growth, which deters banks from taking risk, 
especially  lending  to  SMEs.  Interest  rate  spreads  on  SME  loans  compared  with  those  for 
large non-financial companies have widened by an average of 40 basis points since 2010. A 
key  part  of  the  solution  here  has  to  be  structural  reforms  that  improve  the  medium-term 
growth outlook and hence support risk appetite. Only governments can introduce them. 
Third,  fragmentation  is  also  caused  by  weak  bank  balance  sheets.  Lack  of  capital,  weak 
profitability  or  rising  non-performing  loans  lead  to  lower  credit  provision  or  higher  interest 
rates being charged on new loans to offset losses elsewhere. But it is governments that have 
to deal with this problem through recapitalisation and restructuring. 
In other words, without actions from governments, we will not be able to reintegrate financial 
markets.  
Fortunately, positive progress is being made. The Commission projects the euro area fiscal 
deficit to fall below 3% of GDP this year – less than half the peak reached in 2009. Under 
pressure from supervisors, euro area large and complex banking groups have continued to 
improve their capital positions, with the median core Tier 1 ratio reaching 11.1% in the ﬁrst 
quarter of 2013, up from 9.6% at the end of 2011.  
But there is still a long way to go before the “singleness” of the euro area financial market is 
restored. This means that there is no room for complacency for governments.  
Most  of  all,  they  should  not  expect  the  ECB  to  substitute  for  actions  that  they  must  take 
themselves. 
Dealing with financial fragmentation: the role of the ECB 
2. 
What is then the role of the ECB in addressing financial fragmentation? 
The ECB necessarily operates within certain constraints. We are the European Central Bank, 
and so our focus is the euro area as a whole, not the concerns of any particular country. And 
we can only address issues that fall within our mandate to maintain price stability. 
Within these constraints, we have acted to reduce financial fragmentation in two key ways. 
First,  we  have  taken  measures  to  reduce  divergence  between  countries  caused  by  bank 
funding risk.  
We have provided unlimited liquidity to banks in need at fixed interest rates, extending the 
maturity  of  our  operations  up  to  3  years.  We  have  allowed  national  central  banks  to  tailor 
collateral  rules  to  national  conditions.  And  we  have  narrowed  the  interest  rate  corridor 
between the deposit rate and our main policy rate to 50 basis points, which reduces cross-
country heterogeneity in funding costs. All this was designed to support the transmission of 
our low interest rates more evenly across the euro area. 
Second, we have taken measures to remove fragmentation caused by redenomination risk.  
This  risk  was  affecting  some  countries  more  than  others  as  markets  feared  that,  if  one 
country were to leave the euro area, a domino effect would force certain others to leave as 
well. According to calculations, the redenomination premium being paid by Spain and Italy in 
July 2012 was up to 2%. And the threat this posed for future price stability was evident in the 
cost of deflation protection in the euro area: this rose from 198 bps in January 2012 to a peak 
of 270 bps in July that year. 
Our  answer  to  this  was  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  programme.  Its  effects 
have  so  far  been  powerful,  not  only  in  reducing  sovereign  spreads,  but  also  in  improving 
funding  conditions  for  corporations,  banks  and  individuals  across  the  euro  area.  Financial 
fragmentation  has  been  reduced,  as  shown  by  the  best  summary  indicator,  the  level  of 
Target2 balances. They have declined by 285 billion euros, or 25%, since the peak last year.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It is important to stress, however, that the benefits of lower financial fragmentation are not 
only being felt in struggling countries. I am aware that some of you here are concerned by 
the  current  low  interest  rate  environment,  as  it  reduces  income  for  savers  and  squeezes 
returns for pension funds and insurance companies. Moreover, some are rightly worried that 
interest  rates  that  are  too  low  for  too  long  could  lead  to  misallocation  of  resources  and 
reduce incentives for governments, banks, and corporates to adjust. 
It is therefore worthwhile to note that the overall improvement of the situation has led to an 
increase in German government bond yields, which have gone up by around 25 basis points 
since  the  announcement  of  the  OMT.  This  demonstrates  that  the  more  ECB  actions  help 
normalise the financial situation in the euro area, the higher these and other interest rates will 
eventually rise. This is why we have always said that OMT is a policy not for one or another 
group of countries, but for the euro area as a whole, in line with our mandate. 
Indeed, there will always be some that want the ECB to “do more” and others that want us to 
“do less”. I just attended as an expert the hearing of the German Constitutional Court, where 
those  who  brought  the  case  to  the  constitutional  court  find  the  ECB  has  already  done  too 
much. But our answer, all along, has been consistent: we have done, and will continue do, 
what is necessary to preserve price stability within our mandate.  
Dealing with financial fragmentation: the role of Banking Union 
3. 
While  the  actions  I  have  described  by  governments  and  the  ECB  have  helped  to  combat 
financial fragmentation, there is no doubt that a third factor is also key: building a deep and 
genuine Banking Union. 
The term Banking Union encompasses a number of regulatory initiatives, but it really has two 
key elements: a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and a Single Resolution Mechanism 
(SRM). These are complements and progress on both in parallel is essential. 
As regards the SSM, close cooperation has now been established between the ECB and the 
National Competent Authorities (NCA) and preparatory work is well underway. Among other 
things, this work includes developing a common supervisory approach and preparing for the 
comprehensive  assessment  of  all  banks  that  will  come  under  direct  ECB  supervision,  as 
demanded by the SSM Regulation.  
Let me say a few words on these two issues. 
The  creation  of  a  common  supervisory  approach  is  essential  to  ensure  that  the  overall 
system plays by a single set of rules. But it will not greatly affect day-to-day supervision for 
savings banks such as most of yours. This will still be carried out by local supervisors who 
understand the specificities and needs of smaller institutions. The SSM is not being created 
to interfere where local supervision functions well, but to ensure that there are no “blindspots” 
from which financial instability could emerge – as the crisis has shown, we cannot afford for 
even smaller banks to be completely off the radar. 
The comprehensive assessment of banks under direct ECB supervision will involve an Asset 
Quality  Review  and  Balance  Sheet  Assessment  to  be  conducted  by  the  ECB  in  the  first 
quarter of 2014. This will then feed into the overall stress test to be conducted by EBA, in 
cooperation  with  the  ECB,  in  the  second  quarter  of  2014.  This  assessment  is  essential  to 
ensure that the SSM starts with a clean slate and gain credibility in the market – we therefore 
want it to be as rigorous as possible. 
How will these developments help financial fragmentation?  
First, the creation of a common supervisory approach, together with uniform data reporting 
requirements,  should  reduce  compliance  costs  for  banks  and  encourage  greater  cross-
border banking activity.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Second, the comprehensive assessment, if conducted to a high standard, should increase 
confidence in the overall health of the euro area banking sector. This is important to begin 
reintegrating the interbank and other bank funding markets. 
But for these effects to be realised, it is essential that the SSM is accompanied by a credible 
SRM. Markets will only fully trust in SSM supervision if it is clear that banks can be safely 
wound down without damaging financial stability – otherwise they will expect supervisors to 
practice forbearance. Moreover, without a strong SRM bank funding costs will continue to be 
tied to fiscal situation of the sovereign, which will perpetuate financial fragmentation. 
To deal with large and complex banking groups, we need an institution that can take swift, 
impartial decisions. To break the link with sovereigns, it needs to have sufficient resources to 
back those decisions up. This requires a single resolution authority and a single resolution 
fund,  established  at  the  European  level.  The  first  best  option  would  be  to  entrust  a  newly 
established agency with this task. If this is not feasible in the short run, the ESM could be 
tasked with this for an interim period as a second best option.  
Such a fund would be financed by ex ante risk-based levies on the banking sector, and in the 
build-up phase, any public support would be recouped by additional ex post levies on banks. 
This arrangement has two clear benefits: first, the financial sector itself would ultimately pay 
for the costs of financial crises, and second, less risky banks such as savings banks would 
pay-in less than institutions engaged in speculative activity. 
An additional feature of the SRM, which may appeal to some in this audience, is that it to 
some  extent  reduces  the  need  for  moving  towards  a  common  deposit  guarantee 
arrangements, at least in the medium-term. If banks can be safely wound down, and if there 
is  a  depositor  preference  rule  that  means  that  deposits  are  rarely  bailed-in,  then  national 
deposit guarantee schemes should in most cases be sufficient. 
Finally,  let  me  say  a  word  on  direct  bank  recapitalisation  by  the  ESM.  There  are  various 
misconceptions  about  this  instrument,  such  as  that  it  opens  up  the  possibility  for  debt 
mutualisation through the backdoor. That is absolutely not the case. Recapitalisation through 
the ESM will come only after, first, shareholders and creditors have been written down, and 
second, the beneficiary Member State has absorbed all incurred and expected losses based 
on a rigorous economic evaluation. So the prospect of losses for the ESM is limited. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
I  have  shown  today  that  tackling  fragmentation  requires  action  of  all  fronts:  from 
governments, from the ECB, and from the euro area as a whole through building Banking 
Union. 
The challenge is now to build consensus behind such action, particularly Banking Union. And 
the case is clearly a strong one. For countries in difficulty, financial reintegration is essential 
to reduce interest rates for borrowers and restart growth. For those doing well, it is essential 
to raise interest rates for savers and prevent future distortions.  
I therefore hope that you, as savings banks from across the euro area, will form a key part of 
this constituency. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
