Erdem Başçi: Turkish-Austrian economic relations in a European and 
international context 
Keynote speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, 
at  the  meeting  of  “Turkish-Austrian  economic  relations  in  a  European  and  international 
context”, hosted by the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria, Vienna, 18 March 2013. 
 Distinguished Participants, 
I  would  like  to  start  by  thanking  Ewald  Nowotny,  the  Governor  of  Oesterreichische 
NationalBank  for  hosting  the  meeting  on  the  “Turkish-Austrian  Economic  Relations  in  a 
European and International Context”. My colleagues from the Central Bank of the Republic of 
Turkey and myself are pleased and honored to take part in this important event. After this 
meeting,  opening  ceremony  of  the  Exhibition  titled  “Contemporary  Turkish  Painting  and 
Printmaking in the Republican Era”, which is composed of some examples from our Bank’s 
collection, will take place. It is my pleasure to invite you all to the opening ceremony which 
will take place this evening at 7:00pm. 
In  my  speech,  first  I  will  share  a  few  observations  about  the  increasing  importance  of 
emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  in  the  global  system.  Then,  I  will  talk  about  financial 
stability  in  EMEs  in  general  and  Turkey  in  particular.  Finally,  I  will  conclude  with  the 
developments regarding the economic relations between Austria and Turkey. 
Distinguished Guests, 
The share and significance of EMEs in the global economy has been on the rise. The share 
of EME exports in world total exports increased from 13% in 2000 to 23% in 2010. Likewise, 
exports  from  EMEs  to  EMEs  increased  from  $0.8  trillion  to  $3.5  trillion  during  the  same 
period. The increase in the volume of trade among EMEs has, to some extent, reduced the 
adverse effects of the weak course of external demand from advanced economies. Thereby, 
production and employment levels in EMEs have achieved a rapid pace of recovery after the 
2008 global crisis. 
In  line  with  the  increased  importance  of  these  economies,  we  also  witness  significant 
changes in decision-making mechanisms worldwide. A wide range of important decisions on 
issues ranging from food and energy security to strengthening the global financial system are 
made at the Group of Twenty (G20). In line with the recent increase in their role in the G-20, 
the voice and representation of EMEs among international institutions such as the IMF, the 
World Bank, the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board is increasing as well. 
Distinguished Guests, 
EMEs withstood the global turmoil better than expected. A certain degree of decoupling has 
been observed between emerging and advanced economies in this regard. Underlying this 
resilience were several distinct factors, including sound fiscal fundamentals, a relatively low 
degree of leverage in the private sector, a lower reliance on wholesale funding as part of a 
more traditional  banking  business  model  and minimal  exposure  to  toxic  financial  products. 
Improvements in the financial sector regulation and supervision frameworks have also added 
to this resilience. 
Although EMEs proved resilient during the global financial crisis, they have experienced new 
challenges in the aftermath of the crisis. A relatively stronger financial structure constituted 
the pull factor for the EMEs to attract significant amounts of capital flows. The push factor, on 
the  other  hand  has  been  the  expansionary  monetary  policies  of  advanced  countries. 
Nevertheless,  these  massive  flows  led  to  rapid  credit  expansion,  a  relatively  stronger 
domestic demand and appreciation of local currencies. This in turn had adverse effects on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
EMEs through several channels such as reducing competitiveness and deteriorating external 
balances. 
Faced  with  these  new  challenges,  some  EMEs  have  resorted  to  capital  controls  or  other 
capital  flow  measures  in  order  to  deal  with  the  adverse  consequences  of  capital  flow 
volatility. This approach suffers mainly from difficulties in implementation. Financial flows are 
extremely difficult to manage. Circumventing a capital account restriction or a cross border 
transaction tax is possible in many cases. In cases where loopholes are found and closed 
decisively,  there  may  be  the  risk  of  an  unintended  consequence  of  a  disorderly  capital 
outflow.1 
A second approach would be to keep the capital account open, but not to resist the market 
forces that would equate cross border returns on securities in a risk adjusted basis. Then the 
natural question would be how to manage the risk of an unbalanced growth in the recipient 
country. Credit bubbles, asset price bubbles, higher than sustainable debt to equity and debt 
to income ratios are examples of problems that can easily arise. 
In financial intermediation, two key dimensions are price and prudence. The answer to the 
above question lies in the prudential dimension. If the financial intermediaries of the EMEs 
were able to internalize the macroeconomic risks that arise from the current low interest rate 
environment,  there  would  be  no  need  for  a  policy  apart  from  market  based  return 
equalization. Since this cannot happen by itself due to agency problems, there is a room for 
macroprudential policy. 
Turkey,  following  the  second  approach,  has  been  using  mainly  macroprudential  measures 
along with a relatively low and yet quite flexible interest rate policy in face of volatile short 
term  capital  flows.2  The  Central  Bank  and  the  other  government  agencies  responsible  for 
financial  stability,  developed  new  tools  and  introduced  new  policies  to  avoid  excessive 
deviations of the credit growth rates and the exchange rates from economic fundamentals. 
Examples of macroprudential policies used in Turkey are loan to value restrictions, high risk 
weights and provisioning requirements on credit with negative externalities, maturity based 
reserve  requirements  and  leverage  based  reserve  requirements.  These  policies  already 
helped to start a rebalancing process for domestic and external demand during the rapid post 
Lehman recovery and the more recent European sovereign debt crisis.3 
Distinguished Guests, 
The financial stability, when lost, has deep and long-term impacts on both employment and 
growth.4 The cost of preventing a financial crisis is much lower than the cost of living it. The 
recent developments have reminded us this economic dictum once again. 
The  primary  objective  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  is  to  achieve  and 
maintain  price  stability.  Besides  price  stability,  contributing  to  financial  stability  within  its 
scope of operations has been also listed among the primary duties of the Bank in the Central 
Bank  Law.  To  that  end,  CBRT  has  used  a  combination  of  macroprudential  tools  and 
automatic stabilizers. We view both price stability and financial stability as two indispensable 
components of balanced growth. 
                                                
1  Borio,  C.  (2011).  Central  Banking  Post-Crisis: What  Compass  for  Uncharted Waters?  BIS Working  Papers, 
No. 353. 
2  Akçelik, Y., Başçı, E., Ermişoğlu, E. and Oduncu, A. (2013). The Turkish Approach to Capital Flow Volatility. 
CBRT Working Papers, No: 13/06. 
3  For sustainable debt levels, see: Cecchetti, S., Mohanty, M. S. and Zampolli, F. (2011). The Real Effects of 
Debt. BIS Working Papers, No. 352. 
4  Reinhart,  Carmen  M.,  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff.  (2009).  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial 
Folly.  Princeton,  NJ:  Princeton  Press.;  Taylor,  A.  (2012).  The  Great  Leveraging,  NBER  Working  Papers, 
No. 18290. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Distinguished Guests, 
Comprehending  the  importance  of  systemic  risk  along  with  macroprudential  measures  to 
mitigate  this  risk  to  ensure  financial  stability  has  necessitated  reconsideration  of  the 
regulatory framework at global level. The enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act in the US and the 
establishment  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  in  Europe  as  well  as  new 
regulations introduced in other countries aim to mitigate systemic risk via coordinated action 
across agents responsible for financial stability. To this end, Turkey established the Financial 
Stability Committee in the summer of year 2011. Along with the Central Bank, the Committee 
is composed of the Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency, the Capital Markets Board 
of Turkey, the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund and the Undersecretariat of Treasury. 
In the international arena, Turkey became a member of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) in 
2009. It will take part in G20 Troika in 2014 and assume the Annual Presidency of the G20 in 
2015. Moreover, Turkey’s representative from the Undersecretariat of Treasury will join the 
FSB Steering Committee during the 2014–2016 period when Turkey will be in G20 Troika. 
Moreover,  Turkey  became  a  member  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
(BCBS) and the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision (GHOS) in 2009. The Central 
Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  will  take  part  in  the  FSB  Steering  Committee  during  the 
period 2013–2015 when Turkey will be chairing the FSB Regional Consultative Group for the 
Middle East and North Africa (MENA). 
As  part  of  the  governance  reform  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  a  New 
Constituency was established with the countries Turkey, Austria, Hungary, Czech Republic, 
Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Belarus and Kosovo. According to this agreement, the Executive 
Director  position  will  rotate  among  Austria,  Hungary,  Czech  Republic  and  Turkey.  This  is 
perhaps  a  symbolic  but,  in  my  personal  view,  a  very  significant  step  in  the  right  direction 
regarding the future of the Turkish-Austrian relations. 
Distinguished Guests, 
At this point, I would like to exemplify increasing commercial and economic relations between 
Austria and Turkey. Our export to Austria was 1.1 billion USD and import from Austria was 
1.6 billion USD at the end of 2012. These numbers are quite small compared to the potential. 
On the financing side, however, there is good news. Austria is the leading country in foreign 
direct investment flows to Turkey for the period after 2008 with 7 billion USD in total. Direct 
investments are mainly focused on the energy sector. There are currently 643 Austrian firms 
operating in Turkey. 
Distinguished Guests, 
The  European  Union  is  a  success  story  regarding  peace  and  cooperation  among  nations 
with  rather  bitter  historical  memories.  No  wonder  the  European  Union  obtained  the  Nobel 
Peace Prize in year 2012. Despite all the debates and a high degree of uncertainty regarding 
the  new  economic  governance  structure  in  the  EU,  I  sincerely  believe  Turkey’s  closer 
cooperation with Austria will bring invaluable outcomes in line with the European spirit. 
To conclude, I would like to express my view that the future of the commercial, financial and 
economic  relations  between  Austria  and  Turkey  looks  more  promising  than  ever.  Today’s 
joint  meeting  and  the  opening  ceremony  of  the  Exhibition  “Contemporary  Turkish  Painting 
and  Printmaking  in  the  Republican  Era”  are  small,  symbolic,  yet  quite  significant  steps  to 
mark the start of this new and healthy trend. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
