Peter Praet: Speech on the occasion of the “Annual Danish Top 
Executive Summit 2013” 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the “Annual Danish Top Executive Summit 2013”, Copenhagen, 29 January 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is a real pleasure for me to share some thoughts today with such a distinguished group of 
business leaders.1 It may strike you as somewhat paradoxical for a central banker to address 
such  an  audience  in  a  conference  where  the  main  theme  is  innovative  thinking.  After  all, 
central bankers have traditionally been stereotyped as conservative and, well, rather dull.  
I firmly believe, though, that in a constantly changing world, decision-makers need to develop 
and  maintain  a  healthy  degree  of  scepticism  around  whether  their  current  strategies  and 
practices remain fit-for-purpose. This holds for decision-makers in business as well as in the 
public policy domain. And it is particularly relevant for central bankers, who have shouldered 
large  part  of  the  responsibility  to  navigate  the  economy  through  a  once-in-a-generation 
financial and economic crisis. 
In  the  first  part  of  my  remarks  today  I  will  contour  some  salient  features  of  central  banks’ 
response to the crisis. But I am sure that everyone here today is more interested in the future 
than pondering on what has been done so far. Indeed, as the macroeconomic and business 
environment remains challenging, the calls for a rethinking of business models and strategic 
orientations  become  more  forceful.  This  is  also  the  case  in  the  monetary  policy-making 
arena, where new strategic aspects are being promoted and debated around the globe. In 
the second and main part of my remarks I would, therefore, like to focus on two examples of 
such  “innovative”  strategic  thinking  for  monetary  policy,  assessing  them  from  a  euro  area 
perspective. The first example concerns the objective of monetary policy. The second one 
refers to how policy is conducted to deliver the assigned objective. 
Addressing the global financial crisis: a delicate balancing act requiring strength, control, 
horizon and courage 
Prompted  by  the  crisis,  central  bankers  globally  have  thought  openly  and  creatively.  They 
designed  and  deployed  a  host  of  measures  that  went  well  beyond  their  traditional  modus 
operandi.  This  reaction  of  central  banks  has  clear  parallels  to  the  way  business  leaders 
confront challenges. To illustrate this, let me briefly outline how features of central banking 
practices correspond to the four themes that the organisers of this conference have laid out 
as relevant for addressing challenges in the corporate world. 
The first theme is strength. Central banks typically rely on financial markets to transmit their 
monetary policy intentions to the real economy. During the crisis, dysfunctional segments of 
financial markets threatened to weaken or completely suppress this process. Central banks 
addressed these market dislocations in a resolute way, thereby showcasing the strength of 
the instruments that are at their disposal.  
Second  comes  control.  Ensuring  that  the  expectations  of  firms  and  households  regarding 
future inflation remain well-anchored is of the essence for keeping inflation in check. During 
the  crisis,  through  words  and  deeds,  central  banks  have  strived  to  maintain  these 
expectations under control. 
                                                
1  
I would like to thank Thomas Vlassopoulos for his contribution to the preparation of this speech. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  third  theme  is  horizon.  The  most  obvious  concept  of  horizon  in  the  context  of  central 
banking is that of time-horizon. Both in normal times and in times of crisis, central bankers 
seek to maintain a medium-term horizon and thus avoid being overwhelmed by short-term 
considerations.  At  the  same  time,  central  banks  have  demonstrated  a  capacity  to  deploy 
crisis management measures within a very short time span, when this was necessary. 
The  fourth  and  final  theme  of  the  conference  was  courage.  Again  this  may  sound 
paradoxical.  Central  bankers  are  proverbially  prudent  and  risk  averse.  But  there  is  a 
particular type of courage that they need to exhibit: the courage and firm character to stay 
the  course  and  unwaveringly  pursue  the  assigned  mandate,  when  calls  to  serve  other 
objectives can be increasingly loud. 
At the ECB, in particular, our response to the crisis has been two-pronged. The first element 
has been the swift reduction of our key policy rates to historically low levels in response to 
the  emergence  of  downside  risks  to  price  stability.  This  is  what  is  considered  “standard” 
monetary  policy  action.  The  second  element  has  entailed  a  host  of  measures  to  address 
dislocations in financial markets that were preventing the permissive monetary policy interest 
rates to be fully and evenly reflected in the lending conditions faced by households and firms 
across the euro area. These measures are typically referred to as “non-standard” and were 
intended  to  relieve  liquidity  and  funding  constraints  in  the  banking  sector,  as  well  as 
unwarranted  tail  risks.  This  set  of  measures,  therefore,  serves  to  improve  financing 
conditions over and above what can be achieved through reductions in the key ECB interest 
rates.  
In addressing the crisis we have been acutely aware of the need to strike a delicate balance 
between two sets of competing considerations. On the one hand, central banks were faced 
with the risk of a financial meltdown, which would have had profound implications for the real 
economy and which posed a serious threat to price stability. On the other hand, the resolute 
response of the central bank to the financial crisis relieves the pressure from other actors in 
the  economy  to  measure  up  to  their  own  responsibilities,  correct  the  past  unsustainable 
economic course and unwind excesses. This refers not only to governments but also to the 
private sector. In the past year we have seen significant progress in the European economic 
governance framework. These changes to the institutional architecture of the EU have been 
of great importance for restoring the appropriate incentives of the actors involved.  
Increasing the numerical definition of price stability 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  discussion  of  “innovative”  ideas  on  strategic  aspects  of  monetary 
policy. Since the early 1980s, a broad consensus has emerged across advanced economies 
which has elevated price stability to the main – although not always the sole – objective of 
monetary  policy.  Indeed,  through  the fixed-exchange-rate  policy  for the  krone  vis-à-vis  the 
euro,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  is  effectively  also  among  the  central  banks  aiming  at 
maintaining price stability.2 In most cases, the mandate for pursuing price stability has been 
operationalised by defining a numerical value for inflation that the central bank should aim to 
deliver. In advanced economies this value is low, typically within a narrow range around 2%. 
In the wake of the crisis, however, a number of pundits have called for an increase in the 
inflation  rate  that  central  banks  should  aim  for.  These  calls  have  originated  from  diverse 
sources  spanning  academia,  policy  circles  and  financial  markets.3  Proponents  of  this 
                                                
2   Danmarks  Nationalbank,  Monetary  Policy  in  Denmark,  3rd  edition,  Danmarks  Nationalbank,  Copenhagen, 
2009. 
In  academia  the  recommendation  for  a  higher  inflation  rate  objective  in  a  low  nominal  interest  rate 
environment predates the current crisis, see P. Krugman, “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the 
Liquidity Trap”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1998, reformulated more recently in G. Eggertsson 
and  P.  Krugman,  “Debt,  Deleveraging,  and  the  Liquidity  Trap:  A  Fisher-Minsky-Koo  Approach”,  Quarterly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3  
2 
 approach argue that this is a way to provide more monetary policy stimulus to the economy 
when nominal short-term interest rates – the instrument typically employed by central banks 
– cannot be reduced further because they are at zero, or close to zero.  
The  rationale  is  that  a  higher  inflation  objective,  if  credible,  would  prompt  firms  and 
households  to  revise  their  expectations  regarding  future  inflation  upwards.  By  doing  so,  it 
would reduce further down real interest rates, which are not necessarily constrained by zero. 
As  real  –  rather  than  nominal  –  interest  rates  matter  for  economic  decisions  such  as 
investment and consumption, this change should promote economic activity. It is therefore 
argued  that  switching  to  a  higher  numerical  aim  for  inflation  will  bring  about  a  one-off 
accommodative effect when it is adopted. Moreover, it is claimed that it will also make it less 
likely in the future that nominal rates will become constrained by their lower bound. 
It may not surprise you to hear that I am very sceptical about this proposal, both in general 
terms and in the euro area context in particular. To explain my concerns, I shall step back for 
a moment and clarify an aspect of the ECB’s monetary policy framework that is subtle, but in 
my view important. By contrast to many central banks around the world, the ECB does not 
practice  inflation  targeting.  The  ECB  has  been  mandated  by  the  Treaty  (Treaty  on  the 
Functioning  of  the  European  Union)  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  The 
mandate itself does not entail a precise definition of what price stability means in practice. 
The  Governing  Council,  therefore,  decided  to  identify  inflation  values  consistent  with 
conditions of price stability. 
Price stability conditions do not necessarily entail stable prices, that is to say zero inflation. 
Inflation levels which are sufficiently contained to not interfere with economic choices are to 
be considered indicative of a stable monetary environment, and therefore of price stability. 
Inflation impinges on a large array of economic activities.4 For instance, it has an important 
effect  on  the  way  people  take  decisions  about how  to  allocate  resources  across  time.  For 
example,  a  household’s  decision  to  consume  today  or  instead  save  and  consume  in  the 
future; a worker’s decision to supply labour; or a firm’s decision to invest. Moreover, inflation 
– especially if it is volatile – creates distortions in the information content of relative prices in 
the  economy.  This  can  lead  to  incorrect  economic  decisions  if, for  instance, firms  wrongly 
interpret a general price increase as a signal of increased demand for their product. It also 
affects  the  frequency  of  changes  in  businesses’  price  tags  and  menus.  Importantly,  these 
effects  lead  to  dead-weight  losses  and  distortions  in  the  allocation  of  resources  and, 
therefore, to socially sub-optimal economic outcomes. 
The upshot is that the rate of inflation, above which distortions of economic decision-making 
start becoming material, is not a matter of policy preference, like an inflation target. Instead, it 
is a structural feature of the economy. It is linked to aspects such as contract and commercial 
pricing  technologies;  the  tax  and  welfare  system;  and  the  demographic  structure  of  the 
population, to name but a few. While these structural features of course can and indeed do 
change, they do so only very gradually and infrequently. Moreover, the direction and size of 
the effect of any such changes on the non-distortive inflation rate is not a priori clear. It needs 
to be thoroughly examined and conclusively proven. 
                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Economics, vol. 127 (3), 2012, pp. 1469–1513. A similar recommendation has been put forward by 
IMF  staff,  see  O.  Blanchard,  G.  Dell’  Ariccia  and  P.  Mauro,  “Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy”,  IMF  Staff 
Position  Note,  SPN/10/03,  2010.  An  example  of  an  endorsement  of  this  proposal  by  financial  market 
participants  is  provided  in  M.  Pradhan,  The  Global  Monetary  Analyst:  Debt  Dominance,  Mandates  and  the 
Impossible Puzzle, Morgan Stanley Research, 31 October 2012. 
4   For surveys of the literature on the costs of inflation, see O. Issing, “Why price stability?”, in: A.G. Herrero, V. 
Gaspar,  L.  Hoogduin,  J.  Morgan  and  B.  Winkler  (eds.),  Why  price  stability?,  First  ECB  Central  Banking 
Conference,  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  2001  and  G.  Camba-Mendez, J.A.  Garcia and  D. 
Rodriguez Palenzuela, “Relevant economic issues concerning the optimal rate of inflation”, in O. Issing (ed.), 
Background  studies  for  the  ECB’s  Evaluation  of  its  Monetary  Policy  Strategy,  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 2003. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Where  does  this  leave  us  on  the  proposal  to  increase  the  numerical  objective  pursued  by 
monetary  policy?  An  inflation  target  can  be  changed  to  reflect  shifting  policy  tastes  and 
moving priorities. But a quantitative definition of price stability is a range of inflation values 
that can be qualified as unproblematic for economic decision-making. And this qualification is 
a factual statement, not a matter of tactical choice. Changing it on tactical grounds would be 
opportunistic and would harm the credibility of the central bank. For a central bank like the 
ECB, wedded to a range of inflation values that can be characterised as indicative of stable 
prices, a change to this range – and notably to its upper quantitative limit – is not conceivable 
barring analysis that convincingly argues for a wider range and larger values. A change not 
justified  on  these  bases  would  create  permanent  damage  to  our  ability  to  steer  inflation 
expectations and contain inflation volatility.  
A loss of credibility can lead to an overshooting of inflation expectations. This would require a 
disproportionate  withdrawal  of  monetary  policy  accommodation  in  the  future  to  rein  in 
inflation. Any initial boost to economic activity will therefore ultimately be more than reversed. 
Additional and unnecessary volatility in real activity would be the price to pay.  
In  any  case,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  trade-off  implied  by  this  proposal  is  rather  lopsided. 
Even  if  the  central  bank  is  successful  in  engineering  precisely  the  intended  permissive 
conditions  as  measured  by  a  real  interest  rate  decline,  it  is  far  from  clear  that  this  would 
indeed  generate  real  effects  even  in  the  short-term.  If,  for  instance,  there  are  quantitative 
constraints in the availability of credit at play in the economy, the lower short-term real rates 
will fail to stimulate aggregate demand. Overall, therefore, one risks trading very uncertain 
gains – in terms of immediate policy accommodation – against rather certain costs – in terms 
of higher inflation, possibly for an indefinite period. Such risk-payoff structures are perfectly 
acceptable  in  the  business  world.  Indeed  taking  calculated  risks  is  often  the  mark  of  a 
successful business leader. For public policy, however, this strikes me as a deal that should 
not be made. 
But  for  some  of  the  proponents  of  increasing  the  central  bank’s  inflation  objective  this 
proposal is not motivated by a perceived need to stimulate aggregate demand when nominal 
interest rates are at zero or close to zero. Instead, they focus on another feature of the crisis: 
balance sheet adjustment in order to address the over-indebtedness problem. According to 
this  argument,  a  higher  inflation  objective  makes  it  less  likely  that  the  economy  may  get 
trapped  in  a  destructive  debt-deflation  spiral  of  the  type  described  by  Irving  Fisher.  In  the 
midst of the Great Depression, Fisher put forward a theory of economic crises that centred 
on the mutually reinforcing effects between over-indebtedness and deflation.5 According to 
this  view,  over-indebtedness  beyond  some  point  triggers  distressed  asset  sales  as  debt  is 
called  in.  This  leads  to  abrupt  deleveraging  and  a  contraction  of  the  amount  of  money  in 
circulation. The destruction of money precipitates a fall in the general price level. Deflation in 
turn  causes  the  real  debt  and  interest  burden  to  go  up,  thereby  triggering  a  new  bout  of 
distressed asset sales and deleveraging and trapping the economy in a vicious circle. 
Deflation poses risks to the economy that – in some respects – are even more intractable 
than inflation. It is for this reason that the Governing Council’s definition of price stability rules 
out negative inflation values. Moreover, the Governing Council’s policy aim (within the range 
of  positive  inflation  rates  that  are  consistent  with  price  stability)  is  sufficiently  close  to  the 
upper  bound  of  the  range  to  stave  off  the  risk  that  negative  price  shocks  may  unleash  a 
self-reinforcing  downward  inflation  spiral.  But  engineering  financial  repression  in  order  to 
facilitate  balance  sheet  adjustment  would  clearly  violate  the  mandate  to  maintain  price 
stability as a primary objective conferred upon the ECB by the Treaty. 
Earlier in my remarks I referred to the central bank’s steering of inflation expectations as an 
illustration  of  the  notion  of  control.  Moreover,  I  mentioned  that  the  steadfast  pursuit  of  the 
                                                
5   Fisher, “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions”, Econometrica, vol. 1(4), 1933, pp. 337–357. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
central  bank’s  mandate  exemplifies  the  notion  of  courage.  I  am  very  sceptical  whether 
increasing the numerical definition of price stability helps in either of these dimensions. 
Engaging in communication regarding the future path of policy rates 
Let me now turn to the second example of an innovative proposal for monetary policy that I 
would  like  to  discuss  today.  Unlike  the  previous  proposal,  this  one  does  not  relate  to  the 
objective  of  the  central  bank.  Instead,  it  focuses  on  how  the  central  bank  can  actually 
achieve its assigned objective, when the chances that the objective will be hit diminish.  
As I already mentioned, central banks typically conduct monetary policy by steering nominal 
short-term interest rates. These are the rates over which they can exert significant influence 
through the monopoly supply of central bank reserves. It is, however, widely accepted that it 
is  primarily  long-term  interest  rates  that  matter  for  the  main  economic  decisions  that  the 
central bank wants to influence.  
How is it then that monetary policy can have an impact on the economy? Well, one can think 
of  long-term  interest  rates  as  comprising  two  elements:  expectations  regarding  the  future 
evolution  of  short-term  rates;  and  premia.  Premia  relate  to  the  compensation  investors 
demand for holding on to an asset for a specific period of time (the term premium). Moreover, 
they relate to the compensation for risks, such as the possibility of incurring capital losses 
due  to  difficulties  they  may  encounter  when  selling  the  asset  back  to  the  market  before 
maturity and at short notice (the liquidity premium). Changes in the current policy rate are 
typically interpreted by markets to also signal changes for short-term rates in the future. That 
is, they affect market expectations for future short-term rates and therefore, long-term rates. 
In normal times, this signalling channel works well and market expectations tend to be in line 
with monetary policy makers’ intended long-term rates. When, however, short-term nominal 
rates are at zero or close to zero, this signalling channel loses its potency. The risk is that 
long-term rates may drift away from the central bank’s intended path, in which case financing 
conditions  in  the  economy  will  not  properly  reflect  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  Some 
academic economists have advocated that, particularly in such a situation, the central bank 
should  engage  in  active  communication  regarding  the  future  path  of  policy  rates.6  This 
communication  would  serve  as  a  commitment  device  for  the  central  bank  to  follow  in  the 
future the announced path of short-term rates, possibly conditional on actual developments 
in  the  economy.7  If  this  commitment  is  sufficiently  credible,  it  will  be  effective  in  steering 
expectations regarding future interest rates and so influence the first component of long-term 
interest rates to which I was referring before. This is turn, will allow the central bank to deliver 
accommodative  financing  conditions  in  the  economy  over  a  certain  horizon.  A  number  of 
central  banks  around  the  world  –  most  recently  including  the  US  Federal  Reserve  –  have 
adopted some version of this approach. 
But  the  decomposition  of  long-term  rates  I  mentioned  a  few  moments  ago  suggests  that 
there  is  also  another  possible  way  for  the  central  bank  to  deliver  appropriate  financing 
conditions in the economy. This second approach is to exert influence on the premia, to the 
extent that they are unwarranted and reflect dislocations in markets. I would argue that the 
                                                
6   The  argument  was  originally  made  in  P.  Krugman,  op.  cit.  It  was  presented  in  a  more  formal  way  in 
G. Eggertsson and M. Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy”, Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 2003, pp. 139–233 and, more recently, in M. Woodford, “Methods of Policy 
Accommodation  at  the  Interest-Rate  Lower  Bound”,  paper  presented  at  the  Jackson  Hole  Economic  Policy 
Symposium  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  “The  Changing  Policy  Landscape”,  August  31  – 
September 1, 2012. 
7   The commitment mechanism is necessary due to the time-inconsistency problem inherent in such a situation, 
i.e.  the  incentive  for  the  central  bank  to  ex  post  renege  on  this  promise.  See  F.  Kydland  and  E.  Prescott, 
“Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85(3), 
1977, pp. 473–492. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
assessment  regarding  which  approach  is  more  appropriate  depends  on  the  particular 
situation each monetary policy maker faces.  
The  approach  focusing  on  communication  regarding  the  future  path  of  short-term  interest 
rates is in principle applicable to a situation where there is a need to provide general, across 
the board, stimulus to the economy. Moreover, it applies in currency areas where financing 
conditions are more or less homogeneous throughout segments of the financial market and 
of the currency space. By this I mean a situation in which following a reduction in the array of 
risk-free  interest  rates,  firms  or  households  with  comparable  characteristics  experience  a 
broadly similar decrease in the borrowing rates they are charged for finance. 
Despite  the  notable  improvements  recently,  this  by  and  large  is  not  the  situation  we  are 
facing  in  the  euro  area.  Domestic  financial  conditions  across  euro  area  countries  remain 
fragmented. The spreads that lenders apply over benchmark rates are very uneven and, in 
some countries, abnormally high, reflecting dysfunctional market dynamics. Moreover, there 
is no uncontroversial way to define the term structure of the risk-free rate in the euro area. 
Unlike  economies  with  a  single fiscal  authority or  with  a fully-fledged federal  structure,  the 
euro area comprises multiple sovereign states. The debt of each of these states has different 
liquidity  and  risk  characteristics.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  strikes  me  as  far  more 
appropriate  to  encourage  conditions  for  a  more  even  distribution  of  the  very  permissive 
liquidity provision that is in place. Engaging in promises regarding the future monetary policy 
stance  would  not  be  the  most  effective  instrument  for  achieving  this.  Instead,  we  need  to 
continue  addressing  the  part  of  the  premia  in  long-term  rates  in  the  euro  area  that  is  not 
warranted. But let me be clear, this does not mean that monetary policy instruments should 
be used to reduce credit spreads that reflect well-founded concerns regarding long-term debt 
sustainability and competitiveness.  
Is this alternative approach effective? In a nutshell I would say that the arsenal of the ECB’s 
instruments for monetary policy implementation continues to be able to induce relaxation of 
conditions  in  term  borrowing,  when  this  is  deemed  necessary.  In  particular,  the  very  long 
tenor of some of our refinancing operations combined with the full accommodation of banks’ 
demand for such refinancing at the prevailing rate has proven to be very powerful. Indeed, 
this has been effective in lowering rates along the yield curve, without having to engage in 
commitments  on  the  future  stance  of  monetary  policy  to  steer  expectations.  By  providing 
security  to  our  bank  counterparties  that  central  bank  credit  will  remain  in  place  for  a 
sufficiently long horizon, we have acted on the liquidity premium component of term interest 
rates: the spread that remunerates banks lending in the inter-bank market for the risk that 
their borrowing counterpart may become illiquid and unable to honour the inter-bank credit 
contract  at  maturity.  This  added  degree  of  comfort  has  encouraged  market  activity  at 
decreasing term lending rates.  
But I do not want to imply that the approach that the ECB has followed thus far is free of 
pitfalls. For instance, the use of refinancing operations with a very long maturity results in an 
immediate  expansion  of  the  balance  sheet  when  implemented.  Such  an  expansion  is  not 
without challenges for central bank communication and for managing inflation expectations. 
Moreover,  it  has  the  unintended  side-effect  that  it  increases  the  encumbrance  of  banks’ 
balance sheets. That is, it increases the share of bank assets that are already pledged as 
collateral,  and  thus  unavailable  to  support  the  borrower’s  standing  in  additional  credit 
operations.  The  share  of  bank  assets  that  would  be  available  to  cover  the  claims  of 
unsecured creditors in case of a default shrinks. This, in turn, amplifies the perceived loss 
given  default  of  additional  claimants  and  makes  it  more  difficult  for  banks  to  access  the 
unsecured  money  markets,  which  in  normal  times  is  the  main  market  for  marginal  bank 
funding. We are fully aware of this risk and this is part of the reason that we have allowed for 
early  repayment  of  our  3-year  long-term  refinancing  operations.  This  way,  when  a 
counterparty judges that its chances of accessing market funding are being constrained by 
its use of ECB 3-year long-term refinancing operations, it can repay all or part of the amount 
borrowed earlier than its original maturity. In fact, tomorrow is the first opportunity to make 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
use  of the  early  repayment  option.  Euro  area  banks  have  taken this  opportunity  and  have 
informed us that they will repay €137 billion of the slightly more than €1 trillion outstanding in 
such long-term operations.  
We will exert vigilance to ensure that – notwithstanding the legitimate decisions of individual 
banks to reduce their liabilities to the central bank – the overall liquidity conditions prevailing 
in  the  money  market  will  remain  consistent  with  the  degree  of  accommodation  that  the 
current outlook for prices and real activity warrant. 
Whichever  of  the  two  approaches  a  central  bank  decides  to  use,  it  needs  to  be  well 
appreciated  that  there  are  limits  to  what  monetary  policy  alone  can  achieve.  Delivering 
accommodative  financing  conditions  and  ample  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  has  been 
necessary  to  avoid  an  abrupt  deleveraging  that  could  tip  the  economy  into  a  destructive 
deflationary spiral. But parts of the banking system remain overstretched and this needs to 
be addressed in order to move decisively out of the crisis. Similarly, structural reforms need 
to be undertaken in order to restore the competitiveness of euro area economies. Only such 
reforms can deliver a lasting reversal of the fragmentation phenomena that the euro area has 
witnessed. And clearly neither of these tasks can be taken up by monetary policy. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude with a cautionary tale. Innovation is the quintessence of entrepreneurship 
and a cornerstone for economic growth and prosperity in market-based economies. But there 
can be innovations that create more problems than the ones they were originally conceived 
to address. 
I am reminded of the two mortal sins of economic policy-making that clearly transpire when 
reading Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff’s excellent book on financial crises: arrogance 
and ignorance.8 Transposing this insight to the discussion on monetary policy frameworks, I 
would say that it is dangerously arrogant to believe that one’s current approach to monetary 
policy is perfect and no improvements or changes will ever be needed. Certainly, before the 
crisis, a certain degree of academic group thinking and central bank professional hubris bred 
a  sense  of  accomplishment 
that  proved  exceedingly  complacent  and  ultimately 
self-defeating. Looking forward, we should temper a tendency to self-complacency – if not 
arrogance – with the strength of thought and the courage of vision.  
But courage and vision should not entice us into hazardous experimentations. We should not 
be ignorant of the lessons that history has taught. And history has shown that inflation was 
permanently  brought  under  control  when  the  public’s  inflation  expectations  became  safely 
anchored.  This  in  turn  occurred  when  central  banks  gained  credibility  regarding  their 
determination to stabilise inflation. This credibility was hard-earned but can be eroded easily. 
It would be irresponsible to jeopardise it. 
As regards the ECB in particular, I am convinced that our existing monetary policy framework 
provides  enough scope for  instruments to  continue  addressing the crisis  in  a  decisive  and 
effective way. We remain attentive to possible shortcomings in our policy framework and to 
changes  in  the  structure  of  the  economy  that  would  warrant  revisiting  aspects  of  this 
framework. At present, however, I see no compelling case for change. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                
8   C. Reinhart and K. Rogoff, This time is different: Eight centuries of financial folly, Princeton University Press, 
Princeton and Oxford, 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
