Erdem Başçi: Central bank responsibilities, global financial stability and 
payment systems 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Erdem  Başçi,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey,  at  the  “Payment  Systems  Conference”,  organized  by  Al  Bank  Wal  Mustathmer 
Group, Istanbul, 5 December 2012. 
 Distinguished  Governors  of  the  Central  Banks,  Distinguished  Guests  and  Esteemed 
Members of the Press, 
I  would  like  to  thank  you  all  on  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  and 
myself for your participation in the “Payment Systems Conference” organized by Al Bank Wal 
Mustathmer Group. Welcome to İstanbul and Turkey.  
Participants to the conference, who are all experts in the field, will be discussing payment 
systems, their significance and contemporary approaches. Before moving onto the topic of 
payment  systems,  I  would  like  to  briefly  mention  the  main  responsibility  areas  of  central 
banks.  
Distinguished Guests, 
Price  stability,  financial  stability  and  the  development  of  the  financial  sector  are  three 
significant fields central banks are responsible for, either partially or fully. 
The primary objective is price stability. The social costs to be incurred from the loss of price 
stability have been thoroughly understood by economists. Academic studies indicate that an 
inflation rate that is on average higher by 10 percentage points may cause, on average, a 
quarter  point  decrease  in  the  long  term  growth  rates  of  the  countries.1  While  the  average 
inflation rate in Turkey during 1974–2003 – the period with chronically high inflation rates – 
was 56%; average real growth per person was a mere 2%. On the other hand, during the 
period of 2004–2011, when inflation was expressed with single digits, average real growth 
per person increased to 3.3%. Our inflation target for the 2013–2015 period is set as 5%.  
Loans,  exchange  rates  and  inflation  expectations  are  three  crucial  variables  that  are  the 
determinants of price stability. Therefore, decreasing excessive volatility in the credit growth 
rate and exchange rates highly contributes to price stability.  
The  second  area  of  central  bank  responsibility  is  financial  stability.  The  loss  of  financial 
stability  has  deep  and  long-term  impacts  on  both  growth  and  employment.2  The  cost  of 
preventing a financial crisis is much lower than the cost of the crisis itself. Turkey’s recent 
history is a very good example of this statement. The economic crisis Turkey went through in 
2001 increased the country’s sovereign debt by 30 percentage points and severely affected 
growth  and  employment  prospects.  As  of  2002,  Turkey  focused  on  establishing  price 
stability, financial stability and introducing structural reforms aimed at increasing productivity. 
As  a  result,  while  the  economic  prosperity  of  the  country  increased  rapidly,  the  financial 
sector gained resilience to exogenous shocks. The Central Bank developed new tools and 
introduced new policies to facilitate a stable course in both exchange rates and credit growth 
and  hence,  helped  the  rapid  recovery  of  our  country  from  the  deepening  of  the  global 
financial  crisis  during  2008–2009;  and  enabled  it  to  weather  the  European  sovereign  debt 
crisis of 2011–2012 with minimum damage. 
                                                
1   Barro, Robert J. (1995). “Inflation and Economic Growth.” NBER Working Paper Series, No: 5326. 
2   Reinhart,  Carmen  M.,  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff.  (2009).  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial 
Folly.  Princeton,  NJ:  Princeton  Press.;  Taylor,  A.  (2012).  “The  Great  Leveraging,”  NBER  Working  Papers, 
No. 18290. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Loans and exchange rates are the two main variables, which are significant for not only price 
stability,  but  also  financial  stability.  Therefore,  decreasing  excessive  volatility  in  the  credit 
growth rate and exchange rates underpins financial stability.  
Distinguished Participants, 
Now I would like to touch upon the contributions of Turkey to global financial stability. Turkey 
became  a  member  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  in  2009.  It  will  take  part  in  G20 
Troika in 2014 and assume the Annual Presidency of the G20 in 2015. Moreover, Turkey’s 
representative from the Under secretariat of Treasury will be assigned to the FSB Steering 
Committee during the 2014–2016 period when Turkey will be in G20 Troika.   
Moreover,  Turkey  became  a  member  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
(BCBS) and the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision (GHOS) in 2009. The Central 
Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  will  take  part  in  the  FSB  Steering  Committee  during  the 
period 2013–2015 when Turkey will be chairing the FSB Regional Consultative Group for the 
Middle East and North Africa (MENA).  
As  part  of  the  governance  reform  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  a  New 
Constituency  was  established  with  the  countries  Turkey,  Austria,  Hungary,  the  Czech 
Republic, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Belarus and Kosovo. According to this agreement, 
Turkey will assume the Executive Director position for a two-year term between 2014–2016 
and 2018–2020. 
At the G-20 meeting held in Los Cabos a number of emerging market economies including 
Turkey  declared  their  intention  to  contribute  to  global  financial  stability  by  increasing  the 
resources of the IMF. The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey intends to contribute to 
IMF  resources  up  to  USD  5  billion,  which  will  be  counted  as  part  of Turkey’s  international 
reserves.   
The duties and responsibilities of central banks with regard to payment systems have to do 
with the development of the financial sector, which is the third main field. Efficient payment 
systems contribute to the deepening of financial markets by decreasing operation costs and 
settlement risks. Therefore, the active role assumed by central banks in the design, operation 
and  oversight  of  payment  systems  becomes  more  crucial  given  the  size  of  the  global 
financial system. Hence, in line  with the global trends in this field, the Central Bank of the 
Republic  of  Turkey  cooperates  with  the  Turkish  financial  system  for  the  advancement  of 
payment systems. In this regard, significant progress has been made in the restructuring of 
payment systems operating under the auspices of the Central Bank.  
The  oversight  of  payment  systems  operating  outside  the  Central  Bank  also  rests  with  our 
Bank.  Considering  the  need  for  a  regulation  on  general  standards  including  all  payment 
services  and  systems  in  Turkey,  the  Bank  prepared  a  “Draft  Law  on  Payment  Systems”, 
which also complies with the European Union acquits, and the draft law has been submitted 
to  the  relevant  institutions  and  agencies  to  hear  their  views.  Once  the  draft  law  has  been 
addressed  at  the  Grand  National  Assembly  of  Turkey  and  as  soon  as  the  law  has  been 
revised in line with the views of the relevant institutions, an important step will be taken to 
reshape  the  legal  framework  on  payment  systems  in  harmony  with  the  international 
standards. 
Esteemed Guests, 
The  Central  Bank’s  membership  of  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems 
(CPSS) of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) was finalized in 2009. In this platform 
setting  key  global  principles  and  standards  related  to  payment  and  settlement  systems 
Turkey  is  represented  by  the  Central  Bank,  which  is  actively  involved  in  the  studies 
conducted.  
In parallel with the said efforts, a joint study was carried out with the Committee on Payment 
Settlement  Systems 
of  Securities 
International  Organization 
(CPSS) 
and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Commissions(IOSCO)and  “Principles  for  Financial  Markets  Infrastructures(FMI)”,  which 
covers payment systems of systemic significance, settlement systems for securities, central 
custodians, central counterparties and transaction registry centers. This study was published 
in April 2012. 
The  said  study  outlines  24  principles  for  the  relevant  authorities  of  FMIs  and  5  key 
responsibilities  for  overseers  and  supervisory  authorities.  The  main  objective  of  all  these 
principles and responsibilities is to create a more secure and efficient structure for authorities 
of FMIs that also includes payment systems. In this regard, I think that all authorities related 
to  payment  systems  will  do  their  utmost  to  achieve  harmonization  of  these  systems  and 
apply  the  said  principles  in  the  near future.  Further  international  studies  carried  out  in  this 
field will focus on the implementation of these 24 principles.  
Distinguished Participants, 
Cross-border connections of payment systems progressively gain importance in line with the 
increase in the volume of foreign trade. In the meantime, studies geared towards developing 
the international payment systems continue all around the world. I think this conference will 
significantly  contribute  to  these  studies  and  I  very  much  hope  that  it  will  be  a  useful  and 
fruitful conference. I would like to thank you all for listening.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
