Glenn Stevens: Financial regulation – Australia in the global landscape 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) Annual Forum, Sydney, 26 March 2013. 
 The  title  of  this  session  is  “Australia  as  a  Global  Citizen”.  Accordingly,  I  will  seek  to  set 
financial and regulatory developments in Australia in a global setting. This is worth doing for 
its  own  sake,  since  local  discussion  is  better  informed  if  we  can  see  how  the  various 
initiatives fit in to the broader setting. It is also important to remember that Australia, along 
with  all  other  jurisdictions  that  sign  up  to  international  standards,  will  be  evaluated  by  our 
peers. So it’s worth spelling out our approach to some key issues. 
In addition, from the end of this year Australia will have responsibility for chairing the G20 for 
a  year,  and  financial  reform  and  regulation  have  been  prominent  on  the  G20’s  agenda  in 
recent years. So Australia’s political leadership will have some responsibility for shaping, for 
a brief period, the oversight of the process. It is worth starting to think about how this might 
be done. 
As  a  “global  citizen”,  Australia  has  the  responsibilities  and  rights  of  that  “citizenship”.  The 
responsibilities are to uphold and play by the rules that are globally agreed, which include 
implementing global standards in regulation and oversight, and encouraging others to do so. 
The rights we have are the same as those of others: to have our say and to play our own 
part, however modest and small, in the development of those standards. 
Something  that  is  a  bit  new  and,  overall,  refreshing  is  that  Australia  actually  does  have  a 
place at more of the relevant tables than it used to. ASIC has long been a member of the 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  as  were  its  predecessor 
organisations the ASC and the NCSC. It is quite a feather in the cap for ASIC that its chair 
has this month assumed the chair of the IOSCO Board. The expanded membership of the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  now  allows  Australia  two  members  – 
APRA, naturally, and the Reserve Bank – where we had none before. The Financial Stability 
Board (FSB) likewise allows us two seats, compared with one previously, and membership of 
some of the key committees. 
The international financial landscape 
In the wake of the crisis that swept Europe and North America, the international regulatory 
environment  for  the  financial  system  has  changed  significantly.  An  expanded  Financial 
Stability  Board, with the political backing of the G20 Leaders, has acted to coordinate this 
process,  working  with  existing  standard-setting  bodies  and  also  by  developing  its  own 
processes. 
There have been several main streams to the reforms. 
The first is the Basel III prudential reforms, which aim to improve the resilience of financial 
institutions  by  strengthening  capital  and  liquidity  requirements.  Compared  with  Basel  II, 
minimum capital ratios are higher, capital has been defined more strictly to refer to genuinely 
loss-absorbing instruments, and use of counter-cyclical capital add-ons is contemplated, all 
supplemented  by  a  simple  constraint  on  overall  leverage.  More  attention  is  focused  on 
liquidity management by banks. 
The second key stream of work has aimed to address the problem of “too big to fail”. Global 
systemically important banks (G-SIBs) have been identified, and capital surcharges will be 
set to strengthen their resilience, beginning in 2016. Cross-border crisis-management groups 
have  been  established  for  nearly  all  of  these  institutions,  and  one  of  their  key  tasks  is  to 
review the recovery and resolution plans that are being developed for these firms. Intensity of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
financial 
institutions  (SIFIs)  applies  more  broadly,  and  an 
supervision is also being increased. For domestic systemically important banks, a principles-
based regulatory framework has been developed. 
While banks have been the major focus thus far, the overall policy framework for systemically 
important 
identification 
methodology is close to being finalised for global systemically important insurers. 
A third element is aimed at improving the functioning of markets for over-the-counter (OTC) 
derivatives, so as to reduce risk of contagion in the financial system. This is to be achieved 
by promoting or mandating central clearing of standardised OTC derivatives contracts, and 
adding to transparency through requiring trade reporting. 
A fourth  stream  is  aimed  at  addressing risks  arising from  shadow  banking  –  that  is,  those 
entities  and  activities  outside  the  regulated  banking  system that  are  associated  with  credit 
intermediation  and  maturity  transformation.  The  FSB  released  key  proposals  last  year  for 
consultation and they are being refined on the basis of feedback received, for consideration 
at the G20 Leaders’ Summit in September 2013. 
What has Australia done? 
Australia  was  not  as  badly  affected  by  the  crisis  as  some  other  countries.  Our  banking 
system  overall,  though  hardly  without  blemish,  stood  up  fairly  well.  This  was  testament  to 
generally  sound  management  in  most  institutions  and  a  robust  supervisory  approach.  But 
there were still lessons to be drawn for Australia and the regulators here have given careful 
thought to them and to the associated global reforms. 
APRA finalised its prudential standards to implement the Basel III capital standards in late 
2012. Australia, along with 10 other jurisdictions, adopted the capital elements of Basel III as 
from 1 January this year. Some major jurisdictions – the EU and the US in particular – are a 
little behind, though all the BCBS member jurisdictions had at least released draft regulations 
by mid-February. 
Australia is considered an “early adopter” of the Basel III reforms. Given the relatively healthy 
capital positions of authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs), APRA is requiring ADIs to 
meet  a  number  of  the  main  capital  measures  two  or  three  years  earlier  than  the  rather 
extended timetable required under Basel III and it is not using the discretion available under 
Basel III to provide a concessional treatment for certain items in calculating regulatory capital 
(e.g. deferred tax assets).1 
APRA has also moved ahead on the liquidity standard, in conjunction with the Reserve Bank. 
We  have  established  the  Committed  Liquidity  Facility  (CLF)  –  a  mechanism  by  which  the 
Basel III liquidity standard can be met, in a world in which government debt in Australia is 
relatively scarce compared with other jurisdictions. 
Let me say a little about this facility. It is not a “bail-out” fund for banks. “Bail-outs” usually 
mean  stumping  up  public  funds  to  inject  capital  to  an  institution  whose  solvency  is  in 
question. The CLF does no such thing. It is a facility, for which the institutions concerned will 
pay a fee, which would provide cash against quality collateral pledged by institutions that the 
Bank and APRA judge to be solvent. The fee structure is designed to replicate the cost the 
institutions  would  incur  if  there  were  sufficient  ordinary  high  quality  collateral  –  i.e. 
government  debt  –  for  them  to  hold  to  meet  the  Basel  liquidity  requirements  –  which,  of 
course, there is not. If we are to meet the global standards, we either have to have a facility 
like this, or have the government issue a few hundred billion dollars in extra gross debt so 
                                                
1   As  part  of  international  monitoring  implementation  of  Basel  III,  Australia  will  undergo  a  so-called  Level  2 
assessment conducted by the BCBS later this year, which will assess the regulatory consistency of Australia’s 
implementation of the Basel III minimum requirements. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the banks can hold it. The relevant ADIs will pay a fee of 15 basis points per annum for the 
facility whether they use it or not. If they do use it, any funding will be at an interest rate that 
is 25 basis points above the market rate. This has been developed openly, and under the 
scrutiny  of  the  international  regulatory  community.  It  was  approved  by  the  Reserve  Bank 
Board in November 2010. 
With regard to the “SIFI” reforms, Australia’s large banks cannot realistically be assessed as 
globally systemic. Hence there was no good reason for them to be classed as G-SIBs. But it 
cannot be denied that they are domestically systemic, which is why it is appropriate that the 
Basel Committee’s domestic systemically important bank framework capture them. This will 
involve some additional minimum loss absorbency on the capital side but also an intensity of 
supervision that is greater than applied to the “average” ADI – an aspect that is already a key 
part of APRA’s supervisory approach. In the area of resolution, a number of steps have been 
taken  in  recent  years,  including  a  strengthening  in  APRA’s  crisis  management  powers  in 
2008 and 2010. 
So  far  as  derivatives  markets  are  concerned,  legislation  was  passed  in  Australia  in 
December 2012 to help meet emerging international standards. Given uncertainties around 
both  the final  shape  of key  regimes  internationally,  and  the  broader  market  and  economic 
effects  of  regulation  in  this  area,  the  final  legislative  framework  contains  considerable 
flexibility. In particular, the legislation does not directly introduce any trade reporting, central 
clearing or trade execution obligations for OTC derivatives transactions. What it does do is 
create  a  mechanism  by  which  such  obligations  may  be  implemented  by  supporting 
regulations, which would be developed and administered by ASIC. 
There  is  more  focus  generally  on  what  are  known  as  “Financial  Market  Infrastructures” 
(FMIs). In April last year, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) and 
IOSCO released new Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures, the culmination of two 
years of detailed standard-setting. The Reserve Bank has revised its own Financial Stability 
Standards for Central Counterparties and Securities Settlement Facilities, so as to align them 
with  the  Principles.  It  has  also  committed  to  assessing  Australia’s  high-value  payment 
system,  RITS,  against  the  Principles  on  an  annual  basis.  ASIC  similarly  updated  its 
Regulatory Guide for Clearing and Settlement Facility licensees to reflect the new Principles 
and  aims  to  ensure  consistency  with  the  Principles  in  the  regime  it  is  designing  for  trade 
repositories. 
With  regard  to  shadow  banks,  the  Reserve  Bank  presents  an  annual  review  of  shadow 
banking  developments  to  the  Council  of  Financial  Regulators.  Our  assessment  is  that  the 
shadow banking system in Australia is relatively small compared with the formal ADI sector, 
which means that the recommendations being developed internationally are not as important 
an  issue  here  as  they  may  be  for  other  jurisdictions,  at  least  from  a  stability  perspective. 
Separately, there is the dimension of investor protection. Here ASIC and APRA are working 
on strengthening the regulatory framework for retail debenture issuers. ASIC has proposed 
minimum capital and liquidity requirements, while APRA’s proposals, which are forthcoming, 
will aim to make clearer that the products offered by these entities are not the same as the 
deposit products offered by banks. 
Remaining challenges 
From this very quick tour of the key regulatory themes, it should be obvious that much has 
been achieved, but that significant challenges remain. It is, I think, fair to say that as time has 
passed and implementation has come into focus, various difficulties and complications are 
coming  to  the  fore.  Some  aspects  of  the  Basel  standards  are  being  tweaked.  It  has  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
necessary for standard-setting bodies to issue additional guidance, to provide further clarity 
regarding new reforms, and to ensure consistency in interpretation and implementation.2 
To some extent this was to be expected. Reforms that seemed so simple and obvious, so 
bold and so sweeping in the immediate aftermath of the crisis of 2008, have turned out to be 
harder  to  implement  than  first  expected.  This  is  hardly  surprising  really,  since  so  much  is 
being  attempted  at the same time. It  is  not that  attempting much  is  a mistake:  there  were 
serious problems to be addressed and a lot needed to be done. But in so doing, there was 
always a pretty good chance that the compounding effects of multiple reforms would contain 
some unexpected and unintended consequences. 
To take one example, there is concern in some quarters about a potential shortage of high-
quality  collateral.  This  arises  because  regulatory  reforms  around  bank  liquidity  and 
centralised  clearing  are  likely  to  add  to  demand  for  high-quality  liquid  assets.  This  is 
spawning great interest by intermediaries to offer collateral transformation services – turning 
relative risky assets into ostensibly safe ones – that could present new risks. 
OTC  derivatives  reforms  have  been  a  particularly  thorny  issue,  not  least  because  of  the 
cross-jurisdictional reach of international regulation in this area. European OTC derivatives 
regulation and US regulation under the Dodd-Frank Act are clear examples of measures that 
potentially  have  a  strong  impact  on  other  jurisdictions.  A  grouping  of  market  regulators, 
including  ASIC,  has  been  convened  to  develop  some  common  understandings  around  the 
cross-border  application  of  rules.  Particularly  in  a  global  market  such  as  that  for  OTC 
derivatives,  consistency  with  other  jurisdictions’  rules  is  an  important  consideration  in  the 
development of the domestic framework. 
As OTC derivatives markets make this transition to central clearing, interest is emerging from 
overseas-based central counterparties in providing their services directly to Australian-based 
participants.  Many  international  participants  in  the  Australian  interest  rate  swaps  market 
already  clear  their  trades  through  the  UK-based  global  central  counterparty,  LCH.Clearnet 
Limited (LCH). LCH has announced that it will be seeking a licence to provide these services 
directly to Australian-based participants, alongside a competing offering being developed by 
the domestic derivatives central counterparty, ASX Clear (Futures). 
To the extent that participants in smaller markets choose to clear via overseas-based central 
counterparties  it  is  important  that  they  can  do  so  on  appropriate  terms,  and  also  that  the 
interests of regulators in these jurisdictions be given due weight. In July last year, ASIC and 
the Reserve Bank jointly published a document setting out the measures that would be taken 
to  ensure  appropriate  regulatory  influence  where  an  overseas-based  central  counterparty 
was operating in Australia. These measures would be applied in the oversight of LCH or any 
other  overseas-based  central  counterparty  that  might  obtain  a  licence  to  provide  such 
services.3 
In a world of more central clearing, the question of how the official sector would deal with a 
situation of FMI distress assumes more importance. As a result of a review by the Council of 
Financial Regulators in 2011, work is in progress to develop legislative proposals that would 
                                                
2   An example of this was recent guidance by the BCBS on the usability of high-quality liquid assets under the 
liquidity coverage ratio. Another is the technical guidance by the FSB to assist national authorities and cross-
border crisis management groups in their recovery and resolution planning. 
In  accordance  with  this  approach,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  already  assumed  a  seat  on  a  new  cooperative 
oversight arrangement for LCH. This will provide a vehicle for representing Australian interests in the design 
and operation of this important piece of infrastructure. 
3  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
give effect to a “step-in” power as part of a comprehensive resolution regime for FMIs. This is 
to be designed in accordance with international standards.4 
These  are  just  a  few  examples  of  how  the  world  of  regulation  and  financial  oversight  is 
growing more complex. Whether it is the additional demand for high-quality collateral arising 
from  reforms  on  bank  liquidity  and  centralised  clearing,  or  the  extra-territorial  reach  of  US 
reforms  under  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  or  the  likely  difficulties  in  maintaining  systems  of 
reference  interest  rates  in  a  world  where  banks  are  now  extremely  wary  of  the  legal  risks 
involved  in  voicing  an  opinion  about  where  market  pricing  might  be,  or  the  likelihood  that 
some activities will migrate beyond the regulatory net, complications from regulatory activism 
are in evidence. 
My guess is that we don’t yet know what all the compounding effects of multiple reforms may 
be  and  it  may  be  years  before  we  do.  A  principle  that  the  Reserve  Bank, for  its  part,  has 
sought  to  uphold  in  our  own  participation  in  the  various  reform  streams  is  that  we  should 
proceed  with  all  appropriate  urgency  where  needed,  but  with  deliberate  care  wherever 
possible, being conscious of the limits to our own knowledge as regulators and the likelihood 
of unintended consequences from steps we might take. 
Further ahead 
The financial reform agenda post 2008 has been very large and comprehensive. There has 
been  a  prodigious  amount  of  work  across  a  wide  front.  It  is  worth  thinking  about  how  this 
agenda might be managed in the future. 
It  is  of  course  inappropriate  to  discuss  in  detail  how  Australia  might  approach  its 
responsibilities  in  the  G20  in  2014.  The  Russian  G20  presidency  is  in  full  swing  and  will 
remain  so  until  at  least November. Our  job  until  then  is  to  assist  in  any  way  we  can  for  a 
successful conclusion to that presidency. On financial regulation, the Russian chair has, to 
date,  focused  on  the  G20  working  towards  completion  and  implementation  of  previously 
announced reforms. This is a multi-year task and one we will inherit. One area the Russian 
presidency has identified for particular attention is the possible effects of regulatory reforms 
on the supply of long-term financing, given that one of their major themes is promoting long-
term  financing  for  investment.  To  date  the  FSB  has  found  little  evidence  to  suggest  that 
global  financial  regulatory  reforms  have  significantly  contributed  to  current  long-term 
financing concerns, but they have been asked to continue to monitor the possible effects. 
Australia’s approach will, of course, be a national one, adopted by government, not simply 
one established by the Reserve Bank. 
Subject to all those constraints, I would simply observe that, in my opinion, by 2014 we will 
have reached a point in the financial regulatory sphere where the G20 should be looking for 
careful and sustained efforts at implementation of the regulatory reforms that have already 
been broadly agreed, but being wary of adding further reforms to the work program. Absent 
some  major  new  development,  which  brings  to  light  some  major  reform  need  not  hitherto 
visible,  to  task  the  regulatory  community  and  the  financial  industry  with  further  wholesale 
changes from here would risk overload. Lest this be considered too weak a position, let us 
remember  how  much  is  being  attempted.  And  since  we  are  already  seeing  the  need  to 
“tweak” some  earlier  agreed  proposals,  it  is  surely  clear  that  the  details  of  implementation 
should increasingly be our focus over the next few years. The G20 will need to remain open 
to the possibility – the likelihood even – that as experience is gained with implementation and 
we  grapple  with  the  inevitable  difficulties,  and  as  we  learn  more  about  how  the  financial 
                                                
4   The relevant standards are the FSB’s Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions. 
Work is also underway by CPSS-IOSCO to establish how best to apply the Key Attributes to financial market 
infrastructures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
system is likely to operate in a new world, we will want to make occasional adjustments to 
the rules. 
None of that ought to be seen as a retreat from the high level objectives that have guided 
efforts to date: the desire for a more stable, more resilient and simpler financial system, that 
is better able and more inclined to play its “handmaiden of industry” role and better able to 
withstand failures of individual institutions. But in pursuing these goals, it is important that we: 
strike the right balance between more regulation and more effective enforcement of 
• 
existing regulation. Inadequate enforcement and supervision was as big a problem 
as deficient rules 
recognise the cross-border aspects of the financial system, with the associated need 
for  cooperation  and,  yes,  compromise.  Recognition  of  the  legitimate  interests  of 
smaller markets is clearly of importance to Australia but many other jurisdictions as 
well. This often coincides with the role of pushing for a principles-based approach 
instead  of  a  one-size-fits-all  heavy-handed,  rules-based  approach.  It  may  also 
involve working to develop a “regional voice” on some issues 
consider  the  combination  of  reforms  in  their  entirety,  and  keep  a  lookout  for 
unintended  consequences.  Given  the  breadth  and  speed  at  which  reforms  have 
been introduced in recent years, careful analysis of how the various initiatives  will 
interact is becoming more important. 
  Keeping the regulatory structure fit for purpose across a broad range of jurisdictions around 
the world is in fact a task that will never be complete, since the financial system evolves – in 
response  to  technology  and  innovation,  but  also  in  response  to  regulation  itself.  It  is 
important for Australia not only to keep abreast of the developments and implement the key 
elements  of global  regulation  here,  but  also  to  continue  to  play  our  own  part  in  helping  to 
develop them, and refining them in light of experience. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
