Hirohide Yamaguchi: Path to overcoming deflation and decisive 
additional steps in monetary accommodation 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with 
business leaders, Nagasaki, 31 January 2013. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me an opportunity to exchange views with administrative and business 
leaders in Nagasaki. And I express my gratitude to everyone for your cooperation in various 
business operations of the Bank of Japan’s Nagasaki branch. 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held last week, the Bank of Japan took additional steps to 
provide  monetary  accommodation  decisively  toward  overcoming  deflation  as  early  as 
possible  and  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth  with  price  stability,  and  decided  on 
three things. First, the Bank decided to introduce a 2 percent “price stability target.” Second, 
the  Bank  decided to  introduce  an  “open-ended asset  purchasing method”  under  the  Asset 
Purchase  Program.  Third,  the  Bank  decided  on  the  joint  release  of  a  statement  with  the 
Government  titled  “Joint  Statement  of  the  Government  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  on 
Overcoming Deflation and Achieving Sustainable Economic Growth.” 
Today,  before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  will  first  talk  about  the  current  state  and  the 
outlook  for  economies  at  home  and  abroad,  followed  by  the  thinking  behind  the  recent 
monetary policy decision by the Bank. 
Overseas economic developments: brightening overseas economies 
I. 
Let me first state briefly the view on Japan’s economy. Japan’s economy remains relatively 
weak. While such situation will likely continue for the time being, thereafter, Japan’s economy 
is  expected  to  return  to  the  moderate  recovery  path  toward  the  middle  of  the  year  as 
domestic demand remains resilient and overseas economies emerge from the deceleration 
phase and increase their brightness. Let me explain the background. 
Let  me  start  with  the  developments  in  overseas  economies.  Looking  back  at  the 
developments  over  the  past  year,  the  European  debt  problem  was  aggravated  up  to  the 
summer.  Its  adverse  effects  spread  over  globally  through  a  decline  in  trade  and  a 
deterioration  in  business  sentiment,  and,  since  the  summer,  many  countries  have  moved 
deeper  into  a  deceleration  phase.  While  overseas  economies  have  been  remaining  in  a 
deceleration phase, recently, a silver lining has started to be seen mainly in the United States 
and China. 
Developments in the European economy 
By  region,  the  European  economy  continues  to  be  in  a  moderate  recession  phase  with 
continued  fiscal  austerity  and  tight  financial  conditions  on  the  back  of  a  debt  problem. 
Deterioration  in  business  and  household  sentiment  has  spread  not  only  to  southern 
European  countries  that  have  been  burdened  with  the  debt  problem  but  also  to  core 
European  countries,  including  Germany  and  France.  As  a  result,  firms’  business  fixed 
investment  has  decreased  and  weakness  in  private  consumption,  particularly  of  durable 
goods like automobiles, has become pronounced. 
Meanwhile, the policy authorities’ responses to the debt problem have made some progress 
since  last  summer.  Broadly  speaking,  there  were  four  moves.  First,  the  European  Central 
Bank  established  a  new  scheme  that  allowed  for  purchases  of  an  unlimited  amount  of 
government bonds within the euro area under certain conditions. Second, the framework for 
supporting  Greece  was  maintained  tentatively  and  support  to  Spain’s  banking  sector  was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
implemented.  Third,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  a  permanent  support  fund  for  the 
countries  in  the  euro  area,  started  to  operate.  And  fourth,  the  establishment  of  a  single 
banking supervisory mechanism in the euro area was agreed on. As a result of those policy 
responses,  the  risk  of  a  panic  dispatched  from  Europe  spreading  to  the  global  economy 
mainly through turmoil in global financial markets seems to have subsided considerably. 
As  for  the  outlook  for  the  European  economy,  as  belt-tightening  fiscal  management  will 
continue,  a  moderate  recession  might  continue  for  the  time  being,  but  eventually  the 
European economy will emerge from the recession phase starting from a pick-up in exports, 
mainly in core countries like Germany. 
Developments in the U.S. economy 
The  U.S.  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately.  Up  to  the  end  of  last  year,  business 
sentiment  became  cautious  and  business  fixed  investment  slowed  on  the  back  of 
uncertainties  associated  with  the  so-called  “fiscal  cliff,”  which  refers  to  the  concurrent 
expiration of past tax cut measures and a reduction in fiscal spending at the beginning of this 
year.  Nevertheless,  even  against  such  a  backdrop,  supported  by  an  improvement  in  labor 
and income conditions and the low interest rate environment, housing investment has been 
picking up and private consumption, particularly car sales, has continued to recover. 
Hereafter,  with  the  “fiscal  cliff”  being  barely  averted,  business  sentiment  is  expected  to 
improve  and  business  fixed  investment  is  also  expected  to  recover.  It  is  also  likely  that 
private  consumption  and  housing  investment  will  continue  improving,  supported  mainly  by 
the  accommodative  financial  environment.  As  a  result,  the  U.S.  economy  will  continue  to 
follow  a  moderate  recovery  path  and  is  expected  to  become  a  driving  force  of  the  global 
economy. 
Developments in the Chinese economy 
A  silver  lining  has  also  been  seen  in  the  Chinese  economy.  While  inventory  adjustment 
pressure,  particularly  in  the  material  industry,  has  been  persisting  and  an  increase  in 
production has not yet restored a clear increasing trend, private consumption has remained 
firm on the back of favorable labor and income conditions. Exports have been showing signs 
of recovering, albeit with fluctuations. Infrastructure investment has recently been increasing 
partly due to the policy authorities’ prop-up measures, and a slowdown in an increasing trend 
in fixed asset investment as a whole has come to a halt. Business sentiment, particularly in 
the manufacturing sector, has been improving. From a longer- term perspective, the Chinese 
economy  is  in  a  transition  phase  from  high  growth  to  stable  growth,  and  there  remains 
uncertainty  whether  a  smooth  transition  could  be  made.  Having  said  that,  as  for  the 
immediate  future,  in  addition  to  policy  effects  both  from  the  fiscal  and  monetary  fronts, 
inventory adjustment is likely to progress, supported by firm domestic demand, and exports 
are  also  expected  to  pick  up,  and  thus  the  recovery  trend  in  the  Chinese  economy  will 
gradually become pronounced. 
Developments in the NIEs and ASEAN economies 
At present, partly due to stagnant exports to Europe and other countries, the pick-up in the 
NIEs and the ASEAN economies has moderated. However, as for the outlook, if the global 
economy increases its brightness led by the United States and China, exports will gradually 
pick up and the pace of recovery will likely accelerate. 
Developments in global financial markets 
Meanwhile, the global financial markets have considerably restored stability. Global investors 
have gradually become ready to take risks. Behind that are (a) in the United States, amid a 
continuing  moderate  recovery,  the  “fiscal  cliff”  has  been  barely  averted,  (b)  in  Europe, 
progress has been seen in policy responses with regard to the debt problem, and (c) in the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chinese economy, a silver lining has gradually started to be seen. Against such a backdrop, 
stock  prices  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  bottomed  out  last  summer  and  have  been 
rising. As investors have turned ready to take risks, yields on southern European countries’ 
government bonds have declined substantially. In the foreign exchange market, the euro has 
been bought back and the yen has been depreciating. 
Outlook for overseas economies 
To summarize the above, overseas economies will gradually emerge from the deceleration 
phase  and  turn  to  a  moderate  recovery,  with  the  United  Stated  and  China  being  driving 
forces.  Of  course,  we  cannot  keep  our  eyes  off  the  developments  in  the  European  debt 
problem. Whether the recovery in the U.S. economy will continue while overcoming the fiscal 
problem requires caution. As the Chinese economy is burdened with various problems, I will 
not  say  there  is  no  uncertainty  whether  the  economy  will  make  a  smooth  transition  to  a 
recovery path. Those uncertainties continue to warrant thorough attention. 
II. 
The current state and outlook for Japan’s economy: path to moderate 
recovery 
Current state of Japan’s economy 
Let me turn to the developments in Japan’s economy. At present, Japan’s economy remains 
relatively weak. While the economy registered somewhat a high annual growth rate of about 
3  percent  in  the  first  half  of  2012  mainly  supported  by  increases  in  reconstruction-related 
demand, exports and industrial production declined substantially in the second half due to a 
deceleration in overseas economies. As capital goods and parts account for a large part of 
exports  and  industrial  production  in  Japan,  if  demand  for  those  goods  decline  due  to 
weakening activity in the manufacturing industry worldwide, the resultant effects will tend to 
be large. A substantial decline in exports to China, particularly automobile exports, due to the 
effect  of  Japan-China  relations,  also  added  to  the  decline,  mainly  in  exports.  As  for  other 
effects of Japan-China relations, there has been a large decline in the number of incoming 
foreign  tourists.  I  have  heard  that  this  region  has  also  been  affected.  Against  such  a 
backdrop,  there  has  been  an  increasing  downward  revision  in  the  prospects  for  corporate 
profits and business sentiment has become cautious. While business fixed investment in the 
non-manufacturing sector has been firm, there have been increasing moves, particularly in 
the manufacturing sector, to defer business fixed investment, and thus the overall investment 
has  become  somewhat  weak.  In  terms  of  employment  and  income,  particularly  in  the 
manufacturing sector, the number of new job offers declined substantially and overtime work 
has  also  been  decreasing.  In  such  a  way,  the  deceleration  in  overseas  economies  has 
spread  over  not  only  to  exports  and  production  but  also  to  domestic  demand  and 
employment. 
While  there  have  remained  effects  of  the  decline  following  the  expiry  of  subsidies  for  the 
purchase  of  energy-efficient  cars,  private  consumption  as  a  whole,  particularly  service 
consumption,  has  remained  resilient.  One  reason  why  private  consumption  maintains 
resilience might be the underlying support by demand of the elderly. Households headed by 
60 years or older account for more than 40 percent in private consumption. In the meantime, 
public  investment,  particularly  reconstruction-related  investment,  has  been  increasing  and 
housing  investment  has  been  picking  up  partly  due  to  the  rebuilding  of  disaster-stricken 
houses.  While  such  resilience  in  domestic  demand  has  not  offset  all  the  effects  of 
deceleration  in  overseas  economies,  it  has  nevertheless  been  an  element  steadily 
underpinning Japan’s economy. 
Outlook for Japan’s Economy 
With  regard to  the  outlook,  as  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to 
remain  relatively  weak  for  the  time  being,  and  thereafter,  it  is  expected  to  return  to  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
moderate recovery path toward the middle of the year as domestic demand remains resilient 
and  overseas  economies  gradually  increase  their  brightness.  As  a  recovery  is  the  one 
following some periods of relatively weak developments and the pace will be moderate, firms 
might have difficulty realizing an economic recovery. However, there is a good possibility that 
“with hindsight the first half of 2013 was the turning point.” As mentioned earlier, there is a 
silver lining in overseas economies and, in particular, it is encouraging that the U.S. economy 
is  on  a  recovery  trend. In  addition,  the recent  developments  in  the  yen  exchange  rate  will 
gradually underpin exports. In domestic demand, public investment is likely to continue to be 
on an increasing trend and housing investment likely to also continue to pick up. In the not 
distant future, business fixed investment will likely return to the moderate uptrend partly due 
to  investment  related  to  disaster  prevention  and  energy.  Private  consumption  is  likely  to 
remain resilient as a trend, with the effects of the decline following the expiry of subsidies for 
the purchase of energy-efficient cars subsiding. 
Prices 
On  the  price  front,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI) 
excluding volatile food is around 0 percent. For the time being, it is expected to turn negative 
due  to  the  reversal  of  the  previous  year’s  movements  in  energy-related  and  durable 
consumer goods, and thereafter, is likely to be  around 0 percent again  for some time and 
then gradually increase its rate of change with economic recovery. 
Taking into account such developments in economic activity and prices, the Monetary Policy 
Meeting  last  week  examined  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  for  the  next  two 
years. Looking at the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts, the real GDP growth 
rate, following +1.0 percent in fiscal 2012, is somewhat high at +2.3 percent for fiscal 2013, 
partly due to a surge in consumer spending prior to the consumption tax hike. In fiscal 2014, 
while there will be some reversal developments, the growth will be +0.8 percent exceeding 
the  potential  growth  rate.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  CPI  excluding  volatile  food, 
following –0.2 percent in fiscal 2012, is forecasted to gradually increase the rate of change, 
with +0.4 percent in fiscal 2013, and, on the basis of excluding the effects of the consumption 
tax hike, +0.9 percent in fiscal 2014. The reason the Bank set 2 percent as the “price stability 
target” is, that the achievement of 1 percent – a goal for the time being set by the Bank – has 
come into sight in fiscal 2014, and that it has judged necessary to clarify its next target. I will 
later explain again such line of thinking. 
III. 
Thinking behind the recent policy decisions: decisive additional steps in 
monetary accommodation 
Let me explain the Bank’s monetary policy conduct. 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  last  week,  the  Bank  took 
additional steps to provide monetary accommodation decisively toward overcoming deflation 
as  early  as  possible  and  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth  with  price  stability. 
Specifically,  first,  the  Bank  has  set  the  “price  stability  target”  at  2  percent  in  terms  of  the 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI,  and  second,  aiming  to  achieve  the  target  at  the 
earliest  possible  time,  introduced  the  “open-ended  asset  purchasing  method”  under  the 
Asset Purchase Program. And third, the Bank clarified its posture that it will strengthen policy 
coordination with the Government and work together. 
Introduction of “Price Stability Target” 
To  begin  with,  let  me  talk  about  the  Bank’s  decision  to  set  2  percent  in  terms  of  the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI as the “price stability target.” 
Japan’s economy has been in deflation for a long period. Behind that not only cyclical factors 
but  structural  factors  have  been  at  play.  Amid  substantial  changes  of  the  environment  for 
Japan’s  economy,  such  as  rapid  ageing  and  globalization,  Japan  has  fallen  behind  in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
adapting to those changes, and, as a result, the growth rate has been on a downtrend and 
firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term growth expectations have also declined. Amid 
low growth expectations, firms have sought to survive with cost cutting and price competition. 
In doing so, adjustment has been made mainly in wages and working hours, which exerted 
successive downward pressure on prices in Japan’s economy. To put it another way, if such 
structure can be converted, it becomes possible to overcome deflation. The bottom line is, it 
is  necessary  to  restore  the  flexibility  and  adaptability  of  Japan’s  economy  and  unlock  its 
potential, and thereby raise firms’ and households’ growth expectations. 
In  my  view,  now  is  the  “window  of  opportunity”  toward  overcoming  deflation.  There  is  a 
prospect  that  the  U.S.  and  the  Chinese  economies,  which  have  substantial  effects  on 
Japan’s economy, will return to the recovery path. Against such a backdrop, as I mentioned 
earlier, the possibility of Japan’s economy, which has been stagnant since last year, to return 
to the moderate recovery path toward the middle of the year has been increasing. Also, in 
our  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices,  the  possibility  for  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in the CPI excluding volatile food to reach 1 percent in 2014 has gradually come in 
sight. Under such changes, if the inflation rate actually rises, people’s inflation expectations 
are also likely to increase. We should not miss this “window of opportunity.” 
Based  on  such  line  of  thinking,  the  Bank  has  further  enhanced  its  past  line  of  policy  of 
“setting a goal at 1 percent for the time being” and set 2 percent as the “price stability target.” 
Under the target, the Bank will pursue monetary easing aggressively and aim to achieve the 
target at the earliest possible time. 
With regard to such monetary policy conduct of the Bank, we have sometimes been asked 
whether the Bank has adopted the so-called “inflation targeting.” In that regard, looking at the 
monetary policy conduct of other countries which have actually adopted “inflation targeting,” 
for  example,  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Bank  of  England  conducts  flexible  monetary  policy 
which  takes  into  account  not  only  developments  in  prices  but  also  those  in  other  areas, 
including the real economy and asset prices. The Bank’s decision this time of “price stability 
target” is the same as the one many central banks are currently adopting, and it is generally 
called “flexible inflation targeting.” Within such monetary policy framework the Bank intends 
to  make  as  decisive  policy  responses  as  ever  while  steadily  examining  the  situation  of 
economic activity and prices. 
Introduction of “Open-Ended Asset Purchasing Method” 
Next,  how  to  pursue  aggressive  monetary  easing.  In  particular,  let  me  explain  the  newly 
introduced “open-ended asset purchasing program.” 
The  Bank  will  pursue  aggressive  monetary  easing,  aiming  to  achieve  the  “price  stability 
target,” through a virtually zero interest rate policy and purchases of financial assets, as long 
as  the  Bank  judges  it  appropriate  to  continue  with  each  policy  measure.  Purchases  of 
financial  assets  mean  to  purchase  a  wide  range  of  financial  assets,  including  government 
bonds, corporate bonds, CP, exchange-trade funds (ETFs), and real estate investment trusts 
(REITs), from the market through a program called “Asset Purchase Program.” Through the 
purchases,  the  Bank  aims  at  encouraging  a  decline  in  longer  term  interest  rates  and 
narrowing the risk premiums, thereby facilitating firms’ and households’ funding at a low cost. 
In  actually  purchasing  financial  assets,  the  Bank  used  to  set  the  goal  of  an  outstanding 
purchased amount at a particular point of time in the future, like “about 101 trillion yen by the 
end  of  2013.”  This  time,  the  Bank  has  decided  to  purchase  a  certain  amount  of  financial 
assets  every  month  without  setting  any  termination  date  because  the  Bank  judged  that  it 
could clearly show its intention to continue purchasing financial assets toward achieving the 
newly introduced “price stability target.” Specifically, after completing the current purchasing 
method,  from  January  2014,  the  Bank  will,  for  some  time,  purchase  every  month  about 
13 trillion  yen,  2  trillion  of  which  is  Japanese  government  bonds,  of  financial  assets.  As  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
result, the total size of the Asset Purchase Program will be increased by about 10 trillion yen 
to about 111 trillion yen in 2014 and is expected to be at least maintained thereafter. 
About  the  new  asset  purchasing  method,  we  have  sometime  been  asked  “As  you  have 
introduced  a  new  method,  why  don’t  you  start  purchases  immediately  rather  than  waiting 
until the beginning of next year?” A clear answer would be that the Bank already decided on 
a  massive  fund  provision  of  more  than  50  trillion  yen  this  year.  To  elaborate  on  that,  the 
amount  outstanding  of  the  “Asset  Purchase  Program”  now  stands  at  about  65  trillion  yen 
and,  by  pursuing  the  already  decided  purchases,  it  will  increase  by  about  little  less  than 
40 trillion  yen  by  the  end  of  the  year.  In  addition,  the  Bank  introduced  last  October  a 
framework called “Stimulating Bank Lending Facility,” within which the Bank provides funds 
to financial institutions for the entire amount of a net increase in lending. I will talk about the 
thrust of the facility later. The fund-provisioning under the facility is expected to reach more 
than 15 trillion yen in about a year, based on the recent lending data. Putting those together, 
the Bank will make a new massive fund-provision of more than 50 trillion yen in about a year. 
On top of those purchases and fund-provisioning, from the beginning of next year, the Bank 
will  purchase  about  13  trillion  yen  of  financial  assets  every  month.  As  just  described,  the 
Bank intends to aggressively pursue monetary easing in a continuous manner, and judged 
that, by being committed to continuing such massive fund-provisioning next year onward at 
this  stage,  it  would  like  to  make  the  already  accommodative  financial  conditions  further 
accommodative. 
There  has  also  been  the  opinion  that,  for  the  “decisive  additional  steps  in  monetary 
accommodation,” a net increase in the Program’s total size of about 10 trillion yen might be 
insufficient.  On  that  point,  we  would  like  to  be  assessed  in  relation  to  the  Bank’s  strong 
posture  to  pursue  monetary  easing  in  a  continuous  manner  from  this  year  to  next  year 
onward, as I have just mentioned. Toward achieving the “price stability target” as early as 
possible,  from  the  beginning  of  next  year  onward,  the  Bank  will  purchase  financial  assets 
without setting any termination date. The total size of the Asset Purchase Program will be 
increased by about 10 trillion yen in 2014 and is expected to be at least maintained at that 
high level thereafter. Such commitment by the Bank will be a substantially stepped-up policy 
posture.  Of  course,  with  regard  to  the future management  of the  Program,  it  could  be  the 
case that further accommodation will be pursued, while examining the situation of economic 
activity and prices, if necessary. 
Strengthening policy coordination between the Government and the Bank 
This time, the Government and the Bank decided and released the “Joint Statement of the 
Government  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  on  Overcoming  Deflation  and  Achieving  Sustainable 
Economic Growth.” In the statement, the Bank stated that it set the “price stability target” at 
2 percent and, under the target, would pursue monetary easing to achieve the target at the 
earliest  possible  time.  The  Government  expressed  that  it  would  formulate  measures  for 
strengthening  the  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy,  and  promote 
them  strongly,  as  well  as  steadily  promote  measures  aimed  at  establishing  a  sustainable 
fiscal structure. 
As the possibility of Japan’s economy returning to the recovery path in the not distant future 
and the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding volatile food reaching 1 percent in 
fiscal 2014 has come into sight, the Bank has considered that it would be highly significant to 
seize the “window of opportunity” and that it would be highly significant if the Government 
and the Bank work together and make concerted efforts to overcome deflation and achieve 
sustainable economic growth. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  the  Bank  will  pursue  monetary  easing  aggressively  with  the  aim  of 
achieving the “price stability target.” In doing so, it is important to steadily ensure the market 
credibility  of  fiscal  management.  The  Bank  currently  holds  a  large  amount  of  government 
bonds  and  will  still  pursue  large-scale  government  bond  purchases.  While  Japan’s  fiscal 
conditions are in a severe state, compared with other countries, yields on government bonds 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have been at historic low levels. In our view, such situation suggests that market credibility of 
fiscal management has been ensured. Nevertheless, taking into account the experience of 
Europe and others, we need to be aware that the market’s view could change rapidly. Once 
credibility of fiscal management wavers, the effects of monetary policy may even be eroded 
by a rise in interest rates. In addition, there is a risk that, through adverse effects on business 
performance  of  financial  institutions,  which  hold  government  bonds,  and  eventually  on  the 
financial system, financial and economic stability might be impaired. In the joint statement, 
the  government  referred  to  fiscal  management  and  clearly  stated  that  “in  strengthening 
coordination between the Government and the Bank of Japan, the Government will steadily 
promote  measures  aimed  at  establishing  a  sustainable  fiscal  structure  with  a  view  to 
ensuring the credibility of fiscal management.” That is an important point in the Bank’s pursuit 
of aggressive monetary easing. 
Initiatives to utilizing accommodative financial conditions 
IV. 
In concluding the explanation of monetary policy, let me talk about the relationship between 
monetary  easing  and  firms.  Thanks  to  the  Bank’s  monetary  easing,  at  present,  banks’ 
lending rates have declined to a historic low level of around 1 percent both for a short-term 
and a long-term. Financial institutions have been maintaining their active lending stance and 
firms and households can quite easily borrow money from financial institutions. 
If  firms  and  households  make  better  use  of  such  accommodative  financial  conditions,  the 
Bank’s  monetary  policy  effects  will  become  larger  and  overcoming  deflation  as  well  as 
sustainable growth with price stability will be achieved earlier and more surely. 
For firms and households to thoroughly utilize accommodative financial conditions, what kind 
of situation does it refers to? Presumably, it is to create a situation in which, for firms, they 
can foresee profits by borrowing funds and investing the funds, and for households, they can 
take out housing loans without concern about future income conditions. 
I  might  have  to  repeat  this  several  times,  but,  at  present,  as  positive  developments  have 
been  generated,  including  developments  in  economic  activity  at  home  and  abroad,  the 
Government’s  policy  measures,  and  ensuing  developments  in  foreign  exchange  and  stock 
markets, which offers a “window of opportunity” to build up economic entities’ momentum to 
utilize the current situation. Financial conditions are quite accommodative and the Bank will 
continue  to  promote  monetary  easing  aggressively.  We  are  looking  forward  to  positive 
actions by firms. 
For financial institutions that have contact with firms, while thoroughly knowing that they have 
been aggressively making efforts, we would like to ask the institutions to further make efforts 
to encourage firms’ positive actions and to tap new fund demand. In that regard, the Bank 
itself will provide support as a central bank as much as possible. At present, with a view to 
being  a  catalyst  for  firms  and  financial  institutions  to  promote  efforts  toward  strengthening 
growth  potential,  the  Bank  has  a  framework  of  “the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support 
strengthening the foundations for economic growth.” It is the framework in which the Bank 
provides low interest rate and long-term funds to financial institutions providing loans to or 
investing in wide-ranging areas that contribute to the growth of Japan’s economy, such as 
medical and nursing care, environment and energy, agriculture, forestry and fisheries, and 
tourism. The Bank has prepared 5.5 trillion in a total amount of the framework and already 
about 4 trillion yen has been used. In addition, as I briefly mentioned earlier, last October, 
with  the  view  to  promoting  financial  institutions’  aggressive  action  and  helping  increase 
proactive credit demand of firms and households, the Bank introduced a new framework of 
“Stimulating Bank Lending Facility.” Under the facility, in 15 months through end-March 2014, 
if  financial  institutions  increase  net  lending,  the  Bank  will  provide  an  unlimited  amount  of 
long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  for  the  net  increase.  In  thoroughly  utilizing  the 
accommodative  financial  conditions,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  use  its  ingenuity,  seeing 
whether there is anything that can be done further as a central bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Concluding remarks 
As time is running out, let me conclude my speech by touching on the economy of Nagasaki 
Prefecture. 
Nagasaki Prefecture, as a region that has been open to the world since ancient times, has 
played a major role in formulating Japan’s culture and modernization as well as nurturing a 
unique regional culture. It is blessed with nature like beautiful coast lines as well as ample 
tourism resources such as hot springs and agricultural and marine products, receiving many 
tourists  from  home  and  abroad.  As  a  move  to  further  enhance  the  attractiveness  of 
Nagasaki, last August, the construction of the railway between Isahaya Station and Nagasaki 
Station  of  the  Nagasaki  route  of  the  Kyushu  Shinkansen  line  began  with  an  aim  of 
completion in 2022. I have heard good news that, last October, Nagasaki City was chosen as 
one of the world’s top three nightscapes along with Monaco and Hong Kong at “Nightscape 
Summit 2012 in Nagasaki.” 
Meanwhile, the population, particularly in remote islands, has been declining, and, above all, 
the prefecture is faced with a great challenge of the continuing exodus of young people to 
other prefectures. Needless to say, that is the epitome of a challenge Japan as a whole is 
faced with. In response, the prefectural administration has been making aggressive efforts to 
utilize a location advantage, including a diversity of remote islands and a friendly relationship 
with overseas, as well as to incorporate the vitality of Asian countries like South Korea and 
China. In promoting such projects, I have heard that “Nagasaki Summit,” which is a venue for 
industry-academia-government collaboration, has also been playing a critical role. 
Turning  to  the  financial  front,  local  financial  institutions,  through  collaborating  with  the 
administration  and  universities,  have  been  supporting  the  establishment  and  nurturing  of 
local  firms’  new  business  and  business  revitalization  of  troubled  firms.  Several  of  these 
institutions  have  been  participating  in  the  Bank’s  “fund-provisioning  measure  to  support 
strengthening the foundations for economic growth.” As “Stimulating Bank Lending Facility” 
will start, I strongly hope that local institutions could make the most of the facility. 
As I have just mentioned, in Nagasaki Prefecture, the fruits of the efforts toward incorporating 
external demand and tapping domestic demand have been steadily accumulated, and that 
will not only be the foundations for Nagasaki Prefecture’s future development, but also be a 
precious asset for Japan as a whole and, further, for Asian countries which are bound to be 
faced with similar challenges in the not-so-distant future. 
The  Bank  expects  your  various  efforts  and  will  continue  to  provide  support  as  much  as 
possible as a central bank. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
