K C Chakrabarty: Transitioning from student to professional lives – some 
reflections 
Convocation address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the V.V. Vanniaperumal College for Women, Virudhunagar, 24 March 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Suddhasattwa Ghosh in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Dr.  M.  Narendra,  CMD,  Indian  Overseas  Bank;  Dr.  (Smt.)  P.  Selvameenakshi, 
Principal, V.V. Vanniaperumal College for Women; Shri S.M.S. Manickavasagam, Secretary 
and  Smt.  M.M.N  Jikki  Mathavan,  Joint  Secretary,  V.V.  Vanniaperumal  College  for Women 
Managing Board; distinguished members of the audience and dear students! It is, indeed, a 
great honour and pleasure to be here in your midst today to deliver the Convocation Address 
at this college of eminent credentials. I am proud of the fact that I have been handed this 
opportunity to deliver this convocation address at a college, which was inaugurated by one of 
the leading freedom fighters and statesmen of our times – Bharat Ratna Hon. K. Kamaraj, 
someone whom I deeply admire. The academic excellence achieved by your college over the 
past five decades is a glowing tribute to the vision of the man who introduced free mid-day 
meal scheme in schools and free education up to 11th standard for poor children during the 
1950s. 
2. 
To  be  amongst  bright  young  students  is  always  a  refreshing  and  feel-good 
experience and whenever such an opportunity comes up, I quite look forward to it. Let me 
begin by congratulating all the students of the College who have successfully graduated in 
their  respective  academic  disciplines  and  are  receiving  their  degrees  today.  Convocations 
are  special  as  they  simultaneously  signify  both  –  a  conclusion  as  also  a  commencement. 
They logically conclude a formal learning exercise and hence, provide an occasion for relief, 
fulfilment  and  joy  for  the  graduating  students  as  well  as  the  faculty  members.  They  are, 
however,  even  more  special,  because  they  commence  a  lifelong  informal  learning  as 
graduates  step  out  into  the  University  of  the  World  –  step  out  with  dreams,  hopes  and 
expectations into the terra incognita of life. In our days, when we passed out, it was not a 
dream but a nightmare, because of the difficulty in getting employment. Though over time, 
considerable employment opportunities have come up across various sectors, especially the 
services  sector,  finding  a  fulfilling  job  remains  as  big  a  challenge  as  ever.  However,  I  am 
confident that this venerable institution has prepared you to face and surmount all challenges 
that  life  throws  at  you.  I  am  privileged  to  share  this  special  day  with  a  bright  set  of 
youngsters,  who,  I  hope,  would  turn  out  to  be  the  highly  successful  financial  and  social 
entrepreneurs of the future. 
This  Convocation  ceremony  marks  a  major  milestone  in  your  career.  It  not  only 
3. 
indicates  the  culmination  of  the  hard  work  you have  put  in  over the  years,  but  also marks 
your  transition  from  students  to  professionals.  I  know  only  too  well  the  time,  effort  and 
dedication that are needed to acquire such important academic qualifications. I would also 
like to take this opportunity to congratulate members of your families who are present here 
on  this  very  important  day  in  your  lives.  I  am  sure  they  have  contributed  greatly  to  your 
success and fully share your moment of glory. You should always remember that, but for the 
support and love of your parents and families and the dedication and commitment of your 
faculty members here, it would not have been possible for you to reach this milestone in your 
lives. 
4. 
In a country like ours, education is not only the key to a brighter future; it is, often, 
also a key to survival. Using education as a primary strategy, our visionaries and pioneers 
have aimed to harness, particularly the potential of girls and women, to learn, lead and act on 
their vision of change for themselves, their families, their communities and the nation. Pandit 
Nehru famously remarked, “You can tell the condition of a nation by looking at the status of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
its 
the  college, 
its women”. The Beijing Declaration at the Fourth World Conference on Women (1995) noted 
that,  “Women’s  empowerment  and  their  full  participation  on  the  basis  of  equality  in  all 
spheres  of  society,  including  participation  in  the  decision-making  process  and  access  to 
power, are fundamental for the achievement of equality, development and peace”. In India, 
there has been a perceptible increase in literacy rate amongst women from 53.67 per cent 
(Census 2001) to 65.46 per cent (Census 2011). However, there is still a large gender gap in 
literacy at 16.68 per cent which needs to be bridged. In this context, it is extremely gratifying 
to note that your College has been doing a remarkable work in empowering women of this 
region  by  providing  them  access to quality  higher  education  ever  since  its  inception  about 
half  a  century  ago.  I  am  glad  to  learn  that  this  institution  has  received  the  Best Women’s 
College Award consecutively for the last seven years. However, let me hasten to remind that 
such  accolades  place  even  greater  responsibility  upon 
teachers, 
administrators  and  students  to  work  harder  and  keep  up  the  good  name  of  this  august 
institution. 
5. 
For  years,  women  in  India  have  almost  silently  supported  the  stability  of  our 
society’s cultural institutions and the continuities and consistencies of their ethos. However, 
today, the contours of the world we live in are changing dramatically. The space for growing 
up and living has new co-ordinates. Educated, armed with knowledge and skills, women are 
entering  in  a  big  way  the  world  of  occupation,  career,  profession,  competition  and 
achievements  in  their  own  right  and  are  creating  a  space  where  the  emphasis  is  on 
expressing themselves and being accepted as independent, autonomous beings. 
6.  Our  women  are  now  more  confident  about  their  ability  to  discover  and  identify  their 
personal  capabilities  as  also  to  discover  a  vision  of  life  beyond  that  defined  by  social 
structures and the network of relationships. Today, they encounter the possibility of creating 
a world beyond their visible horizons and boundaries. 
7. 
Empowerment of women, gender discrimination and violence against women have 
become subjects of serious public discourse as also sociological research in India in recent 
times. Several attempts have been made through the years to study the status of women in 
India  and  these  studies  have  clearly  brought  out  that  the  participation  rates  of  women  in 
economic  activities  are  very  low.  The  Draft  12th  Five  Year  Plan  document  released  in 
December 2012 has noted that there has been a consistent decline in workforce participation 
rate  (WPR)  of  women  since  1980s  but  the  decline  seems  to  have  accelerated  between 
2004–05 and 2009–10. The decline in female labour force participation has occurred in both 
rural and urban areas, though the decline is much sharper in rural compared to urban areas. 
8. 
The Human Development Report, 2013 presents the Gender Inequality Index, which 
is a parameterized indicator of the inequality in status and opportunities for the women in the 
population. Its assessment is based on three parameters viz. Labour Market, Empowerment 
and Reproductive Health. It is disappointing to note that on the status of gender inequality, 
the  report  places  India  at  a  lowly  132,  which  is  a  fall  of  three  positions  from  the  previous 
report.  Our  ranking  on  gender  inequality  is  in  stark  contrast  to  our  claims  to  being  a 
progressive  society  and  a  developing  nation.  It brings  into  sharp focus the  urgent  need to 
implement  effective  measures  for  quickly  reversing  this  position.  Each  one  of  us,  cutting 
across  professions  and  positions  in  life,  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  making  this 
transformation. 
9. 
Prior to independence, the gender divide within  our labour force was an accepted 
norm. Especially since the 1970s, scholars and activists have challenged the inequalities that 
had been established and have fought to reverse them. These inequalities included unequal 
wages for women, relegation of women to unskilled spheres of work, and restricting women 
as  a  reserve  army  for  labour.  These  scholars  and  activists  have  also  sought  to  focus  on 
class-consciousness in this discourse, recognizing the inequalities not just between men and 
women  but  also  within  social  structures  such  as  caste,  tribe,  language,  religion,  region  or 
class. In recent years, the focus of such deliberations has gone beyond treating women as 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that 
lives  and 
I  am  glad 
is  playing  a 
their  personal 
the  right  of  self-determination. 
useful members of society and now also focuses on empowering them to decide the course 
of 
the 
V.V. Vanniaperumal  College 
transformational  role  by  churning  out  a 
knowledgeable  and  empowered  lot  of  women  year  after  year,  who  can  claim  their  rightful 
place under the sun. 
10. 
Lack  of  education  and  empowerment  of  women  is  also  reflected  in  the  extent  of 
disparity  between  the  proportion  of  financially  excluded  men  and  women.  That  women  in 
India  are  much  more financially  excluded  than  the  men  is  evident  from  the fact  that  as  of 
March 2011, only 21 per cent of total bank deposit accounts were held by women and these 
accounted for just about 12 per cent of the total volume of deposits. Similarly, women availed 
only  18  per  cent  of  the  total  small  credit  from  banks  in  2011.  Therefore,  initiatives  to 
empower women should, necessarily, include strategies to link them to the formal financial 
system by providing them access to deposit and credit accounts. 
11. 
However,  considering  the  centrality  of  banks  to  the  nation’s  economic  order,  their 
role  in  women  empowerment  cannot  be  restricted  merely  to  linking  them  to  the  formal 
financial  system.  The  banking  and  finance  sector  in  India  has  emerged  as  a  significant 
employer  of  women,  though  related  data  suggests  that  there  is  still  tremendous  scope  for 
improving  their  presence  in  this  sector.  The  financial  sector,  in  specific,  requires  its 
employees to possess traits of passion, conviction and compassion that the women display 
in abundance. The sense of empathy and understanding that the women possess enables 
them  to  earn  respect  and  acceptability  of  their  co-workers.  Expert  studies  highlight  that 
women are more adapt in dealing with concerns of employees, shareholders and customers. 
They are not only good at collating and combining information, their better intuitive abilities 
also helps them to make informed decisions. As leaders, the women bring in an environment 
of strength, confidence, inclusiveness and trust. It is no wonder then that women have risen 
remarkably to the top in the banking sector in both – the public and private sector in India. I 
urge  this  bunch  of  young  women  graduates  today  to  choose  finance  and  banking  as  their 
career  option  where  they  can  really  excel  and  serve  the  customers  and  society  with 
distinction. 
12. 
As you must be aware, the Hon’ble Union Finance Minister Shri P. Chidambaram 
has proposed in this year’s Union Budget that an all-women public sector bank will soon be 
set up, which will predominantly employ and lend to women. This is, indeed, a very welcome 
step and will also, in a sense; help take forward the Reserve Bank’s financial inclusion and 
financial literacy efforts, which also strongly focus on women’s awareness about and access 
to financial services. 
13. 
The world of banking has, in fact, been a mirror of history at large. “Money makes 
the  world  go  around”,  the  saying  goes.  Banking  activities  resemble  a  wheel  turning 
continually. Banking in India too has gone through many phases. While historians can slice 
the past into countless slivers, in terms of transformational change, there have been only a 
few inflexion points in post-independence banking in India. 
14. 
The first was the enactment of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 which brought in a 
comprehensive  and  formal  structure  of  bank  regulation  and  supervision  in  India.  The 
nationalization of banks in our country in 1969 marked the second such point. It generated 
forces that took banking beyond the elite class to the masses. It led to the establishment of a 
very substantial infrastructure across the geographical expanse of the country and was, thus, 
a critical trigger for financial outreach of institutions and empowerment of the common man. 
The  third  inflexion  point  in  banking  was  the  financial  sector  reforms  initiative  that  was 
launched in the early 1990s. 
15. 
These  reform  measures  were  initiated  and  sequenced  to  create  an  enabling 
environment  for  banks  to  overcome  the  external  constraints  –  these  were  related  to 
administered  structure  of  interest  rates,  high  levels  of  pre-emption  in  the  form  of  reserve 
requirements, and credit allocation to certain sectors. One of the major objectives of banking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
sector reforms has been to enhance efficiency and productivity through competition. As you 
know, the Reserve Bank is currently considering issuing licenses for establishment of new 
banks in the private sector. 
16. 
This  changed  environment  and  the  internal  compulsions  arising  from  greater 
competition  and  the  need  to  improve  market  shares  and/or  profitability  is  resulting  in  the 
banks’ quest for greater efficiency and an effort to reposition themselves, given the realities 
of the environment and their internal strengths and weaknesses. This also generates more 
possibilities and greater opportunities for young graduates and post-graduates like you. The 
Reserve  Bank  too  now  recruits  a  certain  number  of  people  every  year.  It  is  a  wonderful 
opportunity that aspirants like you can look forward to, and prepare for, every year. 
17. 
We  live  in  an  age  of  unprecedented  opportunities.  But,  with  opportunity  comes 
responsibility. It is for tomorrow’s managers to carve out their own place, to know when to 
change  course  and  how  to  keep  themselves  engaged  and  productive  throughout.  To  do 
things well, one needs to cultivate a deep understanding of oneself – not only the strengths 
and weaknesses but also how one learns, how one works with others, what his or her values 
are  and  where  he  or  she  can  make  the  greatest  contribution.  Because  only  when  one 
operates from strength, can true excellence be achieved! It is, therefore, for all of you to keep 
on learning, understanding yourself and your environment, so that you always stay ahead of 
the curve as far as success in various life roles is concerned. 
18. 
The  emerging  challenges  in  the  banking  and  finance  sector  call  for  a  new,  more 
dynamic,  aggressive  and  challenging  work  culture  to  meet  the  demands  of  customer 
relationships,  product  differentiation,  brand  values,  reputation,  corporate  governance  and 
regulatory prescriptions. Understanding and dealing with difficult transitions would be the key 
for  youngsters  like  you  while  designing  strategies  for  the  organizations  that  you  will  be 
eventually  joining.  While  leadership  skills,  the  ability  to  multi-task  and  manage  competing 
imperatives  will  be  the  necessary  ingredients  of  the  new  generation  managers,  the  old-
fashioned  qualities  of  desire  to  learn,  a  strong  sense  of  professional  ethics,  an  enquiring 
mind,  a  strategic  view,  the  qualities  of  humility  and  empathy,  a  willingness  to  embrace 
practical experience, and an eagerness to adapt to new experiences would continue to be 
critical. I am personally convinced that the women folk enjoy a head start when it comes to 
being able to multi task and manage competing imperatives. 
19. 
Dr. Charles Eliot, the eminent educator at the Harvard University, was often asked, 
“How had Harvard gained its reputation as the greatest storehouse of knowledge?” His reply 
used to be “it is because the freshmen bring in so much of it and the seniors take away so 
little of it”. The witty professor had, of course, said it in a lighter vein. I am sure all of you 
have made the most of what your College offered you and are taking away a rich treasure-
trove of learnings from here. The inputs that you have gleaned as part of your studies here 
would surely give you the foresight to see things before the curve, much before others do. 
20. 
Before I conclude, there are three basic messages that I always like to convey when 
I  get  to  interact  with  students.  All  of  you  have  completed  your  student  life  and  would  be 
entering into professional lives shortly. With the academic credentials that you have attained 
at  this  institution,  I  am  sure  all  of  you  will  be  able  to  build  up  successful  careers.  My  first 
message to all of you is to never be complacent in life, because complacency is a short cut 
to  failure.  Plan  wisely  during  your  good  times  so  that  you  have  enough  resources  to  live 
through the bad times. My second message is that though bad times are inevitable, they are 
definitely not permanent. So, don’t be discouraged and disheartened. Stay positive and keep 
on working hard and the good times will return. My third message for success in life and in 
your  professional  careers  is  to  be  information  literate.  Retain  the  curiosity  to  seek  and 
assimilate knowledge and to use this knowledge for taking decisions in an unbiased manner. 
This  will  help  in  ensuring that the  decisions  you  take  are  in  your  best  interests  and  in  the 
interest of the organizations you work for. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
21. 
We live in exciting times and as you stand on the threshold of a new life – I trust you 
will  continue  to  cherish  the  ideals  and  dreams  of  youth,  after  all,  they  are  what  make  life 
worthwhile. While you must rejoice and celebrate your achievements, you must also realize 
the enormity of responsibility that would now be cast upon you. The knowledge and skills that 
you have acquired here and the values you have imbibed, must be utilized in not only carving 
a niche for yourself in the professional field that you choose but also in making a difference 
within your homes, your society and the country. You must work with a commitment towards 
upholding the values that your teachers and your Alma Mater has imbued within you. This 
would, perhaps, be the perfect “gurudakshina” to your teachers and to the institution. 
22. 
Thank you. 
I wish all of you every success in all your future endeavours. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
