Andreas Dombret: Systemic risks of shadow banking 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Salzburg  Global  Seminar  “Out  of  the  shadows:  should  non-banking 
financial institutions be regulated?”, Salzburg, 20 August 2013. 
 When talking about shadow banking we should be clear what we mean. I subscribe to the 
FSB’s definition of “credit intermediation involving entities and activities outside the regular 
banking system”. What I deem to be relevant from my financial stability perspective is that 
such entities create bank-like risk without being subject to banking regulation. Obviously, the 
non-banking financial sector is composed of a very heterogeneous set of agents. Some of 
them  –  such  as  insurance  corporations  and  pension  funds  –  usually  have  very  long-term 
investment  horizons  and  can  therefore  potentially  serve  as  a  stabilising  element  for  the 
financial system. To be clear on this point: I firmly believe that insurance corporations can be 
systemically  important  institutions,  too.  Thus,  effective  resolution  regimes  for  Global 
Systemically Important Insurance corporations need to be developed and implemented. 
The  overall  effects  of  the  so-called  shadow  banking  system  and  its  activities  on  financial 
stability  are  ambiguous.  Theoretically,  non-banking  financial  institutions  that  perform  bank-
like  activities  are  associated  with  diversification  and  specialization  benefits.  Therefore,  it 
could  be  assumed  that  they  contribute  to  efficiency  gains  and  greater  financial  system 
resilience. However, empirical evidence from the financial crisis suggests that the activities of 
shadow  banking  entities  might  often  be  driven  by  the  motive  of  exploiting  regulatory 
arbitrage.  Altogether,  the  economically  beneficial  attributes  and  systemically  stabilising 
effects of entities and activities of the shadow banking system are not always that obvious. In 
particular, developments prior to the financial crisis revealed that the activities and entities of 
the shadow banking system can also pose a threat to the stability of the financial system as a 
whole. 
The risks inherent in the shadow banking system pertain to both dimensions of systemic risk: 
the cross-sectional (interconnectedness) dimension as well as the time-serial (procyclicality) 
dimension.  I  see  these  potential  threats  as  being  caused  mostly  by  maturity  and  liquidity 
transformation,  the  build-up  of  leverage  and  credit  risk  transfer  conducted  by  the  shadow 
banking system. All of those activities are not evil per se, but the ensuing systemic risks need 
to  be  contained.  All  activities  must  be made transparent,  in  particular  vis-à-vis  supervisory 
authorities,  and  they  must  be  adequately  regulated.  In  that  regard,  I  welcome  the  global 
regulatory initiative on shadow banking – under the leadership of the FSB – and I am closely 
following initiatives at the regional and national level.  
I want to comment on three specific aspects of the systemic risk posed by shadow banking: 
first, the risk of runs on money market funds (MMFs); second, the potential procyclicality of 
securities financing transactions; and third, the linkages between banks and shadow banking 
entities.  
Regarding  money  market  funds’  liquidity  risk:  due  to  their  perceived  deposit-likeliness, 
constant net asset value MMFs face a relatively high risk of investor “runs” in times of crisis. 
Thus,  the  mandatory  move  to  variable  net  asset  value  MMFs  might  be  the  single  most 
important regulatory action to make the MMF segment more stable. I expect the European 
Commission  to  implement  that  move  in  Europe  soon  –  in  line  with  the  ESRB’s 
recommendation of December 2012. It was with keen interest that I also observed the recent 
proposal by the US Securities and Exchange Commission to adopt similar measures. 
Regarding securities financing transactions: In an environment of ample liquidity, securities 
financing  transactions  can  obviously  contribute  to  a  procyclical  build-up  of  leverage  in  the 
financial  system.  Going  one  step  further  in  a  typical  chain  of  transactions,  the  practice  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
collateral  re-hypothecation  intensifies  interconnections  in  the  financial  system,  while  at  the 
same  time  lacking  the  necessary  transparency  for  clients  and  supervisors.  Therefore,  I 
support the recommendations envisaged at global level to increase regulatory reporting and 
public  disclosure  requirements  for  financial  institutions’  securities  financing  activities.  With 
the results of thoroughly conducted impact assessments at hand, the imposition of somewhat 
tougher regulatory measures, such as minimum standards for calculating collateral haircuts, 
can be considered. 
The  last  issue  I  want  to  cover  are  the  interconnections  between  banks  and  entities  of  the 
shadow  banking  system.  With  the  global  implementation  of  Basel  III  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements for the banking sector, there are increasing incentives to shift risky activities to 
shadow  banking  entities,  where  regulation  is  less  stringent.  However,  such  regulatory 
arbitrage poses risks to the stability of the entire financial system. To effectively regulate the 
direct  ownership  links  between  banks  and  shadow  banking  institutions,  the  scope  of 
regulatory consolidation needs to be internationally harmonised. Also, minority participations 
of  banks,  such  as  investments  in  the  equity  of  funds  belonging  to  the  shadow  banking 
system,  require  an  internationally  consistent,  risk-sensitive  application  of  Basel  capital 
standards. 
And,  last  but  not  least,  large  exposures  of  banks  vis-à-vis  counterparties  of  the  shadow 
banking system need to be adequately measured and controlled by looking through complex 
investment  structures.  Finally,  the  effectiveness  of  regulatory  requirements  with  regard  to 
shadow  banking  must  be  constantly  assessed  and  their  implementation  should  be  peer 
reviewed at the global level. As outlined, addressing the liquidity risk of money market funds, 
procyclical  credit  expansion  via  securitised  financing,  and  interconnections  between  banks 
and shadow banks are key regulatory reforms. Adequately regulated, it should be possible to 
effectively  mitigate  systemic  risks  posed  by  such  non-banking  financial  institutions  and 
enable them to affect financial stability more positively. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
