Benoît Cœuré: The usefulness of forward guidance 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
before the Money Marketeers Club of New York, New York, 26 September 2013. 
The slides referred to in the speech are available on the ECB website. 
 I wish to thank Federic Holm-Hadulla and Arthur Saint-Guilhem for their contributions to these remarks. I remain 
solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure to speak to you tonight.  
I will use this opportunity to elaborate on the latest tool that central banks have adopted to 
deal with the macroeconomic consequences of the global financial crisis. This tool is forward 
guidance. 
What does forward guidance mean in a monetary policy context? 
Well, if you allow a brief definition, forward guidance can be described as explicit statements 
by a central bank about the likely path of future policy rates. These statements are typically 
conditioned  –  more  or  less  explicitly  –  on  the  evolution  of  certain  key  macroeconomic 
aggregates.  
Up until 1970s that central bank communication was based on secrecy and market surprise1. 
But  central  banks  moved  away  from  surprising  markets  and,  instead,  moved  to  open  and 
transparent monetary policy making. Guidance on the future course of monetary policy was 
even common practice in some central banks before the crisis. For example, since 1997, the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand has included in its communication practice the release of the 
numerical projection of the future path of the policy rate. 
However,  forward  guidance  as 
this  crisis  has  been  an 
unprecedented step for many central banks; both in terms of scope as well as clarity. I will 
argue  that  this  recent  initiative  of  central  bank  communication  is  a  useful  addition  to  the 
central bank toolkit. At a time of unprecedented challenges, it ensures that central banks do 
not only act with a steady hand but also speak with a steady voice. 
To  set  the  stage,  I  will  first  give  you  my  take  on  the  design  considerations  surrounding 
forward  guidance,  including  its  rationale;  the  pros  and  cons  of  different  types  of  forward 
guidance; and ways for measuring the effectiveness of forward guidance. 
Then, I will zoom in on the euro area and discuss the ECB’s forward guidance along these 
dimensions. 
introduced  during 
it  was 
Forward guidance: design considerations 
So what’s the purpose of forward guidance? 
Forward  guidance  aims  to  ensure  that  market  expectations  on  future  monetary  policy  are 
indeed  consistent  with  the  policy  intentions  of  the  respective  central  bank.  Of  course,  a 
central bank’s communication should always provide reliable signals to markets that make 
their  way  through  the  yield  curve  to  affect  the  financing  conditions  in  the  economy. 
Otherwise, monetary policy may, in itself, become a source of volatility, thus complicating the 
economic decisions of private actors – the exact opposite of what it should achieve. 
                                                
1  See Brunner (1981) and Goodfriend (1986). For an empirical evaluation see Cook and Hahn (1989). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But the premium on clear communication is particularly large in extraordinary situations, for 
example when policy rates are at, or close to, their effective lower bound, or when the normal 
channels  of  monetary  policy  transmission  are  impaired,  or  when  there  is  exceptional 
uncertainty on the state of the economy. Such situations occur only seldom. This makes it 
difficult  for  private  agents  to  infer  the  future  monetary  policy  path  from  past  regularities. 
Hence,  there  is  a  clear  added  value  in  such  a  situation  to  making  central  bank 
communication more explicit. 
This  explains  why  many  central  banks  that  had  previously  not  used  forward  guidance 
adopted this tool in recent times.  
How does forward guidance work? 
Well, first of all, most central banks have linked forward guidance to their main policy interest 
rates.  
In implementing their monetary policy, central banks calibrate their main policy tools so as to 
establish a certain level of short term interest rates in the market. At the same time, expected 
future short term interest rates are a key ingredient for the determination of long term interest 
rates. Long term interest rates in turn are essential for saving, consumption and investment 
decisions, and ultimately for the development of prices and inflation in the economy.  
Indeed,  some  recent  papers  on  central  bank  communication  provide  clear  evidence  that 
central  banks’  communication  on  their  policy  decisions  and  their  assessment  of  the 
macroeconomic environment can have an important effect on long term interest rates.2 
Through forward guidance – that is by providing more systematic guidance on the expected 
path  of  future  policy  rates  –  central  banks  can  exert  a  stronger  influence  on  market 
expectations of future short term interest rates. In fact, the central bank will have more direct 
leverage on broader financing conditions along a broader maturity spectrum. Some central 
banks have also attempted to influence the term structure at longer maturities more directly, 
for  example  by  giving  regular  indications  to  markets  on  the  future  pace,  composition  and 
timing of their asset purchase programmes.  
In  any  case,  forward  guidance  is  a  means  to  establish  consistency  between  the  current 
policy measures and the long-term policy orientation. But for this to work, the content of the 
forward guidance has to reflect the central bank’s mandate. Only then will the central bank’s 
announcements be perceived as credible.  
Let  me  explain  this  in  more  detail.  From  a  conceptual  perspective  two  types  of  forward 
guidance can be distinguished depending on the objective pursued3.  
First,  forward  guidance  can  aim  at  merely  providing  greater  transparency  about  policy 
intentions. This can entail two elements. The first element is to provide greater clarity about 
the central bank’s assessment of the economic outlook that is relevant for the assessment of 
medium  term  risks  to  price  stability  and  further  policy  goals  it  may  pursue.  The  second 
element is to provide more clarity on how the central bank will react to such outlook.  
In certain cases, the market’s assessment of the economic outlook may clearly deviate from 
the central bank’s assessment. Moreover, even with a shared assessment of the outlook, the 
market  may  expect  a  systematically  different  policy  response  than  pursued  by  the  central 
bank. 
In these cases, forward guidance can help the central bank in clarifying its assessment of 
future economic conditions and its reaction function.  
                                                
2  See Brand et al. (2010), Gürkaynak et al. (2005), Kuttner and Posen (1999), Bibinger et al. (2013). 
3  See Praet (2013) for a detailed exposition of this distinction. See also Campbell et al. (2012) for the taxonomy 
of “Odyssean” vs. “Delphic” forward guidance underlying this distinction. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This  can  be  especially  valuable  at  times  when  upward  volatility  in  financial  markets  risks 
creating  risk  premia  along  the  yield  curve,  thereby  inducing  a  premature  withdrawal  of 
monetary accommodation. 
Second, forward guidance can serve to communicate to market participants that the central 
bank’s policy intentions have changed.  
Most notably, the central bank may try to convince markets that it would keep interest rates 
low, even if this would imply inflation well above its previous objective, at least temporarily. 
The promise of higher future inflation, if credible, induces private agents to substitute future 
for  current  consumption,  hence  providing  additional  stimulus  today.  This  type  of  forward 
guidance  is  closer  to  the  academic  concept  of  forward  guidance  in  the  strict  sense  –  as 
discussed, for example, in Woodford (2012). 
The main challenge of such guidance is its inherent inconsistency over time and thus lack of 
credibility. When the time comes, the central bank may be tempted to deviate from its prior 
commitment:  once  the  benefits  of  higher  inflation  expectations  in  terms  of  front-loaded 
spending have been reaped, the central bank may not be willing to pay the bill in terms of 
higher inflation afterwards. If the public foresees this temptation, expectations might remain 
unaffected in the first instance and the desired inter-temporal substitution of spending might 
not materialise. 
This  is  a  possible  explanation  why,  in  practice,  central  banks  have  refrained  from  using 
forward guidance in a way that implies a major change in strategy. Therefore, central banks’ 
forward guidance has rather aimed at providing greater clarity on the reaction function and 
the assessment of future economic conditions.  
But forward  guidance  also  faces  challenges  if  it  merely  serves  to  clarify  economic  outlook 
and reaction function.  
In particular, the adoption of forward guidance may be interpreted as a sign that the central 
bank is indirectly disclosing negative information about risks to the economic outlook. In this 
case private agents may infer from the forward guidance statement that the recovery may be 
slower or deflationary pressures stronger than widely anticipated. As a consequence, forward 
guidance  could  have  a  contractionary,  rather  than  an  expansionary,  effect  on  economic 
sentiment.  
Hence, in order to be effective, the announcement must emphasise the path of future policy 
rates, albeit conditional on the underlying state of the economy. 
The ECB’s forward guidance 
These considerations have been integral to the design of the ECB’s forward guidance. Let 
me explain why. 
In its July meeting, the Governing Council announced that it expected the key ECB interest 
rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time. This expectation 
has been based on the overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, 
given the broad-based weakness in the real economy and subdued monetary dynamics. 
The  decision  to  adopt  forward  guidance  was  motivated  by  the  sustained  upward  and 
steepening trend displayed by the structure of money market interest rates in the preceding 
months (see Slide 2). This trend had led to a situation in which part of the accommodation 
introduced through earlier policy action was being withdrawn.  
Moreover, the increased volatility in money market rates made expectations of the effective 
stance vulnerable to shocks that were disconnected from underlying economic conditions. 
Thus, precise communication about our monetary policy orientation was necessary to protect 
the still nascent economic recovery and the healing of euro area capital markets from overly 
tight and volatile monetary conditions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Against this background, the ECB’s forward guidance follows two concrete objectives: first, to 
curb  interest  rate  volatility  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon;  and  second,  to  anchor  rate 
expectations more firmly around a path that ensures the degree of monetary accommodation 
warranted by the outlook for price stability. 
The  ECB’s  objective  is  not  to  suppress  money  market  volatility.  In  this  crisis,  abundant 
central bank liquidity has compressed prices in many financial market segments. The ability 
of markets to price two-way risk will be a factor of resilience along the normalisation path. 
Our objective is therefore not to steer money market rates towards a predefined value but to 
ensure  that  their  fluctuations  remain  within  reasonable  bounds  and  do  not  hurt  economic 
recovery. 
When interpreting the Governing Council’s forward guidance, three elements are particularly 
relevant.  
First, it has been provided before exhausting the scope for further reductions in the key ECB 
interest  rates.  In  fact,  the  forward  guidance  formulation,  as  decided  unanimously  by  the 
Governing  Council,  explicitly  incorporates  an  easing  bias,  thereby  accounting  for  the 
possibility of further cuts in policy rates. 
Second, and most importantly, forward guidance is firmly anchored on the ECB’s mandate 
and monetary policy strategy. In particular, the path of the policy rates remains conditional on 
the  outlook  for  inflation  and  will  be  reviewed  over  time  within  the  analytical  framework 
provided by the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.  
This analytical framework assesses both economic and monetary developments relevant for 
inflation.  In  particular,  the  conditionality  of  the  forward  guidance  reflects  the  two-pillar 
strategy.  That  is:  the  medium-term  outlook  for  inflation  is  evaluated  in  terms  of  economic 
analysis indicators confirming a broad-based weakness of real economy; and it is evaluated 
on the basis of monetary analysis indicators confirming subdued monetary dynamics.  
Third, forward guidance helps us to focus on our mandate, as it de-emphasises the policy 
relevance of any single data release and concentrates on the medium term. In other words, 
through our forward guidance we communicate one – and only one – expectation on how our 
key  interest rates  will  evolve.  It  is  this  –  and  only  this  –  communication  that  is  relevant  to 
assess  our  policy  orientation.  Unless  this  communication  changes,  the  policy  orientation 
remains unchanged. 
Has forward guidance achieved its objectives? It is probably too early to answer. But allow 
me a preliminary assessment. Looking at money market conditions, a number of indicators 
give us comfort that, in the absence of forward guidance, money market rates would have 
displayed more upward volatility than was observed.  
First, the influence of shocks coming from outside the euro area has been dampened (see 
Slide 3). Before 3rd July when our forward guidance was announced, econometric evidence 
from high frequency money market data could not exclude that the 1y1y OIS swap rates in 
the US and the euro area exhibited a stable relationship. This relationship broke down after 
3rd  July,  but  recovered  after  a  while,  although  with  a  lower  coefficient  than  before  the 
introduction of forward guidance.  
Second,  the  uncertainty  about  future  monetary  policy  has  declined,  which  represents  a 
positive  outcome  of  forward  guidance  (see  Slide  4).  Less  uncertainty  about  our  policy 
orientation is consistent with lower term premia in money market rates.  
And third, forward guidance has somewhat reduced the sensitivity of money market forward 
rates  at  various  horizons  to  news  and  data  surprises  –  of  the  type  which  should  have  a 
muted impact on our monetary policy conditions.  
These 
for  example 
communication by other central banks about their own monetary policy decisions. And they 
that  are  unrelated 
to  euro  area 
include  news 
fundamentals, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
include data releases that merely confirm our assessment of the outlook, and hence do not 
bring new information that can change that assessment.  
However, one might reasonably ask whether the impact of forward guidance for the whole 
euro area has been constrained by financial fragmentation. To this I would respond that it is 
important to emphasise again that the ECB’s forward guidance is linked explicitly to the main 
policy  rate(s)  in  the  euro  area.  And  however  fragmented  interbank  markets  are,  guiding 
expectation about the future path of the main refinancing rate is relevant for the refinancing 
conditions of banks across the euro area.  
Overall, preliminary evidence suggests that forward guidance has helped to anchor money 
market conditions in the euro area more firmly to levels which we consider as an appropriate 
monetary policy stance, given our present assessment of the outlook for price stability. This 
can  only  be  confirmed  over  time.  And  it  is  over  time  that  forward  guidance  will  prove  its 
usefulness in protecting our nascent economic recovery. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude.  
Faced with sluggish economic activity and limited room for manoeuvre, several central banks 
have  adopted  more  explicit  communication  on  their  future  policy  orientation  in  the  form  of 
forward  guidance.  This  has  served  to  reassure  market  participants  and  the  general  public 
that  central  banks  will  preserve  their  monetary  accommodation  against  the  backdrop  of 
persistently low growth, employment and inflation. 
In  designing  their  forward  guidance,  central  banks  have  been  guided  by  the  particular 
features of their respective economies and the specificities of their mandates.  
The common feature among the different forms of forward guidance that have emerged over 
recent  months  is  that  they  all  aim  at  reinforcing  rather  than  changing  expectations  on  the 
overall policy orientation of the respective central bank. It is an essential condition for them to 
be credible. 
References 
Brand C., D. Buncic and J. Turunen (2010), ‘The impact of ECB monetary policy decisions 
and  communication  on  the  yield  curve’,  Journal  of  the  European  Economic  Association, 
Vol. 8 (6), pages 1266–1298. 
Bibinger,  M.,  Linzert,  T.  and  L.  Winkelmann  (2013),  ‘ECB  monetary  policy  surprises: 
identification through cojumps in interest rates’, SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2013–038. 
Brunner, K (1981), ‘The Art of Central Banking’, Centre for Research in Government Policy 
and Business, Working Paper No.81–6. 
Campbell,  J.,  Evans,  C.,  Fisher,  J.  and  A.  Justiniano  (2012),  ‘Macroeconomic  Effects  of 
Federal Reserve Forward Guidance’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2012, 
Issue 1, pages 1–80.  
Cook, T. and Hahn, T. (1989), ‘The Effect of Changes in the Federal Funds Rate Target on 
Market Interest Rates in the 1970s’, Journal of Monetary Economics, 24, 331–51. 
Goodfriend,  M.  (1986),  ‘Monetary  Mystique:  Secrecy  and  Central  Banking’,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, 17, 63–97. 
Gürkaynak, R.S., Sack, B. and E. Swanson (2005), ‘Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? 
The  Response  of  Asset  Prices  to  Monetary  Policy  Actions  and  Statements’,  International 
Journal of Central Banking, vol. 1(1). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Kuttner,  K.N.  and  A.S.  Posen  (1999),  ‘Does  talk  matter  after  all?  Inflation  targeting  and 
central bank behavior’, Staff Reports 88, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
Praet, P. (2013), ‘Forward Guidance and the ECB’, Column by Peter Praet, Member of the 
Executive Board of the ECB, published on VoxEU.org on 6 August 2013. 
Woodford, M. (2012), ‘Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-rate Lower Bound’, 
The Changing Policy Landscape, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pages 185–288. 
Woodford,  M.  (2013a),  ‘Forward  Guidance  by  Inflation-Targeting  Central  Banks’,  paper 
presented  at  the  conference  Two  Decades  of  Inflation  Targeting:  Main  Lessons  and 
Remaining Challenges, Sveriges Riksbank, 3 June 2013. 
Woodford, M. (2013b), ‘Fedspeak: Does It Matter How Central Bankers Explain Themselves’, 
University Lecture delivered at Columbia University, 22 April 2013. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
