Benoît Cœuré: Global liquidity and international risk-sharing in the post-
crisis environment 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Bank  of  Korea  International  Conference  2013  “Assessing  global  liquidity  in  a  global 
framework”, Seoul, 3 June 2013. 
 I wish to thank Roland Beck and Georgios Georgiadis for their contributions to these remarks, as well as Georges 
Pineau for his comments. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me first thank the Bank of Korea for the kind invitation to this conference, which is taking 
place at a critical time for the global economy. I am delighted that the organisers selected 
“Global  Liquidity  in  a  Global  Framework”  as  the  theme  for  this  year’s  International 
Conference. It is indeed essential that the central bank community makes further progress on 
this important issue. 
Let me briefly recall how we arrived at this point. Against the background of the G20’s work 
on global liquidity management, the BIS – via the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS) – undertook important groundwork leading to the Landau Report of the CGFS.1 The 
IMF carried out important complementary work in response to the G20’s initiative in 2011.2 
And  the  central  bank  community  as  well  as  academia  were  closely  involved  in  these  joint 
research efforts. The ECB, for its part, hosted a joint workshop with the BIS on global liquidity 
and its international repercussions in February 2012. Since then, further progress has been 
made and it is a good time to take stock of where we stand. 
The measurement of global liquidity and its drivers  
The CGFS has established a relatively broad definition of global liquidity by referring to the 
“ease of financing” at the level of the global financial system.3 This definition includes official 
liquidity and private liquidity.  
An  important  observation  with  regard  to  the  drivers  of  global  liquidity  is  that  while  official 
liquidity can ultimately only be created by central banks, private liquidity is pro-cyclical and 
highly endogenous to the conditions that prevail in the global financial system. As a result of 
this, there is, as I explained elsewhere in more detail, a “self-reinforcing interaction between 
risk appetite and liquidity”.4 
Against  this  backdrop,  a  relatively  large  set  of  indicators  has  been  proposed  to  monitor 
trends  in  global  liquidity.  But  how  many  of  these  quantity-  and  price-based  indicators  are 
really relevant for policy-makers and show developments which are “orthogonal” to what the 
other  indicators  show?  Recent  research  has  found  that  a  large  set  of  financial  and 
macroeconomic indicators for global liquidity can be represented by three main factors which 
can be labelled “monetary policy”, “credit supply” and “credit demand”. These three structural 
                                                 
1   See  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  “Global  liquidity  –  concept,  measurement  and  policy 
implications”, CGFS Paper No 45, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, November 2011. 
2   See e.g. S. Chen, A. Maechler, S. Saksonovs, and H. Shin, “Exploring the Dynamics of Global Liquidity”, IMF 
Working Paper 12/246, October 2012. 
3   See CGFS (op. cit.). 
4   See B. Cœuré (2012), “Global liquidity and risk appetite: a re-interpretation of the recent crises”, speech at the 
BIS-ECB  Workshop  on  Global  liquidity  and  its  international  repercussions,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  6  February 
2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
liquidity factors have contributed to shaping global financial dynamics in the run-up to, and in 
the  aftermath  of,  the  financial  crisis  (see  slide  2).  Before  2007  global  credit  supply  was  a 
driving force of low interest rates and rapid credit expansion, while since 2008 looser official 
liquidity has partly compensated for tighter private liquidity (see slide 3).5 While such purely 
statistical exercises should be always treated with caution, it is encouraging that there is a 
broad agreement on the main drivers of global liquidity in the academic literature.6  
A long-term view on international risk sharing and financial globalisation  
A  lot  of  attention  is  currently  being  paid  to  the  negative  externalities  associated  with 
fluctuations  of  global  liquidity.  One  prominent  example  is  the  discussion  about  the 
international spillovers of unconventional monetary policies in the advanced economies. 
Clearly, sustained low interest rates and domestic bond purchases by central banks can spill 
over to asset prices elsewhere. Recent empirical studies indicate, however, that the effect of 
the  various  rounds  of  QE  policies  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve  has  so  far  had  a  relatively 
small, albeit pro-cyclical, global impact.7 
Furthermore,  the  international  transmission  of  unconventional  monetary  policies  is  not 
homogeneous.  The  first  round  of  QE  in  the  US,  mainly  aimed  at  improving  market 
functioning, had a smaller impact on equity markets and exchange rates in emerging market 
economies (EMEs) than the second round of QE policies implemented through large-scale 
asset purchases (see slide 4). In addition, “pull-factors” such as positive growth differentials 
and financial deepening in EMEs have also been important drivers of capital flows to these 
countries  (see  slide  5).  Likewise,  while  the  Bank  of  Japan's  new  monetary  policy  strategy 
prompted  fears  of  a  “currency  war”,  it  is  not  proven  so  far  that  its  global  impact  could  be 
negative. Nevertheless, this is an important debate, and we have to take the arguments put 
forward by EME policy-makers seriously.  
However,  the  current  debate  focuses  too  much  today  on  the  negative  externalities  of 
domestic  monetary  policy  decisions,  and  overlooks  the  fact  that  global  liquidity  is  closely 
intertwined with the degree of international risk-sharing.  
International risk-sharing is usually defined as a situation where fluctuations in consumption 
are decoupled from idiosyncratic fluctuations in output, and where consumption growth rates 
across countries are highly correlated. The disconnect between consumption and output is of 
course  made  possible  by  lending  to,  and  borrowing  from,  abroad,  hence  by  cross-border 
liquidity flows. Access to a complete set of contingent financial assets in the sense of Arrow 
and  Debreu  would  allow  countries  to  perfectly  insure  against  idiosyncratic  risk.  As  is  well 
known  from  the  theoretical  literature,  the  benefits  of  international  risk-sharing  may  be 
considerable and should not be underestimated.8  
                                                 
5   See  S.  Eickmeier,  L.  Gambacorta  and  B.  Hofmann,  “Understanding  Global  Liquidity”,  BIS  Working  Paper 
No 402, February 2013. In addition, the relative importance of global liquidity factors varies across regions. 
For instance, M2 growth seems dominated by the “credit supply” factor in the euro area, while it is dominated 
by monetary policy and macro factors in emerging Asia. 
6   See for example V. Bruno and H. Shin: “Capital Flows, Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity”, Princeton 
University, mimeo. 
7   See  M.  Fratzscher,  M.  Lo  Duca  and  R.  Straub,  “A  global  monetary  tsunami?  On  the  spillovers  of  US 
Quantitative Easing”, CEPR Discussion Paper No 9195, October 2012. 
8   See  M.  Obstfeld,  “Evaluating  risky  consumption  paths:  The  role  of  intertemporal  substitutability”,  European 
Economic  Review,  vol.  38,  no.  7,  August  1994,  pp.  1471–86,  and  “Risk-taking,  global  diversification,  and 
growth”, American Economic Review, vol. 84, no. 5, December 1994, pp. 1310–29. See also more recently, 
K. Lewis  and  E.  Liu,  “Evaluating  International  Consumption  Risk  Sharing  Gains:  An  Asset  Return  View”, 
October 2012, working paper presented at the 2013 American Economic Association meeting. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
One simple metric often used to gauge the extent of international risk-sharing is the ratio of 
gross foreign assets relative to GDP in major economies. This measure has the advantage of 
being  able  to  draw  on  historical  time  series,  allowing  us  to  look  at  long  cycles  in  financial 
globalisation.  
Let’s  look  back  for  a  moment.  During  the  first  wave  of  financial  globalisation,  which  was 
driven by the British, who were often called the “bankers to the world”, foreign assets relative 
to  GDP  reached  a  peak  between  1900  and  1914  (see  slide  6).  Following  a  sharp  decline 
from 1914 to 1945, the share of foreign assets returned to its previous levels only by 1990. 
The period between 1990 and the global financial crisis was marked by extensive financial 
liberalisation, which led to an unprecedented rise in foreign asset positions. Since the crisis 
started this process appears to have levelled off. I will come back to this in a moment.  
The euro was introduced in 1999 in a region where all restrictions on capital movements had 
been lifted. It is no surprise then that unleashed financial forces led to an expansion of intra-
regional  cross-border  capital  flows  (mostly  flowing  from  “core”  to  “peripheral”  euro  area 
economies),  exploiting  the  expanded  risk-sharing  opportunities  created  by  the  single 
currency.  We  now  know  that  risk  was  neither  well  assessed  nor  well  monitored,  and  that 
unchecked cross-border lending supported projects with low intrinsic profitability, such as in 
the  housing  sector.  Moreover,  the  structure  of  these  flows  (i.e.  wholesale  interbank  credit, 
rather than direct loans to firms or capital market investment) was inherently fragile. Credit 
between  institutions  with  domestic  deposit  bases  and  implicit  guarantees  from  their  own 
governments  soon  fragmented  along  national  lines  when  the  financial  crisis  erupted  and 
shook confidence in banks. 
Let me highlight two salient features of the recent wave of financial globalisation, which have 
important consequences for the post-crisis steady state.  
The  first  feature  is  the  geography  of  wealth  transfers  before  and  after  the  global  financial 
crisis. As the academic literature9 indicates, the US external balance sheet displays a very 
specific  pattern:  short  in  “safe”  or  liquid  securities  and  long  in  “risky”  or  illiquid  ones.  This 
implies  that  the  US  earned  a  risk  premium  before  the  global  financial  crisis,  but  suffered 
disproportionate losses during the crisis, when the value of its risky external financial portfolio 
collapsed  relative  to  the  value  of  its  safe  external  liabilities.10  In  other  words,  the  United 
States acted as the world’s global insurer (see slide 7). As noted by the same literature, the 
euro area and Switzerland have played a comparable role, albeit at a regional level and on a 
smaller scale.  
Within the euro area, Germany has played a similar role as the United States at the global 
level: it was the “regional insurer” in the run-up to the crisis, investing in risky assets in other 
euro area countries while selling safe government bonds. Note that Germany did not need to 
run  a  current  account  deficit  to  play  this  role,  confirming  the  modern  disconnect  between 
international risk-sharing and flows of goods and services. 
Another salient feature of the recent wave of financial globalisation is the role of cross-border 
banking  and  the  interaction  between  liquidity  cycles  and  the  leverage  of  global  banks.11 
Before  the  crisis,  the  expansion  of  cross-border  lending  (and  hence  of  international  risk-
taking) was made possible by increased bank leverage in a period when perceived risk was 
                                                 
9   See  P.O.  Gourinchas  and  H.  Rey  (2007),  “From  World  Banker  to  World  Venture  Capitalist:  U.S.  External 
Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege,” in Clarida, R., editor, G-7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability 
and Adjustment, pages 11–55, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, and M. Habib, “Excess returns on net 
foreign assets – the exorbitant privilege from a global perspective”, ECB Working Paper No 1158, 2010. 
10   See P.O. Gourinchas, H. Rey and N. Govillot, “Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty”, 2010, mimeo. 
11   See  H.  Shin,  “Global  Banking  Glut  and  Loan  Risk  Premium”,  presented  at  the  12th  Jacques  Polak  Annual 
Research Conference, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC, 10–11 November 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
low  –  in  other  words,  there  was  “excess  elasticity”  in  the  global  credit  supply.12  The 
intermediation  role  of  European  banks  in  the  global  dollar-denominated  market  before  the 
crisis is a case in point. 
Following the crisis, global banks retreated from cross-border lending, amplifying the impact 
of the financial crisis on those economies that did not have alternative sources of funding, 
and  prompting  partial  substitution  by  official  credit.  This  happened  both  at  the  global  level 
after the demise of Lehman Brothers, prompting large-scale intervention by the IMF and by 
multilateral  development  banks,  and  within  the  euro  area  after  2010,  prompting  official 
support  through  the  EFSF  and  ESM,  and  liquidity  support  by  the  Eurosystem  to  banks  in 
stressed jurisdictions. Here again, the euro area can be seen as a microcosm of the global 
economy – just as a Korean garden is a microcosm of nature. 
Global liquidity and international risk-sharing in the current environment 
One important point in this context is the emergence of a “home bias” and de-globalisation 
following the global financial crisis.  
These trends have profound effects on the degree of international risk-sharing. But are they 
only  temporary  or  do  they  constitute  a  level  shift  in  the  steady-state  level  of  financial 
integration? 
An  optimistic  view  is  to  consider  the  global  financial  crisis  as  a  temporary  shock,  which 
impact will fade away. 
The persistence of a shock, however, depends on the structural and institutional features of 
an  economy,  as  well  as  the  corresponding  policy  response.  And  there  are  some  worrying 
signals at the global level. In the following brief examples, I will illustrate how the interaction 
of  institutions  and  shocks  can  shape  the  new  post-crisis  steady-state  level  of  financial 
integration.  
In  advanced  economies,  for  example,  financial  regulation  and  other  forms  of  public 
intervention  have  contributed  to  global  fragmentation.  Government  bail-outs,  risk-based 
capital  requirements  and  the  ring-fencing  of  capital  and  liquidity  by  local  supervisors  have 
constrained  banks’  risk-taking  outside  domestic  jurisdictions.13  In  the  euro  area,  this  has 
been compounded by the perception of a rising risk of sovereign default, eroding the fiscal 
backing of cross-border liquidity provision.14 As a result, the rise in idiosyncratic country risk 
in  peripheral  countries  and  the  associated  increase  in  government  bond  yields  was 
accompanied  by  a  steady  increase  in  the  share  of  domestic  holdings  of  government  debt 
securities (see slide 8).  
Financial  fragmentation  can,  however,  also  be  observed  at  the  global  level.  Looking  at 
banking  statistics 
the  relationship  between  domestic  and 
international  bank  lending  has  steepened  compared  with  the  pre-crisis  credit  boom  (see 
slide 9).  
This is also reflected in the re-emerging correlation between domestic saving and domestic 
investment,  known  as  the  Feldstein-Horioka  puzzle.  This  is  not  only  driven  by  declining 
in  advanced  economies, 
                                                 
12   See  C.  Borio  and  P.  Disyatat,  “Global  imbalances  and  the  financial  crisis:  Link  or  no  link?”,  BIS  Working 
Paper, No 346, 2011. 
13   For a discussion on the role of institutional features in the transmission of financial shocks from Japan to the 
United States, see J. Peek and E. Rosengren (1997), “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: 
The Case of Japan”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 4 (Sep., 1997), pp. 495–505. 
14   On the importance of fiscal support to international liquidity provision, see M. Obstfeld, “International Liquidity: 
The Fiscal Dimension”, keynote speech at the Bank of Japan, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, 
Tokyo, 2–3 June 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
current account positions in euro area economies. Similar trends can be observed in other 
non-euro area OECD countries (see slide 10). In emerging economies, there seems to be 
some decline in financial openness that may be partly associated with policy responses to 
international spillovers of unconventional monetary policies (see slide 11). 
Of  course,  reducing  external  exposure  can  be  warranted  if  it  is  driven  by  risk-return 
considerations.  European  banks,  for  example,  responded  to  deleveraging  pressures  by 
reducing  the  exposure  to  dollar-denominated  assets,  decreasing  thereby  their  reliance  on 
volatile US dollar funding (see slide 12).  
Overall, the deleveraging of European banks had far-reaching global implications. In Asia, for 
example, the share of euro area banks in the provision of cross-border credit has declined, 
particularly in areas such as infrastructure and trade credit. (see the left panel of slide 13). 
Regional Asian banks took advantage of this opportunity and increased their share in cross-
border credit (see the right panel of slide 13). Similar patterns can be observed in Central 
and Eastern European countries. This implies that risk-sharing is increasingly concentrated 
at the regional level.  
Whether the regionalisation of risk-sharing will be lasting, and whether it will make the global 
financial system more robust, are open questions for researchers and policy-makers. Europe 
offers  a  sobering  lesson  in  this  respect.  The  single  currency  has  made  participating 
economies  more  resilient  to  global  shocks,  but  it  has  magnified  the  impact  of  regional 
shocks, given the initial absence of a regional financial safety net. 
Conclusions and lessons for policy-makers 
Let me conclude. Global liquidity is an important concept and our understanding of its drivers 
and its effects has improved considerably over the past two years. The further evolution of 
global liquidity will depend on the way world trade and investment, and the related financial 
flows, globalise and sometimes de-globalise, and this in turn depends on policy reactions to 
the financial crisis. 
Overall,  these  trends  will  have  profound  effects  on  international  risk-sharing,  which  for  the 
time  being  appears  to  have  decreased  or  at  least  levelled  off  in  the  immediate  post-crisis 
environment. 
The  world  has  gained  a  lot  from  being  financially  open  and  the  benefits  from  international 
risk-sharing  should  be  preserved.  Current  concerns  related  to  international  spillovers  of 
unconventional monetary policy in the major advanced economies must not lead to a rise in 
financial protectionism. When confronted with a surge in capital flows, the first line of defence 
should  always  consist  in  macroeconomic  adjustment.  Capital  flow  management  measures 
are also available but they should be used exceptionally and on a temporary basis if all other 
policy options have been exhausted, as the IMF has recently said.15  
In  advanced  economies,  post-crisis  policy  interventions  should  avoid encouraging  financial 
fragmentation by confining banks’ risk-taking to domestic jurisdictions. This is why achieving 
a level-playing field in the implementation of new financial regulations is so important. This is 
also  why  the  European  banking  union  project,  with  its  single  supervisory  and  its  single 
resolution mechanisms, matters so much. It is only by restoring the free flow of capital within 
the  euro  area  that  the  full  benefits  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  can  be  reaped,  and 
growth can restart in Europe. 
Concerns related to the “excess elasticity” of global credit supply and the pro-cyclical nature 
of private liquidity need to be addressed ex ante if we want the international monetary and 
                                                 
15   See  International  Monetary  Fund,  “The  Liberalization  and  Management  of  Capital  Flows:  An  Institutional 
View”, Washington, 14 November 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
financial system to become more resilient to shocks. This is currently being done in various 
policy  circles,  particularly  in  BIS-  associated  committees.  It  covers  not  only  work  achieved 
within  the  Basel  III  framework  to  improve  the  resilience  of systemically  important  banks  to 
shocks  to  their  capital  and  liquidity,  but  also  ongoing  work  related  to  financial  market 
infrastructures and the regulation of shadow banking. This work is geared at improving the 
resilience of individual institutions but also, and maybe more importantly, at dampening the 
global financial cycle. If well coordinated at the international level, the new micro- and macro-
prudential  instruments  should  go  a  long  way  in  addressing  global  liquidity  issues  and 
potential imbalances. 
Further  reflection  is  also  warranted  on  the  provision  of  public  liquidity,  i.e.  precautionary 
foreign-exchange  reserve  holdings  and  on  international  coordination  in  the  face  of  global 
liquidity shocks. The rise of regional risk-sharing, if confirmed, will make regional financing 
arrangements  (such  as  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  and  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative) 
even more useful, but it will also call for fresh thinking on their interaction with each other and 
with global financial safety nets.. Following the seminal work of the G-20 Korean Presidency, 
I expect that the IMF will be doing further work in this area.  
However,  improved  global  and  regional  safety  nets  cannot  and  should  not  substitute  for 
resilient banks and capital markets and strict risk management in the financial industry. To 
borrow from the theory of insurance, we should strike the right balance between ex-post and 
ex-ante  efficiency.  At  a  domestic  as  well  as  at  a  global  level,  public  balance  sheets  can 
expand during a crisis only if they can revert to normal thereafter, letting private transactions 
thrive  again,  and  if  the  associated  moral  hazard  is  mitigated  by  strong  prudential  policies. 
Only then will a “third wave” of financial globalisation benefit from the lessons of the past. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
