Jens Weidmann: “There is light at the end of the tunnel” 
Interview by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, with the newspaper 
WirtschaftsWoche, published on 22 December 2012. 
 Mr  Weidmann,  Germany’s  Chancellor,  Angela  Merkel,  is  promulgating  cautious 
optimism that the worst is behind us in the euro crisis. Do you share this view? 
We have come a long way, but at the same time we must not underestimate the distance we 
still have to travel. The adjustment process in the countries affected by the crisis is a long 
way  from  being  complete,  and  the  work  on  the  institutional  framework  of  monetary  union 
must be rigorously advanced. Above all, we first need to see whether new agreements like 
the Fiscal Compact will be turned into practical reality. 
Do you see a recovery in the stressed economies? 
There is certainly light at the end of the tunnel. The approach of providing assistance with 
conditions  attached  is  bearing  fruit:  competitiveness  has  improved  in  many  countries,  and 
current account and government budget deficits are shrinking. Though this is being achieved 
in  a  recessionary  environment,  structural  improvements  are  also  playing  their  part. 
Obviously,  there  are  major  differences  between  the  individual  countries.  Ireland  is  without 
doubt at one end of the spectrum, while Greece is at the other. And, with a long way still to 
go, we must not further weaken the incentives to adhere to the agreed conditions. 
Further weaken? 
The financial assistance measures have become ever more generous as time has gone by. 
This  reduces  the  pressure  to  tackle  government  debt  and  competitiveness  problems  in  a 
resolute fashion. 
Do  you  have  a  solution  for  restoring  Greece’s  competitiveness  and  putting  the 
country’s economy back on its feet? 
That is just what the adjustment programme is intended to achieve. At the end of the day, 
every  economy  has  to  be  able  to  stand  on  its  own  two  feet  financially  without  needing 
transfers  from  outside.  An  economy  cannot  consume  more  than  it  produces  indefinitely.  If 
European  politicians  should  decide  to  disregard  this  principle  and  to  permanently  prop  up 
member states, then they need to be clear about the consequences. 
That  may  be  correct  from  a  technocratic  point  of  view,  but  what  about  the  political 
reality?  The  outbursts  in  the  Berlusconi  camp  about  Germany  waging  a  third  world 
war show that the community is more divided than united by its common currency. 
Those who make scapegoats of others are merely seeking to deflect attention from their own 
responsibility. It goes without saying that economic adjustments bring major challenges for 
policymakers and, above all, for the populations affected. But other countries, too, face limits 
of political acceptability, not just the crisis countries. 
Your spectrum extends from Ireland at one end to Greece at the other. Where do Italy 
and France lie between these two poles? 
Italy is suffering the effects of weak growth, low productivity and a lack of ability to innovate. 
But under Mr Monti’s government, Italy has set itself ambitious reform goals in an effort to 
restore investors’ confidence, and has made progress. It would be disastrous if Italy were to 
give the impression that this progress might be reversed, depending on the outcome of the 
election. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Let us be clear: anyone who votes for Berlusconi makes the need for a bailout more 
likely.  But  the  rescue  shield  should  not  be  forced  to  provide  funds  because  of 
Berlusconi. 
I do not wish to speculate on the outcome of the elections. Whatever the case, Italy’s present 
government  has  recognised  the  need  for  reform  and  has  embarked  on  this  reform  in  key 
areas. If the reform process were halted, then Italy would once again lose investors’ trust. 
When interest rates then rise again and Italy does not have a government capable of 
taking action, everything will start again from square one, will it not? 
To say “when they then rise again” is going a bit too far for me. It is obviously in Italy’s own 
interests  to  prevent  that  from  happening.  Pressure  must  not  be  put  on  the  central  banks 
again through irresponsible action. As guardians of the currency, we need to make clear that 
we are bound only by our primary objective of ensuring price stability. We are not there to 
clean up the politicians’ mess. 
Does this consensus still exist at the ECB? 
It is very clearly our mandate. 
Is the ECB the governments’ bully or their bankroller? 
The role of bankroller is expressly prohibited, and being a bully is good neither for the ECB 
nor  for  monetary  union.  If  we,  as  central  bankers,  started  trying  to  shove  democratically 
elected  governments  around,  people  would  soon  be  asking,  and  rightly  so,  whether  the 
central bank was perhaps overstepping its remit. 
The announcement of the bond purchase programme has finally brought some calm. 
Whereas  critics  claim  the  move  goes  beyond  the  central  bank’s  mandate,  your 
colleagues have lauded it as a great success. 
It  is  obvious  that  central  banks  are  able  to  influence  markets  in  the  short  term  simply  by 
making announcements. But the question is: is that the right way to measure the success of 
our actions? We have started on a slippery slope, and the brake built into the programme, in 
the  form  of  conditionality,  will  have  little  grip.  The  pressure  of  the  markets  increases  at 
precisely the point when a country diverts from its reform path. And then the only options are 
to refuse to buy bonds, and accept the escalation of the crisis that we are seeking to prevent, 
or to allow the conditionality to fall by the wayside. We should interpret our mandate narrowly 
and not get ourselves into such a dilemma in the first place. 
Is an announcement sufficient to calm the markets? 
Even  if  an  announcement  were  sufficient,  that  would  not  mean  that  my  opinion  on  the 
programme would change. 
What do you dislike so much about the bond purchases? 
First, the programme entails a willingness to make huge and, in principle, unlimited use of 
the central bank balance sheet to reallocate insolvency risks among taxpayers in individual 
countries. In a monetary union with 17 sovereign member states, such decisions should be 
reserved for democratically elected parliaments. Furthermore, as a central bank, we should 
keep  ourselves  at  a  safe  distance  from  monetary  financing  of  governments.  Finally,  moral 
hazard  comes  into  play  –  the  risk  that  governments’  willingness  to  reform  will  wane  if, 
through the measures we take, we reduce the pressure on them to act. 
Will  the  ECB  tighten  the  monetary  reins  again  –  even  if  this  means  jeopardising 
financial stability? 
Our  primary  responsibility  is  to  ensure  price  stability.  If  inflation  risks  were  to  intensify,  we 
would have to act. Obviously, this course of action may have feedback effects on financial 
stability.  Some  governments  appear  to  be  financing  themselves  on  an  increasingly  short-
term basis. This means that their budget position is more closely tied to current short-term 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
interest rates. But the fact that the fiscal policymakers have manoeuvred themselves into this 
dependency cannot mean that the monetary policymakers should go easier on their primary 
task of ensuring price stability. 
So, to be clear: if the ECB has to raise interest rates to combat inflation, it will drive 
governments  so  far  into  deficit  that  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  will  start  up  all  over 
again. 
Budgetary positions should see fundamental improvement as a result of the reforms. But if 
some sovereigns should find it hard to access the capital markets, then the ESM would be 
there  as  the  financial  assistance  mechanism  which  was  created  for  just  this  purpose. 
However, in principle countries need to arrange their affairs in such a way that they can deal 
with  the  single  monetary  policy  without  assistance.  Competitive  economic  structures  and 
sound government finances are preconditions for a stable monetary union. Monetary policy 
cannot  create  those  preconditions. That  would  be  asking  too much  of  it. This  was  entirely 
clear when monetary union was launched. 
The speed of a convoy of ships is always set by the slowest ship. 
The image is not the right one. It is not a matter of everyone proceeding at the same speed, 
but  of  every  vessel  being  seaworthy  enough  not  to  need  rescuing  whenever  storm  clouds 
gather – and then to call on the central bank to keep them afloat. It will always be the case in 
a monetary union that some economies have more dynamic growth than others. 
But it seems that Germany is sailing at a rapid rate of knots whilst the other countries 
are lagging ever further behind. 
In  the  current  transition  period  the  distance  will  widen  initially  because  the  peripheral 
countries  are  being  held  back  by  their  consolidation  measures.  But,  first  of  all,  that  will 
change  –  many  have  forgotten  that,  just  a  few  years  ago,  Germany  was  the  economic 
laggard.  And,  second,  Europe  is  not  an  island.  We  compete  with  the  whole  world.  So  the 
solution  cannot  be  to  hold  back  the  most  competitive  country.  To  use  another  image:  the 
strongest player in the team should not have to hop around on one leg to make things seem 
fairer. 
A lesson that we have had to learn is that monetary union is not working because the 
differences  in  competitiveness  and  economic  strength  are  so  great.  And  then  the 
politicians come along and say: we just need to cooperate more closely, then it will 
work. But no one wants common taxation and economic policies let alone a joint fiscal 
policy. 
I share your assessment that there is not much political will or public support for surrendering 
national sovereignty. In fact, it is often lowest in those countries that are the loudest in calling 
for  greater  shared  liability.  So  I  see  no  great  leap  towards  fiscal  union.  But  that  means 
sticking to what we agreed when monetary union was set up: the principles enshrined in the 
Maastricht  Treaty,  according  to  which  each  member  state  is  responsible  for  itself.  In  any 
case,  we  should  steer  clear  of  the  ever  greater mutualisation  of risks  if  this  does  not  also 
involve surrendering national sovereignty – because if liability and control are not in step, the 
basis for monetary union will be undermined. 
Will the ECB become a superpower if, from 2014 onwards, it has responsibility not just 
for price stability but also for supervising Europe’s 200 largest banks? 
Let me say first of all that we at the Bundesbank regard banking union in principle as a very 
important  and  appropriate  step  in  the  process  of  strengthening  the  future  institutional 
framework of monetary union. The purpose, amongst other things, is to put in place effective 
supervision  and  a  strict  regulatory  framework  which  will  loosen  the  current  close  links 
between the risks arising in a country’s public finances and the health of its banking system. 
When important decisions like this are being made, careful planning should take priority over 
speed. In our view it is particularly important to prevent conflicts of interest between banking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
supervision  and  monetary  policy.  I  do  not  regard  this  issue  as  having  been  satisfactorily 
resolved yet. 
Can the planned mediation panel resolve the problem? 
There  are  to  be  three  bodies  looking  after  banking  supervision  in  future,  starting  with  the 
Supervisory  Board,  which  will  operate  within  the  ECB  and  prepare  decisions  for  the  ECB 
Governing Council. The Governing Council will only be able to simply reject or accept these 
decision-making proposals – it will not be able to amend them. I find this curious: if I am to 
bear political responsibility, I have to be able to shape the decisions. But that is not all: if the 
ECB  Governing  Council  rejects  a  proposal  from  the  Supervisory  Board,  and  one  country 
does not agree with this decision, then a third body comes into play – the mediation panel. 
This mediation panel then decides by simple majority. But the panel’s decisions cannot be 
binding: under the relevant EU legislation the ECB Governing Council has to have the final 
say. 
Sounds like a complex construct that makes little sense. Why are things being done 
this way? 
It  is  an  attempt,  using  a  legal  basis  which  is  not  really  suitable,  to  erect  a  Chinese  wall 
between  monetary  policy  and  supervisory  tasks.  But  it  is  more  like  a  Japanese  wall  or  a 
room-divider. All this leads to is a very complex system in which the lines of responsibility are 
blurred. In my view, it would be preferable to amend the EU treaties with a view to putting in 
place  robust  separation  between  monetary  policy  and  supervisory  decision-making 
structures. 
Isn’t  such  a  separation  at  the  ECB  just  theoretical  anyway?  What  is  the  use  of  a 
Chinese  wall  on  floors  five  to  twelve,  if  the  monetary  policymakers  and  bank 
supervisors have lunch together in the same canteen? 
The  exchange  of  opinions  between  specialists  and  the  bundling  of  expertise  are  wholly 
desirable.  That  is  why  the  Bundesbank  is  part  of  the  German  banking  supervisory 
framework. The problem does not arise potentially until one body is making binding decisions 
for two areas of responsibility. In this respect, Germany’s dual system has its advantages, in 
that the Bundesbank undertakes ongoing supervision while BaFin in Bonn makes sovereign 
decisions. 
So you do not want the ECB to decide that a bank should be wound up. 
This  bundling  of  responsibilities  has  been  decided  on  for  the  time  being,  we  now  need  to 
minimise conflicts of interest. As an organisation which is already up and running, the ECB 
could act as a midwife for the supervisory set-up. But I would like the current construct, in 
which  final  responsibility  lies  with  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  to  be  no  more  than  a 
transitional  solution.  Banking  supervision  should  be  transferred  to  an  entirely  independent 
body to make the decisions. This is the only way that doubts about the independence of the 
ECB Governing Council in its monetary policy decisions can be dispelled. 
The French wanted to get going with the single European supervisor at the beginning 
of  next  year.  Now  March  2014  has  been  agreed.  Is  that  enough  time  to  create  a 
functioning supervisory set-up with sufficient staff? 
It  is  certainly  an  ambitious  timetable.  The  practical  requirements  placed  on  a  supervisory 
set-up should not be underestimated, even if it will initially cover only the large, systemically 
important institutions. Supervisors have to be familiar with the language, the legal regimes, 
the corporate structures and the particular features of the national markets. And, of course, 
they  also  need  to  bring  with  them  a  great  deal  of  experience  in  banking  supervision. 
Therefore, supervision of the systemically important institutions, too, can only succeed if the 
present national supervisors are heavily involved. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What  will  happen  if  the  European  supervisors  find  that  a  bank  requires  additional 
capital? 
Then  the  bank  will  have  to  obtain  the  capital.  If  it  is  not  able  to  do  so,  it  will  have  to  be 
restructured  or  wound  up.  It  is  for  such  cases  that  we  need  a  recovery  and  resolution 
mechanism at European level financed by the banks. Such a mechanism has to ensure that 
liability  is  borne  first  by  the  banks’  shareholders,  then  by  other  creditors,  then  by  a  fund 
financed by the banks, and only lastly and exceptionally by taxpayers. We should create this 
mechanism  swiftly,  otherwise  the  banking  union  will  be  incomplete.  And  even  then,  the 
banking union must not act as a cover for shifting responsibility for problematic legacy assets 
in  individual  countries  to  the  European  level.  The  problematic  assets  which  are  currently 
stuck on bank balance sheets stem from unhealthy developments at national level and the 
mistakes of national supervisors, and should therefore be borne by the owners and creditors 
of the relevant banks or by taxpayers in the country concerned. 
Does it make sense for the ECB to have responsibility only for banks with total assets 
of €30 billion and above? 
It is certainly a clear criterion which enables those banks subject to single supervision to be 
separated out easily from the others. However, a somewhat smaller number of banks could 
have  been  covered  than  the  200  which  are  planned.  After  all,  according  to  the  plans,  the 
ECB can extend its supervision to smaller institutions anyway if it deems this necessary. 
The compromise is a first step towards a European banking union. Is the next step a 
joint  deposit  insurance  scheme,  in  which  German  savers  will  be  liable  for  Spanish 
banks? 
No. As I mentioned, the next step is a recovery and resolution mechanism. I do not think a 
deposit  insurance scheme  is  necessary.  Adding  a further  element  of  liability  would  require 
considerably greater powers of intervention in member states’ fiscal and economic policies. 
Is it not unfair that banks have higher refinancing costs just because they come from a 
country with unsound government finances? 
Just as fair or unfair as higher car insurance premiums if you live  in a  region with a large 
number  of  accidents.  The  reality  is  that  we  have  differing  government  solvency  risks.  The 
fact that sovereign solvency and national economic performance are also reflected in banks’ 
balance sheets and refinancing costs is not a dysfunction, it is plain logic. The conclusion we 
draw from this must not be that these risks need to be negated or spread across the whole of 
Europe, but that states need to be forced to stick to the rules, to ensure they have sound 
finances  and  to  restore  their  economy’s  competitiveness.  It  is  the  causes  of  the  solvency 
spreads  that  need  to  be  tackled,  not  the  symptoms  which  are  reflected  in  banks’  balance 
sheets. 
Other  countries  will  soon  be  joining  the  euro,  then  the  national  representatives  will 
start rotating on the ECB Governing Council. At some point, Germany will not be at 
the table when decisions are made. 
I  regard  such  an  alarmist  scenario  as  exaggerated.  In  any  case,  rather  than  adjusting  the 
voting mechanism, it would be better for the Eurosystem to confine itself once again to its 
proper and primary task: managing monetary policy with the aim of ensuring price stability. 
The  redistribution  of  risks  is  a  task  for  fiscal  policymakers,  who  have  the  necessary 
democratic legitimacy and are answerable to parliament and, ultimately, to the voters. 
That  is  straight  out  of  the  central  banking  text  book.  But  in  reality,  risks  will  be 
redistributed and our representative will be outside the room. 
What matters is taking part in the meetings where decisions are made – all members of the 
ECB Governing Council are always present and entitled to contribute to the discussion. And 
the concerns that many people express – the implications of central bank measures for us as 
taxpayers and for price stability – cannot be allayed by changing the voting mechanism. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
You have often been a lone voice anyway in many of the decisions made by the ECB 
Governing  Council.  Why  have  you  not  been  able  to  make  your  views  prevail  in  the 
past? 
In such a fundamental debate about the role of monetary policy, a number of factors play a 
role, one of which is doubtless the national traditions and history that shape each and every 
one of us. But nor can one always escape the influence of the economic situation in one’s 
own country. It makes a difference whether 50 per cent of young people are out of work back 
home or whether there is almost full employment. However, I do not have the feeling that my 
arguments are not coming across in the discussions. Many of my concerns are shared by 
colleagues on the Governing Council. 
You are the only one voting against! 
That is far from being true of all decisions. However, when it comes to measures which might 
be seen as monetary financing of governments, I believe it is particularly important to take a 
principled  stand.  But  even  then  the  majority  on  the  Governing  Council  factors  into  its 
decisions concerns which I have put forward. 
And if you want to mop up the flood of money, the others say: we would rather have 
five per cent inflation than five per cent unemployment? 
You seem to be suggesting that my colleagues are not sticking to our mandate. We all feel 
duty-bound to price stability. And according to our most recent projections, the inflation rate 
is  likely  to  fall  back to  below  2  per  cent  in  the  next  two  years. To  ensure  continuing  price 
stability thereafter, we will have to tighten up the ultra-loose monetary policy in good time. 
But no one can say at the moment when that will be. 
What steps have you taken off duty to protect your family from inflation? Have you 
bought some gold? 
No, I have not bought any gold. Besides, my investment options are deliberately restricted so 
as not to give the slightest appearance of any conflict of interests. 
That sounds reassuring. But the Bundesbank is often accused of sowing disquiet with 
its alarmism. 
Such  an  accusation  is  baseless.  Our  positions  are  well  argued,  the  German  public  is  well 
informed, and it appreciates the Bundesbank’s clear stance. In such an exceptional situation 
in  which  the  ECB  Governing  Council  is  acting  at  the  outer  edge  of  its  mandate,  there  is 
bound to be a plurality of views – we are not a politburo. 
Politicians grumble about you all the same. 
A  politician  once  said  to  me  that  the  two  camps  on  the  ECB  Governing  Council  are  like 
mountain  guides.  And  when  they  argue,  they  cause  anxiety  and  disquiet  in  the  whole 
climbing  party.  I  answered  that I find  it  strange that  politicians,  who  should  be  leading  the 
way and making the decisions, wish to file in behind us and be guided by us. And if they do 
want  to  do  that,  then  it  is  probably  better  for  the  mountain  guides  to  discuss  their  route 
through uncharted territory rather than deciding resolutely on a particular path which might 
lead to them into the abyss.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
