Andreas Dombret: Boring banking? 
Opening statement by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the panel discussion, organized by “Bündnis 90/Die Grünen”, Frankfurt am 
Main, 28 May 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Let me start with some reflections on the slogan of today’s event, “Boring Banking”. Actually, 
I will argue that banking has become more challenging since the outbreak of the crisis. And I 
am not at all sure whether making banking boring is exactly what we want to do. 
Regulators  are  working  hard  on  the  “too-big-to-fail”  issue.  We  want  to  ensure  that  large 
banks are resolvable. Do we make banking boring when banks can no longer benefit from an 
implicit state guarantee? Do we make banking boring when large banks can no longer rely 
on the tax payer stepping in when losses pile up? I don’t think that a functioning resolution 
system makes banking boring. 
At the same time, we are analyzing how  we can best use new instruments to reduce pro-
cyclicality  in  the  banking  system  and  to  curb  exaggerations.  Do  we  make  banking  boring 
when  we  raise  costs  for  banks  that  simply  earn  money  by  following  and  augmenting  the 
market trend? I don’t think that driving back pro-cyclicality makes banking boring. 
Another topic on the reform agenda is remuneration. Do we make banking boring when we 
combat greed and short-termism? I don’t think that aligning compensation more closely to a 
bank’s longer-term success makes banking boring. 
Finally,  we  have  to  distinguish  between  banking  and finance.  Making  banking  boring  does 
not necessarily mean making finance boring. Only think of the shadow banking issue. 
Simplicity and complexity 
2. 
I  was  asked  to  speak  about  simplicity  and  complexity.  I  want  to  start  with  the  latter.  I  am 
deeply concerned about complexity. Where does the real risk of complexity lie? 
With  respect  to  regulation  and  the  change  of  the  landscape  it  is  not  so  much  a  single 
measure  or  a  single  initiative  that  creates  complexity.  It  is  more  the  interplay  of  different 
approaches. Let me give you two examples: 
One  important  strand  of  regulation  is  concerned  with  liquidity.  Regulation  sets  new 
requirement in order to protect the banking system against a shortage of liquid assets. At the 
same  time,  a  financial  transaction  tax  is  envisaged  that  might  have  drastic  effects  on  the 
liquidity  on  some  important  markets.  How  do  these  measures  interplay?  What  will  the 
outcome be? To my mind, this is a truly complex question. 
Another  example  –  this  time  concerning  the  structure  of  the  banking  industry.  If  the  US 
follows Volcker, the UK follows Vickers and the euro area follows a version of Liikanen, how 
much complexity will we add to banking? 
Or think of the issue of accounting standards: How complex is the system if it remains hard 
to compare the balance sheets of US banks with those of European banks? 
So, I believe that complexity is mainly caused by the multitude of approaches; not by a single 
regulatory step. The main point is: Basel is likely to make the global banking system even 
more complex if it were not adopted in all important jurisdictions. 
Now  let  me  turn  to  simplicity.  I  very  much  like  simplicity.  But  it  is  important  to  remember 
another basic principle: It is unfair to treat different things equally. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In the early days of football, the rules were much simpler than today. One simple rule was 
that  if  a  player  commits  a  foul,  the  opposing  team  will  get  a  free-kick.  That  rule  applied 
regardless of whether it was a mild or a harsh foul, whether it took place in the midfield or 
close to the goal. A perfectly simple rule. 
But  it  became  increasingly  clear  that  the  rule  was  too  simple.  After  a  player  committed  a 
deliberate goal line handball in an important English Cup match, the idea of a penalty kick 
came up and was finally added to the rulebook in 1891. Of course, that made the rulebook 
more complicated. Since then we have had to distinguish between fouls that lead to a free-
kick  and  fouls  that  lead  to  a  penalty.  But  after  all,  that  distinction  does  seem  to  be 
appropriate. 
So,  there  is  always  a  trade-off  between  appropriateness  and simplicity. And  now,  taking  a 
very  bold  leap  from  football  back  to  banking  regulation:  It  is  appropriate  to  demand  more 
capital  for  holding  high-risk  assets  than  for  holding  nearly  risk-free  assets.  In  addition,  an 
apparently simpleleverage ratio could serve as a valuable backstop and act as a safeguard, 
in particular, against model errors and mis-calibration of risk weights. I fully agree with the 
leverage ratio’s overall intention to deliver transparent and credible ratio, complementing the 
risk-based capital requirements – how simple it really is still has to be seen, especially in the 
light of different national accounting standards. 
Nevertheless, the core message of Basel III itself is quite simple. It is all about: 
• 
• 
• 
All  in  all,  it  is  about tightening the micro-prudential  dimension  of  regulation,  which  forms  a 
first line of defense against systemic risk. 
more capital, 
better-quality capital, 
and introducing a global liquidity standard. 
Macroprudential dimension of regulation 
3. 
The  new  macroprudential  dimension  of  regulation  serves  as  the  second  line  of  defense. 
There are three pressing issues on the reform agenda: 
The  first  problemconcerns  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  SiFis  for  short.  To 
realign risks and return, the reform agenda is putting much effort in resolving the “too-big-to-
fail” problem. Capital surcharges for SIFIs will be applied to help achieve this goal. 
In addition, a proposal for a framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions 
and investment firms has been adopted; this is even more essential, as only a system that 
allows an orderly restructuring of SIFIs will impose the necessary market discipline on them. 
Thus,  thesecond  pressing  issue  which  needs  to  be  solved  is  the  concern  with  shadow 
banking and its lack of transparency. Here, the adoption of the EU regulation on the OTC 
derivatives market represents a significant step towards greater stability and transparency in 
an important segment of shadow banking. 
Obviously, there is a risk that stricter banking regulation will set incentives to move business 
to less regulated parts of the financial system, thus causing regulatory arbitrage. 
The thirdpressing issue is the inherent bias of the financial system towards pro-cyclicality. In 
the  next  stage,  macroprudential  policymakers  will  have  to  learn  how  to  handle  the  new 
instruments and will need to define strategies which include intermediate objectives. 
 Conclusion 
4. 
Let me conclude by making a prediction. I don’t believe that banking will become boring. I 
actually happen to believe that banking in Germany may become even more challenging. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I say this with several aspects in mind: 
Some banks have to adjust their business models. 
There is still significant overcapacity in German banking. 
Firms have improved access to credit via bonds, thus bypassing banks. 
Competition with insurance companies may well increase. 
Funding for banks is becoming more challenging. 
Equity investors’ appetite does not reconcile well with boring banking. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Coping with difficult market conditions remains the private sector’s job. But let me tell you: 
For them, since the outbreak of the crisis there is no such thing as dull banking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
