Philip Lowe: Some tensions in financial regulation 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Institute of Global Finance Second Conference on Global Financial Stability and Prosperity, 
Sydney, 4 July 2013. 
 I would like to thank the Institute of Global Finance for the invitation to speak today. It is a 
pleasure to be here. 
As I am sure you are all aware, over recent years regulators have looked into almost every 
corner of the global financial system. Too often they found practices and behaviours that they 
judged generated unacceptable risks. In response, they have developed a very large and a 
very complex regulatory reform agenda. Much of this agenda is now being implemented, and 
other pieces are still being negotiated. 
It is understandable why this reform is taking place. While financial intermediation can be a 
force of great good, it can also do much damage if not done well. Indeed, the decisions that 
were made in the 2000s by some financial institutions ended up causing very real damage to 
the global economy. These decisions caused many people to lose their jobs and suffer a loss 
of their hard-earned wealth. There were also serious ethical failings by some of the highly 
paid staff in a number of these institutions. And a significant amount of taxpayer dollars had 
to be put at risk to help solve the problems. 
The societies in which this has occurred have been, and continue to be, rightly angry. I am 
sure that you have all heard variations of statements that run something like this: “regulators 
need  to  make  sure  that  these  problems  never  occur  again”  or  “not  one  cent  of  taxpayers’ 
money should ever again be put at risk to support a financial institution”. 
Many of you in this room would, I suspect, agree with such sentiments. 
This afternoon I would like to reflect on the ideas behind both of these statements, which are 
clearly relevant to the theme of this conference, Global Financial Stability and Prosperity. In 
the world of finance, implementing what seems like simple and attractive ideas often turns 
out to be quite difficult. Tensions emerge and trade-offs are inevitable. You touch one piece 
of the financial system and another piece moves, sometimes quite unexpectedly. This partly 
reflects  the  fact  that  the  way  in  which  savers  and  borrowers  connect  with  one  another  is 
constantly  evolving.  Moreover,  views  about  the  role  of  the  public  sector  in  the  financial 
system are not static over time. All this means that it can be problematic to put into practice 
what seem like simple ideas. 
“Regulators should make sure it does not happen again” 
I would like to start with the first of these two ideas: that regulators should make sure that this 
type of financial instability never happens again. 
This idea has motivated much of the reform effort. And it is entirely understandable. 
Good, well-designed regulation can make an important difference. This reflects a number of 
features  of  financial  intermediation,  including  the  existence  of  pervasive  information 
asymmetries and the potential for runs if confidence is shaken for any reason. In addition, 
financial  institutions  and  investors  seem too  often  to  underestimate  risk  in  the good  times, 
with  sometimes  severe  consequences  for  the  broader  community.  This  all  means  that  our 
societies can benefit from a well-designed set of rules and standards to govern how financial 
intermediation takes place. 
At the same time, though, we need to be realistic about what can be achieved through the 
application of rules alone. History provides some salutatory lessons here. As soon as the ink 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
is dry on a set of rules, people start trying to find ways around them, and they generally have 
some success in doing so. One possible response to this is to write more rules, and this is 
sometimes the appropriate response. But, as we are discovering (perhaps rediscovering), as 
we write more rules, new tensions emerge and new difficult trade-offs become apparent. 
I would like to highlight a couple of the difficult trade-offs that are evident at the moment. 
The first arises from efforts to shift to a system in which a greater share of banks’ exposures 
is  collateralised.  This  shift  is  being  encouraged  through  regulation  as  well  as  by  financial 
institutions themselves. It can be seen in the move to secured funding markets, for example, 
covered  bonds.  It  can  also  be  seen  in  initiatives  to  increase  the  collateralisation  of 
counterparty  exposures  in  OTC  derivatives  markets,  including  by  having  more  derivatives 
novated  to  central  counterparties  and  by  introducing  margining  where  novation  is  not 
possible. 
A common high-level objective of these changes is to reduce counterparty risk. Few would 
disagree  that  this  is  a  sensible  objective.  After  all,  if  more  exposures  are  collateralised, 
shouldn’t the system be safer? 
The reality, though, is that there is some uncertainty as to what the end effects of this shift 
will be. The reasons for this uncertainty are spelt out in a recent report by the Committee on 
the  Global  Financial  System  (CGFS)  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS).1  The 
report noted that financial institutions are likely to respond to the increased calls for collateral 
by  changing  the  way  they  do  business.  Some  change  is  clearly  desirable,  given  that  a 
number of risks were previously underpriced. But if past experience is any guide, as prices 
change  and  the  demand  for  collateral  increases,  financial  institutions  will  seek  to  manage 
their collateral more efficiently and this is likely to increase interconnections in the financial 
system.  The  report  also  noted  that  the  greater  collateralisation  is  likely  to  increase  the 
procyclicality  of  the  financial  system  and  to  increase  uncertainty  about  the  strength  of  the 
claim that unsecured creditors have over the assets of a financial institution. 
So there are clearly tensions. Reducing counterparty risk is an appropriate objective. But the 
BIS  report  suggests  that  the  side  effects  of  doing  so  could  run  counter  to  achieving  other 
high-level  objectives,  including  reducing  interconnectedness,  reducing  procyclicality  and 
reducing  uncertainty. The  challenge  is getting  the  balance  right  so  that fixing  one  problem 
does not create another one. 
A second example of where tension between objectives is evident is in the effort to increase 
the stability of banks’ funding. In this context, it has become common to think of deposits as 
“good and stable” and wholesale funding as “bad and unstable”. Signs of this thinking are 
evident in Australia, as they are in many other countries. Many financial institutions have had 
an  explicit  objective  of  increasing  the  share  of  their  liabilities  that  are  accounted  for  by 
deposits. Consequently, they have been prepared to pay large premiums for liabilities that 
are  called  deposits  relative  to  wholesale  funding  liabilities  of  similar  maturity.  This  has 
pushed up banks’ overall funding costs and led to increased spreads between lending rates 
and wholesale rates. 
It  is  difficult  to  argue  with  the  idea  that  this  shift  towards  deposits  is  helpful  for  overall 
financial stability. While there can be a deposit run on an individual bank, a deposit run on 
the system as a whole is very unlikely, as deposits tend to get recycled from one bank to 
another.  In  comparison,  it  is  easier  to  think  of  scenarios  in  which  disruptions  to  foreign 
wholesale funding cause system-wide stress. 
                                                
1  CGFS (Committee on the Global Financial System) (2013), “Asset Encumbrance, Financial Reform and the 
Demand for Collateral Assets”, CGFS Papers No 49, May. Available at <http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs49.pdf>. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But, once again there is a balance to be struck. The recent problems in Cyprus give us a hint 
of  this.  The  Cypriot  banks  were  very  heavily  deposit  funded.  This  turned  out  to  have  two 
distinct disadvantages. 
The first was that when the value of the banks’ assets fell, depositors had to bear the brunt of 
losses  after  the  equity  holders.  This  significantly  complicated  the  resolution  of  the  banks’ 
problems.  A  similar  tension  is  currently  evident  in  some  of  the  international  policy 
discussions.  In  particular,  some  regulators  want  banks  to  have  more  deposit  funding 
because  it  is  seen  as  more  stable.  At  the  same  time,  others  want  heavily  deposit-funded 
banks to rely less on deposits and issue certain types of wholesale debt to make it easier to 
resolve a problem should it occur. 
The  second  disadvantage  is  that  with  only  limited  wholesale  liabilities,  the  Cypriot  banks 
were  arguably  subject  to  less  market  scrutiny  than  were  banks  with  a  different  funding 
structure. One benefit of wholesale funding is that the issuing bank needs to keep turning up 
to the market and selling its story to sophisticated investors. There is no guarantee that this 
extra scrutiny will prevent problems, but it is likely to help. 
The general point from both these examples is that there are tensions in financial regulation. 
Regulations  are  introduced  to  address  one  issue,  and  another  issue  emerges.  Many 
countries have had the experience of regulating one aspect of the financial system only for 
other parts to grow very quickly, and problems to emerge in those other parts. 
I do not want this to be interpreted as a counsel of despair. But we need to be cognisant of 
the limits of rules alone. It may well be possible that a set of rules could be introduced to 
ensure that the specific problems of recent times are never allowed to occur again. But what 
is much less certain is whether these rules could ensure that a different set of problems, but 
with broadly similar consequences, do not emerge at some point in the future. 
I  suspect  that  it  is  simply  not  possible,  or  in  fact  desirable,  to  regulate  a  modern  financial 
system to the point that we can say with absolute confidence that problems will not occur. 
What we can do, however, is to reduce the likelihood and severity of future problems. 
If we are to do this on a sustainable basis, we need to look beyond rule-making, as important 
as that is. In particular, any set of rules needs to be accompanied by strong risk management 
frameworks, both within financial institutions and within the regulatory community. A critical 
element of these frameworks, and thus ultimately of a stable and  well-functioning financial 
system,  is  the  undertaking  of  holistic  risk  assessments  by  those  who  manage  financial 
institutions and by those who regulate them. 
These holistic risk assessments are not easy to undertake, involving as they do both system-
wide and more detailed, disaggregated views. But neither are they impossible. While each 
situation is different from the one before, there are a number of system-wide variables that 
need  to  be  monitored  carefully.  These  include,  but  are  certainly  not  limited  to:  the  rate  of 
increase  in  the  overall  level  of  borrowing  in  the  community;  developments  in  key  asset 
prices, particularly property; the amount of construction activity in the economy; the pace of 
innovation  in  financial  products;  the  degree  of  competition  in  the  financial  products;  and 
changes in market-wide lending standards. 
Obviously, this is only a starting point and managers of financial institutions and supervisors 
need to keep their eyes and ears open for new developments in the financial system. Both 
need  to  ensure  that  the  institutions  they  manage  or  supervise  comply  with  the  rules  but, 
equally  importantly,  they  need  to  examine  what  is  going  on  in  the  system  as  a  whole.  In 
some  cases,  supervisors’  perspectives  will  differ  from  those  of  bank  management,  and 
supervisors  clearly  face  different  incentives  from  bank  management.  Where  they  reach 
different judgements they need to be prepared to use their discretionary supervisory tools to 
buttress the rules that are in place. In the end, ensuring financial stability requires as much 
attention to supervision as it does to regulation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
It is important to point out that in this regard the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority 
(APRA) has done a better job than many prudential authorities elsewhere. It has been able to 
combine  a  sensible  approach  to  rule-making  with  a  focus  on  the  big  picture.  It  has  been 
assisted in this by the Reserve Bank with its broad responsibility for financial stability, and 
the  coordination  arrangements  between  APRA  and  the  Reserve  Bank  have  worked  well. 
These arrangements are one of the factors that have supported Australia’s stable financial 
environment over recent times. 
“Not one cent of public money should ever again be put at risk” 
I would now like to turn to the second sentiment: that not one cent of public money should 
ever again be put at risk. 
Over recent times, there has been a noticeable swing in international forums against the idea 
that the public sector’s balance sheet has a role to play in dealing with financial stress. Many 
people find it difficult to accept the idea that the very same banks that caused the problems 
have  been  supported,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  by  the  public  sector’s  balance  sheet.  A 
number  of  the  regulatory  proposals  under  consideration  aim  to  ensure  that  this  does  not 
happen again. 
This  response  is  entirely  understandable,  particularly  where  such  support  is  seen  to  have 
benefited the management of a troubled bank and/or its shareholders. Societies rightly rail 
against the idea that those who were responsible for problems receive some benefit at the 
expense of the taxpayer. A better set of arrangements needs to be found, so that taxpayers 
are not always drawn into troubles in financial institutions. 
It would be a mistake, however, to reject completely the idea of the public sector using its 
balance  sheet  during  a  period  of  financial  stress  or  crisis.  Indeed,  in  some  situations  the 
public sector can play an important stabilising role. 
One example of this is where the central bank liquefies assets in a stressed environment. 
In a “first best” world, all assets are liquid; they can be bought and sold at any time at a fair 
price. The real world is clearly not like this. Markets are incomplete, information asymmetries 
exist and the technology supporting trading is sometimes expensive to put in place. So we 
are in world of second best, which is sub-optimal from a welfare perspective. 
Most of the time, this deviation from first best is probably not that costly. But in a stressed 
environment – when even high-quality assets cannot be bought and sold –  it can become 
very costly. 
One  way  of  ameliorating  this  departure  from  first  best  is  for  the  central  bank  to  use  its 
balance sheet to liquefy assets in times of stress. It can do this by purchasing assets under a 
repurchase agreement with a conservative haircut. In doing so, it can provide liquidity when it 
is most highly valued, and do so with relatively little risk. 
This type of activity should not be viewed, a priori, as a bailout of the banks. Arguably, it is an 
efficient solution from society’s perspective to a potentially costly deviation from the first best 
world  of  complete  markets.  Central  banks,  by  virtue  of  their  ability  to  create  money,  are 
uniquely  placed  to  deal  with  such  situations.  The  alternative  solution  is  for  the  private 
financial sector to self-insure fully against liquidity problems. If the objective is to maximise 
the welfare of the community – as it should be – it is far from clear that full self-insurance is 
the right policy. 
A  second  example  of  the  public  sector  playing  a  stabilising  role  was  provided  during  the 
2008–09  financial  crisis,  when  governments  issued  bank  funding  guarantees.  During  that 
period,  risk  aversion  soared,  capital  markets  shut  down,  and  even  the  well-rated  financial 
institutions found that they could not raise funding and provide critical financial intermediation 
services to the broader economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These types of temporary surges in risk aversion can be very costly for society. At least in 
principle they can be ameliorated if there is an entity that has a stable risk appetite and that 
is  prepared,  and  financially  able,  to  play  a  stabilising  role.  This  was  what  happened  in 
Australia  during  the  crisis,  where  the  Australian  Government  was  prepared  to  insure  bank 
debt for a fee. The fee was considerably higher than what the market would have normally 
demanded for providing such insurance, but was substantially less than the near infinite fee 
that the market was then implicitly charging. There is a strong argument that the Australian 
taxpayer was well compensated for the risk that it undertook, with insurance premiums paid 
to date by financial institutions exceeding $4 billion, and no money has had to be paid out 
under the guarantee. 
A  third  example  in  which  the  public  sector  can  play  a  stabilising  role  is  through  the 
government  underwriting  a  capital  injection  for  a  troubled  bank  when  a  very  risk-averse 
private sector is not prepared to do so. This example is of a distinctly different character than 
the  other  two  and  the  threshold  of  action  is  higher.  There  may,  however,  be  some  very 
limited  circumstances  where  it  does  make  sense  for  the  government  to  take  an  institution 
under public ownership before selling it again when the risk appetite of the private sector has 
returned to more normal levels. As the Scandinavian experience from a couple of decades 
ago illustrates, this type of policy can work. I want to emphasise, though, that I am not saying 
the  Australian  authorities  would  or  should  behave  in  a  similar  way,  but  rather  that  such  a 
response should not be excluded from the potential toolkit. Importantly, if such a policy were 
to  be  used,  then  private  shareholders  of  the  troubled  institution  as  well  as  its  managers 
would need to be held to full account. 
The common element in each of these three examples is that the private sector has swung 
from  relatively  normal  risk  preferences  to  being  temporarily  very  risk  averse.  In  modern 
financial  systems,  these  swings  in  risk  aversion  can  be  very  costly.  High  levels  of  risk 
aversion mean that good assets cannot be bought and sold, that otherwise sound institutions 
cannot  access  funding  markets  and  that  investors  are  not  prepared  to  purchase  capital  in 
banks.  In  these  situations,  the  public  sector,  with  its  more  stable  risk  preferences  and  its 
financial capacity, can play a stabilising role. There are obviously financial risks in doing this, 
but there are also potential benefits to the broader community. 
There are two main arguments against such involvement. The first is that financial institutions 
will change the way they operate if they think that the public sector will provide support, that 
these  changes  will  make  the  system  less  stable. The  second  is that  if the  public  sector  is 
prepared  to  play  the  role  of  a  countercyclical  provider  of  liquidity,  insurer  or  –  in  limited 
circumstances – capital, then there is the potential for this role to be misused. One way that 
this could happen is for support to be provided to avoid confronting problems in a financial 
institution, with the result that taxpayers take on additional risk. 
Both  of  these  concerns  are  real  and  they  need  to  be  taken  seriously.  But  these  concerns 
should  not  rule  out  public  sector  support  in  some  situations.  Concerns  about  adversely 
changing behaviour can be addressed through ensuring that shareholders are not bailed out 
and that the managers of financial institutions are exposed to the downside as well as the 
upside. And governance arrangements can be put in place to address concerns about public 
decision-making. 
The critical question needs to be what set of policies best maximise social welfare, not what 
set of policies best minimise the risk of public sector involvement. It may be the case that the 
answers  to  these  two  questions  are  the  same,  but  I  suspect  that  there  are  circumstances 
where they are not. Once again, the challenge is to find the right balance. 
Where does this leave us? 
So where does this leave us? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
I am afraid that those who want a cast-iron guarantee that financial instability will never be 
allowed to return, or that the public sector will never have any risk exposure to the financial 
sector, are likely to be disappointed. 
Modern financial systems can be a force of great good. But they can be prone to bouts of 
instability. Attitudes to risk can change abruptly and willingness to extend credit and to trade 
assets can evaporate almost instantly. Over recent years we have seen too many examples 
of where investors seamlessly moved from seeing risk nowhere to seeing it everywhere. 
If  we  are  to  live  up  to  the  challenge  of  this  conference  –  Global  Financial  Stability  and 
Prosperity – we need to find a better way of dealing with these swings. First and foremost, 
this is a responsibility of the managers of financial institutions. But public policy also has an 
important role to play in designing a system that is strong enough to cope with these swings. 
A core set of prudential rules is obviously an important element here. But rules can never be 
enough.  An  understanding  of  how  borrowers  and  investors  are  viewing  risk  and  how  their 
decisions are affecting the financial system as a whole is critically important. Also, we should 
not lose sight of the fact that the public sector – with its more stable risk appetite – has a 
balance sheet that can be used to play a stabilising role. Importantly, if this balance sheet is 
to  be  used,  we  need  to  be  sure  that  it  is  done  in  a  way  that  promotes  the  welfare  of  the 
community  at  large,  rather  than  just  the  welfare  of  the  owners  and  managers  of  financial 
institutions. 
Thank you.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
