Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Achieving middle income status by 2017 
– prospects and challenges 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
First Economic Dialogue on the Vision 2040, Kampala, 26 August 2013. 
 Need for a realistic time scale  
1. 
The World Bank defines middle income countries in terms of Gross National Income (GNI) 
per capita, with a lower bound of $1,036 for lower middle income countries. Uganda’s GNI 
per  capita  was  $510  in  2011.  To  attain  the  minimum  threshold  of  $1,036  for  lower  middle 
income status, Uganda must double its GNI per capita in real terms. With real GDP growth of 
7 percent and population growth of 3.2 percent, per capita incomes will grow at 3.7 percent per 
year. At this rate of per capita income growth, it will take 19 years for Uganda to double its real 
income per capita. It is, therefore, clearly not possible for Uganda to double its real income by 
2017. A more realistic target would be to reach middle income status by the early 2030s.  
To  achieve  middle  income  status,  Government  needs  to  adopt  a  long  term  approach  to 
economy  strategy,  focusing  on  the  policies  which  can  generate  sustainable  high  rates  of 
growth for the next 20 years. Uganda has established a good track record of macroeconomic 
management  over  the  last  two  decades.  It  is  imperative  that  macroeconomic  stability  is 
maintained  over  the  long  term,  which  means  that  demands  for  public  spending  must  be 
accommodated  within  the  available  budget  resource  envelope  so  that  public  debt  remains 
sustainable and does not crowd out private sector borrowing from the banking system. But 
macroeconomic  stability  is  a  necessary  but  not  sufficient  condition  for  sustainable  growth 
over the long term. It must be combined with structural reforms which strengthen the supply 
side  of  the  economy,  enabling  the  economy  to  generate  growth  in  productivity.  There  are 
three crucial areas pertinent to the supply side of the economy where Uganda needs to do 
much  better  if  it  is  to  achieve  middle  income  status  and  transform  the  structure  of  its 
economy.  These  are:  i)  the  modernization  of  agriculture;  ii)  accelerate  the  demographic 
transition and iii) raise private sector investment rates.  
Modernisation of agriculture  
2. 
There  are  very  few  developing  economies,  other  than  city  states,  which  have  successfully 
transformed  their  economies  and  reached  middle  income  status  without  modernizing  their 
agriculture. Agricultural modernization is a prerequisite for industrialization, for three reasons; 
i)  to  generate  agricultural  surpluses  which  can  then  be  used  as  raw  materials  in  agro-
processing  industries;  ii)  to  free  up  labour  for  employment  in  modern  industries,  and  iii)  to 
create a rural market for the products of domestic industry.  
Uganda formulated the Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture in the 1990s but this has not 
been implemented effectively with dire consequences for the performance of the agricultural 
sector. Labour productivity in Ugandan agriculture is among the lowest in the world. Most of 
the  smallholder  food  crop  sector  is  characterized  by  subsistence  farming,  with  no  use  of 
modern inputs.  
The  strategic  objective  of  agricultural  policy  should  be  to  help  Uganda’s  smallholders  to 
adopt  good  agricultural  practices,  produce  more  output  for  the  market  and  to  start  to  use 
modern  farm  inputs.  The  first  step  towards  agricultural  modernization  is  an  effective 
agricultural  extension  service  which  can  reach  the  mass  of  smallholder  farmers  and 
encourage  them,  through  technical  advice  and  demonstrations,  to  adopt  good  agricultural 
practices.  The  returns  to  investing  in  modernizing  smallholder  agriculture  are  potentially 
huge.  The  combination  of  adopting  good  agricultural  practices  and  low  input  technology 
could  enable  smallholders  to  double  their  yields,  which  would  raise  farm  incomes  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
generate  marketable  surpluses.  It is  a  mistake  to  believe  that  Ugandan  agriculture  can  be 
modernized  by  focusing  on  large  scale  commercial  farms,  rather  than  smallholders.  Given 
the structure of agriculture in Uganda, which is dominated by smallholders, large scale farms 
are never likely to account for more than a small share of farm output. Furthermore, yield per 
area  of  land  in  Ugandan  agriculture  is  inversely  related  to  farm  size;  hence  replacing 
smallholder agriculture with large scale farms is likely to reduce total farm output.  
Accelerate the demographic transition  
3. 
The  demographic  transition  plays  a  key  role  in  economic  development.  No  developing 
country  has  achieved  middle  income  status  and  structural  transformation  of  the  economy 
without  undergoing  a  demographic  transition. A  demographic  transition  entails  a  fall  in  the 
total  fertility  rate,  which  reduces  the  population  growth  rate  and  the  pulls  down  the  age-
dependency rate.  
Uganda  has  only  just  begun  its  demographic  transition.  It  has  a  total  fertility  rate  of 
6.1 children per woman and so has one of the highest age-dependency rates in the world, at 
over  100  dependents  per  people  of  working  age.  Many  of  the  fast  growing  economies  of 
developing  Asia  have  age-dependency  rates  of  around  50,  because  they  began  their 
demographic  transitions  several  decades  ago.  Lower  age-dependency  rates  are  closely 
correlated with higher savings rates and greater real spending per person on human capital 
development, which is crucial for structural transformation, because it allows an economy to 
invest in physical and human capital.  
Uganda’s demographic transition has stalled because insufficient effort has been devoted to 
population policies. Across the developing world, in countries with diverse cultures (e.g. Iran, 
Malaysia, Sri Lanka), fertility rates have been brought down because Governments actively 
promoted smaller families, made contraceptives available to all the population and invested 
in  reproductive  health  and  women’s  education.  Uganda  should  follow  these  examples  and 
prioritise population policies to reduce the fertility rate as quickly as possible.  
Private investment in labour intensive modern industries  
4. 
Uganda’s  record  of  attracting  private  investment  into  labour  intensive  industries  such  as 
manufacturing is poor, which is one of the reasons why so few formal sector jobs in medium 
and large scale enterprises are being created. The essence of structural transformation is a 
large  shift  in  the  labour  force  out  of  low  productivity,  informal,  traditional  activities  into 
modern,  formal  sector  industries  with  higher  productivity.  This  is  what  is  driving  structural 
transformation in developing Asia. However, such a shift in the labour force is only possible if 
there is private investment in the modern sector, to create jobs in high productivity industries.  
Private investment rates in Uganda are around 20 percent of GDP, but this is only half the 
private  investment  rates  in  developing  Asia.  Uganda’s  policies  to  boost  private  investment 
have been ad hoc and ineffective. Fiscal concessions, such as tax holidays, by themselves, 
are  not  an  effective  tool  for  raising  the  overall  rate  of  private  investment,  even  if  they  are 
successful at attracting investment in a few individual cases.  
To  boost  private  investment,  many  different  aspects  of  the  business  environment  must  be 
improved, to reduce the cost and risks of doing business in Uganda. These include: reducing 
the  regulatory  burden  on  business  and  the  burden  of  lengthy  customs  procedures  for 
exporters  and  importers,  reducing  the  burden  caused  by  demands  for  corrupt  payments, 
strengthening the legal system to resolve commercial disputes fairly and expeditiously and 
improving  the  infrastructure  in  the  transport  and  power  sectors.  Because  the  Ugandan 
domestic market is very small, the country will become a much more attractive destination for 
private investment only if firms located in Uganda can serve the entire East African market. 
But this will only be possible if non tariff barriers (NTBs) to intra-regional trade in the EAC are 
removed. The customs union in the EAC has not yet been properly implemented because a 
multitude of NTBs are still in place, slowing down trade across borders within the region. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
