Deepak Mohanty: Perspectives on banking in India 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
5th Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC) Banking Summit, Kolkata, 18 May 2013. 
 The assistance provided by Rekha Misra and Pallavi Chavan in preparation of the speech is acknowledged. 
I thank Shri Rajiv Mundhra, President Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC) and Shri Rajeev 
Singh, Director General ICC for the opportunity to be a part of this distinguished panel. The 
ICC is making an important contribution to the development of banking by bringing together 
the  experience  and  expertise  from  the  banking  industry,  corporate  sector  and  financial 
regulators  through  its  banking  summits  year  after  year.  In  this  year’s  Summit  too,  I  see  a 
judicious mix of expertise from the relevant areas to deliberate on the Indian banking. 
The decade of the 2000s was eventful for the Indian economy. We saw acceleration in GDP 
growth: with India recording its highest average annual output growth of 8.7 per cent during 
the period 2004–08. This was accompanied by a sharp increase in savings and investment. 
At the same time, we had to contend with the fallout of the global financial crisis, the adverse 
impact of which has been persisting. Economic growth has slowed down over the last two 
years  and  inflation  remained  above  the  tolerable  level,  though  there  has  been  significant 
moderation  in  the  first  month  of  the  current  financial  year,  2013–14.  These  developments 
have had an impact on banking. 
Against this economic background, I examine the performance of the Indian banking sector 
over  the  last  12  years  as  finance  is  inexorably  linked  with  economic  progress.  I  will  then 
touch  upon  financial  inclusion,  with  a  particular  reference  to  the  eastern-region,  as  it  is  a 
major plank of the Reserve Bank’s current policy thrust. I will conclude with some thoughts 
on challenges for the banking sector in the way forward. 
Finance and growth 
Economic  literature  establishes  a  positive  association  between  financial  development  and 
growth. In the 1960s and 1970s, the pioneering work by Raymond Goldsmith, Mckinnon and 
Shaw underlined the importance of financial liberalisation to step up savings and investments 
in  an  economy,  and  thereby  economic  growth.1  More  recent  studies,  carrying  forward  the 
earlier work have reinforced our understanding of the ways in which finance could exercise a 
positive  influence  on  economic growth  across  time  and  across  countries.2  Even  the  recent 
global financial crisis, the causes of which are complex as they are, does not negate the view 
that  financial  development  commensurate  with  the  requirements  of  the  real  economy  is 
essential  for  sustained  economic  growth.3  This  is  particularly  important  for  a  developing 
economy like ours where the reach of the formal financial sector is still inadequate. Let me 
now turn to banking in India. 
                                                
1   Mckinnon,  R.  I.  (1973),  “Money  and  Capital  in  Economic  Development”,  Washington  D. C.,  Brookings  Institution; 
Shaw, E. S. (1973), Financial Deepening in Economic Development, New York, Oxford University Press. 
2   See Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck (2000), “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and 
Causes”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  Volume 46,  Issue  1  and  also,  Demirguc-Kunt,  Asli  and  Ross  Levine 
(2004)  (eds.),  Financial  Structure  and  Economic  Growth:  A  Cross-Country  Comparison  of  Banks,  Markets  and 
Development, MIT Press. 
3   While lessons are still being distilled from the crisis, the IMF assigned a central role to failure of risk management 
and  weaknesses  in  regulation  and  supervision  besides  the  global  pattern  of  low  interest  rates  and  a  build-up  of 
leverage (World Economic Outlook, April 2009, IMF). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ours is a bank dominated financial sector: commercial banks account for over 60 per cent of 
the total assets of the financial system comprising banks, insurance companies, non-banking 
financial companies, cooperatives, mutual funds and other smaller financial entities.4 Banking 
expansion as reflected in the growth of total assets of banks was rapid till the intensification 
of the global financial crisis  which affected the Indian economy through trade, finance and 
confidence  channels.  Bank  assets  as  a  percentage  of gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  rose 
from  60  per  cent  in  2000–01  to  93  per  cent  by  2008–09,  but  there  after  it  has  plateaued. 
Bank  credit  to  GDP  ratio  more  than  doubled  from  24  per  cent  to  53  per  cent  during  this 
period but has remained around that level in the following years (Chart 1). 
The  growth  of  the  banking  sector  was  influenced  by  the  performance  of  the  economy, 
reflected in a co-movement between the growth in banking business and real GDP growth 
(Chart  2).  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  period  up  to  2007–08  was  also  a  period  of  fiscal 
consolidation, with combined fiscal deficit of the centre and the states falling from over 9 per 
cent of GDP in early 2000s to 4 per cent by 2007–08 (Chart 3). The consequent reduction in 
government  borrowing  requirement  opened  up  the  space  for  expansion  of  credit  to  the 
commercial sector in a non-inflationary manner. 
While the financial expansion has slowed down in the post-crisis period, the Indian banking 
sector has shown remarkable resilience and stability. During the global financial crisis, the 
timely  recourse  to  counter-cyclical  prudential  and  monetary  policy  measures  helped  the 
banking sector in transiting through this challenging period largely unscathed. 
Most of the indicators of soundness bear out the stability of the Indian banking sector. The 
capital  to  risk-weighted  assets  ratio  (CRAR)  at  the  aggregate  and  bank  group-levels  have 
remained above the statutory minimum requirement of 9 per cent and international norm of 
minimum 8 per cent since 2001 (Chart 4). 
There was a steady  improvement in the asset quality through the 2000s. For instance the 
gross  non-performing  assets  (NPAs)  as  per  cent  of  gross  advances  had  declined  from 
12.0 per cent in 2000–01 to 2.4 per cent in 2007–08. Thereafter it has increased to 3.7 per 
cent by December 2012, first with higher NPAs in foreign and private sector banks and more 
recently in public sector banks (Chart 5). 
While  Indian  banks  compare  well  with  many  other  advanced  and  emerging  economies 
including BRICS in terms of NPA and CRAR, there is considerable scope for improvement 
(Table 1). 
Banking efficiency 
It  has  been  a  key  objective  of  financial  sector  reforms  to  improve  the  efficiency  and 
profitability  of  the  banking  sector.  In  this  regard,  the  interest  rate  structure  has  been  fully 
deregulated.  The  statutory  pre-emptions  of  bank  resources  through  statutory  liquidity  ratio 
(SLR)  and  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  have  been  substantially  reduced.  Banks’  access  to 
central  bank  liquidity  through  export  credit  refinance,  marginal  standing  facility  (MSF)  and 
liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) has been enhanced. Furthermore, branch licensing norms 
have been relaxed and prudential norms have been strengthened. In addition, banks have 
increasingly  adopted 
to  human  resource 
management.  These  changes  have  helped  improve  efficiency  as  borne  out  by  various 
indicators. 
The profitability of the Indian banking sector has been maintained at about 1.0 per cent in 
terms of Return on Assets (RoA), even in the post-crisis period. The banks have also shown 
significant improvement in other efficiency indicators such as cost to income ratio, business 
technology  and  accorded  greater 
focus 
                                                
4   Reserve Bank of India (2012), RBI Annual Report – 2011–12, Mumbai. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
per  employee  and  business  per  branch.  However,  net  interest  margin  (NIM)  has  gone  up 
indicating  deterioration  in  allocative  efficiency  (Table  2).  Let  me  now  turn  to  financial 
inclusion with a particular reference to the eastern-region. 
Financial inclusion 
In order to sustain a higher economic growth, it is important to bring the excluded segment of 
the society into the fold of the formal financial sector. In recognition of this, the Reserve Bank 
has  taken  a  number  of  steps  to  take  formal  banking  to  door  steps  of  habitations  with 
population  over  2000  through  the  business  correspondent  (BC)  model  where  the  BCs 
provide  basic  banking  functions  acting  as  agents  of  banks.  Simultaneously,  a  number  of 
initiatives such as incentivisation of branch authorisation scheme for banks to open branches 
in  unbanked  centres,  simplification  of  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)  norms,  technological 
interventions and financial literacy-oriented programmes to increase awareness have been 
taken. While  the  initial  impact  of these  initiatives  has  been  positive,  it  has  created  a  huge 
potential  for  expansion  in  banking  business  once  the  level  of  activity  is  scaled  up  and 
government social benefit transfers increasingly take place through the banking sector. 
While  we  have  our  own  data  source  to  gauge  financial  inclusion,  the  Census  of  India 
provides  useful  information  on  access  to  banking.  It  shows  that  about  59  per  cent  of 
households had access to banking services in 2011 as compared with only 35 per cent in 
2001.  Increase  in  access  for  the  eastern-region  has  also  gone  up  significantly  from  about 
29 per cent in 2001 to 47 per cent in 2011, though the region still lags behind the all-India 
average (Table 3). 
In  2001,  the  all-India  average  population  per  bank  branch  was  15,600,  which  has  fallen 
steadily to 12,500 by 2012 again suggesting an increased penetration of the branch network. 
For the eastern-region population per branch has declined from 19,500 in 2001 to 17,300 in 
2012. While the eastern region has witnessed an increase in banking outreach since 2001, 
its average has remained lower than the all-India average underlining considerable scope for 
expansion. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude with some thoughts on the challenges ahead. 
First, weakening asset quality is an immediate concern for the banking sector. This is more 
so  as  the  banks’  credit  composition  in  the  recent  years  has  changed  towards  longer  term 
assets  such  as  infrastructure  and  housing.  While  improvement  in  macroeconomic  policy 
environment  and  expected  revival  in  economic  growth  should  help  mitigate  risks  to  some 
extent, banks would have to make concerted efforts to improve asset quality. 
Second,  while  on  many  efficiency  parameters,  Indian  banks  compare  favourably  to  their 
global peers, the net interest margin (NIM) remains relatively high. The banks need to further 
enhance their productivity so that the intermediation cost between depositors and borrowers 
is  minimised.  This,  coupled  with  containment  of  NPAs,  will  help  improve  monetary 
transmission. 
Third, as the Indian economy reverts to its high growth path, the demand for credit will go up. 
The  consequent  expansion  of the  banking  sector  will  require  more  capital.  Additionally,  as 
the  Basel  III  norms  are  made  applicable,  the  capital  requirements  would  increase  further. 
The preliminary assessment by the Reserve Bank made in June 2012 showed a comfortable 
position of Indian banks at the aggregate level to meet the higher capital norms. As per the 
broad estimates from the Reserve Bank, public sector banks would require a common equity 
of Rs1.4–1.5 trillion in addition to Rs 2.65–2.75 trillion as non-equity capital to meet the full 
Basel III norms by 2018. Banks, therefore, need to design appropriate strategies for meeting 
these capital norms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Fourth,  a  key  factor  that  accentuated  the  global  financial  crisis  was  excessive  leverage. 
While  the  Indian  banking  system  is  currently  moderately  leveraged,  according  to  the 
guidelines  issued  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  banks  should  strive  to  maintain  a  minimum  Tier  I 
leverage ratio of 4.5 per cent pending the final proposal of the Basel Committee. It would be 
prudent for banks not to dilute their leverage position in the interim period5. 
Fifth,  there  are  proposals  for  expansion  of  the  banking  sector  with  new  entrants.  The 
Reserve  Bank  has  already  invited  applications  for  new  banks.  Further,  as  indicated  in  the 
annual  policy  statement  of  May  2013,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  preparing  a  policy  discussion 
paper  on  banking  structure  in  India  which  would  be  placed  in  the  public  domain.  The 
expansion of the banking sector commensurate with the growth of the economy would not 
only enhance competition but also facilitate financial inclusion. 
With these remarks, I wish the conference all success. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
5   Subbarao D. (2012), “Basel III in International and Indian Contexts Ten Questions We Should Know the Answers 
For”, Inaugural Address delivered at the Annual FICCI – IBA Banking Conference, Mumbai. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
