Barry Whiteside: Celebrating the Fijian entrepreneurial spirit 
Opening address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch 
of the 2013 Fuji Development Bank Small Business Awards, Suva, 14 August 2013. 
 Ratu Deve Toganivalu 
Executives and Staff of Fiji Development Bank 
Fellow Sponsors 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory comments 
Bula vinaka and a very good morning to you all. 
Thank  you,  Ratu  Deve,  for  your  kind  invitation  to  launch  the  2013  FDB  Small  Business 
Awards.  It  is  another  significant  event  on  the  business  calendar  where  we  recognise  the 
achievements of the private sector, and in this particular case, small businesses in Fiji. 
These Awards were conceived around the idea of the need for us all to stop what we are 
doing and salute those small businesses doing great things for our country. Let us not only 
celebrate the winners, but also all the others that have dared to back their entrepreneurial 
spirit and set up a business. 
We trust that this event will create the necessary awareness out there of these “mum and 
dad” type enterprises. We hope that this will further encourage them to grow from strength to 
strength  to  become  much  larger  businesses  in  the  future.  There  are  of  course  many 
examples we can cite of large successful Fijian companies that started from virtually nothing. 
The small business awards 
Today  is  actually  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  FDB’s  Small  Business  Awards  and  I  am 
honored to be here to share this achievement with you. 
I applaud the Fiji Development Bank for organising this competition over the years. The fact 
that it has been sustained shows FDB’s commitment and energy towards growing the Fijian 
economy by assisting the small players, particularly, in providing them with access to credit. 
One of the major challenges of small businesses is who will give them the money to start and 
sustain their initial operations? 
The winners 
I have been informed that this year there are seven award categories: – agriculture, tourism, 
wholesale & retail, professional & business services, manufacturing, a best business practice 
award and a special award. That pretty much covers everything. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in as far as gender balance goes when it comes to small businesses, 
women  are  clearly  the  driving  force.  Unfortunately  they  beat  us  men  “hands  down”.  Last 
year’s  awards  saw  women  entrepreneurs  win  five  of  the  seven  awards.  As  a  man,  this  is 
always a difficult and painful one to explain as it is not only Fijian men that suffer our well 
known  “malua”  fever,  but  this  is  a  larger  phenomenon  across  the  globe.  Studies  actually 
show  women entrepreneurs conducting small businesses are the driving force and are, by 
far, more successful than men – and, dare I say it, with such empowerment at this level, they 
are said to contribute more to GDP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Indeed there is one micro finance institution operating in Fiji, and in other parts of our Pacific 
region, that will only lend to the ladies, for the very reason that women are more likely to pay 
back  the  loans  with  interest!  South  Pacific  Business  Development  currently  has  nearly 
3,900 lady  clients  under  its  Fijian  micro  loan  portfolio  and  a  repayment  rate  in  excess  of 
95 percent. Clearly we men need to step up to the plate and be counted. So, while I am not a 
judge for the awards, (and I would not wish to influence anyone), hopefully we may see a 
change this year when the prizes are handed out – if just to prove all those studies wrong! 
It would be remiss of me not to mention a great example of one of our small businesswoman 
entrepreneurs who is riding the path of success. 
Makereta  Matemosi  was  the  overall  winner  of  the  2007  Fiji  Development  Bank  Small 
Business  Awards.  A  $35  manual  sewing  machine  was  her  initial  investment.  She  started 
sewing  bags  using  mats  as  the  base  material.  Then  the  opportunity  from  the  makers  of 
Mokosoi  products  gave  her  a  break  –  she  was  asked  to  make  traditional  packs  for  their 
products. With product engineering, masi was blended with the mat bags. With three more 
electric sewing machines donated to her, her business flourished and she was able to attract 
more orders from as far as New Zealand. The assistance from her community also assisted 
her in the production process so that she was able to meet her customers’ orders. 
Today,  Makareta’s  masi  designs  are  recognised  internationally  –  her  masi  design  is  Fiji 
Airways’ brandmark. It epitomises Fiji and enhances the new name of our national carrier. 
The new symbol in the brandmark brings Fiji’s culture and heritage to life by linking the name 
“Fiji Airways” with this highly respected and traditional art form that has been a part of Fijian 
culture for several centuries. 
From humble beginnings, Makareta has shown us that there is light at the end of the tunnel 
and if you persevere, work hard and believe in  your dreams, everything  will turn out right, 
eventually.  I  have  no  doubts  that  she  will  move  on  to  bigger  things  and  I  wish  her  the 
success she obviously deserves! 
Assistance to small businesses 
It  is  my  view  that  the  formal  financial  sector  needs  to  be  a  bit  more  accommodative  in 
granting access to small businesses. The FDB’s Small Business Awards cover businesses 
with a turnover of between $30,000 and $100,000. However, there are also those that have a 
lower  turnover  that  need  finance  to  start  up.  Money  is  not  the  only  ingredient  required  for 
successful businesses. They need assistance with business acumen and good governance 
principles.  Training,  coaching  and  mentoring,  including  complying  with  the  laws,  are  huge 
challenges. 
The Government in its 2012 National Budget Address introduced the SME Credit Guarantee 
Scheme  with  the  aim  of  encouraging  and  supporting  small  and  medium  sized  local 
businesses,  particularly  by  improving  private  sector  lending  in  their  direction.  Under  this 
Scheme,  Government  will  provide  a  guarantee  for  up  to  50  percent  of  the  outstanding 
principal amount of any defaulted SME business loans, up to a limit of $50,000 per business. 
Interest charged on such lending must not be higher than 10 percent per annum. The fact 
that the  lending  institutions  no  longer  have  to  cover  the  total  risk  should  make  it  easier to 
lend and our latest data shows this to be the case with 338 SMEs already qualifying through 
the  commercial  banks  since  the  Scheme’s  inception  in  January  2012.  These  businesses 
have managed to borrow a total of $18.8 million and to date there have been no failures or 
calls reported on the guarantee. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the RBF Board at its June 2013 meeting approved a reduction in the 
RBF  advance  rate  to  lending  institutions  under  its  Import  Substitution  and  Export  Finance 
Facility  (ISEFF)  and  Natural  Disaster  Rehabilitation  Facility  (NDRF).  Licensed  credit 
institutions, commercial banks and the Fiji Development Bank are now able to access ISEFF 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and NDRF funding from the Reserve Bank at 1 percent per annum compared with 2 percent 
previously. They on-lend these funds to eligible businesses up to a maximum of 5 percent. 
Together the Fijian Government and the RBF have been building an enabling and supportive 
environment  that  is  conducive  to  economic  growth  for  the  business  community.  RBF 
monetary policy continues to be accommodative towards growth. 
The Fijian economy 
Before I close, I would just like to provide a brief update for you on the positive news about 
the  Fijian  economy.  Growth  this  year  is  estimated  at  3.2  percent,  the  highest  since  2004. 
This compares with our earlier forecast of 2.7 percent. The 2013 growth rate is broad based 
with positive contributions from all sectors, except for mining and quarrying. 
The revised growth projection for 2013 reflects a growing optimism in the economy and is 
consistent with the strong growth in various partial indicators, for example, net value added 
tax  collections,  inward  remittances,  domestic  cement  sales,  and  borrowing  by  the  private 
sector  for  consumption  and  investment  purposes.  The  surveys  conducted  by  the  RBF  – 
Business  Expectations  and  Retail  Sales  Surveys  –  together  with  direct  feedback  from 
industry groups and the private sector, echo many positive sentiments as well. 
Investment  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  is  estimated  at  28  percent  in  2013,  above  the 
Government’s target of 25 percent. 
The growth forecasts for 2014 and 2015 have also been revised upwards. 
Official launch 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in concluding, let me also thank all the sponsors for their valuable 
contributions towards these Small Business Awards. The Reserve Bank has been a sponsor 
since  the  inception  of  the  Awards  in  2004  and  we  intend  to  continue  supporting  small 
businesses. We will be recognising micro businesses and their contributions later this year at 
a separate ceremony. 
I take this opportunity to extend my best wishes to the contenders of this year’s competition – 
you are all winners in my eyes. 
Hibiscus is just a few days away and  we hope that everyone will  visit the RBF’s Financial 
Inclusion  Village  at  Albert  Park  to  learn  more  about financial  literacy,  capital  markets,  and 
also support the micro entrepreneurs who will be selling their wares. 
Once  again,  thank  you  for  the  kind  invitation  to  share  in  the  launch.  I  now  have  much 
pleasure in officially launching the 2013 Fiji Development Bank Small Business Awards. 
Vinaka vaka levu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
