Dimitar Bogov: Policy nexus and the global environment – a new 
consensus emerging from the crisis? 
Address by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at  the  2nd  Research  Conference  “Policy  nexus  and  the  global  environment  –  a  new 
consensus emerging from the crisis?”, Skopje, 26 April 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dear guests, 
Let me wish you welcome on our second Research Conference that we usually organize on 
the  day  of  the  monetary  independence  anniversary  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia.  The 
subject of this year’s conference we believe is highly topical, in line with the ongoing lively 
discussions among central bankers, research and academic institutions worldwide.  
The global economy in the last couple of years undergone remarkable changes, both from 
institutional  and  policy  design  setup.  We  witnessed  financial  market  turbulences,  banks 
failures and sovereign debt crisis with strong contagion around the world economy that was 
almost  unique  by  its  size,  and  the  global  economy  is  still  struggling  to  recover.  After  five 
years of global crisis we could say that we experienced a lot, and hopefully, we learnt a lot. 
One of the main lessons of the crisis was exactly related to the topic of the conference – the 
need of policy nexus as a kind of a consensus emerging from the crisis.  
What is the policy nexus about? 
At the initial stage of the financial crisis the importance of the macro prudential policies in the 
overall  policy  mix  was  highlighted  and  therefore,  a  lot  of  attention  has  been  put  on  the 
monetary  and  macro  prudential  policy  nexus,  conveying  the  main  message  that  the  price 
stability and financial stability are interconnected. With the appearance of the sovereign debt 
and banking crisis in the last couple of years in the euro area, it was quite obvious that the 
poor  public  finances  management  could  also  impose  threats  to  the  financial  system.  The 
financial  instability  and  weak  public  finances  can  potentially  have  adverse  effects  on  the 
financial markets, imposing distortions in the monetary policy transmission mechanism, and 
resulting  in  serious  macroeconomic  imbalances.  The  required  policy  nexus  is  becoming  a 
necessary  precondition 
implementing  a  sound  macroeconomic 
management. 
Under  situation  that  was  more  specific  than  usual,  when  the  role  of traditional  instruments 
was  limited,  the  monetary  policy  turned  to  unconventional  policy  measures.  Although  the 
monetary  policy  in  the  region  has  not  been  constrained  by  zero  lower  bound  on  interest 
rates, the central banks also turned towards unconventional monetary policy tools, having in 
mind the potential risks of repeated deterioration of the external imbalances and inflationary 
pressures or aiming at supporting other objectives (including credit growth). While listing the 
experiences  of  unconventional  measures  among  the  central  banks,  we  can  distinguish 
between: measures for increasing and changing the composition of the assets in the balance 
sheet of the central banks in different forms and with high heterogeneity across the countries, 
and  measures  for  influencing  agents’  expectations  by  strong  commitment  by  the  central 
banks for keeping low interest rate for a longer time horizon.  
In the public finances domain, the strengthening of fiscal discipline and the need of careful 
monitoring  of  fiscal  sustainability  can  be  taken  as  the  core  preventing  arms  against  fiscal 
imbalances  that  highlight  this  crisis.  The  fiscal  consolidation  is  already  on  the  list  of 
objectives  within  the  EU  and  it  will  require  serious  efforts  and  internal  adjustments  for 
reaching this goal. In the midstream of the crisis, the need of fiscal adjustment imposed the 
confronting issue of the adverse impact over recovery and growth dynamics that was really 
for  designing  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
one of the tight spot in the crisis management. The fiscal stimulus obviously supported the 
recovery  in  the  countries  where  there  was  a  room for  it,  but  looking forward,  the  need  for 
fiscal consolidation should be taken seriously. 
The financial stability, not only nationwide, but also in international framework, is quite often 
quoted as a common good. Attention should be paid to the risk distribution among financial 
institutions, as well as to the aggregate risk level evolution. The regulatory response to the 
crisis  was  oriented  towards  strengthening  the  banks’  soundness  as  well  as  designing 
treatment of systemically important banks which certainly require a special attention by the 
authorities. Systemic risk requires systemic and comprehensive solutions, including changes 
in  the  institutional  setup.  In  the  EU  it  was  done  by  establishing  crisis  management 
mechanisms,  strengthened  governance  aimed 
to  monitor  and  prevent  against  any 
macroeconomic imbalances, as well as to move towards the banking union. The EU member 
states  and  institutions  face  many  challenges  when  making  the  new  institutional  setup 
operational and when making the necessary adjustments in a reasonable time framework. In 
addition, all other countries face the challenge of converting the lessons from the crisis into 
policy actions.  
The changing role of central banks  
During the crisis, the role of the central banks moved from traditional way of monetary policy 
implementation towards combining the monetary and financial stability objectives, both being 
complementary  components  of  macroeconomic  stability.  The  set  of  instruments  became 
more  complex  because  of  the  unconventional  measures,  designed  to  bridge  the  period  of 
extraordinary circumstances affecting the effectiveness of standard instruments, and aiming 
to  strengthen  the  financial  stability  or  economic  recovery.  Due  to  the  variety  of  those 
unconventional  measures  across  the  countries,  it  is  still  difficult  to  assess  their  impact, 
although  the  experiences  of  countries  could  confirm  the  quite  largely  accepted  consensus 
that the "monetary stimulus" really supported the economy. However, we should be aware 
that at one point in the future their contribution will be overwhelmed and we will need to take 
appropriate action on time in order to impede any reverse effects.  
In the policy design and decision making process under the current dynamic environment, 
the strengthening of analytical tools and the enhancement of knowledge on the policy nexus 
are extremely important. The interplay of monetary, fiscal and macro prudential policies is a 
quite new area, seeking for deeper research work to support the decision making process at 
the  central  banks  and  other  policy  makers,  to  provide  appropriate  advices  and  policy 
recommendation and therefore, to prevent from underlying risks. The aim of our conference 
is to contribute towards building knowledge and exchanging views on the policy nexus issue. 
Having in mind the quality of papers that are going to be presented today, I truly hope that 
we will make our contribution towards this aim.  
I wish you a successful conference and fruitful discussion! 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
