Ardian Fullani: Achievements and challenges facing the Albanian 
banking sector 
Address by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the year-end event with 
the Albanian Association of Banks, Tirana, 20 December 2012. 
 Dear bank managers, 
At the end of this calendar and financial year, I take this opportunity to share with you some 
of the achievements and challenges facing the banking sector, confident that they will serve 
to guide our actions in the future. 
As  expected,  the  year  2012  was  a  very  challenging  year  for  the  financial  and  economic 
activity  of  the  country  and  of  various  economic  agents.  Very  likely,  this  year’s  economic 
growth will remain positive, but significantly lower than last year. This economic performance 
is dictated by the weakening of the fiscal and monetary stimuli, as well as the slowdown of 
private investment and consumption. The slowdown in the latter is, however, accompanied 
by a reduction of imports. On the other hand, foreign demand has supported higher growth of 
exports,  especially  of  energy  products.  This  has  led  to  an  improved  trade  balance  during 
2012,  hence  marking  a  decrease  in  the  deficit-to-GDP  ratio.  The  impact  of  the  global 
economic crisis continues to be present and its prospects to overcome it in 2013 remains our 
hope,  which  is  not  supported  by  the  expectations  of  international  financial  institutions  and 
public authorities, especially with regard to the economic situation in the euro area. 
During  2012,  the  banking  sector  marked  a  positive  financial  result,  overall.  Net  interest 
income  was  stable  but  provisions  on  credit  risk  reduced  the  size  of  profit.  Generally,  the 
banking sector maintained control over other costs of the activity. Liquidity indicators, short-
term  and  structural  ones,  stand  at  satisfactory  levels.  All  banks  complied  with  the 
requirements set out in the regulatory framework regarding the size of liquid assets, both in 
the lek and in major foreign currencies. Deposits continued to grow at good rates, although at 
lower levels than in the last year.  
Due to the credit growth slowdown, the credit/deposit ratio appears at very suitable levels to 
support  the  liquidity  needs  of  the  sector.  Indicators  of  activity  capitalization  stood  at  good 
levels, due to capital increase by some banks and slowdown in risk-bearing assets growth. In 
the  course  of  the  year,  the  Bank  of  Albania  applied  tighter  requirements  for  liquidity  and 
capitalization of banks in accordance with the risk profile of their activities. 
In  the  interbank  market,  trading  volumes  and  participation  increased  in  the  2012.  This 
performance  is  influenced  by  structural  liquidity  movements,  banks  demand  and  market 
operations of the Bank of Albania to support them.  
Market interest rates were downward, reflecting the trend of policy interest rate and banks' 
actions  to  control  operations  costs  and  profit  margins.  The  foreign  exchange  market  has 
been  stable,  despite  increasing  trading  volumes  and  higher  number  of  participants  in  the 
market.  Banks  were  active  and  prudent  in  servicing  their  clients’  demand  for  foreign 
currency. 
Dear bank managers, 
Let me now focus on a number of issues of concern to the banking industry and the Bank of 
Albania, which we believe should be addressed carefully during the next year. 
I  would  like  to  start  with  lending  as  the  activity  that  has  the  main  impact  on  the  banks’ 
financial result. We find that lending growth rates decreased and credit quality continued to 
deteriorate, particularly for foreign-currency denominated loans. This performance is due to 
the fall of demand for loans; however, it also reflects a persistent reluctance of banks to lend. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This trend needs to be reversed by addressing problems related to the pace of lending and 
non-performing loans.  
The  stable  growth  of  deposits  as  well  as  the  significant  increase  in  non-residential 
investments  show  that  banks  have  sufficient  financial  resources  to  lend  at  higher  growth 
rates. These resources should be used to lend mainly to the private sector in Albania, acting 
in  accordance  with  the  established  regulatory  framework  and  your  policies  for  investment 
diversification.  On  the  other  hand,  efforts  to  address  the  non-performing  loans  should 
multiply,  in  terms  of  both  prevention  and  addressing  them  properly.  Your  focus  should  be 
placed  on  the  cautious  process  of  loan  restructuring,  especially  before  such  loans  are 
transformed into non-performing loans. Further, you should act discreetly, but consistently, 
for  the  execution  of  collateral.  We  are  all  aware  of  the  problems  that  exist  in  this  area. 
Nonetheless, also thanks to your work, I find that the awareness of decision-making public 
authorities  in  this  regard  has  improved  significantly.  I  had  the  opportunity  to  communicate 
about these issues today to the parliamentary, Commission of Economy and Finance. I am 
confident that the work started by the Ministry of Justice for the revision and improvement of 
some  important  legal  acts,  including  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedures,  will  be  finalized, 
incorporating  and  approving  some  concrete  proposals  for  amendments  submitted  by  the 
banking  industry  and  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  order  to  enhance  the  process  of  collateral 
execution.  
In addition, upon the conclusion of legal processes, it is pivotal to proceed swiftly to write-off 
loss  loans  from  the  bank’s  balance  sheets,  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the 
regulatory framework. We would kindly ask you and your shareholders for dedication in this 
process,  not  only  to  find  the  necessary  human  and  financial  resources,  but  also  the  most 
appropriate forms for a quick, transparent, and consistent handling of non-performing loans. 
We need to bear in mind that lending carries along risks that are difficult to identify at the 
time  of  disbursement.  These  risks  are  determined  not  only  by  the  quality  of  bank  lending 
procedures,  but  also  by  significant  external  factors,  including  the  performance  of  the 
economy. This uncertainty permeates the current phase our banking sector is going through. 
Therefore,  it  is  indispensable  that  bank  management  structures  and  their  shareholders 
commit  the  necessary financial  resources to  cope  with  the  possible  additional  costs  in  the 
future. For shareholders, this implies not only retention of profits in the bank, but also adding 
new capital in case of need. Remember that it also represents a more general trend in the 
banking  industry  globally,  with  a  number  of  new  forthcoming  standards  that  provide  for 
improving  the  quality  of  bank  capital  and  increase  of  its  size.  Our  banks  should  gradually 
begin to adapt to these new standards. 
For  senior  managers,  strengthening  the  control  systems  of  the  bank  activity  remains  a 
primary  objective,  especially  for  those  activities  that  generate  the  main  revenues  and 
expenses arising from the activity. Risk management structures should be really empowered 
and have a stronger voice in decision-making. Banks should continue to further improve the 
efficiency of their operations, including the establishment of a better control over the costs of 
the  activity.  Setting  priority  activities  for  your  institution  will  allow  you  to  identify  new 
investment  needs  as  well  as  those  activities  that  use  bank  resources  inefficiently;  they 
should, in turn, be restructured. This process will positively affect the financial performance of 
the institution, and will allow the implementation of other active policies in areas that benefit 
the activity of the bank. 
We all know that banking is an activity based on trust. For this reason, the bank’s services to 
customers should be “first class” across the entire bank network. This means that customers 
should be served correctly, timely and transparently. Banking services should be provided in 
accordance with the clients’ financial literacy, in any case highlighting, the benefits and the 
risks that customers may incur as they use your bank products. 
In the context of its role as the supervisory and regulatory authority of banking operations, 
the Bank of Albania will continue to carefully monitor and address the challenges facing this 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
activity. Our regulatory framework and supervisory and operational activities will be adapted 
to  provide  all  the  necessary  support  for  the  banking  activity  to  be  safe  and  have  multiple 
benefits for the banking industry, customers, and the economy in general. The professional 
and continuous communication with you will be at the basis of our activity, to identify together 
the best solutions that address your needs and those of other interest groups. 
Dear bank managers,  
In conclusion, I would like to bring to your attention one of the biggest lessons learned from 
the crisis of the latest global financial system, which I think remains applicable for Albania: 
concentration  on  short-term  time  horizons  is  counterproductive  to  both  individual  financial 
institutions that engage in them, and the overall financial system and economy of a country. 
In  this  context,  I  invite  you  all  to  be  farsighted  in  your  analyses  and  decision-making 
processes with regard to the future of the economy of Albania and its banking industry.  
In my view as well as in the conclusions by all the analyses that focus on this issue, Albania 
has huge potential, to a large extent unutilised, to support a sustainable economic growth, 
convergent to the economies of our trade partner countries in the euro area. Despite short-
term  difficulties,  originating  largely  from  external  sources,  the  fundamentals  of  Albania’s 
economic  development  remain  sound.  The  macroeconomic  stability,  natural  resources, 
structure  and  cost  of  the  labour  force,  render  the  long-term  investment  in  the  Albanian 
economy an investment with a guaranteed return. 
In invite you all to be partake in this vision; engage even more intensively in supporting the 
Albanian economy with loans and financial services; and explore new areas and directions 
for the country’s economic development. I am confident that this is not only the best service 
you may provide to Albania, but also the best strategy to ensure sustainable and profitable 
development of the banking industry in Albania.  
In unison, we should not allow short-term problems to be transformed into weaknesses and 
lost opportunities in the long run.  
You will always find in the Bank of Albania an institution that is fully determined to comply 
with its objective on price and financial stability;  a fair and farsighted regulator on banking 
supervision;  an  efficient  administrator  of  liquidity  and  financial  markets;  and  a  profoundly 
professional institution and provider of useful macroeconomic analyses. 
Finally, I would like to make my most sincere wishes for a successful New Year 2013 in your 
professional career and personal life! 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
