Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Upgrades and strong growth – dealing with the 
short-term to get to the end goal 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at The Asset Forum, Makati City, 26 June 2013. 
 These are interesting times… 
As I survey this ballroom, I see that in our midst are some of the individuals most affected by 
the global and domestic developments over the last few weeks. I was on my way – literally 
on  the  road  –  to  a  Governors’  meeting  in  Switzerland  on  Thursday  when  news  of  the 
market’s  reaction  to  the  Fed’s  statements  hit  my  blackberry.  The  divergence  in  what  the 
guidance  the  Fed  meant  to  convey  about  its  policy  and  how  the  market  interpreted  Mr. 
Bernanke’s  statements  and  his  assessment  of  the  state  of  the  US  economy  has  created 
some  furor  across  financial  markets  around  the  globe,  including  our  own  local  financial 
markets.  
I  have  been  asked  what  I  thought  about  the recent  market  movements. I  say,  this  market 
price  action  is  a  good  thing.  It  is  good  because  it  helps  put  a  brake  somehow  on  the 
exuberance,  and  thereby  help  reduce  some  of  the  risks  from  bubble  formation  in  certain 
asset  classes  that  could  lead  to  more  financial  market  imbalances.  Have  the  movements 
been excessive? Well, rather than answering that question, I would say, the recent market 
movement can help separate the “wheat” from the “chaff” – or to those who enjoy a good 
glass  of  beer,  help  raise  the  “head”  to  the  top  of  the  glass.  When  these  separations  are 
completed, the process could actually create opportunities for those who keep their eye on 
the ball. Let me therefore repeat… we live in very interesting times. 
Times  like  this  remind  me  of  the  one  clear  fact  I  have  learned,  first  as  head  of  BSP’s 
Treasury and now as BSP Governor – “There is always volatility on the way to recovery. The 
road  to  recovery  is  never  a  straight  path.”  And  the  one  clear  lesson  I  have  learned  from 
periods of volatility is this: “Keep the main things, main.” In other words, focus on your goal 
and don’t be distracted because volatility is inevitable. I hope you will indulge me when I say 
that my nearly four decades of central banking experience bear me on this assertion.  
To  help  me  keep  the  main  things  main  when  I  am  faced  with  any  situation,  I  follow  three 
simple steps, “my triple A's” which will essentially be the outline of my remarks this afternoon: 
1) Appreciate the knowns – what is in my arsenal. 2) Anticipate the unknowns – what are the 
risks that my arsenal can’t handle now. And finally, 3) Act on the known, mindful that there 
are  unknowns  –  or  how  can  I  be  creative  to  address  the  potential  impact  of  what  could 
transpire when the knowns become entangled with the previously unknown? 
First,  let’s  appreciate  the  knowns.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  events  of  the  last  couple  of 
weeks notwithstanding, these are what we undeniably know: 
1. The Philippine fundamentals are intact. Friends, this is not a cliché. It is not meant to be a 
bumper  sticker.  It  is  a  statement that  I  hope  you  would  not  take  lightly.  On  one  hand,  Q1 
2013 GDP grew at 7.8 percent. Divorcing from the fact that this was the highest Q1 growth in 
the  region  (better  even  than  China’s),  this  growth  was  supported  by  capital  formation  and 
public  spending  on  infrastructure.  In  other  words,  the  economy  is  being  buoyed  by 
expenditures that would cement the growth to a sustainable level. At the same time, year-to-
date average inflation of 3.0 percent is at the lower end of our inflation target range. Over the 
policy  horizon,  the  BSP  expects  inflation  to  fall  well-within  the  government’s  official  target 
range of 3-5 percent. 
Clearly, the Philippine fundamental story remains solid as we continue to enjoy the positive 
convergence of high growth and low inflation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
2. The Philippine banking system is sound. Again, this is not to be taken as a trite phrase. 
The banking system is growing steadily, creating a solid base for domestic retail funding. It is 
also more than adequately capitalized and the BSP does not foresee any major difficulties for 
the  system  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  early  adoption  of  the  capital  requirements  of 
Basel 3 in January 2014.  
3. The Philippine external position is robust. The GIR at over $82B has been supported by 
strong  current  account  receipts  that  are  not  easily  affected  by  changes  in  the  global 
operating environment. At about 12 months’ worth of imports of goods and services, the GIR 
provides a hearty cushion to external shocks.  
4.  The  Philippines’  liquidity  conditions  are  adequate  and  credit growth  is  robust. Together, 
these two support healthy economic growth.  
Ladies and gentlemen, these statements are undeniable. And these developments have led 
to the country achieving investment grade rating from two of the three major western credit 
rating agencies. In fact, the organizers of this event have built this forum on the theme of the 
country’s investment grade rating, which I will come to shortly.  
So, then you might ask, if it is all good, then why have the domestic financial markets sold off 
in  the  last  few  days?  To  answer  this,  let’s  now  move  to  the  second  step:  Anticipate  the 
unknowns.  
Our  financial  markets  have  been  affected  by  the  recent  global  developments  because 
financial  markets  have  become  increasingly  integrated.  We  pushed  hard  to  achieve 
investment grade rating precisely because, in a globally integrated market, the independent 
rating of a credit rating agency helps market participants distinguish between good and better 
investment destinations. Add to this, the combination of the accommodative monetary policy 
in  the  advanced  economies,  on  one  hand,  and  the  good  growth  prospects  in  emerging 
market economies (such as the Philippines), on the other. The confluence of these elements 
has  indeed  made  the  Philippines  a  magnet  for  capital  flows,  i.e.,  portfolio  flows  that  are 
looking for better yields.  
Still,  the  good  story  behind  the  investment  grade  rating  and  strong  capital  flows  begs  the 
question,  why  the  sell  off?  I’m  afraid  given  our  collective  years  of  market  experience,  you 
would  agree  with  me  when  I  say  that  there  are  three  specific  risks  an  integrated  financial 
market  faces  –  Capital  flow  reversal,  market  overshooting,  and  the  loss  of  market 
confidence. If we are able to scope these risks, our problems would possibly go away. To 
scope these risks, however, both policy makers and market participants must measure two 
things  –  1)  speed  and  2)  magnitude. We must find  answers  to  the  questions  of  –  by  how 
much  and  how  fast  could  capital  flow  reverse?  By  how  much  and  in  which  direction  will 
market overshoot? By how much and in what form would loss of market confidence manifest 
itself?  The  problems  would  go  away  even  faster,  if  there  is  a  convergence  in  the 
assessments of policy makers and the market in all of these.  
But these variables are not easily quantifiable with any measure of accuracy. To address this 
problem,  the  BSP  has  therefore  had  to  constantly  sharpen  our  market  surveillance  skills, 
enhance our forecasting models, and widen the breadth of our regional cooperation efforts. I 
hope the market is able to appreciate this fact and see that we have achieved some amount 
of success in all these fronts. 
Which brings me to the third step – Act on the known, but be mindful of the unknown. This is 
a  policy  that  the  BSP  adheres  to  with  diligence  and  circumspection.  Our  recent  monetary 
policy  actions,  responses  in  the form  of macroprudential  measures  and refinements to the 
manner in which we conduct our open market operations are examples of this.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the Philippines, in part through the efforts of the BSP, has sufficient 
cushions to ride out the recent bout of financial market volatility and take advantage of the 
opportunities  that  would  present  themselves  as  the  Fed-forecasted  US  economic  growth 
indeed gains more solid traction. Liquidity – both peso and dollar – remains ample and the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BSP  is  prepared  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  remains  adequately  lubricated  during 
this period of global normalization.  
I know that was quite a mouthful and from the perspective of treasury players, perhaps too 
broad and macro. I know that what the market really wants to hear from the BSP governor is 
this – where are the exchange and interest rates headed?  
I don’t want to suffer the same fate as Bernanke had. So I will make it clear – my message 
today is this: the Philippine fundamentals are solid, and we have built up safeguards to ride 
out  the  volatilities.  Therefore,  at  the  moment,  there  is  no  need  for  us  to  deviate  from  our 
current policy stance.  
The  exchange  rate  will  continue  to  be  market-determined,  and  the  BSP  will  maintain  its 
strategic market presence to avoid excesses in volatilities and to provide appropriate market 
guidance.  
Monetary  policy  will  continue  to  be  conducted  in  consideration  of  the  inflation  outlook  and 
mindful of any financial stability pressures, which in our current assessment are benign.  
The  challenge  for  all  of  us  is  preparedness.  The  BSP  will  continue  to  work  towards  an 
operating environment that would help businesses and consumers plan for the medium and 
long-term. In the near-term, however, we look to you in the market to help mitigate market 
volatilities so that those whom we both serve could cross through, get past these volatilities 
and in the end reach their ultimate goals of a better life ahead. Maraming salamat. 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
