Jean-Pierre Danthine: Credit – is the sky the limit? 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the  Swiss  National  Bank,  at  the  International  Center  for  Monetary  and  Banking  Studies, 
Geneva, 16 April 2013. 
 I would like to thank Claudia Strub and Till Ebner for their very valuable support in drafting this speech and for the 
underlying analysis of the topic. I would also like to thank Robert Bichsel for his helpful comments. 
Introduction 
1. 
The Swiss Federal Council has recently decided to activate the countercyclical capital buffer 
(CCB) acting on a proposal by the Swiss National Bank (SNB). The key feature of this new 
tool is to counter the “pro-cyclical” behavior of  financial institutions whose collective action 
can be a source of systemic risk. To this end it requires banks to temporarily increase the 
level  of  capital  they  must  hold  as  a  backing  for  mortgage  loans  on  residential  property.  In 
doing this, Switzerland is one of the first countries to make effective use of a tool advocated 
by  the  international  community  as  a  means  for  preemptively  dealing  with  cyclical  risks  to 
financial stability. 
What  was  the  motivation  for  activating  this  instrument?  The  main  goal  of  the  CCB  is  to 
increase the resilience of financial institutions against the background of imbalances in the 
domestic mortgage credit and housing markets that have been building up gradually over the 
last several years. In 2012, these imbalances intensified further reaching levels that pose a 
risk to the stability of the banking sector, and hence to the Swiss economy. Here, two facts 
stand out. 
First,  real  estate  prices  in  Switzerland  have  been  persistently  increasing  since  2000,  at 
accelerated  speed  since  2008,  reaching  levels  estimated  to  be  40  to  60%  higher  than 
12 years ago (see Figure 1).1 Second, the growth of credit volumes has been significant with 
the consequence that credit volumes relative to gross domestic product (GDP) have reached 
new  historical  peaks  (see  Figure  2a  and  2b).  The  fact  that  these  two  developments  have 
progressed  hand  in  hand  spells  out  conditions  that  may  lead  to  subsequent  financial 
instability.  Indeed,  historical  evidence  –  widely  documented  by  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements (BIS)2 – shows that such a twin development – elevated residential prices and 
dynamic credit growth – constitutes the prime advance indicator of financial instability. We 
only  have  to  look  outside  our  borders,  to  the  US  and  various  regions  of  Europe,  or  back 
through Switzerland’s own past to get a feel for the devastating consequences on the real 
economy of financial crises originating in real estate excesses. 
Credit: is the sky the limit? 
2. 
Today I would like to focus on one of the two critical elements mentioned above, the growth 
of  credit  volumes.  Figure  2b  easily  explains  the  question  asked  in  the  title:  is  the  sky  the 
limit?  The  answer  is  just  as  easy.  Clearly  the  credit-to-GDP  ratio  cannot  grow  indefinitely 
because otherwise the cost of servicing the debt would end up exhausting the whole of GDP. 
In other words: What we observe here cannot be the manifestation of a secular trend! As we 
                                                 
1  Since  2000,  average  growth  rates  of  real  supply  prices  for  single-family  houses  and  owner-occupied 
apartments come to 2.5% and 3.7%, respectively (annual growth rates based on quarterly data provided by 
Wüest&Partner). 
2  Borio, C. (2012); see also Schularick, M. and Taylor, A. (2012) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
will see, making sense of this development is less trivial. To get a broader perspective on this 
question let us enlarge the picture shown in Figure 2b. 
Figure  3  provides  the  international  dimension.  As  is  clearly  visible,  there  has  been  a 
substantial built-up of credit relative to GDP on a global scale over the last decades. There 
are  some  notable  differences  in  the  size,  timing  and  scope  of  this  development  between 
individual countries but the general direction is the same. Ominously the upward trend was 
particularly  steep  in  the  run-up  to  the  recent  financial  crisis  in  those  countries  that  were 
subsequently most heavily affected (US, Ireland, Spain, UK). 
Figure 4 looks at the Swiss data from an earlier starting point. Here one is struck by the fact 
that the recent significant upward trend in the credit-to-GDP ratio has been preceded by an 
even more spectacular jump during the 1970s and 1980s, pushing the ratio to about 150% – 
a  high  level  in  international  comparison.  During  the  1990s,  it  then  fluctuated  around  this 
mark.  From  2000,  we  again  observe  an  increase  in  the  ratio3,  at  accelerated  speed  since 
2009, such that, as of today, the ratio has reached about 170%.4 This more recent upward 
trend seems to be continuing unabated. 
How can we understand these developments? And can this understanding form a basis for 
predicting the likely future evolution of this variable in Switzerland? These are the questions I 
would like to focus on in this speech. 
To begin with, let me argue that if the dynamics in credit-to-GDP observed since the 1970s 
cannot be construed as an ongoing trend, the recent development must either be viewed as 
a structural adjustment to a new plateau – which seems to have been the case until 1990 – 
or as a cyclical upswing to be followed by a later correction. Schematically one can describe 
these possibilities in terms of Figure 5.5 In the first case, the implication is that at some point, 
credit volumes will be growing in line with GDP again. This could be either the result of an 
acceleration of nominal GDP growth at constant credit volume growth, or of a moderation of 
credit growth to adapt to the long run growth rate of nominal GDP. In the second case, that is 
if  the  situation  is  rather  one  of  a  cyclical  upswing,  then  clearly  credit  growth  will  have  to 
undershoot  nominal  GDP  growth  for  many  years  in  the  future.  In  both  cases  the  present 
situation with credit growth significantly exceeding nominal GDP growth is not sustainable. 
However, the challenge to the financial industry to adapt to a much lower growth of credit is 
clearly larger in the second. This holds even if a harsh backlash in the form of an outright 
crisis can be avoided. 
Unfortunately  it  is  not  possible  to  precisely  ascertain  where  we  stand  and  what  the  future 
holds in store. Nevertheless, I will try to bring some clarity to the issue by examining – first – 
possible  explanations  for  an  increasing  credit-to-GDP  ratio  (section  3),  then  by  assessing 
their explanatory power in the Swiss case (section 4). Section 5 will conclude. 
                                                 
3  Between  2006  and  2008,  the  ratio  temporarily  decreased,  as  a  result  of  the  strong  growth  of  GDP  in  this 
period. 
In this context, it is important to note that a vast majority of outstanding loans in Switzerland are granted as 
mortgages (mortgage volume to GDP: approx. 140%). The discussion of the Swiss situation will thus focus 
mainly on mortgage loans. 
4 
5  As  a  third  scenario  it  is  also  conceivable  that  there  is  a  structural  shift  during  which  credit  overshoots 
temporarily.  This  would  also  imply  a  certain  correction  down  the  road.  However  it  would  be  clearly  a  less 
pronounced one than in the pure cyclical case. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
3. 
3.1. 
Possible explanations for increasing credit-to-GDP ratios 
Supply side considerations: Financial liberalization, the likely explanation for 
the 1970s and 1980s 
A  first  important  reason  for  an  increase  in  credit  volumes  can  be  found  in  an  improved 
availability of credit. It is well recognized that quantity rationing is prevalent in credit markets.6 
Technical innovation and regulatory changes have an impact on the extent of credit rationing 
and  thus  very  directly  on  the  volume  of  allocated  credit.  The  financial  liberalization  of  the 
1970s and the 1980s and technical innovation in financial services that resulted are therefore 
natural  and  plausible  explanations  for  the  spectacular  credit  development  observed 
internationally in the later part of the last century. Here, a permanent adjustment to a new 
plateau  seems  to  be  a  viable  explanation.  This  does  not  mean  that  such  an  adjustment 
process  is  innocuous  from  the  perspective  of  financial  stability,  nor  does  it  imply  that  the 
adjustment process cannot overshoot. Indeed, a higher credit-to-GDP ratio means a higher 
degree of leverage which, in all cases, is likely to increase the fragility of the financial system. 
Demand side developments 
3.2. 
Second,  structural  changes  in  the  demand  for  credit  are  also  a  conceivable  driver  of  an 
increasing  credit-to-GDP  ratio.  For  example,  an  economy-wide  perception  of  improved 
growth opportunities justifies a broad increase in borrowing to finance investment projects. 
One can thus rationalize an increase in the credit-to-GDP ratio in economies in the process 
of catching up with advanced economies. This is a plausible element of explanation for credit 
developments in the case of a country such as Japan in the 1960s and 1970s. It is, however, 
much less plausible in the case of mature countries such as Switzerland in the latter part of 
the period of observation (Figure 3). 
Other  structural  changes  in  credit  demand  are  also  conceivable.  For  instance,  it  can  be 
argued  that  the  financial  liberalization  of  the  1970s  and  1980s  (together  with  related 
sociological  developments)  has  significantly  affected 
towards 
indebtedness  making  it  much  more  socially  acceptable,  in  particular  with  regard  to 
consumption 
the  demand  side,  such  as 
demographic transitions or an increase in idiosyncratic income risk could lead to an increase 
of  credit  demand  for  consumption  smoothing  purposes.  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  connect 
these  theoretical  considerations  with  the  realities  of  developed  economies  in  the  last 
decades.  In  particular  the  demographic  trends  observed  in  advanced  countries  (also  in 
Switzerland) would imply a structural shift towards less rather than more borrowing. 
financing.  Further  structural  changes  on 
the  public  attitude 
The role of the interest rate 
3.3. 
Third,  the  role  of  the  interest  rate  deserves  special  attention  when  thinking  about  credit 
developments.  The  interest  rate  is  of  course  an  endogenous  variable  when  examining  the 
demand  and  supply  for  credit.  Yet  additional  insights  are  possible  when  considering  it 
separately.  For  instance,  a  structural  low  interest  rate  level  such  as  typically  observed  in 
Switzerland can help explain a relatively high credit-to-GDP ratio in international comparison. 
Similarly  a  prolonged  period  of  exceptionally  low  rates  such  as  the  one  we  are  currently 
experiencing is a potential explanation for an increase in credit volumes. 
At a superficial level this relation is obvious. Low interest rates reduce the cost of servicing a 
given  credit  which  becomes  affordable  for  a  broader  range  of  households.  Alternatively, 
borrowers  can  afford  higher  credit  lines.  Moreover,  low  interest  rates  translate  into  higher 
asset prices and higher notional wealth. The increased collateral values support higher credit 
lines  and  decrease  the  amount  of  credit  rationing.  This  is,  in  particular,  relevant  with 
                                                 
6 
Stiglitz, J. and Weiss, A. (1981) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
reference  to  the  real  estate  market  where  higher  house  prices  imply  higher  mortgage 
volumes to finance the same stock of housing.  
The rationality of this explanation has to be relativized, however. This is certainly the case if 
we think of credit financing long run projects such as real estate. Here the average interest 
rate over the life-time of the credit must be relevant for investment decisions. An exceptional, 
prolonged period of low rates might imply a decrease in the lifetime average rate, a form of 
“window of opportunity”. However, the very fact that interest rates must – eventually – rise 
again implies that credit expansion based on low interest rates cannot be viewed as a shift to 
a  permanent  higher  credit  level.  At  higher  interest  rates,  credit  demand  will  decline  once 
again.  To  the  extent  that  the  credit  expansion  was  driven  by  miscalculations  on  credit 
affordability, this may even lead to a crisis. 
Behavioral biases 
3.4. 
The latter remark leads to a fourth potential explanation, that is, credit expansion driven by 
behavioral biases. As highlighted by Hyman Minsky7, the credit cycle appears to be driven by 
“waves  of  optimistic  and  pessimistic  sentiment”8.  In  an  upswing,  expectations  about  future 
developments  may  turn  erratically  exuberant.  Observing  a  long  period  of  price  increases, 
investors tend to believe that new circumstances justify the perpetuation of the upward trend 
and act on this belief. Overconfident lenders and borrowers are increasingly ready to take 
higher  risks.  Ever  increasing  prices  become  a  necessary  condition  to  enable  borrowers  to 
service  their  debts.  Then  the  tide  turns.  A  few  investors  fail  to  meet  their  obligations, 
confidence crumbles, asset prices stop increasing or begin to fall and optimism turns into a 
wave  of  pessimism.  Clearly,  credit  expansion  driven  by  such  erratic  beliefs  is  a  cyclical 
phenomenon and no viable explanation for a sustainable increase in the credit-to-GDP ratio. 
As we have seen, there are various potential explanations for an increase in the credit-to-
GDP ratio, some suggesting a permanent, structural increase in this ratio, others hinting at a 
temporary, cyclical upswing. Which of those explanations can plausibly contribute to explain 
the remarkable development of credit-to-GDP ratio in Switzerland highlighted before? 
A plausible explanation for the current Swiss developments 
4. 
As already hinted at, the review of possible structural drivers of an increase in credit volumes 
does not seem to provide solid support for arguing in favor of a recent permanent shift in the 
case of Switzerland. Switzerland has a highly developed financial system. Economic stability, 
a  high  wealth  level  –  Swiss  households’  stock  of  financial  assets  amounted  to  about 
3.5 times GDP in 2011 (Figure 6) – a high savings rate and structurally low interest rates are 
probable  reasons  for  high  credit  volumes,  possibly  even  a  high  credit-to-GDP  ratio,  in 
international  comparison.  It  is  not  clear,  however,  how  one  could  argue  that  significant 
changes in these structural factors are currently at work.9 By contrast, many of the cyclical 
drivers  that  we  have  discussed  appear  highly  plausible  in  the  current  circumstances. 
Specifically,  the  prolonged  current  period  of  ultra-low  interest  rates  feeding  into  and  being 
reinforced  by  rising  real  estate  prices,  combined  with  the  potential  for  some  of  the  above-
mentioned behavioral biases, have a higher explanatory power. These developments bear 
clear risks for financial stability. Let me go into more detail. 
We are currently experiencing a prolonged period of low interest rates (Figure 7a). This holds 
globally as well as in Switzerland; it is one of the key consequences of the financial crisis of 
                                                 
7  Minsky, H.P. (1982) 
8  Keynes, J.M. (1936) 
9  For instance, wealth of Swiss households relative to GDP, measured in terms of financial assets, shows no 
clear trend over the last decade (Figure 7). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2008–09 and the sluggish recovery recorded since 2009. In the fall of 2008, the SNB lowered 
the policy rate significantly to counter unwarranted tightening of financial conditions and the 
risk of deflation and recession. Since then, the policy rate has been kept close to zero and, in 
September 2011, the SNB set a minimum exchange rate for the euro against the Swiss franc 
to ensure appropriate monetary conditions for the Swiss economy. In this environment the 
interest  rate  is  not  available  as  an  instrument  for  influencing  developments  in  the  credit 
market. As a consequence of this exceptional period of low rates, Swiss mortgage rates have 
fallen substantially over this time period, with advertised rates for 10 year mortgage credits 
hitting  all-time  lows  in  2012  at  2.1%,  substantially  below  the  pre-crisis  average  of  4.7% 
(Figure 7b). 
It  thus  comes  as  no  surprise  that  credit  growth,  mainly  driven  by  the  growth  of  residential 
mortgage loans, accelerated from 2009 onwards (as shown before in Figure 2a). Given the 
rather rigid Swiss rental market, the decrease in mortgage rates has not been, until recently, 
accompanied by a similar decrease in rental rates. This has led to a situation where it may 
seem relatively more attractive to buy than to rent. 
Such a prolonged period of ultra-low rates is also fertile ground for behavioral biases. It is, for 
instance, tempting to compute the cost of home ownership on the basis of a permanently low 
rate,  a  practice  which  can  lead  to  grossly  overestimating  the  cost  advantage  of  home 
ownership. The persistent real estate price increases reported in Figure 1 are also relevant in 
this context. This can lead to an overestimation of housing wealth, on the one hand, or to an 
underestimation of the riskiness of mortgages granted on the basis of these elevated housing 
prices, on the other. A long period of rising prices also tends to feed beliefs that prices can 
only  go  up,  contrary  to  all  historical  experience  (“this  time  is  different”-argument10).  At  the 
same time the low interest rates put pressure on the margins of lenders. This increases their 
propensity  to  compensate  lowered  margins  with  increased  volumes.  All  this  leads  to 
increasing  fragility  and  added  riskiness.  For  Switzerland,  indications  of  such  a  high  risk 
appetite are found in recent survey data.11 
Summing up, the analysis of the Swiss situation suggests that although structural factors can 
possibly explain a high level of credit-to-GDP in Switzerland in international comparison, they 
are unlikely to rationalize the most recent upward move in this ratio. The latter is likely to be a 
cyclical movement that could reverse when interest rates themselves return to more normal 
levels at some point in the future. 
Conclusion: Fasten your seatbelts! 
5. 
What does this analysis imply for market participants? As observed earlier, credit volume has 
gone from around 150% to around 170% of GDP in the past few years. This is the result of 
an average growth of credit of nearly 4%, while nominal GDP growth has averaged slightly 
above 1% over the same period. For this movement to be fully reversed, credit growth would 
have to significantly undershoot nominal GDP growth. The critical question is: could such a 
reversal  happen  smoothly,  or  in  other  words,  is  a  soft  landing  possible?  International 
experience (Figure 3) suggests this is a significant challenge. Credit-to-GDP ratios often fall 
in the wake of a severe crash, with pronounced falls in property prices and large increases in 
credit default rates; but this is exactly what we aim to avoid.  
While the diagnosis cannot be totally certain until history has run its course, the lessons from 
the analysis are, in my mind, crystal clear. The large increase in leverage, presumably of a 
                                                 
10  Reinhart, C. and Rogoff, K. (2009) 
11  According to SNB survey data, about 20% of new mortgages are granted for investments with a loan-to-value 
ratio above 80%, and 25% of newly originated mortgages are granted to lever existing mortgages. Moreover, 
in  the  case  of  40%  of  new  mortgages  the  imputed  costs  would  exceed  one-third  of  gross  income  at  a 
mortgage interest rate of 5%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
cyclical nature, the elevated property prices and the evidence of high risk appetite translate 
for the Swiss economy into a state of high vulnerability requiring caution and the exercise of 
responsibility  by  all  concerned.  The  activation  of  the  CCB  and  the  adoption  of  other 
prudential measures have to be seen in this perspective. 
References 
Borio,  C.  (2012):  The  financial  cycle  and  macroeconomics:  What  have  we  learnt? 
BIS Working Paper No 395 
Keynes,  J.  M.  (1936):  The  General  Theory  of  Employment,  Interest  and  Money,  London, 
Macmillan; Chapter 12 
Minsky, H. P. (1982): Can “it” happen again?, Essays on instability and finance, New York 
1982 
Reinhart, C. and Rogoff, K. (2009): This time is different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, 
Princeton University Press 
Schularick M., and Taylor, A. (2012): Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage 
Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008, American Economic Review, American Economic 
Association, Vol. 102(2), pp. 1029–61 
Stiglitz, J. and Weiss, A. (1981): Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information, The 
American Economic Review, Vol. 71, No. 3, pp. 393–410. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
