Benoît Cœuré: Currency fluctuations – the limits to benign neglect 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  luncheon  panel  “Currency  wars  and  the  G-20’s  goal  of  strong,  sustainable,  and 
balanced  growth”,  at  the  Conference  on  “Currency  wars  –  economic  realities,  institutional 
responses,  and 
International  Economics, 
Washington, DC, 2 April 2013. 
the  G-20  agenda”,  Peterson 
Institute 
for 
 I wish to thank Luca Dedola and Giovanni Lombardo for their contributions to this speech and Georges Pineau for 
his remarks. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Peterson Institute for the invitation to speak in this panel. 
In my remarks today, I wish to consider the current debate on competitive devaluations and 
the peril of a currency war. 
Large  policy  spillovers  in  an  increasingly  integrated  world  economy  naturally  raise  the 
possibility  of  inefficiencies.  National  policy-makers,  who  pursue  a  domestic  objective  and 
ignore the externalities they impose on other countries, may find themselves in equilibria that 
entail  collective  welfare  losses.  Policies  that  are  efficient  for  the  global  economy  are  not 
necessarily  optimal  from  the  national  vantage  point,  and  there  is  a  temptation  to  shift  the 
burden  and  costs  of  adjustment  abroad,  and  maximise  the  net  gains  accruing  to  national 
residents. 
A classic example of the application of this framework to monetary policy is Ragnar Nurkse’s 
well-known  analysis  of the  devaluations  that  took  place  in  the  interwar  period.  Since  then, 
concerns about spirals of competitive devaluations have motivated the design of institutions 
and  rules  –  from  the  Bretton  Woods  arrangements  of  1944  to  the  Group  of  Twenty  –  to 
prevent countries from adopting “beggar thy neighbour” policies1. The lessons from the crises 
of the interwar period continue to have an impact on policy discussions today, as the world 
economy is adjusting to the Great Recession. 
Some  central  banks  in  major  industrialised  countries  are  currently  pursuing,  or  have 
announced  policy  measures  to  stem  entrenched  deflationary  pressures  and  bring  down 
unemployment levels. Because policy interest rates are at or close to their lower bound in 
these economies, monetary easing has taken the form of non-standard measures, such as 
forward  guidance  concerning  the  path  of  future  policy  rates,  and/or  quantitative  easing. 
These measures have had domestic effects (e.g. raising inflation expectations); but as it is a 
standard outcome of monetary policy easing, have also exerted some depreciation pressures 
on the currency of the respective country. The question I want to address is the following: 
should policy-makers, especially those in large countries whose currency is appreciating, be 
concerned by these developments? Do the latter pose a challenge to the G20 international 
cooperation policy agenda? 
Taking mainly the perspective of a large currency area, I will first outline the conditions under 
which the answer to the above question is “No”. In the process, I will also argue that there is 
a misleading “Panglossian” view that is emerging, namely that competitive devaluations are 
an efficient way to coordinate national policies on the global task of taking the world economy 
                                                
1  See  B.  Bernanke  (2013),  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Global  Economy”,  Remarks  at  the  Department  of 
Economics  and  Suntory  and  Toyota  International  Centres  for  Economics  and  Related  Disciplines,  Public 
Discussion in Association with the Bank of England, London School of Economics, London, 25 March; and 
B. Eichengreen  (2013),  “Currency  wars  or  international  policy  coordination?”,  University  of  California, 
Berkeley. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
out  of  a  deflationary  trap.  I  will  then  contend  that  competitive  devaluations,  if  aggressively 
pursued,  would  be  quite  harmful,  due  to  the  constraints  faced  by  policy-makers  in  most 
countries in today’s environment. 
The case of no concerns about currency manipulations 
1. 
Typically,  sustained  exchange  rate  movements  affect  policy  objectives  (e.g.  inflation  and 
output) and hence demand offsetting policy actions. Other things being equal, these policy 
actions, by resisting the exchange rate movement to a degree, will re-establish the original 
target  outcomes  over  the  relevant  horizon.  So,  to  the  extent  that  such  offsetting  policy 
actions are unconstrained and also pose no trade-offs, and the exchange rate is not per se a 
target (namely under a floating exchange rate regime), there is little or no scope for effective 
currency manipulations. 
This is by and large the environment in which the ECB operates. The exchange rate is not a 
policy target for the ECB; however, it matters for price stability and growth and, as such, it is 
part of the overall assessment of the appropriateness of the policy stance. If contrary to the 
objective of medium term price stability, it may thus trigger offsetting policy actions. 
An important aspect of the consequences of an exchange rate movement resulting from a 
monetary  policy  shock  abroad  is  that  it  brings  about  few  trade-offs  for  domestic  monetary 
policy-makers. Currency appreciation would tend to have effects of the same sign on inflation 
and  growth.  However,  exchange  rate  movements  reflecting  other  forces,  particularly  those 
resulting  in  severe  misalignments,  would  not  have  such  benign  consequences.  Currency 
swings disconnected from fundamentals, or brought about by misguided policies, have the 
potential to become disruptive. 
The  empirical  evidence  on  the  cross-border  effects  of  standard  monetary  policy  shocks  in 
major  economies  suggests  the  following.  A  monetary  easing,  say  in  the  US,  while 
depreciating the dollar, is associated with a fall in net exports and a global output expansion; 
interest rates also decrease in other countries.2 Therefore, if foreign policy measures, e.g. in 
the  form  of  forward  guidance,  can  be  readily  matched  with  domestic  policy  actions,  we 
should  not  worry  about  the  risk  of  a  loss  of  competitiveness.  In  addition,  a  foreign  policy 
expansion  might  not  require  a  domestic  response  that  fully  neutralises  the  exchange  rate 
movement if there are sources of overall positive spillovers, in particular through increased 
foreign  demand.  Objectives  in  terms  of  inflation  and  output  gaps  can  then  be  achieved 
despite some currency appreciation. 
The previous argument should not be confused with an emerging “Panglossian” perspective3 
which posits that competitive devaluations triggering an exchange rate “arms race” would be 
welcome in the current conjuncture. The argument put forward is that, contrary to a tariff war 
that leaves everybody worse off, such a race would generate a needed global, coordinated 
monetary expansion. This view rests on the assumption that monetary policy-makers should 
do more than they are currently doing. Chasing an exchange rate depreciation would make 
up  for  a  perceived  lack  of  action  and  deliver  the  appropriate  symmetric  policy  response. 
However, there is no such lack of action in advanced economies, where monetary policy has 
                                                
2  See  the  key  contributions  by  S.  Kim  and  N.  Roubini  (2000)  “Exchange  rate  anomalies  in  the  industrial 
countries: A solution with a structural VAR approach”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 45 pp. 561–586; 
and Kim (2001) “International transmission of U.S. monetary policy shocks: Evidence from VAR’s”, Journal of 
Monetary Economics, Vol. 48, pp. 339–372. 
“In truth, the so-called ‘currency war’ is not all bad: if everyone debases their currency, the world will get closer 
to  the  monetary  stimulus  necessary  to  outweigh  excessive  fiscal  zeal”,  from  “G20  in  search  of  recovery”, 
Financial 
February 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/cec13222-76a2-11e2-8569-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz2O5GVvOZi 
Times 
2013, 
14 
3 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
been and is likely to remain very accommodative. Moreover, the “Panglossian” approach to 
coordination may create difficulties of its own, as I shall illustrate later on. 
to 
from 
the  Mundell-Fleming-Dornbusch  model 
Monetary policy limits and the costs of competitive devaluations 
2. 
It  would  be  simplistic  to  think  that  countries  should  always  put  up  with  any  exchange  rate 
movement  generated  by  policy  actions  abroad,  when  the  latter  aim  to  address  domestic 
problems and are not carried out through overt currency manipulations. Let me list here three 
reasons  why  there  are  limits  to  non-cooperative  policy  responses  to  exchange  rate 
movements following foreign monetary policy shocks. 
First, it is true that starting in the mid-1980s the economic literature by and large finds only 
international  policy  cooperation.4  This  consensus,  although  not 
modest  gains  from 
undisputed,5  has  been  reinforced  by  the  paradigm  shift  in  international  macroeconomic 
theory 
the  New  Open  Economy 
Macroeconomics.6  However,  the  workhorse  open-economy  model  underlying  those  results 
describes  a  benign, 
frictionless  environment,  with  only  moderate  macroeconomic 
interdependence. These theoretical economies are in an ideal state of “divine coincidence”: 
one policy instrument suffices to achieve all targets, quite independently of policy decisions 
abroad.7 In the real world, a number of market frictions – in particular of a financial nature – 
have been identified as channels of large cross-country spillovers and, hence, as potential 
sources  of  non-trivial  gains  from  cooperation  –  particularly  concerning  unconventional 
policies.8  The  ever  stronger  global  integration  of  trade  in  goods  and  services  and,  in 
particular,  in  financial  markets  makes  the  issue  of  central  bank  cooperation  ever  more 
relevant today. 
Second,  a  group  of  large,  systemically  relevant  economies  has  not  been  affected 
symmetrically by the crisis. As noted by Barry Eichengreen,9 this is an important difference 
with the interwar period. Insofar as they have decoupled from advanced economies, the main 
policy concern in emerging market economies has been inflationary pressures, and in some 
cases, growth rates and asset prices that are too strong rather than too weak. Rather than 
resorting to tighter macroeconomic policies, these countries may instead be tempted to fight 
back against currency appreciation. To deal with the ensuing pro-cyclical bias, they might opt 
for  second-best  measures  designed  to  limit  capital  inflows  and/or  moderate  their  domestic 
impact; the effectiveness of which remains unascertained.10  
                                                
4  See the classic contribution by G. Oudiz, and J. Sachs (1984), “Macroeconomic Policy Coordination among 
the  Industrial  Economies”,  Brookings  Paper  on  Economic  Activity  15(1),  pp.  1–76.  For  a  survey  of  this 
literature,  see  the  book  by  M.  Canzoneri  and  D.  Henderson  (1991),  “Monetary  Policy  in  Interdependent 
Economies”, MIT Press, Cambridge MA. 
5  W.  McKibbin  (1997).  “Empirical  evidence  on  international  economic  policy  coordination”,  in  M.  Fratianni, 
D. Salvatore and J. Von Hagen (eds.), Handbook of Comparative Economic Policies, Greenwood Press. 
6  The seminal paper studying international monetary cooperation in this new paradigm is the now classic paper 
by  M.  Obstfeld  and  K.  Rogoff  (2002),  “Global  Implications  of  Self-Oriented  National  Monetary  Rules”, 
Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  pp.  503–535.  This  paper  found  that  the  welfare  gains  from  monetary 
cooperation are very small. 
7  This  term  was  used  by  Blanchard,  O.,  &  Gali,  J.  (2007)  (“Real  Wage  Rigidities  and  the  New  Keynesian 
model”; Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 39, pp. 35–65) to refer to closed economy models where 
all gaps can be easily closed by policy-makers. More generally, it has been used to describe all cases, also in 
open economy models, where trade-offs are absent or negligible. 
8  See,  for  example,  Dedola,  L.,  P.  Karadi  &  G.  Lombardo  (2013),  “Global  implications  of  self-oriented 
unconventional policies”, Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming. 
9  See B. Eichengreen (op. cit.). 
10  It has been argued however that capital flows to emerging market economies have been driven as much by 
“pull” factors at home as by “push” factors originating abroad, see M. Fratzscher, M. Lo Duca and R. Straub 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Likewise, small open economies which find it desirable to peg their exchange rates also have 
little room to react, unless the easing is undertaken in their anchor currency. Even then, their 
ability to deliver domestic monetary easing may be hampered by the lack of domestic assets 
available for quantitative easing. 
Third,  central  banks  in  the  advanced  countries  are  close  to  reaching  the  limits  of  their 
conventional policies, or are already undertaking unconventional ones, such as quantitative 
easing.  The  operational  difficulties  that  would  surround  additional  non-standard  measures 
and doubts over their traction on domestic aggregate demand suggest that there is at least 
an  implicit  cost  in  responding  to  further  negative  developments,  as  an  exchange  rate 
appreciation would be for many economies. This is particularly likely to be the case when the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  is  hampered  by  persistent  structural  rigidities,  as  it  is  the 
case  in  large  parts  of  the  euro  area  today.  In  situations  in  which  it  becomes  difficult  to 
generate  monetary  policy  stimuli  for  domestic  economies,  the  “coordinated”  expansion 
unwittingly  resulting  from  a  currency  war  would  not  provide  more  room  for  manoeuvre  for 
policy-makers.  To  the  contrary,  the  “Panglossian”  approach  may  only  result  in  a  global 
inflationary bias. 
In the light of these constraints, it would be a matter of concern if countries were to directly 
pursue overt competitive devaluations, particularly by resorting to large purchases of foreign 
assets.11 Moving to expenditure-switching policies would in effect create a zero sum game 
and  expose  global  markets  to  serious  risks  of  an  escalation  of  trade  and  financial 
protectionism. 
Conclusion 
3. 
As much as exchange rate movements are the natural result of policies aimed at achieving 
sound and legitimate domestic targets, such as price stability, and as long as other central 
banks  are  not  constrained  in  their  ability  to  take  offsetting  actions,  there  is  no  reason  for 
concern. Keeping one’s own house in order, however, is quite different from sticking one’s 
head in the sand. Especially in the current conjuncture, the room for policy actions might be 
reduced,  or  countervailing  interventions  might  have  become  more  costly.  Then,  large  and 
sustained currency swings might hinder the achievement of domestic targets. 
I am inclined to believe that global economic circumstances are currently far from the ideal 
case of “divine coincidence” where one policy instrument would suffice to achieve all targets. 
Although they are on a clear path to recovery, financial markets in advanced economies are 
still  fragile  and  the  real  economy  is  at  best  giving  timid  signs  of  improvement.  There  are 
some  concerns  that  non-standard  policies  would  not  gain  enough  traction  on  domestic 
aggregate  demand  because  of  deleveraging  by  domestic  agents,  including  banks.  This 
would  leave  the  exchange  rate  as  the  residual  macro-policy  instrument,  with  forward 
guidance  but  especially  quantitative  easing  mainly  operating  via  external  channels.  Under 
these circumstances, the temptation to divert global demand and foreign capital towards the 
domestic economy at the expense of other ailing countries could be dangerously alluring. It is 
during  times  like  these  that  the  international  community  has  to  display  an  ability  to  reach 
mutually beneficial agreements, while recognising the legitimate ambition of each country to 
solve its domestic problems. 
                                                                                                                                                   
(2012), “A Global Monetary Tsunami? On the Spillovers of US Quantitative Easing”, CEPR Discussion Paper, 
No.  9195.  Also,  as  recalled  by  B.  Bernanke  (op.  cit.),  empirical  simulations  suggest  that  the  drag  on  the 
competitiveness  of  emerging  market  economies  and  the  output  spillovers  arising  from  accommodative 
monetary policies in the advanced economies are roughly offsetting. 
11  See  J.  Gagnon  (2013),  “The  Elephant  Hiding  in  the  Room:  Currency  Intervention  and  Trade  Imbalances”. 
Peterson Institute Working Paper 13-2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The economic literature highlights the dangers of individual countries pursuing “beggar they 
neighbour” or “burden-shifting” policies. I believe this message is well understood by central 
bankers. We  strive  to  conduct  policies  in  a  cooperative  spirit  as  much  as  possible.  There 
have been several initiatives at global level to foster monetary cooperation. The commitment 
by  G20  leaders  to  build  a  more  stable  and  resilient  international  monetary  system,  as 
reaffirmed  at  the  Cannes  summit,  is  echoed  for  instance  in  the  CGFS  report  on  global 
liquidity,12 which develops a framework for the analysis of global liquidity cycles, as well as in 
the  IMF’s  work  on  the  multilateral  aspects  of  policies  affecting  global  capital  flows.13  The 
recent G7 statement on exchange rates also reflects this cooperative spirit, as well as the 
G20 communiqué subsequently adopted. 
This  kind  of  cooperation  seems  different  from  the  way  it  is  treated  in  theoretical  models, 
where cooperation takes the form of policy-makers agreeing on a configuration of policies to 
maximise  global  welfare.14  I  do  not  think  this  difference  matters.  For  me,  the  main  value 
added  coming  from  the  economic  literature  consists  in  identifying  and  quantifying  the 
implications  for  welfare  of  spillovers  across  economies  and  policies.  Cooperation  between 
the ECB and other major central banks is and will remain extensive and effective, building on 
a common ground of shared experience and mutual trust. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
12  BIS  (2011):  Global  liquidity  –  concept,  measurement  and  policy  implications,  CGFS Publications  No 45 
November 2011. (http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs45.pdf) 
Aspects 
Multilateral 
(2011): 
The 
13  IMF 
(http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2011/101311.pdf) 
of 
Policies 
Affecting 
Capital 
Flows, 
14  International  exchanges  of  information  do  not  necessarily  produce  better  outcomes,  as  shown  e.g.  by 
J. Frankel  and  K.  Rockett  (1988),  “International  macroeconomic  policy  coordination  when  policy-makers 
disagree on the model”, American Economic Review 78. For a survey of this literature, see also A. Ghosh and 
P. Masson (1994), “Economic cooperation in an uncertain world”, Blackwell, Oxford. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
