Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The planned introduction of the East 
African Monetary Union 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
opening of the East African Legislative Assembly Consultative Workshop on the East African 
Monetary Union, Kampala, 9 September 2013. 
 Honourable Ministers and 
Honourable Members of the East African Legislative Assembly 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The issue that we have gathered here to discuss today – the planned introduction of the East 
African Monetary Union (EAMU) – is one which will have profound effects on this region for 
decades to come. Later this year I expect that the heads of state of each of the partner states 
of the East African Community (EAC) will sign the Protocol for the introduction of the EAMU. 
The  Protocol  will  pave  the  way  for  the  transition  to  EAMU  over  the  course  of  the  next 
10 years and the complementary legal, institutional and economic reforms. 
The East African Monetary Union is a project with potentially large long term benefits for all 
of  the  economies  in  the  EAC  but  which  also  entails  considerable  risks.  The  long  term 
success of EAMU will be dependent upon major changes to public policy and in the way in 
which public policy is made in all partner states of the EAC. A successful monetary union is 
only  possible  if  each  partner  state  is  prepared  to  accept  the  pooling  of  its  economic 
sovereignty. Many economic decisions which are now made at the national level will have to 
be made at the regional level. 
This  pooling  of  economic  sovereignty  extends  beyond  the  loss  of  independent  national 
monetary policy and exchange rates, which is of course inherent in a monetary union; it also 
requires that each partner state accepts constraints on its fiscal policy and implements fully 
the  provisions  of  the  common  market,  including  not  just  free  trade  in  goods  and  services 
within the EAC but also the free movement of capital and labour within the EAC. If we do not 
build  the  requisite  foundations  for  monetary  union,  the  introduction  of  EAMU  may  actually 
harm our economies. The problems which are currently being experienced by some of the 
peripheral  members  of  the  Euro  zone  –  Greece,  Portugal  and  Spain  for  example  –  which 
have  lost  competitiveness  on  international  markets  and  can  no  longer  use  exchange  rate 
depreciation to restore their competitiveness, should provide a salutary lesson to everyone 
involved in planning for the introduction of the EAMU. 
Without  wishing  to  pre-empt  any  of  the  contributions  from  my  colleagues  in  the  EAC 
Secretariat, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Economic 
Policy Research Council which we will hear later on in this workshop, I would like to take a 
few minutes of your time to explain why I believe that monetary union in East Africa will make 
an important contribution to the long term development of our region, potentially helping to 
accelerate the transition of our economies to middle income status, and also to identify the 
critical prerequisites for the successful introduction of EAMU.  
Why is monetary union important in East Africa? 
The partner states of the EAC are implementing a customs union and a common market in 
order  to  promote  regional  economic  integration.  Deeper  regional  economic  integration  will 
provide a major spur to development in all partner states by strengthening competition within 
our respective domestic markets, by allowing producers to reap greater economies of scale 
and thus become more efficient, and by widening opportunities for trade. The regional market 
will also provide a stepping stone for domestic producers to access global markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The primary rationale for the monetary union is to cement the benefits of regional economic 
integration. Replacing individual currencies with one single common currency will reduce the 
costs and risks of transacting business across the national boundaries of the partner states 
of the EAC. Monetary union removes the costs of having to transact in different currencies 
and the risk of adverse exchange rate movements for trade within East Africa. 
Furthermore,  because  the  combined  economy  of  all  of  the  partner  states  together  will  be 
more diversified than that of any individual partner state, it will be less vulnerable to external 
shocks such as commodity price shocks and as a consequence, the volatility of the common 
exchange rate against that of other major currencies such as the dollar or Euro should be 
less  than  the  volatility  of  the  currently  existing  national  currencies  of  the  partner  states. 
Exchange  rate  volatility  is  a  major  risk  for  business  and  a  deterrent  to  private  investment, 
especially  in  the  traded  goods  sectors  of  the  economy.  Hence  by  eliminating  entirely 
exchange  rate  movements  within  the  EAC,  and  by  reducing  exchange  rate  volatility  with 
respect to third party currencies outside of the EAC, the EAMU should reduce some of the 
commercial risks of doing business in East Africa and, as such, help to promote more private 
investment. 
EAMU will also be important for the future of East Africa because of the signal it sends to the 
rest of the world. Having a common currency is one of the clearest statements of intent that 
the EAC can make to demonstrate its long term commitment to deep regional integration. It 
sends a message to foreign investors that the EAC really is a genuine single market in which 
to do business. Because it involves a major loss of economic sovereignty, the introduction of 
the EAMU is also a political statement about the commitment of partner states in the EAC to 
a common future as East Africans, rather than just as citizens of individual nation states. 
What are the prerequisites for the success of monetary union? 
The first  prerequisite for  the  EAMU  is  that  all  partner  states  implement the  customs  union 
and  common  market  in  full.  This  means  removing  all  non  tariff  barriers  (NTBs)  to  intra-
regional  trade  in  the  EAC.  It  means  allowing  firms  in  the  services  industries,  such  as 
transport firms, domiciled in any partner state to sell their services  without restriction in all 
other  partner  states.  It  also  means  accepting  without  preconditions  the  free  movement  of 
labour throughout the EAC: for example Kenyans should be able to live and work in Uganda 
without restrictions and without having to pay for work or residency permits. Finally, it means 
allowing the free movement of capital across borders within the EAC. Free capital mobility 
within the EAC will only be meaningful if each partner state imposes no restrictions on the 
purchase of assets by investors from any other partner state. 
A  genuine  single  market  in  the  EAC,  without  any  restrictions  on  the  movement  of  goods, 
services or factors of production, is an essential foundation for EAMU for two reasons. First, 
the benefits of monetary union to the partner states are positively correlated with the amount 
of trade between the partner states and the degree of integration of their economies. Unless 
there is very substantial trade within the EAC, there will be only minor benefits to be derived 
from a common currency. East Africa will not be able to attain the fullest degree of economic 
integration which is possible until all of the artificial barriers to intra-regional trade and to the 
movement of factors of production within the EAC have been abolished. 
Secondly, the member states of the EAC will inevitably suffer what are called “idiosyncratic 
economic shocks”; these are shocks which affect the economy of one member state but not 
those of others. For an economy with its own currency and an independent monetary policy, 
the optimal response to a macroeconomic shock will usually involve monetary and exchange 
rate policy; for example, an economy might adjust to a negative terms of trade shock through 
a  depreciation  of the  real  exchange  rate  to  restore  external  balance.  It is  self  evident  that 
membership of a monetary union means that national authorities cannot use either monetary 
or  exchange  rate  policy  to  adjust  to  an  idiosyncratic  macroeconomic  shock,  leaving  them 
more vulnerable to the adverse consequences of such shocks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However,  regional  integration  offers  an  alternative  adjustment  mechanism  for  countries 
experiencing idiosyncratic shocks. For example, suppose the economy of one partner state 
suffers  a  major  decline  in  the  international  price  of  one  of  its  main  exports.  Such  a  shock 
would  reduce  the  incomes  of  exporters  and  thereby  cut  aggregate  demand,  causing  a 
recession in the domestic economy if the shock were large enough. In this case, the shock to 
aggregate demand could be mitigated if domestic producers were able to redirect their output 
to  the  markets  of  their  partner  states.  Hence  the  initial  idiosyncratic  shock  to  one  partner 
state can be absorbed by all partner states within the monetary union, lessening the adverse 
impact  on  the  partner  state  which  suffered  the  initial  shock.  But  this  mechanism  of 
adjustment will only be possible if there are no barriers to trade across national boundaries 
within the EAC, so that it is not much more difficult for Ugandan firms to sell their goods or 
services in Kenya than it is in Uganda itself. 
Another  example  is  that  of  the  Dutch  disease  which  is  often  created  by  the  domestic 
spending generated by a natural resource boom. The adverse impact of Dutch disease can 
be mitigated through the entry into the resource boom economy of labour and service sector 
firms from partner states, which can ease supply constraints and thus inflationary pressures 
in the resource boom economy. The point that I want to emphasize is that, if we introduce a 
monetary union without first having put in place a genuine common market which can act as 
a  shock  absorber  for  idiosyncratic  shocks  hitting  individual  economies,  we  run  the  risk  of 
exposing our economies to greater macroeconomic volatility. 
The  second  prerequisite  for  a  successful  monetary  union  is  sound  fiscal  policy,  as  is  very 
clearly demonstrated by the problems currently afflicting some of the Euro zone members, 
notably  Greece.  The  credibility  of  the  monetary  policy  of  the  common  central  bank  of  the 
EAC  will  depend  on  it  never  having  to  finance  the  fiscal  deficits  of  partner  states. 
Unfortunately,  it  is  difficult  for  a  common  central  bank  to  credibly  commit  itself  never  to 
finance  the  fiscal  deficit  of  a  partner  state,  because  there  may  be  circumstances  when 
providing  deficit financing  is the  least  worst  option  available  if the  alternative  of  allowing  a 
sovereign default to occur risks a systemic financial crisis throughout the EAC. This is the 
dilemma which has faced the European Central Bank since the global financial crisis broke 
out: a sovereign default in, for example, Italy would not just affect Italians; the damage would 
be spread throughout the Eurozone because of the contagion to financial institutions in other 
Euro zone members. 
To  avoid  any  danger  of  monetary  policy  being  undermined  by  having  to  bail  out  the 
Government of a partner state, it is necessary that the public debt of each partner state of the 
EAMU must be sustainable and also perceived to be sustainable, so that each Government 
can always fully meet its borrowing requirement from the market without having to resort to 
finance from the common central bank to avoid a sovereign default. To ensure public debt 
sustainability institutional mechanisms must be put in place, and enforced, to impose ceilings 
on fiscal deficits and public debt. The Euro zone had the mechanisms to ensure public debt 
sustainability  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact, but  they  were  not  properly  enforced.  In the 
EAC we are formulating fiscal rules to curb fiscal deficits and public borrowing. These targets 
will be set out in the EAMU Protocol to be signed later this year. It goes without saying that it 
is imperative that these fiscal rules are complied with at all times. Failure to abide by these 
fiscal rules could fatally undermine the prospects for a successful monetary union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Conclusion 
The  introduction  of  a  monetary  union  is  undoubtedly  the  most  challenging  project  ever 
undertaken at the regional level in East Africa. The difficulties and risks involved should not 
be  underestimated.  The  potential  long  term  benefits  of  monetary  union  are  large.  If  the 
monetary  union  is  designed  well  and  implemented  properly,  it  should  contribute  to  faster 
growth in trade, productivity, jobs and output over several decades. But the benefits will not 
be realized unless partner states are prepared to undertake the radical reforms necessary to 
put in place the essential foundations for monetary union, which include the implementation 
in  full  of  the  common  market  within  the  EAC  and  the  establishment  of  rules  based  sound 
fiscal policies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
