Haruhiko Kuroda: Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the 
Yomiuri International Economic Society, Tokyo, 12 April 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to be invited to this meeting hosted by the Yomiuri International Economic 
Society today. This is my first speech as Governor of the Bank of Japan. Today, I would like 
to explain the “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing” that we decided to embark on 
last week. 
Basic thinking 
I. 
When I was appointed as the governor, I had the following basic thinking in mind. 
The first is that we should do whatever is necessary to overcome deflation, which has been 
causing  a  deterioration  in  Japan’s  economy  for  nearly  15  years.  The  Bank  of  Japan  has 
engaged  in a  wide  range  of  monetary  easing  efforts  – including  the implementation  of  the 
zero interest rate policy, the quantitative easing policy, and comprehensive monetary easing. 
Despite its cumulative efforts, there have been no easily derived concrete results, and I have 
felt strongly that we should make all-out efforts to utilize every possible resource bestowed 
upon the Bank, rather than to adopt an incremental approach – or, put differently, to adopt 
gradualism. 
The  second  point  is  the  importance  of  committing  strongly  and  clearly  that  the  Bank  is 
responsible  for  achieving  the  price  stability  target.  At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  in 
January, the Bank – on its own judgment – set the price stability target at 2 percent in terms 
of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  and  made  a 
groundbreaking commitment to achieve that target at the earliest possible time. Regarding 
the time frame for achieving the target, looking at other economies, many central banks have 
been making efforts to achieve the price stability in the medium term, with a time horizon of 
about two years for the effects of monetary policy to permeate the economy. I have found it 
appropriate for Japan’s economy as well to make a commitment with a time horizon of about 
two years. 
The third point is to convey the Bank’s strong policy stance to markets and economic entities 
with  clarity  and  intelligibility,  thereby  dramatically  changing  the  expectations  of  market 
participants as well as firms and households. During the course of 15 years of deflation, the 
public’s behavior has been based on the assumption that prices would either decline or be 
unlikely  to  rise.  It  is  necessary  to  eliminate  deflationary  expectations  through  the  Bank’s 
strong commitment and intelligible explanation. 
And lastly, we should enter a new phase of monetary easing both in terms of quantity and 
quality  in  order  to  underpin  such  a  commitment.  There  is  a  reason  to  emphasize  the 
qualitative aspect of monetary easing along with its quantitative aspect.  While the Bank of 
Japan  and  other  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  have  almost  exhausted  further 
declines in short-term interest rates, they now engage in policies to increase the size of their 
balance sheets as part of unconventional policy measures. There is now a broad consensus 
with regard to the effect of balance sheet expansion. That is, the central banks’ purchases of 
government bonds and other assets from the markets have the effect of encouraging further 
declines  in  long-term  interest  rates  and  lowering  risk  premia  of  asset  prices  by  absorbing 
risks – such as the one stemming from interest rate fluctuations. Consequently, it becomes 
important  to  determine  not  only  how  much  liquidity  to  supply  but  also  how  to  supply  that 
quantity.  Even  with  the  same  amount  of  liquidity,  purchasing  short-term  T-Bills  produces 
different effects than in the case where the Bank purchases other assets such as long-term 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
JGBs and risk assets like exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Thus, it is important to work on two 
aspects of monetary easing, both in terms of quantity and quality. 
Introduction of the “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing” 
II. 
With this basic set of views, I assumed the governorship and attended the Monetary Policy 
Meeting on April 3 and 4. Following discussion with other Policy Board members and taking 
into account the staff view regarding practicalities, we came to a conclusion. The name of the 
quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  that  we  introduced  this  time  speaks  for  itself. 
This is indeed a new phase of monetary easing both in terms of quantity and quality. 
Strong and clear commitment 
First, the Bank decided – as I mentioned earlier – to convey a strong and clear commitment. 
The Bank clearly announced in a statement that “[it] will achieve the price stability target of 
2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) at 
the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years.” This is the decision of the 
Bank’s Policy Board – namely, it expresses the will of the Bank as an institution. 
New phase of monetary easing both in terms of quantity and quality 
Next, the Bank decided to embark on the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing as a 
means to underpin this commitment. 
Concretely,  with  a  view  to  pursuing  quantitative  monetary  easing,  the  Bank  decided  to 
change  the  main  operating  target  for  money  market  operations  from  the  uncollateralized 
overnight  call  rate  (i.e.,  interest  rates)  to  the  monetary  base  (i.e.,  quantity)  and  conduct 
money market operations so that the monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 
60–70 trillion yen. The monetary base is the currency supplied to the economy as a whole by 
the Bank; more specifically, it is the sum of banknotes and coins in circulation and financial 
institutions’  current  account  deposits  at  the  Bank  of  Japan.  As  of  end-2012,  its  amount 
outstanding  was  138  trillion  yen,  and  it  is  expected  to  reach  about  200  trillion  yen  at  end-
2013 and 270 trillion yen at end-2014. It will almost double in two years. This accounts for 
nearly 60 percent of nominal GDP, far above the levels of any other advanced economies. 
As a means to increase the monetary base, the Bank decided to purchase JGBs so that its 
holding of their amount outstanding on the Bank’s balance sheet will increase at an annual 
pace  of  about  50  trillion  yen.  Consequently,  the  Bank’s  holding  of  JGBs  will  be  increased 
from  89  trillion  yen  at  end-2012  to  190  trillion  yen  at  end-2014.  In  short,  it  will  more  than 
double in two years. The monthly flow of JGB purchases is expected to become 7+ trillion 
yen, because the Bank needs to compensate for JGBs redeemed. 
In terms of quality, in increasing the purchases of JGBs, those with all maturities including 
40-year bonds will be made eligible for purchase, and the average remaining maturity of the 
Bank’s  JGB  purchases  will  be  extended  from  slightly  less  than  three  years  at  present  to 
about seven years – equivalent to the average maturity of the amount outstanding of JGBs 
issued. We intend to strengthen the working of monetary easing on the economy and prices 
by  encouraging  a  further  decline  not  only  in  shorter-term  interest  rates  but  also  in  those 
across the yield curve. Furthermore, with a view to lowering risk premia of asset prices, the 
Bank  will  purchase  ETFs  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs)  so  that  their 
amounts outstanding on the Bank’s balance sheet will increase at an annual pace of about 
1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. 
Intelligible monetary policy 
In  the  implementation  of  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing,  as  mentioned 
earlier, we have taken account of the need to present our policy stance intelligibly to markets 
as well as firms and households. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Until  last  week,  the  Bank’s  purchases  of  JGBs  had  been  conducted  according  to  the 
following  two  types  of  operations:  one  under  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  introduced  in 
October  2010  and  the  other  for  facilitating  money  market  operations,  often  referred  to  as 
Rinban operations. This reflects the Bank’s various efforts to tackle challenges in response to 
changes  in  economic  circumstances.  In  fact,  these  types  of  operations,  reflecting  their 
objectives, had differed in terms of the purchasing methods used. However, this framework 
was somewhat complicated and entailed a problem that the Bank’s serious efforts to combat 
deflation by monetary easing were rather difficult for the market and the public to understand. 
Based  on  such  recognition,  the  Bank  has  terminated  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  and 
synthesized purchasing methods of JGBs. Moreover, it has decided to express the target of 
JGB purchases as a net increase in its JGB holdings – namely, at an annual pace of about 
50  trillion  yen.  We  believe  that  these  changes  will  facilitate  understanding  of  the  Bank’s 
intention with regard to monetary easing in a straightforward manner. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Bank  decided  to  adopt  the  monetary  base  as  an  indicator  for 
quantitative  easing.  This  also  reflects  our  judgment  that  the  monetary  base  –  the  total 
amount  of  currency  that  the  Bank  supplies  to  the  economy  as  a  whole  –  will  be  the  most 
appropriate indicator for conveying the Bank’s aggressive stance on monetary easing to the 
public. 
Continuation of monetary easing 
The  Bank  will  continue  with  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  that  I  have 
explained thus far, “aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is 
necessary  for  maintaining  that  target  in  a  stable  manner.”  Obviously,  there  will  be  both 
upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices  going  forward.  The  Bank  will 
examine  those  risks  carefully  and  will  not  hesitate  to  make  adjustments  as  appropriate, 
should circumstances warrant. 
One  may  ask,  why  is  there  a  connection  between  what  I  have  just  mentioned  and  a  time 
horizon  of  about  two  years?  In  our  view,  the  latest  decisions  include  all  the  necessary 
measures  to  achieve  the  2  percent  target  with  that  time  horizon.  Nonetheless,  it  is  not 
appropriate to say that the monetary easing will only last for two years. The economy entails 
uncertainty, and there is always a degree of latitude in people’s expectations; for example, 
some people may not share the view that the inflation rate will reach 2 percent in two years. 
For everyone – including those who are somewhat skeptical – to be convinced that sufficient 
monetary  easing  will  be  implemented,  it  is  appropriate  to  state  that  the  Bank  will  continue 
with monetary easing, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, “as long as it is 
necessary.” Making such a commitment will, in the end, further ensure the achievement of 
the target in two years. 
I also want to elaborate on the meaning of “as long as it is necessary.” The Bank does not 
believe 2 percent inflation achieved at a certain point in time is enough; rather, it believes 
2 percent inflation should be maintained in a stable manner. Therefore, even if the inflation 
rate  hits  2  percent  at  some  point,  the  Bank  could  continue  with  the  quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing if it is judged necessary to do so in order to maintain that rate in 
a  stable  manner.  The  opposite  could  also  be  true.  In  short,  analyzing  the  fundamental 
movement  of  prices,  the  Bank  intends  to  continue  with  monetary  easing,  as  long  as  it  is 
necessary. 
III. 
Effects of the “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing” 
Transmission channels of monetary easing effects 
I will next explain the mechanism of achieving the 2 percent target under the quantitative and 
qualitative  monetary  easing.  The  Bank  expects  that  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  will 
permeate the economy and influence prices primarily through three channels. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
First, the purchases of JGBs, ETFs, and J-REITs will encourage a further decline in longer-
term interest rates and lower risk premia of asset prices. This will raise firms’ credit demand 
through a decline in funding costs. Second, as a result of the Bank’s massive purchases of 
JGBs, both investors and financial institutions investing in JGBs are expected to shift from 
JGBs  to  such  risk  assets  as  stocks  and  foreign-denominated  bonds  and/or  to  increase 
lending  within  their  portfolios.  In  economic  textbooks,  this  is  referred  to  as  a  portfolio 
rebalancing  effect.  The  extension  of  the  average  remaining  maturity  of  JGB  purchases 
reflects  our  understanding  of  such  an  effect.  Third,  the  commitment  to  achieve  the  price 
stability  target  at  the  earliest  possible  time  and  the  continuation  of  the  new  phase  of 
monetary easing are thought to drastically change the expectations of markets and economic 
entities. This is what I referred to earlier as the elimination of deflationary expectations. A rise 
in the expected inflation rate will not only influence actual prices but also stimulate private 
demand through a decline in real interest rates. 
Developments in economic activity and prices 
Looking at recent developments in economic activity and prices, it seems that the conditions 
are being prepared to  demonstrate the effects of the quantitative and  qualitative monetary 
easing  through  the  three  transmission  channels  that  I  just  mentioned.  Indeed,  Japan’s 
economy has shown some bright signs of picking up. Going forward, we expect the economy 
to return to a moderate recovery path against the background of firm domestic demand and a 
pick-up  in  growth  rates  of  overseas  economies.  In  recent  months,  conditions  in  financial 
markets  have  significantly  turned  favorable  due  to  the  abatement  of  global  investors’  risk 
aversion and expectations for domestic policies. 
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI has recently been at around 0 percent or slightly 
negative, but looking to the future, it is expected to turn positive and start picking up, mainly 
reflecting  the  improvement  in  the  aggregate  demand  and  supply  balance.  Looking  at 
breakeven inflation rates – using the information content in inflation-indexed bonds – and the 
results of economists’ and households’ surveys, we have increasing evidence that inflation 
expectations are starting to rise. Behind this are expectations for policies including monetary 
policy. This indicates that policies can move expectations. 
The  Bank  expects  that  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  will  support,  in  a 
timely manner, the positive movements that have started to appear in economic activity and 
financial markets, contribute to a further pick-up in inflation expectations that appear to have 
risen, and lead Japan’s economy to overcome deflation that has lasted for nearly 15 years. 
Some points of discussion in the monetary policy conduct 
IV. 
After the announcement of this time’s decision, some wonder if the Bank can carry out the 
quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  while  others  say  that  it  has  gone  too  far.  In 
addition,  we  often  receive  questions  about  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and 
other policies conducted by the government. In the final part of my remarks, I wish to answer 
some of these questions. 
the  conventional  knowledge  of  market  participants. 
Execution of the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
The  newly  planned  purchase  of  JGBs  at  an  annual  pace  of  50  trillion  yen  is  massive  and 
goes  beyond 
the 
achievement  of  the  monetary  base  of  270  trillion  yen  at  end-2014  requires  that  financial 
institutions’ current account balances held at the Bank reach 175 trillion yen. Again, this is 
extremely large. Furthermore, the extension of the average remaining maturity from slightly 
less than three years to about seven years (i.e., allowing for a range of about six to eight 
years) necessitates the purchases of JGBs with longer maturity, including 20- and 30-year 
bonds. Such JGBs with super-long maturities are likely to be held to maturity by institutional 
In  addition, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
investors  and  their  market  is  not  so  active.  Against  this  background,  some  market 
participants wonder if the Bank is able to purchase these JGBs in practice. 
To answer this question, we can do this, in principle, so long as the Bank purchases a wide 
range  of  JGBs  through  a  competitive  auction.  I  assure  you  that  we  will  achieve  our 
commitment.  Having  said  so,  however,  such  purchases  by  the  Bank  might  not  proceed 
smoothly because they go beyond the market’s convention. To start with, these measures 
are meant to encourage a further  decline in interest rates; thus, effects on the market are 
inevitable to some extent. As the Bank wants to facilitate such operations, it is vital to have 
the cooperation of market participants, such as counterparties’ active bidding in the Bank’s 
market operations.  The Bank has decided to set forums for enhanced dialogue with those 
market participants in order to exchange views pertaining to money market operations and 
market  transactions  in  general.  In  fact,  it  has  already  initiated  such  dialogue  with  various 
market participants since last week. 
Relationship with financing the fiscal deficit 
Once  the  Bank  embarks  on  the  large-scale  purchase  of  JGBs  under  the  quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing, some worry that this will result in financing the fiscal deficit. The 
JGB market remains stable, but if such purchases by the Bank were regarded as monetizing 
government debt, the JGB market might start destabilizing, raising long-term interest rates in 
a manner inconsistent with the real economy. This might not only offset the monetary easing 
effects  but  also  have  negative  effects  on  Japan’s  financial  system  and  its  economy  as  a 
whole. 
Of  course,  the  JGB  purchases  under  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  are 
executed for the purpose of conducting monetary policy and not for the purpose of financing 
fiscal deficits. Moreover, in order to avoid a possible arousal of doubt regarding the Bank’s 
increasing  purchases  of  JGBs  as  financing  fiscal  deficits,  it  is  vital  for  the  government  to 
clearly show the future course of fiscal consolidation and steadily make progress to reform 
the fiscal structure. On this point, the government – in the joint statement released with the 
Bank in January – stated that “in strengthening coordination between the Government and 
the Bank of Japan, the Government will steadily promote measures aimed at establishing a 
sustainable fiscal structure with a view to ensuring the credibility of fiscal management.” We 
strongly expect the government to move on that front. 
Because  the  Bank  synthesized  the  purchasing  methods  of  JGBs  this  time,  it  temporarily 
suspended  the  so-called  banknote  principle.  This  principle  indicates  that  the  purchases  of 
JGBs conducted for facilitating money market operations are subject to the limitation that the 
outstanding  amount  of  long-term  government  bonds  effectively  held  by  the  Bank  be  kept 
below the outstanding balance of banknotes issued. In reality, however, after the introduction 
of the Asset Purchase Program in 2010, the total amount outstanding of JGBs held by the 
Bank  has  already  exceeded  the  outstanding  balance  of  banknotes.  Based  on  this 
recognition,  the  Bank  has  decided  to  temporarily  suspend  the  banknote  principle  as  it 
pursues the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. In any case, let me reiterate that 
the Bank will not finance the fiscal deficit during or after the period of the quantitative and 
qualitative monetary easing, and this line of thinking will not change. 
Effect on exchange rate 
We also hear comments about the relationship between monetary policy and exchange rates 
against  the  background  of  the  recent  depreciation  of  the  yen.  On  this  point,  we  have  no 
intention to conduct monetary policy targeting the exchange rate. The objective of the Bank’s 
monetary policy is, obviously, to pursue the stability of domestic prices. 
It is true that, when a central bank takes accommodative actions, there is a tendency for its 
country’s  currency  to  depreciate.  This,  however,  is  merely  a  general  observation,  ceteris 
paribus. For instance, if the growth potential of the economy rises as a result of monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
accommodation  as  well  as  appropriate  fiscal  policy  and  the  growth  strategy,  its  currency 
could appreciate rather than depreciate. 
In any event, the Bank’s monetary policy is focused on achieving the domestic objective to 
lead  Japan’s  economy  toward  overcoming  deflation.  Achieving  this  goal  will  eventually 
provide the global economy with favorable effects. I believe that the international community 
shares a common understanding on these points. 
Three-pronged strategy (three arrows) 
At  present,  the  government  is  determined  to  address  challenges  that  Japan’s  economy 
faces, including the overcoming of deflation, through the combination of three policy arrows – 
namely,  bold  monetary  easing,  flexible  fiscal  policy,  and  a  growth  strategy  that  promotes 
private  investment.  I  think  it  is  indeed  an  appropriate  policy  package.  Achieving  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, through the first arrow (i.e., monetary 
easing)  is  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Japan.  As  I  have  explained  to  you  today,  the  Bank  will 
achieve this target under its own responsibility. 
In addition, parallel to monetary easing, if the government creates real demand and wages 
and  employment  improve  through  the  expansion  of  consumption  and  investment,  this  is 
expected  to  contribute  to  generating  a  virtuous  cycle  that  eventually  will  lead  to  a  gradual 
pick-up  in  inflation.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  implementation  of  the  other  two  arrows  
– namely, flexible fiscal policy for the time being and a growth strategy – will lead to raising 
the growth outlook, thereby contributing to the achievement of the price stability target more 
smoothly.  We  have  high  expectations  that  the  government  will  make  steady  progress  on 
these fronts. 
Concluding remarks 
For eight years before assuming the position of Governor of the Bank of Japan, I looked at 
Japan  from  overseas  as  President  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank.  No  other  country  has 
suffered from deflation for nearly 15 years. Given that Japanese financial institutions, firms, 
and individuals play active roles in each Asian economy, I have often found it hard to accept 
the contrasting image at home and abroad. 
The  world  is  eagerly  waiting  for  Japan  to  overcome  deflation  and  for  Japan’s  economy  to 
recover its economic strength. I believe steady efforts toward achieving these goals will also 
lead Japan toward regaining its influence on the global society. 
Thank you.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
