Manuel Sánchez: Emerging economies in the face of financial bonanza 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  CEMLA’s 
(Center for Latin American Monetary Studies) IX Meeting of Monetary Policy Managers, co-
sponsored by CEMLA and the Central Bank of Argentina, Buenos Aires, 23 May 2013. 
 It is an honor for me to address the monetary policy managers from the central banks that 
are members and invitees of the Center for Latin American Monetary Studies. I would like to 
thank the Central Bank of Argentina and the CEMLA for the opportunity to participate in this 
conference, devoted to a discussion of the possible implications of the monetary policies of 
advanced nations for emerging markets. 
Since  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2007–2008,  advanced  economies  have  implemented  a 
wide range of measures to counter the ensuing financial turbulence and its consequences for 
economic  activity.  Among  these  actions,  expansionary  monetary  policy  has  been  both 
innovative  and  key  to  the  management  of  domestic  problems,  and  at  the  same  time,  has 
created  challenges  for  emerging  economies,  both  in  terms  of  likely  repercussions  and  the 
need to respond. 
In  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to  address  first,  the  possible  effects  of  the  monetary  policies 
implemented by developed countries on emerging economies, manifested especially through 
a significant rise in capital inflows; second, some concerns and risks associated with these 
larger foreign resources; and third, the most important measures that the authorities of many 
developing nations can adopt to mitigate some of the vulnerabilities derived from capital flow 
surges. 
Advanced economies and capital flows 
The  global  financial  crisis  led  most  central  banks  to  relax  their  monetary  policies 
considerably,  which  included  unconventional  strategies  in  some  advanced  countries.  In 
particular, in the United States, the Federal Reserve cut its policy interest rate to near zero 
by the end of 2008, while it expanded liquidity facilities substantially. 
Unlike the Great Depression of 1929–1933, which was characterized by bank runs in favor of 
cash, in the recent crisis, the public sought financial instruments backed by the government 
in an attempt to rid themselves of other assets suddenly perceived to be high risk. This time, 
the Federal Reserve acted in a timely way as lender of last resort, effectively controlling the 
financial panic. 
Once  the  markets  became  calmer,  some  central  banks  of  developed  nations  continued 
relaxing monetary policy in the aim of fueling the recovery of their economies. Thus, in the 
United States, successive quantitative easing programs have been put into place, consisting 
of the acquisition of financial assets, mostly Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities, 
in exchange for bank reserves. The size of the Fed’s balance sheet has reached 20 percent 
of GDP, a record high. 
Although monetary policy has supported economic activity, as expected it has not been able 
to generate on its own a firm and sustained recovery. In the United States, the nonstandard 
monetary  expansion  applied  during  more  than  four  years  has  not  precluded  the  economic 
upturn from being the slowest in the post-war period, with the economy remaining below its 
secular trend. 
The Fed has announced that it will maintain its lax monetary policy for an extended period of 
time,  conditioning  its  future  interest-rate  decisions  on  given  unemployment  and  inflation 
parameters. Despite positive effects, this extraordinary monetary accommodation can cause 
problems.  Low  interest  rates  can  facilitate  excessive  risk-taking  and  the  financing  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
low-return investments, which can undermine efficiency and put financial stability at risk. In 
addition, when the time comes, the unwinding of monetary stimulus could be complicated, 
causing volatility in financial markets and putting control over inflation at risk.1 
Given the globalization of markets, it is natural to expect that abundant liquidity in developed 
markets may extend to the rest of the world, as part of the process of the search for yield at 
the  expense  of  higher  risk.  Investments  can  go  to  the  purchase  of  emerging-economy 
assets, either stocks or bank and nonbank debt. 
Indeed,  since  the  middle  of  the  last  decade,  considerable  net  private  capital  inflows  from 
nonresidents have been seen in emerging markets, with a peak in 2007, a slowdown in the 
following  two  years,  and  new  momentum  beginning  in  2010.  Approximately  half  of  these 
inflows have been foreign direct investment. However, what is unusual about the last three 
years  has  been  the  significant  share  of  portfolio  funds,  especially  those  dedicated  to  debt 
instruments, something which seems to have accelerated during 2013.2 
Even  though  the  recent  significant  investment  in  emerging  markets  does  not  represent  a 
phenomenon  without  precedent  in  modern  history,  its  current  strength  has  reopened  the 
debate on the role that lax monetary policy in advanced nations may be playing in fueling the 
trend.  Undoubtedly,  the  synchronized  nature  of  capital  inflows  to  many  developing  and 
recently  industrialized  nations  points  toward  the  conclusion  that  external  global factors  are 
crucial. 
Although  research  is  ongoing,  statistical  studies  suggest  that  the  monetary  policy  of 
advanced nations has been a trigger of capital flows to emerging markets. This observation 
is consistent with the hypothesis that expansionary monetary policy includes a transmission 
channel that tends to amplify risks adopted by investors.3 
A second determinant of capital inflows is lower global risk aversion. However, since at least 
2009, it is possible that higher global risk tolerance has depended, to a certain degree, on 
the monetary policy stances and perspectives in advanced nations. Thus, for example, the 
beginnings  of  the  most  noteworthy  drops  in  the  average  spreads  of  internationally  traded 
emerging-market bonds included in JP Morgan´s EMBI+ Index appear to coincide with the 
announcements of various stages of the quantitative monetary easing in the United States. 
The  same  studies  confirm  that  a  third  predictor  of  capital  inflows  are  the  individual 
characteristics  of  emerging  economies,  something  that  should  be  expected  given  the 
international differences in the intensity and composition of these flows. Idiosyncratic factors 
include the economic growth outlook, the openness of capital accounts, the foreign exchange 
regime,  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  “country  risk,”  and  the  financing  needs  of  the 
emerging-market countries themselves.4 
 1  For  a  discussion  of  these  risks,  see  the  minutes  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  of  the 
2  See  IIF  (2013),  “Capital  flows  to  emerging  market  economies,”  IIF  Research  Note,  January;  and  Banco  de 
México (2013), Inflation report: January–March 2013, p. 27. 
3   A lower funding cost in foreign currency allows domestic banks to increase lending, which, together with other 
Federal Reserve of March 19–20, 2013. 
foreign investment, tends to cause the local currency to appreciate and dampens real volatility, making lending 
appear  to  be  less  risky  and,  in  turn,  promoting  greater  risk-taking.  See  Bruno,  V.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2012), 
“Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of monetary policy,” BIS Working Papers. 
4   Two empirical analyses of the factors that explain capital flows, including monetary policy, are Ghosh, A.R., et 
al. (2012), “Surges,” IMF Working Paper, WP/12/22, January; and Fratzscher, M. (2011), “Capital flows, push 
versus pull factors and the global financial crisis,” ECB Working Paper Series, No. 1364, July. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Concerns and risks from capital flows 
In  principle,  capital  inflows  should  be  viewed  as  positive  since  they  allow  emerging 
economies to complement their sources of funding for economic activity, and they also make 
it possible for investors to obtain higher yields and diversify their risks. Notwithstanding these 
benefits,  abrupt  capital  inflows,  in  particular  capital  inflows  with  short-term  horizons,  can 
trigger unintended effects. The key causes of concern are twofold. 
The first has to do with the possible generation of financial imbalances for families, firms and 
governments, in the form of excessive and unsustainable borrowing. This phenomenon can 
be accompanied by bubbles in financial asset prices, in the sense of prolonged deviations in 
these prices above those values that may be consistent with fundamentals. For example, in 
the United States, the real estate bubble both stemmed from and fueled the credit bubble, a 
combination that led to the global financial crisis. 
Assets with prices that can be highly sensitive to capital inflows are, in general, of two kinds. 
First,  greater  foreign  funding  tends  to  cause  local  currencies  to  appreciate,  making  the 
exchange rate a possible early indicator of pressures. Second, assets preferred by investors 
such as stocks, bonds and real estate may increase considerably in value. 
To date, no clear evidence exists of possible widespread financial imbalances in emerging 
markets.  Most  countries  with  significant  capital  inflows  have  maintained  their  public  and 
current account balances relative to GDP in surplus or only slightly in deficit, and they also 
have banking systems with adequate portfolio quality even in cases of rapid loan growth.5 At 
the  same  time,  the  containment  of  domestic  spending  pressures  on  current  accounts  is 
explained, partly, by the accumulation of international reserves by central banks, as well as 
external financing by some firms, whose proceeds are invested abroad. 
In contrast, data reveal that the prices of some assets have increased considerably. From 
2007  to  2013,  most  currencies  have  appreciated  in  real  multilateral  terms.  Some  studies 
suggest that, in some cases, these rates could be above their fair values, when fundamental 
conditions are taken into consideration.6 
Additionally, the stock market indices in most emerging economies have behaved similarly to 
those in the United States, some of them surpassing their levels prior to the crisis. However, 
as in the U.S. economy, rising stock prices could be justified by the generation of corporate 
profits in recent years. In contrast, no general trends of excessive rises in real estate prices 
have been observed.7 
Government  bonds  have  seen  considerable  appreciation,  as  the  monetary  expansion  in 
advanced economies has contributed to downward shifts in and flattening of the yield curves 
in  emerging  economies.8  To  the  extent  that  extraordinarily  loose  monetary  policies  in 
developed countries are not a normal situation, it is reasonable to infer that emerging-market 
bonds are currently above their long-term values. 
 “Emerging  markets:  Who  is  vulnerable  to  overheating?”,  Deutsche  Bank  Research  Briefing,  Emerging 
5   See IMF (2013), Global Financial Stability Report, chapter 1, IMF; and Lanzeni, M.L. y C. Weistroffer (2013), 
Markets, March 12. 
6   See,  for  example,  Mustafayev,  N.  (2013),  “Valuation  of  emerging  markets  currencies,”  Credit  Suisse 
Economics Research, March 21. 
WP/12/193, July. 
8   Edwards,  S.  (2010),  “The  international  transmission  of  interest  rate  shocks:  The  Federal  Reserve  and 
emerging markets. 
emerging  markets  in  Latin  America  and  Asia,”  Journal  of  International  Money  and  Finance,  29  contains  an 
empirical  examination  of  the  transmission  of  changes  in  interest  rates  in  the  United  States  to  those  of 
7   See  Cubeddu,  L.,  et  al.  (2012),  “Latin  America:  Vulnerabilities  Under  Construction?”,  IMF  Working  Paper, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
However,  these  observations  cannot  be  considered  to  be  complete  or  definitive.  Available 
statistical information is limited and could impede a more adequate reading of some markets. 
In  addition,  the  current  scenario  does  not  guarantee  that,  in  the  near  future,  evidence  of 
problems will not surface. Furthermore, financial bubbles are hard to detect in advance, and 
when they are finally evident, it may be too late to do anything because market participants 
themselves may rapidly cause their elimination through bets against them. 
A second cause for concern is that the factors that explain capital inflows, above all portfolio 
funds, can vary over time. International experience confirms, time and again, that increases 
in capital inflows have ended invariably in sudden stops and even reversals. This can occur 
even if internal financial imbalances are not generated, for reasons that have nothing to do 
with  the  recipient  country,  as  can  be  the  case  with  the  anticipation  of  tighter  monetary 
conditions and an increase in global risk aversion. 
Independently  of  possible  causes,  capital  flow  reversals  tend  to  depress  asset  prices  and 
bring  cuts  in  aggregate  spending  with  adverse  effects  on  economic  activity.  The  impact  is 
magnified  by  the  simultaneity  of  these  events  in  many  economies  and  the  frequently 
leveraged nature of the institutions that finance the flows. Domestically, debtors and savers 
with exposure to interest rate risk can suffer considerable damage. 
Policies in emerging markets 
The  risks  associated  with  increased  capital  inflows  require  the  authorities  to  implement 
strategies that allow the prevention and management of possible problems in the economy 
and the financial system. The tools for policy makers fall into two groups. 
The first consists of measures to discourage capital inflows, on the assumption that portfolio 
flows are the most volatile, the main incentive for them being the search for yield. One way to 
weaken  the  draw  for  external  financing  is  to  lower  domestic  policy  interest  rates,  even  to 
levels that might not be optimal from the point of view of price stability. 
It  is  not  possible  to  know  the  degree  to  which  this  consideration  has  influenced  monetary 
policy in emerging economies, although some studies suggest that it could be significant.9 
Aside  from  the  issue  of  frequency,  this  approach  can  put  at  risk  the  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations  and  compromise  control  over  future  inflation.  Additionally,  the  likelihood  of 
financial instability can increase if many central banks react in the same way. 
Another option in the same group is to enforce explicit capital controls, including restrictions 
on  portfolio  investment  and  short-term  debt.  Some  emerging  economies  have  used  these 
measures with various degrees of intensity, but, in general, on a temporary basis since they 
have noteworthy limitations. 
If they are effective, these controls can reduce the benefits of external resources that would 
not necessarily bring about future financial instability. But in general, their effectiveness itself 
tends to be weak, since it is hard to prevent evasion, and there seem to be no rules on the 
conditions under which the measures can be successfully applied. The resulting distortions 
reduce efficiency and can provoke protectionist measures in international trade. 
The second group of tools seeks to mitigate possible adverse effects, rather than discourage 
capital  inflows  themselves.  A  frequently  used  measure  has  been  intervention  by  central 
banks in foreign exchange markets through the accumulation of international reserves, which 
 9   See  Taylor,  J.  B.  (2013),  “International  monetary  coordination  and  the  Great  Deviation,”  presented  in  the 
speech given at the conference, “CEMLA-SEACEN, Punta del Este,” Uruguay, November. 
“Session on International Policy Coordination, American Economic Association Annual Meetings,” San Diego, 
California;  and  Caruana  J.  (2012),  “International  monetary  policy  interactions:  challenges  and  prospects,” 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are  a  sign  of  domestic  financial  health,  since  they  permit  a  country  to  face  possible 
interruptions in the availability of foreign funding. 
Nevertheless, international reserves can increase the attractiveness of a country to capital 
inflows  and  increase  the  expectation  of  future  currency  appreciation.  The  need  to  sterilize 
foreign currency purchases through open market operations to avoid pressures on inflation 
implies a carry-trade cost for the monetary authorities. Also, the accumulation of international 
reserves involves the risk of valuation losses due to the appreciation of the local currency. 
A complementary approach to counter the possible undesirable effects of capital inflows is to 
strengthen the fiscal stance through the lowering of public spending, as well as deepening 
prudential regulation of the financial system. Standing out in the second range of tools are 
capital, liquidity, and provision requirements, as well as caps on leverage ratios, on exposure 
to foreign exchange risks, and on lending. Some of these measures have the advantage that 
they can be applied to diminish the possible surfacing of imbalances in specific sectors of the 
economy. 
Conclusions 
The extraordinarily lax monetary policy of advanced economies helps explain the high capital 
inflows  seen  recently  in  emerging  economies.  Although  in  principle  they  are  beneficial, 
capital inflows, above all short-term, can end abruptly for reasons not necessarily related to 
the recipient country, causing financial instability and a drop in economic activity. 
To  date,  available  information  does  not  suggest  the  existence  of  generalized  imbalances 
arising  from  the  abundant  supply  of  foreign  funds  in  emerging  markets.  However,  the 
authorities should remain vigilant for the consequences of capital inflows and act swiftly to 
prevent imbalances from breaking out that can magnify the impact of a possible interruption 
in capital flows. Given the advantages and disadvantages of the tools available to face the 
risks associated with capital inflows, the strategy which seems preferable is the mitigation of 
possible  adverse  effects,  especially  through  the  strengthening  of  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies, and the deepening of prudential regulation of the financial system. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
