Benoît Cœuré: Non-standard monetary policy measures – where do we 
stand? 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  International  Monetary  Seminar  “Sovereign  Risk,  Bank  Risk  and  Central  Banking” 
organised by the Banque de France, Paris, 10 July 2013. 
 I wish to thank Peter Karadi for his contributions to this speech, and Oreste Tristani for his comments. I remain 
solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be at the Banque de France today to speak at the 2013 International 
Monetary Seminar. 
In  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to  look  back  on  the  policy  actions,  and  especially  the  
non-standard measures, undertaken by the ECB over the past five years. 
As in other countries, such measures were ultimately inspired by the goal of averting the risk 
of more severe consequences of the financial crisis on the macroeconomy and, ultimately, 
on price stability. The exact non-standard measures deployed to achieve this goal, however, 
differ across economic areas. I would like to take this opportunity today to highlight how the 
specific measures implemented by the ECB were designed to tackle the peculiar euro area 
phenomenon of “financial fragmentation” – that is, the observation of fault lines in the flow of 
funds  between  savers  and  borrowers  specifically  shaped  along  national  borders,  and 
accompanied by capital repatriation and sharp increases in the home bias. 
Financial  fragmentation  has  manifested  itself  in  the  form  of  strong  divergences  between 
sovereign yields and ensuing differences in the cost of funding across banks, depending on 
the country in which these banks operate. In turn, owing to the relationship aspects of bank 
lending,  cross-country  fragmentation  in  banks’  funding  costs  have  been  reflected  in  a 
disparity of financing conditions offered to firms, with an increase in the dispersion in retail 
interest  rates  on  loans,  and  especially  small  loans,  to  non-financial  corporations.  Lending 
rates have tended to follow the path of key ECB rates in some countries, but not in others. 
While the rate charged by the ECB on its main refinancing operations (the so-called MRO 
rate) was cut by 50 basis point between end-May 2012 and end-May 2013, the rate charged 
by  banks  on  their  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  went  down  by  more  than  50  basis 
points in Germany, 25 basis points in Spain and less than 20 basis points in Portugal.1 
All  in  all,  financial  fragmentation  has  exacerbated  cyclical  fluctuations,  leading  to  an 
inefficient  allocation  of  capital  across  countries  and  altering  in  an  erratic  fashion  the 
transmission of monetary policy impulses. 
Under  such  circumstances,  and  within  the  ECB  price  stability  mandate,  some  of  our  
non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  have  been  geared  at  responding  to  financial 
fragmentation. In so doing, we have followed three general principles. 
• 
The  first  principle  is  the  simplest  and  best  understood.  It  prescribes  that  any 
provision  of  excess  liquidity  should  be  specifically  targeted  towards  the  market 
which is most impaired by funding constraints. This principle ultimately amounts to 
ensuring that the provision of liquidity produces the most beneficial effect per unit of 
intervention.  The  ECB  adhered  to  this  principle,  for  example,  when  in  2008  it 
                                                
1  Rates  on  outstanding  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  over  1  and  up  to  5  years.  Rates  went  down, 
respectively, from 3.46% to 2.93%, 3.8% to 3.55% and 5.2% to 5.03%. Source: ECB. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  decided to apply full allotment in its liquidity-providing tender operations. This policy 
ensures that liquidity can automatically reach the sets of banks with greater funding 
difficulties. 
The second principle derives from the observation that fragmentation has been the 
result of an unwarranted increase in certain risk premia – notably, liquidity or funding 
risk premia and redenomination risk premia. The causality goes, however, in both 
directions,  as  financial  fragmentations  can  lead  to  an  unwarranted  rise  in  risk 
premia, and the outcome of this cumulative and potentially self-fulfilling process can 
be devastating. Our non-standard measures have therefore incorporated an element 
of insurance against those risks. For our liquidity-providing operations, the element 
of insurance is represented by the extension of their maturity to up to three years 
with  the  VLTROs.  In  the  phase  of  the  crisis  when  funding  risks  were  highest,  the 
VLTROs  have  not  just  helped  to  overcome  current  funding  constraints;  they  have 
also represented a commitment to mitigate those constraints over the future, so as 
to reduce ex ante funding risk. A similar element of insurance is clearly present in 
the  design  of  our  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  programme,  which  is 
designed to address tail risks of currency redenomination. 
The third principle is the direct consequence of the second. It is well known that any 
provision of insurance against adverse scenarios can generate perverse incentives. 
The  ECB  has  perhaps  been  more  acutely  aware  of  this  feature  of  non-standard 
measures than other central banks because of the multi-country nature of the euro 
area.  Consistently  with  the  results  of  the  academic  literature,  offering  partial 
insurance  has  been  our  guiding  principle  to  mitigate  moral  hazard  concerns.  The 
conditionality  associated  with  our  OMT  programme,  can  be  viewed  as  direct 
applications of this principle. 
Let me elaborate on these three principles in the rest of my remarks. 
Targeting liquidity at the most impaired market 
It is well understood that the policy interest rate is not an efficient tool for redressing financial 
impairments  when  such  impairments  produce  large  fluctuations  in  the  demand  for  central 
bank reserves. In these circumstances, the amount of reserves supplied by the central bank, 
and their opportunity cost, are the crucial variables to affect economic outcomes. If reserves 
are not supplied adequately, banks are forced to obtain the liquidity they need at potentially 
much  higher  costs  in  an  impaired  market.  These  costs  would  then  be  passed  through  to 
lending rates, leading to an unwarranted reduction in financial intermediation. 
To mitigate the resulting inefficiencies, a recommendation from the recent monetary literature 
is that central banks should supply liquidity so as to satisfy all fluctuations in the demand for 
it.2 
A  direct  corollary  of  this  principle  when  fluctuations  in  liquidity  demand  are  geographically 
fragmented within a monetary area is to target the provision of excess liquidity towards the 
region  where  demand  is  highest.  In  an  otherwise  frictionless  world,  one  simple  way  to 
implement this policy is to remunerate all reserves at the key central bank policy interest rate, 
and  then  make  the  supply  of  liquidity  perfectly  flexible.  It  could  be  objected  that  targeted 
liquidity  provision  has  redistributive features that fall  outside the  scope of  monetary  policy. 
But redirecting liquidity to those segments where financial intermediation ceased to function 
is not redistributive per se. On contrary, as I argued elsewhere, the distributional neutrality of 
                                                
2  See  Curdia,  V.  and  Woodford,  M.  (2011),  “The  central-bank  balance  sheet  as  an  instrument  of  monetary 
policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 58(1), January, pp. 54–79. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
our  monetary  policy  can  only  be  ensured  by  reducing  spatial  fragmentation  within  the 
monetary union.3 
The  type  of  liquidity  provision  that  I  have  described  thus  far  does  not  represent  a  non-
standard  measure  per  se.  Supplying  liquidity  to  banks  is  obviously  a  standard  activity  for 
central banks. However, there are examples of financial distortions which can be effectively 
countered by non-standard measures taking the form of liquidity injections. One example is 
the  case  of  an  unexpected,  large fall  in  the  value  of  assets  held  by  commercial  banks.  If, 
realistically,  agency  problems  imply  that  the  conditions  of  intermediary  balance  sheets 
influence the overall flow of credit, then a large fall in asset valuations can disrupt lending 
and amplify the consequences of the shock on the real economy through a disproportionate 
increase in credit spreads. Ceteris paribus, a given firm would face tighter or looser credit 
conditions depending on whether it obtains its external financing from banks whose balance 
sheets are more, or less affected by the fall in asset prices. 
In  these  circumstances,  liquidity  injections  may  also  be  warranted.4  In  the  presence  of 
heterogeneity, it again follows that such injections should be tailored to reach the sectors or 
regions in the economy where firms are most affected by the financial disruption, so as to 
undo the distortion at source. 
Some of our non-standard policies during the various stages of the crisis can be directly seen 
as a way to abide by the principle of targeting liquidity to the markets with the most severe 
financial impairments. 
In  the  euro  area,  required  reserves  have  always  been  remunerated  at  the  MRO  rate  and 
excess reserves at the rate on our standing deposit facility – i.e. at a small spread below the 
MRO rate. Since the opportunity cost of holding excess reserves is small, our full allotment 
policy  was  effective  at  alleviating  adverse  funding  conditions  for  those  banks  which  were 
unable  to  satisfy  their  additional  liquidity  needs  in  the  market.  Demand for  excess  liquidity 
has been a direct symptom of banking fragmentation – that is, of the heterogeneous ability of 
commercial banks to receive wholesale liquidity in private markets. Our readiness to provide 
liquidity  on  demand,  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  and  against  adequate  collateral,  ensured  that 
liquidity  could  automatically  reach  those  banks, especially  in  distressed countries,  with  the 
greatest funding difficulties. 
Let me emphasise that the “substitute liquidity” generated during these crisis episodes is not 
inflationary. It effectively amounts to a replacement once private liquidity has dried up. Risks 
to  price  stability  would  arise  if  central  bank  liquidity  remained  tight  during  a  crisis.  In  this 
case, liquidity conditions would remain scarce, leading to a credit crunch with recessionary 
and deflationary risks. 
Providing insurance against funding or tail risks 
Let me move on to the second principle of providing insurance against tail risks. 
The recent financial crisis has been a stark reminder of the potentially devastating effects of 
self-fulfilling  crises.  Self-fulfilling  liquidity  crises  for  individual  banks  are,  of  course,  well 
                                                
3  There are actually three dimensions along which fragmentation can and should be reduced: the vertical, or 
intertemporal dimension; the horizontal, or interpersonal dimension; and the spatial dimension. See Cœuré, B. 
(2013),  “Monetary  policy  in  a  fragmented  world”,  speech  delivered  at  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank 
41st Economics  Conference:  “A  Changing  Role  for  Central  Banks?”  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/ 
date/2013/html/sp130610.en.html. 
4  See  Gertler,  M.  and  Karadi,  P.  (2011),  “A  model  of  unconventional  monetary  policy”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics,  Elsevier,  vol.  58(1),  January,  pp.  17–34,  and  Gertler,  M.  and  Kiyotaki,  N.  (2010),  “Financial 
intermediation  and  credit  policy  in  business  cycle  analysis”,  in  Friedman,  B.M.  and  Woodford,  M.  (eds.), 
Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 547–599. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
documented. The experience of bank runs is far from unprecedented. What has been new in 
the  recent  financial  crisis  is  the  systemic  or  market-wide  nature  of  bank  runs.  Interbank 
market  freezes  and  deposit  withdrawals  from  distressed  countries  are  examples  of 
confidence  crises  that  have  affected  the  whole  or  an  important  segment  of  the  banking 
system at the same time. 
The  effects  of  such  systemic  confidence  crises  can  be  much  more  devastating  owing  to 
externalities.5 If all banks are distressed at the same time, they will all scramble to sell their 
assets  to  be  able  to  meet  their  obligations.  In  so  doing,  asset  prices  will  be  pushed  on  a 
downward  spiral,  which  exacerbates  banks’  distress  and  leads  to  further  credit  and  asset 
price losses and a further deepening of the confidence crisis. The general scarcity of credit, 
in  turn,  leads  to  a  substantial  worsening  of  the  macroeconomic  outlook.  The  potential 
negative aggregate effects of such systemic liquidity crises can jeopardise price stability over 
the medium term. 
The lender-of-last-resort function of central banks is the classic solution to the run problem 
for individual banks. The central bank stands ready to provide liquidity to the distressed bank 
at  a  penalty  rate  against  adequate  collateral.  A  credible  lender-of-last-resort  function  can 
ensure that no solvent financial institution ever faces a bank run. Depositors know that even 
if all the other depositors withdraw their funds, the liquidity needs of a solvent bank will be 
met by the central bank. As a result, bank runs never happen in the first place. 
A similar form of liquidity insurance against adequate collateral can also be useful in the case 
of  runs  to  the  whole  banking  system.  A  central  bank  commitment  to  provide  liquidity 
insurance in the future alleviates expected future funding constraints, thus reducing funding 
risk and eliminating the possibility of systemic bank runs. 
The progressive lengthening of the maturity of ECB liquidity-providing operations – from six 
months in early 2008 to twelve months in late 2009, and to three years at the end of 2011 – 
can be viewed as a form of commitment to guarantee the availability of ample liquidity over a 
future period of time. 
I would argue that providing secured financing with a three-year maturity in our VLTROs at 
the  end  of  2011  and  at  the  beginning  of  2012  was  a  successful  example  of  system-wide 
liquidity  insurance  for  banks.  The  VLTROs  successfully  lowered  interbank  tensions,  as 
shown by a steady reduction of the spread between the unsecured EURIBOR interbank rate 
and the OIS swap rate over the following months. Standard bank lending surveys and ad hoc 
surveys asking banks specifically about the effectiveness of the two VLTROs provide further 
evidence  that  the  programmes  have  helped  to  make  banks’  credit  standards  less  tight 
towards both households and non-financial corporations.6 
All in all, by removing the prospects of future liquidity constraints on credit supply, this policy 
has  avoided  a  major  credit  crunch.  Without  the  launch  of  the  two  VLTROs,  banks  in 
distressed regions may have been forced into a self-reinforcing fire sale of their assets, could 
have  defaulted  on  their  maturing  obligations,  or  may  have  discontinued  and  withdrawn 
existing credit lines to companies. The ensuing restricted credit supply could have dragged 
the whole euro area economy further into recession and could have even led to deflationary 
risks. 
More specifically, the VLTROs have helped tackle financial fragmentation. Recourse to these 
policies  has  been  particularly  intense  in  countries facing  stress  in  sovereign  bond  markets 
and  where  dried-up  interbank  funding  has  been  replaced  with  ECB  liquidity.  The  policies 
                                                
5  See, for example, Gertler, M. and Kiyotaki, N. (2013), “Banking, Liquidity and Bank Runs in an Infinite Horizon 
Economy” at http://www.princeton.edu/~kiyotaki/papers/GertlerKiyotakiBankRunModel2013May22.pdf. 
6  See Darracq-Paries, M. and De Santis, R. (2013), “A non-standard monetary policy shock – the ECB’s 3-year 
LTROs and the shift in credit supply”, Working Paper Series, No 1508, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, January. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
were therefore successful in limiting heterogeneity in terms of liquidity costs across euro area 
countries. Around 60% of the initial net liquidity injection of about EUR 500 billions has now 
been repaid. This is evidence that liquidity constraints on banks have significantly receded. 
The  second  and  probably  more  obvious  application  of  the  principle  of  providing  insurance 
against tail risks is the Outright Monetary Transaction programme. 
Although  the  VLTROs  were  successful  in  alleviating  banks’  funding  risk,  doubts  have 
progressively  emerged  over  the  ability  of  distressed  sovereigns  to  roll  over  their  maturing 
debt. At some point these concerns have appeared to validate the theoretical possibility of a 
liquidity  run  on  sovereigns  –  that  is,  the  possibility  that  a  government  is  forced  to  default, 
even if it is fundamentally solvent, owing to self-fulfilling reasons.7 
The  ECB’s  response  through  the  OMT  programme  announced  in  the  autumn  of  2012  is 
another example of the commitment to provide liquidity insurance against a tail risk scenario. 
Under certain conditions, the ECB stands ready to intervene with amounts unlimited ex-ante, 
meaning with amounts commensurate with this objective. This commitment-like feature of the 
OMT  has  been  correctly  understood  by  the  markets.  Favourable  developments  in  the 
sovereign markets followed the announcement of this programme without the need for it to 
be activated. The ECB’s commitment to provide liquidity insurance has successfully calmed 
unwarranted fears of a roll-over crisis in distressed euro area sovereigns. 
In general, the imperfect pledgeability of future income results into a demand for as well as a 
shortage  of  liquidity  with  far  reaching  implications  for  the  financial  system.8  In  this 
perspective, private risk sharing is always imperfect and may lead to financial crises induced 
by liquidity shortages, which can only be alleviated through provision of public liquidity. 
But publicly supplied liquidity can also create distortions in the economy. This is an argument 
that  policy  makers  need  to take  seriously,  and  it  will  be  the  third  theme  I  will  address  this 
morning. 
Providing partial insurance 
I have argued so far that some of our non-standard measures can be interpreted as forms of 
insurance  against  certain  forms  of  risk.  I  have  also  argued  that  such  measures  were 
desirable, given that those risks were about to materialise. It is well known, however, that the 
ex ante availability of insurance distorts incentives and can lead to imprudent behaviour. It is 
worth  bearing  in  mind  that  the  trade-off  between  insurance  and  incentives  is  the  third 
important principle inspiring our non-standard measures. 
I have already elaborated on this principle elsewhere, so I will be brief.9 The classic example 
of the trade-off between insurance and incentives is that of car insurance. Car insurance is 
obviously  desirable  ex  post.  Without  it,  many  people  may  stop  driving  for  fear  of  being 
involved in an accident and having to pay for the damages in full. Insurance is however less 
desirable ex ante because it hurts incentives – it may encourage imprudent driving. 
The standard solution to the trade-off between insurance and incentives is to provide partial 
insurance.  Car  insurance  policies,  for  example,  do  not  normally  cover  the  full  cost  of 
damages. Health insurance policies also entail copayments. While partial insurance means 
less  insurance  against  shocks,  and  hence  less  ex  post  efficiency,  it  improves  ex  ante 
                                                
7  See  Corsetti,  G.  and  Dedola,  L.  (2011),  “Fiscal  crises,  confidence  and  default  –  a  bare-bones  model  with 
lessons for the euro area”, unpublished manuscript. 
8  See, for example, Holmström, B. and Tirole, J. (2011): “Inside and Outside Liquidity”. 
9  See  Cœuré,  B.  (2012),  “Central  banking,  insurance  and  incentives”,  speech  delivered  at  the  ECB  
“Debt,  growth  and  macroeconomic  policies”,  Frankfurt,  6  December  2012, 
conference  entitled 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp121206_1.en.html 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
efficiency.  At  the  ECB  we  had  the  insurance  versus  incentives  trade-off  in  mind  when 
designing  our  non-standard  measures.  Let  me  briefly  conclude  with  an  illustration  of  this 
point with reference to our provision of liquidity and to the OMT. 
With  regard  to  our  unlimited  provision  of  liquidity,  we  have  applied  the  classic  Bagehot 
principle of providing insurance at penalty rates and against adequate collateral. There is a 
thin line between bank illiquidity and bank insolvency, and the former can easily morph into 
the  latter.  By  requiring  collateral,  the  central  bank  ensures  that  it  only  provides  credit  to  a 
fundamentally  solvent  institution,  and  the  penalty  rate  is  the  means  to  ensure  that  central 
bank liquidity provision is indeed a last resort. 
These features also apply to all our provisions of liquidity. Over the past years, the overnight 
rate at which non-distressed banks can obtain market funding has fallen to levels close to the 
rate on our deposit facility. In comparison, the rate on our refinancing operations at which we 
provide liquidity has effectively turned into a penalty rate –not to mention the rate charged by 
national central banks when they provide emergency liquidity assistance to distressed banks 
which is set even higher, above our marginal lending rate. ECB liquidity is also only available 
against  collateral.  Our  collateral  policy  has  evolved  in  the  crisis  but  strict  valuation  and 
haircuts rules are always applied. Last but not least, our liquidity is only available to banks, 
subject  to  micro-prudential  supervision.  Prudential  checks  by  national  supervisors  (and 
looking forward, by the future prudential arm of the ECB) ensure that liquidity only flows to 
fundamentally solvent institutions. 
The OMTs also provide partial insurance. To qualify for interventions, countries must have 
negotiated a precautionary European Stability Mechanism programme with other euro area 
governments,  with  IMF  involvement.  This  condition  serves  to  ensure  that  governments 
continue  to  correct  existing  economic  and  fiscal  weaknesses  when  OMTs  are  activated. 
Moreover,  the  objectives  of  the  programme  are  clearly  defined.  The  ECB  does  not  aim  to 
eliminate spreads between sovereign bond issuers. This is because sovereign yields do not 
have to be identical in a monetary union and market discipline has an important role to play. 
The ECB will solely buy bonds with shorter remaining maturities. Relying on short-term debt 
strengthens the disciplining power of the right to stop our interventions at any point in time. In 
short,  OMTs  strike  a  balance  between  ex  ante  and  ex  post  efficiency,  and  they  are  fully 
compliant with the ECB mandate. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. 
The euro area is still engulfed in a severe crisis, which is posing a formidable challenge to all 
European  policy-makers.  In  designing  our  response  to  the  crisis,  the  interplay  of  many 
different factors must be borne in mind. In my remarks I have briefly illustrated three of those 
factors,  which  have  played  an  important  role  in  shaping  our  non-standard  monetary  policy 
measures so far: targeting liquidity at the most impaired market, providing insurance against 
funding  or  tail  risks,  and  mitigating  moral  hazard  when  providing  such  insurance.  We  will 
keep an open mind and stand ready to react flexibly to new developments, abiding by the 
same principles and staying within the boundary of our mandate. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
