Mark Carney: Crossing the threshold to recovery 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  at  a  business  lunch  hosted  by  the  CBI  East  Midlands,  Derbyshire  and 
Nottinghamshire  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  the  Institute  of  Directors,  Nottingham, 
28 August 2013. 
 Introduction 
I’m delighted to be in the East Midlands today to deliver my first speech as Governor of the 
Bank  of  England.  With  leaders  in  retail,  manufacturing,  engineering,  logistics,  information 
services, biosciences and education, Nottingham and the East Midlands are integral to the 
success  of  the  UK  economy.  The  businesses  here  will  make  good  on  the  promise  of 
recovery in our economy. So I’m very pleased to have the opportunity to listen to business 
people in this region. In my years in central banking, I have found that there is no substitute 
for hearing directly from those who deliver economic growth. 
What I hear from businesses here and elsewhere is that a renewed recovery is taking hold 
amid  a  rising tide  of  optimism. The  signs  are  that  this recovery  is  broad  based  and  set to 
continue. This is welcome and should be encouraged. 
Over the past five years, a pervasive sense of uncertainty has held the economy back. The 
British  people  have  been  through  the  virtual  collapse  of  the  financial  system,  the  worst 
recession in living memory, large job losses, falls in real wages and a, at times harrowing, 
crisis in the euro area, our most important trading partner. 
Households  have  been  worried  about  their  savings,  jobs,  earning  power  and  their  homes; 
companies have been concerned about the availability of credit, the health of their suppliers, 
the viability of their markets and the prospects for their investments. Uncertainty has reduced 
confidence, dampened spending, and slowed growth. 
As  a  result  the  UK  has  endured  its  weakest  recovery  on  record.  Comparisons  with  other 
countries throw that fact into sharper relief. Over the past five years Germany has grown by 
2%,  the  US  by  5%,  Australia  by  13%  and  China  by  more  than  50%.  Meanwhile  the  UK 
economy still produces 3% less than it did five years ago. 
The real cost of this poor performance is that around a million more people are unemployed 
than  before  the  recession.  Capacity  has  lain  idle  in  firms  and  opportunities  have  gone 
wanting for lack of finance and confidence. It will take a period of robust growth to begin to 
reduce meaningfully this spare capacity in the labour market and in companies. 
The Bank of England’s task now is to secure the fledgling recovery, to allow it to develop into 
a  period  of  sustained  and  robust  growth.  We  aim  to  get  there  in  part  by  reducing  the 
uncertainty that has held back growth. And we are using our full suite of policy tools to help 
rebuild confidence so that we all can move forward in a sustainable manner. 
First,  we  are  giving  confidence  that  interest  rates  won’t  go  up  until  jobs,  incomes  and 
spending are recovering at a sustainable pace. In particular, we will have to see the rate of 
unemployment,  currently  7.8%, fall  at  least  to  a threshold  of  7%  before  even  beginning  to 
consider whether to raise Bank Rate. 
Second,  we  are  building  confidence  in  banks  so  they  can  serve  the  needs  of  the  real 
economy by providing credit to those who can put it to work. In particular, we have required 
banks to repair their balance sheets so that their capital ratios at least reach a threshold of 
7% by the turn of the year. 
Crossing these two 7% thresholds  is necessary to ensure that our economy can withstand 
the inevitable bumps along the road to full recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We  must  meet  the  thresholds  in  a  disciplined  way.  We  will  ensure  that  we  bring  inflation 
down as the recovery progresses. And we will use our considerable policy tools to prevent 
new vulnerabilities, whether in the housing sector or financial sector, from arising during this 
critical transition period. 
Today I want to say more about how the Bank will help bring the British economy over the 
threshold into a sustainable recovery and what that means for you. 
Guidance about monetary policy 
Three  weeks  ago  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  did  something it  has  never  done 
before:  we  gave  clear,  quantitative  guidance  about  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy. 
Specifically,  we  announced  that  we  do  not  intend  to  raise  Bank  Rate  at  least  until  the 
unemployment  rate  falls  to  7%,  provided  there  are  no  material  threats  to  either  price  or 
financial stability.1 All nine MPC members agreed to set monetary policy in future according 
to this framework of forward guidance. 
That does not mean Bank Rate will automatically rise when unemployment falls to 7%. Nor is 
7% a target for the unemployment rate – it should ultimately fall well below that level. Before 
the Great Recession, the UK’s unemployment rate stood at just over 5%. The 7% threshold 
is instead a staging post along the road to recovery. When unemployment reaches 7% the 
MPC will reassess the state of the economy and the appropriate stance of monetary policy. 
Our forward  guidance  provides  you  with  certainty  that  interest rates  will  not  rise  too  soon. 
Exactly how long they stay low will depend on the progress of the recovery and in particular 
how quickly unemployment comes down. What matters is that rates won’t go up until jobs 
and  incomes  are  really  growing.  The  knowledge  that  interest  rates  will  stay  low  until  the 
recovery  is  well  established  should  give  greater  confidence  to  households  to  spend 
responsibly and businesses to invest wisely. 
It  may  seem  that  unemployment  doesn’t  have  far  to fall,  from  the  current  7.8%  to  the  7% 
threshold.  The  MPC’s  central  view,  though,  is  that  this  could  take  some  time  –  for  three 
reasons. 
First,  while  the  outlook  for  growth  has  improved  considerably  in  recent  months,  growth 
prospects over the next three years are solid not stellar. The MPC’s current forecast is for 
growth to average around 2½% per year over the next three years, just below its historical 
average rate of 2¾%. That suggests spare capacity will be used up only gradually. 
Second,  a  great  many  jobs  need  to  be  created  to  bring  unemployment  down.  A  fall  in 
unemployment  from  its  current  level  to  7%  over  three  years  would  mean  well  over  three 
quarters of a million new jobs created – and given the shrinkage in the public sector, over a 
million new jobs in the private sector. 
Third,  a  recovery  in  growth  does  not  necessarily  mean  faster  job  creation  and  lower 
unemployment. 
More than half of the increase in employment since the recession has been in part-time jobs. 
Many part-timers would prefer to work full time. If the recovery were fuelled by involuntary 
part-time jobs becoming full time, nearly half a million fewer new jobs would be created.2 
                                                
1   Until  the  unemployment  threshold  is  reached,  the  MPC  also  intends  not  to  reduce  the  stock  of  asset 
purchases financed by the issuance of central bank reserves and, consistent with that, intends to reinvest the 
cashflows associated with all maturing gilts held in the Asset Purchase Facility. 
2   1.4 million part-time workers would prefer to be working full time, three quarters of a million more than before 
the  financial  crisis.  If  those  additional  involuntary  part-time  workers  switched  to  full  time  working,  the  extra 
hours worked would be equivalent to over 400,000 new jobs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Moreover, there is certainly scope for the economy to grow through an increase in output per 
hour  worked  rather  than  new  job  creation.  Productivity  growth  has  been  anaemic  and  – 
remarkably – the UK is no more productive than it was back in 2005 – before Jake Bugg got 
his first guitar. The critical questions are how much and how quickly productivity improves. 
The MPC’s central view is that productivity growth is likely to pick up only slowly in the early 
phase of recovery, but that there is potential for growth to accelerate as the recovery takes 
hold.  The slow  pickup  in  productivity  means  unemployment  could  initially  fall quite  rapidly, 
but fall short of 7%. 
Over the next three years productivity is expected to grow at around 1.8% per year, below its 
pre-crisis trend3 of 2.2%. While even that modest productivity recovery is not assured, it is 
hardly an aggressive forecast. It implies that productivity reaches its 2008 level only in 2015. 
And it means that productivity doesn’t catch up any of its current 15% shortfall relative to its 
pre-crisis trend. 
Were any productivity catch-up to happen, unemployment could take even longer than three 
years to reach the threshold. 
A rebound in productivity, if accompanied by higher output growth, would be no bad thing. It 
would boost the incomes of those in employment and is an essential part of improving the 
UK’s competitiveness. 
Moreover,  in  such  a  scenario,  you  would  know  to  expect  interest  rates  to  stay  lower  for 
longer, encouraging household spending and business investment. Our forward guidance is 
a  stabiliser  –  securing  the  scale  and  duration  of  recovery  that  is  needed  to  bring 
unemployment down. 
The prospect that interest rates might stay at their low level for longer will not be welcome for 
savers. I have tremendous sympathy for them – after all they have done the right thing, set 
money aside, and now they are earning returns that are substantially below what they would 
have expected. But raising interest rates now is not the answer – instead what savers need 
is  a  stronger  economy. That  will  mean  higher  asset  prices,  and  will  allow  interest  rates  to 
return to normal levels in a sustainable way. A strong economy is in all of our interests, as it 
will deliver better job prospects for our friends, neighbours, children and grandchildren. 
The  last  thing  savers  want  is  for  the  UK  to  follow  Japan  by  raising  interest  rates  before 
recovery  is  secured,  only  to  find  that  we  are  condemned  to  decades  more  of  low  interest 
rates and lost opportunities. 
Our forward guidance is about setting the path of inflation to return to target 
Let me reassure you that our mandate to deliver price stability has not changed. Our inflation 
target  of  2%  was  reconfirmed  in  our  remit  from  the  Chancellor  in  March.  The  MPC’s 
guidance  is  fully  consistent  with  price  stability.  I  can  also  assure  you  of  my  personal 
commitment  to  price  stability.  I  certainly  have  no  hesitation  in  raising  interest  rates  when 
required  –  when  I  was  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  raised  interest  rates  as  the 
recovery there gathered pace. 
But that was the appropriate policy for Canada at that time. The challenges in the UK today 
are different, and policy must be tailored accordingly. 
The Bank of England’s remit recognises that, at times, it is appropriate to bring inflation back 
to  target  more  slowly  in  order  to  avoid  unnecessary  volatility  in  output.  With  a  depressed 
level  of  output  and  inflation  above  target  due  to  temporary  factors  rather  than  demand 
                                                
3   The trend is adjusted for the secular decline in North Sea oil and gas production. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
pressures,  this  is  such  a  time. The  MPC  is  charting  the  right  path  back  to  its  2%  inflation 
target. 
CPI inflation is currently being pushed up by rises in utility prices and tuition fees that do not 
reflect the underlying pressure of demand on supply, along with the effect of past increases 
in import prices. Underlying domestic inflationary pressure is subdued, with wages growing at 
only around 1% per year. Although there will be bumps in the road, inflation is set to fall back 
over the next two years. In these circumstances it would not make sense to choke off the 
recovery by raising interest rates prematurely. Given that ‘administered and regulated’ price 
increases will continue to push up on inflation over the next two years, the MPC is prepared 
to bring inflation back to the target over two years or a little longer. 
Rest assured, however, that we will bring inflation back to target – and at each point we will 
ensure  that risks  to  price  stability  are  contained.  Our forward  guidance  builds  in  important 
safeguards of price stability. If there are any signs of underlying inflation pressures building 
such  that  it  seems  inflation  18–24  months ahead  will  be  2.5%  or  more,  or  if medium term 
inflation expectations are no longer sufficiently well anchored, then the guidance on interest 
rates  no  longer  applies.  These  safeguards  give  ample  flexibility  to  bring  inflation  back  to 
target at the appropriate pace, while ensuring that risks to price stability are contained. 
Market reaction to forward guidance 
Much  has  been  made  of  the  upward  movements  in  market  interest  rates  since  our 
announcement of forward guidance. Let me give you my perspective. 
There  has  been  a  generalised  upward  move  in  long-term  yields  in  advanced  economies, 
including the UK, over the past month. The main common driver is speculation that the US 
Federal Reserve will soon reduce the pace of its asset purchases. That has – not surprisingly 
–  affected  yields  in  other  countries  because  safe,  liquid  sovereign  bonds  of  the  world’s 
largest economies are close substitutes for each other. 
In the UK, these movements have been reinforced by growing expectations of recovery. As 
we explained at the time of the forward guidance announcement, a rise in the yields on long 
term bonds is consistent with our commitment to price stability and supporting the recovery. 
Market interest rates at terms of 2–5 years have also risen recently. The date at which the 
markets expect the first increase in Bank Rate has moved in from the end of 2015 to mid-
2015. One possible explanation is that markets think that unemployment will come down to 
7% more quickly than we do. Since the aim of our policy is to secure recovery as quickly as 
possible, that would be welcome. But policy is built not on hope, but on expectation. And we 
estimate there is only a 1 in 3 chance of unemployment coming down that quickly (Chart 1).4 
Furthermore, thinking unemployment will come down faster than we expect isn’t enough to 
believe interest rates will rise soon. As I said earlier, the 7% threshold is a staging post to 
assess the economy. Nobody should assume that it is a trigger for raising rates. 
Another possible explanation is that the increase in shorter-term yields, like the move in long 
yields, reflects changing expectations of US monetary policy. But the US recovery is much 
further advanced than that in the UK. 
While much has been made of the special relationship between the US and UK, it is not so 
special that the possibility of a reduction in the pace of additional stimulus in the US warrants 
a current reduction in the degree of monetary stimulus in the UK. 
                                                
4   We are not alone in that belief – other major independent forecasters such as the OBR and NIESR share our 
view  that  unemployment  will  be  above  7%  in  3  years’  time.  The  MPC’s  assessment  of  the  outlook  for 
unemployment and likelihood of hitting the threshold is described in the August Inflation Report, available on 
the Bank’s website at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/2013/ir1303.aspx. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Movements in longer-term market interest rates are certainly relevant, but what matters most 
to you is what actually  happens to Bank Rate, now and in the future. That is because the 
interest rates on 70% of loans to households and more than 50% of loans to businesses are 
linked to Bank Rate.5 
And  it  is  the  Bank  of  England  that  controls  that  rate.  We  do  not  intend  even  to  consider 
raising  it  before  unemployment  falls  to  7%. When  it  does  reach  that  point,  we  will  control 
whether a rise is warranted, taking into account the strength of the recovery and the outlook 
for inflation. 
The upward move in market expectations of where Bank Rate will head in future could, at the 
margin, feed into the effective financial conditions facing the real economy. The MPC will be 
watching those conditions closely. If they tighten, and the recovery seems to be falling short 
of the strong growth we need, we will consider carefully whether, and how best, to stimulate 
the recovery further. Our forward guidance was clear that, although we would not reduce the 
stimulus until the recovery is secure, we would if necessary provide more. 
Crossing the threshold to a healthy banking system 
Confidence that interest rates will stay low is a necessary step to securing the recovery, but it 
is not sufficient. The UK also needs a fit and healthy financial sector. It plays a vital role in 
generating services output in the UK, creating jobs and in exporting to the rest of the world. 
To serve the needs of the wider economy by extending credit to where it is needed, banks 
must  command  the  confidence  of  their  customers  and  investors.  That  is  why  a  second 
element of the Bank of England’s strategy is to ensure that banks reach a clear threshold of 
good health. 
Some argue that the repair of banks’ balance sheets holds back economic recovery because 
it causes banks to cut back their lending. The reality is the opposite: where capital has been 
rebuilt and balance sheets repaired, banking systems and economies have prospered. 
US banks have added more to their capital base since the crisis and, as a result, have been 
able to provide more credit to their economy than UK banks have to ours. In the past two 
years, UK banks have reduced their lending to the real economy by 1%. In those same two 
years, US banks have increased their lending by more than 8% (Chart 2). 
Within Europe, the correlation between the market’s assessment of a bank’s capital base at 
the end of 2011 and that bank’s lending over the subsequent year is striking (Chart 3). 
Without  an  adequate  capital  base,  banks  will  be  wary  of  lending  and,  if  they  do,  will  find 
themselves  needing  to  turn  off  the  lending  taps  when  the  unexpected  happens,  as  it 
inevitably does. Investors will lack the confidence to fund banks cheaply, raising the cost of 
credit to the real economy, and most importantly, you will lack the confidence that credit will 
be available if you need it. 
That is why the Bank of England has established a threshold for the capital base of the major 
banks  and  building  societies  after  taking  account  of  likely  future  losses,  fines  for  past 
misconduct and prudent calculations of risk. That threshold, a capital base of 7% of their risk-
weighted assets and at least 3% of their total assets, must be crossed if the system is to be 
able to support and sustain the recovery. Some of the UK’s major banks had already crossed 
it, and over the summer we have made sure that the others put in place plans to reach it. The 
plans do not involve cutting back lending to the real economy. 
                                                
5   53% of the stock of bank loans to non-financial businesses pay a floating interest rate, and for an additional 
one third the interest rate is fixed for one year or less. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
As a result of the Bank of England’s actions, we can relax other requirements to help with the 
flow  of  credit.  Balance  sheet  repair  will  give  confidence  to  depositors  and  investors  who 
provide  funding  to  banks.  With  that  market  funding  assured,  banks  can  safely  hold  fewer 
liquid assets, such as government bonds, that act as a cushion to be sold in the event that 
investors withdraw their funding. 
Accordingly,  I  can  confirm  today  that,  for  major  banks  and  building  societies  meeting  the 
minimum 7% capital threshold, the Bank of England will reduce the level of required liquid 
asset holdings. The effect will be to lower total required holdings by £90 billion, once all eight 
major banks and building societies meet the capital threshold.6 That will help to underpin the 
supply of credit, since every pound currently held in liquid assets is a pound that could be 
lent to the real economy. 
Taken together, our actions create not just a more resilient system, but also one more able to 
support and sustain a recovery by serving the real economy. 
Crossing the threshold of balance sheet repair is not the end-point. The 7% capital threshold, 
like  the  7%  unemployment  threshold,  is  only  a  staging  post  at  which  we  assess  our  next 
steps.  Beyond  that  our  major  banks  will  need  to  strengthen  their  capital  base  further.  For 
example, large international banks will be 
subject  to  new  internationally-agreed  requirements  for  systemically-important  firms.  Other 
UK-focussed retail banks will need to meet the requirements set by the Vickers commission 
for “ringfenced” banks. Our task will be to manage the transition from the threshold to the end 
point in a gradual way that supports continued confidence in growth. 
Using all the Bank of England’s tools to secure a sustainable recovery 
A  recovering  banking  sector,  coupled  with  persistently  low  interest  rates  and  new 
government  programmes,  may  lead  to  concern  that  the  seeds  are  being  sown  for  a  new 
cycle in the housing market. The number of mortgage approvals for house purchase is up by 
20% on a year ago, while house prices have risen by 5% over the same period – and by 
more than that in some parts of the country. 
That must be kept in perspective, however. Mortgage approvals are currently running at only 
a  little  more  than  half,  and  transactions  a  little  more  than  two-thirds,  of  pre-crisis  levels. 
Households’  debt  servicing  costs  relative  to  income  are  below  their  20-year  average,  and 
houses cost the same relative to earnings as they did in 2003. 
Nevertheless, the Bank of England is acutely aware of the risk of unsustainable credit and 
house price growth and will be monitoring it closely. 
The important thing to recognise is that we now have tools other than interest rates that can 
be  used 
financial  sectors.  These  so-called 
macroprudential  tools  were  not  available  to  us  before  the  crisis  and  we  are  now  fully 
prepared to deploy them if that were needed. The Bank of England is now in a position, for 
example, 
to  make 
recommendations to banks and building societies to restrict the terms on which new credit is 
provided, or even to raise capital requirements on mortgage or other types of lending. 
to  specific  sectors  more 
the  property  and 
to  contain  risks 
to  supervise 
intensively, 
lending 
in 
                                                
6  
In  June  2013  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  concluded  that  there  was  scope  for  banks  to  reduce  their 
holdings of liquid assets in the near term, and recommended a relaxation in liquidity requirements in order to 
strike the appropriate balance between achieving resilience and reducing possible impediments to the supply 
of credit to the economy. That relaxation was subject both to banks meeting the minimum capital threshold, 
and  to  additional  firm-specific  considerations.  Today  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (PRA)  has  agreed 
with that recommendation, and is announcing how it will be implemented. The PRA  will be making a more 
detailed statement today and writing to individual firms in due course. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  secure  recovery  without  creating  risks 
Having these in our toolkit – and if necessary using them – will help us to keep interest rates 
low 
that  recovery  ultimately 
unsustainable. If that is not enough, a final safeguard is built into our new forward guidance 
framework.  The  Bank’s  independent  Financial  Policy  Committee  has  the  task  of  warning 
publicly if persistently low interest rates are leading to vulnerabilities that cannot be contained 
by other means. 
In short, we are providing the stimulus the economy needs, but in a disciplined way to secure 
price and financial stability. 
that  make 
Conclusion 
Let me finish by drawing the pieces of the jigsaw together. 
Developments  at  home  and  abroad  suggest  that  conditions  are  in  place  for  growth  to  be 
sustained into the medium-term – though at a pace that is likely to be measured rather than 
rapid. 
Households have reduced their debt levels and are now spending out of income. The outlook 
for the world economy and our major export markets is a bit better. The extreme risks in the 
euro area have been substantially reduced. The global financial system is being repaired. 
There  will  still  be  bumps  in  the  road  ahead.  A  few  can  be  foreseen,  others  will  surprise. 
Emerging market economies – the engine of global growth in recent years – are under strain 
as capital flows back to recovering advanced economies. A few less well-managed financial 
institutions still have a long journey ahead to rebuild their balance sheets and are vulnerable 
to shocks until they do so. Progress in Europe will remain uneven. 
We cannot control all these events. Instead we are focussed on doing what we can to reduce 
uncertainty and build resilience so that the recovery can be sustained despite the inevitable 
shocks ahead. 
We are removing uncertainty with our guidance that interest rates will stay low at least until 
unemployment has fallen. That will boost demand. 
By repairing the balance sheets of banks we are putting them in a position to support the real 
economy. That will promote investment. 
And by standing ready to use the range of other tools at our disposal, we can help to avoid 
sowing the seeds of the next crisis. 
In these ways, the Bank of England is helping the British economy over the threshold and 
into strong, sustainable and balanced recovery. 
Thank you. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
