Norman T L Chan: Recent economic and financial developments in Hong 
Kong 
Remarks by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, 
Hong Kong, 22 February 2013. 
 The property market in Hong Kong moderated briefly after the introduction of the fifth round 
of prudential measures on property mortgages by the HKMA in September 2012 and the new 
tax measures by the Government in October 2012. However, activities in the property market 
picked  up  again  recently,  with  significant  increases  in  transaction  volume  and  prices  of 
residential properties as well as commercial and industrial properties. The risk of overheating 
in the property market has, once again, risen sharply. 
Moreover,  the  recent  increase  in  intensity  of  the  quantitative  easing  by  central  banks  in 
Europe, the US and Japan has made it more difficult and uncertain for them to “exit” these 
measures in the future. It will be particularly so when inflationary pressures emerge again in 
the advanced economies, and the pace and extent of interest rate hike could be greater than 
originally expected. In fact, in the last quarter of 2012, the HKMA already started requesting 
local banks to assume a of 300 bps increase in interest rate above the baseline scenario for 
its mortgage portfolio when conducting stress testing. In order to further enhance banks’ risk 
management  in  property  mortgage  lending  and  to  strengthen  borrowers’  resilience  to 
withstand future interest rate hikes, the HKMA has just issued a set of guidelines to banks, 
requiring  them  to  adopt  an  increase  of  300  bps  instead  of  200  bps  of  interest  rate  when 
stress-testing the repayment ability of mortgage applicants. This measure is applicable to all 
types  of  mortgages,  including  residential  as  well  as  commercial  and  industrial  property 
mortgages. 
The risk of overheating in the commercial and industrial property market also continues to 
rise. Our experience shows that the quality of commercial and industrial property mortgages 
will deteriorate more significantly than that of residential property mortgages during market 
downturns. In view of these circumstances, our guidelines have also required banks to lower 
the maximum LTV ratio of mortgage loans for commercial and industrial properties, whether 
or not for self-use, by 10 percentage points from the existing applicable levels. For example, 
for mortgage applicants with income mainly derived from Hong Kong, the maximum LTV ratio 
will be lowered from 50% to 40%. If the applicant’s income is mainly derived from outside 
Hong Kong, the maximum LTV ratio will be lowered from the current 40% to 30%. 
The  HKMA  has  also  required  banks  to  standardise  the  maximum  LTV  ratio  of  mortgage 
loans  for  all  standalone carpark  spaces  at  40% and  the  maximum  loan tenor  at  15  years. 
Other requirements on maximum LTV ratio and debt-servicing ratio applicable to commercial 
and  industrial  property  mortgage  loans  also  apply  to  standalone  carpark  space  mortgage 
loans. 
The  above  measures  take  effect  immediately.  However,  loan  applications  in  respect  of 
property transactions with provisional sale and purchase agreements signed today or earlier 
will not be affected. 
The  HKMA  is  also  aware  that  the  risk  weight  allocated  by  Hong  Kong  banks  adopting the 
Internal  Ratings-Based  (IRB)  Approach  under  the  Basel  Capital  Accord  to  residential 
property  exposures  is  at  a  relatively  low  level.  This  may  not  fully  reflect  the  existing  and 
future risks of property market volatility. To further enhance the risk management of banks in 
Hong  Kong,  the  HKMA  has  decided  to  introduce  a  risk  weight  floor  of  15%  for  residential 
mortgages approved by banks on or after 23 February 2013 under the IRB Approach. 
Mr  Arthur  Yuen,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  HKMA,  will  explain  the  above-mentioned 
measures in more details later. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Meanwhile,  the  Hong  Kong  Mortgage  Corporation  will  introduce  revisions  to  its  Mortgage 
Insurance  Programme  in  line  with  the  latest  developments  in  the  property  market  and  will 
announce the details later. 
I hope the public would understand that Hong Kong is facing an extremely unusual macro-
monetary  environment.  The  ongoing  quantitative  easing  by  advanced  economies  is 
unprecedented in both scale and duration. Interest rates have been artificially maintained at 
extremely low levels, and we see huge volumes of liquidity flow into emerging markets like 
Hong Kong. The current unusual circumstances are one of the main drivers for the prolonged 
boom in the local property sector. The risk of over-heating in the property sector to financial 
stability in Hong Kong is no smaller than that seen in 1997. We should note in particular that 
while mortgage rates were generally over 10% in 1997, after the burst of the property bubble, 
US  interest  rates  have  fallen,  and  mortgage  rates  in  Hong  Kong  have  spiralled  down 
reaching about 2% in 2004. The situation we faced now is just the opposite. Mortgage rates 
are around 2%. And, even if the low interest rate environment were to remain until 2015 as 
anticipated  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  the  US  interest  rates  are  bound  to  head  back  to 
more  normal  levels. Will  mortgage  borrowers  in  Hong  Kong  then  be  able  to  withstand  the 
impact  of  interest  rate  hikes  and  property  price  falls?  For  example,  under  a  30-year 
mortgage, even though the borrower will be able to enjoy a low interest rate in the first two 
years, the repayment burden could become much heavier as a result of interest rate hikes in 
the  years  that  follow.  This  could  have  serious  consequences  for  the  well-being  of  those 
families in the coming years. Therefore, I hope that the public will be cautious and should not 
underestimate the risks that rising interest rate could have on repayment ability, asset prices 
and the overall economy in Hong Kong. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
