Jörg Asmussen: Building Banking Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Atlantic Council, London, 9 July 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me thank the Atlantic Council for inviting me here to speak today. 
This  event  is  part  of  the  Atlantic  Council’s  Transatlantic  Finance  Initiative,  and  in  recent 
weeks we have been reminded again just how important the transatlantic relationship is. We 
have seen how policy decisions in the United States can have immediate impact on markets 
here. 
Similarly, when I speak to American colleagues I often hear how the euro area’s reaction to 
the on-going crisis is seen as key risk factor for the outlook there. 
To emphasise this interconnection, just yester-day negotiations started on the Transatlantic 
Trade and Investment Partnership, which is expected to give an annual boost to the EU and 
US economies of around 120 billion euro and 95 billion euro, respectively. 
This underscores why strengthening dialogue through events such as these is important, to 
better  understand  how  and  why  policy  decisions  in  the  US  and  the  euro  area  are  being 
made. 
And in that context, I would like to use my intervention today to discuss a key issue for the 
euro area that also has a strong transatlantic dimension: Banking Union. 
But before I turn to this, let me briefly say a word about the UK. I understand that there is in-
tense debate going on at the moment about the UK’s place in the EU, and a lot of questions 
are being asked about the value of continued membership. 
But I firmly believe that the best place for this country is to be at the heart of Europe. That is 
where it can have most influence on the EU. 
And  that  is  where  the  EU  can  benefit  most  from  its  contribution,  not  least  in  transatlantic 
relations where the UK traditionally has a special link to the US. I therefore hope that, when 
the current debates are resolved, the UK returns to that position. 
That said, it is clear now that the euro area will move faster than others in terms of economic 
and political integration: there will be a Europe of different speeds, with the euro area as its 
engine. But this need not be a threat to the EU. 
The key is to ensure that integration remains open to all: the Fiscal Compact, where 25 out of 
then  27  countries  chose  to  join,  and  the  SSM,  which  is  open  to  non-euro  area  countries, 
show how this can be done. 
Moreover, as we have seen today in the case of Latvia, the euro area is still attractive to new 
members. 
And for the time being, this trend should be helpful for this country: it will allow the UK to find 
a place in the EU that suits it, without holding back others that want to go further. 
Supervision 
Let me start by reviewing the state of play of the key elements of Banking Union, beginning 
with the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
As you know, the SSM Regulation is still being discussed by the European Parliament. The 
Parliament  has  scheduled  a  vote  on  the  Regulation  for  its  plenary  session  on  9–12 
September. 
If this vote passes, the text would then have to be agreed with the Council and enter into the 
official journal, which could take a few weeks. This means that we can tentatively conclude 
that the ECB will take over supervision in September or October 2014. 
Following the approval of the Regulation, the members of the Supervisory Board can be ap-
pointed and we will start the general recruitment of staff for the SSM. This is key to get the 
SSM moving, as a number of major decisions can only be taken when the Supervisory Board 
is in place. 
That said, this has not prevented us from progressing with the preparatory work. 
Technical  preparations have  been  on-going  since  September  2012,  involving  officials from 
the ECB and the national supervisory authorities. Some of the key issues we are working on 
are as follows. 
First,  a  full  mapping  of  the  euro  area  banking  system,  so  we  can  identify  which  are  the 
significant  and  less  significant  banks  –  that  is,  those  which  will  and  will  not  be  directly 
supervised  by  the  ECB.  Our  current  estimate  is  that  we  will  directly  supervise  around  130 
banking  groups  operating  in  the  euro  area  which  covers  approximately  85%  of  euro  area 
bank assets. 
Second, we are developing a common supervisory model, which lays down how the different 
layers of SSM – national supervisors and the ECB – will work together. The aim is to create, 
for  each  banking  group  we  supervise,  a  joint  supervisory  team  that  vertically  integrates 
supervisors in Frankfurt with those in the national competent authorities. 
As part of this work we are also developing a supervisory manual which will create a unified 
supervisory approach across all SSM jurisdictions. This will apply to issues like off-site and 
on-site reviews, risk assessments and model validations. 
It is worth noting that the task we are undertaking here is comparable to the challenge of set-
ting up the ECB and European System of Central Banks in the late 1990s. One difference is 
that central bankers in Europe had been cooperating for decades, not least to maintain the 
various European exchange rate regimes, and met frequently in the Committee of Governors 
in Basel. This meant that there was already a largely homogenous culture on which we could 
build. 
In the supervisory field, however, cooperation has historically been  looser, and as a result 
there are several different supervisory traditions and philosophies that we need to unite into a 
single system. In other words, we are working together to create a single supervisory culture 
and find our leitmotif, but it will take time. 
Third, we are preparing to conduct a comprehensive assessment of all banks that will come 
under direct ECB supervision, which is required by the SSM Regulation. The assessment will 
involve  a  Balance  Sheet  Assessment  (BSA),  including  an  Asset  Quality  Review,  to  be 
conducted  by  the  ECB  together  with  the  national  supervisors  and  assisted  by  external 
expertise.  This  will  then  feed  into  the  overall  stress  test  to  be  conducted  by  EBA,  in 
cooperation with the ECB. 
Technical work on the design of the BSA is al-ready underway, and it will accelerate through-
out  the  summer. While  the  methodology  and  timing  of  the  assessment  can  only  be  finally 
established when the Supervisory Board is in place, we currently expect the whole exercise 
to start in Q1 of next year and to be completed be-fore the SSM takes over supervision. 
We want this exercise to be rigorous to restore confidence in the European banking sector 
after two previous stress tests failed to do so. This means that it may reveal capital shortfalls. 
It is therefore essential for market confidence that supervisors and governments make clear 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
ex  ante  how  such  shortfalls  would  be  dealt  with.  I  am  pleased  that  the  recent  European 
Council  has  acknowledged  this  issue  and  called  for  backstops  to  be  in  place  before  the 
assessment is completed – otherwise we would not be in a position to undertake it. 
The first backstop for any capital needs will of course be the market, and for the time being 
national  budgets  and  the  existing  ESM  facilities  will  form  the  second  and  third  line  of 
defence. 
Direct bank recapitalisation via the ESM – with the exception of very rare and unlikely cases 
– will only be available once the SSM is fully operational. 
A  further  issue  we  are  working  on  is  the  accountability  arrangements  with  the  European 
Parliament. We place a high priority on this, because supervision may directly affect citizens’ 
and companies’ property rights and therefore has to be given full democratic legitimisation at 
the right level. 
We believe that level is the European Parliament. We expect the discussions to be finalised 
soon. 
I mentioned above the EBA, and some of you may be wondering what the creation of the 
SSM will mean for this authority. In my view, the SSM will in fact be very positive for the EBA, 
for two reasons. 
First,  the  EBA  will  remain  responsible  for  developing  regulatory  policy  and  technical 
standards that will form the basis of a single rulebook for banks across Europe. 
The  creation  of  the  SSM  should  help  this  pro-cess,  as  having  a  significant  number  of 
countries participating in the SSM will reduce the scope for coordination failures, thus making 
the EBA’s coordination function easier. 
At  the  same  time, the  interests  of  non-SSM  members  will  be  protected  by  double-majority 
voting: for a vote to pass, there will have to be a majority by voting weight of all EU members, 
plus a simple unweighted majority of the euro-zone "outs" and the "ins". 
Second,  the  EBA  is  currently  developing  a  supervisory  handbook  which  reflects  best 
supervisory practices across the EU. The ECB is cooperating closely with the EBA to ensure 
that its own supervisory manual and the EBA handbook are fully consistent. Here again, the 
existence  of  the  SSM  should  help  the  EBA’s  work,  as  all  SSM  members  will  naturally 
converge in their supervisory practices. 
Resolution 
Let  me  now  turn  to the other key  element  of  Banking  Union,  which  is  a  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism operating under a single legal framework for resolution. 
Looking at the US financial sector shows the value of a strong and clear resolution regime. 
The  FDIC  has  resolved  around  480  smaller  banks  since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  and  it  is 
probably no coincidence that there a few concerns there about “zombie banks”. 
Dodd-Frank  has  created  a  similar  resolution  framework  for  larger  banks,  strengthening 
market discipline and reducing distorted incentives linked to “too big to fail”. This is what we 
should be aiming for in Europe: we cannot afford to have a regime that is too weak or too 
complicated. 
The  process  of  building  a  stronger  resolution  framework  has  now  begun  with  the  recent 
agreement by the ECOFIN Council on the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), 
which now needs to be agreed with the European Parliament. 
Overall, I welcome the Council general approach and hope that the Trialogue process with 
European Parliament can be completed swiftly after the summer break. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
But let me single out two issues that I find positive in the agreement, and two which I believe 
could still be improved. 
Starting  with  the  positives,  it  is  important that we  have  now  established  the  principles  that 
bail-out is out, and bail-in is in. 
Under  the  Council  approach,  banks  can  only  be  recapitalised  with  resolution  financing 
arrangements – such as a resolution fund – after a minimum level of bail-in equal to 8% of 
the  total  li-abilities  including  own  funds,  has  been  imposed  on  shareholders  and  creditors. 
While this of course does not mean that taxpayers will never again be on the line, it should 
give  them  more  protection,  and  sharpen  incentives  to  exercise  discipline  in  the  financial 
sector. 
The second positive is that Council approach on BRRD contains a depositor preference rule 
which puts some types of deposits at the end of the resolution pecking order and exempts 
insured deposits from bail-in. 
Depositor preference is important to give the same reassurance to depositors in all parts of 
the  euro  area,  especially  smaller  depositors  like  ordinary  citizens  and  micro-,  small-  and 
medium-sized  enterprises,  who  will  be  given  preference  over  depositors  from  large 
corporations. 
Moreover, it helps reduce financial fragmentation based on varying credibility of national de-
posit  guarantee  schemes.  As  deposit  guarantee  schemes  will  be  given  highest  priority  in 
resolution, they should only have to pay out in extreme cases. This means that the existing 
arrangements backstopped by individual countries should be sufficient. 
The two issues which I believe could be improved are as follows. 
First, the entry into force of the bail-in tool un-der the Council approach would be 1 January 
2019 at the latest, and in my view, this is too late. 
It means that there is a time gap where a harmonised resolution framework has entered into 
force but one of the key resolution tools is not available to national resolution authorities. In 
the interim, not having access to this tool may impact the timely and orderly resolution of an 
institution or result in possible ad hoc national solutions which should be avoided in a Single 
Market. 
The European Parliament proposal for bail-in to enter into force in 2016 is an improvement, 
but January 2015 would be better. Markets will in any case anticipate bail-in earlier. 
Second, the arrangements for bail-in could be more rules-based. 
The ECB has always argued for discretionary exclusions from bail-in to be limited so as to 
make  the  rules  of  the  game  clear  for  global  investors.  The  Council  approach  gives  the 
resolution  authority  powers  to  discretionarily  exclude  any  type  of  liability  for  reasons  of 
impossibility within a certain time frame, or to avoid wide-spread contagion. In our view, there 
would  have  been  a  benefit  in  defining  ex  ante  the  categories  of  liabilities  that  could  have 
been excluded. 
This means that investors will lack certainty about how the new framework will be used, and 
in my view it may slow down the process of reducing financial fragmentation. 
For instance, there will inevitably be a political economy dimension to how national resolution 
authorities  decide  to  exercise  their  discretion,  with  creditor  classes  that  have  particular 
importance in different national contexts likely to be favoured. This will affect the level-playing 
field between Member States. 
Moreover, the BRRD foresees that after 8% of a bank’s liabilities have  been bailed-in, the 
national resolution authority has the option to use its resolution fund to bail-out a further 5% 
of  the  bank’s  liabilities.  However,  some  countries  will  have  larger  resolution  funds  than 
others,  for  instance  if  they  have  more  banks  paying  into  the  fund.  This  means  that  these 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
countries would be able to bail-out more domestic banks before they exhaust the fund than 
those with less resolution resources available, who would need to use more bail-in. This will 
also not help reduce fragmentation. 
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  –  comprising  of  a  European  resolution  authority 
and  a  single  resolution  fund  –  could  remedy  both  these  fragmentation  problems  of  the 
BRRD, which is a further reason why it is so essential. 
First,  a  central  authority  would  not  be  influenced  by  national  preferences  when  applying 
discretion. 
Second, a single resolution fund, financed by levies on the whole banking sector and with a 
European  backstop,  would  be  effectively  de-linked  from  national  budgets.  However,  these 
benefits will of course only apply to countries that join the SSM and SRM. 
Moreover,  it  is  essential  that  the  European  resolution  authority  will  be  in  a  position  to  act 
swiftly  –  if  needed  over  a  weekend  for  example  –  in  order  to  avoid  uncertainty  about  its 
course of action with a specific bank. 
As  you  know,  we  await  the  release  of  the  Com-mission’s  proposal  on  the  SRM  which  is 
expected tomorrow, and I expect it goes in this direction. 
As to its institutional structure, the first-best option would be to entrust a newly established 
agency with full decision-making powers. 
If this is not feasible in the short run, a second-best option would be to use the ESM for this 
purpose for an interim period. 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
There is no doubt that the banking system in the euro area is suffering from a confidence 
problem. Investors remain unsure about the health of banks’ balance sheets; about the rigour 
of their supervision; and about the capacity of fiscally-constrained countries to resolve banks 
that are no longer viable. 
This is why advancing with Banking Union is such an urgent priority for the euro area. 
It is essential to build trust in the banking sector; to increase transparency over asset quality; 
and to ensure that banks that need to be wound down, can and will be. From the perspective 
of  the  ECB,  it  is  also  indispensable  to  reintegrate  financial  markets  and  so  to  restore  the 
even transmission of our monetary policy across the euro area. 
The progress made so far has been impressive, by any measure. The SSM is a milestone in 
European integration. But this is no time to rest on our laurels. We cannot afford a half-baked 
Banking Union. So I hope that, as of tomorrow, policy makers will now take up with urgency 
the task of building a strong SRM. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
