Simon M Potter: The implementation of current asset purchases 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Forecasters Club of New York, New York City, 
27 March 2013. 
 I would like to thank Katherine Femia and Linsey Molloy for help in preparing these remarks along with members 
of  the  Markets  Group  Staff  for  their comments  and  suggestions,  including  James  Egelhof,  Joshua Frost,  Lorie 
Logan, Julie Remache, Roman Shimonov, and Nathaniel Wuerffel. These remarks are an expanded version of 
those given to the Annual Primary Dealers meeting on March 1. 
Thank you very much. It’s a pleasure to be here today to talk with you all about the Federal 
Reserve’s ongoing policy actions and the role of the Trading Desk (the Desk) at the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  in  implementing  those  policies  on  behalf  of  the  Federal  Open 
Market Committee (FOMC). As always, the views expressed here are my own and do not 
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve 
System.  
Outcome-based purchases 
At  the  September  2012  FOMC  meeting,  the  Committee  decided  to  increase  policy 
accommodation  by  purchasing  an  additional  $40  billion  per  month  of  agency  mortgage-
backed securities (MBS) and to continue the Maturity Extension Program (MEP). Then at its 
December  meeting,  the  Committee  decided  to  continue  buying  $45  billion  per  month  in 
longer-term  Treasury  securities  following  the  completion  of  the  MEP.  As  a  result  of  these 
decisions, the Federal Reserve is currently adding $85 billion in longer-term securities each 
month  to  its  holdings,  in  addition  to  reinvesting  principal  payments  from  its  holdings  of 
agency  MBS  and  agency  debt  securities  into  agency  MBS.1  We  have  bought  about 
$130 billion  in  Treasury  securities  since  January  and  about  $260  billion  in  agency  MBS, 
excluding  reinvestments,  since  mid-September,  bringing  the  total  par  value  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s SOMA (System Open Market Account) portfolio to over $2.9 trillion.2  
The FOMC’s current asset purchase program has some key differences from earlier policy 
initiatives.  In  the  past,  when  announcing  previous  programs  to  change  the  size  or 
composition of its balance sheet, the FOMC communicated an expected total size of each 
program  and  an  anticipated  date  by  when  it  would  be  completed.  Under  the current  asset 
purchase  program,  the  FOMC  has  announced  only  the  monthly  pace  and  composition  of 
purchases and noted that purchases will continue until there is a substantial improvement in 
the  outlook  for  the  labor  market  in  a  context  of  price  stability.  The  Committee  has  also 
indicated that, in determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, it will 
take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of its purchases as well as the extent 
of progress toward its economic objectives. 
The structure of the current purchase program reflects the Committee’s expressed intention 
to provide policy accommodation as necessary to improve the outlook for the labor market 
and  allows  the  FOMC’s  policy  response  to  adjust  over  time  in  response  to  incoming 
information. The flexibility to adjust purchases is useful given our relatively limited experience 
                                                
1  The FOMC also directed the Desk to reinstate its previous policy of rolling over maturing Treasury holdings 
into new issues. See the Desk’s Frequently Asked Questions for more information. In practice, the amount of 
maturing proceeds will be quite small over the next several years, since nearly all securities maturing within 
the next three years were sold or redeemed as part of the MEP. 
2  The current par value of the portfolio excludes about $75 billion of agency MBS trades scheduled to settle in 
the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
with  the  balance  sheet  as  a  monetary  policy  tool  and  the  uncertainty  about  the  policy’s 
effects. 
Of course, previous asset programs have also been conditioned on the FOMC’s assessment 
of the economy and its evolving views on the efficacy and costs of purchases. For example, 
the  September  2011  FOMC  announcement,  in  which  the  Committee  introduced  the  MEP, 
noted  that  “the  Committee  will  regularly  review  the  size  and  composition  of  its  securities 
holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate”. Indeed, the FOMC chose 
to adjust the policy by extending the MEP to the end of 2012, beyond its planned completion 
in  June  2012,  in  order  to  support  a  stronger  economic  recovery  and  help  ensure  that 
inflation, over time, reached a rate most consistent with its dual mandate. Market participants 
recognized the program’s conditionality and adjusted their expectations for additional policy 
accommodation prior to the announcement of the extension of the program. 
Indeed,  results  from  the  Desk’s  Survey  of  Primary  Dealers  prior  to  the  announcement 
indicated that respondents placed 60 percent odds on the Committee either increasing the 
duration of Federal Reserve holdings, for instance by extending the MEP, or expanding the 
size of the portfolio through asset purchases without short-term Treasury sales at the June 
2012  FOMC  meeting.3  There  are  also  other  examples  of  the  FOMC  adjusting  its  balance 
sheet based on its ongoing assessment of the economy. The advantage of the current policy 
is that it relates asset purchases to economic conditions and the efficacy and costs of the 
policy in a more explicit and transparent manner. This should enable market participants to 
recalibrate  their  expectations  more  continuously  in  light  of  incoming  information  and  may 
provide some additional reassurance against downside risks. 
Despite the changes in communication around the current purchases, their intended purpose 
and the way that I anticipate the purchases will impact the economy are similar to previous 
policies.  The  purchases  are  conducted  to  help  achieve  the  FOMC’s  dual  mandate  of 
maximum employment and price stability. Asset purchases promote this mandate by putting 
downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, supporting mortgage markets, and helping 
to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. 
The current purchases reduce interest rates and ease financial conditions through the same 
transmission channels as previous purchase programs. As has been widely discussed in the 
academic literature, one of the most important channels is the portfolio balance effect.4 This 
theory  relies  on  the  premise  that  financial  assets  are  imperfect  substitutes  in  investors’ 
portfolios, and, as a result, a rise in the demand for a particular financial asset relative to its 
supply  –  reflecting  the  Federal  Reserve’s  asset  purchases,  for  example  –  will  increase  its 
price  and  reduce  its  yield.  After  selling  that  asset  to  the  Federal  Reserve,  investors  may 
rebalance  their  portfolios  by  investing  in  other  assets,  raising  the  prices  of  those  assets, 
lowering their yields, and easing overall financial conditions. 
The Federal Reserve’s asset purchases are designed to remove risk from the portfolios of 
private investors. For example, Treasury and agency MBS purchases remove duration risk, 
thereby  lowering  longer-term  interest  rates  and  reducing  private-sector  borrowing  costs. 
Furthermore, agency MBS purchases also remove prepayment risk from the market, since 
homeowners  have  the  option  to  prepay  their  mortgages  at  any  time.  Investors  generally 
demand an extra return to bear this risk, which is incorporated into agency MBS yields and 
passed along to borrowers in the form of higher primary mortgage rates. All else equal, the 
removal of a considerable amount of this risk by the Fed’s purchases would be expected to 
lower  agency  MBS  rates  by  lowering  this  extra  return,  thereby  reducing  primary  mortgage 
rates, stimulating demand for housing, and prompting increased refinancing activity. Indeed, 
                                                
3  See responses to June 2012 Survey of Primary Dealers. 
4  For  example,  see  Brainard  and  Tobin  (1968),  Vayanos  and  Vila  (2009),  Li  and  Wei  (2012),  Gagnon  et  al 
(2010), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011), and Hancock and Passmore (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
asset purchases do appear to have a meaningful impact on mortgage markets. For example, 
in  the  two  days  following  the  announcement  of  additional  agency  MBS  purchases  at  the 
September  2012  FOMC  meeting,  agency  MBS  yields  declined  by  roughly  30  basis  points 
and option-adjusted spreads to Treasury securities narrowed by about 25 basis points. Over 
time, the primary mortgage rate also declined to about 3.3 percent, near its lowest levels on 
record. 
Even  though  the  Committee  is  communicating  a  monthly  pace  and  composition  of 
purchases,  in  my  opinion,  the  predominant  effect  on  interest  rates  from  changes  in  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  portfolio  holdings  comes  from  the  expectations  of  the  total  stock  of 
different risks that the Federal Reserve will remove from private investors and the length of 
time that it will hold these risks. The Desk’s January Survey of Primary Dealers indicates that 
the median respondent expects the FOMC to purchase about $1 trillion in securities over the 
course of 2013 and early 2014, roughly equally split between Treasuries and agency MBS. 
As  a  group  interested  in  forecasting,  you  will  appreciate  that  while  individual  survey 
respondents may provide a modal expectation for asset purchases – that is, the total amount 
that they think the FOMC is most likely to purchase – they also place probability on a variety 
of other outcomes. If a respondent is more uncertain about the economic outlook, the way 
the FOMC  will respond  to the outlook, or the Committee’s assessment of the efficacy and 
costs of purchases, he or she will place much higher odds on a wider range of outcomes for 
the size of the Federal Reserve’s portfolio. The Survey of Primary Dealers asks respondents 
about their individual forecast distribution about the size of the Federal Reserve’s portfolio in 
the  future.5  These  individual  probability  distributions  can  then  be  aggregated  by  simple 
averaging  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  probability  attached  to  different  sizes  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s portfolio. 
The evolution of this probability distribution can be seen in Figure 1. As can be seen, the 
probability  attached  to  a  very  small  amount  of  purchases  or  a  very  large  amount  of 
purchases has come down over the last few months. The dispersion seen in this probability 
distribution  can  be  attributed  to  two  factors:  disagreement  across  point  forecasts  and 
uncertainty around individual point forecasts.6  
Uncertainty,  which  is  calculated  by  first  taking  the  standard  deviation  of  each  dealer’s 
distribution  and  then  averaging  these  individual  uncertainties,  provides  a  sense  of  how 
confident  respondents  are  about  their  individual  point  forecasts.  Based  on  this  calculation, 
the uncertainty around dealers’ expectations for the size of the SOMA portfolio at the end of 
2014  is  large.  In fact,  at  around  $500  billion  it  is  almost  as  large  as  the  entire  size  of  the 
large-scale asset purchase program announced in November 2010 or the MEP announced in 
September 2011. Moreover, this uncertainty has not changed significantly since the start of 
the  purchases  in  September  2012.  The  dispersion  around  individual  point  forecasts  likely 
reflects uncertainty about both how the economy will evolve and how the FOMC will adjust its 
purchases in response to changes in the economic outlook or changes in its understanding 
of the efficacy and costs of the policy. 
Disagreement  among  dealers  about  the  likely  amount  of  purchases  is  measured  as  the 
standard deviation across their average forecasts for the size of the SOMA portfolio at the 
end of 2014. In the January survey, disagreement was about $250 billion, significantly lower 
than its level in October. 
Investors’  disagreement  and  uncertainty  about  the  overall  stance  of  monetary  policy  will 
reflect  their  views  on  the  future  evolution  of  both  the  federal  funds  rate  and  the  SOMA 
                                                
5  See, for example, Question 8 in the January 2013 Survey of Primary Dealers. 
6  The measures of forecast uncertainty and disagreement discussed here are based on Rich and Tracy (2006) 
and Wallis (2004, 2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
portfolio. One way to get a sense of the overall level of policy uncertainty is to convert the 
SOMA portfolio into “fed funds equivalents”.7 With this translation, it is possible to estimate 
the  hypothetical  level  of  the  federal  funds  rate  that  would  provide  a  similar  amount  of 
monetary  policy  accommodation  as  both the  actual  level  of  the federal  funds  rate  and the 
size  of the  SOMA  portfolio. Figure 2  shows  the disagreement  and  uncertainty  around this 
measure of policy uncertainty 12 months in the future. Disagreement about current policy is 
quite low relative to the past few years, which likely reflects the effect of forward guidance on 
expectations about the federal funds rate and the relatively low disagreement about the size 
of the portfolio that I mentioned earlier. Uncertainty, on the other hand, is relatively high and 
larger than the amount of disagreement. Since there is very little uncertainty about the level 
of the federal funds rate one year from now, most of this effect comes from uncertainty about 
the size of the portfolio. 
Implementation of the current asset purchase program 
As  you  may  know,  one  of  the  roles  of  the  Desk  at  the  New  York  Fed  is  to  implement 
monetary policy, including the current purchase program, on behalf of the FOMC. As always, 
the  Desk  seeks  to  implement  policy  in  a  manner  that  obtains  competitive  prices  in  its 
transactions, minimizes market disruptions, and achieves the Committee’s policy objectives. I 
would  like  to  take  some  time  to  explain  how  the  Desk  is  conducting  its  operations,  with  a 
particular focus on our agency MBS purchases. 
Outright purchases of agency MBS are executed in the To-Be-Announced, or TBA market. 
The  TBA  market  is  a  forward  market  that  is  built  around  a  trading  convention  that  allows 
market  participants  to  trade  thousands  of  different  agency  MBS  backed  by  millions  of 
individual mortgages. The market uses only a few standardized contracts, which are grouped 
based  on  key  characteristics  such  as  the  agency,  term,  coupon,  or  settlement  date  of  the 
security that will be delivered. At the settlement date, TBA sellers have the option to deliver 
any agency MBS that meet the contract requirements. Sellers have an incentive to identify 
securities  that  are  the  most  economical  to  deliver  into  the  contract  –  these  so-called 
“cheapest-to-deliver” agency MBS are generally the least valuable because their underlying 
mortgages  tend  to  have  higher  prepayment  risk.  Of  course,  buyers  in  a  TBA  transaction 
understand  that  sellers  will  look  to  exercise  their  option  of  delivering  these  relatively  less 
valuable  pools,  and  the  price  of  the  TBA  contract  will  reflect  the  expected  value  of  these 
securities.  Market  participants  who  wish  to  trade  in  MBS  with  more  favorable  prepayment 
characteristics do so in the “specified pool” market, where specific agency MBS are traded at 
prices quoted as a spread above the corresponding TBA. In other words, TBA prices serve 
as a benchmark for pricing all agency MBS. The standardized nature of TBA contracts helps 
make a large segment of the agency MBS market effectively homogeneous and thus highly 
liquid – an important characteristic for implementing large-scale purchases of agency MBS.8  
Within the TBA market, the “production coupons” are the contracts in which the bulk of newly 
issued  agency  MBS  are  delivered  and  most  trading  occurs.  The  coupon  rates  on  the 
production  TBA  contracts  are  linked  to  the  primary  mortgage  rate.  As  a  highly  stylized 
example, say a mortgage originator plans to securitize a group of mortgages with an average 
primary  mortgage  rate  of  4  percent. The  originator  pays  a  fee  of  about 50  basis  points  to 
Fannie  Mae,  Freddie  Mac  or  Ginnie  Mae,  in  return  for  a  guarantee  on  the  principal  and 
interest payments of the underlying loans. The originator is also required to retain at least 
25 basis  points  to  cover  costs  associated  with  servicing  the  loan.  Since  coupon  rates  on 
                                                
7  Fed  funds  equivalents  are  calculated  by  comparing  the  change  in  the  10-year  Treasury  yield  due  to  asset 
purchases to the change that historically occurred following movements in the target federal funds rate. This is 
a simple framework, so the uncertainty around this measure is likely large. 
8  For more information on the TBA market, see Vickery and Wright (2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
agency MBS are offered in 50 basis point increments, the originator might choose to sell the 
remaining cash flows to investors in the TBA market in the form of an agency MBS with a 
coupon  rate  of  3  percent  and  retain  the  remaining  25  basis  points.9,10  In  this  case,  the 
3 percent TBA contract would be the production coupon.11 
The  Desk  focuses  its  purchases  in  production  coupons  because  these  securities  are  the 
most  liquid  segment  of  the  TBA  market  and  their  yields  are  closely  tied  to  the  primary 
mortgage  rate  through  the  dynamics  I  just  described.  Purchases  are  distributed  across 
different  agencies,  maturities,  and  coupons  in  amounts  that  are  roughly  proportional  to 
anticipated gross issuance of those securities. Purchases lower the yield on these securities 
relative  to  where  they  would  otherwise  be,  which  should  enable  originators  to  offer  lower 
mortgage rates to borrowers.12 Lower borrowing rates should in turn help stimulate demand 
in the housing market, support home prices, and increase mortgage borrowers’ purchasing 
power. 
As  I  mentioned  before, asset  purchases  affect  interest  rates  in  part  by  removing  risk from 
investors’  portfolios.  Although  it  will  not  be  the  case  in  all  interest  rate  environments, 
currently,  purchasing  newly  issued  production  coupons  removes  from  private  hands 
securities that generally have greater exposure to duration risk, since the borrowers whose 
loans back these lower coupon agency MBS have limited incentive to refinance.13 Moreover, 
by  purchasing  in  the  TBA  market,  investors  also  ultimately  deliver  securities  that  have 
relatively  more  prepayment  risk  than  the  more  valuable  securities  that  trade  as  specified 
pools. 
One difficulty with purchasing in a manner that is roughly proportional to anticipated gross 
issuance is that it can be difficult to forecast which securities will be produced in the future. 
Gross issuance of new securities changes over time, based on the level of refinancing and 
home purchase activity, and the production coupons will vary along with the overall level of 
interest rates. This uncertainty is compounded by the fact that TBA market transactions settle 
up to three months in the future, so in many cases the Desk is purchasing a security that has 
not yet been issued. For example, mortgage originators will often sell agency MBS backed 
by loans that they anticipate will close, which allows them to hedge the risk that interest rates 
will change in the period of time between when a borrower locks in his or her mortgage rate 
and when the securitized loan is sold. However, a different number of borrowers may actually 
receive  loans  than  were  assumed  when  the  originator  sold  the  forward  TBA  contracts,  a 
condition  that  could  result  in  a  different  amount  of  gross  issuance  than  initially  expected. 
Given the uncertainty around agency MBS issuance, at times we adjust our purchases when 
market functioning indicators suggest that particular securities are less readily available for 
                                                
9  This extra 25 basis points is called “excess servicing”. 
10  For more information on mortgage origination process and the relationship between primary mortgage rates 
and yields on agency MBS, see Fuster et al (2012). 
11  Originators can also choose to originate in lower coupons by retaining more “servicing”, or in a higher coupon – 
by paying the agency guarantee fee up front, as long as the coupon provides for the originator to still retain 
25 basis points required to service the loans. 
12  Purchasing non-production coupons could also have an impact on the primary mortgage rate. Purchases of 
non-production coupons could increase the value of those securities relative to production coupons. This may 
prompt  investors  to  rebalance  their  portfolios  by  shifting  their  positions  into  the  relatively  undervalued 
production coupons, lowering yields on the production coupon relative to where it would otherwise be. 
13  An increase in interest rates may result in origination activity migrating to higher coupon agency MBS. This 
may result in the duration of lower coupon securities exceeding the duration of the new production coupon 
securities  (because  borrowers  backing  lower  coupon  MBS  would  not  have  an  incentive  to  refinance  their 
loans). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
settlement relative to other securities.14 Another consequence of this uncertainty is that the 
Desk is not able to provide the same detailed guidance about the composition of its future 
agency MBS purchases that it does with its purchases of Treasury securities. 
These same factors make it more difficult to determine ex ante the total amount and pace of 
securities  that  the  Committee  could  purchase  without  causing  market  disruptions.  For 
production coupon agency MBS with little outstanding stock available for trading – such as 
the 30-year 2.5 percent contract – there is risk associated with buying more than anticipated 
gross  issuance.  In  the  event  of  an  increase  in  mortgage  rates  or  a  decline  in  refinancing 
activity,  gross  issuance  of  these  securities  could  decline,  leaving  the  market  with  less 
tradable  supply.  For  TBA  contracts  with  sizable  outstanding  stock,  such  as  the  30-year 
3 percent and 3.5 percent coupons, gross issuance may be a smaller concern, since market 
participants can deliver existing securities into TBA contracts. The total amount and pace at 
which the Desk could purchase in these TBA contracts would likely depend on the supply of 
securities  that  could  be  readily  delivered  and  the  willingness  of  investors  to  sell  these 
securities from their portfolios.15 
For these reasons, it can be useful to gauge our purchases both relative to gross issuance 
as well as the amount of outstanding stock that can likely be delivered into the Desk’s TBA 
purchases.  Since  the  current  purchase  program  began,  the  Desk’s  purchases  have 
accounted for about 50 percent of gross issuance on average, below the average monthly 
purchase rate  of  roughly  two-thirds  during the first  round  of  large-scale MBS  purchases  in 
2009. If refinancing activity declines, leading to a decrease in gross issuance, our purchases 
could exceed these levels. Such higher levels still seem unlikely to cause significant market 
functioning issues, given the considerable supply of existing stock that we believe could be 
delivered into the Desk’s TBA purchases over time. Nevertheless, not all new securities are 
issued in the TBA market, and it is difficult to estimate future gross issuance, so the Desk 
monitors the purchasable supply of MBS closely.16  
Purchases of Treasury securities are more straightforward, reflecting the relative simplicity of 
the market and our long history of operating in it. Treasury purchases are distributed across 
securities with different maturities, with the intent of removing a specified amount of duration 
risk from the market without causing significant market disruption. For recent programs, this 
maturity  distribution  has  been  announced  at  the  outset,  and  a  schedule  of  upcoming 
operations is released at the end of each month.17 Such transparency is possible because, 
unlike the agency MBS market, the composition of Treasury coupon securities available for 
purchase is reasonably predictable. 
The current monthly pace of Treasury purchases is within the range seen during the Federal 
Reserve’s  previous  asset  purchase  programs,  whether  measured  in  par  terms  or  when 
adjusted  for  duration  risk.  Current  SOMA  holdings  are  less  than  20  percent  of  coupon 
Treasuries outstanding, and our purchases make up only about 25 percent of monthly gross 
                                                
14  For example, in January, the Desk decreased its purchases of 30-year fixed-rate 3.5 percent coupon agency 
MBS  relative  to  projected  gross  issuance  as  a  result  of  concerns  about  the  near-term  availability  of  this 
coupon for settlement and increased its purchases of 3 percent coupon agency MBS. 
15  The  Desk  could  also  purchase  from  the  stock  of  securities  that  trade  as  specialized  pools,  although  such 
purchases may involve different efficacy and cost considerations. 
16  For example, the percentage of securities issued outside of the TBA market has recently been higher due to 
programs  like  the  Home  Affordable  Refinance  Program  (HARP).  MBS  backed  by  loans  refinanced  through 
HARP have lower prepayment risk than other MBS, because borrowers can only use the program once, and 
consequently are not typically issued in the TBA market. 
17  Of  course,  this  maturity  distribution  could  change  as  part  of  the  Committee’s  ongoing  assessment  of  the 
economic outlook and the efficacy and costs of asset purchases. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
issuance  of  coupon  securities.18 We  have  a  larger  presence  in  the  market  for  longer-term 
securities, with SOMA holdings making up about 35 percent of securities with four or more 
years to maturity. 
The Committee carefully assesses the total amount, pace and composition of its purchases 
in part because it is aware of the potential for large-scale asset purchases to contribute to 
financial market dysfunction. Some on the Committee have listed financial market disruptions 
among  the  potential  risks  that  they  will  consider  as  they  evaluate  the  current  purchase 
program.  There  is  a  finite  supply  of  Treasury  securities  and  agency  MBS  available  to 
purchase, in terms of both total outstanding amount and how much is available for purchase 
in the market at any given time. If the Federal Reserve were to become too dominant a buyer 
or  holder,  it  could  reduce  the  tradable  supply  of  these  securities  and  discourage  trading 
among market participants, leading to diminished liquidity and price discovery. A significant 
deterioration in liquidity could lead investors to demand a premium for transacting in these 
markets, ultimately raising borrowing costs and undermining the program’s policy goal.19 
With  this  concern  in  mind,  the  Desk  closely  monitors  how  our  implementation  of  asset 
purchases impacts financial market functioning. In particular, we follow measures of market 
activity, such as trading volumes, bid-ask spreads, trade sizes, quote sizes, financing costs, 
and  settlement  fails,  as  well  as  other  indicators. We  also  monitor  indicators  related  to  our 
operations,  which  can  provide  some  direct  insight  into  potential  market  functioning  issues. 
These  include  the  prices  at  which  we  can  execute  in  comparison  with  prevailing  market 
quotes, the  extent  and concentration  of  dealer participation  in  operations,  and  the  ease  of 
settlement of our MBS purchases. As an example, Figure 3 and Figure 4 show daily trading 
volumes  and  failures  to  deliver  in  the  Treasury  and  agency  MBS  market.  Based  on  these 
types of measures, our operations are going smoothly and market liquidity is holding up well. 
In  addition  to  this  monitoring,  we  have  developed  active  policies  to  help  prevent  market 
dysfunction as a result of our operations. In the Treasury market, the Desk ceases purchases 
of  a  specific  security  once  SOMA  holdings  of  that  security  reach  70  percent  of  the 
outstanding stock. In addition, when SOMA holdings of a specific issue exceed 30 percent of 
outstanding securities, the Desk limits the rate at which it acquires new holdings of that issue 
based  on  a  predetermined,  graduated  schedule.  The  Desk  also  refrains  from  purchasing 
certain Treasury securities in its operations if investors’ demand for those specific securities 
as collateral in the repurchase market or as deliverables into Treasury futures contracts is 
relatively high. In the event of significant market demand for specific Treasury collateral held 
by  the  SOMA,  investors  can  borrow  these  holdings  through  competitive  securities  lending 
operations. 
In the agency MBS market, the Desk is supportive of market functioning in two main ways. 
First, as I mentioned earlier, we adjust our purchase allocation as necessary to respond to 
concerns  about  relative  scarcity  in  particular  securities.  Second,  we  use  dollar  roll 
transactions to facilitate the orderly settlement of our unsettled purchases.20 Selling dollar roll 
                                                
18  Some analysts calculate the Desk’s Treasury purchases as a percentage of the Federal budget deficit. This 
approach  overstates  the  Federal  Reserve’s  role  in  the  market  since  the  Treasury  is  obligated  to  issue 
additional  securities  to  finance  direct  loan  accounts,  most  notably  the  Department  of  Education’s  Federal 
Direct  Student  Loan  Program.  In  fiscal  year  2013,  the  OMB  estimates  that  the  net  effect  of  direct  loan 
accounts on Treasury’s borrowing needs will be about $175 billion. (See the Fiscal Year 2013 Mid-Session 
Review). 
19  For  more  information  about  liquidity  premiums  in  the  Treasury  market,  see  Fleming  (2002)  and  Fleming 
(2000). 
20  The Desk also has the ability to use coupon swap transactions to facilitate the settlement of its purchases, if 
needed.  A  coupon  swap  involves  the  sale  of  one  agency  MBS  and  the  simultaneous  purchase  of  another 
agency  MBS  with  a  different  coupon.  For  example,  in  2010  the  Desk  swapped  unsettled  Fannie  Mae 
5.5 percent coupon securities for other agency MBS that were more readily available for settlement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
contracts  essentially  postpones  the  settlement  of  an  outstanding  purchase,  while  buying 
dollar roll contracts brings it forward. The Desk actively monitors implied financing rates on 
dollar  roll  contracts for the  securities that  the  Desk  expects  to  be  delivered. When  implied 
financing  rates  reach  levels  notably  below  the  general  level  of  short-term  interest  rates, 
thereby signaling supply concerns, the Desk sells dollar roll contracts to postpone settlement 
of that outstanding purchase.21 Our dollar roll activity is consistent with the guidelines laid out 
by  the  Treasury  Market  Practices  Group  (TMPG),  an  industry  group  sponsored  by  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  TMPG  Best  Practices  encourage  market  participants 
who have amassed a particularly large position in the agency MBS market to manage that 
position mindful of the need to support market liquidity and to take care that sudden changes 
in  trading  strategies  do  not  adversely  impact  liquidity  or  settlement.22  The  Desk  has  often 
transacted  in  the  dollar  roll  market  when  purchasing  agency  MBS  to  facilitate  the  orderly 
settlement of its purchases and will continue to do so as necessary to avoid deterioration in 
the liquidity of these contracts.23 
Developing  and  implementing  policies  that  are  supportive  of  market  functioning  and 
monitoring market liquidity on an ongoing basis are important elements of the Desk’s work. 
However, actual or potential deterioration in financial market functioning is only one of many 
considerations in the FOMC’s monetary policy decisions. Moreover, signs of stress, if they 
emerge, may be unrelated to Federal Reserve policy actions. Stresses in liquidity and market 
functioning could also be temporary, as the market learns to adapt to the Desk’s presence in 
the  markets.  So  far,  though,  there  seems  to  be  little  evidence  that  the  current  pace  of 
purchases  is  prompting  deterioration  in  market  liquidity  or  straining  the  market’s  ability  to 
deliver securities. 
Conclusion 
Overall, I believe the Desk has effectively and efficiently carried out the FOMC’s directive to 
purchase  additional  Treasury  securities  and  agency  MBS  in  a  transparent  fashion  that 
achieves  the  FOMC’s  policy  objectives,  supports  orderly  market  functioning,  and  obtains 
competitive market prices. I also believe that the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet policies 
have been effective in easing financial conditions, particularly with respect to helping make 
historically low borrowing costs available to existing and prospective American homeowners, 
as well as lowering interest rates to spur business investment and household spending. 
Thank you for listening to me today. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
References 
Brainard,  William  and  James  Tobin.  1968.  “Pitfalls  in  Financial  Model  Building.”  American 
Economic Review, Vol. LVIII, no. 2 (May).  
Fleming,  Michael.  2000.  “The  Benchmark  U.S.  Treasury  Market:  Recent  Performance  and 
Possible Alternatives.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, Vol. 6, 
no. 1 (April): 129–45.  
Fleming,  Michael.  2002.  “Are  Larger  Treasury  Issues  More  Liquid?  Evidence  from  Bill 
Reopenings.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 145, March. 
                                                
21  The  Desk  also  purchases  dollar  roll  contracts  when  implied  financing  rates  are  sufficiently  positive.  Such 
operations occurred in December 2011. 
22  See TMPG Best Practices for Treasury, Agency Debt, and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities Markets. 
23  Selling dollar rolls when concerns arise about the availability of certain TBA contracts is conceptually similar to 
making  SOMA  Treasury  holdings  available  to  the  market  through  our  securities  lending  program.  One  key 
difference  is  that  the  Desk  offers  settled  Treasury  holdings  to  the  market  through  its  securities  lending 
program, whereas the Desk only rolls unsettled MBS holdings. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Fuster,  Andreas,  Laurie  Goodman,  David  Lucca,  Laurel  Madar,  Linsey  Molloy,  and  Paul 
Willen.  2012.  “The  Rising  Gap  Between  Primary  and  Secondary  Mortgage  Rates.”  Paper 
presented  at  the  The  Spread  between  Primary  and  Secondary  Mortgage  Rates:  Recent 
Trends  and  Prospects  conference,  held  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York, 
December 3.  
Gagnon,  Joseph,  Matthew  Raskin,  Julie  Remache,  and  Brian  Sack.  2010.  “Large-Scale 
Asset  Purchases  by  the  Federal  Reserve:  Did  They  Work?“  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
New York Staff Reports, no. 441, March. 
Hancock,  Diana,  and Wayne  Passmore.  2011.  “Did  the  Federal  Reserve’s  MBS  Purchase 
Program Lower Mortgage Rates?“ Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 58 (July): 498–514.  
Krishnamurthy,  Arvind,  and  Annette  Vissing-Jorgensen.  2011.  “The  Effects  of  Quantitative 
Easing  on  Interest  Rates:  Channels  and  Implications  for  Policy.“  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity, no. 2: 215–65.  
Li,  Canlin,  and  Min  Wei.  2012.  “Term  Structure  Modelling  with  Supply  Factors  and  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  Large  Scale  Asset  Purchase  Programs.“  Finance  and  Economics 
Discussion  Series  2012–37.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, May.  
Rich,  Robert  and  Joseph  Tracy.  2006.  “The  Relationship  between  Expected  Inflation, 
Disagreement,  and  Uncertainty:  Evidence  from  Matched  Point  and  Density  Forecasts.“ 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 253, July. 
Vayanos, Dimitri and Jean-Luc Vila. 2009. “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure 
of Interest Rates.“ NBER Working Paper Series 15487. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau 
of Economic Research, November.  
Vickery,  James  and  Joshua Wright.  2013.  “TBA  Trading  and  Liquidity  in  the  Agency  MBS 
Market.“ Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, Forthcoming.  
Wallis,  Kenneth.  2004.  “Forecast  Uncertainty,  Its  Representation  and  Evaluation.“  Tutorial 
Lectures, IMS Singapore, May 3–6.  
Wallis,  Kenneth.  2005.  “Combining  Density  and  Interval  Forecasts:  A  Modest  Proposal.“ 
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 67 (2005 Supplement): 983–994.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 