Njuguna Ndung’u: Cooperation between the Bank of South Sudan and 
the Central Bank of Kenya 
Remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
3rd Governors Consultative Forum on “Cooperation between the Bank of South Sudan and 
the Central Bank of Kenya”, Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 19 December 2012. 
 Mr. Kornelio Koriom Mayik, Governor, Bank of South Sudan;  
Members of the Technical Committee, Bank of South Sudan  
and Central Bank of Kenya;  
The Central Bank of Kenya is delighted and honoured to host the 3rd Consultative Forum on 
cooperation between Bank of South Sudan and Central Bank of Kenya here at the Kenya 
School of Monetary School Studies.  
I take this opportunity to welcome the Governor, Bank of South Sudan, H.E. Kornelio Koriom 
Mayik, and the entire BSS delegation to Nairobi, Kenya and more specifically to the Kenya 
School of Monetary Studies (KSMS).  
The genesis of the cooperation between BSS and CBK goes back a few years ago before 
South Sudan became a Republic when a number of officials were hosted here at KSMS and 
the first Governor of BSS operated for a while from an office at CBK.  
To date we have had two other Consultative Forums at Bank of South Sudan in Juba; the 
1st one being in July 2012 and the 2nd in October 2012. The purpose of these forums is to 
strengthen  the  mutual  cooperation  between  the  two  institutions  and  to  seek  solutions  to 
common binding constraints.  
During  the  1st  Consultative  Forum,  BSS  outlined  the  challenges  the  Bank  was  facing, 
including;  
• 
• 
The capacity constraints in conventional banking operations;  
Facilitating  Government  borrowing  from  the  domestic  market  and  putting  in  place 
the necessary infrastructure;  
The  need  to  put  in  place  a  framework  and  appropriate  instruments  for  monetary 
policy implementation;  
The adverse impact of stoppage of oil revenues that led to reduced foreign currency 
revenues; and,  
The need to establish a functioning Capital Market  
• 
The  CBK  on  its  part  identified  a  number  of  areas  that  it  could  provide  support.  This, 
combined with the challenges highlighted by BSS formed the basis for mutual cooperation 
between the two Central Banks.  
During  the  2nd  Consultative  Forum  which  was  held  in  October  2012,  we  agreed  to  form  a 
Technical  Committee  (TC)  to  fast-track  the  implementation  of  issues  discussed  during  the 
1st Consultative Forum.  
The  Terms  of  Reference  of  the  Technical  Committee  were  drawn  up  and  agreed  upon. 
Among the tasks given to this TC include;  
1.  
To formulate  a  comprehensive  Memorandum  of Understanding  between  BSS  and 
CBK;  
To map out capacity building requirements for BSS and support to be provided by 
CBK to enhance operations at BSS;  
  2.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
To review and finalize a Balance Sheet for BSS;  
To fast-track the opening and operationalization of reciprocal accounts at both BSS 
and  CBK  to  facilitate  trade  between  the  two  countries  and  solve  the  supply 
constraints of dollars in the market in South Sudan;  
To formulate a method of determining the bilateral exchange rate;  
To  propose  instruments  to  enhance  Government  borrowing  and  facilitate  the 
deepening of the financial markets in South Sudan; and  
To propose a comprehensive budget for the TC.  
7.  
I am informed that the TC held its 1st meeting from 4th to 6th December, 2012 in Juba and that 
you  have  been  holding  the  2nd  TC  meeting  in  this  same  venue  over  the  last  two  days. 
Governor Kornelio and myself look forward to the TC’s report on the progress made on the 
tasks identified. In this particular meeting, we need to make tangible progress and produce 
meaningful results that the market participants and governments on both sides are waiting 
for.  
I  am  pleased  to  hear  that  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  has  been  finalized  and 
reviewed  by  the  Legal  Counsels  of  the  two  Central  Banks,  who  are  present  here  with  us 
today.  
Before we give the chance to the TC for the presentation, I want to invite Governor Kornelio 
to make a few remarks.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
