Yves Mersch: Monetary policy and financial stability under one roof 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  6th  Policy  Roundtable  of  the  European  Central  Bank:  “The  future  of 
global policy coordination”, Frankfurt am Main, 6 September 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to join you at the 6th Policy Roundtable of the ECB, which this year focuses 
on  “The  future  of  global  policy  coordination”.  I  will  be  speaking  about  the  interaction  of  a 
particular set of policies, namely monetary, micro-prudential and macro-prudential policy. But 
rather than discussing the global dimension or replicating the discussion at Jackson Hole, I 
will restrict myself to the changes taking place under the roof of the ECB: the ECB taking 
over responsibility for elements of micro and macro-prudential supervision in the euro area. 
Having the financial stability function under the roof of the central bank is of course nothing 
new. It is almost exactly hundred years since that the Federal Reserve Act was signed into 
law. According to the regulation, Federal Reserve Banks were created “to furnish an elastic 
currency, to afford means of rediscounting commercial paper” – and notably – “to establish a 
more effective supervision of banking”. 
This  combining  of  monetary  and  supervisory  functions  reflects  the  fact  that,  for  monetary 
policy authorities, financial stability is obviously key. A stable financial system with sound and 
solvent  banks  supports  the  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  ultimately 
contributes to macroeconomic stability. This is particularly relevant for the euro area, where 
banks play and crucial role in providing financing to the real economy, most notably to SMEs. 
Conversely,  financial  imbalances  can  be  a  genuine  threat  to  price  stability,  in  addition  to 
being extremely costly from a macroeconomic perspective. 
But in my remarks today I would like to focus on a specific aspect of these interactions – that 
is, between monetary and macro-prudential policy. The key point I would like to make is that 
this  interaction  should  be  stronger  than  in  the  micro-prudential  area,  where  the  impending 
regulation imposes a separation between monetary policy and supervision. The reason for 
this is simple. While micro-prudential policy focuses on the stability of individual institutions, 
both  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policy  take  a  more  systemic  perspective  and  aim 
ultimately at system-wide stability. 
Let me explain the interaction between these two policies in more detail. 
In  many  ways  –  objectives,  frequency  and  instruments  –monetary  and  macro-prudential 
policy are different. But there are also important ways in which they have a mutual impact. 
In terms of objectives, they differ in the way their objectives can be quantified and achieved. 
Price stability can be quite easily quantified, and actually has been for the ECB as a year-on-
year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 
2%  over  the  medium  term.  Consequently,  the  central  bank  has  to  achieve  its  objective 
symmetrically:  to  avoid  falling  short  of  its  price  stability  objective  on  either  side.  Financial 
stability, by contrast, is about avoiding a tail event with high potential costs. Given the binary 
nature of such events, this is much more difficult to capture quantitatively in terms of a value 
or a threshold. As a result, the financial stability objective has a more asymmetric nature. 
In terms of frequency, monetary policy tends to follow the business cycle, whereas macro-
prudential policy is related to the financial cycle. Certainly, these cycles are not independent 
from one another. But the BIS has calculated that the financial cycle in advanced economies 
has an average length of about 16 years, whereas business cycles tend to have a duration of 
1 to 8 years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
And in terms of instruments, the main tool of monetary policy is a set of key interest rates 
(and I will abstract here from the conduct of non-standard monetary policy measures). For 
macro-prudential  policy,  there  are  instruments  related  to  the  asset  side  of  bank  balance 
sheets,  such  as  loan-to-value  ratio  ceilings  and  debt-to-income  ceilings;  liquidity-related 
instruments  such  as  liquidity  coverage  ratios  and  the  net  stable  funding  ratio;  and  capital-
related instruments such as the leverage ratio and the countercyclical capital buffer. 
Yet despite these differences, the two policies undoubtedly have a strong mutual impact. The 
instruments deployed in one policy domain affect the objective of the other. Or put differently, 
the two policies work through similar transmission processes, although not necessarily with 
the same intensity, as they have a bearing on the same economic variables. 
For instance, if macro-prudential authorities deploy a stricter loan-to-value ratio, this would 
curtail bank lending to some extent. This could in turn slow down investment and production, 
and possibly have some adverse impact on prices and inflation. As an example in the other 
direction, keeping monetary policy rates too low for too long may encourage excessive risk-
taking in some markets. This may spur the creation of asset bubbles and have repercussions 
on financial stability. 
We  can  see  why  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policies  need  to  be  properly  aligned.  In 
striving for price stability, the ECB needs to keep an eye on the possible effects of currently 
deployed  or  planned  macro-prudential  policies.  Likewise, 
from  a  macro-prudential 
perspective,  the  current  and  expected  future  course  of  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  taken 
into consideration. 
For  this  reason,  we  would  support  different  institutional  arrangements  for  macro-prudential 
decision-making  within  the  SSM  than  those  that  are  foreseen  for  micro-prudential.  In  the 
latter case we have always argued for a clear separation of functions between the ECB as 
monetary policy-maker and supervisor. For macro-prudential decision-making, however, we 
see it as important that the Governing Council is more closely involved. 
But  beyond  these  considerations,  one  may  ask,  when  the  SSM  is  operational,  what  role 
should monetary policy play in financial stability directly? You will recall the discussion after 
the Lehman failure about whether central banks should do more to “lean against the wind”. 
With a close-to-optimal macro-prudential framework in place, should monetary policy leave 
financial stability out of sight? 
In  my  view,  the  answer  should  be  no.  There  are  two  reasons  why  it  is  important  that  the 
central bank remains alert to financial stability issues, even though its primary objective will 
remain to secure price stability. 
First,  the  ECB’s  policy  analysis  for  price  developments  can  contribute  to  financial  stability 
surveillance. 
Here,  I  have  in  mind  our  monetary  analysis,  which  focuses  on  money  and  credit 
developments.  Exaggerated  dynamics  in  such  aggregates  can  help  identify  dangerous 
trajectories  that  could  threaten  financial  stability.  We  will  have  to  reflect,  once  the  SSM  is 
operational, on how best to have the broader financial stability assessment benefiting from 
tools  or  insights  from  the  monetary  analysis.  By  doing  so, we  have  to  be  examine  closely  
– first – how structural changes in securisation markets influences the information stemming 
from monetary analysis, and –second –that analyses and policy goal are closely related and 
should not be mixed. 
Second,  in  most  of  all  cases  the  actions  necessary  to  maintain  price  stability  and  those 
required to maintain financial stability are fully aligned. If, however a conflict arises between 
these  two  objectives,  it  is  clear  that  ECB’s  mandate  leaves  no  discretion:  The  primary 
mandate is to secure price stability. 
Generally  speaking,  financial  stability  risks  should  be  addressed  through  macro-prudential 
policies, especially now that we have the SSM. But there could be a situation where financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
imbalances  are  broad-based  across  sectors  and  countries.  Macro-prudential  policy 
instruments  and  the  distribution  of  competences  between  the  national  and  European  level 
could  be  ineffective  in  addressing  such  area-wide  imbalances.  If  the  central  bank  decides 
that  these  imbalances  could  eventually  threaten  medium-term  price  stability,  interest  rate 
policies may be relevant. 
As Federal Reserve Board member Jeremy Stein recently put it, the advantage of the policy 
rate tool in such circumstances is that it can “get in all of the cracks and reach into corners of 
the market that supervision and regulation cannot reach”. 
So there are some circumstances where a “leaning against the wind” approach would still be 
valid and helpful even under a properly working macro-prudential framework. But any such 
actions by the ECB would be based on our policy framework – that is, to fulfil our primary 
mandate of price stability over the medium-term. 
And let me stress that I am not referring here to the current situation: we do not see risks to 
financial  stability  stemming  from  the  current  low  level  of  interest  rates  that  would  warrant 
policy action at the European level. Moreover the medium-term outlook for inflation remains 
subdued. 
So, let me conclude by reiterating what I would see as the general principles for guiding the 
interplay  between  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policies,  when  both  functions  are  partly 
under one roof at the ECB. 
First,  macro-prudential  and  monetary  policy  both  have  a  systemic  dimension,  and  macro-
prudential instruments affect monetary policy objectives and vice versa. This suggests that 
decision-making for monetary and macro-prudential policy should be more closely integrated 
than for micro-prudential policy. 
Second, there should be close interaction on the level of policy analysis to exploit synergies 
and maximum information regarding risks to price and financial stability. 
Third,  for  monetary  policy,  even  with  suitable  macro-prudential  frameworks  in  place,  there 
always remain circumstances that could warrant leaning-against-the-wind policies. 
I now look forward to our discussion. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
