Ravi Menon: Allianz and Singapore – growing a specialist insurance hub 
in Asia 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the launch of Allianz’ Regional Centre, Singapore, 18 September 2013. 
 Mr Manuel Bauer 
Dr Dieter Wemmer 
Dr Maximilian Zimmerer 
Dr Christoph Mascher 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good evening. I am pleased to join you this evening at the official opening of Allianz’s new 
regional centre in Asia Square. 
Allianz and Singapore 
This marks a major step forward for Allianz in Singapore and in Asia. For the first time, we 
will  see  Allianz’s  450  staff  across  11  entities  coming  under  one  roof.  This  new  centre  will 
strengthen synergies across business units, enabling Allianz to better serve the needs of its 
20 million customers in the region. 
In  a  way,  Allianz’s  story  reflects  Singapore’s  own  development  as  a  specialist  insurance 
market. Just ten years ago, the insurance industry in Singapore was focused on writing pure 
domestic risks. Singapore has now developed the capacity and expertise to underwrite large 
and complex risks across Asia. 
With  the  opening  of  Allianz’s  new  office  here,  Asia  Square  is  also  shaping  up  to  be 
Singapore’s own version of London’s Leadenhall Street, where many prominent insurers and 
brokers are located. Such physical co-location will help to promote greater exchange of ideas 
and  collaboration,  and  create  an  insurance  marketplace  that  is  committed  to  deliver 
customised and innovative solutions. 
Mitigating Asian risks 
The  prospects  for  Asia’s  insurance  market  are  bright.  A  growing  middle  class  and  rising 
affluence  will  underpin  a  steady  increase  in  insurance  penetration  rates.  Continued 
industrialisation,  growing  trade  activities,  and  infrastructure  development  will  mean  greater 
demand  for  insurance  solutions  to  mitigate  a  variety  of  risks.  Over  the  next  decade, 
insurance business in Asia is projected to grow  at about 8% per annum. By 2020, Asia is 
likely to account for almost 40% of the global market. 
It is vital that insurers seeking to expand in Asia have a deep understanding of Asia’s risk 
landscape. Aggregate exposures have grown steadily in Asia, due to rapid urbanisation and 
economic growth over the last two decades. Asia’s strong record of development means that 
we have more to lose from unforeseen calamities. 
Take for example the spate of natural calamities in Asia in 2011. The three costliest events – 
the Tohoku earthquake and tsunami, Thai floods and New Zealand earthquake – caused a 
combined insured loss of almost US$70 billion. The scale of these losses was unexpected. 
Thailand had not even been viewed as a catastrophe risk zone, and had in fact been used to 
diversify  against  catastrophe  risks.  These  events  are  a  timely  reminder  to  the  industry  to 
constantly stay ahead of the risk management curve. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
3 + One strategy 
I understand that Allianz embraces a “3+One” strategy to achieve sustainable growth. In the 
spirit of this very happy occasion, allow me to adapt your framework to illustrate its relevance 
to Singapore’s insurance industry as a whole. 
One, Capacity. Allianz strives to support its businesses with sufficient capacity to underwrite 
risks. The establishment of the Singapore branch of Allianz Global Corporate and Specialty 
in 2011 reflects a deep commitment to build underwriting capacity in the Asia-Pacific. In the 
same way, to be the premier specialist insurance market in Asia, Singapore must deepen its 
underwriting expertise in reinsurance and specialty insurance with an Asian focus. 
Two, Profitability. Allianz seeks to be profitable through its operating businesses alone, so as 
to  be  as  independent  as  possible  from  volatility  in  the  financial  and  capital  markets.  The 
global insurance industry continues to face pressure from weak economic growth, soft pricing 
and persistently low investment yields. Insurers can no longer rely on investment income or 
rate increases alone, to compensate for weak underwriting. Likewise, even as Singapore’s 
insurance  industry  diversifies  the  span  of  its  activities  to  include  capital  markets,  it  must 
continue  to  stay  focused  on  core  competencies  in  underwriting  insurance  risks.  High 
underwriting standards are critical for sustainable growth. 
Three, Internal Capabilities. Allianz aims to reduce complexity by focusing on core activities, 
reducing  structural  inefficiencies,  and  streamlining  processes.  Likewise,  in  seeking  to 
strengthen its value proposition as a specialist insurance market with a deep appreciation of 
Asia’s risks, Singapore’s insurance industry must invest in Asia-focussed data, research and 
analytics. Singapore has achieved a good head-start in a number of areas, such as SMU’s 
Centre  for  Silver  Security  for  longevity  risk  and  NTU’s  Institute  for  Catastrophe  Risk 
Management for catastrophic risks. We must continue to build on these capabilities. 
Finally, +One, Synergistic Growth. Allianz seeks to inculcate systematic cooperation between 
business  lines  and  markets  across  the  Group  to  deliver  profitable  growth.  Likewise, 
Singapore’s  insurance  market  must  continue  to  be  underpinned  by  the  strong  partnership 
between  industry,  academia,  and  government.  Research,  talent  development  and  market 
infrastructure are areas where active collaboration is a critical success factor. 
Conclusion 
The  commitment  of  key  industry  players  such  as  Allianz  has  been  instrumental  in 
establishing Singapore as a leading insurance market. On this happy occasion, we are also 
pleased  to  announce  that  Singapore  has  been  chosen  to  host  the  Geneva  Association 
General Assembly in 2015. The General Assembly will bring together global CEOs and other 
stakeholders in the insurance industry over a two-day conference to discuss industry trends. 
This is only the second time it will be hosted in Asia, after Japan in 2009. 
In closing, I thank Allianz for growing with Singapore. I am confident your strong presence in 
Singapore will serve you well as you continue to extend your Asian footprint. 
Once again, congratulations, and a very good evening to all of you. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
