Takehiro Sato: Recent economic and financial developments, and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Fukushima, 22 July 2013. 
 Introduction 
I.  
It has been two years and four months since the Great East Japan Earthquake took place. 
First of all, I would like to offer my greatest appreciation and respect to everyone who has 
continued to work devotedly to achieve restoration and reconstruction since the earthquake 
disaster. I would also like to take this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude for your 
cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s Fukushima Branch. 
Today,  I  will  begin  by  focusing  on  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  and  economic  activity  and 
prices in Japan and abroad. I will then touch briefly on the economy of Fukushima Prefecture 
in  my  closing  remarks.  Following  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  hear  your  views  on  actual 
conditions in the local economy, including the progress in reconstruction, as well as on the 
Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
II.  
Recent conduct of monetary policy 
Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and market reactions 
A.  
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  held  on  April  3  and  4,  2013,  the  Bank  introduced 
quantitative and qualitative  monetary easing (QQE). This policy aims to achieve the “price 
stability target” of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price 
index (CPI) at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. To achieve 
this, the Bank decided on new monetary easing measures. Specifically, the monetary base 
and the amounts outstanding of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) as well as exchange-
traded funds (ETFs) will be doubled in two years, and the average remaining maturity of JGB 
purchases  will  be  more  than  doubled  (Chart  1).  Since  these  policy  measures  exceeded 
market  expectations,  the  initial  reaction  of  the  foreign  exchange  and  stock  markets  was 
positive. Thereafter, in the JGB market, long-term interest rates rose with some volatility and 
these developments drew public attention (Charts 2 and 3). 
From  late  May,  there  was  an  increase  in  investors’  risk  aversion  worldwide  reflecting 
speculation that the Federal Reserve would reduce the pace of its asset purchases earlier 
than  expected,  and  the  foreign  exchange  and  stock  markets  were  affected  by  these 
developments. Investors’ risk aversion was observed especially in emerging markets, but the 
Japanese  stock  and  foreign  exchange  markets,  which  are  considered  to  be  sensitive  to 
global economic fluctuations, were also affected to some degree. On the contrary, long-term 
interest rates in Japan were generally stable despite the rise in U.S. long-term interest rates.  
Summarizing these developments in financial markets, we can point to the following. 
In general, the central bank needs to communicate carefully to financial markets in the early 
stages  of  a  policy  change  or  in  the  course  of  discussion  leading  up  to  a  change.  This  is 
because  the  message  delivered  by  policymakers  tends  to  be  misinterpreted  and  financial 
markets  tend  to  overreact  in  the  early  stages.  Typical  examples  are  (1)  the  case  of  the 
Bank’s  policy  change  at  the  MPM  on  April  3  and  4;  and  (2)  the  case  of  Federal  Reserve 
Chairman Ben Bernanke’s testimony to the U.S. Congress on May 22, 2013 and his press 
conference after the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting on June 19. In the 
former case, some market participants misunderstood that the Bank of Japan had given up 
its commitment to the stability of short-term interest rates. In the latter case, market reaction 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
was fairly large due to the reversal of movement until mid-May, when risk-taking activities in 
asset  markets  were  active,  mainly  in  emerging  markets,  due  partly  to  speculation  that  the 
Federal Reserve would maintain the current pace of its asset purchases. 
This type of initial market reaction generally becomes contained as the policy intention of the 
central bank permeates financial markets through close communication between the central 
bank and financial markets based on economic indicators. As financial markets gain better 
understanding of the central bank’s policy intention and find a new equilibrium point, market 
volatility is usually contained even at the time of a policy change.  
Currently,  the  Japanese  financial  markets  are  becoming  stable  on  the  whole  as  they  gain 
further understanding of the Bank’s policy intention regarding the April decision. The reaction 
by the U.S. financial markets is expected to moderate as they find a new equilibrium point as 
a  result  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  intensive  communication  with  them  based  on  economic 
indicators. 
Stable bond market in Japan compared with that in the United States 
B.  
When Japanese long-term interest rates rose with volatility after the policy change in April, 
some regarded the new policy as a failure. But it is not appropriate to judge the validity of the 
policy  merely  from  the  initial  reaction  of  the  rise  in  interest  rates  immediately  after  the 
introduction of QQE. The market reaction after the policy change reflects the phenomenon of 
“buying  on  rumor  and  selling  on  fact,”  which  is  observed  frequently  in  financial  markets. 
Market  developments  since  end-2012  show  that  there  has  been  a  positive  correlation 
between  the  JGB  and  stock  markets  –  long-term  interest  rates  rose  when  stock  prices 
surged and long-term interest rates plunged when stock prices dropped. It can be added that 
Japanese long-term interest rates have been substantially contained despite the rising stock 
prices  and  fluctuations  in  foreign  exchange  rates  since  end-2012,  given  the  effects  of  the 
increase in the Bank’s purchases of JGBs. Moreover, the recent stability in the JGB market 
compares favorably with the large fluctuations in the U.S. bond market since the end of May 
(Chart 2). 
C. 
Corporate and household sectors anticipate economic developments and 
prices 
As  market  participants  anticipate  a  recovery  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  firms  and 
households  also  anticipate  a  recovery  and  change  their  investment  and  consumption 
activities accordingly. In this sense, it would be unfair to disregard such changes in firms’ and 
households’  activities  when  assessing  the  effects  on  the  economy  of  the  rise  in  nominal 
interest rates. 
In fact, firms’ funding activities in the corporate bond market after the introduction of QQE 
were more active than usual on the whole, although some firms avoided issuing new bonds 
due  to  the  high  volatility  in  the  JGB  market.  To  put  it  another  way,  it  was  confirmed  that 
investor demand was steady (Chart 4). 
In  short,  as  market  participants  anticipate  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices, 
firms also anticipate changes in funding conditions as well as demand in the bond market to 
seek investment opportunities, and investors anticipate the asset management environment 
in their investment decisions. Households also anticipate conditions following the economy’s 
overcoming  of  deflation;  this  is  evidenced  by  the  increase  in  the  proportion  of  fixed-rate 
mortgages  compared  to  the  previously  dominant  floating-rate  mortgages.  These  dynamics 
show that the economy and financial markets are currently seeking a new equilibrium point. 
Only  three  months  have  elapsed  since  the  Bank  introduced  QQE.  The  Bank’s  previous 
monetary  policy  was  sometimes  questioned  by  other  countries,  which  later  revised  their 
judgments  after  experiencing  a  situation  similar  to  that  faced  by  Japan  after  the  bubble 
economy burst in the 1990s. It might therefore be premature to assess the effectiveness of 
QQE solely from the money market reaction since early April. What is important is whether 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  underlying  trend  in Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices  is  heading  toward  a  recovery 
from  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective  after  the  introduction  of  QQE.  As  I  will  mention 
later, I am more optimistic about the outlook for Japan’s economy than in fiscal 2012, when 
the  Bank  revised  downward  its  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  several  times 
because of the European debt problem and deceleration of the Chinese economy. 
Toward a stable JGB market 
D. 
It should be noted that QQE has contradictory, two-sided policy effects on the JGB market. 
Massive bond purchases by the Bank lower the risk premiums in the JGB market, and this 
contains  nominal  interest  rates;  at  the  same  time,  once  the  policy  effect  materializes,  the 
market’s anticipation of a recovery in economic activity and prices exerts upward pressure on 
nominal interest rates. After the introduction of QQE, interest rates fluctuated due to these 
two  contradictory  factors,  and  the  volatility  in  the  JGB  market  rose  as  a  result.  Such  high 
volatility, if it is prolonged, tends to prompt market participants to sell bonds for the purpose 
of  risk  management,  and  heavy  bond  sales  could  cause  an  unnecessary  rise  in  interest 
rates. Given the heightened volatility in the JGB market, at the May MPM the Policy Board 
members  discussed  measures  to  stabilize  long-term  interest  rates,  and  confirmed  that  for 
JGB  purchases  it  was  important  for  the  Bank  to  conduct  operations  flexibly.  At  the  end  of 
May,  the  Bank  clearly  showed  that  it  would  conduct  operations  flexibly,  for  example  by 
adjusting  as  necessary  the  parameters  of  its  JGB  purchases,  such  as  frequency  and 
allocation of purchase amounts by maturity (Chart 5). 
Subsequently,  at  the  June  MPM,  the  Policy  Board  members  discussed  the  possibility  of 
introducing funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral with a loan duration of more 
than one year. Based on the discussion at the MPM, the Policy Board members concluded 
that it was not necessary at that time for the Bank to extend the maximum duration of loans 
provided  through  its  funds-supplying  operations  against  pooled  collateral,  because  (1)  the 
effect of compressing risk premiums driven by the Bank’s massive JGB purchases was likely 
to strengthen steadily, and (2) flexible conduct of market operations was sufficiently ensured 
under  the  current  guideline  for  the  operations  to  contain  the  volatility.  In  other  words,  the 
current policy guideline allows a range of “about six to eight years” for the average remaining 
maturity  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases.  By  utilizing  this  guideline,  it  would  be  possible  to 
stabilize the entire yield curve by purchasing JGBs with a maturity of one to five years more 
intensively. As the policy guideline allows a range of “about six to eight years,” I see no need 
for concern even if the actual remaining maturity of JGB purchases temporarily falls short of 
six years. 
Let me add that the Policy Board members judged that it was not necessary to introduce the 
funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral with a loan duration of more than one 
year, taking into account the following points. First, the introduction of such operations could 
cause misunderstanding that the Bank is encouraging financial institutions to hold JGBs even 
though the Bank has already introduced new measures to encourage portfolio rebalancing by 
financial  institutions  and  investors.  Second,  since  such  operations  contain  a  message 
regarding  policy  duration,  the  introduction  of  such  operations  could  confuse  market 
participants about the relationship between this message and the policy duration under the 
QQE  framework  –  namely,  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the  earliest 
possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years.  And  third,  the  fund-provisioning 
measure to stimulate bank lending (the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility), whose first loan 
disbursement  was  made  on  June  20,  2013  and  whose  original  aim  was  to  encourage 
portfolio rebalancing by banks, works to reduce banks’ duration risk for a maximum of three 
years on their liability. The facility is in this sense substitutable to some extent with the funds-
supplying operations against pooled collateral with a loan duration of more than  one year, 
and thus it was necessary to reconsider the relationship between these two measures. The 
Bank, however, does not completely exclude the possibility of introducing these operations, 
since they could be an effective tool for stabilizing the market.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Policy change from comprehensive monetary easing to QQE 
E. 
The Bank had pursued comprehensive monetary easing through March 2013, and in April it 
carried out a policy change and introduced QQE soon after the new Governor and Deputy 
Governors  took  office.  Questions  have  been  voiced  regarding  the  Policy  Board  members 
who voted unanimously to approve the policy change in April, even though comprehensive 
monetary easing had been promoted through March.  
My understanding is that like the decision made at the MPM held on April 3 and 4, 2013, it 
was  a  major  decision  to  introduce  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  at  the  January  MPM 
(Chart  6).  While  details  of  the  discussions  at  the  February  and  March  MPMs  held  in  the 
period after the price stability target was introduced but before the new Governor and Deputy 
Governors took office are referred to in the minutes, the topic of discussion shifted to specific 
measures to strengthen monetary easing with the aim of achieving the price stability target of 
2 percent. In the discussions, issues were raised regarding purchases of JGBs with longer 
remaining  maturities,  and  consolidation  of  purchases  of  JGBs  under  the  Asset  Purchase 
Program with those conducted in terms of money market operations (Chart 7).  
Although the set of decisions made at the MPM held on April 3 and 4 is called a new phase 
of monetary easing, some of the ideas largely reflect quantitative easing and comprehensive 
monetary easing, adopted from March 2001 to July 2006 and from October 2010 to March 
2013, respectively. For example, the setting of the main operating target for money market 
operations to the monetary base instead of the uncollateralized overnight call rate is similar 
to the framework of quantitative easing – in which the main operating target was the Bank’s 
current account balances – on the premise that the outstanding balance of banknotes issued 
does  not  fluctuate  significantly.  Moreover,  most  of  the  financial  assets  currently  being 
purchased are the same as those purchased during the period of comprehensive monetary 
easing – such as JGBs, ETFs, and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) (Chart 8). 
The  extension  of  the  average  remaining  maturity  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases  to  around 
seven years has consequently increased the scale of monetary easing. However, during the 
last phase of comprehensive monetary easing, the Bank had set the amount outstanding of 
the  Asset  Purchase  Program  at  around  111  trillion  yen  by  end-2014.  In  terms  of  the 
monetary base, this would be equivalent to around 200 trillion yen (although a range should 
be allowed for this number). The amount is less than the targeted amount outstanding under 
QQE,  which  is  270  trillion  yen  at  end-2014,  but  one  can  argue  that  the  Bank  had  already 
committed  to  considerably  increasing  the  size  of  the  monetary  base.  In  this  sense,  the 
Bank’s policies over the years should be understood as being consistent.  
What it means to avoid an incremental approach 
F.  
Since late May 2013, expectations for further monetary easing had increased in the market, 
in a situation where instability had been observed in financial markets at home and abroad.  
However, QQE differs completely from the Bank’s other monetary easing policies adopted in 
the past in the sense that (1) the Bank had adopted the stance of pursuing bold monetary 
easing all at once to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in about two years and to 
avoid an incremental approach; and (2) by doing so, the Bank aims to exert influence on the 
expectations of firms and households as well as financial markets. 
The  former  policy  stance  of  avoiding  an  incremental  approach  is  based  on  the  lessons 
learned from the fact that Japan’s economy could not overcome deflation, even though the 
Bank had continued to fine-tune its policies under the framework of comprehensive monetary 
easing  in  accordance  with  the  economic  cycle.  Therefore,  this  policy  stance  should  be 
regarded  as  a  serious  one.  The  latter  policy  stance  of  aiming  to  exert  influence  on  the 
expectations  of  firms  and  households  as  well  as  financial  markets  is  associated  with  the 
former  policy  stance.  The  Bank  aims  to  drastically  change  such  expectations  by 
implementing  all  possible  measures  called  for  at  the  time. To  do  so, it  is  important  to  first 
implement  bold  monetary  easing  measures  that  go  beyond  market  expectations  and  then 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
carefully monitor their effects, rather than adopting measures in a piecemeal manner, which 
would  have  adverse  effects.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  does  not  exclude  the 
implementation of additional measures and will not hesitate to fine-tune its policies flexibly 
when unexpected tail risks materialize.  
The policy stance of the Bank that I have just described is not necessarily fully understood 
yet by market participants. Therefore, the Bank should provide a thorough explanation to the 
public of its policy stance through various communication channels, including dialogue with 
market participants. 
The meaning of the 2 percent price stability target 
G. 
I  will  now  discuss  my  understanding  of  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  Generally, 
inflation-targeting policy is a flexible monetary policy framework and countries adopting it do 
not change their monetary policy stances mechanically in accordance with the achievement 
or undershooting of their targets. This understanding is widely shared by central banks that 
have  adopted  such  a  policy  framework.  I  understand  that  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy 
framework – in which the Bank sets the 2 percent price stability target – is a flexible one, in 
the sense that it focuses mainly on maintaining the 2 percent target in a stable manner rather 
than merely on achieving the target exactly (Chart 9). 
In  terms  of  maintaining  the  target  in  a  stable  manner,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  stably 
maintain  the  inflation  rate  specifically  at  2  percent,  given  the  time  lag  required  for  the 
permeation of monetary policy effects and the uncertainty of such permeation. Rather, it is 
natural  to  think  that  there  is  an  allowance  of  a  certain  range  for  upward  and  downward 
deviations  of  the  actual  inflation  rate  from  the  target.  Of  course,  the  degree  of  acceptable 
allowance varies depending on the view of each Policy Board member, but I think that if the 
inflation rate is projected to stabilize within a certain range with a median of 2 percent, then 
the  main  objective  of  QQE  will  have  been  fulfilled.  Taking  into  account  the  trend  of  the 
inflation rate in Japan, unless inflation expectations rise soon, the possibility of achieving the 
price  stability  target  of  exactly  2  percent  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years  is  not 
necessarily high. However, if we take the price stability target as a flexible framework with a 
certain  range  of  allowance  for  inflation  deviations,  then  the  2  percent  target  is  reasonable 
and achievable. 
I would like to emphasize that the Bank’s aim under QQE is “achieving price stability, thereby 
contributing to the sound development of the national economy,” as stipulated in the Bank of 
Japan  Act. Specifically,  the  economic  situation  the  Bank  aims  to  bring  about  is  not  one  in 
which  prices  simply  rise.  Rather,  it  is  one  where  a  virtuous  circle  operates  in  which  fixed 
investment  and  private  consumption  grow  and  corporate  profits  increase  in  line  with  the 
improvement in the economic situation as a whole, and prices rise in a balanced manner in 
line with the improvement in the employment and income situation. The sound development 
of the national economy must not be put at risk in achieving 2 percent inflation merely in a 
superficial sense. 
How to achieve the 2 percent inflation target 
H. 
To achieve the 2 percent price stability target, the Bank assumes three channels, as follows. 
First, the Bank’s purchases of financial assets will encourage a further downward pressure 
on  interest  rates  across  the  yield  curve  and  lower  risk  premiums  of  asset  prices.  Second, 
there will be a portfolio rebalancing effect. And third, the Bank’s commitment to achieving the 
price  stability  target  and  the  continuation  of  massive  asset  purchases  are  expected  to 
fundamentally change the inflation expectations of firms and households as well as financial 
markets. I will now discuss each of these three channels in turn. 
Regarding  the  first  channel,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  risk  premiums  of  asset  prices  have 
already been relatively contained due to the Bank’s purchases of JGBs, ETFs, and J-REITs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In  this  regard,  some  market  participants  have  mistakenly  assumed  that  the  Bank’s 
commitment to stabilizing short-term interest rates weakened because the Bank changed its 
main  operating  target  from  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to  the  monetary  base. 
However, the Bank’s commitment to maintaining short-term interest rates at a low level by 
generating a massive amount of financial institutions’ excess reserves has not changed at 
all. Purchases of medium- to long-term JGBs amounting to about 50 trillion yen at an annual 
pace alone are not sufficient to meet the policy guideline of increasing the monetary base at 
an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen. Therefore, it is implied that to fill the gap the Bank 
will purchase a certain amount of treasury discount bills (T-Bills) and/or conduct short-term 
funds-supplying operations. The scale of T-Bill purchases is not mentioned in the guideline 
for money market operations, because the Policy Board members consider that, given the 
experience of comprehensive monetary easing, the provision of short-term funds should be 
left to the discretion of the Bank’s staff, so that it can respond flexibly to potential fluctuations 
in short-term interest rates. 
When the Bank announced immediately after the MPM held on April 3 and 4 that it would 
introduce QQE and aim to achieve the price stability target of around 2 percent in about two 
years,  market  participants  anticipated  that  short-term  interest  rates  two  years  ahead  might 
not  be  around  0  percent,  and  this  affected  medium-  to  long-term  interest  rates.  Such  a 
phenomenon may be observed again. On this issue, I expect that the effects of the automatic 
adjustment function of QQE will emerge and financial markets will be able to cope with price 
developments  on  their  own.  To  elaborate  on  this,  once  the  probability  of  achieving  the 
2 percent price stability target rises, this will inevitably be incorporated in medium- to long-
term interest rates to some extent; on the other hand, if the probability of achieving the target 
remains low, such interest rates will continue to be contained. The important point is that the 
Bank  should  contain  the  level  of  medium-  to  long-term  interest  rates  at  a  level  below  that 
consistent with market participants’ outlook  for economic activity and prices by proceeding 
with  JGB  purchases  and  lowering  risk  premiums.  So  far,  massive  JGB  purchases  by  the 
Bank  have  contained  various  factors  that  have  exerted  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates, 
and  the  effect  of  reducing  risk  premiums  is  expected  to  strengthen  cumulatively  as  the 
amount of purchases increases (Chart 10). 
As for the second channel, the portfolio rebalancing effect is aimed at stimulating economic 
activity  and  asset  markets.  The  Bank  generates  large  amounts  of  financial  institutions’ 
excess  reserves  through  its  massive  purchases  of  JGBs  from  them  and  induces  them  to 
rebalance their portfolios from JGBs to risk assets with higher expected returns. The Bank 
decided  to  extend  the  average  remaining  maturity  of  JGB  purchases  at  the  MPM  held  on 
April 3 and 4 so that the portfolio rebalancing effect can strengthen. 
The portfolio rebalancing effect works as follows. The Bank’s asset purchases do not change 
the size of private financial institutions’ balance sheets, but the composition of their balance 
sheets changes on the asset side. In other words, private financial institutions’ holdings of 
JGBs and other assets decrease, and their current account balances at the Bank increase 
accordingly.  From  the  viewpoint  of  private  financial  institutions’  asset  management,  the 
profitability  of  their  portfolios  as  a  whole  decreases  since  their  assets  under  management 
decline and their current account balances at the Bank increase. Private financial institutions 
are then expected to shift their portfolios to assets with higher expected returns such as risk 
assets and to increase lending to secure profits (Chart 11).1  
                                                 
1 
It  should  be  noted  that  when  private  financial  institutions  shift  their  assets  to  those  with  higher  expected 
returns,  their  current  account  balances  held  at  the  Bank  do  not  decrease  accordingly,  as  some  mistakenly 
assume. In fact, overall current account balances held at  the Bank are  not affected by transactions among 
individual private financial institutions. For example, when a private financial institution purchases stocks from 
a counterparty and reduces its own current account balance at the Bank, the current account balance of the 
counterparty  that  sells  the  stocks  increases  accordingly;  thus,  there  is  no  change  in  the  current  account 
balances at the Bank as a whole. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In this way, the Bank aims to generate massive excess reserves of financial institutions to 
encourage  a  change  in  the  investment  behavior  of  banks,  life  insurance  companies,  and 
pension  funds.  It  is  no  simple  matter  to  discuss  whether  portfolio  rebalancing  will  spread 
among all investors, as there are also individual regulatory and accounting factors at work. In 
addition,  such  changes  would  not  occur  immediately.  Nevertheless,  I  look  forward  to  the 
progress in rebalancing despite the institutional constraints. 
Finally, for the third channel, inflation expectations are generally formed with an element of 
adaptive expectations (that is, expectations are formed by adjusting them based on previous 
data)  and  inflation  expectations  of  firms  and  households  as  well  as  financial  markets  are 
likely to be low in a situation of persistent low inflation or deflation, as in Japan. However, the 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  in  Japan  is  currently 
0 percent  due  to  (1)  cost-push  factors  such  as  rises  in  fuel  prices  due  to  the  recent 
weakening of the yen and in electricity charges, as well as (2) a halt in the decline in prices of 
TVs and IT-related goods such as personal computers. In this situation, the year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is expected to turn positive this summer from 
the current level of around 0 percent.  
If actual inflation remains in positive territory, inflation expectations of firms and households 
as  well  as  financial  markets  might  shift  upward  accordingly.  Some  reports  –  such  as  the 
Consumer  Confidence  Survey  released  by  the  Cabinet  Office,  the  Opinion  Survey  on  the 
General  Public’s  Views  and  Behavior  released  by  the  Bank,  and  surveys  conducted  on 
economists  and  market  participants  –  already  suggest  a  rise  in  inflation  expectations, 
although it is hard to gauge the extent to which this is caused by the scheduled consumption 
tax  rate  hikes.  The  Bank  expects  a  mechanism  of  a  feedback  loop  between  inflation 
expectations and the actual inflation rate – in which a rise in inflation expectations causes a 
rise in actual inflation and vice versa – to operate and medium-term inflation expectations to 
rise accordingly. 
Wages and prices 
I. 
In considering channels more in line with economic activity, a wage increase – as well as the 
narrowing  of  the  output  gap  –  is  indispensable  for  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability 
target (Chart 12). At a meeting with business leaders in Gunma Prefecture on February 6, 
2013,  I  stated  that  a  significant  wage  increase  of  approximately  4  percent  was  consistent 
with  achieving  2  percent  inflation.  However,  considering  the  slowdown  in  the  pace  of 
increase  in  labor  productivity  in  recent  years,  I  came  to  realize  that  the  wage  increase 
needed  might  be  lower  –  approximately  2  percent.  The  reason  is  that  a  wage  increase 
consistent with achieving a certain inflation rate is higher when the pace of increase in labor 
productivity is high, and lower when the pace is low (Chart 13). 
As  for  the  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market  consistent  with  achieving  a 
wage increase of 2 percent, judging from the wage Phillips curve – with the unemployment 
rate  on  the  x-axis  and  the  rate  of  wage  inflation  on  the  y-axis  –  which  excludes  a  rise  in 
inflation expectations, the unemployment rate would be roughly 3.0 percent to 3.5 percent. 
As the most recent unemployment rate is 4.1 percent, achieving the range of approximately 
3.0 percent to 3.5 percent is not impossible. 
It is still uncertain whether such a situation close to full employment can be reached within 
about  two  years  –  the  period  in  which  the  Bank  aims  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target 
under QQE. Developments in employment and wages tend to lag behind economic growth, 
and therefore, once the economy returns to a moderate recovery path, a considerable time 
lag is expected for its effects to spread to wages. Nevertheless, as I mentioned, an inflation-
targeting policy is generally a flexible monetary policy framework. As mentioned, what I think 
is  important  is  not  mechanically  achieving  the inflation  rate  specifically  of  2  percent  in  two 
years, but creating a situation in which 2 percent inflation is in sight in about two years, as a 
result of the tightening of supply and demand conditions in the labor market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Creating a more favorable environment for firms to increase their base salary 
J. 
As  the  importance  of  a  wage  increase  in  overcoming  deflation  has  become  widely 
recognized,  the  government  has  taken  the  unprecedented  action  of  appealing  to  the 
business  community,  urging  its  members  to  raise  wages.  In  fact,  increases  in  bonus 
payments  have  already  been  observed  in  particular  industries  and  firms,  and  some 
nonmanufacturing  firms  are  giving  indications  of  raising  their  base  salary,  as  their 
employment  situation  has  tightened  reflecting  a  drive  to  obtain  new  personnel.  However, 
many firms remain hesitant to increase their base salary due to concerns about a rise in fixed 
costs. For the nonmanufacturing firms just mentioned, the increase in base salary has been 
limited to full-time employees and a majority of the workers who are part-timers have not yet 
received such benefits. 
The  issue  of  widespread  achievement  of  such  an  increase  in  base  salary  is  deeply 
connected to the issue of ensuring flexibility in the employment systems and practices, and 
thus  it  might  not  be  easy  to  form  a  consensus  on  these  matters.  Nevertheless,  Japan’s 
economy has recently increased its robustness, and therefore economic developments are 
expected to support such structural reforms in the labor market. I will now discuss Japan’s 
economy. 
III. 
Economic activity and prices in Japan and abroad 
The current state of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
A. 
Even after the Lehman shock, Japan’s economy faced a series of headwinds such as the 
Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  and  the  flooding  in  Thailand  in  2011,  as  well  as  the 
deceleration of the Chinese economy from 2012. However, it has overcome such shocks and 
a  path  toward  a  self-sustained  recovery  is  finally  in  view.  A  high  degree  of  uncertainty 
remains  concerning  the  global  economy,  and  I  see  risks  to  the  economic  outlook  as 
somewhat tilted to the downside. However, the external environment as a whole is expected 
to exert positive effects on Japan’s economy unless a tail risk affecting the global economy 
emerges.  Therefore,  I  believe  that  the  present  offers  a  window  of  opportunity  for  Japan’s 
economy to overcome deflation (Chart 14). 
Exports had lagged behind domestic demand,  which has started to increase its resilience, 
but have been picking up led by exports of automobiles to the United States. Production of 
manufacturing firms followed a moderate increasing trend in the April-June quarter of 2013, 
and is expected to continue to do so in the July-September quarter judging from interviews 
with  firms  (Chart  15).  Although  the  deceleration  of  the  Chinese  economy  –  which  I  will 
discuss  later  –  is  a  major  concern,  it  is  not  a  serious  obstacle  to  the  recovery  of  Japan’s 
economy as long as the robustness of the U.S. economy is maintained.  
Private consumption for the January-March quarter of 2013 seemed to be supported by an 
improvement in sentiment and wealth effects. Private consumption is expected to continue 
increasing, as household sentiment has remained firm on the whole even amid the recent 
turmoil  in  financial  markets,  and  as  the  employment  and  income  situation  improves 
moderately (Chart 16). According to anecdotal information, negative effects on consumption 
of high-end goods and services have not been observed to a large degree despite the recent 
turmoil in financial markets. The contribution of public investment to the economy is expected 
to  increase  again  from  the  July-September  quarter,  supported  by  the  effects  of  various 
economic measures (Chart 17). In these circumstances, coincident indicators of machinery 
investment – such as shipments of capital goods and the aggregate supply of capital goods – 
suggest  that  business  fixed  investment,  which  had  been  sluggish,  is  finally  showing  some 
signs  of  picking  up  from  the  April-June  quarter.  Investment  for  energy-saving  and  disaster 
prevention  as  well  as  pent-up  demand  for  maintenance  and  replacement  of  business 
equipment  seem  to  be  emerging  (Chart  18).  Business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
increase moderately as shown by firms’ business fixed investment plans in the June 2013 
Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey on Enterprises in Japan). 
Although there are disparities among demand components, they have shown some positive 
developments,  and  in  this  situation  Japan’s  economy  has  become  increasingly  robust  – 
albeit  gradually.  In  these  circumstances,  the  employment  and  income  situation,  which  had 
lagged behind other demand components, is expected to improve gradually.  
Outlook for and risks facing the global economy 
B. 
The  prerequisite  for  Japan’s  economy  to  return  to  a  self-sustained  growth  path  is  that 
overseas economies move out of the deceleration phase that has continued since 2012 and 
return to a moderate recovery path. On this point, the resilience in the U.S. economy even 
under the fiscal drag is a positive factor, but it is a matter of concern that the Chinese and 
other  emerging  economies  have  not  yet  shown  clear  signs  of  acceleration  in  growth.  The 
World Economic Outlook, updated in July by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), shows 
that the growth rates of these economies will increase gradually from 2013 to 2014, but these 
economic projections were revised downward from the April update (Chart 19). However, the 
U.S. economy – which is increasing its robustness – is expected to firmly propel the global 
economy even in a situation where emerging economies are losing their role as the driving 
force  in  the  global  economy.  Therefore,  on  the  whole,  there  is  almost  no  considerable 
change in the outlook that the global economy will return to a moderate recovery path. 
The U.S. economy experienced a soft patch during the April-June quarter of 2013 due to the 
effects  of  fiscal  austerity  measures.  From  the  July-September  quarter,  as  the  effects 
dissipate to some extent, the U.S. economy is likely to exhibit relatively high growth on the 
back of firm consumer sentiment and a pick-up in the housing market (Charts 20 and 21). 
The fact that the debt ceiling problem has been delayed until autumn 2013 at the earliest due 
to  higher-than-expected  federal  government  revenues  is  judged  to  be  one  of  the  factors 
reducing the immediate tail risk. 
The  European  economy  still  lags  behind,  but  the  situation  does  not  call  for  a  further 
downward  revision  to  the  economic  outlook.  This  is  because  (1)  European  countries  are 
shifting  away  from  and  softening  fiscal  austerity  measures;  (2)  exports  from  Europe  are 
improving  to  some  extent;  and  (3)  business  and  household  sentiment  is  starting  to  show 
some signs of improvement (Charts 22 and 23).  
As for emerging economies, on the other hand, an issue of concern is that the pace of capital 
flows  into  these  economies  has  been  decelerating  and  an  outflow  of  funds  from  these 
economies has been observed, amid a shift toward low-risk investments in global financial 
markets  caused  by  emerging  speculation  about  an  earlier-than-expected  reduction  by  the 
Federal Reserve in the pace of its asset purchases. Behind the speculation lies the fact that 
the U.S. economy has continued to recover steadily, and this itself is a positive factor for the 
global economy, including emerging economies. Nevertheless, I am paying careful attention 
to whether the speculation causes an abrupt change in capital flows, leading to a downturn in 
some emerging economies, or causes difficulty in funding conditions (Chart 24).  
Furthermore,  in  China,  it  has  been clearly  observed  that  the  government  is  placing  a  high 
priority on coping with structural problems, such as population-related issues and the excess 
capacity  problem,  rather  than  on  pursuing  strong  economic  growth.  Thus,  we  should  not 
expect the growth rate to recover noticeably for the time being (Chart 25). The labor market 
is firm even though the annualized GDP growth rate is less than 8 percent, and this suggests 
that the potential growth rate in China is decreasing. Therefore, the Chinese authorities are 
concerned  about  inflation,  even  in  a  situation  where  the  economic  growth  rate  has  not 
increased  (Chart  26).  In  June  2013,  short-term  interest  rates  surged  temporarily,  but  this 
reflects the fact that the Chinese authorities had clearly shown an intention of encouraging 
financial  institutions  to  strengthen  their  liquidity  risk  management  in  view  of  rapid  credit 
expansion, in addition to the tightening of the supply-demand conditions for funds toward the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
end of the first half of the fiscal year (Chart 27). This stance of the Chinese authorities will 
strengthen the quality of economic growth, contributing to stability in the global economy in 
the medium to long term. 
Taking  into  consideration  the  developments  I  have  just  mentioned,  the  global  economy  is 
expected  to  return  to  a  moderate  recovery  path,  supported  by  accommodative  financial 
conditions, amid the weakening downward pressure from the fiscal side in countries such as 
the United States. We can point to the following factors as signaling a return of the global 
economy to such a recovery path: (1) steady household sentiment worldwide; (2) a globally 
favorable shipment-inventory balance in manufacturing; and (3) adjustment in the stance of 
fiscal austerity in Europe. By region, I am focusing especially on the U.S. economy, which is 
supported by the recovery in housing investment, as the driving force of the global economy. 
As for accommodative financial conditions, they are mainly attributable to an improvement in 
the funding conditions of financial institutions. The tail risk that the European debt problem 
will  lead  to global  financial  market turmoil  and  a  significant  global  economic  downturn  has 
decreased on the whole, although considerable uncertainty remains. The recent stability in 
prices of primary commodities is another positive factor (Chart 28). 
The two main risk factors to the outlook for the global economy that warrant attention are (1) 
as  mentioned  earlier,  the  effects  of  the  reduction  in  the  pace  of  asset  purchases  by  the 
Federal  Reserve  on  global  financial  markets,  especially  on  emerging  economies’  markets; 
and (2) the global disinflationary trend. The effects on global financial markets are expected 
to dissipate moderately with the expansion of global economic growth, and as the Federal 
Reserve's policy intention gradually permeates the markets. On the other hand, I am paying 
attention  to  the  global  disinflationary  trend  –  particularly  whether  the  recent  decline  in  the 
inflation rate in the United States is temporary as assumed by the Federal Reserve. 
Concluding remarks 
IV 
Lastly, I would like to touch on economic activity in Fukushima Prefecture. 
Economic  activity  in  the  prefecture  has  been  picking  up  reflecting  factors  such  as  an 
improvement in overseas demand and growth in demand related to post-disaster restoration 
and  reconstruction.  Public  investment  has  continued  to  increase  significantly  at  a  pace  far 
exceeding that of Japan as a whole, mainly due to decontamination work and construction 
orders related to restoration following the earthquake disaster. Housing investment has also 
been increasing significantly, supported in part by reconstruction of homes and demand from 
evacuees to transfer their residence (Chart 29). The situation for tourism remains severe, but 
there are signs of gradual improvement mainly in the area around Aizu, due to a historical TV 
drama  series  featuring  the  region.  The  Tohoku  Rokkon  Festival  held  in  Fukushima 
Prefecture in early June was also very successful. 
As  for  the  outlook,  economic  activity  in  the  prefecture  is  expected  to  gradually  show  clear 
signs  of  picking  up  due  partly  to  signs  of  an  increase  in  production,  in  a  situation  where 
demand related to post-disaster restoration and reconstruction is expected to remain strong. 
It should be noted, however, that the effects of the earthquake disaster – and especially of 
the  nuclear  power  plant  accident  –  remain  and  a  number  of  issues  must  be  overcome  to 
achieve  economic  reconstruction  in  the  prefecture.  According  to  statistics  released  by  the 
prefectural government, about 150,000 residents are still displaced. Harmful rumors persist, 
and  their  effects  continue  to  spread  to  industries  such  as  food,  agriculture,  and  tourism. 
Production  activities  are  recovering,  but  the  level  of  industrial  production  since  the 
earthquake  disaster  has  consistently  been  about  10  percentage  points  below  the  national 
average (Chart 30). There are challenges for the employment situation as well, such as the 
mismatch between supply and demand in the labor market and the employment situation for 
disaster victims. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
To overcome these challenges, it is important above all to proceed as promptly as possible 
with environmental restoration and rebuilding of the daily lives of evacuees in a broad sense, 
by  achieving  progress  in  decontamination  work  and  restructuring  in  the  evacuation  zones, 
among others. From the viewpoint of ensuring economic reconstruction in the prefecture, it is 
particularly important to foster growing firms and vibrant industries that generate employment 
opportunities. Worthy of note in this regard are the efforts to foster new growth areas from a 
medium-term perspective contained in the Plan for Revitalization in Fukushima Prefecture, 
released by the Fukushima prefectural government. Directions for revitalization described in 
the plan include (1) the medical industry cluster project, such as investment in a new drug 
research  center,  as  well  as  (2)  the  renewable  energy  promotion  project,  for  example, 
expansion  of  renewable  energy  and  clustering  and  fostering  of  renewable  energy-related 
industries.  Also  called  for  are  the  rebuilding  and  revitalization  of  the  agriculture,  forestry, 
fisheries, and tourism industries. 
Fukushima Prefecture has long enjoyed a high degree of regional attractiveness and other 
advantages  that  support  growth.  These  include  (1)  geographical  proximity  to  the  Tokyo 
metropolitan area, a very large market; (2) a strong manufacturing sector, as shown by the 
fact that the prefecture posts the largest value of shipments of manufactured goods in the 
Tohoku region; and (3) a range of tourist resources such as rich natural surroundings and hot 
spring resorts as well as local agricultural products. If the efforts described in the Plan for 
Revitalization in Fukushima Prefecture draw fully on the region’s attractions and advantages, 
the prefectural economy can be restored even more strongly and more rapidly. It is therefore 
deeply  hoped  that  the  range  of  cooperative  efforts  among  industry,  government,  and 
academia  progress  steadily  and  support 
further 
development. 
 
the  economy’s  reconstruction  and 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19
  20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21
   22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23
  24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  25
   26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  27
28 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  29
  30 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  31
  32 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  33
   34 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  35
  36 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  37
38 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  39
  40 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  41
 42 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
