Carlos da Silva Costa: The importance of strengthening European 
integration to ensure the success of the Portuguese adjustment 
Article by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, published in Diário 
Económico Newspaper, 31 December 2012. 
 The flaws in the architecture of the European Economic and Monetary Union 
Today it is clear that the architecture of the Economic and Monetary Union was flawed and 
incomplete from the  start,  which  made  it  unable  to  ensure  economic  and financial  stability 
when exposed to abrupt changes in market uncertainty and risk perception. In some cases, 
these flaws have heightened the difficulties faced by Member States, which in turn explains 
why the contagion effects among euro area economies have surpassed expectations. 
The flaws in the architecture and institutional framework supporting the establishment of the 
Economic and Monetary Union necessitate an urgent rethink of this model to ensure that the 
euro area is stable and resilient both to common and specific exogenous shocks and to risks 
of  inconsistency  among  the  policies  of  the  various  economies.  This  is  to  ensure  that  the 
construction of the euro area is supported by all pillars determining its stability and resilience 
and that it relies on rules and institutions controlling the mutual interdependence between the 
stability of the whole and each of its parts. 
The construction of a new future for Europe 
The  flaws  in  the  architecture  of  the  euro  area  and  the  lack  of  appropriate  rules  and 
institutions to promote the stability of the whole and its parts explain why the sovereign debt 
crisis was deeper and more protracted than initially expected. These flaws also explain why 
resolving  this  crisis  and  restoring  sustainable  and  job-creating  growth  in  Europe  requires 
measures  both  at  national  and  European  level.  In  the  euro  area,  these  two  dimensions 
complement and determine each other: the stability of the whole does not tolerate a lasting 
divergence/instability in one of its parts. Likewise, the stabilisation of one of its parts depends 
on the nature of the impulses it receives from the whole. 
National policies to restore debt sustainability 
First, the countries that have accumulated significant macroeconomic imbalances in the past 
and that were faced with market-based funding constraints in the context of the current crisis 
need  to  adopt  policies  to  restore  public  debt  sustainability,  financial  stability  and 
competitiveness,  thereby  recovering  their  credibility  and  confidence.  This  is  the  case  of 
Portugal.  The  strategy  established  in  the  Economic  Adjustment  Programme  for  Portugal  – 
which  relies  on  fiscal  consolidation,  financial  stability  and  structural  reforms  –  is  crucial  to 
eliminate the macroeconomic imbalances and structural blockages that have led us to this 
crisis. In spite of the considerable challenges facing the Portuguese economy and society, 
the progress achieved with the implementation of this strategy is already clearly visible today, 
particularly in the correction of the external imbalance. 
Need for measures at European level to enhance the growth potential of the economy 
Compliance by a euro area country with the adjustment programme is a necessary though 
insufficient condition to ensure the success of the adjustment process. In fact, the ongoing 
adjustment effort at national level needs to be complemented by initiatives at European level 
that enhance its effectiveness. 
This means that the credibility of the ongoing adjustment programmes must be validated and 
sustained by the European context: first, through the adequacy and quality of the rules and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
institutions which frame and govern the euro area and each of its parts, thereby annulling the 
perception of a risk of fragmentation and of moral hazard; second, through mechanisms to 
ensure  liquidity  (which  mitigate  the  risk  arising  from  asymmetric  shocks),  mechanisms  to 
monitor/encourage  structural  reforms  (which,  by  nature,  yield  medium  term  results),  and 
mechanisms to safeguard the stability of the financial system; last but not least, through an 
effective and ex ante practice of cooperation and coordination of the macroeconomic policies 
of euro area countries to ensure the stability and growth of both the whole and each Member 
State. 
In  the  short  term,  the  euro  area  needs  to  have  instruments  to  respond  quickly  and 
effectively to financial stability problems. Important steps were taken in this regard with 
the  creation  of  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  and  then  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism. 
In addition, the process of coordination of economic policies at European level must be 
strengthened  and  improved.  The  main  concern  should  be  to  ensure  that  national  policies 
complement each other. In particular, it is important that the fiscal consolidation path of each 
Member State takes into account its room for manoeuvre in order to make the process more 
stable as a whole. 
It is also desirable to implement investment projects at European level with a proven impact 
on  potential  output,  for  example  in  energy  and  telecommunications.  These  projects  are 
expected  to  contribute  to  a  more  integrated,  efficient  and  competitive  economy  taking  full 
advantage of the benefits of the European Single Market. 
The new European institutional architecture 
Building a new European institutional architecture rests on four pillars: banking union, fiscal 
union,  economic  union  and  the  strengthening  of  democratic  legitimacy  and  accountability. 
We must ensure that the construction of each one of these pillars is progressing well and in 
an articulate manner. We must also ensure that the materials used in this construction are of 
high quality, so that the new building is structurally solid and able to withstand future shocks. 
To  ensure  this  high  quality  we  must  immediately  promote,  on  the  one  hand,  the  shared 
notion of common interest and willingness to minimise moral hazard; and, on the other hand, 
policies aligned with the stability and economic growth objectives. These materials must take 
the  form  of  institutions  assuring  group  control  over  the  integrating  parties,  in  order  to 
minimise moral hazard undermining group efficiency and cohesion; it shall also ensure the 
scrutiny of each member on the manner in which the objectives pursued by the group are 
established and put into practice, which is a condition for accepting the constraints defined 
by the group. These institutions will make it possible to recover, under shared sovereignty, 
the loss of individual autonomy arising from the need to comply with the group’s regulations. 
The  importance  of  mitigating  moral  hazard  cannot  be  underestimated,  given  that  it  may 
obstruct  mutual  aid  and  solidarity  among  Member  States.  Minimising  moral  hazard  is  a 
necessary  condition  of  confidence  and  mutual  aid  among  group  members,  implying 
participation rules and compliance-monitoring mechanisms and institutions. 
In order to overcome the crisis that has been undermining the European project, the sense of 
urgency,  diagnosis  and  the  convergence  of  willingness  are  not  enough.  It  is  essential  to 
establish and implement a new institutional framework ensuring the move to a new mutual 
confidence  stage.  The  future  of  Europe  therefore  involves  the  mandatory  deepening  of 
financial, fiscal, economic and political integration of Member States. 
Banking union 
The design of the banking union has been drawn up. This is a key pillar to solve the financial 
fragmentation in the euro area and to break the link between sovereign risk and banks’ risk. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Currently, euro area corporations experiencing similar situations in terms of profitability and 
risk  are  faced  with  rather  differentiated  credit  conditions  merely  for  geographical  reasons. 
Portugal  must  overcome  this  problem,  in  order  to  strengthen  the  competitiveness  of 
Portuguese corporations. 
In my opinion, a complete banking union should encompass three key elements: (i) a Single 
Supervisory Mechanism, applicable to all credit institutions, involving centralised decision 
making  and  decentralised  implementation;  (ii)  a  Single  Deposit  Guarantee  System;  and 
(iii) a Single Resolution Mechanism. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism was recently approved by the Council of the European 
Union. Under this new mechanism, the European Central Bank (ECB) shall be responsible 
for  carrying  out  supervisory  tasks  over  credit  institutions  in  the  euro  area  Member  States. 
There will be, however, a coordinated distribution of tasks between the ECB and the national 
supervisory authorities, depending on the size of banks and national banking systems. 
With all banks in the euro area under unified supervision, responsibility for deposit guarantee 
and  resolution  shall  be  held  at  the  level  where  supervisory  powers  are  exercised,  i.e.  at 
European level. Banking union must therefore cover not only integrated supervision, but also 
shared deposit guarantee and bank resolution mechanisms. 
If a single supervisory mechanism is not accompanied by European deposit guarantee and 
bank resolution mechanisms, it represents banking union under construction and therefore 
an incomplete separation between sovereign and banking risk. 
Fiscal union 
Lack of fiscal discipline among Member States during the pre-crisis period revealed the need 
to strengthen the European fiscal policy institutional framework. 
Important decisions have already been taken in this field, involving a range of regulations to 
promote fiscal discipline in Member States (for example the so-called “six pack” and “fiscal 
compact”). However, work for the construction of that pillar is still currently under way. These 
regulations  must  be  complemented  by  institutions  assuring  their  effective  implementation. 
Indeed, Europe needs a qualitative change towards fiscal union. 
Economic union 
The achievement of a genuine economic union requires the establishment of an institutional 
framework  able  to  assess,  coordinate  and  monitor  Member  States’  economic  policy 
measures and reforms. Special emphasis should be placed on areas with a potentially higher 
impact  on  competitiveness,  economic  growth  and  employment,  simultaneously  promoting 
social cohesion. Member States’ economic policies and macroeconomic imbalances are an 
issue  of  common  interest  and  therefore  require  a  “win-win”  concerted  response.  The 
“European Semester” and the “Euro-Plus Pact” are important improvements in this area. 
Strengthening democratic legitimacy and accountability 
To  move  towards  more  integrated  fiscal  and  economic  policies  we  need  to  implement 
mechanisms  ensuring  democratic  legitimacy  and  accountability  in  joint  decision-making.  If 
this  political  dimension  is  ignored,  we  will  not  be  able  to  evolve  towards  greater  financial, 
fiscal and economic integration, for lack of legitimacy and accountability. 
This political dimension of the integration process must reconcile two sources of concern: the 
need for a legitimate response vis-à-vis “the whole”; and the need to ensure that all parts, 
irrespective of their size, are represented and participate in the decision-making process. 
In particular, the so-called “community method” must be revitalised, in tandem with restoring 
the European Commission’s central role, by strengthening its effectiveness and legitimacy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
This  subject  requires  separate  attention.  I  have  already  tackled  it  in  a  number  of  public 
addresses, as for instance on the occasion of the European Courts of Auditors meeting in 
Estoril this year. 
It must be understood, however, that the political pillar, although going hand in hand with the 
pillars of greater financial, fiscal and economic integration, has its own different timeframe. 
The  construction  of  the  other  pillars  cannot  be  delayed  for  the  launch  of  the  work  on  the 
strengthening  and  reconstruction  of  the  political  pillar.  The  time  criticality  of  the  problems 
requires prompt responses to the Economic and Monetary Union’s flaws. These are likely to 
be a catalyst for responses of political organisation and legitimacy that are less grandiose, 
but certainly more efficient, as they are based on the resolution of actual problems (as may 
be expected from an evolutionary/gradualist model, such as has been the case in Europe, as 
opposed to the institutional/constitutional model, which is a federal integration-like model). 
By way of conclusion, I would like to stress once again that European development is very 
important  for  the  success  of  Portugal’s  adjustment.  Determined  domestic  policy  action  is 
essential  but  not  enough.  The  European  context  must  validate  the  credibility  of  the 
adjustment in every euro area economy. The level of certainty, quality and vigour of the new 
euro area mechanisms and institutions are key to strengthening market confidence and are 
therefore an indispensible complement to national adjustment effects. This means that there 
is a virtuous relationship between the so-called frontloading of national adjustment processes 
and  the  frontloading  of  the  European  integration  process.  For  this  reason,  the  Governing 
Council of the ECB has repeatedly advocated that the response to the sovereign debt crisis 
should  be  the  responsibility  of  the  European  Council  and  that  the  costs  and  depth  of  the 
crisis were inversely related to the celerity and forcefulness of the response. The Portuguese 
and  the  citizens  of  other  Member  States  must  understand  this:  the  regulations  and 
mechanisms under development in Europe are not the result of some external imposition, but 
are  rather  inherent  to  the  integration  stage  representing  a  successful  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union  and  are  therefore  essential  for  the  prosperity  of  Europe  and  each  of  its 
Member States. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
