Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Financial innovation and inclusion – 
challenges and implications for monetary policy and financial stability 
Opening remarks by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
the COMESA (Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa) Committee of Central Bank 
Governors Symposium on “Financial innovation and inclusion – challenges and implications 
for monetary policy and financial stability”, Kampala, 24 May 2013. 
 Governors of COMESA Central Banks 
Secretary General of COMESA 
Resource Persons 
Senior Central Bank officials 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good  morning  everyone.  I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you  to  this  COMESA  Committee  of 
Central  Bank  Governors  symposium  on  the  theme,  “Financial  Innovation  and  Inclusion: 
Challenges and Implications for Monetary Policy and Financial Stability”. 
During our 18th meeting held in Kigali in December 2012, we recognised new challenges in 
the  financial  sector  and  decided  to  organise  a  symposium  to  share  experiences  and  to 
explore  ways  of facilitating financial  innovation  and  inclusion  with  due  consideration  of  the 
Page attendant effects on the efficacy of monetary policy and financial stability. 
Today,  we  have  a  panel  of  experts  who  will  enrich  our  understanding  of  the  challenges 
posed by financial innovation and inclusion on monetary policy and financial stability. I am 
confident that the presentations and discussions during this symposium will fill any existing 
knowledge gaps on these issues. We will undoubtedly leave this forum with a strategic vision 
on  the  role  that  central  banks  should  play  in  shepherding  the  development  of  financial 
innovation and inclusion. 
Fellow  Governors,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  this  very 
important  topic  as  a  precursor.  To  date,  our  financial  systems  have  experienced  rapid 
financial 
information  and  communication 
technology.  Both  the  banked  and  unbanked  public  can  move  money  and  effect  payments 
much faster and with greater convenience. 
Of  all  the  innovations,  mobile  money  growth  has  developed  and  proliferated  across  the 
region  at  such  a  remarkable  pace  that  it  should  attract  keener  regulatory  oversight.  Yet, 
regulation  and  supervision  of  innovations  is  often  a  double  edged  sword.  On  one  hand, 
suboptimal regulation restrains the pace and extent of innovation. On the other hand, smart 
regulation provides a safe and secure environment. Our discussions should shed light on the 
threshold  beyond  which  the  extent  of  new  financial  services  makes  them  systemically 
important, and below which freedom unleashes creativity. 
Moreover,  because  ICT  has  delivered  services  to  the  unbanked  who  had  no  access  to 
financial  services  before,  it  carries  the  hope  of  facilitating  development.  Nonetheless, 
financial inclusion may also pose risks to financial stability. 
As central bankers, we should promote greater financial inclusion but not without due care 
and  caution.  Among  the  questions  before  us  are:  (1)  what  institutional  structure  and 
regulatory  regime  should  we  promote  in  order  to  maximize  the  benefits  from  financial 
innovations while minimizing the risks?; (2) what mechanisms should be instituted to manage 
distressed institutions arising out of financial innovation?; and 3) how should the public be 
protected from the associated risks including cyber-crime, among others? 
innovation,  driven  mainly  by  advances 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Naturally, we would also be concerned to ensure reliable data management so as to monitor 
and appropriately adjust our monetary policy operations in tandem with the related structural 
changes.  This  symposium  will  help  us  to  master  the  role  of  central  banks  in  harnessing 
financial innovation so as to prudently maximize financial inclusion. 
It is now my pleasure to invite our eminent experts to make their presentations and to also 
encourage the active participation of every one of us in the deliberations.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
