Jens Weidmann: Banking supervision and regulation – what action does 
the Bundesbank consider necessary? 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Club  of 
Hamburg-based  economic  journalists  (Club  Hamburger  Wirtschaftsjournalisten),  Hamburg, 
30 August 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Mr Nicolai 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I’m delighted to have the opportunity to speak to you today at the Club of Hamburg-based 
economic  journalists.  Of  course,  I  can  hardly  say  that  I  don’t  have  much  contact  with 
economic journalists. But it’s unusual for me to have the chance to discuss current issues 
with so many members of the media at once. 
The contact between central bankers and the press is so close because we need you, the 
economic journalists, to help the public understand our decisions and actions. Despite our 
best efforts, our publications simply do not reach the same number of people as your media. 
But  it  is  incredibly  important  for  the  public  to  understand  our  decisions  so  that  they  have 
confidence in our work. And this confidence is vital to maintaining a stable currency. After all, 
monetary  policy  mainly  works  by  influencing  expectations  –  the  current  issue  of  “forward 
guidance” being a case in point. 
Yet the public have to be confident not just in a central bank’s monetary policy decisions but 
also  in  its  role  in  payments  or  banking  supervision  and  regulation.  There  are  no  half 
measures: either a central bank has the public’s trust or it doesn’t. 
And bearing in mind the old adage that it takes years to build up a good reputation and only 
minutes to ruin it, it’s easy to see why we central bankers – especially those in Europe – are 
focusing so intensely on banking supervision and regulation at the moment. 
Today, I’d like to give you a brief overview of the state of play in banking supervision and 
regulation and the steps that still need to be taken. 
Year five of the crisis – where are we up to? 
2. 
The financial and sovereign debt crisis has exposed substantial flaws in the financial system, 
which various reform projects are now seeking to address. 
Many banks proved unable to withstand losses on their assets without outside help and had 
to be bailed out by taxpayers. This shook the foundations of some countries’ public finances, 
too.  Some  European  countries  became  less  and  less  solvent,  worsening  the  banks’ 
economic woes, as they had to take write-downs on their government bond holdings. 
The  crisis  therefore  revealed  a  fatal  feedback  loop  between  government  finances  and  the 
banking system: when one player ran into financial difficulties, the others would get caught in 
the maelstrom. 
To solve this problem we need two approaches, each working in tandem with the other. 
First,  the  banks  themselves  have  to  increase  their  resilience:  Basel  III  has  now  been 
transposed into EU law, significantly tightening capital and liquidity requirements. 
Second, we need to loosen the close ties between banks and governments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
And it is this second point that I would like to discuss in more detail today. In my view, there 
are two main components to this approach: first, better rules restricting banks’ balance sheet 
risk arising from government debt holdings and, second, the banking union. 
We  want  to  ensure  that  banks’  economic  situation  no  longer  depends  so  heavily  on  the 
solvency of their home country. We can only achieve this if we stop giving government debt 
preferential  regulatory  treatment  over  other  loans  or  securities.  Government  debt  should 
therefore be backed with a level of capital which adequately reflects the risks it carries and 
caps should be imposed on bank sovereign debt holdings. 
I  am  well  aware  that  making  these  kinds  of  changes  during  the  current  crisis  might 
exacerbate the funding problems that some countries are experiencing, which is why I think 
there is an argument for a transitional period. 
But  it  would  be  wrong  to  dismiss  a  reform  like  this  out  of  short-term  considerations.  I’m 
convinced that if bank balance sheets do not take adequate account of sovereign risk, this 
will remain an “Achilles heel” in the financial system. 
Indeed,  appropriate  capital  rules  and  caps  on  lending  to  governments  also  have  a 
disciplining  effect  on  national  fiscal  and  economic  policy.  Kenneth  Rogoff,  former  Chief 
Economist at the IMF, considers this effect to be stronger than that of stricter fiscal rules. 
On  top  of  this,  however,  we  also  need  to  minimise  the  implicit  government  guarantee  for 
systemically important banks as far as possible. To achieve this,  we  will need both higher 
capital  requirements  and  stricter  banking  supervision  which  is  not  geared  to  national 
interests. 
In addition, the cross-border effects of bank turmoil also mean that we need a harmonised 
approach to bank restructuring and resolution. 
To achieve both of these goals, Europe is in the process of setting up a banking union which 
will initially be based on two pillars: 
• 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism, or SSM, based at the European Central Bank 
(ECB).  A  “single  rulebook”,  which  has  yet  to  be  finalised,  will  help  to  ensure 
harmonised  supervisory  practices  and  standards  and  avoid  a  home  bias  among 
national supervisors. 
the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  or  SRM,  aimed  at  reinforcing  the  no-bailout 
principle. 
 A good deal of progress has already been made in creating an institutional framework for the 
first pillar of the banking union, the SSM. The SSM Regulation is likely to be adopted by the 
EU  institutions  this  autumn.  Based  on  this  ambitious  schedule,  the  SSM  is  due  to  be 
launched in autumn 2014. 
The  plans  for  the  second  pillar  of  the  banking  union,  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism 
(SRM), have not yet progressed quite as far. The political discussions are still ongoing; the 
European Commission put forward a draft regulation on the SRM in July this year. 
The  Commission  envisages  the  SRM  being  approved  next  year  and  launched  in  January 
2015. 
Challenges in banking supervision and regulation 
3. 
The  banking  union  may  play  a  key  role  in  making  the  financial  system  more  stable  and 
strengthening the European regulatory framework. But in order to achieve this, it is important 
to get the details of the set-up right. 
Let’s look at the SSM first: the plans for its institutional structures are now largely in place. 
Yet we still face certain organisational challenges, particularly concerning the organisational 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
set-up  of  banking  supervision  at  the  ECB  and  the  process  of  setting  common  supervisory 
standards. 
One of the main difficulties will be to ensure, as far as possible, the necessary separation 
between monetary policy and banking supervision. The ECB Governing Council could find 
itself torn between these two allegiances, risking conflicts of interest. 
While the compromise reached on the SSM’s institutional structure will allow a swift transition 
to  European-level  banking  supervision,  it  does  not  separate  monetary  policy  and  banking 
supervision strictly enough. 
Although the ECB will have a dedicated Supervisory Board for banking supervision, it is the 
Governing  Council  which  will  have  the  final  say. This  situation  cannot  be  changed  without 
amending the EU treaties – as is required by the ECB statute. 
To separate monetary policy and banking supervisory tasks effectively, it will be necessary in 
the long run either to reform the institutional basis upon which the ECB is founded or create 
an  independent  European  banking  supervisory  authority.  Swift  steps  should  be  taken  to 
initiate the treaty change that this will require. 
While I believe that the current compromise of basing European-level supervision at the ECB 
should only be an interim solution, the Bundesbank is giving the ECB every possible support 
in the process of setting up the SSM, not least by providing experienced staff. In addition, the 
Bundesbank  will  bring  its  experience  to  the  table  through  the  joint  supervisory  teams 
coordinated  by  ECB  staff.  And  it  will  continue  to  play  a  major  role  in  the  supervision  of 
smaller financial institutions. 
To build the banking union on solid foundations and avoid shaking confidence in the ECB, a 
“balance  sheet  assessment”  will  be  carried  out  before  the  SSM  is  launched.  This  will  be 
rather like a doctor’s check-up. 
And that brings us back to the problem of legacy assets. As you may recall, this issue has 
been part of the banking union debate right from the start. 
The balance sheet assessment will screen the balance sheets of the around 130 significant 
institutions which will fall under the ECB’s direct supervisory remit. The aim is to ensure that 
these banks’ finances are sound before the SSM is launched so that they are not found to 
have major write-down needs just after the SSM has started its work. That would be a heavy 
political  burden  for  the  SSM  to  bear  –  especially  if  banks  then  had  to  be  recapitalised  or 
restructured following such write-downs. 
Precisely because this balance sheet assessment could uncover some inconvenient truths 
for the current national supervisors, it is important to ensure that it is carried out correctly, 
competently and consistently. That is why  we should also draw on external expertise – by 
enlisting the help of external auditors, for example. 
If the assessment reveals that banks need to be recapitalised, this should be achieved as far 
as possible via the capital market. If this isn’t possible, the next step is to establish whether 
the bank actually has a sustainable business model at all or whether it needs to be resolved. 
Only  if  the  bank  cannot  be  resolved  because  of  a  threat  to  financial  stability  will  it  be 
recapitalised by its home country. The ESM will only be involved in exceptional cases; then, 
banks will not be recapitalised directly but via a loan to their home country. 
At this point, I’d like to emphasise one key overarching concept: taxpayers should not have 
to prop up banks which have unsustainable business models. 
Setting up the SSM offers us the opportunity to subject bank balance sheets to strict scrutiny. 
We  must  not  let  this  chance  slip  through  our  fingers.  Otherwise,  we  could  jeopardise 
confidence in the banking union. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  process  of  setting  up  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM) 
also poses certain institutional challenges. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Concerning the specific set-up of the mechanism, I regard the following points as important: 
When  a  bank  is  restructured  or  resolved,  there  should  be  a  sequence  of  liability,  defined 
clearly  ex  ante,  in  which  private  funds  –  not  public  money  –  are  the  first  port  of  call. This 
means that European taxpayers will no longer have to form the first line of defence. 
Generally speaking, decisions should be rules-based as far as possible. Discretionary ad-hoc 
decisions must have democratic legitimacy. 
The  principle  that  shared  liability  should  lead  to  shared  control  also  applies  the  other  way 
around: shared control via the ECB  will lead to shared liability at the European level. This 
means  that  banks  subject  to  European  supervision  will  generally  also  need  a  European 
resolution system. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  European  Commission  put  forward  a  proposal  for  the  SRM’s 
institutional  framework  in  July.  One  welcome  aspect  of  this  draft  is  that  it  includes  the 
guidelines for burden-sharing I have just outlined. 
Nonetheless, I take a critical view of the leeway that the draft would allow member states in 
their restructuring decisions. 
In  addition,  the  Commission  proposes  creating  a  European  Resolution  Fund  and  making 
itself responsible for resolution decisions. This is problematic under EU law. The existing EU 
treaties  do  not  provide  for  such  a  transfer  of  responsibilities,  which  could  also  have  far-
reaching  financial  implications  for  the  member  states.  Treaty  change  would  therefore  be 
needed to provide a rock-solid legal basis for these measures, too. 
A conceivable interim solution would be to form a network of national resolution authorities, 
as  proposed  by  the  German  government.  But  to  be  able  to  resolve  conflicts  between  the 
different national resolution authorities, there needs to be a powerful European body at the 
heart of the system which ensures that common resolution standards are applied and carries 
out  binding  mediation.  This  interim  solution  would  probably  be  quicker  to  implement  and 
stand on firmer legal ground than the Commission’s proposal. 
Essentially, though, in the legal groundwork for the SRM it is more important to be thorough 
than to be fast. These decisions have to be legally sound: where there are resolutions, there 
will also be law suits. 
Still,  I’m  well  aware  that  such  a  network  of  national  resolution  authorities  would  stand  in 
conflict with the desired harmonisation of banking supervision via the ECB and a European 
resolution system. But that is a price I would be willing to pay until we find a solution with a 
rock-solid grounding in EU law. 
Particularly  in  the  early  days  of  the  banking  union,  emerging  burdens  will  have  actually 
accumulated,  above  all,  on  the  watch  of  national  banking  supervisors.  It  would  therefore 
make no sense to fully communitise burdens just after the banking union has been launched 
– say, via a European Resolution Fund – not least because many economic policy decisions 
which have a considerable impact on the quality of bank balance sheets will still be taken at 
national level. In addition, the network solution would also allow the possibility of agreeing to 
share burdens among the participating countries if national funds do not suffice. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
A  great  deal  of  progress  has  been  made  in  banking  supervision  and  regulation  since  the 
crisis broke out. Yet we still face major challenges. The aspects I’ve touched on today reflect 
only some of these issues. 
Let’s face facts:  creating  a  banking  union  is  a similarly  major  undertaking to the  launch of 
monetary union. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  transfer  of  European-level  banking  supervision  to  the  ECB  will  increase  not  only  its 
range of tasks but also the responsibility that lies with the Governing Council. 
Clear institutional structures and transparent decisions are essential as the basis for public 
confidence in our work as banking supervisors. But creating this confidence will hinge on our 
ability – yours and mine – to help the public understand the particular difficulties associated 
with the banking union project. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  look forward  to  our  discussion  and  will  now  pass  the floor to  our 
host, Mr Birger Nicolai. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
