Ewald Nowotny: A changing role for central banks 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of Austria, at the 41st Economics Conference of the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria, 
Vienna, 10 June 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to welcome all of you to the 41st Economics Conference of the Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank here in Vienna. 
My  warmest  regards  to  State  Secretary  of  Finance  Andreas  Schieder,  and  our  keynote 
speakers,  Benoît  Coeuré,  Member  of  the  ECB  Executive  Board,  and  Harold  James, 
Professor at Princeton University. 
I am delighted and honored to welcome very prestigious speakers among us, who will enrich 
this conference with their insightful ideas and novel research. 
“A Changing Role for Central Banks?” is the question addressed at this year’s conference. 
During  the  19th  century  central  banks  were  very  closely  interlinked  with  national 
governments. Only in the late 20th century did  we observe a shift in emphasis toward the 
institutional autonomy of central banks. One can safely say that the status, reputation and 
self-image of central banks have considerably improved over the years. Today, central banks 
alongside  parliaments,  governments  and  judiciary  are  among  the  pillars  of  modern 
democratic nations. 
At  our  conference  we  will  discuss  what  kind  of a  pillar  of the  democratic  system  a  central 
bank is or should be. In my short introduction, I want to emphasize two interconnected issues 
that are relevant to this discussion: 
1)     the role of a central bank in the general context of economic policy, and 
2)     the concept of central bank independence. 
In the period after the Great Depression of the 1930s and in the first decades after World 
War II, the mandate of central banks usually reflected the traumatic experiences both of high 
inflation and mass unemployment. This is e.g. reflected in the broader mandate of the U.S. 
Fed and also applied to the mandate of Austria’s central bank before Austria joined EMU. 
In the period following the oil price shocks and up to the “Great Recession” – the economic 
crisis we have been experiencing for five years now – the role of central banks seemed to be 
clear  cut:  central  banks  should  focus  on  price  stability,  should  operate  mainly  with  one 
instrument – the policy rate – and should be independent in their actions. This was also the 
leading  perspective  when  laying  the  foundation  of  the  European  Central  Bank  –  the 
Maastricht Treaty in 1992. It reflected a strong position of economic theories based on a firm 
belief in perfectly functioning markets, and was supported by empirical evidence such as a 
situation of strong – or at least adequate – economic growth and at the same time full price 
stability.  A  happy  historical  episode  that  would  later  on  become  known  as  the  “Great 
Moderation.” 
Unfortunately, we now know that the optimism of this period had not been well founded in 
many respects. It was based on very specific circumstances: The low inflation rates were to a 
large  extent  caused  by  special  globalization  effects,  such  as  rapidly  rising  cheap  imports 
from  Asia.  In  important  but  poorly  regulated  markets,  financial  and  real  estate  bubbles 
developed.  In  Europe,  current  account  disequilibria  –  and  to  a  lesser  extent  fiscal 
disequilibria – were growing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We  all  know  what  happened  later.  Indeed,  there  have  been  critical  moments  when  the 
financial system of the advanced economies, maybe of the whole world, was threatened with 
meltdown.  In  this  situation  central  banks  reacted  fast  and  forcefully  by  using  conventional 
and  unconventional  instruments.  With  regard  to  the  financial  system,  a  fair  amount  of 
stabilization has been achieved. But we still see major challenges for the banking sector, and 
–  especially  in  Europe  –  we  still  see  a  struggling  real  economy  and  overstretched  public 
finances. This is why an accommodative monetary policy stance is still needed. 
One has to be aware, of course, that this kind of monetary policy, like any policy measure, 
may  also  have  side  effects.  These  potential  side  effects  have  led  to  a  number  of  critical 
reflections, especially in the German-speaking countries. In my view, central banks have to 
take side effects into account and have to be cautious about them. But central banks also 
have to have a clear view of priorities and of the potential macroeconomic costs of moving 
away  from  the  present  monetary  policy  stance.  I  am  therefore  convinced  that  there  is  no 
meaningful alternative to the present ECB strategy in the euro area’s current situation. 
The limits of monetary policy with regard to overcoming a deep and long-lasting crisis of the 
real  economy  have  become  very  obvious  in  the  recent  past.  There  is  a  large  variety  of 
problems that are at the core of this crisis, ranging from political to structural problems, but 
also including demand aspects. 
From the point of view of macroeconomic theory it should come as no surprise that economic 
dynamics – and especially investments – are influenced by both supply-side and demand-
side  factors.  Both  sides  are  affected  by  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  measures  alike,  and 
therefore there is a clear interconnectedness between fiscal and monetary policy. 
There  are  two  diametrically  opposed  theoretical  positions  on  how  to  deal  with  this 
interconnectedness.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  Keynesian  revolution,  economists  like  Abba 
Lerner  (1943)  developed  the  concept  of  “functional  finance.”  This  means  that  fiscal  and 
monetary  policy  should  be  seen  as  comparable  and  interchangeable  tools  for  demand 
management. At the other end of the spectrum, there is the position is that monetary policy 
completely  ignores  general  macroeconomic  circumstances  and  only  follows  a  goal  of 
narrowly defined price stability. 
What we see in practice today is a clear division of institutional responsibility for fiscal policy, 
on the one hand, and monetary policy, on the other. At the same time, it is acknowledged 
that  under  specific  circumstances,  coordination  between  fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy 
institutions may be necessary. This is also reflected in the legal mandate of the European 
Central Bank, which states1: 
In accordance with Article 127(1) and Article 282(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the 
European  Union,  the  primary  objective  of  the  ESCB  shall  be  to  maintain  price  stability. 
Without  prejudice  to  the  objective  of  price  stability,  it  shall  support  the  general  economic 
policies in the Union with a view to contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the 
Union as laid down in Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union. 
These objectives of the Union as laid down in Article 3 of the Treaty include especially the 
goal of high employment and adequate economic growth. So the mandate of the ECB sets 
clear priorities, but it does not ignore macroeconomic perspectives. 
Given  the  experience  of  the  last  years,  we  now  again  see  a  far-ranging  discussion  on 
monetary policy frameworks and especially monetary policy targets. For the specific aspects 
of monetary policy it is important to specify a target that serves as a nominal anchor for the 
economy, but it is obvious that no single economic indicator or variable can provide complete 
                                                
1   See ON THE STATUTE OF THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM OF CENTRAL BANKS AND OF THE EUROPEAN 
CENTRAL BANK available at 
http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/en_statute_from_c_11520080509en02010328.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
guidance to monetary policy. The ECB, which follows a primary goal of price stability, has 
defined  price  stability  as  a  rate  of  inflation  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  That  means  that  the 
primary task of monetary policy is to prevent inflation, but also deflation. This is to be seen in 
the  context  of  “flexible  inflation  targeting,”  which  must  be  understood  as  a  goal  to  be 
achieved  over  the  medium  run  –  allowing  the  ECB  to  pursue  a  steady  hand  strategy  to 
stabilize expectations. At the Bank on International Settlements (BIS) we have recently had 
very  relevant  and  interesting  discussions  on  different  central  banking  strategies,  including 
flexible inflation targeting, which soon will be published. 
An  important  contribution  to  the  role  of  central  banks  nowadays  is  their  increasing 
involvement in financial sector stability and banking supervision. One of the lessons of the 
big  economic  crisis  of  the  1930s  had  been that  price  stability  and  also  stability  of the  real 
economy cannot be achieved without stability of the financial sector of an economy. In the 
golden days of the “Great Moderation” this lesson seems to have been lost to a large extent; 
there was a tendency to separate the role of central banks and of financial market agencies. 
Today, in the context of the recent crisis, we again observe a tendency  toward a stronger 
role  of  central  banks  with  regard  to  microprudential  –  and  especially  macroprudential  – 
supervision. A specific example is the new supervisory role of the ECB in the context of the 
great  project  of  a  European  Banking  Union,  especially  the  European  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM). 
As a central banker I am fully aware that banking supervision is one of the most risky tasks in 
economic governance, especially with regard to reputational risks. No central banker with a 
healthy  survival  instinct  will  therefore  actively  try  to  obtain  an  encompassing  mandate  for 
banking supervision. On the other hand, given the huge potential for market failures in this 
field – like different forms of asymmetric information and problematic incentive structures – 
there is a clear need for public intervention – and somebody has to do it. 
After a period of de-regulation we are now in a period of re-regulation. Maybe we just see the 
usual  oscillation  from  one  end  of  the  spectrum  to  the  other,  meaning  that  after  too  much 
deregulation we now may see too much re-regulation, especially too much of uncoordinated 
regulation.  But  in  any  case,  effective  regulation  needs  effective  supervision  and  there  are 
valid  economic  arguments  in favor  of  independent  central  banks taking on  a  larger role  in 
banking supervision. In my view this also holds for the specific case of the ECB assuming 
greater responsibilities for banking supervision. 
One has to be aware, however, that we have to deal with a very specific case with regard to 
institutional, economic and legal set-up. To mention just a few aspects: the ECB would act as 
a bank supervisor not only for banks of the euro area, but of all countries joining the SSM. 
Moreover, it is well known that effective banking supervision also requires clarity with regard 
to bank resolution and eventually fiscal backstops. Right now, we do not have this clarity in 
Europe. We also still have no coordination between potentially necessary state intervention 
and European competition policy. In the U.S. there had been the TARP program, which can 
be seen as an example of a successful structural program for the banking sector. It did not 
involve lengthy state-aid procedures and a great part of its success was that it was able to 
work fast. 
I do not want to get into further details, but for me the message for the ECB is rather clear: 
Taking  up  such  a  huge  responsibility  for  European  banking  supervision  needs  careful 
preparation, quality being at least as important as speed. This is recognized by the existing 
road map insofar as not all European banks will be subject to ECB supervision. But anyhow, 
it is expected that the roughly 130 banks participating in the SSM will cover more than 80% 
or more than 25 trillion euro of the euro area’s banking assets. It may make sense to follow 
the  advice  of some  of  our German  colleagues to  start  with  a  smaller  number  of  the  major 
European banks to allow for a staggered approach. 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Ladies and Gentleman, 
Let me finally share with you some short comments on the independence of central banks 
and the connected issue of democratic accountability. For a long period of time, central bank 
independence  was  not  such  a  clear-cut  concept  as  it  seems  to  be  today.  Both  orthodox 
Keynesians  and  orthodox  Monetarists  see  no  economic  reason 
for  central  bank 
independence and many of you may know the famous dictum by Milton Friedman (1962, p. 
51) “Money is much too serious a matter to be left to the Central Bankers”. 
At the European level, central bank independence was mainly strengthened by the example 
of the Deutsche Bundesbank, and it was a key element in the Delors report in preparation for 
the  institutional  set-up  of  the  ECB.  The  importance  of  central  bank  independence  is  also 
stressed  in  the  recently  published  book  “Making  the  European  Monetary  Union”  by  our 
keynote speaker Harold James. In his book he explores the historical developments in the 
institutional architecture of Economic and Monetary Union in Europe. 
Today,  it  can  be  said  that  the  ECB  is  probably  the  most  independent  central  bank  of  the 
world because its independence is enshrined in the European Treaties, and any changes to 
these  Treaty  provisions  would  be  extremely  difficult  and  are  thus  unlikely.  In  most  other 
countries,  central  bank  independence  is  a  matter  of  national  law  –  and  as  we  have  seen, 
there may always be attempts to change such laws. 
The traditional legitimation for central bank independence is the purpose of shielding central 
banks  against  government  intervention  and  short-term  political  cycles.  And  indeed,  I  think 
that  this  is  a  very  important  element  of  central  bank  independence.  But  today  I  think  it  is 
important to see independence in a wider context: central banks are macroeconomic policy 
institutions;  they  have  to  follow  the  policy  goals  embodied  in  their  democratically  given 
mandate.  That  means  they  not  only  need  to  be  independent  from  short-term  political 
influences, but they also have to be independent from all other sorts of special interests. This 
includes  the  special  interests  of  the  banking  sector  in  an  economy.  In  the  context  of  a 
general  macroeconomic  policy,  central  banks  must  have  an  interest  in  a  well-functioning 
banking sector – and they need to fulfil efficient technical and supervisory tasks vis-à-vis the 
financial  sector  of  an  economy.  But  like  any  public  institution,  central  banks  have  to  be 
careful not to be captured by any special interest group. An independent central bank must 
act as a macroeconomic institution and not as a lobbyist for the financial sector – and I am 
sure all responsible central banks are very much aware of this. 
In this macroeconomic context, I see the specific task of an independent central bank to act 
as  an  expert  and  also  as  an  advocate  for  the  long-term  perspectives  and  interests  of  an 
economy and a society in general. The privilege of being shielded from short-term political 
cycles  should  be  used  for  serving  as  an  objective  and  long-term  oriented  institution  in  the 
field  of  economic  policy.  If  central  banks  are  able  to  build  up  and  maintain  this  kind  of 
reputation they will continue to play a clear and valuable role also in the future. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  wish  all  of  you  two  very  fruitful  days  with  lively  discussions  inside  and  outside  of  the 
presentation rooms. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
References: 
M. Friedmann, Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago 1962 
H. James, Making the European Monetary Union. Cambridge (MA) 2012 
A.P. Lerner, Funktionale Finanzpolitik und Staatsschuld (engl. Originalausgabe 1943) in E. 
Nowotny,  Hrsg.,  öffentliche  Verschuldung,  Wirtschaftswissenschaftl.  Seminar,  Bd.  8., 
Stuttgart 1979 
Statutes of the ESCB and the ECB, available at 
http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/en_statute_from_c_11520080509en02010328.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
