Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Fostering a culture of good governance and 
compliance 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the induction of new officers and general membership meeting of 
the Bankers Institute of the Philippines, Makati City, 17 July 2013. 
 The officers and members of the Bankers Institute of the Philippines under the leadership of 
President Francis Puzon, SEC Chairperson Tess Herbosa, my colleagues at the Monetary 
Board  Ignacio  Bunye  and  Armando  Suratos,  former  PM  Cesar  Virata,  friends  from  the 
banking  community,  fellow  BSPers,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good 
afternoon. 
It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  join  events  of  the  BAIPHIL,  a  partner  of  long  standing  of  the 
Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas.  In  particular, today  is  special  as  we  witnessed  a  transition  of 
leadership. 
This  gives  me  the  opportunity  to  thank  the  previous  set  of  officers  led  by  immediate  past 
president  Salvador  Serrano  for  a  job  well  done  and  to  congratulate  brand  new  BAIPHIL 
President Francis Puzon and his fellow officers on winning the confidence of their peers to 
lead them for the fiscal year 2013–2014. 
I learned that by tradition, incoming BAIPHIL leaders should have served earlier as an officer 
or in working committees. This is a good practice: it reflects a long-term commitment to serve 
BAIPHIL and the interests of the industry. 
In your case, the baton is passed on to runners who have run previous legs of the relay. This 
represents a great opportunity to leverage from the experience of the past and to apply this 
perspective to what lies ahead. 
As we all know, industry association work is never easy; but it can be most fulfilling and quite 
educational – literally and figuratively. 
BAIPHIL as a Partner for Good Governance 
Francis  and  his  team  have  chosen  as  their  underlying  theme  “Fostering  a  Culture  of 
Governance  and  Compliance”.  For  us  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  this  is  a  good 
theme. It is simple and direct. It shows clarity of vision. And it is aligned with the continuing 
thrust of the Bangko Sentral. 
Indeed,  having  a  culture  of  good  governance  and  compliance  not  only  within  the  banking 
system but across all sectors as well is what we should aspire for. 
Over  the  years,  the  Bangko  Sentral  has  been  working  on  ensuring  good  governance  and 
compliance systems in banks. We benchmark against international standards and adapt to 
emerging challenges. 
In  January  last  year,  for  instance,  the  Bangko  Sentral  adopted  revised  guidelines  under 
Circular 749 and 757 to strengthen governance standards that have been largely patterned 
after the paper on “Principles for Enhancing Corporate Governance” by the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision (BCBS). 
The BSP also adopted rules under Circular 747 to strengthen banks’ compliance systems. 
Only last May, the BSP deployed its Compliance Rating System (CRS), an assessment tool 
that  we  developed  to  comprehensively  evaluate  during  an  on-site  examination  the 
effectiveness of a supervised institution’s compliance system in mitigating business risk. 
In crafting new policies on governance and compliance, the Bangko Sentral adheres to the 
principle that good governance is the primary responsibility of the particular bank’s board of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
directors  and  its  senior  management.  We  respect  the  mandate  of  the  leadership  of  each 
bank to make strategic decisions and it is the risk choices in these decisions that differentiate 
one bank from another as a business proposition. 
Thus, when the BSP intervenes in the conduct of any bank, governance has broken down 
and remedial action is needed. For the record, we intervene in the conduct of a bank only to 
protect the broader public interest. 
It  is  critical  for  a  bank  therefore  to  embrace  a  mandate  on  good  corporate  governance. 
Having a pool of officers who can preach, practice and promote good corporate governance 
is clearly an essential facet of success. 
Two challenges to the BAIPHIL as Partner in Governance 
On this point, BAIPHIL is faced with two challenges. 
First, data culled from the BAIPHIL Secretariat show that 2,273 individuals have taken your 
governance course between August 2002 and June 2013. A quick work on the numbers tells 
us that it comes out to about 17 course participants per month or a little over 200 on average 
every year. 
I believe these numbers can be significantly improved and the new board may want to look 
into this as a key result area. In an industry of over 140,000 officers and staff, we need to find 
ways  to  ensure  that  good  governance  is  not  only  a  nice-to-have  training  but  a  must-have 
perspective among bankers. 
The  governance  perspective  that  we  seek  must  be  fundamentally  entrenched  as  a  core 
competency  of  any  banker.  Banking 
is  about  mobilizing  other  people’s  savings. 
Intermediating these funds to borrowers... only to be faced with collection issues gives rise to 
conflicted interests. We can point to internal checks and balances but what better mitigant is 
there than practitioners who shun unacceptable behavior and practices. 
In my view, developing a broad and deep pool of practitioners should mean more than the 
200 individuals completing governance courses a year. Not only is this a game of numbers 
for an industry that is growing both in size and complexity, governance standards themselves 
are central to the on-going reforms of global best practices. Thus, not only should there be 
many  more  advocates  of  good  governance,  there  is  much  to  re-learn  of  governance 
standards in the first place. 
The second challenge is the natural consequence of the first. If we are to develop training 
programs for corporate governance in banking, there must be a way to evaluate whether the 
training is itself an “effective” intervention. 
Is the program content reflective of the modified global norms? Is the training itself making a 
difference? 
These questions must be addressed. The metric, in our view, is properly developed at the 
bank-level  since  it  is  bank  leaders  who  have  the  appropriate  perspective  of  the  extent  to 
which conflicts of interest arise and how these are resolved. Banks also possess the needed 
information to directly assess progress. 
Governance and Consumer Protection 
As an intermediary, you serve the interests of the saving and investing public as much as 
you look to meet the needs of those borrowing and raising funds. You provide great service 
as  you  are  able to regularly  do  as  an  institution what  individuals  and  entities  will  find  very 
costly to do on their own. 
In an ideal world, this symbiotic relationship will generate benefits mutually agreeable to all 
parties. Left to its own, however, the subsequent results may not always be positive. 
As defined in academic literature and repeatedly confirmed in practice, finance in general is 
fraught with conflicts of interest. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This is the reason why good governance and the general ambit of consumer protection must 
be  inherently  intertwined.  The  ultimate  measure  of  success  cannot  be  simply  summarized 
either by a Capital Adequacy Ratio that is above regulatory norms or by the extent of profits 
banking operations generate. 
Instead, banking must be about addressing the financial needs of various stakeholders. Not 
only are we talking about making the system more inclusive, we need to step up to protect 
the financial consumer, from improved awareness to redress mechanisms. 
The  mantra  of  good  corporate  governance  therefore  cannot  be  just  about  the  bank  or  its 
personnel.  It  has  to  go  beyond  compliance  with  regulatory  directives.  It  must  consider  fair 
and acceptable behavior, among others, to those who are more vulnerable, even if it means 
accruing  less  to  the  bottom-line.  This  is  the  very  essence  of  why  banking  is  imbued  with 
public interest. 
In  this  connection,  the  Bangko  Sentral  is  preparing  to  release  a  Consumer  Protection 
Framework  (CPF)  that  is  applicable  to  its  covered  institutions.  Built  upon  the  pillars  of 
consumer  empowerment,  market  conduct  and  collective  responsibility,  the  governance 
standards put into practice by each BSP-covered institution will play a central role within the 
CPF. 
The  introduction  of the CPF  is  a  milestone for us.  Consumer  protection  is  now  part of  the 
core  practices  for  which  the  BSP  exercises  supervision  and  regulation.  In  this  initiative,  I 
expect that BAIPHIL will again be one of our key partners. 
What Lies Ahead: A Challenge to BAIPHIL 
Ladies and gentlemen, we can always talk of governance at length. The challenge, however, 
is not in extolling the virtues of good corporate governance. Rather, it is what happens after 
THAT is the key challenge. 
If a “culture of good governance” is meant to define our set of values, beliefs and practices 
on  governance,  then  we  are  clearly  along  the  proper  path. This  cannot  be  delineating  the 
shades of grey between “acceptable” and “unacceptable”. When it involves the interests of 
several stakeholders, we need to be categorical about what is “right” and “wrong”. 
The  challenge  is  measuring  how  far  we  moved  forward.  I  am  not  referring  to  specific 
instances of compliance or breaches. What we want to achieve is having that comfort that 
values, beliefs and practices are fully in place and updated even when no one is looking. 
Certainly, it is this last part that is at the core of the issue. 
BAIPHIL  has  always  been  the  advocate  of  training  and  capacity  building.  The  industry 
benefits from your course offerings and capacity building programs. But BAIPHIL’s mandate 
cannot  and  should  not  stop  when  the  courses  end  or  when  we  choose  to  mount  a  new 
training. 
Is BAIPHIL up to this critical task? Abangan! 
Actually, given your track record, I trust that BAIPHIL will find new and creative solutions to 
meet these challenges. 
Finally, I thank and commend BAIPHIL for its continuing commitment to support the Bangko 
Sentral’s financial education program for parents and teachers in our public schools. This is a 
parallel  program  that  complements  the  lessons  on  saving,  money  management  and 
entrepreneurship  being  taught  in  public  elementary  schools  under  a  joint  program  of  the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and the Department of Education. 
As the members of your education committee and other BAIPHIL volunteers can attest, the 
learnings  on  personal  finance  are  deeply  appreciated  by  teachers  and  parents,  some  of 
whom are moved to tears when they share what they go through to make both ends meet. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
It means a lot to them that BAIPHIL and the Bangko Sentral spend time with them to help 
improve their lives. Think about it. Education Secretary Brother Armin Luistro has learned of 
our joint project and is interested in scaling it up to help teachers get out of debt and handle 
their finances properly. 
I remember that this BSP-BAIPHIL financial education program has been in place under four 
consecutive  BAIPHIL  presidents.  It  started  with  Susan  Uranza-Alcala  who  signed  a  MOA 
with  the  Bangko  Sentral  in  2009  under  the  Banking  on  Your  Future  Program  which  was 
launched  when  we  celebrated  60  years  of  central  banking  in  the  Philippines.  BAIPHIL 
continued  the  program  under  Emmanuel  Barcena,  Agnes  Brillante-Santos  and  Salvador 
Serrano.  I  have  been  informed  Francis  has  been  joining  the  group  that  goes  to  public 
schools. I am optimistic therefore that Francis and his board will continue this program that is 
already being requested in elementary schools and by some NGOs. 
Ladies and gentlemen of BAIPHIL. You are used to training bankers. Now, you are reaching 
out to the underbanked and the unbanked. Truly, I can say that BAIPHIL is aligned with the 
Bangko  Sentral’s  goal  of  promoting  good  governance  and  the  development  of  a  financial 
system that is inclusive and able to sustain inclusive growth. 
Mabuhay ang BAIPHIL! 
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
