William C Dudley: The national and regional economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at Queens College, Flushing, New York, 18 November 2013. 
 Good afternoon. It is always a pleasure to speak with the different communities that make up 
our region, and it is especially gratifying to have the opportunity to speak with you, our future 
leaders. So thank you for inviting me. 
I am especially pleased to be here at CUNY (City University of New York) Queens College, 
given  the  relationship  that  we  have  developed  with  CUNY  through  our  educational  and 
regional  outreach.  This  academic  year  we  are  hosting,  at  the  Bank,  a  Queens  College 
student participating in the CUNY Service Corps which is a program to provide students with 
work experiences in regional and economic outreach. We also collaborated with CUNY for 
this year’s College Fed Challenge, our yearly competition where teams of students from area 
universities  take  on  the  roles  of  the  members  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
(FOMC) and debate the appropriate next step for U.S. monetary policy. A number of CUNY 
schools  competed  and  professors  served  as  judges,  including  your  own  Professor  Thom 
Thurston. 
My meeting with you today is part of our continuing efforts to understand what is going on at 
the grassroots level of our economy and to share what we are seeing. Earlier today, I met 
with  a  number  of  Queens  business  leaders,  and  the  leadership  of  HANAC,  the  Hellenic 
American  Action  Committee.  Following  this  visit  to  Queens  College,  I’m  headed  to  the 
Queens  Chamber  of  Commerce  to  meet  with  others  in  the  business  community. 
Subsequently, I’ll tour the manufacturing floor of Steinway & Sons piano factory. 
The agenda for these visits is always packed, but that’s part of the point – to meet with a 
diverse array of people in order to get a comprehensive picture of economic conditions and 
issues in the regions we serve and a fuller understanding of the major concerns. This is our 
second trip to the Borough of Queens in the past few years and recent trips have also taken 
us throughout our District, to Upstate New York, Northern New Jersey, Long Island, Fairfield 
County, Staten Island, Brooklyn and the Bronx. 
These  outreach  trips  complement  the  ongoing  efforts  of  the  New  York  Fed  to  assess 
conditions  in  our  region,  which  I  will  discuss  shortly.  Among  our  activities,  we  monitor 
economic performance on a monthly basis, we tap into the insights of the members of our 
Small  Business  and  Agriculture  Advisory  Council  and  Upstate  Advisory  Board,  we  have 
constructed  a  consumer  credit  panel  that  allows  us  to  better  understand  the  financial 
condition  of  homeowners  and  students,  we  have  developed  a  “Regional  Mortgage 
Conditions” dataset and other housing tools at the county and zip code level to ensure that 
policymakers  and  counselors  are  well  informed,  and  we  conduct  a  biannual  poll  of  small 
businesses  to  understand  their  credit  needs  and  availability.  Interestingly,  our  most  recent 
poll,  released  in  May  of  this  year,  shows  improvements  in  small  businesses’  ability  to  get 
credit throughout the region, though it remains a major growth challenge for these types of 
firms. 
As you can see, we have a lot to keep us engaged with the region. Much of this information 
can be found on our website, which I would invite you to visit and use as a resource. 
Now, I’d like to review recent developments in the local and national economies, and at the 
end of my talk will be happy to answer any questions you have. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Regional economic conditions 
Starting  with  the  area’s economy,  one  of the greatest  challenges  in  the  City  over  the  past 
year has been the massive disruption and destruction caused by Superstorm Sandy. While 
areas of the New York City metropolitan region were hard hit by the storm, the devastation 
was particularly severe along the waterfronts of Queens – and in particular in Far Rockaway. 
We saw and heard about the devastation of the storm first-hand from many of those affected, 
through a series of support clinics that we held in the storm’s immediate aftermath, as well as 
from many of our own employees who lived in some of the hardest hit areas. 
The good news is that a little more than one-year later there has been a significant rebound 
in employment and economic activity across the five boroughs. New York City has continued 
to  see  pretty  solid  job  creation  through  this  past  summer,  and,  in  stark  contrast  with  past 
economic  expansions,  this  is  happening  without  any  direct  contribution  from  the  securities 
industry – or, more colloquially, Wall Street. So far this year, the city’s job gains have been 
broad-based, led by strong growth in industries such as education and health, advertising, 
computer  services,  leisure  and  hospitality,  wholesale  and  retail  trade,  and,  especially, 
construction. 
Of  course,  while  it  is  reassuring  that most  of the  city  has  bounced  back  strongly from this 
historic natural disaster, it is important to remember that the hardest hit communities, and the 
residents  and  businesses  there,  who  lost  so  much,  are  still  struggling  to  recover.  Many  of 
those communities are right here in Queens: the whole Rockaway peninsula – from Breezy 
Point  to  Arverne  –  was  completely  flooded,  as  were  neighborhoods  like  Howard  Beach, 
Springfield Gardens, Lindenwood, and even parts of Flushing, Long Island City, Astoria and 
Maspeth.  Still,  Queens  as  a  whole  showed  strong  resilience  –  employment  bounced  back 
from Sandy fairly quickly, and as of early 2013 it had already surpassed its pre-Sandy level. 
While many residents here commute to work in other boroughs, primarily Manhattan, Queens 
has  a  formidable  industrial  base  of  its  own.  Jobs  are  prevalent  in  industries  ranging  from 
medical care to construction, not to mention printing and a number of other manufacturing 
industries  that  benefit  from  being  in  a  large  population  center.  But  Queens’  most 
concentrated industry is transportation – specifically air transportation which employs about 
27,000 workers, about five percent of Queens’ jobs. 
Education is another key industry in Queens and the city as a whole. And it is not just a job 
creator. The investment in human capital that education entails makes it a socially desirable 
activity.  There  is  considerable  value  from  a  college  education  both  to  the  person  that  has 
been educated and to society as a whole. The Great Recession and sluggish recovery that 
has followed has made it difficult for people to find jobs, and I’m sure you may be wondering 
about whether going to college will turn out to be a good investment, especially if faced with 
the burden of student debt, something we track quite closely. 
Let me reassure you, the benefits of a college degree remain significant. Research we have 
undertaken at the New York Fed shows that young people with a college degree are more 
likely  to  have  a  job  and  they  tend  to  earn  considerably  higher  wages  than  those  without 
degrees – and this is true even for those who may be underemployed initially when they first 
enter the labor market after graduation. Although the labor market has been challenging for 
college graduates in recent years, I am confident that most will find work and transition into 
higher-skilled jobs as they gain experience and as the labor market improves. 
Now, I’d like to turn my attention to recent developments in the national economy. 
National economic conditions 
Let  me  begin  by  taking  stock  of  where  we  are  at  the  moment.  Then  I  will  address  my 
expectations for the performance of the economy in 2014 and 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Since the end of what is now called the Great Recession in mid-2009, the U.S. economy has 
experienced 17 consecutive calendar quarters of positive growth of real GDP. However, the 
compound annual rate of growth over that period has only been around 2 ¼ percent, close to 
prevailing  estimates  of  the  economy’s  potential  growth  rate.  Thus,  we  have  made  limited 
progress in closing the substantial output gap that was created during the recession. 
A similar conclusion is drawn from an assessment of labor market conditions. Although the 
unemployment  rate  has  declined  by  about  2  ¾  percentage  points  since  peaking  at 
10 percent  in  October  of  2009,  a  significant  portion  of  that  decline  reflects  the  substantial 
decline of the labor force participation rate over that period. It should also be noted that since 
the  previous  business  cycle  peak  at  the  end  of  2007,  the  decline  of  the  labor  force 
participation rate has been more than accounted for by a decline in participation of people in 
the prime working age of 25 to 54. 
The inflation data are also consistent with this overall picture of an economy operating well 
below  its  full  potential.  Total  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption 
expenditures (PCE) deflator, has been quite volatile in recent years due to sharp fluctuations 
in energy prices. Core inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy components and 
thereby  may  be  a  better  guide  as  to  underlying inflation,  slowed  from  around  2  percent  in 
early  2012  to  just  above  1  percent  in  mid-2013.  In  recent  months  it  has  shown  signs  of 
stabilizing, but remains well below the FOMC’s expressed goal of 2 percent for total inflation. 
Fortunately,  inflation  expectations  remain  relatively  stable  at  levels  somewhat  above  the 
current inflation rate. This stability should help prevent an undesirable further drop in inflation 
relative to our 2 percent objective. 
That  said,  there  are  some  nascent  signs  that  the  economy  may  be  doing  better.  For 
example,  based  on  the  first  estimate,  which  is  subject  to  revision,  real  (gross  domestic 
product) GDP increased at a 2.8 percent annual rate in the third quarter of 2013, above the 
trend of the past four years. And the most recent payroll employment report showed a pickup 
in  the  monthly  pace  of  job  gains.  The  3-month  moving  average  rose  back  above  a 
200,000 pace after slowing to about 150,000 as of July of this year. I hope that this marks a 
turning point for the economy. 
But before we rush to this conclusion a few more cautionary comments are appropriate. With 
respect to GDP growth, it turns out that inventory investment contributed ¾ of a percentage 
point  to  that  overall  growth  rate.  Thus,  because  this  impetus  from  inventories  will  likely 
reverse this quarter, the real GDP growth rate is likely to slow to around a 2 percent annual 
rate  or  a  bit  less  in  the fourth  quarter. With  respect  to  payroll  employment,  we  have  seen 
such  bursts  in  payroll  growth  before  over  the  past  few  years  and  have  been  disappointed 
when the pickups proved temporary and did not lead to a rise in the overall growth rate. 
But, I have to admit that I am getting more hopeful. Not only do we have some better data in 
hand, but also the fiscal drag, which has been holding the economy back, is likely to abate 
considerably over the next few years at the same time that the fundamental underpinnings of 
the economy are improving. 
The first thing to note is that federal fiscal policy in 2013 has been unusually contractionary. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  year  the  payroll  tax  cut  expired  while  tax  rates  on  higher  income 
households  were  raised,  a  series  of  taxes  associated  with  the  Affordable  Care  Act  took 
effect,  and  spending  was  reduced  due  to  the  sequester  and  the  gradual  winding  down  of 
foreign  military  operations.  According  to  the  Congressional  Budget  Office,  the  cyclically-
adjusted or full-employment budget balance increased by roughly 1 ¾ percentage points of 
GDP in fiscal year 2013. Over the past 50 years there have been only two other episodes of 
fiscal  contraction  of  this  order  of  magnitude,  and  both  of  those  occurred  when  the 
unemployment rate was substantially lower than it has been of late. Under current law, the 
amount of federal fiscal restraint will decline in 2014 and then decline further in 2015. At the 
same  time,  the  sustained  contraction  in  spending  and  employment  by  state  and  local 
governments appears to be over. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The fact that the U.S. economy has continued to grow at around a 2 percent pace in 2013 
despite this quite intense fiscal restraint provides evidence to the second key point, which is 
that the private sector of the economy has largely completed its healing process and is now 
poised to ramp up its level of activity. Key measures of household leverage have declined 
and are now near the lowest levels they have been in  well over a decade. Household net 
worth, expressed as a percent of disposable income, has increased back to its average of 
the previous decade, reflecting rising equity and home prices and declining debt. Recently, 
banks  have  eased  credit  standards  somewhat  after  a  prolonged  period  of  tightness.  As  a 
result,  we  are  now  experiencing  a fairly  typical  cyclical  recovery  of  consumer  spending  on 
durable  goods.  For  example,  sales  of  light-weight  motor  vehicles  have  increased  steadily 
over the past four years, reaching an annual rate of 15.7 million in the third quarter of 2013, 
though sales in September and October have been somewhat below that average. 
Similarly, after five years in which housing production was well below what is consistent with 
underlying demographic trends and the replacement demand for houses, it now appears that 
we have worked off the excess supply of housing built up during the boom years of the last 
decade. Housing market activity has begun to recover, and a widely followed national home 
price  index  is  up  12  percent  over  the  12 months  ending  in  September.1  Anecdotal  reports 
suggest  that  this  higher-than-expected  increase  in  home  prices  is  due  to  a  relatively  low 
number  of  homes  for  sale.  Due  to  this  shortness  of  supply,  there  is  reason  to  expect 
increases in starts going forward. 
Yet  another  bright  spot  on  the  horizon  is  the  fact  that  growth  prospects  among  our  major 
trading  partners  have  improved  following  a  few  years  of  lackluster  performance  which 
induced a sharp slowing of growth of U.S. exports. In particular, the euro area appears to 
have emerged from a protracted recession and is experiencing modest but positive growth. 
To summarize, while growth in 2013 has been disappointing, I believe a good case can be 
made that the pace of growth will pick up some in 2014 and then somewhat more in 2015. 
The private sector of the economy should continue to heal, while the amount of fiscal drag 
should  subside.  Despite  near-term  concerns,  growth  prospects  among  our  major  trading 
partners  will  improve  further  next  year.  This  combination  of  events  is  likely  to  create  an 
environment  in  which  business  investment  spending  will  strengthen.  As  growth  picks  up,  I 
expect to see more substantial improvement in labor market conditions and a gradual updrift 
in inflation back towards the FOMC’s target rate. 
However, the notion that the economy will grow more swiftly remains a forecast rather than a 
reality at this point. As is always the case, there is substantial uncertainty surrounding this 
forecast. Moreover, there is always the possibility of some unforeseen shock. Thus, we will 
continue  to  monitor  U.S.  and  global  economic  conditions  very  carefully  and  will  adjust  our 
views on the likely path for growth, inflation and the unemployment rate accordingly. 
Thank you for your kind attention and I will now be happy to take some questions. 
                                                
1   Based on the CoreLogic home price index including distressed sales. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
