William C Dudley: Ending too big to fail 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Global  Economic  Policy  Forum,  New  York  City, 
7 November 2013. 
 It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today. My remarks are going to 
focus on what is called the “too big to fail” problem. As you are aware, this problem arises 
when the failure of a large, complex financial institution threatens to cause such significant 
disruption to the financial system and the economy that these potential costs are judged as 
too severe to bear, leading to government intervention to prevent the failure. As a result, the 
firm,  by  being  too  big  to  fail,  gains  an  implicit  guarantee  at  the  taxpayers’  expense  that  it 
does not have to pay for. I think there is broad agreement that such a regime is unacceptable 
in several respects. The first problem is that it creates an uneven playing field between large 
and  small  financial  firms,  with  larger  financial  firms  gaining  a  funding  advantage  from  the 
perception  that  they  may  be  too  big  to  fail.  The  second  problem  is  that  this  funding 
advantage  creates  incentives  for  financial  firms  to  become  bigger  and  more  complex.  The 
third problem is that there is a positive feedback loop. As the banking system becomes more 
concentrated and complex, that just increases the financial stability risks, making the too big 
to fail problem even more acute.  
So what should we do about it? Today, I will evaluate three broad sets of choices: 1) Building 
a credible resolution regime and more resiliency in the financial system that together reduce 
the systemic costs of failure sufficiently so that large, complex firms can be allowed to fail; 
2) taking steps, such as tougher prudential standards, that further reduce the probability of 
failure of such firms; and 3) breaking up the too big to fail firms so that no firm is so large that 
its failure would threaten financial stability in the first place.  
To  summarize,  I  conclude  that  building  a  credible  resolution  regime  is  necessary  but  not 
sufficient.  Even  if  the  single-point  of  entry  resolution  framework  proposed  by  the  Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  which  I  very  much  endorse,  is  fully  perfected,  the 
costs of resolution for the largest systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) will still 
be significant. I will argue that at least as much effort should be made to lower the risk of 
failure  of  such  large,  complex  firms.  Not  only  does  this  include  higher  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements,  which  we  are  implementing,  but  also  building  incentives  into  the  system  so 
that firm managements will act more forcefully and much earlier to put their firms on more 
solid ground before they encounter greater difficulties.  
Finally, I am not yet convinced that breaking up large, complex firms is the right approach. In 
particular,  these  firms  presumably  exist,  in  large  part,  because  there  are  scale  or  network 
effects that allow these firms to offer certain types of services that have value to their global 
clients. These benefits might be lost or diminished if such firms were broken up. In addition, 
the costs incurred in breaking up such firms need to be considered. Finally, the breakup of 
such firms would not necessarily result in a significant reduction in overall systemic risk if the 
resulting component firms were still, collectively, systemic.  
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System.  
Defining the too big to fail problem 
The root cause of the too big to fail problem is the fact that the failure of a large, complex 
financial  firm  is  likely  to  generate  significant,  undesirable  externalities.  These  include 
disruption to the ability of the financial system to provide credit and other essential financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
services to households and businesses. When this happens, not only is the financial sector 
adversely affected, but its troubles spill over and harm the real economy.  
Although  there  are  negative  externalities  associated  with  the  failure  of  any  financial  firm, 
these externalities are disproportionately more damaging in the case of large, complex and 
interconnected  firms.  However,  despite  the  label,  too  big  to  fail,  the  magnitude  of  these 
externalities does not depend simply on size. The extent of the externalities also depends on 
the particular mix of business activities and the degree of interconnectedness with the rest of 
the  financial  industry.  One  significant  element  is  the  importance  of  the  services  the  firm 
provides to the broader financial system and the economy, as well as the ease with which its 
customers  can  move  their  business  to  other  providers.  Another  element  is  the  extent  to 
which  the  firm’s  structure  and  activities  create  the  potential  for  contagion  –  that  is,  the 
potential that a problem at one firm could spread more broadly through the financial system. 
Contagion might occur along several different pathways, including the direct losses imposed 
by failure on the firm’s counterparties, the impact of the failure on the asset prices held by 
other  leveraged  financial  institutions,  or  a  loss  of  confidence  spreading  to  other  firms  with 
similar business models.  
The presence of large negative externalities creates a dilemma for policymakers when such 
firms are in danger of failing, particularly at a time when the wider financial system is also 
under  stress.  At  that  point  in  time,  the  expected  costs  to  society  of  failure  are  very  large 
compared to the short-run costs from providing the extraordinary liquidity support, capital, or 
other emergency assistance necessary to prevent catastrophic failure.  
The  market’s  belief  that  a  too  big  to  fail  firm  is  more  likely  to  be  rescued  in  the  event  of 
distress  than  other  firms  weakens  the  degree  of  market  discipline  exerted  by  capital 
providers  and  counterparties.  Since  the  government  does  not  charge  for  this  implicit 
guarantee, this reduces the firm’s cost of funds and incents the firm to take more risk than 
would be the case if there were no prospect of rescue and funding costs were higher. The 
fact that firms deemed by the market to be too big to fail enjoy an artificial subsidy in the form 
of  lower  funding  costs distorts  competition  to  the  detriment  of  smaller,  less  complex  firms. 
This  advantage,  in  turn,  creates  an  unfortunate  incentive  for  firms  to  get  even  larger  and 
more complex. As a result, the funding benefit of being seen to be too big to fail causes the 
financial system to become skewed toward larger and more complex firms in ways that are 
unrelated to true economies of scale and scope.  
Thus,  the  too  big  to  fail  problem  consists  of  two  intertwined  issues.  The  first  is  that  the 
negative consequences to the financial system and to the economy from failure for a given 
set  of  firms  are  unacceptably  high.  This  is  the  financial  stability  risk.  The  second  is  that 
anticipated interventions to prevent catastrophic failure create an uneven playing field. Not 
only  is  this  outcome  unacceptable  from  an  equity  or  fairness  perspective,  but  it  is  also 
undesirable because it can increase the incentives for firms to become even bigger and more 
complex. Over time, this may lead to a greater number of systemically important firms and 
expose the financial system to greater systemic risk.  
This  suggests  that  we  need  to  maintain  our  focus  on  two  goals:  (1)  Making  the  financial 
system  more  stable  by  reducing  the  degree  of  disruption  when  failures  occur  –  that  is, 
shrinking the size of the externalities – and by lowering the risk of failure in the first place, 
and (2) eliminating the artificial advantages that large, complex firms might have that create 
incentives for them to become bigger and more complex. 
One  more  point  deserves  emphasis.  Only  eliminating  the  competitive  advantage  of  large, 
complex firms from the too big to fail subsidy will not necessarily make the financial system 
more stable. For example, consider a regime in which interventions to prevent the failure of 
large, systemically important firms were impossible. In that case, the funding advantage that 
comes from being perceived as too big to fail would be eliminated because such firms could 
fail putting the firm’s equity and debt holders at risk. But, this would not be a good outcome 
from  a  financial  stability  perspective  because  the  failure  of  such  firms  could  still  be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
catastrophic  for  the  financial  system  and  the  economy.  Thus,  we  need  to  solve  the 
“fairness/subsidy” issue, but do so in a way that ensures that the resulting regime is more 
stable, resilient and robust.  
The fairness/subsidy issue  
There is considerable debate about the size of the funding advantage of large banks that is 
due  to  too  big  to  fail  and  how  much  this  funding  advantage  creates  incentives  to  become 
larger  and  more  complex.  One  reason  is  that  it  is  difficult  to  measure  the  size  of  these 
effects. For example, consider funding costs. We can document that larger banks’ unsecured 
debt funding costs tend to be lower than those for smaller banks. But the funding costs for 
larger firms across a broad range of industries also tend to be lower than for smaller firms in 
the same industries. This reflects, in part, the fact that the debt issues of larger firms tend to 
be  more  sizeable  and  more  liquid.  In  addition,  larger  firms  may  be  more  diversified  on 
average and thus less prone to failure, everything else equal.  
The measurement challenge, then, is to identify what portion of the lower funding costs at the 
largest financial firms, after accounting for these other factors, is due to a perception among 
investors that such firms are too big to fail.  
Despite these measurement difficulties, most of the evidence is consistent with a too big to 
fail  funding  advantage  in  banking.  First,  during  the  financial  crisis,  we  observed  that  the 
funding cost advantage of the larger banks grew substantially relative to the smaller banks as 
the crisis became more acute. This is noteworthy because if the funding cost advantage is 
due  to  a  too  big  to  fail  premium,  then  that  premium  should  rise  when  the  economic 
environment worsens and the potential risk of failure increases. Of course, the Dodd-Frank 
Act has changed the landscape.  
Second,  ongoing  research  by  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  staff  shows  that  the 
funding advantage of large versus small banks is higher than the funding advantage for large 
versus  small  non-bank  financial  firms  and  non-financial  firms  when  other  factors  are  held 
constant.  
Third, the major rating agencies add an uplift to their credit ratings for the largest banks due 
to the prospect of government support. While it is possible that the rating agencies are wrong 
in their assessment, what matters is perception. If investors share this view or simply follow 
the ratings, then this should create a too big to fail funding advantage.  
With respect to the second consequence of the subsidy – the incentive for management to 
make their firms larger and more complex so as to be perceived as too big to fail and thus 
able to take advantage of any funding subsidy – this is harder to evaluate. On one hand, this 
is  not  the  only  incentive  management  may  have  to  get  bigger.  For  example,  the  fact  that 
chief  executive  officer  compensation  and  prestige  are  related  to  size  may  be  just  as 
important. On the other, this still is a problem because it works to distort the structure of the 
financial system and makes – by encouraging the proliferation of large, complex firms – the 
too big to fail problem worse.  
I conclude that while the funding advantage issue is very relevant to the debate on too big to 
fail, it may not be the most important issue. To me, the unacceptable risk posed to financial 
stability from the failure of large, systemic firms is at least as important.  
Solving too big to fail  
As  I  see  it,  there  are  two  broad  ways  of  solving  the  too  big  to  fail  problem.  The  first  is  to 
create a more robust financial system so that the failure of a large, systemically important 
financial firm does not threaten to take down the rest of the financial system. In this case, the 
authorities  can  let  the  troubled  firm  fail.  Because  failure  is  now  credible,  this  should  also 
eliminate the funding advantage from being perceived as too big to fail.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  second  is  to  take steps  to  prevent  the  failure  of  such  large,  complex  firms  in  the  first 
place. This also reduces any funding advantage for firms perceived as being too big to fail, 
but without  some of the negative financial stability consequences associated with failure. I 
view these two strands as complements rather than substitutes, with more work necessary 
on both.  
Turning  first  to  the  issue  of  reducing  the  consequences  of  failure,  there  are  numerous 
elements  of  this  effort  underway.  Some  are  focused  on  making  the  financial  market 
infrastructure  more  robust  so  that  when  a  failure  occurs  the  shock  is  dampened,  not 
amplified and propagated throughout the financial system. For example, considerable effort 
has  been  made  to  create  incentives  for  firms  to  standardize  over-the-counter  derivative 
trades and to clear those trades through central counterparties. Similarly, extensive work has 
been undertaken by the Federal Reserve and the major clearing banks to make the tri-party 
repo  system  more  stable.  Money  market  mutual  fund  reform  is  also  part  of  this  ongoing 
effort.  
Other initiatives are focused on reducing the financial stability consequences from the failure 
of a systemically important financial firm. The major initiative here is the single point of entry 
framework for resolution proposed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Under this 
framework, if a financial firm is to be resolved under Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act, the FDIC 
will  place  the  top  tier  bank  holding  company  into  receivership  and  its  assets  will  be 
transferred to a bridge holding company. The equity holders will be wiped out and sufficient 
long-term unsecured debt will be converted into equity in the new bridge company to cover 
any  remaining  losses  and  to  ensure  that  the  new  entity  is  well  capitalized  and  deemed 
creditworthy.  Subsidiaries  would  continue  to  operate,  which  should  limit  the  incentives  for 
customers  to  run.  By  assigning  losses  to  shareholders  and  unsecured  creditors  of  the 
holding company and transferring sound operating subsidiaries to a new solvent entity, such 
a “top-down” resolution strategy should ensure continuity with respect to any critical services 
performed by the firm’s subsidiaries and this should help limit the magnitude of any negative 
externalities.  
I very much endorse the FDIC’s single point of entry framework for resolution. I think it is the 
best plan for implementing Title II given the complexity and scope of large, global financial 
institutions, and I also think it is well suited to the U.S. bank holding company framework. For 
this regime to work properly there needs to be a sufficient amount of debt outstanding at the 
parent company that can be converted by the FDIC into equity to ensure that the new bridge 
company  will  be  demonstrably  well-capitalized.  We  don’t  yet  have  a  long-term  debt 
requirement – this is an area where we are still working out the details. My own view is that a 
holding  company  needs  a  substantial  amount  of  long-term  debt  to  ensure  that  the  newly 
created bridge company will be considered fully viable by its counterparties.  
While the Title II single-point-of-entry strategy holds tremendous promise, there are important 
implementation issues that still need to be worked out. Implementing the resolution regime 
on a cross-border basis remains one of the most significant challenges. In this regard, I am 
worried about two current shortcomings:  
 
The reach of Title II’s one-day stay on the close out of qualified financial contracts is 
incomplete and  does  not  extend  to  contracts  governed  by  non-U.S.  law  with  non-
U.S. counterparties.  
The  placement  of  the  parent  company  into  receivership  may  be  treated  by  these 
counterparties as an event of default due to the presence of a parent guarantee or 
other cross-default provisions triggered by the parent-level insolvency.  
 Unless  market  participants  make  the  appropriate  contractual  changes  that  will  ensure  that 
the placement of the parent company into Title II will not trigger the close-out provisions of 
over-the-counter derivatives and other qualified financial contracts that are outside the reach 
of  Title  II’s U.S.  application,  foreign  counterparties  to  a  SIFI  will  tend  to  exercise  this  right 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
whenever  it  is  in  their  individual  economic  interest  to  do  so.  This  would  create  significant 
difficulties.  Such  actions  could  greatly  complicate  the  operations  of  the  firm  during  a  time 
when  it  is  already  under  considerable  stress  and  could  propagate  stress  more  broadly  in 
financial markets.  
There are two main courses of action for addressing this concern, and they are not mutually 
exclusive. First, existing derivative contracts need to be amended and future contracts need 
to provide that the parent’s entry into the Title II proceeding does not trigger the close out 
option. Second, legal changes need to be implemented abroad so that the one-day stay that 
applies  to  qualified  financial  contracts  governed  by  U.S.  law  is  enforceable  against  those 
contracts governed by foreign law. Only by making these changes can we avoid the potential 
for  disruptive  close  outs.  I  strongly  encourage  the  ongoing  efforts  to  address  this  critical 
issue.  
A second issue with respect to Title II resolution on a cross-border basis is that we cannot be 
certain how foreign authorities will react when the parent holding company is put into the Title 
II proceeding. While the U.S. authorities have been in discussion with our colleagues abroad 
to  enable 
for  a  smooth  cross-border  resolution  process, 
uncertainties  remain  regarding  the  circumstances  under  which  host  authorities  may  either 
choose  to  take  or  be  required  to  take  actions  such  as  unilateral  “ring-fencing”  that  might 
disrupt the implementation of the single point of entry approach. Thus, we need to continue 
to  work  with  foreign  regulators  to  iron  out  any  issues  ahead  of  time  to  remove  these 
uncertainties  so  that  the  resolution  regime  will  work  well  for  global,  systemically  important 
firms.  
Another issue with respect to the Title II resolution regime is the residual uncertainty about 
whether a particular firm in fact would go through a Title II resolution. Recall that under the 
Dodd-Frank  Act,  Title  II  is  not  the  default  approach  for  dealing  with  the  failure  of  a  large 
complex firm. For a firm to go through Title II, a determination must first be made that the 
failure  of  the  firm  and  its  resolution  would  have  serious  adverse  effects  on  U.S.  financial 
stability  under  the  insolvency  law  that  would  otherwise  apply.  This  means  that  market 
participants will not know for certain which path U.S. authorities will ultimately take until this 
determination is made – allowing resolution under ordinary insolvency law, as contemplated 
under Title I, versus initiating a Title II resolution. Faced with this uncertainty, investors in the 
short-term  obligations  that  would  likely  be  protected  only  under  the  Title  II  regime  could 
decide to run.  
the  coordination  needed 
Reducing the likelihood of failure  
Even  with  an  appropriate  resolution  process  in  place  that  ends  too  big  to  fail,  the 
consequences  of  failure  will  still  be  messy.  Also,  market  discipline  is  only  effective  to  the 
extent that those investors with their funds at risk perform the appropriate due diligence on 
an  ongoing basis.  This suggests  that  a  resolution  regime  by  itself  is  not  sufficient.  Further 
efforts should also be made to reduce the probability of a default.  
A number of steps have already been taken along these lines that further reduce default risk. 
The Basel III framework significantly raises both the quantity and quality of capital required of 
internationally  active  bank  holding  companies.  This  risk-weighted  capital  standard  is  also 
being  augmented  by  a  higher  leverage  ratio  requirement.  The  Basel  framework  will  also 
require SIFIs to hold additional capital due to their complexity (more commonly referred to as 
the  SIFI  surcharge).  As  a  result,  the  capital  buffer  for  the  more  systemic  firms  should  be 
higher based on size, complexity, interconnectedness, global exposure and substitutability, 
so that their expected probability of failure will be lower than for less systemic firms.1  
                                                 
1   New liquidity requirements such as the liquidity coverage ratio also work to reduce the risk of failure by giving 
firm management more time to address problems before a funding squeeze becomes acute. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The SIFI surcharge acts as a penalty for size and complexity, leaning against any remaining 
funding  cost  advantage  that  might  remain  for  a  large  complex  firm  even  after  a  viable 
resolution regime is in place. This should further level the playing field for smaller firms and 
reduce the incentive to become systemically important in the first place. However, I expect 
that it will take considerable time for the surcharge to have a meaningful impact on size and 
complexity.  
We also need to create new mechanisms and incentives for bank management to act early, 
well  before  resolution  becomes  necessary.  Early  intervention  is  likely  to  be  much  more 
successful  in  preventing  failure  as  compared  to  last-ditch  efforts.  These  actions  can  take 
many  forms  –  cutting  capital  distributions  earlier,  raising  new  capital  faster,  restructuring 
businesses  sooner,  and  reorganizing  senior  management  and  boards  of  directors  more 
radically when the firm is not performing well.  
In this regard, the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) should bolster the 
incentives  for  early  action.  The  CCAR  is  a  significant  supervisory  innovation  intended  to 
ensure  that  large,  complex  bank  holding  companies  have  robust  internal  capital  planning 
processes and sufficient capital to withstand stressed economic conditions and to continue to 
be viable financial intermediaries. Importantly, the CCAR takes a forward-looking perspective 
in  assessing  a  bank’s  capital  adequacy,  including  ensuring  that  its  internal  stress  testing 
processes address its unique vulnerabilities and exposures. The CCAR should push banks 
to proactively manage their capital so as to be well prepared for the type of market stresses 
that could cause significant declines in income and capital.  
Other steps could be taken to complement the CCAR. One approach would be to implement 
a long-term debt requirement in a way that further enhances market discipline and provides 
incentives  for  regulators  to  promptly  intervene  if  necessary.  Another  might  be  to  structure 
compensation  practices  to  strengthen  senior  bank  managers’  incentives  to  proactively 
manage risk. For example, imagine how incentives would change if a significant portion of 
senior bank management’s compensation each year were deferred to be available to cover 
future  capital  losses.  I  suspect  that  over  time  this  would  meaningfully  alter  management’s 
risk tolerance. Also, in addition to the quantity of the deferred compensation, the form it takes 
could also affect incentives. If most of the deferred compensation were in the form of debt 
rather  than  equity,  I  suspect  this  would  also  affect  management’s  risk  tolerance  and  the 
appetite  to  cut  dividend  payments,  reduce  share  repurchases  or  raise  more  capital  more 
promptly  when  the  firm  began  to  become  stressed.  The  terms  and  the  form  of  deferred 
compensation are an important tool that could be further developed to generate a better set 
of incentives consistent with our financial stability objectives.  
We must also ensure that firms can respond to financial or operational weakness of any type 
by  having  robust  recovery  plans  that  get  triggered  long  before  resolution  becomes 
necessary. They should develop and track metrics that not only identify when they are on the 
verge of insolvency or default, but that trigger appropriate remediation actions whenever the 
firm begins to become stressed. These plans should identify actionable options that the firm 
can  take  in  response  to  financial  weakness  that  will  restore  the  confidence  of  the  firm’s 
counterparties without the need for extraordinary official sector support. They must also have 
disciplined processes that analyze the root causes of their problems and identify longer-term 
strategies  that  will  need  to  be  employed  as  other  recovery  options  to  restore  capital  and 
liquidity  are  being  executed.  And  firms  must  support  the  viability  of  their  contingency  and 
recovery plans by implementing the internal governance necessary to develop, test, update 
and implement them credibly.  
Some argue that what I have proposed – higher capital requirements and better incentives 
that  reduce  the  probability  of  failure  combined  with  a  resolution  regime  that  makes  the 
prospect  of  failure  fully  credible  –  are  insufficient.  Perhaps,  this  is  correct.  After  all, 
collectively  these  enhancements  to  our  current  regime  may  not  solve  another  important 
problem evident within some large financial institutions – the apparent lack of respect for law, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
regulation and the public trust. There is evidence of deep-seated cultural and ethical failures 
at many large financial institutions. Whether this is due to size and complexity, bad incentives 
or some other issues is difficult to judge, but it is another critical problem that needs to be 
addressed.  Tough  enforcement  and  high  penalties  will  certainly  help  focus  management’s 
attention  on  this  issue.  But  I  am  also  hopeful  that  ending  too  big  to  fail  and  shifting  the 
emphasis to longer-term sustainability will encourage the needed cultural shift necessary to 
restore public trust in the industry. 
One alternative strategy for dealing with too big to fail is to reduce the size of large banks by 
imposing  size  limits.  While  I  understand  the  motivation,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that 
imposing size limitations might not be a very efficient means of making the financial system 
more stable. First, it could sacrifice some socially beneficial economies of scale and scope, 
especially to the global clients of large financial institutions, depending on how the size limits 
were implemented. Second, the resulting benefits in terms of reducing systemic risk might be 
quite small. As demonstrated by the thrift crisis, if many firms are all vulnerable to the same 
shock,  ensuring  that  these  firms  are  small  and  numerous  won’t  necessarily  reduce  the 
systemic  risk  they  collectively  pose  to  the  financial  system.  Third,  the  costs  incurred  in 
breaking up such firms also need to be considered.  
Others have argued in favor of separating commercial and investment banking activities of 
the  large  banks.  In  my  opinion,  there  are  shortcomings  to re-imposing  Glass-Steagall-type 
activity  restrictions.  It  is  not  obvious  to  me  that  the  pairing  of  securities  and  banking 
businesses was an important causal element behind the financial crisis. In fact, independent 
investment banks were much more vulnerable during 2008 than the universal banking firms 
which  conducted  both  banking  and  securities  activities.  More  important  is  to  address  the 
well-known  sources  of  instability  in  wholesale  funding  markets  and  to  give  careful 
consideration  to  whether  there  should  be  a  more  robust  lender  of  last  resort  regime  for 
securities activities. 
Evaluating the socially optimal size, scope and organizational structure of financial firms is a 
complicated  exercise,  and  so  is  establishing  a  viable  transition  path  to  a  system  of  much 
smaller banks. It would be helpful in this regard if advocates of the break-up solutions would 
develop detailed proposals that address the essential questions of how such downsizing or 
functional  separation  would  be  accomplished,  and  what  the  expected  benefits  and  costs 
could be from such a restructuring.  
The recent financial crisis underscores the importance of financial stability as a necessary 
condition  for  a  vibrant  economy.  An  important  element  in  improving  financial  stability  is  to 
reduce the expected loss associated with the failure of any financial firm to the point where 
default  does  not  imperil  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy.  A  holistic  approach  is 
needed 
large,  complex  and 
interconnected banks, uses enhanced prudential standards and initiatives to further reduce 
the  probability  of  default  and  the  social  losses  associated  with  a  default,  and  that  incents 
management  to  intervene  early  to  address  incipient  problems  before  they  threaten  the 
viability of the firm. Relying solely on resolution is not sufficient. Until the Title II resolution 
process is used, there will remain uncertainties regarding how well this approach will work in 
practice – especially in a time of market stress. For this reason it is also important to continue 
to pursue a number of alternative approaches.  
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to answer a few questions. 
 
that  both  provides  a  credible  resolution  process 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
