Spencer Dale: Inflation targeting and the Monetary Policy Committee’s 
forward guidance 
Speech by  Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director, Monetary Policy, and Chief Economist of 
the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  International  Journal  of  Central  Banking  Annual  Conference, 
“Inflation targeting and its discontents”, Warsaw, 6 September 2013. 
 A central theme of this conference has been to highlight potential shortcomings of inflation 
targeting and to consider potential alternatives.  
I believe that the traumatic events in the UK economy over the past five years have, in fact, 
strengthened the case for inflation targeting. The credibility of the inflation target has played 
a crucial role in anchoring inflation expectations over the past five years, a period in which 
inflation  has  been  consistently  above  target.  That  credibility  has  been  vital  in  giving  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  the  flexibility  to  loosen  monetary  policy  aggressively  in 
order to support growth and jobs.  
But  while  it  has  not  constrained the  MPC’s  freedom to  act  in support  of  the  economy,  the 
inflation target, on its own, has proved less well suited to addressing some of the exceptional 
communications  challenges  posed  by  the  sustained  combination  of  weak  growth  and 
elevated inflation. I would highlight two in particular: the need to make clear the central role 
that  monetary  policy  has  played  in  supporting  output  and  employment;  and  the  need  to 
provide guidance about the Committee’s view of the appropriate trade-off between bringing 
inflation back to target and stimulating the recovery.  
The forward guidance provided by the Committee in August can be seen as a response to 
these challenges. To retain the clarity and credibility of the inflation target but to augment the 
framework so that monetary policy is better equipped to address the exceptional challenges 
currently faced by the UK economy. In this talk, I will provide a post-crisis report card for the 
UK’s  inflation  targeting  regime  and  explain  how  the  MPC’s  forward  guidance  responds  to 
some  of  the  areas  exposed  as  having  ‘room  for  improvement’.  I  will  also  show  how  a 
threshold for monetary policy defined in terms of the unemployment rate is particularly helpful 
in addressing two other challenges currently facing the MPC: the uncertainty surrounding the 
future path of productivity; and the need to provide greater clarity concerning the setting of 
monetary policy as the economy recovers.  
A bit of background 
Before  doing  so,  it  is  worth  highlighting  three  features  of  the  UK’s  economic  performance 
over the past five years which should be borne in mind when evaluating the performance of 
the  UK’s  inflation  targeting  framework  and  understanding  the  Committee’s  decision  to 
provide forward rate guidance. 
First,  CPI  inflation  has  been  above  target for  almost this  entire  period  (Chart  1).  Fifty  four 
months out of the past sixty to be precise. Over this period, CPI inflation has averaged 3%. 
And, on the basis of the MPC’s central projection in the August Inflation Report, it is expected 
to remain above target until the second-half of 2015.  
Second, notwithstanding the recent encouraging data, the recovery following the crisis has 
proved exceptionally  weak. The level of UK GDP is still more than 3% below its pre-crisis 
level. This is the weakest UK recovery on record. And with the exception of Italy, the weakest 
across the G7 (Chart 2). 
Third,  the  sluggish  recovery  has  been  accompanied  by  extraordinary  weakness  in 
productivity.  The  level  of  private  sector  productivity  has  actually  fallen  over  the  past  five 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
years: the first time since the late 1800s that productivity has fallen over such a timeframe 
other than as a result of economic demobilisation following the World Wars (Chart 3).  
High  inflation,  anaemic  demand  and  even  weaker  supply:  an  extraordinarily  challenging 
economic  backdrop  against  which  to  set  monetary  policy.  So  how  did  the  UK’s  inflation 
targeting framework stand up to this challenge?  
A post-crisis report card for UK inflation targeting 
In short, a bit like my old school reports: good, but could do even better. 
The  regime’s  main  success  is  that  inflation  expectations  have  remained  well-anchored 
despite the sustained period of above target inflation. There is no definitive test or measure 
of  the  stability  of  inflation  expectations.  But  evaluating  a  wide  range  of  expectations 
measures along a number of different dimensions presents little evidence that the stability of 
inflation expectations has lessened to any material extent.1  
This  stability  is  all  the  more  striking  given  that  monetary  policy  was  loosened  very 
aggressively  during  this  period.  As  has  been  discussed  before  by  many  of  my  MPC 
colleagues  (see,  for  example,  Bean  (2011),  Broadbent  (2011),  Fisher  (2013)),  to  not  have 
done so would have meant presiding over an even deeper recession and an even greater 
rise in unemployment. Rather than a constraint as some claimed, the inflation target and the 
credibility it afforded were essential in allowing the MPC to respond as forcefully as we did. 
The much vaunted flexibility offered by inflation targeting frameworks – to set policy in such a 
way that mitigates damaging booms and busts in activity as well as controlling inflation – can 
be  exercised  only  if  policymakers’  commitment  to  their  target  remains  credible.  Without 
credibility, there can be no flexibility.  
The  experience  of  the  UK  economy  over  the  past  5  years  has  provided  a  real-time 
examination as to how long inflation can remain above an explicit policy target without the 
credibility of that target being undermined. Thus far, the UK’s inflation target has passed this 
test with flying colours. And, in so doing, it has enabled the MPC to provide vital support to 
our economy.  
But  although  inflation  targeting  scored  highly  against  its  primary  objective  –  anchoring 
people’s  inflation  expectations  –  there  was,  as  my  teachers  used  to  say,  some  room  for 
improvement. For me it was speling. For inflation targeting, at least as operated in the UK, it 
was in addressing some of the communications challenges posed by the sustained period of 
weak demand and elevated inflation.  
Room for improvement: explaining our policy choices  
The public emphasis that we, as inflation targeters, place on achieving outcomes for inflation 
plays a key role in underpinning the MPC’s anti-inflation credentials. But this focus can be a 
double-edged sword, in that it can give the false impression that inflation is the sole focus of 
our monetary policy.  
In fact, over recent years nothing could have been further from the truth. Indeed, inflation has 
been above target for the vast majority of the period since the financial crisis. Yes: some of 
this inflation overshoot might be the result of poor forecasting. For much of this period, the 
Committee expected inflation to fall back to target more quickly than it actually did. But much 
more  important  was  the  recognition  that  a  lower  profile  for  inflation  was  possible  only  by 
tightening monetary policy at the expense of an even deeper recession and an even greater 
rise in unemployment. Throughout this exceptionally challenging period, monetary policy has 
                                                
1  See Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2013 Q2 and recent Inflation Reports for a detailed analysis of recent 
movements in inflation expectations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
consistently been set to ensure that inflation remains on track to return to the 2% target in the 
medium term. But, subject to that, we have done everything in our power to support the UK 
economy through the aftermath of the financial crisis, using the flexibility afforded to us by 
the inflation targeting framework and by our own credibility to the full.  
But the nature of our inflation targeting framework – with the primacy it attaches to the control 
of inflation – means it is not well suited to explaining our role in supporting growth and jobs. 
Policy actions have typically been explained solely in terms of inflation: for example, reducing 
the risk that inflation will undershoot the target in the medium term or extending the horizon 
over  which  we  intend  to  return  inflation  to  target.  Although,  technically  accurate,  such 
explanations  don’t  speak  to  the  distress  of  businessmen  and  women  worrying  about  the 
future of their companies or to the anxiety faced by families unsure as to whether they will 
still be in a job next week.  
Make  no  mistake:  inflation  targeting  provides  the  flexibility  for  policy  to  respond  to  such 
anxieties. And we have fully exploited that flexibility over recent years. But it doesn’t provide 
a  natural  framework  –  a  ready  vocabulary  –  in  which  this  flexibility  can  be  clearly 
communicated.  
This almost exclusive focus on inflation in our communications didn’t matter for much of the 
first 20 years of inflation targeting in the UK. Indeed, arguably it was one of its attractions. 
Prior to the introduction of inflation targeting in 1992, the UK had searched – in vain – to find 
a  credible  anchor  for  monetary  policy  and  inflation  expectations.  The  simplicity  and  clarity 
provided  by  a  numerical  target  for  inflation  helped  to  establish  the  credibility  of  monetary 
policy and was instrumental in fostering the period of stable growth and low inflation enjoyed 
in the decade or so prior to the financial crisis.  
But in the aftermath of the crisis and faced with five years of almost no growth, it is natural for 
people to ask what monetary policy is doing to help get the economy going. The control of 
inflation is important but so too is supporting the creation of jobs as unemployment rose to its 
highest level for almost twenty years. There was a real risk that this would start to erode the 
trust  and  support  of  inflation  targeting;  to  damage  its  democratic  legitimacy.  This  was 
arguably  evident  earlier  this  year  in  the  discussions  in  the  media  and  amongst  some 
commentators  as  to  whether  the  framework  of  monetary  policy  should  be  altered,  say  to 
adopt a nominal GDP target or for the MPC to have an explicit objective for growth. A subtext 
of that discussion was that the inflation target was in some way acting as a constraint on the 
support that monetary policy could provide to the faltering recovery. 
To  repeat:  such  criticism  is  misplaced.  The  credibility  provided  by  the  inflation  target  is  a 
prerequisite for monetary policy to be able to respond so aggressively to the fallout from the 
crisis. And with inflation being above target almost consistently over this period, it is hard to 
argue that monetary policymakers have somehow been fixated by inflation.  
But  the  forward  guidance  provided  by  the  MPC  makes  that  support  explicit.  The  primary 
objective of monetary policy remains the 2% inflation target. The sanctity of that objective is 
guarded  by  the  two  price  stability  knockouts.  But  subject  to  those  knockouts  and  the 
knockout  pertaining  to  financial  stability,  our  guidance  clearly  signals  the  Committee’s 
intention  to  maintain  a  highly  stimulatory  stance  of  policy  until  the  economy  returns  to 
something closer to normality.  
Abstracting  from  the  precise  details  of  the  thresholds  and  knockouts,  the  message  to 
businesses and families should be clear. The MPC intends to keep interest rates low until we 
have seen a sustained period of strong growth, rising incomes and higher employment, as 
long as that does not pose risks to either price stability or financial stability. To be clear: that 
is  no  different  to  the  approach  underlying  our  policy  over  the  past  five  years.  But  forward 
guidance provides a framework and a language in which that intention can be made plain. 
A closely related issue is the policy trade-off currently faced by the MPC. With inflation well 
above target and the level of output still depressed, the Committee has to balance the speed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
with which it returns inflation to target and the support it provides to output and employment. 
If we attempt to return inflation to target too quickly, by withdrawing monetary stimulus, we 
risk undermining the fledgling recovery. But returning inflation to the target too slowly might 
cause people to question the MPC’s commitment to keep inflation close to 2% in the medium 
term. 
Again, the issue here is to do with the transparency and accountability of policy, rather than 
its actual setting. The need to juggle these two challenges – returning inflation to target and 
supporting growth – has been the single most important determinant of our monetary policy 
decisions over recent years. But an inflation target, on its own, is not well suited to explaining 
the judgements and rationale underlying the Committee’s approach. Put bluntly, it speaks to 
only one half of the trade-off. 
The stakes are high. Our management of the trade-off between returning inflation rapidly to 
target and supporting the recovery directly affects businesses and families up and down the 
country. It is only right that the Committee be clear about its view of the appropriate trade-off 
so  that  we  can  be  challenged  and  held  to  account.  Indeed,  a  noteworthy  addition  to  the 
MPC’s remit when it was renewed by the Chancellor earlier this year was a request that “… 
the Committee should promote understanding of the trade-offs in setting monetary policy to 
meet  a  forward-looking  inflation  target  while  giving  due  considerations  to  output  volatility.” 
The  forward  guidance  announced  by  the  Committee  clarifies  its  view  of  the  appropriate 
trade-off.  The  primacy  of  the  inflation  target  makes  clear  that  the  long-run  objective  for 
monetary  policy  hasn’t  changed,  and  the  inflation  forecast  knockout  provides  information 
about the minimum speed at which the Committee judges it acceptable to bring inflation back 
to target. At the same time, the unemployment threshold provides guidance about what the 
MPC is trying to achieve in terms of real activity as the economy gradually normalises. 
Moreover,  by  making  clear  its  view  of  the  desired  trade-off,  the  MPC  helps  to  make  our 
monetary  policy  more  predictable.  This  enables  financial  markets,  companies  and  families 
alike to make more informed decisions and so improve the effectiveness of policy.  
Let me summarise where we have got to so far. The inflation target served us well during the 
financial crisis. Straight A’s for preserving credibility and for anchoring inflation expectations. 
But  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  has  posed  particular  challenges  of  communication  and 
accountability  that,  on  its  own,  an  inflation  target  is  ill  equipped  to  address.  The  MPC’s 
forward guidance is designed to help us to meet those challenges head on. 
The role of unemployment in our forward guidance 
It is important to be clear what role unemployment is – and is not – playing in the setting of 
monetary  policy.  If  you  remember  just  one  thing  from  this  talk,  I  would  ask  that  you 
remember this: targeting a particular level of the unemployment rate is not a job for monetary 
policy.  Monetary  policy  can’t  control  the  level  of  unemployment  in  the  long  run:  we  can’t 
generate sustainably higher output or employment simply by printing more money. That way 
lies the horrors of the high and variable inflation rates of the 1970s and 80s. We forget those 
lessons  at  our  peril.  Monetary  policy  continues  to  have  only  one  target:  the  2%  inflation 
target. Nor is unemployment a sufficient measure of slack in the economy on which to base 
our policy. The 1970s and 80s also taught us the foolishness of trying to control inflation by 
responding  to  movements  in  a  single  intermediate  target.  When  we  reach  the  7% 
unemployment threshold, the Committee will reassess the state of the economy based on all 
available  information  and,  on  that  basis,  decide  whether  it  should  start  to  withdraw  the 
current extraordinary levels of stimulus.2  
                                                
2   Some (eg Taylor 2013) have suggested that the use of an unemployment threshold, together with an inflation 
target, might mark the beginnings of a transition to the setting of monetary policy according to some form of 
quasi-Taylor rule. But that misunderstands the role being played by the unemployment threshold. Monetary 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
An unemployment rate of 7% is not our intended destination. Nor even is it necessarily the 
first turning on the way to our final destination. Rather, it is a conveniently located layby at 
which  we  can  pull  over,  study  our  economic  map  in  detail,  and  work  out  whether  we  are 
anywhere close to our first turning. 
Why unemployment? 
There are two other challenges facing the UK economy and the MPC which the Committee’s 
guidance also helps to address: the uncertainty as to why productivity has been so weak and 
the extent it will rebound as demand increases; and the need to clarify how monetary policy 
is likely to respond as the economy recovers. Defining our guidance in terms of a threshold 
for unemployment is helpful in both cases. 
Giving supply a chance 
When considering the appropriate trade-off between bringing inflation back to target quickly 
and supporting the recovery, by far and away the biggest judgement facing the Committee is 
the extent to which productivity is likely to recover as demand increases.  
If  you  speak  to  some  economists  they  are  quite  optimistic  and  suggest  that  productivity 
growth is likely to rebound relatively robustly as growth picks up. They note that productivity 
is  strongly  pro-cyclical.  They  also  point  to  evidence  that  some  companies  have  retained 
employees  in  anticipation  of  the  recovery,  while  others  have  had  to  use  resources  more 
intensely to generate the same level of orders given the weakness of demand.3  
But other economists are less upbeat. They highlight the role an impaired banking system 
may  have  played  in  contributing  to  the  weakness  in  productivity.  And  to  evidence  that 
suggests that a failure to reallocate resources from less to more productive firms has had a 
pronounced  effect  on  productivity  growth.  Such  factors  may  persist  even  as  demand 
recovers, suggesting that any rebound in productivity growth may be more muted.4  
Both sets of arguments are very plausible. Indeed, it is likely that both played some role in 
the  weakness  of  productivity.  The  challenge  for  the  Committee  is  weighing  up  the  relative 
importance of these different factors. And this judgement is central to the setting of policy. 
Too  optimistic  and  we  risk  stoking  up  excessive  demand that  will  feed through  into  higher 
inflation  and  a  potential  loss  of  credibility.  Too  pessimistic  and  our  nation’s  resources  will 
remain underutilised for an even longer period, with potentially damaging effects on the long-
run health of our economy. 
The  design  of  the  forward  guidance  –  in  particular  the  combination  of  the  unemployment 
threshold  and  the  knockouts  –  makes  the  setting  of  monetary  policy  more  robust  to  this 
uncertainty,  allowing  the  Committee  to  learn  about  the  responsiveness  of  supply  as  the 
economy  recovers,  without  needing  to  work  out  the  precise  cause  of  the  productivity 
weakness up front.5  
Let me explain. 
If productivity picks up strongly as the recovery gathers pace - as the more optimistic reading 
of the evidence would imply – this means that we are likely to have a relatively prolonged 
                                                                                                                                                   
policy is not being set with particular reference to the unemployment rate; rather the threshold simply provides 
a convenient point at which to reassess the stance of policy. Monetary policy continues to be set on the basis 
of a wide range of variables affecting the outlook for growth and inflation. 
3   See, for example, Miles (2012 and 2013) and McCafferty (2103). 
4   See, for example, Broadbent (2011, 2012, 2013). 
5   My fellow MPC member Paul Tucker recently referred to this as a “probing strategy” (Tucker 2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
period  of  strong  growth,  and  a  relatively  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates,  before 
unemployment  reaches  the  7%  threshold.  But  if,  even  as  the  recovery  gathers  pace, 
productivity growth remains relatively muted, unemployment will likely fall more quickly and 
the Committee will need to raise rates sooner. 
A threshold defined in terms of the unemployment rate is particularly well suited to dealing 
with  this  uncertainty.  As  demand  picks  up,  those  companies  that  can  use  their  existing 
workforces more intensely or can shift employees to more productive activities are likely to 
do so before hiring additional staff.  This suggests that to the extent that productivity picks up 
in  response  to  increasing  demand  it  should  largely  do  so  before  unemployment  falls 
materially.  As  such,  the  Committee  can  remain  largely  agnostic  about  the  extent  to  which 
productivity is likely to pick up and instead respond to the signal provided by movements in 
the  unemployment  rate.6  At  the  same  time,  the  three  knockouts  make  clear  that  the 
Committee  will  continue  to  pursue  such  a  policy  only  if  it  does  not  pose  a  risk  to  price  or 
financial stability. 
Its levels that matter 
The second challenge relates to the need for the Committee to explain how monetary policy 
is likely to evolve as the economy recovers. 
The good news is that after several years of virtual flat-lining, a recovery appears to be taking 
hold.  The  UK  economy  grew  by  over  1%  in  the  first  half  of  this  year,  more  than  in  the 
previous two years put together. And it looks set to grow even more quickly in the second 
half of this year. The most recent indicators and business surveys suggest that the economy 
may currently be growing at an annualised rate of between 3% and 4%.  
In  the  midst  of  this  long  awaited  growth,  there  is  the  risk  that  people  may  overreact  and 
expect the MPC to start raising Bank Rate relatively quickly. Such an overreaction would risk 
dampening the recovery, pushing up longer-term interest rates and, more generally, causing 
companies and families  to pullback from investment and spending decisions for fear of an 
imminent rise in borrowing costs. 
And based on past experience, there would be good reason for people to behave in such a 
way. During the so-called Great Moderation in the15 years or so prior to the financial crisis, 
there  was  a  close  relationship  between  changes  in  Bank  Rate  and  the  growth  of  GDP. 
Indeed, my colleague Ben Broadbent, in his former life as a city commentator, used to draw 
attention  to  the  startling  correlation  between  the  behaviour  of the  MPC  and  movements  in 
growth  implied  by  business  surveys.7  The  self-same  surveys  that  are  currently  pointing  to 
quarterly GDP growth of around 1%, a rate which in the past would have signalled the MPC 
was likely to tighten policy.  
That type of relationship during the Great Moderation is perhaps not that surprising. During 
much  of  that  period,  the  economy  was  close  to  balance  and  the  job  for  monetary  policy  
– absent worrying longer-term trends or significant cost or price shocks – often boiled down 
to keeping GDP growth close to trend. But this time is different. We start with significant slack 
in the economy: the level of GDP is still below its pre-crisis level; there are almost one million 
more people unemployed. We need to see a sustained period of robust growth before the 
economy moves back into anything resembling balance. Linking the future path of monetary 
                                                
6   The Committee can’t remain entirely agnostic since its forecast for inflation will be affected by its judgement of 
the degree of economic slack and the speed with which that slack is likely to close as the economy grows. But 
the  Committee  updates  its  inflation  forecast  on  a  regular  basis  and  so  the  forecast  can  be  adjusted  and 
revised as the Committee learns about the responsiveness of productivity to a pickup in demand.  
Indeed, Ben drew attention to this relationship, and why it is not likely to hold in the current environment, in a 
speech last month (Broadbent 2013). 
7  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
policy to the level of unemployment makes that clear. Its levels not growth rates that matter. 
Likewise, those expecting to see the close synchronisation between UK and US policy rates 
that held during much of the Great Moderation to reassert itself as rates begin to normalise 
need to remind themselves about the differences in the extent of the recoveries in the two 
countries to date. The US economy has been growing for almost 4 years; the UK for barely 6 
months.  The  level  of  US  GDP  is  5%  above  its  pre-crisis  level;  UK  GDP  is  3%  below.  Its 
levels not growth rates that matter. 
I don’t know how quickly Bank Rate will begin to rise. That will depend critically on the extent 
to which productivity recovers as demand increases. But the MPC’s forward guidance makes 
clear that, after the worst recession in post-war history and the weakest recovery on record, 
this time is likely to be different. Its levels not growth rates that matter. 
Conclusion 
The  financial  crisis  and  its  aftermath  provided  a  tough  examination  of  the  UK’s  inflation 
targeting regime. And the results slip reads pretty well. In particular, the inflation target was 
instrumental  in  anchoring  the  credibility  of  policy,  without  which  the  MPC  would  not  have 
been able to respond so aggressively. Without credibility, there can be no flexibility. And the 
MPC has used that flexibility to the full, providing extraordinary levels of stimulus to support 
growth and jobs.  
But the nature of the inflation targeting framework meant that it dropped a few marks in terms 
of  helping  the  MPC  to  communicate  the  role  monetary  policy  played  in  supporting  the 
recovery. That risked undermining the democratic legitimacy of inflation targeting. Likewise, 
the inflation target on its own was less suited to explaining the MPC’s view of the appropriate 
trade-off  between  the  speed  with  which  inflation  is  returned  to  target  and  the  support 
provided to the fledgling recovery.  
The forward guidance announced by the Committee retains the primacy of the inflation target 
while allowing the Committee to more effectively tackle these communication challenges. In 
so doing it enhances the transparency and accountability of monetary policy. The guidance 
also  provides  a  robust  framework  in  which  the  MPC  can  explore  the  scope  for  economic 
expansion and helps to provide greater clarity about the likely path of monetary policy as the 
economy recovers. 
The  inflation  target  remains  front  and  centre  in  the  conduct  of  UK  monetary  policy.  Price 
stability  remains  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy.  The  MPC’s  forward  guidance 
builds on the clarity and credibility of the inflation target to address some of the exceptional 
challenges  currently  facing  our  economy.  And  in  so  doing  it  should  help  to  increase  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
References 
Bean,  C  (2011)  “The  Economic  Outlook”,  speech  to  the  Northern  Ireland  Chamber  of 
Commerce. 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2011/speech497.pdf 
Broadbent,  B  (2011)  “Rebalancing  and  the  real  exchange  rate”,  Speech  at  Thompson 
Reuters,London. 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2011/520.aspx 
Broadbent, B (2012) “Productivity and the allocation of resources”, speech at the Durham 
Business 
Schoolhttp://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2012/599.aspx 
Broadbent, B (2013) “Conditional guidance as a response to supply uncertainty”, speech at 
the London Business School.  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2013/678.aspx 
Fisher, P (2013) “The Outlook for the UK economy”, speech to the Cardiff Breakfast Club.  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech659.pdf 
Maule,  B  and  Pugh,  A  (2013)  “Do  inflation  expectations  currently  pose  a  risk  to  the 
economy?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2013 Q2.  
McCafferty,  I  (2013)  “Monetary  Policy  in  a  Changing  Economy”,  speech  at  Bloomberg, 
London  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2013/627.aspx 
Miles,  D  (2012)  “Monetary  policy  and  the  damaged  economy”,  speech  at  the  Society  of 
Business Economists Annual Conference.   
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2012/576.aspx 
Miles, D (2013) “Monetary policy and forward guidance in the UK”, speech at Northumbria 
University.  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2013/681.aspx 
Taylor, J (2013) “Forward guidance as an incipient policy rule at the BoE and ECB”,  
http://economicsone.com/2013/08/25/forward-guidance-as-an-incipient-policy-rule-at-the-
boe-and-ecb/ 
Tucker, P (2013) “Monetary strategy and prospects”, speech at the Association for Financial 
Markets in Europe flagship conference on Financing Growth, London. 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2013/679.aspx 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Annex: Charts 
Chart 1: UK CPI inflation 
Per cent 
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
 
 
Chart 3: UK labour productivity 
Chart 2: Recoveries across the G7 
Index (pre-crisis preak =100)
Germany
France
Italy
UK
US
Japan
2007
 2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
108
106
104
102
100
98
96
94
92
90
 Sources: Eurostat and Datastream 
The pre-crisis peak was: 2008 Q1 for Germany, 
France, Japan and the UK; 2007 Q3 for Italy; 2007 Q4 
in the US; and 2008 Q3 for Canada. 
Percentage change on five years earlier
1861
1886
1911
1936
1961
1986
2011
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
 9 
