Haruhiko Kuroda: Overcoming deflation – the Bank of Japan’s challenge 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Council on Foreign 
Relations, New York, 10 October 2013. 
 Introduction 
Good morning. I am honored to be given an opportunity to speak this morning at the long-
established Council on Foreign Relations. 
Today,  I  will  talk  about  what  Japan’s  deflation  is  all  about  and  what  challenges  Japan  is 
faced with, followed by how the Bank of Japan is trying to overcome deflation. 
Deflation that Japan has been experiencing 
I. 
Japan has been mired in deflation for the past 15 years. Let me bring up some figures. In 
Tokyo, the minimum fare for the subways of 160 yen, or 1.6 dollars, has not changed since 
1995. During the same period, the fare in New York increased from 1.5 dollars to 2.5 dollars. 
As fees for public services are not likely to be reduced as a rule, the minimum fare for the 
subways in Tokyo has not declined, but prices as a whole have declined moderately for a 
long period in Japan. 
The feature of Japan’s deflation is that it is moderate but persistent. This is a phenomenon 
quite different from the deflation seen in the days of the Great Depression. In the period of 
deflation that occurred in the United States during the Great Depression, prices plunged in a 
short  period.  Prices  declined  significantly  in  the  two  years  of  1931  and  1932,  by  almost 
10 percent  annually,  but  deflation  continued  for  only  four  years.  In  contrast,  Japan’s 
consumer prices have fallen 4.1 percent in the past 15 years from fiscal 1998 to fiscal 2012. 
That is merely a 0.3 percent decline on an annual average basis. However, the deflation in 
Japan has been extremely persistent. Young Japanese people have been born into a life of 
carrying the recognition that prices either will be constant or decline. 
The continuation of price declines, albeit moderate ones, for a protracted period has deprived 
Japan’s  economy  of  vitality.  In  a  state  of  deflation,  the  holding  of  cash  or  deposits  will 
become  a  relatively  better  investment.  In  fact,  cash  and  deposits  held  by  Japanese  firms 
have reached 230 trillion yen, close to 50 percent of nominal GDP. Persistent deflation has 
created  an  environment  in  which  the  status  quo  is  better  than  making  investment  in  new 
initiatives,  and  has  brought  a  sense  of  stagnation  to  Japan.  In  an  economy  with  few  new 
challenges and investment, growth potential will decline gradually. Therefore, it is necessary 
to  overcome  deflation  this  time  around  and  enhance  people’s  willingness  to  take  on  new 
challenges. 
There were economic cycles during the past 15 years. However, even when the economy 
recovered, prices did not increase in a sustainable fashion. The major reason for this is that, 
due to prolonged deflation, persistent deflationary expectations – that is, the recognition that 
it is natural for prices not to increase – have become entrenched among people, and they 
took actions based on such expectations. In such a situation, firms, households, and even 
labor unions will act on the assumption that prices will not increase, and thus it has become 
intrinsically difficult to increase prices. 
In  the  past,  the  Bank  of  Japan  (BoJ)  took a  variety  of  initiatives,  including  the  adoption  of 
unconventional measures ahead of other central banks, such as a zero interest rate policy, 
quantitative  easing,  and  –  in  the  latest  wording  –  forward  guidance.  Nevertheless,  while 
those policies were effective in terms of stimulating economic activity, they could not change 
people’s persistent deflationary expectations. The greatest challenge in overcoming deflation 
this time is to raise people’s inflation expectations.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
II. 
The BoJ introduced the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) in April. The new 
policy aimed at working directly on inflation expectations, with the goal of increasing inflation 
to the global standard of 2 percent. The question is: how? 
The  conclusion  we  reached  was,  first,  to  show  our  clear  commitment  to  achieving  the 
2 percent  price  stability  target  in  a  stable  manner  as  soon  as  possible,  and,  second,  to 
underpin this determination by launching massive monetary easing that clearly differed from 
the past policies. Specifically, we declared that there would be a doubling in two years of the 
monetary base the BoJ provides. With this QQE, Japan’s monetary base two years from now 
will become 270 trillion yen, or 2.78 trillion dollars, reaching 56 percent of nominal GDP. For 
reference, the current monetary base in the United States is 329 trillion yen, or 3.39 trillion 
dollars, which is 20 percent of nominal GDP. 
To build the monetary base, on the asset side of the BoJ’s balance sheet, the holdings of 
Japanese government bonds (JGBs) would be doubled. An associated massive purchase of 
JGBs would alter supply and demand conditions in the JGB market and put strong downward 
pressure on long-term interest rates. 
However, there was a problem. The 10-year government bond yield in Japan was less than 
1 percent. How could we make additional room for monetary easing? The point was the real 
interest  rate,  which  is  the  nominal  interest  rate  minus  the  expected  inflation  rate.  In  this 
regard,  the  situation  facing  Japan,  in  which  expected  inflation  rates  were  stagnant, 
fortunately provided a breakthrough to this question. By raising inflation expectations while 
containing  a  rise  in  nominal  interest  rates,  we  would  be  able  to  lower  real  interest  rates, 
which  affect  decision-making  with  respect  to  business  fixed  investment  and  private 
consumption.  
Let me elaborate on this. In the United States and Europe, amid stagnant growth, observed 
inflation rates have been hovering around central banks’ targeted inflation rate of 2 percent, 
and  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  expected  inflation  rates  have  also  been 
stable at around 2 percent. In other words, expected inflation rates are anchored at around 
targeted inflation rates. In such cases, central banks cannot afford to raise expected inflation 
rates  further.  Therefore,  to  lower  real  interest  rates,  nominal  interest  rates  need  to  be 
lowered. When long-term interest rates fall to the historic low level of  less than 2 percent, 
room to further lower real interest rates becomes limited, as there is not much room to further 
lower nominal interest rates. 
By  contrast,  in  Japan,  expected  inflation  rates  have  been  anchored  at  too  low  of  a  level 
compared with the 2 percent price stability target, and thus there is sufficient room to raise 
them. If a rise in nominal interest rates can be contained to a lesser extent than an increase 
in inflation expectations, then real interest rates can be lowered by that extent. With such a 
decline  in  real  interest  rates,  business  fixed  investment  and  private  consumption  are 
expected  to  be  stimulated,  thereby  elevating  economic  activity.  Observed  prices  are  also 
expected  to  increase  gradually.  In  addition,  a  rise  in  observed  inflation  will  lead  to  an 
increase in inflation expectations. 
There  is  little  time  today  to  explain  all  the  transmission  channels  of  the  QQE,  but  I  have 
covered the core part. Through its effects, it is our aim to stimulate the economy, improve the 
output  gap  and,  above  all,  shift  inflation  expectations  upward,  and  achieve  the  2  percent 
price stability target as soon as possible. 
Achievements under QQE and perspective on overcoming deflation 
III. 
Now that six months have passed since the QQE was introduced, is it working? As it turns 
out, there have been improvements in financial markets, economic activity and prices, and 
people’s expectations, and the QQE has been powerfully exerting its effects. Let me point 
out some examples. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In the financial markets, stock prices have risen by more than 30 percent since the beginning 
of  the  year.  This  substantially  exceeds  the  rate  of  increase  not  only  in  Europe,  of  around 
13 percent, but also in the United States, of around 16 percent.  
On the real economy front, real GDP has marked high growth since the turn of the year of 
around an annualized 4 percent for two consecutive quarters. The unemployment rate has 
recently declined to the levels seen prior to the Lehman shock of around 4 percent. 
People’s  expectations  have  also  changed.  Consumer  confidence  indicators  clearly  have 
tilted upward since around the end of last year. Looking at business confidence indicators, 
according to the BoJ’s business survey, called the Tankan survey, the diffusion index (DI) for 
business conditions bottomed at minus 9 percentage points in the last December survey and 
has improved to plus 2 percentage points in the latest September survey – the same level as 
that in December 2007, prior to the Lehman crisis.  
Turning  to  price  developments,  expected  inflation  rates  have  increased  as  a  whole, 
according to market indicators and various surveys. The break-even inflation rate (BEI) has 
increased to close to 1.7 percent, from around 0.70 a year ago. In the Opinion Survey on the 
General Public’s Views and Behavior conducted by the BoJ, in which consumers are asked 
their  views  on  the  inflation  rate  one  year  from  now,  the  proportion  of  consumers  who 
answered that prices would increase was just over 50 percent in the last December survey, 
but  increased  to  above  80  percent  in  the  September  survey.  In  addition,  the  DI  for  selling 
prices in the Tankan survey, which is calculated based on a question firms were asked of 
developments in selling prices of their own products and services, have improved for large 
firms from minus 15 percentage points in the last December survey to zero in the September 
survey. 
Looking at the observed inflation rates, the CPI inflation rate turned positive in June for the 
first time in 14 months, and accelerated to 0.8 percent in August. 
As  explained,  stock  prices  have  been  rising  and  the  real  economy  has  been  improving 
steadily.  The  inflation  rate  has  turned  positive  and  inflation  expectations  have  risen.  Such 
improvements  in  economic  activity,  prices,  and  people’s  expectations  could  be  factors  in 
increasing interest rates. Nevertheless, thanks to strong downward pressure stemming from 
the  BoJ’s  JGB  purchases,  Japan’s  long-term  interest  rates  have  been  slightly  lower  than 
those of a year ago, with 10-year JGB yields hovering at less than 0.7 percent. In addition, 
while  long-term  interest  rates  have  been  rising  since  May  in  the  United  States  and  other 
overseas  economies,  those  in  Japan  have  been  more  or  less  flat  or  slightly  declining. 
Commercial banks’ lending rates on new loans – an average of loans to firms and individuals – 
have declined to a historic low of below 1 percent. 
Meanwhile, as people’s inflation expectations have been increasing gradually on the whole, 
real  interest  rates  have  been  declining.  Thus,  the  situation  we  have  aimed  for  has  been 
generated. This decline in real interest rates is likely to stimulate business fixed investment, 
housing investment, and private consumption, thereby bolstering the economy. In addition, 
the QQE and various measures by the government seem to have been gradually improving 
people’s sentiment, making them proactive and igniting their animal spirits. In fact, there are 
signs  that  firms’  funding  is  becoming  active.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  bank 
lending, which once declined to below 0.5 percent in the first half of fiscal 2012, has since 
been moderately expanding to slightly over 2 percent. The amount of corporate bonds issued 
in  the  April-June  quarter  reached  a  high  level  for  the  first  time  since  the  July-September 
quarter  of  1998,  which  was  coincidentally  the  quarter  when  deflation  began.  Initial  public 
offerings by firms have also become active recently. 
So  far,  the  QQE  has  been  exerting  its  intended  effects,  which  is  quite  encouraging.  By 
continuing  to  pursue  the  QQE  with  a  strong  determination  to  achieve  the  2  percent  price 
stability target, we are convinced that we will definitely overcome deflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Concluding remarks 
Japan has a solid growth base. It has first-class technology and human resources. What has 
been lacking is positive sentiment – both the confidence in our ability to succeed and in our 
animal spirits – which were lost amid the sense of stagnation under persistent deflation. The 
overcoming of deflation will progress in line with a dispelling of this sense of stagnation. I am 
a firm believer that Japan will regain confidence and grow with vigor again. 
There is another tail wind for Japan. The recent decision to hold the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo 
is boosting the level of  people’s sentiment. At  the time of  the Olympics, seven years from 
now, we will welcome you to a Japan that has regained its brightness. However, I am afraid 
that you may not be able to ride subways in Tokyo at a minimum fare of 160 yen at that time.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
