Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Raising performance standards and improving 
consumer protection in the Malaysian insurance industry 
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at 
the Insurance and Takaful Industry Annual Dinner 2013, Kuala Lumpur, 15 November 2013. 
 It is my great pleasure to join all of you this evening at the Insurance and Takaful Industry 
Annual Dinner 2013. This is indeed a significant and unique gathering as we have the whole 
of  the  insurance  and  takaful  industry  represented  here  tonight.  The  collective  wisdoms  of 
those  present  in  this  hall  tonight,  if  harnessed  well,  could  significantly  alter  the  insurance 
landscape towards a more diversified, efficient, and competitive industry. 
We  are  facing  an  increasingly  complex  business  environment  characterised  by  rapid 
advancements  in  technology,  more  discerning  consumers  and  mounting  competition,  that 
necessitate  the  industry  to  adapt  and  continually  innovate  to  remain  competitive  and 
relevant. Of importance is for the industry to remember that the fundamental of insurance is 
premised on safeguarding consumers’ interest against financial loss when things go wrong. 
Consumers’ interest is always at the heart of the matter. 
My  remarks  this  evening  will  touch  on  some  regulatory  changes  that  have  taken  place,  in 
response  to  the  changing  operating  environment.  My  remarks  will  have  strong  focus  on 
consumer protection. 
The  Financial  Services  Act  and  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Act  2013  which  came  into 
force in June this year has provided the Bank with statutory duty to foster fair, responsible 
and  professional  business  conduct  amongst  financial  service  providers.  Such  regulatory 
developments mark an important milestone in modernising Malaysia’s financial sector which 
goes  beyond  the  mandate  of  preserving  financial  stability.  These  laws  ensure  a  robust 
financial  consumer  protection  regime.  The  new  legislations  provide  explicit  powers  for  the 
Bank to set and enforce standards on business conduct for financial service providers that 
ensure  financial  consumers  are  treated  fairly.  The  laws  also  specifically  prohibit  financial 
service  providers  from  engaging  in  unfair  or  deceptive  business  conduct  including  making 
false, misleading or dishonest representations, and tied selling. 
It  is  important  to  highlight  that  the  new  legislation  also  provides  enhanced  protection  in 
respect  to  consumers’  pre-contractual  disclosure  obligations  in  consumer  insurance 
contracts.  Among  others,  an  insurer  or  takaful  operator  must  pose  specific  questions  to 
consumers for its underwriting purpose. The legislation also sets out various remedies that 
an insurer may rely on depending on the type of pre-contractual misrepresentation made by 
the consumers. Changes were also introduced under the new laws to deliver a more efficient 
regulatory  regime  for  insurance  and  takaful  intermediaries  including  introduction  of  an 
approval  and  registration  regime.  The  changes  made  were  more  reflective  of  the  risks 
presented  by  such  entities,  with  the  regulatory  oversight  focusing  primarily  on  promoting 
professional conduct in activities that relate to businesses that are approved or registered. 
We had recently issued a concept paper on Life Insurance and Family Takaful Framework. 
This Framework is set to transition the life insurance and family takaful industry into a new 
operating  environment,  characterised  by  changing  market  dynamics  including  demand  for 
greater  transparency,  and  driven  by  advancement  in  technology  and  changing  consumer 
behaviour. The Framework’s main aim is to increase insurance and takaful penetration, and 
ensuring  a  fair  deal  to  consumers.  The  framework  is  supported  by  three  main  pillars;  the 
liberalisation  of  operating  limits,  diversification  of  delivery  channels  and  strengthening  of 
market conduct practices. 
The  Framework  will  be  implemented  in  two  phases  to  allow  the  industry  and  the  public 
sufficient  time  to  adjust  to  the  new  operating  environment  before  further  liberalisation  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
considered. Under the first phase, greater operational flexibility is given to life insurers and 
family  takaful  operators  to  operate  in  a  more  competitive  environment  and  allow  greater 
product  innovation  to  be  delivered  through  a  wider  range  of  delivery  channels.  The 
Framework  proposes  for  the  current  commission  and  other  operating  cost  limits  for 
investment-linked  products  to  be  removed.  In  addition,  the  commission  limit  for  pure 
protection  products,  namely  pure  term,  critical  illness  and  medical  and  health  is  also 
proposed to be removed subject to certain preconditions. 
While  allowing  greater  operational  flexibility,  the  Bank  will  ensure  consumers’  interest 
remains  protected.  Among  the  safeguards  to  be  introduced  include  requiring  a  certain 
percentage of premiums paid by policyholders in respect of investment-linked policies to be 
placed in the policyholders’ unit fund in order to preserve policy values. Consumers will also 
be given a wider choice of delivery channels to obtain insurance and takaful products. This 
includes  the  availability  of  additional  channels  so  that  consumers  have  more  choices  and 
options. In addition, the enhanced disclosure standards will increase transparency, enabling 
consumers  to  make  more  informed  decision  and  become  more  empowered  to  make 
investment decisions over the longer term. 
We  shall  raise  the  level  of  professionalism  in  the  industry  with  new  requirements  and 
expectations placed on intermediaries in their conduct of business. Needless to say, that the 
reputation  of  the  industry  will  be  positive  when  industry  players  discharge  their  respective 
roles in an appropriate manner that enhance the image, integrity and professionalism of all of 
us here today. A good reputation is beneficial to the industry. An industry that has a good 
reputation will be good for its players, and that good reputation would be translated into good 
value propositions for all those who are involved. 
There had been representations made to the Bank as well as at the highest level, that the 
current commission rates are too low for agents to sustain a decent living and to attract new 
talents into the profession. Let me share with you some relevant statistics; a full time agent 
(which we understand makes up less than 40% of the total number of agency force) brings 
home an income of more than three times the national average income. What is clear is that 
part  time  work  doesn’t  cut  it  if  we  want  to  earn  a  decent  income.  Full  commitment  and 
dedication  is  required  of  an  insurance  or  takaful  agent  if  it  is  to  become  a  viable  career. 
Therefore,  there  is  a  strong  case  for  part-time  agents  to  significantly  enhance  their 
productivity in taking the profession more seriously by becoming full time agents. The Bank, 
through the LIFE framework, has set clear expectations, that going forward, we envisage that 
at least half of the insurance agents ought to comprise full time agents. Under the proposed 
framework,  the  Bank  will  take  stern  actions  and  heavier  penalties  against  unfair  business 
practices including mis-selling of insurance and takaful products through its market conduct 
supervision. 
We hope that the industry would study the concept paper thoroughly, before the Framework 
is finalised. 
As  part  of  the  reform  in  the  general  insurance  industry,  in  particular  the  motor  insurance 
industry, various measures have been introduced to improve the efficiency in motor claims 
assessments.  The  insurance  and  takaful  industry  has  established  a  24-hour  nationwide 
toll-free call centre known as Accident Assist Call Centre which provides immediate roadside 
assistance to road accident victims as well as answers basic enquiries on motor insurance 
claims.  Presently,  the  call  centre  is  only  available  for  consumers  in  the  Klang  Valley  and 
Selangor and is expected to cover nationwide very soon. 
In addition, enhancements to the Motordata Research Consortium system have been made 
to  facilitate  online  submission  of  third  party  claims  assessments  directly  to  insurers  to 
improve the turnaround time for processing claims as well as minimise disputes on offer of 
settlement. We also need a database akin to the CCRIS to the banking industry, that would 
significantly improve the risk management aspects and operational efficiency of the industry. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This need is dire as cases of fraudulent claims and excessive third party damages are on an 
increasing trend. 
Priorities towards a more competitive insurance and takaful industry 
There are a number of areas that the industry must strengthen to maintain their competitive 
positions. 
• 
Firstly,  the  insurance  and  takaful  industry  must  make  significant  changes  to  raise 
performance standards in tandem with the global advances and keeping pace with 
the established international best practices. In particular, there is a need to manage 
and  improve  the  underwriting  performance,  by  improving  claims  ratio,  enhance 
productivity  and  reduce  distribution  costs.  The  industry  need  to  adopt  a  more 
disciplined  approach  to  underwriting,  increase  efficiency  and  precision  of  internal 
processes, leverage on the benefits of technology to improve claims processing and 
policy administration, hence reducing operational costs. At the same time, insurers 
and takaful operators should take advantage of the emergence of new and low-cost 
distribution channels such as the internet and mobile technology, and adopt multi-
distribution  strategies  as  a  competitive  tool  to  expand  the  pool  of  potential 
customers and cater to a wider range of needs of society. 
Secondly,  the  industry  must  deliver  more  positive  customer  experience.  As  the 
industry is operating in a challenging operating conditions with intense pressure to 
control  costs,  one  should  not  compromise  on  the  level  of  customer  service 
standards.  Bad  perception  of  the  insurance  industry  can  only  happen  if  services 
rendered are poor. Industry players must always put the customer experience 
at the center of their business strategy. Once customers are satisfied with the 
service level, the upside is to improve customer retention and satisfaction. A 
recent research has shown that there are various factors that influence customers’ 
decisions  to  choose  or  leave  an  insurer.  Although  price  and  rates  and  product 
features  are  the  most  often  cited  reason  to  select  and  to  leave  a  provider,  about 
40% of customers say they would consider choosing an insurer because of brand 
trust  and  after-sales  services.  Therefore,  insurers  and  takaful  operators  need  to 
assess how customers perceive the quality of their interactions, taking into account 
the views, perceptions, expectations and values of customers. 
Thirdly, with more complex products and more sophisticated customer demands, the 
industry  needs  more  skilled  professionals  to  support  the  financial  sector.  The 
insurance  industry  need  to  change  their  approach  in  attracting  talent.  Only  by 
attracting the right talent, can the industry prosper. In attracting talent, you have to 
compete with other sectors. That means paying a package that is as good as others. 
Skill sets including technical, analytical and creative thinking doesn’t come cheap. 
You  have  to  pay  for  quality.  The  industry  need  to  devise  a  scheme  that 
commensurate with the talent they expected. Anything less, would not position the 
industry well or competitive. For existing talents, continuous professional and skills 
enhancement programmes organised by professional bodies like MII, would help the 
insurance and takaful industry in meeting the industrys’ needs. 
  Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  As  we  advance  forward  into  the  future,  the  economic  and 
financial  landscape  would  evolve  and  it  would  evolve  very  rapidly.  Our  duty  as  industry 
leaders is to build on the existing foundation that got us here. But moving the industry to next 
level would require strategic change. It would require fundamental rethinking to stay ahead of 
the curve and to meet the difficult challenges. The highest of priority needs to be given to 
raising  performance  standards,  improving  customer  experience  and  retention,  as  well  as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
attract new and fresh talent. But all this can only be achieved if we embark on a collective 
effort. Only effective effort would ensure an industry that is vibrant and resilient. 
Thank you, and enjoy the rest of the evening. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
