Jörg Asmussen: Banking Union – essential for the ins, desirable for the 
outs! 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Danske Bank Financial Forum 2013, Stockholm, 5 November 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a pleasure to participate in the Danske Bank Financial Forum here in Stockholm. 
Sweden  was  hit  very  hard  by  the global financial  crisis. It  experienced  a  contraction  of  no 
less  than  5  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2009.  Yet  economic  growth  rebounded  strongly  2010  and 
2011, recording an annual growth rate of 6.1% and 3.9% respectively. 
This very strong recovery illustrates the resilience and adjustment capacity of the Swedish 
economy.  This  is  not  to  say  that  there  are  no  problems  in  Sweden.  To  name  just  one, 
unemployment  has  remained  at  rather  high  levels,  hovering  at  around 8%.  Yet  overall  the 
indicators point to solid fundamentals. As a matter of fact, Sweden’s economic and financial 
policies can be considered to set a benchmark for many other economies in Europe. 
The euro area did not manage to track Sweden’s strong rebound from the Great Recession. 
Following a shallow recovery in 2010 and 2011, it fell back into recession in the course of 
2012. Yet the darkest clouds hanging over the euro area now appear to have lifted. Recent 
economic and financial developments have indeed been encouraging. Following six quarters 
of negative output growth, euro area real GDP rose by 0.3% in the second quarter of this 
year.  Although  more  recent  data  have  pointed  to  a  fairly  slow  start  in  the  third  quarter, 
survey-based confidence indicators are running near a 27-month high.  
This gives some comfort that the turning point in economic activity that we saw earlier in the 
year has not reversed. Hard and soft data seem to suggest that the shoots of a recovery are 
there, yet they are still very green and need to be nurtured carefully. The recovery is indeed 
weak, fragile, and uneven. We are basically running on one engine – net exports; the other 
engine – domestic demand – is sputtering but has not yet really taken off.  
These positive developments have not fallen out of the sky. They have been made possible 
by resolute actions, taken at both the national and the European level. Whilst these positive 
signs  are  obviously  welcome,  they  also  harbour  the  risk  that  they  may  be  a  prelude  to 
complacency.  We  cannot  and  should  not  yet  rest  on  our  laurels,  as  our  work  is  not  yet 
finished. 
High  unemployment  and  financial  fragmentation  both  remain  a  chief  concern.  The 
unemployment rate, currently at around 12%, remains unacceptably high. Market sentiment 
also remains fragile. To use an analogy, the needle of market sentiment has shifted from fear 
to caution. Now we need to move the needle from caution to confidence. And the way to do 
that is by avoiding any relapse in the progress made so far, and by moving forward towards a 
genuine EMU.  
Bringing our banking system back to health is an essential precondition for restoring growth. 
It is against this background that in my remarks today, I would like to focus on a key pillar of 
a genuine EMU, that is the Banking Union. I will try to answer three questions. 
What are the necessary components of a Banking Union? 
What does a Banking Union mean for countries inside the euro area and those outside, like 
Sweden and the home country of today’s host, Denmark? 
And is a Banking Union sufficient to kick-start bank lending and consolidate the recovery? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Elements of a banking union 
Let me start with my first question. What are the necessary components of a Banking Union? 
To our mind, a Banking Union requires a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and a Single 
Resolution Mechanism (SRM). 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism  
A lot of progress has been made on the SSM. Last month, the EU legislature gave the final 
green light to the Regulation. The entry into force of the Regulation has allowed us, the ECB, 
to speed up our internal preparations. 
We recently communicated on the comprehensive assessment that we will undertake in the 
run-up to the actual assumption of supervisory tasks, twelve months from now. In a way, this 
comprehensive assessment is the “founding act” of the SSM. And we are very much aware 
of the conventional wisdom that “there is no second chance to make a good first impression”. 
So we are adamant that this comprehensive assessment needs to be thorough, credible, and 
transparent.  We  are  intent  to  not  only  shed  light  on  the  potential  weaknesses  in  banks’ 
balance sheets, but we will also prescribe the necessary corrective actions that need to be 
undertaken. After all, there is no point in making the right diagnosis, if you don’t apply the 
remedy and cure the disease. 
If  you  read  some  press  reports,  one  could  get  the  impression  that  the  euro  area  banking 
sector is terminally ill. This is not the case. A lot of “healing” has already taken place. Since 
the  start  of  the  financial  crisis,  half  a  trillion  euro  of  additional  capital  has  already  been 
pumped into the banks (totalling to over 5% of area-wide GDP). 
Results for the second quarter for euro area banks also show an improvement in return on 
equity.  However,  both  the  geographic  location  and  the  size  of  banks  remains  a  crucial 
determinant of financial performance. The funding situation has also normalised somewhat; 
still, it remains challenging given persistent fragmentation in funding markets.  
Our comprehensive assessment is aimed at completing this ongoing “healing process”, by 
identifying  remaining  pockets  of  weaknesses  and  prescribing  and  fostering  the  necessary 
corrective actions to overcome them. 
How  those  corrective  actions  should  be  financed  is  clear.  Private-sector  money  should  be 
first  in  line  to  reinforce  the  banking  sector.  Banks  could  increase  their  capital  by  various 
means, they could retain earnings, raise equity in the market, or sell some of their assets. 
Public  money  should  only  be  used  when  private  solutions  are  not  available  or  have  been 
exhausted. Whilst it is not yet clear whether these public backstops will need to be tapped, it 
is essential to have them in place. If not, the credibility of the whole exercise is put at risk, as 
the outcome will then almost certainly be negatively perceived by market participants. 
Doing this balance sheet assessment without a backstop in place would be a bit like getting 
on a boat in rough weather conditions, and not taking a life jacket on board. Discussions are 
progressing in the European fora on putting in place these backstops.  
The Single Resolution Mechanism 
Whilst the progress on the SSM is a step in the right direction, it is not enough. We at the 
ECB  consider  the  SRM  to  be  an  indispensable  second  pillar  of  the  Banking  Union.  In 
economist jargon: the current state is not a stable equilibrium. 
Indeed, a SSM without an SRM will not set the right incentives for national authorities. If they 
have to pick up the tab when the banks need to be resolved, we cannot expect them to fully 
cooperate within the SSM. So, we need to put in place a strong SRM. We support the main 
tenets of the Commission’s proposal on the SRM. In particular, having a single system with a 
single Fund is of the essence. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Experience  in  recent  years  has  in  fact  shown  that  any  form  of  coordination  of  national 
resolution authorities and national funds was beyond reach. On the basis of this experience 
we  do  not  believe  that  a  network  of  resolution  authorities  and  funds  can  cater  for  swift, 
effective, and impartial decision-making, which is so much needed in case of resolution.  
In the recent discussions surrounding bank resolution, a lot has been said on bail-in versus 
bail-out. Allow me to take the opportunity of being here in Stockholm, at an event organised 
by a Danish bank, to make a few points on the Danish and Swedish experience with banking 
crises, and draw lessons for the future. 
The Danish case 
The  Danish  government’s  first  reaction  to  the  financial  sector  woes  in  2008  was  in  many 
ways similar to those of other European states: ample recourse was made to bailouts, loans, 
guarantees etc. However, at the peak of the banking crisis in 2010, Denmark chose to take a 
tougher stance than its European counterparts. With its third Bank Package, it was the first 
European state to force senior creditors to take a hit when banks failed. Haircuts of 16% and 
14% were imposed on senior creditors of Amagerbanken and Fjordbank Mors respectively. 
As Danish banks were deemed to be benefiting less from an implicit government guarantee 
than  their  competitors,  they  were  penalised  by  rating  downgrades  and  a  hike  in  funding 
costs.  
The  Danish  experience  illustrates  the  need  for  a  harmonised  approach  across  the  EU  to 
ensure a level-playing-field. Whereas the rationale may have been sound, market effects can 
be  negative  and  even  volatile  when  Member  States  implement  such  policies  alone  and 
unexpectedly, particularly in times of market stress. 
It is important to allow banks as well as investors adequate lead-time to anticipate for such 
regime shifts. With this in mind, the ECB is of the view that the envisaged bail-in rules should 
be introduced at the same time across the EU and that this should be done by 2015, thereby 
providing the required certainty for market actors and ensuring a level playing field.  
The Danish example also teaches us another lesson: the debate on resolution should not be 
reduced to a mere question of bail-in versus bail-out. There are other tools in the resolution 
toolkit  –  apart  from  bail-in  –  that  can  be  used  to  deal  with  troubled  banks  and  be  equally 
effective in shielding taxpayers. 
While reviewing  their  response  to the  crisis, the  Danish  authorities  decided  that facilitating 
bank consolidation was the primary path towards a healthier sector. They decided to push for 
private  sector  buy-outs  of  troubled  lenders  by  offering  a  financial  dowry  to  strong  banks 
willing to take over their struggling counterparts. 
In the US, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s (FDIC) similarly plays an active role 
in  promoting  private  solutions  to  banks  failures  through  mergers  and  acquisitions.  Indeed, 
450  out  of  the  FDIC’s  490  bank  resolutions  since  2008  have  involved  what  is  called 
“Purchase and Assumption” – selling parts of banks to other banks, often located in different 
states. In the EU, almost no cross-border mergers or acquisitions have taken place and only 
around 50 banks have been wound down, and at a heavy cost for tax payers due to delayed 
restructuring.  I  dub  this  approach  the  “US’  private  banking  union”  and  this  is  a  route  that 
Europe needs to explore further, not just within borders but also cross-border to complement 
its public banking union. 
M&A in the context of resolution can not only bring down resolution costs, but can also be a 
solution  to  the  “excess  capacity”  and  the  resulting  depressed  margins  that  are  arguably 
present in various pockets of the euro area banking system. Whilst this could contribute to a 
further consolidation of the banking sector, it also increases the need for a workable SRM 
that  is  able  to  effectively  wind  down  bigger  banks,  thus  avoiding  the  “too-big-to-fail” 
syndrome. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The Swedish example 
Having looked at Denmark’s experience, let us now also take a look at the experiences at the 
other side of the Øresund. The way Sweden dealt with its troubled banking sector in the 90s 
also holds some useful lessons. 
The Swedish government took a very different approach from the recent Danish one. Faced 
with  a  systemic  banking  crisis,  the  government  resolutely  took  control  of  the  banks,  came 
public  with  the  expected  losses  and  write-downs,  and  subsequently  cleaned  the  banks’ 
balance sheets, and gradually returned them to private ownership. This proactive approach 
allowed the banking system to continue to function during the crisis, with no bank runs and 
hardly any signs of a credit crunch. Estimates from the IMF suggest that, although the gross 
fiscal cost for banking support amounted to 3.6 per cent of GDP, the cost to the taxpayer is 
likely  to  have  been  recovered  after  the  liquidation  of  the  assets  taken  over  by  the 
government1.  
Given  these  different  experiences,  it  is  no  surprise  that  the  Swedish  and  Danish 
governments  took  different  positions  during  the  discussions  on  the  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolutions  Directive  (BRRD).  Denmark  very  much  pleaded  for  a  strongly  harmonised 
scheme,  thereby  ensuring  a  level-playing  field  across  the  EU.  Sweden  on  the  other  hand 
called for greater national flexibility, especially when facing systemic crises. In order to allow 
governments to still play an active role, they proposed to include the possibility of temporary 
public  ownership  of  financial  institutions  and  called  for  adequate  flexibility  in  tapping  the 
resolution fund and applying the bail-in tool. To my mind, the Council position on the BRRD 
duly  incorporates  the  lessons  from  both  the  Danish  and  the  Swedish  experiences.  And  in 
doing so, it probably strikes roughly the right balance. 
By  setting  common  rules,  it  ensures  a  level-playing  field  in  the  internal  market,  thereby 
catering for legal certainty and predictability as to what will happen to troubled banks from 
Riga  to  Porto.  But  it  also  allows  for  some  flexibility.  For  instance,  recapitalisation  outside 
resolution can be considered in certain cases. And creditors can be exempted from bail-in in 
specific conditions and after quite high hurdles have been reached. Arguably, this flexibility – 
if pushed too far – could challenge the level-playing field. This is a concern also for us at the 
ECB.  Yet  what  is  clear  is  that  for  the  countries  in  the  SRM,  this  is  not  an  issue,  as  the 
decisions  on  availing  of  this  flexibility  will  be  taken  at  the  European  level.  Therefore,  the 
wider  the  regional  scope  of  the  SRM,  the  more  the  level-playing  field  within  the  internal 
market will be maintained. 
Ins and Outs 
This brings me to my second question: how does the banking union relate to countries inside 
and outside the euro area? I will make three points here. 
First, the banking union is critical for the Euro Area countries. 
Second, it is also desirable for Member States, which do not share the euro. 
And third, the banking union should be about strengthening the internal market, rather than 
dividing it in two. 
The banking union is critical for the euro area… 
Let me start with the first point: the banking union is critical for the euro area countries. 
                                                
1  Valencia,  F.,  and  Laeven,  L.,  (2012),  Systemic  Banking  Crises  Database:  An  Update,  IMF  Working 
Papers 12/163, p. 26. International Monetary Fund. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  reason  why  we  are  building  it  is  to  break  the  vicious  circle  between  sovereigns  and 
banks, the manifestations of which are much more acute and disruptive in a monetary union. 
That is why we need the Banking Union in the single currency area. But one thing must be 
clear: putting the Eurozone on a stronger footing will also benefit the countries that are not in 
the  eurozone.  The  crisis  has  clearly  shown  that  in  Europe  a  receding  tide  lowers  all  the 
boats, not just the ones which are in trouble. 
financial  stability,  and  national  responsibility 
… and desirable for the outs 
My second point is that the banking union – whilst critical for the ins – is also desirable for the 
outs.  The  so-called  financial  trilemma2  –  in  other  words  the  impossible  trinity  of  financial 
integration, 
for  crisis  prevention  and 
management – holds for the entire region, and not just for the euro area. The Swedish and 
Danish banking system are not only large in proportion to your GDP, but they are also very 
closely integrated with the rest of Europe.  
Let me focus on the case of the Danish banking sector. Danish banks’ consolidated assets 
are almost four times Denmark’s GDP. The biggest banks have considerable cross-border 
activities.  For  these  reasons,  it  would  make  perfect  sense  for  Denmark  to  join  a  Banking 
Union  that  is  composed  not  only  of  a  single  supervision  mechanism,  but  also  a  single 
resolution  mechanism  with  a  resolution  fund  that  can  serve  as  an  insurance  scheme  in 
relation  to  systemic  banks.  Whilst  participating  in  the  banking  union  therefore  appears 
desirable, the terms of that participation should also be right. Indeed, we at the ECB consider 
it of the utmost importance to ensure that the participation of the outs occurs on equal terms 
as  the  Euro  Area  countries.  The  safeguard  clauses  in  the  SSM  Regulation,  which  for 
example  allow  for  objections  to  decisions,  should  ensure  that  national  specificities  will  be 
duly taken into account. 
On resolution, we need to find creative solutions to ensure a level-playing field between ins 
and outs. This holds a fortiori for the backstop for the single resolution fund which is currently 
the subject of much discussion. Taking part in the Banking Union from the beginning would 
bring many benefits. Having a chair at the table now allows participants to steer the practical 
implementation  of  the  SSM  –  for  example  the  development  of  the  supervisory  manual, 
guidelines  and  general  instructions,  as  well  as  benefit  from  the  “healing  effect”  that  the 
comprehensive assessment should bring. 
Banking union and financial integration 
Let me now come to my third point: The banking union should be about strengthening the 
internal market, rather than fragmenting it. Both the single currency and the single market are 
key  pillars  of  growth  and  prosperity  in  Europe.  Both  should  be  maintained  and  enhanced. 
Hence,  the  banking  union  should  not  create  new  barriers  within  the  internal  market.  If 
countries choose not to join, they should not be discriminated against. Two safeguards will 
be crucial in this regard: having a single rulebook that sets the same standards for all, and 
having a strong and effective EBA with a fair representation of the outs.  
Banking union and the real economy 
I  now  come  to  my  last  question:  is  Banking  Union  sufficient  to  kickstart  bank  lending  and 
consolidate the recovery? A banking union can make an important contribution to overcome 
financial fragmentation, and support lending. Without healthy banks, there can be no strong 
and sustainable recovery. Yet a banking union is not a “silver bullet”. The drought of credit is 
a multi-pronged problem, which requires a multi-pronged solution. 
                                                
2  Schoenmaker, D., (2011). “The financial trilemma,” Economics Letters, vol. 111, pages 57–59, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In addition to a banking union, I see three additional requirements for restoring lending and 
putting the recovery on a solid footing. The first condition is not to unravel what has already 
been  achieved,  sometimes  at  a  high  cost.  As  regards  fiscal  policies,  substantial  fiscal 
adjustment has been undertaken by the euro area countries over the last few years. 
The average fiscal position of the euro area countries is much stronger than that of global 
peers. The euro area budget deficit is expected to have more than halved from its crisis peak 
of 6.4% of GDP in 2009 to 2.9% of GDP this year. National authorities should not backtrack 
on these efforts.  
The  second  condition  is  to  address  our  well-known  structural  problems,  through  well 
designed reforms aiming at ensuring a smooth functioning of the EMU and the single market. 
Euro  area  governments  must  decisively  strengthen  their  efforts  to  implement  the  needed 
structural reforms in product and labour markets. These reforms are required not only to help 
the respective countries to regain competitiveness and to rebalance within the euro area, but 
also  to  create  more  flexible  and  dynamic  economies  that  will  generate  sustainable  growth 
and employment.  
The third and last condition is continue resolutely on our road towards a genuine EMU. This 
should be our long term objective, of which the Banking Union is now at the forefront. 
Yet  the  other  unions  are  equally  important.  If  I  may  pick  out  just  one,  further  progress  on 
economic  union  is  needed,  as  the  experience  with  the  European  Semester  shows  that 
economic policy coordination is still very much a “paper tiger”. Only one tenth of last year’s 
country-specific recommendations have been implemented by the member states. We need 
to  explore  all  possible  avenues  to  give  greater  “teeth”  to  the  economic  coordination 
processes. To our mind, the idea of reform contracts backed up by some financial incentives 
continues to be an interesting avenue. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
