Mario Draghi: Interview with Der Spiegel 
Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Der Spiegel, 
published on 30 December 2013. 
 SPIEGEL: Mr Draghi, do you know Andrea Nahles? 
Draghi: I have heard the name before but I don’t know her personally.  
SPIEGEL: Ms Nahles is the new German Labour minister and boss of Jörg Asmussen, 
your former colleague in the Executive Board of the ECB. That he gives up this 
prestigious job has caused great surprise in Germany. Did you chase him out? 
Draghi: Jörg and I had an excellent personal and professional relationship. I consider it as a 
great loss for us that he is returning to the government. Of course we did not agree on every 
occasion. 
SPIEGEL: Asmussen is the third German central banker to give up his job 
prematurely, after Bundesbank boss Axel Weber and the former ECB Executive Board 
member Jürgen Stark. Why aren’t the Germans happy at the ECB? 
Draghi:  You  can’t  compare  these  cases.  Jörg  has  made  it  clear  that  it  was  only  family 
reasons which prompted him to go back to Berlin. I have no reason to doubt that. 
SPIEGEL: In any case, Weber and Stark resigned because of your policy, which led to 
your famous remark in London a year and a half ago about doing “everything 
necessary” to save the euro. That means, in an emergency, buying up the government 
bonds of the crisis-ridden countries and taking on risks amounting to billions for 
which in the end German taxpayers above all would be liable. Can you understand that 
many German citizens are at odds with this? 
Draghi:  Weber  and  Stark  resigned  before  my  arrival  at  the  ECB.  But  the  truth  is  that 
conditions  in  the  euro  area  have  improved  considerably  since  then.  Consider  the  latest 
developments:  crisis-ridden  countries  such  as  Ireland  and  Portugal  are  exiting  the  bailout 
programme, the risk premia for loans to crisis-hit countries in southern Europe are declining, 
and  investors  from  all  over  the  world  are  once  again  investing  in  Europe.  In  other  words, 
most of the financial-economic data are turning in the right direction. 
SPIEGEL: Are you saying the euro crisis is over? 
Draghi:  No,  but  the  fears  felt  by  some  sectors  of  the  public  in  Germany  have  not  been 
confirmed. What haven’t we been accused of? When we offered European banks additional 
liquidity  two  years  ago,  it  was  said  there  would  be  a  high  rate  of  inflation.  Nothing  has 
happened. When I made my comment in London, there was talk of a violation of the central 
bank’s mandate. But we had made clear from the beginning that we are moving within our 
mandate. Each time it was said, for goodness’ sake, this Italian is ruining Germany. There 
was  this  perverse  Angst  that  things  were  turning  bad,  but  the  opposite  has  happened: 
inflation is low and uncertainty reduced. 
SPIEGEL: The economic crisis in Europe is still threatening to blow up the euro. 
Growth is low, so unemployment in southern Europe is reaching record levels. 
Draghi:  The  crisis  has  not  been  overcome,  but  there  are  many  encouraging  signs.  The 
economy  is  recovering  in  many  countries,  the  imbalances  in  European  trade  are  declining 
and the budget deficits in the monetary union are falling. That’s more than was expected a 
year ago. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
SPIEGEL: But the debt level in many euro area countries is rising unabated, and 
there’s less willingness to reform. Greece, for example, will again miss its targets. 
Does the country need another bailout? 
Draghi: In Greece, quite a few things have changed for the better, but the country has to do 
more, there’s no doubt about that. 
SPIEGEL: In fact, the situation is disastrous. If the state has to take up emergency 
loans again, Greece will definitely be living off the rest of the euro area. How is the 
country ever to get back on its feet? 
Draghi: Some countries need a programme that runs for three years, others take somewhat 
longer. In Greece, the position at the outset was particularly difficult, so now we have to be 
particularly patient with the country. That’s no surprise. 
SPIEGEL: The reform process is slowing down in other countries as well. France, for 
example, is again making debts, and the planned reforms in the labour market or the 
tax system are not moving ahead. How concerned are you about developments in the 
euro area’s second-largest country? 
Draghi:  France  is  facing  the  same  problems  as  other  countries  which  need  to  get  their 
budgets  in  order  and  to  make  structural  reforms.  Many  states  have  raised  taxes  and  cut 
investments  first.  This  is  the  easiest  way,  but  both  approaches  weaken  growth.  A  more 
promising  avenue  is  to  bring  current  government  spending  down  and  introduce  structural 
reforms in the labour market. 
SPIEGEL: The only problem is that France isn’t doing that. Aren’t you getting tired of 
repeatedly urging the country to reform, but then nothing happens? 
Draghi: In Latin you say: “Repetita iuvant – to repeat is beneficial”. The fewer changes made 
in a country, the more often I repeat my messages. And it works. 
SPIEGEL: We have a feeling that the number of governments which can no longer 
hear your tune is growing. The new coalition in Germany, for example, wants to undo 
the pension reforms made by the red-green coalition government years ago and 
introduce a universal minimum wage of €8.50. Are these policies that help the euro? 
Draghi: It is too early to assess the policies of the new German government. I can only say 
that  the  crisis  has  shown  that  the  monetary  union  is  incomplete  and  that  the  weaknesses 
need  to  be  remedied.  Germany  helps  the  euro  best  by  further  strengthening  its 
competitiveness and promoting growth. Whatever helps that process is right, everything else 
is wrong. 
SPIEGEL: Many economists represent a completely different theory. They regard 
Germany’s competitiveness as the real problem of the euro area and are calling for 
state curbs on exports. What do you think of that? 
Draghi: Not much. It’s a mechanistic perspective of economic activity, and there’s little I can 
do with it. We won’t make the weak stronger by making the strong weaker, as a very wise 
man once said. That applies to the economy as well. If Germany were less competitive, the 
euro area as a whole would lose, because less could be produced then. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
SPIEGEL: In Germany, ECB policy is unpopular because you have now pushed the 
interest rates for investments down so far that they are often no longer enough to 
compensate for inflation. In other words, only fools save.  
Draghi: That’s not the fault of the ECB. The link between the short-term interest rates set by 
the ECB and the long-term interest rates paid on investments which are relevant for savers in 
Germany is not very strong. 
SPIEGEL: Really? It’s a stated goal of your policy to indirectly suppress long-term 
interest rates. 
Draghi: No, especially in recent years, we were unable to control long-term interest rates – 
because  investors  were  very  unsettled  by  the  euro  crisis.  That’s  why  everyone  has  been 
taking money into Germany to buy safe German government bonds. That’s why the interest 
rates in Germany have fallen. We take the concerns of savers very seriously. But how can 
we respond? We run monetary policy for the entire euro area, not for a single country. If we 
are able to dispel the uncertainty, many investors will again take their money out of Germany 
and back to their home countries and interest rates will rise again. 
SPIEGEL: People can see in the statements from their life insurance companies that 
they are getting ever smaller payouts from year to year because of the interest rates. 
The truth is that savers are paying the price for rescuing the euro. 
Draghi: I am sure that the insurance companies do not refer to the key policy rate when they 
send their statements. We can only control that rate. Long-term interest rates are determined 
largely  by  global  financial  markets.  If  the  Fed  decides  to  buy  US  Treasury  bonds  worth 
USD 1 trillion a year, then that affects interest rates worldwide. 
SPIEGEL: The Fed has now announced to reduce the purchases of government 
bonds. What does that mean for the Euro area and the Euro? 
Draghi: So far markets have shown that the announcement by the FOMC has not affected 
the euro area markets. Their resilience is greater than a year ago. 
SPIEGEL: That does not help the savers much. Currently, you get about 0.8% interest 
per year on a savings account in Germany, while the inflation rate is 1.3%. Do you 
think that is a normal and healthy development? 
Draghi: Normal and healthy it is not. The real interest rate should be positive under normal 
conditions. Today in some countries it is negative, in others it is positive and even too high. 
We are very aware of the risks such fragmentation entails. 
SPIEGEL: Which risks do you mean? 
Draghi: First, the stability of the financial system is at risk if interest rates are too low for too 
long. Until now, however, we have only seen significant price increases in some specific and 
limited markets, for example, in some real estate markets in Europe. The second serious risk 
is that inflation, which is already clearly below our 2% target, might fall further. Yet we aren’t 
seeing any deflation, i.e. a general fall in prices. But we must be very careful that we do not 
permanently fall below 1% inflation and thus into the danger zone. 
SPIEGEL: How do you intend to react to it – should interest rates fall further? 
Draghi:  At  the  moment  we  see  no  need  for  immediate  action.  We  don’t  have  Japanese 
conditions.  There,  the  expectation  of  falling  prices  became  entrenched.  In  the  euro  area, 
market  participants  are  convinced  that  inflation  will  rise  to  close  but  below  2%  again.  In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
addition, Japan for a long time did not respond so resolutely in terms of its monetary policy 
as did the ECB. And finally, banks and companies in Japan were in a worse condition than 
those in the euro area today. 
SPIEGEL: The condition of European banks is bad enough. So the banking union is 
going to come now and create a level playing field for all banks in the euro area. How 
important is the project for the monetary union? 
Draghi: Extremely important. Europe’s financial system is still fragmented. Although the gap 
in funding costs for banks within the euro area is no longer as wide as it was two years ago. 
But  in  lending  the  differences  are  still  very  large,  and  in  some  countries  the  credit  flow  is 
disrupted.  The  banking  union  can  help  to  restore  confidence  in  cross-border  lending.  The 
most important objective of the Asset Quality Review is transparency. We want to shed light 
on what is hidden in the banks’ balance sheets. 
SPIEGEL: The EU has just agreed on a procedure how to handle banks that are not 
viable. Does the new resolution mechanism meet your wishes? 
Draghi:  I  really  want  such  a  mechanism  to  work.  We,  as  a  supervisory  body,  decide  only 
whether a bank is viable or not. Then the resolution authority has to decide what to do with 
the bank: close it, split it up or sell it. The problem is, when we say that the bank is not viable, 
steps then have to be taken extremely quickly. And it is certain that it does not work when 
hundreds of people across Europe have to discuss what needs to be done. 
SPIEGEL: But is that certain with the decision taken now? 
Draghi: If urgent action is needed we’ll have a fast-track procedure that gives the Council and 
the Commission 24 hours to decide on proposals of the Board of the resolution mechanism. 
If  they  don’t  decide  a  bank  faces  liquidation,  so  there  will  be  enough  pressure  to  find  a 
solution. 
SPIEGEL: What condition are European banks in? 
Draghi:  To  find  that  out,  we  will  be  closely  examining  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  in  the 
coming year. No conclusive judgement can be reached prior to that. But the banking system 
is now in a much better position than four years ago. Since then, around €0.5 trillion of fresh 
capital  has  flowed  into  the  euro  area  banks  and  many  institutions  have  changed  their 
business  models. What  is  also  certain  is  that  almost  all  banks  have  been  operating  much 
more profitably and with lower costs. 
SPIEGEL: You paint a very positive picture of the euro area, but many German policy-
makers remain very critical of ECB policy. How much longer can the conflict between 
you and Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann go on? 
Draghi:  I  would  rather  speak  of  convergence  than  of  conflict.  Our  positions  have  clearly 
moved  closer  to  each  other  and  cooperation  has  improved.  Take  the  recent  interest  rate 
reduction, Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann initially had some reservations, but then 
he  said  that  this  step  was  justified.  I  have  often  said  that  I  have  great  respect  for  the 
Bundesbank as an institution and for what it means to the Germans. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
SPIEGEL: That sounds rather like Christmas harmony. Some economists in Germany 
speak of the “Club Med” when they talk about the majority of southern Europeans in 
the Governing Council and accuse you of copying the inflation policy of the Bank of 
Italy in the 1970s. 
Draghi: There are only a few who are insinuating that I am helping Italy because I’m Italian. 
This doesn’t affect me. I have proved often enough that I adhere strictly to the mandate of 
the central bank and run a policy for the entire euro area. This is also true of my colleagues 
in the Governing Council. No one there thinks in nationalist categories; that applies more to 
those who voice such unjustified criticisms. 
SPIEGEL: But ECB policy is very sceptically viewed not only by the Bundesbank, but 
also by the Federal Constitutional Court. Probably at the beginning of the year, the 
Court will decide whether the ECB’s bond-buying programme complies with the Basic 
Law. Are you worried about the verdict? 
Draghi: There is no point in thinking about a court ruling beforehand. But we are certain that 
with all our monetary policy decisions we are operating within our mandate. 
SPIEGEL: Many expect you that the judges will set a limit on government bond 
purchases. What will you do then? 
Draghi: There are already limits. We have said from the beginning that our programme would 
be  limited  to  the  purchase  of securities  with  short maturities.  Apart from  that,  we  can  only 
wait, we have no plan B. 
SPIEGEL: Now you need a successor to the outgoing ECB Executive Board member 
Asmussen. The Federal Government has nominated Sabine Lautenschläger, the 
current Vice-President of the Bundesbank. What do you think of her? 
Draghi: I have known Ms Lautenschläger for years and appreciate her work as supervisor. 
Appointing  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council  is  a  matter  for  the  governments  of  the 
euro area. But I would welcome it very much if the vacancy could be filled by a woman. 
SPIEGEL: Mr Draghi, thank you for this interview. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
