DeLisle Worrell: Developments in the global financial sector with 
implications for regulators and financial institutions 
Introductory remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
4th Annual Domestic Financial Institutions Seminar, Bridgetown, 11 September 2013. 
 The  conference  offers  an  opportunity  to  reflect  on  developments  in  the  financial  sector  at 
home  and  abroad,  and  on  their  implications  for  policy  changes  by  regulators,  and  for  the 
strategies  of  financial  institutions.  The  presentations  at  conferences  such  as  this  one  may 
serve  as  background  material  for  policy  making  and  strategic  planning,  and  they  may 
suggest to us topics to be added to our agenda for further study. On some topics we will be 
reporting on recent developments, while on others we will be sharing thoughts and ideas that 
are yet in the process of development. Among the major challenges of today's world is the 
challenge  of  change,  and  an  occasion  like  this  one  provides  a  forum  for  us  to  share 
perspectives on where changes to the financial sector are heading, and what we may need 
to do about them, at the individual and at the regulatory levels. In addition to the topics on 
which formal presentations will be made, participants are encouraged to raise any pertinent 
issue which we might fruitfully discuss, and put on our agenda for further discussion.  
On  the  whole  we  may  be  satisfied  that  we  have  a  financial  system  that  suits  our  needs, 
performs well and is  well supervised. We keep up to date with international best practices 
and we keep our eyes on all the circumstances and developments, domestic, regional and 
international, that could have adverse effects on our financial system. 
Our financial system has a full range of services for the needs of households, for savings, 
mortgages,  purchase  of  consumer  durables, 
insurance  and  payments.  Established 
businesses  are  also  well  served,  with  finance  for  equipment,  office  space  and  working 
capital.  
These  services  are  delivered  by  financial  institutions  in  which  consumers  may  have 
confidence. They are all supervised either by the Financial Services Commission (FSC) or 
the  Central  Bank,  and  they  report  regularly  to  the  supervisor  on  their  operations.  We  the 
supervisors  carry  out  examinations  to  verify  that  our  financial  institutions  operate  to 
standards of international best practice.  
The  Central  Bank  and  the  FSC  collaborate  closely  to  maintain  oversight  of  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole.  This  collaboration,  recently 
in  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  signed jointly  between  the  Bank  and  the  FSC,  predates the  FSC,  and  was 
reflected in links between the earlier regulatory bodies. Twice per year the regulators conduct 
a  comprehensive  evaluation  of  the  health  of  the  financial  system,  and  put  in  place  any 
measures  that  may  from  time  to  time  be  necessary  to  address  any  elevated  risks  to  the 
system, whether from internal sources or from abroad. Each year a Financial Stability Report 
is published, reporting on the health of the system, with an update at mid-year. Today  we 
share with you the report of our mid-year assessment.  
We are well aware that there are ways in which our financial system needs to be improved. 
We have never had a perfectly competitive financial system, and if we are realistic we will 
admit that our financial sector is too small to attract many players. We should think of other 
ways to encourage higher levels of service and efficiency on the part of financial institutions.  
As you know, individual savers do not do very well at commercial banks, earning 2.5 percent 
on savings only because the Central Bank stipulates that minimum. It is no secret that banks 
are unhappy that there is a minimum at all. I am suggesting to individuals that, for all their 
rainy day savings, they consider Government savings bonds instead. Savings bonds are just 
as convenient as savings deposits, because you buy them at commercial banks, and they 
are just as liquid as savings deposits, because you can cash them in at any time. However, if 
formalised 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
you hold them for the full five years of their maturity you earn an interest rate in the region of 
5 percent, compounded over 5 years.  
One area which our financial sector does not serve very well is the financing of innovation 
and of small and medium enterprises. This is an area of exceptionally high risk, into which 
conventional financial institutions no longer have any incentive to enter. The stipulations for 
reserves and provisions against possible loss are now so stringent that even small portfolio 
allocations  for  high  risk  high  return  propositions  may  no  longer  be  viable.  Conventional 
institutions, even insurance companies and others with a long horizon, may not be the best 
sources of funds for SMEs in their initial years. New firms should start with equity funding, so 
as to avoid debt service obligations during the formative period of the enterprise, before it 
has a regular clientele and a dependable cash flow. Some new firms have been successful in 
finding equity, in spite of the absence of an organised market for venture capital in Barbados, 
and  some  capital  has  been  provided,  over  the  years,  by  NGOs  and  others.  We  need  to 
continue the search for better arrangements for equity funding of new ventures.  
There  are  issues  which  are  of  current  importance  which  are  not  on  today's  programme 
because  we  need  to  give  more  thought  to  them.  An  important  one  is  the  unanticipated 
consequences  of  international  financial  reform  for  emerging  market  economies  like 
Barbados. We are discussing this issue at the Regional Consultative Group for the Americas 
of the Financial Stability Board, and we will place this item on our agenda going forward.  
Also for the future agenda are ongoing projects to improve regional financial surveillance and 
to  put  in  place  formal  mechanisms  to  actively  manage  any  future  difficulties  of  financial 
institutions that are regional in scope. These efforts are being coordinated by the Caribbean 
Centre for Money and Finance.  
As  we  look  forward  to  a  day  of  fruitful  discussion,  I  urge  everyone  to  view  this  as  a 
waystation  in  our  ongoing  journey  of  financial  development.  This  is  an  opportunity  for 
thoughtful  reflection  about  what  we  have  achieved  since  last  year,  and  about  what  lies 
ahead. I trust we will all leave this meeting with a clearer vision for our future. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
