Haruhiko Kuroda: Recent developments in Japan’s economy, and 
observations on the European situation given Japan’s experience during 
the 1990s financial crisis 
Remarks  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Paris  Europlace 
Financial Forum, Tokyo, 25 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to have this opportunity to speak before the Paris Europlace Financial Forum 
today. 
In  the  following  few  minutes,  after  briefly  touching  on  the  recent  developments  in  Japan’s 
economy, I would like to go over what we can say about the European authorities’ various 
initiatives from our experience of Japan’s financial crisis in the 1990s, bearing in mind the 
recent European situation. 
The developments in Japan’s economy and prices 
I would like to start off with the recent developments in Japan’s economic activity and prices. 
The  Bank  of Japan  introduced quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  in  April 
this year with a view to bringing Japan’s economy out of deflation, which has lasted for nearly 
15 years. In the subsequent eight months, the Bank has been steadily pursuing this policy. 
Positive developments have been spreading in financial markets and the real economy, as 
well  as  in  people’s  mindset  and  expectations.  The  QQE  has  steadily  been  exerting  its 
intended  effects.  Japan’s  economy  is  recovering  moderately,  with  a  positive  spillover  from 
income to expenditure in the household and corporate sectors taking course. Looking ahead, 
a  virtuous  circle  among  production,  income,  and  spending  is  expected  to  continue,  and 
Japan’s economy is projected to grow, as a trend, at a pace above its potential. On the price 
front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less 
fresh food has recently been accelerating to a range between 0.5 and 1.0 percent. With the 
prospect  of  an  improvement  in  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  and  a  rise  in 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is 
likely to follow a rising trend. Therefore, Japan’s economy has been following a path toward 
achieving the 2 percent price stability target as expected. 
European situation 
Now, let me briefly refer to the European situation. While details will be provided by Governor 
Noyer, our recognition is that the European economy is bottoming out and there are signs of 
a  pick-up.  As  a  recovery  in  the  European  economy  is  an  essential  factor  not  only  for  a 
sustained recovery of Japan’s economy but also for the stability of the global economy as a 
whole, we are watching developments very carefully. 
After  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  President  Draghi’s  remarks  in  July  2012  and  the 
introduction of the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) by the ECB in September 2012, 
fluctuations in international financial markets triggered by developments in Europe seem to 
have  declined  substantially.  Meanwhile,  progress  also  has  been  made  on  the  financial 
stability  front,  with  preparations  for  the  Asset  Quality  Review  (AQR)  and  stress  testing 
progressing ahead of the formation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism next year. Along 
these lines, we  note that discussions on the need to arrange a public backstop in case of 
capital  shortages resulting from  the  AQR  and  stress  testing  have  been moving forward  as 
well. While difficult issues may lie ahead, including establishment of a resolution framework, 
we are confident that the European authorities will produce appropriate policy responses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In light of Japan’s experience 
Let me now move on to what we might be able to say based on our experience during the 
financial crisis in the 1990s in relation to the European authorities’ initiatives. Of course, the 
situation  the  authorities  face  and  the  primary  features  of  the  problem  are  probably  not 
completely the same as what Japan endured in the 1990s. Thus, I do not think that Japan’s 
experience is wholly applicable, although I hope it will provide some insight. 
The  first  point  I  would  like  to  make  is  with  regard  to  the  difficulty  of  establishing  an 
appropriate resolution framework. During Japan’s financial crisis in the 1990s, the Japanese 
authorities were repeatedly criticized for acting too late. Admittedly, looking back, we could 
have acted more swiftly in some areas. However, there seem to be two factors behind the 
fact  that  it  took  time  to  establish  an  institutional  framework.  A  trial  and error  situation  was 
inevitable due to lack of a framework previously, and the overall process involved the need to 
gain understanding from the public. Measures to set up institutional frameworks, especially 
when it involves public money, are bound to take time. Coordination among various relevant 
parties to compile legislative measures has to be made, and the public’s understanding of 
the necessity for such a framework has to be gained. Public understanding of a resolution 
framework involving public money becomes important, especially in a case where there is a 
need to actually use or modify such a framework. 
While  the  establishment  of  a  framework  is  taking  place,  financial  markets  tend  to  want 
immediate  tangible  results,  and  a  gap  between  the  timeframe  of  action  by  the  market 
participants  and  that  of  the  public  authorities  tends  to  emerge.  Policymakers  need  to 
conscientiously and patiently deliver explanations in order to narrow the gap by as much as 
possible. 
The second point I would like to make is with regard to the detection of financial imbalances. 
As the source of Japan’s financial crisis in the 1990s was the bursting of the bubble that was 
generated  in  the  late  1980s,  active  debate  took  place  on  how  we  can  promptly  recognize 
financial imbalances like the bubble. After the global financial crisis, the importance of having 
a  macroprudential  perspective  has  been  underlined  following  a  similar  thought  process. 
Based on past insights, the Bank has been examining whether there are financial imbalances 
using  such  techniques  as  "macro  risk  indicators"  and  "macro  stress  testing."  Some  of  the 
results  of  such  exercises  have  been  included  in  our  publications  of  the  Financial  System 
Report.  In  a  number  of  countries  including  those  in  Europe,  efforts  have  been  made  from 
macroprudential  perspectives.  In  my  view,  it  would  be  useful  if  we  could  share  our 
discoveries and experiences so that we can better detect any future financial imbalances. 
The third point is that, even if the banking sector’s nonperforming asset problem has been 
solved, it could take time until funds are smoothly channeled to the real economy. In Japan’s 
case,  after  the  financial  crisis  in  the  1990s,  financial  system  stability  issues  were  mostly 
addressed  by  the  mid-2000s;  however,  firms’  funding  remained  sluggish  even  after  that. 
Against such a backdrop, the Japanese government implemented various policy measures. 
The  Bank  also  provided  support  for  corporate  financing.  Measures  include  expanding  the 
range  of  eligible  collateral  to  include  asset-backed  securities,  purchasing  asset-backed 
securities, commercial paper, and corporate bonds, and creating funds supplying facilities to 
support corporate financing. These measures did support corporate financing, especially in 
the face of a series of stress events such as the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the Great 
East  Japan  Earthquake in  2011.  However,  I have  to  admit  that there  are  still a  number of 
issues to be examined, such as to what extent a central bank should be involved in resource 
allocation  and  the  effectiveness  of  individual  measures.  I  understand  that  measures  to 
promote lending to small and medium-sized firms are being contemplated in Europe. It also 
would be useful for us to share our findings and experiences in this field so that we will have 
a better understanding of what types of measures are appropriate in the area of corporate 
lending. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding remarks 
Regarding what I have talked about today, we do not have clear answers yet on such issues 
as the detection of financial imbalances or measures to revitalize corporate financing. These 
deserve further examination. It would be beneficial if, by using occasions like this event, we 
could accumulate our knowledge on those issues by also learning from the experiences of 
our European colleagues. By making use of views exchanged with you, the Bank, through 
bringing  Japan’s  economy  out  of  deflation  that  has  lasted  for  nearly  15  years  while 
maintaining the stability of the financial system, will contribute to sustainable growth of the 
global economy. 
I would like to thank you very much for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
