Agathe Côté: The promise of potential 
Remarks by Ms Agathe Côté, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the CFA Society 
Winnipeg/Manitoba Chambers of Commerce, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 29 October 2013. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
Thank you. It is a great pleasure to be here. 
I want to talk today about potential, a word that speaks optimistically to the future – to what 
can be. 
It’s a word that means different things to different people under different circumstances. 
It’s an abstraction: a concept that promises a road leading to success. That is the finish line – 
the  promised  destination. Getting  there  is  another  story. The  way  forward  is  seldom  direct 
and reaching potential is a trajectory where the journey is as important as the destination, 
especially for the “dismal” science of economics. 
We  can  think  of  Canada’s  economic  potential  as  where  we  can  be  if  we  do  our  best  and 
make all the right decisions. It is what we can hope to achieve over the longer run. 
Since potential output growth is key to a country’s standard of living, it should be of interest 
to all of us. Consider this: if potential output were to grow by an extra percentage point every 
year for the next ten years, the cumulative increase in income would be almost $30,000 for 
every Canadian. 
At the Bank of Canada, we care about potential output for two reasons. First, the growth rate 
of potential output sheds light on the prospects for our country’s economic growth. Second, 
the difference between the level of actual and potential output – or the output gap – is a key 
measure of inflation pressures. And keeping inflation at the 2 per cent target rate is the best 
contribution that monetary policy can make to the financial well-being of Canadians. 
The  Bank’s  assessment  of  the  current  output  gap  and  the  projected  growth  of  potential 
output have a direct bearing on the Bank’s inflation outlook and monetary policy decisions. 
Other things being equal, a larger degree of slack in the economy implies a greater need for 
monetary policy stimulus. As well, the higher the projected growth rate of potential output, the 
higher the economy can grow without stoking inflation.1 
Each year in October, the Bank reviews its estimates of potential output. I will share with you 
some  of  our findings  and  what  we  think  they  say  about  the  journey  Canada’s  economy  is 
taking. 
Although  Canada  came  out  of  the  recession  earlier  and  recovered  faster  than  other  G-7 
countries, our economic growth has been disappointing in the past year. I think we can agree 
that the finish line is proving elusive; we “are not there yet.” 
Looking ahead, the Bank sees the economy gaining momentum through next year and 2015, 
but there are uncertainty and risks around the outlook. 
                                                
1   Over time, one can expect the economy to operate at its full capacity, with no output gap and with inflation 
steady at its target rate. At that point, the growth rate of potential determines the pace of economic activity. It 
is worth noting that reaching potential growth does not necessarily imply that the economy has returned to its 
natural  or  self-sustaining  growth  rate.  Depending  on  the  circumstances,  monetary  policy  may  still  need  to 
provide stimulus or restraint. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
If my speech today achieves its potential, you will gain a deeper understanding of potential 
output in Canada, why it is hard to measure, why it has slowed, where we are today, and 
what the future may hold for our economy. 
Deconstructing the immeasurable 
Measuring  potential  output  and  the  output  gap  is  difficult  because  potential  is  not  directly 
observable. It is hard to measure what could be. 
What  we  try  to  do  is  determine  the  level  of  output  that  can  be  achieved  with  available 
resources (labour, capital and materials) without creating inflationary pressures. 
Potential output as a concept, and its link to inflation, make a lot of sense. Time is the most 
precious quantity, and as you know too well, balancing our professional and personal lives is 
no  easy  task.  And  as  the  former  encroaches  on  the  latter,  history  tells  us  that  wage 
pressures  begin  to  build,  eventually  leading  to  higher  prices.  Similarly,  when  a  firm’s 
production can’t keep pace with demand, prices move up in an attempt to restore balance. 
But while conceptually appealing, accurately measuring potential output is a formidable task. 
To do so, we must take a view not only on how many hours people are willing to work at a 
given wage, but also on how productive these people will be when their labour is combined 
with other inputs, such as machinery and equipment or on-the-job training. 
At  the  aggregate  level,  the  future  trajectory  of  potential  output  will  depend  on  a  lot  of 
variables: on how strong the demand is for our goods and services, on how much existing 
firms decide to invest in research and development and technology, on how many new firms 
are created, and other unknowns.2 It will also depend on our workforce – who is working and 
until what age, and whether workers can move easily to where the best jobs are and where 
they are most needed. 
In light of all these unknowns, the Bank of Canada has to use various models, indicators, as 
well as information gathered from businesses, and a good deal of judgment to come up with 
its estimates.3 Our analysis focuses on the two  variables that determine actual output and 
whose  trends  determine  potential  output,  that  is,  labour  input  (or  total  hours  worked)  and 
labour productivity (or real output per hour worked). 
The results  of  our most  recent  analyses  tell  us that the  output gap  is  sizable  and  that  the 
growth rate of potential is likely to remain fairly steady at around 2 per cent in coming years. 
But, before I go into further detail on the outlook, let me step back and describe how we got 
to where we are now. 
A tale of troughs and trends 
For that I have a short story and a long story. 
I’ll begin with the short story: the recession. 
As I said, Canada weathered the global financial crisis relatively well, but we were severely 
affected nonetheless. In the space of three quarters in 2008 and 2009, the level of output fell 
by 4 per cent. The export-oriented sectors (including resources) were hardest hit, with GDP 
dropping by 15 per cent (Chart 1). Across Canada, almost 400,000 jobs were lost. 
                                                
2   See  S.  Poloz,  “Returning  to  Natural  Economic  Growth”  (speech  to  the  Vancouver  Board  of  Trade, 
18 September 2013). 
In  practice,  separating  potential  from  actual  output  amounts  to distinguishing  between  the  underlying  trend 
and cyclical movements in output. Different approaches can be used to extract these trends, ranging from very 
simple mechanical filters to structural models. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3  
2 
 The  recession  also  led  to  a  drop  in  the  growth  rate  of  potential  output  (Chart  2).  Some 
businesses  shut  their  doors.  Machinery  and  other  capital  were  left  idle  or  scrapped 
altogether.  Rather  than  investing  in  new  capital,  other  firms  made  do  with  old  equipment. 
These factors  combined  to make  workers  less  productive. Our  best  judgment  is  that trend 
labour productivity growth might have fallen to less than half a per cent during that period 
and that potential output troughed at about 1.5 per cent. 
But as I said, there is also a long story. That story has two parts: trend labour productivity 
and trend labour input. 
Trend labour productivity 
I’ll  start  with  trend  labour  productivity.  From  the  mid-1990s  to  about  2000,  the  boom  in 
technology production was associated with a sharp increase in the growth rate of productivity 
and  potential  output  in  Canada.  Since  then,  however,  productivity  growth  has  slowed  to 
historically  low  rates  and  has  languished  well  below  U.S.  rates.  While  U.S.  companies 
started using information and communication technology (ICT) capital (specifically software) 
to boost their processes and business practices, it appears that Canadian companies did not 
follow suit. 
Many other factors likely contributed to the slowing of productivity growth in Canada and the 
widening gap with the United States (Chart 3). The explanations range from measurement 
issues,  to  economic  restructuring  in  response  to  large  commodity  price  shocks,  to  deeper 
structural determinants, including a poor innovation record, low competition in some sectors 
and a less-skilled workforce.4 The Canada-U.S. gap may also reflect greater offshoring and 
foreign affiliate sales by U.S. firms. 
Since much of the decline in actual productivity growth in the first half of the 2000s coincided 
with strong overall economic growth, this suggests that a significant part was structural (and 
not  only  cyclical)  and  therefore  affected  trend  labour  productivity  growth.  Since  2008, 
however,  part  of  the  weak  growth  has  been  due  to  cyclical  factors  associated  with  the 
recession. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  in  spite  of  low  productivity,  Canadians  have  enjoyed  relatively  high 
incomes in the past several years. Our standard of living depends not only on the volume of 
output but also on the trading value of that output. As commodity prices rose, our terms of 
trade  –  the  price  we  get  for  our  exports  relative  to  the  price  we  pay  for  our  imports  – 
improved,  helping  to  boost  Canadian  income  growth.  But  going  forward,  productivity  may 
become more crucial to our financial well-being, since real commodity prices, while expected 
to remain elevated, may not rise as much as they did in the past decade. 
Trend labour input 
Let me turn now to the second part of the story: trend labour input. 
The total hours worked by the labour force is a function of the working-age population, the 
employment rate, and average hours worked. Demographic factors are key to all of these. 
Until  around  2008,  the  growth  rate  of  the  working-age  population  remained  fairly  steady 
(Chart  4)  and  the  increased  participation  rate  of  women  almost  completely  offset  the 
declining participation rate of men. But, since then, the effects of an aging population have 
                                                
4   See M. Carney, “The Virtue of Productivity in a Wicked World” (speech to the Ottawa Economics Association, 
24  March  2010);  T.  Macklem,  “A  Measure  of  Work”  (speech  to  the  Winnipeg  Chamber  of  Commerce, 
4 October  2012);  and  “Canada’s  Competitive  Imperative:  Investing  in  Productivity  Gains”  (speech  to 
Productivity Alberta, 1 February 2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
become  more  noticeable.  We  are  getting  older,  living  longer  and  having  fewer  children.5 
Baby boomers are retiring or reducing the amount of hours they work and lower fertility rates 
over the past 20 years means that more people are leaving the workforce than entering it. 
While net immigration is important, and currently accounts for half of the population growth in 
Canada, it cannot stop the labour force deceleration. 
Other factors, besides demographics, are evidently affecting labour input, but their impact on 
the  trend  is  harder  to  discern.  For  instance,  the  recession  affected  both  the  demand  and 
supply of labour. On the one hand, firms cut back on hiring and hours worked diminished. On 
the other hand, individuals looked to work more to make up for lost wealth and income. It is 
unclear  to  what  degree  these  two  factors  offset each  other  in  terms  of  the  trend  and  how 
persistent they are. The Bank’s estimates assume that, on balance, the recession had little 
impact on trend labour input growth.6  
Taking stock 
To sum up, productivity growth was on a downward trend going into the recession and the 
recession exacerbated this trend. Largely as a result, the growth rate of potential output is 
estimated to have declined from above 3.5 per cent in the late 1990s to about 1.5 per cent in 
2009. With  output  well  below  potential  during  the  recession,  the  amount  of  excess  supply 
grew to as much as 3.5 to 4.5 per cent. 
Thanks to strong domestic demand, Canada recovered fairly rapidly from the recession and 
registered solid growth in 2010 and 2011. As production increased and business investment 
accelerated, we estimate that trend labour productivity growth has slowly increased, leading 
to a pickup in potential output growth to about 2 per cent in the past year. 
While  our  estimates  suggest  that the  economy  was  getting  close to  potential  in  late  2011, 
slower  growth  since  then  has  led  to  a  significant  buildup  of  excess  capacity.  Taking  into 
account a range of indicators and models, the Bank judges that the amount of slack today is 
between 1 and 2 per cent. 
Given  the  enormous  complexity  in  estimating  potential  output,  it  is  no  surprise  that  the 
various indicators monitored by the Bank suggest a range, rather than a single point. 
Furthermore,  distinguishing  between  movements  in  indicators  that  reflect  cyclical  demand-
driven factors from those that are more structural is very tricky. Let’s take the employment-to-
population ratio as one example. This ratio has been hovering at about 0.62 for more than 
two years, much lower than its pre-recession peak of 0.637 (Chart 5). Taken at face value, it 
points  to  a  considerable  degree  of  slack  in  the  labour  market.  But,  our  discussion  of 
demographics  suggests  that  there  are  other  forces  at  play  not  related  to  cyclical  labour 
demand.  With  each  passing  year,  older  workers  are  making  up  a  larger  share  of  the 
workforce,  and  these  workers  understandably  have  a  much  lower  participation  rate.  If  we 
focus  instead  on  the  employment  ratio  of  prime-age  workers,  we  see  that  a  much  larger 
proportion of the losses suffered during the recession have been recovered. 
Whether we should expect to get back to the pre-recession peak is also open to question, 
since  this  period  marks  the  highest  employment  ratio  going  back  several  decades.  The 
problem with using historic peaks in employment, or connecting historic peaks in GDP, is that 
                                                
5   Canada is far from unique in this situation. All G-7 countries have seen a drop in the total fertility rate and an 
increase in life expectancy. However, the situation in Canada is more favourable when compared with that of 
Germany, Italy and Japan. See J. Boivin, “Aging Gracefully: Canada’s Inevitable Demographic Shift” (speech 
to the Economic Club of Canada, 4 April 2012). 
6   Prolonged unemployment can lead to a loss of human capital, as workers’ skills deteriorate, making it difficult 
to re-enter the work force. These persistent effects could ultimately have a negative effect on potential output 
growth. However, it is not yet clear how large this effect will be. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
by definition, the economy can never be in excess demand. But, of course, history suggests 
otherwise. Economies can and do produce above their long-run sustainable level. 
Reaching our destination 
Looking  forward,  the  Bank  of  Canada  expects  that  excess  supply  will  be  absorbed  slowly 
over time and that the Canadian economy will return to its full potential around the end of 
2015. 
This outlook depends on the various forces at play that will affect demand growth in Canada, 
and also on how potential output growth will evolve. 
The  Bank  expects  the  underlying  momentum  in  the  economy  to  build  over  time.  Growing 
foreign  demand  will  benefit  our  export  sector.  Growth  in  the  export  sector,  combined  with 
continued  moderate growth  in  household  spending,  should  boost  business  confidence  and 
investment – investment that will contribute to higher productivity growth. But this growth is 
expected  to  be  offset  by  a  further  slowing  in  trend  labour  input,  such  that  potential  output 
growth remains fairly stable at about 2 per cent (with a range of ± 0.3 percentage points). 
The projected slowdown in the growth rate of trend labour input (from 0.8 per cent in 2013 to 
0.5 per cent in 2016) is the result of the continuing demographic trends I mentioned earlier. 
This could change a little if older people stay in the workforce longer or increase the average 
number  of  hours  they  work.  Whether  or  not  they  do  so  will  depend  importantly  on  their 
financial  situation  and  whether  they  think  they  can  afford  to  retire.  For  example,  if 
15,000 additional  workers  over  55  decide  to  stay  in  the  labour  force  next  year,  we  could 
expect the growth rate of trend labour input to remain stable. 
The growth rate of trend labour productivity is expected to continue to increase in the next 
few years, reaching an above-average rate of 1.4 per cent in 2015. 
Since  the  recession,  we  have  seen  strong  investment  in  the  mining,  oil  and  gas  sector 
(Chart 6). Given the time it takes for these investments to translate into stronger output, the 
continued  expansion  of  infrastructure  in  this  sector  is  expected  to  contribute  to  future 
productivity growth. 
The  Bank  expects  to  see  greater  investment  across  most  sectors  of  the  economy. 
Investment  in  machinery  and  equipment  (M&E)  and  in  research  and  development  (R&D), 
which  have  been  slower  to  recover,  are  expected  to  gain  strength  as  foreign  activity,  in 
particular U.S. demand, accelerates. 
In  addition  to  contributing  directly  to  productivity  through  capital  deepening  (the  amount of 
capital available per worker), investment in M&E and R&D are associated with the adoption 
and  creation  of  new  technologies  and  processes  that  have  a  further  positive  effect  on 
productivity. 
Other factors  that  are  expected  to  contribute  to  the  recovery  in  the  growth  of  trend  labour 
productivity include Canada’s highly educated workforce, which will be able to adapt quickly 
to new technologies.7 As well, we expect firms to continue to adjust to the strong Canadian 
dollar as they adapt to highly competitive international markets. 
Stronger  investment  also  means  more  new  jobs.  Already  we  are  seeing  job  creation  in 
occupations that demand relatively high skill levels in industries with above-average wages. 
Recent  experience  has  shown  how  new  technologies  and  industries  can  emerge  from 
                                                
7   Although  Canada  has  a  highly  educated  workforce  (we  have  one  of  the  highest  levels  of  tertiary  degree 
attainment in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), we are lacking in certain key 
areas for productivity growth including fewer managers with university degrees and fewer university degrees 
granted in science, technology and business than in the United States. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
recessions and create new classes of jobs and a virtuous circle of improving confidence and 
expanding economic capacity. 
There  are  also  positive  signs  pointing  to  improved  labour  productivity.  But  there  is  still 
considerable uncertainty on the road ahead, and relatively weak performance in the recent 
past should temper our expectations. This said, productivity could also increase at a faster 
pace than we currently anticipate. This could occur if, for instance, net firm creation, which 
has  been  relatively  weak  since  2008  rebounds  at  a  faster  pace.  Canadian  firms’  plans  to 
expand  exports  to the fastest-growing  emerging  market  economies  and  greater  integration 
into global supply chains could also result in higher productivity growth over time. 
Conclusion 
As I said at the beginning, potential output growth is key to a country’s standard of living. 
In  arriving  at  its  forecast  for  Canadian  economic  growth  and  inflation,  the  Bank  analyzes 
where economic activity could be and where it actually is. We assess how – and when – this 
gap is most likely to close. This analysis feeds directly into our monetary policy decisions. 
Our analysis suggests that low inflation in recent months mainly reflects a significant amount 
of slack in the economy. We expect this slack to be absorbed gradually in the next two years, 
such that inflation also returns gradually to 2 per cent around the end of 2015. Weighing the 
downside  risks  to  inflation  against  the  risk  of  exacerbating  already-elevated  household 
imbalances has led the Bank to judge that the substantial monetary policy stimulus currently 
in place remains appropriate and therefore to maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 
per cent. 
As I’ve made clear in my remarks, estimating the output gap and the speed at which potential 
output will grow in the future is subject to considerable uncertainty. As more data become 
available, the Bank will continuously review its assumptions, and the balance of risks. 
The  analysis  also  offers  some  key  takeaways  about  what  the  future  may  hold  for  our 
economy. While Canada’s potential output took a hit during the recession, longer-term trends 
have also been at work affecting both trend labour input and trend labour productivity. 
An unrelenting demographic shift is under way. Strength in the growth rate of trend labour 
input can no longer be counted on to support potential output growth in the face of poor trend 
labour productivity. And, while Canada benefits from abundant natural resources, one cannot 
necessarily count on commodity prices to provide the same boost to income growth in the 
future as they have in the recent past. 
Here in Winnipeg you have reasons for confidence, with a productive and skilled workforce, 
diverse  industry,  healthy  investment  in  research  and  development,  and  an  unemployment 
rate that is consistently among the lowest in Canada. Your province has the necessary tools 
to build productivity and prosperity. 
As we journey forward, the Bank of Canada will continue its efforts to understand the trends 
affecting Canada’s economy and sharing what we learn with business leaders like you. 
We will also maintain our firm commitment to keeping inflation low, predictable, and stable. 
While  there  are many  variables  at  play,  the  2  per  cent  inflation  target  is  a  constant  at  the 
Bank  of  Canada,  and  an  essential  part  of  our  role  to  promote  the  financial  and  economic 
welfare of Canada. 
Thank you very much. 
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
