Cyril Roux: Effective banking and securities regulation 
Opening address by Mr Cyril Roux, Deputy Governor (Financial Regulation) of the Central 
Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  conference  on  Effective  Banking  and 
Securities Regulation, Dublin, 11 October 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  here  on  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  to  this 
conference on effective regulation of banking and securities. Five years after the collapse of 
Lehman  Brothers  and  four  years  after  the  G20  Summit  in  Pittsburgh  which  set  out  an 
ambitious agenda of banking and securities regulatory reform, it is timely that we ask: 
1. 
What are our expectations of banking and securities regulation and to what extent 
are they likely to be realised?  
Whether the challenges of delivering a better financial services industry to the real 
economy requires more far-reaching changes than writing new rules and increasing 
supervisory oversight.  
And if we have fully seized the opportunity to deliver safe supervisory oversight and 
soundness to the financing of economic activity?  
2. 
3. 
The topic of effective banking and securities regulation has indeed many dimensions.  
First,  it  operates  at  different  levels:  conduct  of  business,  micro-prudential  and  macro-
prudential.  In  some  cases,  a  single  competent  authority  may  have  responsibility  for 
regulation at all levels. In other cases, responsibilities may be given to a number of distinct 
authorities. Whatever the regulatory architecture, there are challenges of managing conflicts 
of purpose and coordinating agendas. 
Second, financial regulation has effects at a local level, national level and international level. 
A  common  approach  to  regulation  is  needed  for  it  to  be  effective.  Restrictions  on  short-
selling, high frequency trading or large bonuses may or may not make sense, but in any case 
they make very little sense within the confines of a single jurisdiction. 
Third,  banking  and  securities  regulation  use  a  variety  of  tools  which  operate  on  different 
planes: prudential rules on capital and liquidity; corporate governance codes and fitness and 
probity  standards;  prescriptive  rules  how  client  assets  are  held  or  investment  assets  are 
custodied; minimum disclosure requirements and indeed rules on remuneration and fees. 
And so, the rule books which underpin banking and securities are quite different. To a certain 
extent,  this  reflects  the  fact  that  securities  regulation  attempts  to  deal  with  a  host  of 
relationships  which  link  end-issuers  with  end-investors.  By  contrast,  banking  regulation 
typically  focuses  on  intermediation  conducted  under  the  roof  of  a  single  institution.  It  has 
been  said  that  the  basic  framework  for  securities  regulation  grew  out  of  a  need  to  protect 
investors.  By  contrast,  the  framework  for  banking  regulation  grew  out  of  desire  to  avoid 
depositors’ runs. 
Although  planned  some  time  ago,  this  conference  could  hardly  have  been  more  timely. 
Intense regulatory activity here in Ireland, in the EU, as well as in global sectoral fora and in 
the Financial Stability Board (FSB), hinges on these very issues. 
Avid readers of our Strategic Plan know that the effective regulation of financial institutions 
constitutes  one  of  the  eight  high  level  goals  set  for  our  institution  by  the  Central  Bank 
Commission. 
We  are  doing  our  very  best  to  deliver  that  goal.  I  don’t  need  to  remind  this  distinguished 
audience  that  on  the  1st  of  August,  the  Central  Bank  was  given  enhanced  regulatory  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
enforcement powers. How to use these powers most effectively is an issue at the forefront of 
our agenda. 
But the Central Bank is not the only Irish institution addressing the challenge of drawing up 
effective banking and securities regulation. The Irish public authorities have enacted a suite 
of new legislative Acts on the matter. Furthermore, Ireland has played a major role in pushing 
forward  decisively  many  large  pieces  of  financial  regulation  during  the  course  of  its 
presidency of the EU earlier this year. Some of this work carried over to the second half of 
this year, and 2013 will be remembered as a signal year for European financial regulation. 
On the European front, the European Banking Authority (EBA) and the European Securities 
and Markets Authority (ESMA) regularly bring new or revised guidelines, recommendations, 
technical standards and other ancillary regulations that complement the Directives and EU 
regulations in an ever increasing flow. 
In the eurozone, umpteen daily meetings in Frankfurt address the questions around setting 
up the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). Detailed supervisory manuals are drawn up. 
Organisation structures around the supervisory board are developed and plans are made for 
the recruitment and training of hundreds of supervisors in Frankfurt, picked from 18 countries 
or more. All these pieces are meant to create an effective international banking supervisor – 
when so many national ones are seen to have failed. 
What are the animating principles that underpin this regulatory activity? Financial stability is 
certainly  at  the  top  of  the  list.  A  century  or  so  ago,  after  the  Great  War,  nations  were 
determined  to build the global governance apparatus that would bring enduring peace. So 
are the financial regulators of today with regard to financial stability. But financial stability has 
not  always  been  the  only  objective  of  financial regulation, or  even  the  central  one.  Not  so 
long ago, the central regulatory impetus within the single market for financial services was to 
remove obstacles to freedom of services and freedom of establishment. At times, in Europe 
but  also  outside  of  Europe,  prominence  was  given  to  fostering  competition,  innovation,  or 
affordability. Even today, other objectives coexist with financial stability. Consumer protection 
is  the  concurrent  animating  principle  of  the  day,  embedded  in  the  mandate  of  the  Central 
Bank  of  Ireland  as  in  that  of  many  other  supervisory  authorities.  Anti-money  laundering 
comes  with  its  own  set  of  directives  and  reviews  by  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force.  Still 
other objectives are present today, even if they do not carry the same institutional weight. 
That  is  the  case  of  fostering  lending  to  the  non-financial  sector,  in  particular  to  small  and 
medium size companies, or fighting against tax evasion. Some even argue that preferential 
treatment of sovereign debt in financial regulation is the manifestation of an unacknowledged 
financial repression objective. 
With  this  complex  and  shifting  set  of  objectives,  it  is  no  wonder  that  there  are  no  easy 
answers  to  the  multiple  conundrums  that  face  those  who  design  regulations  and  the 
supervisors who are tasked to ensure that financial entities abide by them.  
Let me mention a few of these: 
1. 
Should we regulate activities or legal entities? We have done more work regulating 
legal entities, giving, or shall I say imposing on, banks with evermore detailed and 
complex rules, than we have made progress on regulating banking-like activities – 
hence the continuing debate around what to do about shadow banking  
Should  the  focus  of  regulations  be  on  the  financial  institutions  or  on  the  people 
working in them? Few would dispute that some of the most galling failures have had 
very little to do with capital requirements and everything to do with greed coupled 
with  disregard 
them.  Some 
commentators  have  been  so  far  as  ascribing  most  of  our  troubles  to  skewed 
compensation  structures  and  incentives,  an  area  where  the  debate  between 
jurisdictions  with  widely  differing  regulatory  approaches  has  been  most  acute. 
the  risks,  or  gross  misjudgement  about 
for 
2. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
3. 
Others  believe  that  a  comprehensive  set  of  rules  on  institutions  will  suffice  to 
constrain behaviors and provide the financial stability that we seek.  
Is a principle-based regulation more effective than a rule-based one? Comparing the 
word count of the Basel agreement with that of the European package of CRD4 and 
CRR  can  give  us  pause.  The  Lamfalussy  approach  was  meant  to  move  us  away 
from  detailed  European  directives  –  yet  they  have  kept  on  growing  in  size  and 
complexity.  
We  address  and  resolve  these  conundrums  through  the  democratic  dialogue;  financial 
regulation is like any other, it is ultimately a product of a political process. The outcomes of 
that  process  are  the  product  of  compromise  where  conflicting  interests  come  into  play; 
business interest clash with electoral and institutional considerations, where the voice of the 
supervisor is one among several. 
Today’s conference gives this voice more prominence. It brings together some of the most 
experienced thinkers and policy makers in this area and I would like to thank them all for their 
participation. 
I trust they will make this conference useful and stimulating. Thank you for your attention.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
