Dimitar Bogov: “The savings deposits soar also during crisis” – 
interview in Radio Free Europe 
Interview  with  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia,  in  Radio  Free  Europe,  conducted  by  Mr  Aleksandar  Pesev  on  29  September 
2013. 
 Mr. Bogov, is the ending of the crisis in the Euro area going to have a direct impact on 
the boost of the economic growth in the Republic of Macedonia? 
Of  course,  the  Euro  area  and  the  European  Union  are  the  largest  trading  partners  of  the 
Republic of Macedonia, the largest portion of our export is placed there, and as a result, the 
demand  in  the  Euro  area  has  large  influence  on  the  production  in  Macedonia.  We  were 
encouraged by the data for the second quarter of the year on the Gross Domestic Product, 
where after six quarters of negative results, positive growth rate has finally been registered. 
We expect that this will endure also in the following period, we are aware that this growth in 
the Euro area and the European Union is still very fragile, meaning, there are still risks, but 
we are optimistic, the indicators that emerge in the Euro area economy every day are mainly 
positive, so it is expected that it will reflect adequately on the Macedonian economy growth, 
as well. 
Can  the  recent  trade  war  we  had  with  the  neighboring  Kosovo  somehow  spoil  the 
perceptions for this positive growth? 
Kosovo  is  one  of  our  largest  export  markets,  and  it  is,  certainly,  a  significant  market  for 
Macedonia.  This  deadlock  in  the  trade  was  relatively  brief,  so  we  will  see  the  data  on 
September when they will be available, but I hope that it will not disturb largely the economic 
activity in our country. 
It is forecasted that the growth will be around two, two and a half percents annually. 
How  many  percentages  of  growth  are  necessary  to  enable  the  citizens  to  feel  the 
benefits of the economic growth of RM? 
Our projection for this year remains 2.2 percentages, but after the publication of the data on 
GDP for the second quarter, it will probably move upwards. We are now launching the new 
round of projections which will be finalized near end of October, but it can be expected that 
the increase in the Gross Domestic Product this year will be over 3%. The growth should be 
continuous,  meaning  a  growth  of  3,  4,  and  even  5  percents  in  a  several  year  continuous 
period  in  order  to  be  felt  more  substantially  by  all  citizens,  by  each  class  and  by  all 
enterprises. 
According to the National Bank data, increase in the savings deposits was registered. 
If  my  data  are  right,  the  deposits  increased  by  about  Euro  87  million.  What  is  the 
reason for such a trend? 
Yes, it is interesting that the deposits here are growing continually, even during the hardest 
times of the global financial crisis at the beginning of 2009, we had a deposit growth. It is 
sometimes hard to explain where this inflow comes from, but it indicates that in the economy 
there are sources that generate income, that create savings potential, meaning, the savings, 
although maybe not sufficient, is still substantial in our country and that deposit growth is just 
below the one in the good years, but it is positive and continuous, which is encouraging. 
Does this mean that the banks are more focused on collecting capital, than releasing 
money in the economy in form of credits? 
We can state that the deposit growth is higher than the one in the last several years, but the 
deposit growth is also a reflection of lack of enough alternatives for investments. You know 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
that  the  stock  exchange  is  in  standstill,  we  don't  have  some  other  developed  financial 
markets where the citizens can place their savings, so every savings is mainly placed in form 
of banks deposit. 
Despite the inflation slows down, in the last several months, according to the NBRM 
estimations, it seems that the banks restrain over landing. Is this an indicator for the 
unfavorable  conditions  in  the  economy,  or  on  the  market,  or  is  it  a  try  for  further 
reduction of the inflation? 
No, the inflation is not an issue, since it is on quite moderate level, 2.8 percentages is the 
latest data for August and we expect average inflation of about 2.8 percentages for the entire 
year,  there  is  no  probability  for  inflationary  pressures  in  the  following  period.  The  banks 
restraint over crediting is a result of several factors. One is the economic crisis in the Euro 
area,  the  deceleration  of  our  economy  last  year,  the  banks  prudency,  the  rise  of  the  bad 
placements. Another very important factor is the condition in the parent banks of some of the 
owners  of  our  banks,  you  know  that  they  mainly  come  from the  Euro  area,  some  of  them 
have serious problems in their own countries and they face with serious challenges, although 
their banks in Macedonia have extremely good quality and they are in good condition, since 
the strategy is developed at the level of the group, the problems in the parent bank prevail so 
they can have conservative strategy also in our country. 
This  exactly was  the  reason  that  caused  panic  in  the  public,  that some  banks  have 
problems in their main offices. Has the situation been stabilized a little in this regard? 
The situation here is mainly stable. Although there are occasional rumors in the public, the 
data  do  not  mirror  that, and  we  did  not  have  registered,  in  any  moment,  that  the  deposits 
plunged  with  the  banks  the  main  offices  of  which  are  facing  with  problems.  The  deposits, 
generally, were increasing during all these past several years. Clearly, we tried to explain to 
the citizens and I think that they understood well, that the deposits stay here in Macedonia, 
and that they are not taken abroad, they are invested in the Macedonian economy and there 
is absolutely no reason for fear for losing the deposits. 
Speaking of banks, the companies are those being less credited than the households. 
Does it mean that the banks do not trust the economy? 
It  is  fact  that  the  last  year,  year  and  a  half,  the  banks  have  been  more  focused  on  the 
households, and less to the companies. The main reason for that is the higher risk with the 
companies,  because  the  bad  placements  with  the  enterprises  got  higher  in  the  last  two 
years, while with the households, they stagnate, or even decrease. It certainly has reflection 
on the bank perception and their behavior. 
However, with the introduction of the reserve requirement instrument, the rise in the 
savings  deposits  become  evident,  but  can  such  instrument  stimulate  the  credit 
growth, as well? 
Yes, in the recent 12 months, we have taken several measures, especially with the reserve 
requirement, which were directed towards: firstly, stimulation of the crediting and secondly, 
changes in the savings structure in favor of the Denar savings for the account of the Euro 
savings.  Certainly,  the  measure  which  became  effective  in  January  where  we  reduce  the 
reserve  requirement  for  lending  to  net  exporters  and  producers  of  electricity  is  already 
productive, we have already extended such loans worth approximately Euro 70 million this 
year, while the measure that should underpin the Denar savings for the account of the Euro 
savings  became  effective  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  and  we  expect  that  the  banks  will 
adjust their interest rate policies to this measure in the following months. 
Did your forecast from the beginning of the year materialize, that the Government is 
not going to borrow much on the domestic market, at least in the first quarter? 
Within this period, since the beginning of the year, the Government is not borrowing much on 
the domestic market, because it has accumulated enough funds on their accounts with the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
National Bank. Also, the funds it borrowed from abroad in the beginning of the year are still 
disposable on their account, because of which there was no need for additional debiting on 
the domestic market. 
However, some of the economists fear that exactly the foreign debiting is unfavorable, 
saying that it was made for unprofitable, unproductive purposes. How do you see this 
situation, is there a risk? 
Well,  Macedonia  has  a  lack  of  domestic  savings,  and  as  a  country,  we  will  need  foreign 
savings for a long time, and that is the situation with most of the developing countries, if I 
may  say.  It  means,  the  foreign  savings  is  necessary,  and  part  of  it  will  pour  through  the 
foreign  direct  investments,  while  part  through  debiting.  Of  course,  speaking  from  the 
viewpoint of the monetary policy, we would like to see the state to borrow also from abroad, 
not only on the domestic market, because it gives additional security and stabilization to the 
Macedonian economy. The level of debt is still moderate and causes no other unfavorable 
implications. 
So, whether like it or not, we must borrow, better abroad, in order to, if not else, cover 
also the current expenditures? 
Well, the state budget is structured in such a manner that it has a deficit, meaning a need of 
funding,  but  whether  that  funding  is  used  for  current  or  capital  needs,  it  is  hard  to  say, 
because it is one account of the Government from which all those needs are covered. 
If a problem regarding the repayment emerges, hypothetically, does it mean that the 
monetary policy can feel the consequences as well? 
The  fiscal  and  the  monetary  policy  are,  of  course,  interleaving  and  the  monetary  policy  is 
always adjusted in order to maintain the balance in the Macedonian economy. If we come to 
a situation when this balance is disturbed, the monetary policy will adequately react in order 
to restore the balance. 
The  foreign  reserves  for  a  month  "melted"  by  approximately  Euro  80  million.  Has 
these  reserves  been  spent  for  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  Denar,  or  for  other 
purposes? 
No, the foreign reserves reduced in the first half of the year. The decrease amounted about 
Euro  150  million.  The  largest  part  was  due  to  the  changes  in  the  gold  prices  and  the  US 
Dollar  –  Euro  exchange  rates.  You  know  that  that  the  gold  was  decreasing,  and  we  have 
smaller accounting value of the gold price in Euros, as a result of which the foreign reserves 
reduced.  However,  we  should  know  that  in  the  previous  period  when  the  gold  price  was 
mounting,  our  foreign  reserves  were  also  increasing,  for  the  same,  purely  accounting, 
reason. In the second quarter, we made a slight intervention, which is seasonally common 
because  some  large  companies  pay  dividends,  and  then  there  is  a  lack  on  the  foreign 
exchange market which is covered by the National Bank. However, in the third quarter, once 
again  due  to  seasonal  reasons,  there  are  reverse  movements,  and  we  have  already 
compensated  those  interventions  we  had  in  the  second  quarter.  At  the  level  of  the  entire 
year, the amount of foreign exchange that the National Bank has purchased on the foreign 
exchange market exceeds the amount of the foreign exchange it has sold. It means that the 
decrease in this moment is quite smaller than the one I have mentioned previously, which is 
totally due to the changes in the gold price. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
