Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The challenge of modernising 
smallholder agriculture in East Africa 
Keynote address by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
the  International  Symposium  on  Agricultural  Developments  in  the  EAC  Partner  States, 
Kampala, 5 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
All the countries of East Africa share the long term vision of transforming the structure of their 
economies  to  attain  middle  income  status  and  eradicate  mass  poverty.  Structural 
transformation, which is the essence of economic development, will not be achieved without 
the modernisation of the agricultural sector. The lessons of successful development around 
the  world  demonstrate  that  agricultural  modernisation,  involving  the  transformation  of  low 
productivity subsistence farming into high productivity commercial farming, is almost always 
a precondition of industrialisation. 
In  this  address  I  want  to  set  out  what  I  believe  should  be  the  key  elements  of  a  feasible 
strategy for agricultural modernisation in East Africa. I will start by diagnosing the reasons for 
the  stagnation  of  the  region’s  agriculture  over  several  decades  and  discuss  the  key 
constraints which hold back the modernisation of agriculture. I will then examine how these 
constraints can be progressively alleviated, to allow farmers to make the transformation from 
subsistence production to commercial farming. Finally I will explore the implications for public 
policy in East Africa. 
Modernising agriculture in East Africa will require more financial resources to be invested in 
the sector, by both the public and private sectors, but the amount of resources required is not 
vast; agriculture is not a capital intensive sector. It should be possible to provide the public 
goods  and  services  needed  to  support  agricultural  modernisation,  such  as  agricultural 
extension services and rural feeder roads, with relatively modest increases in the share of 
Government budgets allocated to agriculture. 
Getting the policies right is more important than the total amount of public resources invested 
in agriculture. Agricultural policies should be clearly focussed on helping the broad mass of 
smallholder  farmers  to  begin  the  process  of  transforming  from  subsistence  production  to 
commercial farming. Unfortunately, the record of agricultural performance in the region over 
the last two decades is very weak, which indicates that the agricultural policies pursued over 
a long period have been deficient. Without radical reform of these policies, I don’t believe that 
it will be possible to modernise agriculture in the region. 
Why has agricultural performance been so poor? 
2. 
Table 1 below provides data on agricultural value added per worker in constant prices, which 
is a measure of labour productivity in the sector, for the five East African Community (EAC) 
partner  states,  and  by  way  of  comparison,  the  averages  for  sub-Saharan  Africa  (SSA), 
developing  Asia  and  South  and  Central  America,  in  1991  and  2011.  Agricultural  labour 
productivity in all of the five EAC partner states is very low; it was below the average for SSA 
in 2011 and only a fraction of the average for the other two developing regions. The average 
labour productivity in South and Central America is more than 10 times higher than that in 
every one of the five EAC partner states. Furthermore, labour productivity growth in the EAC 
has been at best very weak over the last two decades and at worst stagnant or declining. 
Both Rwanda and Tanzania have achieved some long term growth in labour productivity, but 
only at 1.5 percent a year and from a very low base. Productivity has stagnated in Kenya and 
Uganda and fallen by nearly half in Burundi since the early 1990s. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 There are, of course, differences in labour productivity within each country. In general, labour 
productivity  is  higher  than  the  average  in  export  crop  agriculture  (coffee,  flowers,  etc)  but 
lower than average in food crop agriculture. It is the region’s food crop agriculture, which is 
dominated  by  semi-subsistence  smallholder  farmers,  that  presents  the  most  difficult 
challenges for agricultural modernisation. In Uganda, food crop production has grown at an 
average rate of only 0.4 percent per annum over the last 10 years, which  is far below the 
population growth rate of 3.2 percent per annum.  
Why is productivity so low in the food crop sector across East Africa? The main reason is 
that  smallholder  food  crop  farmers  are trapped in  a  vicious  circle  which  links  their  poverty 
and lack of resources to low agricultural productivity and thus to low incomes. 
In general, smallholder farmers use rudimentary farm technology with very low levels of farm 
inputs,  often  allied  with  poor  agricultural  practises  such  as  the  mining of  soils  which  are  a 
reflection  of  their  poverty  and  lack  of  feasible  alternative  strategies.  The  average  value  of 
fertiliser used on Ugandan farms is only $0.6 per acre per annum, and only 7 percent of farm 
land  in  Uganda  is  planted  with  improved  varieties  of  seeds.1  The  use  of  rudimentary 
technology, combined with the mining of soils which depletes soil nutrients, means that crop 
yields are low and of poor quality. As a consequence, the crop surplus available for selling on 
the market is also very low. The 2008/09 Agricultural Census in Uganda revealed that only 
40  percent  of  maize  grown  in  Uganda  is  sold  on  the  market:  the  figures  for  millet  and 
sorghum are even lower; 19 percent and 14 percent respectively.2 
Farmers  receive  low  farm  gate  prices  for  what  little  surplus  they  do  sell  on  the  market 
because of the high cost of transporting produce from the farm to the market, which arises 
from the poor state of rural feeder roads, many of which are impassable in the rainy season, 
and  the  low  volumes  of  produce  traded.  Consequently  the  financial  returns  to  farming  are 
very  low.  This  means  that  farmers  do  not  accumulate  savings  for  investment  in  improved 
farm technology, and even if they do have resources, they have few incentives to invest in 
raising  their  yields.  As  a  result,  farmers  remain  trapped  in  poverty,  engaged  in  low 
productivity subsistence farming, without the resources or incentives to increase their yields 
and thus raise their incomes. Breaking this vicious circle of low farm productivity and poverty 
is  the  key  to  modernising  smallholder  farming  in  the  region.  The  pertinent  question  for 
agricultural policy is: what is the most feasible strategy for achieving this? I will turn to this 
question next. 
                                                
1   These data are from World Bank (2011), Agriculture for Inclusive Growth in Uganda, p7. 
2   Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 2012 Statistical Abstract, p44. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What should be our strategy for modernising agriculture? 
3. 
The goal of our agricultural strategy should be to support the modernisation of agriculture. 
Modernisation  entails  farmers  adopting  good  agricultural  practises,  employing  productivity 
enhancing farm inputs, making decisions about input use and choice of crops or livestock to 
maximise  their  profit  and  selling  more  of  their  output  on  the  market.  It  will  bring  about  a 
switch towards the production of higher value crops, as well as raising yields per acre and 
yields per worker. 
Before discussing how public policy can support the modernisation of smallholder agriculture 
I  want  to  address  a  key  question  pertaining  to  our  overall  agricultural  strategy.  There  are 
essentially two routes to agricultural modernisation. The first entails clearing peasants off the 
land  and  replacing  the  existing  smallholder  agriculture  with  large  scale  mechanised 
commercial  farms;  this  was  the  route  to  modernisation  pursued  by  Britain  in  the  17th  and 
18th  centuries  and  in  parts  of  Latin  America  in  the  19th  and  20th  centuries.  The  second 
entails  helping  the  existing  smallholder  farmers  to  modernise,  a  route  which  has  been 
pursued in many parts of East Asia. 
I don’t believe that an agricultural strategy focused on replacing smallholder agriculture with 
large  scale  mechanised  commercial  farms  is  either  socially  desirable  or  feasible  in  East 
Africa. It is not socially  desirable because it would require mass displacement of peasants 
from their land, probably forcibly. Mechanised farming is not labour intensive and so would 
absorb  only  a  fraction  of  the  peasants  driven  off  the  land  as  farm  labourers.  Most  of  the 
peasants displaced from the land would have to be absorbed in the urban areas, but they 
have few of the skills needed for urban employment and there are already acute shortages of 
jobs in the urban areas. Consequently the social consequences of modernising agriculture 
through large scale mechanised farming would be catastrophic; poverty would increase. 
The  distributional  consequences  of 
to  agricultural  modernisation  
–  supporting  smallholders  to  modernise  their  farm  practises  –  are  much  more  benign. 
Smallholder farmers are one of the poorest sections of society, so helping them to raise their 
incomes will reduce poverty. Although not all smallholders will remain on the land, especially 
as  population  pressure  intensifies  land  constraints,  rural-urban  migration  should  be  lower 
than if peasants were forcibly displaced on a large scale, and hence it will easier to absorb 
these  migrants  into  urban  employment.  Promoting  smallholder  farming  is  an  agricultural 
strategy  which  will  support  inclusive  growth;  economic  growth  which  includes  the  poorest 
sections of society. 
 
the  second  route 
 
A strategy based on large scale mechanised farming is also likely to fail in terms of raising 
agricultural  output  in  the  region.  In  many  parts  of  the  region,  arable  land  is  becoming  an 
increasingly scarce factor of production because of high rates of population growth. Hence 
maximising crop yields per land area is essential if overall agricultural output is to be raised. 
Large  farms,  however,  perform  poorly  compared  to  small  farms  in  terms  of  crop  yield  per 
acre. Research in Uganda reported by the World Bank has revealed that average crop value 
added per acre is four times higher on small farms, with a land area of one hectare or less, 
than on large farms with land of more than five hectares, as shown in table 2. Small farms 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
are much more productive than large farms because they mainly employ family labour, which 
have  much  greater  incentives  to  work  efficiently  without  supervision  than  the  hired  labour 
employed on large farms. 
Policy measures to support agricultural modernisation 
4. 
If  smallholder  farmers  are  to  embark  on  the  transition  to  agricultural  modernisation,  the 
vicious  circle  of  poverty,  lack  of  resources  and  low  productivity  which  characterises 
smallholder  food  crop  farming  must  be  broken.  Fortunately,  there  are  feasible  policy 
measures which can be taken to help resource poor farmers to raise their yields. The key is 
to encourage and educate farmers to adopt good agricultural practises in combination with 
greater use of improved varieties of seeds. 
Good  agricultural  practises  includes  proper  land  and  seedbed  preparation,  proper  plant 
population  and  spacing,  timely  planting  and  weeding,  pest  control,  soil  conservation  and 
proper  harvest  and  post  harvest  handling.  Currently  most  smallholders  have  only  partially 
adopted the full suite of feasible good agricultural practises. However, the adoption of good 
agricultural practises should be within the means of even resource poor farmers, and this will 
enable them to raise their yields even without having to purchase modern farm inputs.3 Pilot 
programs such as the USAID funded Agricultural Productivity Enhancement Program have 
demonstrated  that  yields  per  acre  can  be  doubled  for  many  of  the  major  crops  grown  in 
Uganda  –  coffee,  bananas,  maize,  rice  and  cotton  –  if  farmers  adopt  good  agricultural 
practises  even  with  only  low  input  technology.  Once  smallholder  farmers  can  raise  their 
yields and produce a larger surplus for the market, they will begin to generate the financial 
resources which will enable them to start to purchase more modern inputs, such as fertiliser, 
which  will  enable  them  to  further  boost  their  yields.  The  combination  of  high  input 
technologies  and  good  agricultural  practises  could  boost  yields  per  acre  fourfold  from  the 
prevailing levels.4 
Providing  loans  to  farmers  is  sometimes  seen  as  the  key  to  raising  productivity  in  the 
agricultural  sector.  For  the  most  part  this  is  mistaken.  Until  smallholder  farmers  have 
improved  their  agricultural  practises  and  can  generate  surpluses  to  sell  on  the  market, 
access  to  loans  will  not  help  them  and  may  even  further  worsen  their  poverty.  Access  to 
loans will only benefit smallholders when they are in a position to use this finance to raise 
their incomes sufficiently to both repay their loans and earn some profit. 
How  can  public  policy  best  help  smallholder  farmers  to  begin  the  journey  to  agricultural 
modernisation? Government must provide several sets of essential public goods – these are 
goods which cannot be provided optimally by the market – if agricultural modernisation is to 
be feasible. 
The priority for public policy should be an effective agricultural extension system which can 
reach smallholder farmers all over the countryside and  whose main objective is to provide 
technical advice to farmers to promote the adoption of good agricultural practises, allied with 
the  provision  of  appropriate  improved  seed  varieties.  To  enable  the  agricultural  extension 
services to give the best possible advice to farmers, Government must also fund agricultural 
research. Government must also take the lead in controlling the spread of plant and animal 
diseases.  The  rural  feeder  road  infrastructure  must  be  strengthened  to  enable  farmers  to 
access  local  markets  with  their  crops.  A  further  area  where  Government  intervention  is 
needed  is  to  strengthen  land  tenure  rights  for  smallholders.  Only  if  farmers  have  secure 
rights to use their land will they have incentives to invest in land improvement and to avoid 
                                                
3   See  the  discussion  in  Clive  Drew  (2010),  “Past  Successes  and  Failures  in  Supporting  Agricultural 
Commercialisation in Uganda”, mimeo, prepared for the World Bank. 
4   See table 8 in World Bank (2011), Agriculture for Inclusive Growth in Uganda. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
practises  which  damage  the  long  term  productivity  of  the  soil.  Secure  land  rights  will  also 
encourage  land  rentals  and  enable  farmers  to  use  their  land  as  collateral  for  credit. 
Admittedly this is an extremely sensitive issue for public policy, but its importance for the long 
term future of agriculture means that it cannot be ignored. 
Government  should  avoid  subsidising  the  provision  of  goods  and  services  which  can  be 
supplied by the market, such as credit and fertiliser. Subsidised farm inputs are not the best 
way  to  help  smallholder  farmers  to  raise  their  yields.  Given  constraints  on  Government 
budgets, subsidised inputs can only benefit a small share of the total number of farmers in 
Uganda  and  other  countries  in  the  region.  Subsidised  inputs  are  likely  to  be  captured  by 
larger,  better  off  farmers,  rather  than  resource  poor  smallholders.  Subsidies  often  simply 
transfer resources from taxpayers to favoured beneficiaries and encourage the inefficient use 
of  subsidised  inputs.  When  the  opportunity  cost  of  subsidising  private  goods  from  the 
Government budget is taken into account – the fact that the money spent on these subsidies 
could have been used more productively on public goods and services – the overall impact 
on agricultural productivity is negative. Scarce budgetary resources should be allocated only 
to public goods and services, such as agricultural research and extension services and rural 
feeder roads, where they can generate the highest social rates of return, if well designed and 
implemented.5 
Conclusions 
5. 
To conclude, I will briefly summarise the main messages of my address. 
First,  the  very  weak  performance  of  agriculture  in  East  Africa,  especially  food  crop 
agriculture,  demonstrates  that  our  agricultural  policies  have  not  worked.  They  must  be 
reformed.  Although  agriculture  deserves  a  larger  share  of  Government  budgets  than  it 
currently receives, modernising agriculture will not require huge public investments. Far more 
important is putting in place the right policies for the sector. 
Secondly,  the  strategy  for  agricultural  modernisation  should  involve  helping  smallholder 
farmers to  raise their  yields  and  to  produce more  output for  the market. This  strategy  can 
support  inclusive  growth  and  reduce  poverty  by  raising  farm  incomes.  Agricultural 
modernisation  should  not  involve  displacing  smallholders  to  make  room  for  large  scale 
mechanised farming. This would be extremely regressive and, given that large farms have 
much lower yields per acre than small farms, lead to lower agricultural output. 
Thirdly, the first step on the road to the modernisation of smallholder farming should be to 
encourage  smallholders  to  adopt  good  agricultural  practises,  which  can  enable  substantial 
gains in yields even without the use of high input farm technology. This should be the priority 
of  the  agricultural  extension  services.  Government  should  also  strengthen  the  rural  feeder 
road network and strive to enhance the security of land rights for farmers. 
Fourthly, Government spending on agriculture should be focussed on the provision of public 
goods and services, such as extension services which provide technical advice to farmers. 
Scarce public resources should not be used to subsidise inputs which can be provided by the 
market. 
                                                
5   The  evidence  for  high  social rates  of  return  to  the  provision  of  public  goods  and  services  for  agriculture  is 
surveyed  in  Enrique  Blanco  Armas,  Camilo  Gomez  Osorio,  Blanca  Moreno  Dodson  and  Dwi  Endah 
Abriningrum (2012), “Agriculture Public Spending and Growth in Indonesia”, Policy Research Working Paper 
5977 World Bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
