Benoît Cœuré: The implications of bail-in rules for bank activity and 
stability 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the conference on “Financing the recovery after the crisis – the roles of bank 
profitability, stability and regulation”, Bocconi University, Milan, 30 September 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Paolo  Emilio Mistrulli  for his  contributions  to  these  remarks.  I  remain solely  responsible for the 
opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  thank  CAREFIN  and  the  Department  of  Finance  at  Università  Bocconi  for 
inviting me to speak today in Milan. I would like to use this opportunity to focus on what is in 
my  view  a  crucial  aspect  of  bank  stability,  namely,  the  existence  of  effective  resolution 
mechanisms.  
Excessive risk-taking by banks is at the origin of the financial crisis. One of the many factors 
contributing to their risk-taking behaviour was the distorted incentive structure resulting from 
the  lack  of  an  effective  resolution  mechanism.  Establishing  a  strong  approach  to  bank 
resolution is an essential component of properly realigning incentives towards risk.  
Why  is  this  the  case?  As  you  know,  bank  resolutions  are  often  costly,  complex  and  time-
consuming,  in  particular  for  large  institutions.  Without  alternative  ways  to  restore  their 
viability, governments have too often found themselves compelled to bail-out entities using 
taxpayer money. This government support may be successful in avoiding financial contagion 
within closely interconnected banking system. But the expectation of assistance via publicly 
funded bailouts amplifies moral hazard, leading to excessive risk-taking.  
Moreover,  in  the  euro  area  it  has  nurtured  what  became  the  nexus  of  the  crisis,  the  fatal 
feedback  loop  between  bank  and  sovereign  creditworthiness.  So  these  are  already  two 
reasons to rethink the allocation of losses in bank resolution. The former is general and the 
latter is specific to the fragmented structure of the euro area. 
A  third  reason,  which  I  will  not  discuss  here,  relates  to  the  political  economy  of  bank 
resolution.  Even  if  it  were  efficient  for  financial  stability  reasons  to  let  taxpayers  bear  the 
burden of losses in resolution, it would be unpalatable to them, and it would be unfair unless 
they can exert effective control on the risk-taking behaviour of banks – which has not been 
the case so far. 
Existing bank resolution mechanisms are being overhauled in many countries following the 
adoption  in  2011  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)’s  Key  Attributes  for  Effective 
Resolution Regimes1. In Europe, where most countries did not have a resolution framework 
before  the  crisis,  extraordinary  efforts  have  been  made  to  design  a  new  regulatory 
framework,  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD).  The  BRRD,  which  has 
been agreed by the EU Council and is now being discussed by the European Parliament, will 
set harmonised standards for national resolution regimes across Europe in compliance with 
the  FSB  Key  Attributes.  It  aims  to  reduce  the  costs  of  bank  resolution,  make  banks 
resolvable  without  using  taxpayer  funds,  and  hence  induce  bank  creditors  to  exert  more 
market discipline. 
                                                
1  See  Financial  Stability  Board,  “Key  Attributes  for  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial  Institutions”, 
October 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I would like to use my remarks today to comment on this new Directive, and in particular the 
introduction  of  creditor-funded  recapitalisation  –  otherwise  known  as  bail-in.  I  want  to 
explore, on the basis of the economic literature, how this is likely to affect bank funding and 
lending and hence, as suggested by the title of this conference, the financing of the recovery. 
I will not discuss here resolution strategies, which are at the heart of the FSB discussion and 
can be particularly challenging for large and internationally active banking groups.  
The proposal for a bank recovery and resolution directive  
Let me begin by briefly reviewing the main features of the new bail-in tool. Bail-in rules are 
envisaged to apply no later than four years after the entry into force of the new resolution 
Directive.  If  this  is  1st  January  2014,  as  is  currently  planned,  then  they  will  have  to  be 
incorporated in national laws by 1st January 2018 at the latest. I will comment this timeline 
later. 
The scope of bail-in clauses is generally broad, encompassing all liabilities apart from those 
explicitly  excluded.  Non-excluded  liabilities  will  be  bailed-in  following  the  order  of  their 
ranking in national insolvency laws.  
The only exception to the seniority rankings in national insolvency laws relates to customer 
deposits.  The  latest  Council  compromise  text  introduces  a  “super  priority”  for  insured 
deposits  (up  to  €  100  000)  and  a  “simple  priority”  for  retail  deposits  (deposits  of  natural 
persons,  micro  and  SMEs  above  €100  000).  The  latter  category  will  rank  below  insured 
deposits, but above all other senior unsecured claims.2  
It is important to stress that the Directive does not exclude other funding sources to manage 
banking  crises.  Privately-funded  national  resolution  funds  may  step  in,  but  only  up  to  a 
certain limit and only after some losses have been borne by shareholders and creditors.3 In 
addition,  the  Directive  does  not  completely  exclude  the  possibility  of  a  bail-out  via 
extraordinary public financial support. However, the principle is that support has to be given 
exceptionally and temporary in nature.4  
In  order  to  prevent  banks  from  circumventing  the  bail-in  rules,  the  Directive  also  defines 
minimum  requirements  for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities  (MREL),  ensuring  that  banks 
have sufficient loss-absorbing capacity, i.e. sufficient bail-inable liabilities. The requirements 
are currently based on the size, risk characteristics and the corresponding business model of 
banks. In 2016, the proposal aims at introducing harmonised MREL for all banks based on 
recommendations by the European Banking Authority (EBA).  
Additional to the bail-in rules, the European Commission adapted temporary state aid rules, 
applicable  as  of  the  1st  August,  2013.  These  rules  demand  mandatory  capital  write-down 
and bail-in of subordinated debt before any public supports is granted. Therefore, these rules 
further clarify the interaction between bail-in and bail-out in the European Union, even before 
the  BRRD  becomes  effective,  and  provide  for  a  level  playing  field  between  similar  banks 
located in different Member States.  
                                                
2  This differs from the US where the depositor preference applies to all deposits, both insured and uninsured. 
3  National resolution funds (RF) have to be set up in each Member State and financed by ex-ante contributions 
of the institutions. They can only be used to absorb losses and finance resolution after losses of at least 8% 
have been borne by shareholders and creditors. When the RF steps in its total contribution is limited to 5% of 
total liabilities. 
4  Public  support  may  be  given  as  (i)  State  guarantee  backing  central  bank  liquidity;  (ii)  State  guarantee  for 
newly  issued  liabilities;  or  (iii)  capital  injection  at  market  price,  as  long  as  the  institution  still  fulfils  the 
authorisation requirements and is solvent. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The impact of mandatory bail-ins on bank funding 
The  implementation  of  bail-in  rules  can  be  expected  to  affect  banks  activity  in  several 
respects that matter not only for bank stability but more broadly for the funding of economic 
activity. Here I want to focus on two in particular: bank funding and bank lending.  
Starting  with  bank  funding,  the  bail-in  rules  transfer  risk  from  taxpayers  to  unsecured 
bondholders.  In  this  way,  they  counterbalance  the  perceived  implicit  subsidy  from  which 
some very large or highly interconnected institutions have benefited, leading to excessively 
low funding costs, particularly in good times. As a result of this increased risk, holders of bail-
inable liabilities may be expected to ask, everything being equal, for a higher return. The cost 
of funding for such liabilities would reflect more accurately their actual risks.  
How  will  this  affect  banks’  overall  cost  of  funding?  This  is  not  easy  to  answer  definitively. 
There are many factors that we have to take into account. Let me list four of them. 
First, the systemic importance of the bank. The greatest effect of the new bail-in rules should 
in principle be on those banks that would in the past have benefited most from an implicit 
guarantee. In other words, it should affect more significantly systemically important financial 
institutions (SIFIs). And among the SIFIs, it should affect the riskiest banks the most.  
Second, the bank’s liability structure. For those banks that fall short of the bail-inable debt 
requirements,  the  Directive  will  force  them  to  increase  their  unsecured  liabilities,  since 
secured  ones  cannot  be  bailed-in.  This  could  increase  overall  funding  costs,  as  it  would 
require banks to adapt their liability structure such that more costly debt plays a greater role. 
But equally, the higher share of senior unsecured liabilities could also result in a lower level 
of  encumbered  assets,  possibly  lowering  the  overall  cost  of  funding.  Indeed,  asset 
encumbrance  makes  balance  sheets  more  complex  and  poses  significant  challenges  to 
investors in assessing banks’ riskiness, which may result in higher risk premia for unsecured 
debt,  especially  at  a  time  where  the  overall  demand  for  collateral  assets  is  expected  to 
increase.5  
Moreover,  we  need  to  consider  the  effect  on  the  overall  cost  of  funding  from  the 
strengthening  of  depositor  protection,  which  has  a  potential  to  reduce  the  relative  interest 
rate paid on deposits compared to unsecured debt. While depositors have, in normal times, 
low sensitivity to risk and any decline in their cost is expected to be limited; deposits typically 
represent a large share of the overall bank debt. As a result, even small reductions in the 
remuneration of deposits could produce a significant impact on the overall cost of funding. 
On top of this, banks that already meet the minimum bail-inable debt requirement may adjust 
their liability structure to incorporate a larger fraction of deposits.  
Third, to assess the overall impact of bail-in rules on bank funding, we have to consider their 
interaction with other initiatives in the field of regulation. Let me give me two examples. There 
is a possibility that the higher cost of senior unsecured long-term debt could lead banks to 
raise more short-term debt, resulting in a higher maturity mismatch and greater liquidity and 
interest rate risks. This could happen in particular for those banks that have already a high 
level  of  encumbered  assets  and  so  are  unable  to  issue  long-term  secured  liabilities.  Such 
reshuffle of liabilities will be limited by the proposed Basel III requirements on the Liquidity 
Coverage  Ratio  (LCR)  and  the  net  stable  funding  ratio  (NSFR).  Similarly,  recourse  to  the 
repo market, which we know is inherently fragile,6 will be constrained by the envisaged FSB 
rules on shadow banking. 
                                                
5  Committee on the Global Financial Stability (2013), “Asset encumbrance, financial reform and the demand for 
collateral assets”, CGFS Papers, n. 49. 
6  See G. Gorton and A. Metrick (2012), “Securitized Banking and the Run on the Repo”, Journal of Financial 
Economics, Vol. 104, No. 3, pp. 425–451. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
As  another  example,  as  there  is  at  least  in  theory  a  risk  that  bail-in  rules  could  trigger 
financial contagion if a significant proportion of banks’ liabilities are held by other banks or by 
systemically  important  non-banks  such  as  insurance  companies,7  we  need  to  understand 
and if necessary limit such cross-exposures.  
Fourth, we have to take into account the effect of bail-in on banks investment and lending 
behaviour.  Let’s  not  forget  that  one  objective  of  an  efficient  resolution  mechanism  is  to 
mitigate  excessive  risk-taking.  As  a  result  of  the  removal  of  an  implicit  bail-out  guarantee, 
bank  debt-holders  should  exert  more  efforts  in  monitoring  banks,  thus  mitigating  moral 
hazard phenomena. Such market discipline may mean that the expected rise in the cost of 
bank funding would be counterbalanced by an overall reduction in bank risk and hence the 
cost of funding may not rise. 
By redistributing the risk between tax-payers, depositors and debt holders, bail-in rules can 
reduce the overall risk in the system. The corporate finance literature has pointed out the role 
of secured bank debt as an equilibrium response to the agency problems of equity financing.8 
This highlights the risk of a “race to the bottom” towards a liability structure that would leave 
bank  managers  unchecked.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  all  sources  of  bank  financing  are 
subject to adequate monitoring.  
The economic literature clearly points out that exposure to credit risk should be left primarily 
to  those  actors  who  have  the  best  information  on  counterparty  risk,  namely,  shareholders 
and  debt-holders,  hence  the  new  capital  requirements  and  the  bail-in  rules.  Let  me  note 
however that inducing greater monitoring efforts is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition 
to  mitigate  excessive  risk-taking.  Bank  debt-holders  have  to  be  able  to  monitor  banks 
(market monitoring), but by monitoring them and pricing risk correctly they are also effectively 
influencing  banks’  behaviour  (market  influence).  Making  market  discipline  work  calls  for  a 
more comprehensive regulatory and supervisory framework of which bail-in rules are only a 
part, even if a significant one. And since bail-in rules have confirmed that insured depositors 
are  protected  by  deposit  guarantee  schemes,  i.e.  ultimately  by  the  taxpayer,  the  banking 
supervisor can be represented as the public authority to whom insured depositors delegate 
the monitoring of bank behaviour. 
All in all, while a good resolution framework is needed, it can only be a complement, and not 
a substitute for market discipline and supervisory vigilance. 
What does the empirical evidence of the effect of bail-in on funding costs say so far? 
The evidence points to a possible increase in the cost of funding for senior unsecured debt. 
For instance, a recent survey9 suggests that under a bail-in regime investors would demand 
around 90 basis points more for a senior bond issued by a single “A” bank. The investors 
surveyed also expect that the implementation of a bail-in framework will lead to an increase 
in  price  differentials  across  issuers  with  diverse  credit  quality.  However,  all  this  has  to  be 
weighed against the offsetting considerations that I just described. 
Indeed, econometric results undertaken at the ECB for a sample of European banks suggest 
that  the  announcement  of  the  Directive  had  so  far  limited  impact  on  the  cost  of  senior 
unsecured  debt.  But  for  the  financial  sector,  there  are  still  two  sources  of  uncertainty  with 
                                                
7  See M. Dewatripont and X. Freixas (2012), “Bank Resolution: Lessons from the crisis” in M. Dewatripont and 
X.  Freixas  (eds.),  The  Crisis  Aftermath:  New  Regulatory  Paradigms,  eReport,  Centre  for  Economic  Policy 
Research. 
8  This literature can be traced back to D. Diamond (1984), “Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring”, 
Review  of  Economic  Studies,  Vol.  51,  pp.  393–414.  See  also  the  discussion  in  A.  Kashyap,  R.  Rajan  and 
J. Stein  (2008),  “Rethinking  Capital  Regulation”,  in  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  2008  Economic 
Symposium, "Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System", pp. 431–471. 
9  European bank bail-in will cost +87 basis points”, Financial Times , October 25, 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
regards  to  the  bail-in  rules.  First,  about  the  timing  of  the  implementation  of  bail-in.  The 
European  Parliament,  for  example,  wants  to  have  bail-in  from  2016.  Second,  about  the 
degree  of  discretion  national  resolution  authorities  will  have  in  applying  the  bail-in  rules, 
which in my view should be as constrained as possible. 
This would seem to suggest that, although likely to be priced in to a considerable extent, the 
ultimate effect of bail-in on funding costs, and its success as a market discipline device, will 
depend on the final design of bail-in and how markets see it being used in practice. This calls 
for an early implementation of bail-in as a way to reduce uncertainty for banks themselves 
and market participants, and allow for a once-for-all repricing of risk.10  
The impact on lending  
Turning  now  to  the  effect  of  bail-in  on  bank  lending,  my  baseline  assumption  is  that  the 
higher cost of bail-inable liabilities will have a limited impact on bank lending. Let me explain. 
Clearly,  if  overall  funding  costs  were  to  rise,  this  could  in  theory  have  an  effect  on  banks’ 
lending activity: banks may respond by providing less credit and charging higher loan interest 
rates. That said, I am not certain how realistic this scenario would be in practice. Building on 
the vast literature on the bank lending channel, one can argue that even if overall funding 
costs increase, there are several factors that can mitigate the transmission of funding shocks 
to lending. For instance, capital and liquidity buffers11 allow banks to shield borrowers from 
funding  shocks  and  these  are  in  the  process  of  being  strengthened  by  the  Basel  III 
requirements. Moreover, the type of relationship between banks and borrowers may affect 
the  way  banks  translate  shocks  into  their  lending  activity.12  A  very  recent  paper,  to  be 
presented in this conference, suggests that banks more reliant on relationship lending are in 
a better position to shield borrowers from shocks.  
Finally, any assessment of the effect of bail-in on bank lending and ultimately on economic 
welfare should take into account the general equilibrium benefits of reallocating risk to those 
who have the ability to monitor and eventually absorb it: shareholders and debt-holders. As 
noted by Paul Tucker, there is no place to hide risk: if the risk in banking is not incorporated 
in  the  yields  of  bonds  issued  by  banks  themselves,  then  it  will  be  reflected  in  higher 
                                                
10  To  give  a  flavour  of  the  issues  markets  will  have  to  consider,  we  can  look  at  the  literature  on  contingent 
convertibles bonds tied to market evaluation, or CoCos – see among others, O. Hart and L. Zingales, 2011, “A 
New  Capital  Regulation  for  Large  Financial  Institutions”,  Journal  of  Antitrust  Enforcement,  Vol.  13,  
pp. 453–490. The literature have shown that if bail-in takes place at too low share values, a “death spiral” can 
occur whereby the bail-in leads to a decrease in stock prices which triggers additional bail-in (P. Hillion and 
T. Vermaelen, 2004, “Death Spiral Convertibles”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 71, pp. 381–415). At 
the same  time,  it  is  essential that  the conversion  is  triggered  early  enough  and  leads  to enough  dilution  of 
existing shareholders. If not, then the conversion of the debt into capital will increase the value of the firm for 
shareholders after losses arise, with the perverse effect of increasing risk-taking incentives (See C. Berg and 
T. Kaserer  (2012),  “Does  contingent  capital 
induce  excessive  risk-taking  and  prevent  an  efficient 
recapitalization of banks?”, New York University and Humboldt University.) A somewhat related issue is that 
banks may have a perverse incentive to increase the risk of its assets’ returns in order to transfer value from 
contingent  capital  investors  to  the  original  bank  shareholders  (G.  Pennacchi,  2011,  “A  structural  model  of 
contingent capital”, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Working paper No. 10-04). In principle, this is less an 
issue in the case of mandatory bail-ins, since the conversion of debt into equity occurs at the point of non-
viability.  In  practice,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  establish  what  this  point  of  non-viability  actually  entails,  so 
effectively these concerns could also be relevant in the case of bail-ins. 
11  See A. Kashyap and J. Stein (2000), “What do a million observations on banks say about the transmission of 
monetary policy?” American Economic Review, 90(3), pp. 407–428. R. Kishan and T. Opiela (2000). “Bank 
size,  bank  capital,  and  the  bank  lending  channel,”  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  vol.  32(1), 
pages 121–41. 
12  See P. Bolton, X. Freixas, L. Gambacorta and P.E. Mistrulli (2013), “Relationship and Transaction Lending in 
a Crisis”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 9662. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
sovereign  borrowing  costs.13  The  euro  area  crisis  has  shown  the  negative  and  potentially 
highly non-linear consequences of such an increase in today’s situation of high public debt.  
including  creditor-funded 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Creating an efficient mechanism to swiftly resolve insolvent banks is a crucial step towards 
making the  costs  of  tackling  bank  crises  less  onerous for  taxpayer. While  there  is  a  lot  of 
work  ahead,  a  well-designed,  comprehensive  and  consistent  regulatory  framework  for 
banking  resolution, 
recapitalisation  schemes,  will  mitigate 
excessive  risk-taking  phenomena.  By  improving  financial  stability,  it  would  also  have  a 
favourable long-term impact on the real economy. 
While  a  good  resolution  framework  is  needed,  it  can  only  be  a  complement,  and  not  a 
substitute 
for  market  discipline  and  supervisory  vigilance.  The  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  (SSM)  and  its  founding  act,  the  balance  sheet  assessment  and  asset  quality 
review of all directly supervised euro area banks that will take place in 2014, can therefore be 
seen as complementing and supporting the new resolution framework. 
Effective resolution is not only about strong rules creating sound incentives, but also about 
quick judgment and decision-making. Given the inherent instability of financial markets, there 
is  no  time for  a  negotiation  between  bank  creditors  and  shareholders  leading  to  an  equity 
write off and a conversion of debt into equity, as would be usual outside the financial sector – 
and in the case of a large systemic bank, such a process would have the potential to impose 
significant negative externalities on the economy. In this respect, the creation of a strong and 
independent  Single  Resolution  Authority  (SRA)  is  needed  in  Europe  as  a  necessary 
complement to the SSM. The SRA should have the capacity to take swift decisions in the 
European interest and to tap a Single Resolution Fund financed by the industry.  
If these steps are taken, bail-in rules will be conducive to a better monitoring of banks’ risk 
behaviour  and  will  thereby  lead  to  a  better  banking  system  –  a  system  that  fulfils  its 
economic role without creating an excessive risk for society. 
I thank you for your attention. 
                                                
13  P. Tucker (2012), “Resolution – a progress report”, speech at the Institute for Law and Finance Conference, 
Frankfurt, 3 May. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
