Luis M Linde: The recovery of the Spanish economy 
Speech by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the XVI Congreso Nacional 
de la Empresa Familiar, Instituto de la Empresa Familiar, Madrid, 28 October 2013. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for inviting me to take part in this Congress. It is an important 
meeting  and  offers  me  the  opportunity  to  discuss,  firstly,  the  recently  released  data 
suggesting  an  improvement  in  economic  activity  across  the  European  Union,  and  also  in 
Spain.  And,  secondly,  to  address  the  strengthening  of  the  Spanish  banking  sector  and  its 
role in the start of the recovery we expect in 2014. 
In the euro area, the indicators signal that activity is beginning to pick up, and most analysts 
foresee that this recovery can take root. 
As a member of the European Central Bank’s Governing Council I should, before continuing 
with  my  address,  highlight  the  contribution  of  the  monetary  policy  applied  by  the  ECB  to 
containing the crisis. 
In facing up to the crisis, the European Central Bank has used its full range of measures, 
providing abundant liquidity at increasingly lower prices. The easing of monetary conditions 
has  led  to  a  substantial  reduction  in  official  interest  rates,  to  their  current  level  of  0.5%, 
almost 4 pp down on that five years ago. 
The monetary easing has been bolstered, moreover, by a policy of abundant liquidity supply 
in ordinary operations; extraordinary operations at terms of up to three years; the broadening 
of the range of guarantees or collateral accepted for liquidity-provision operations; the launch 
of  asset  purchase  programmes;  and,  finally,  the  approval  in  August  2012  of  the  Outright 
Monetary Transactions programme, which has not had to be used, but which is one of the 
“weapons” at our disposal and which played an important role during the very difficult times 
the euro area experienced in the summer of 2012. And lastly, in this area, the latest novelty: 
the  “forward  guidance”  policy,  involving  the  more  precise  communication  of  the  future 
behaviour of official interest rates, shadowing the measure used some time ago now by the 
Federal Reserve. 
Outside the monetary policy sphere, mechanisms have been set in place in the European 
Union to provide funds to those Member States deprived of access to the capital markets. 
Also, a reform of the economic governance of the area – whose ultimate scope may prove 
substantial – has been launched. 
Turning to what we call the “real” economy, following six consecutive quarters of contraction 
euro area GDP posted a year-on-year rate of increase in the second quarter of this year of 
0.3%. And analysts expect a positive though moderate rate for the third quarter. The latest 
projections  by  international  agencies  place  GDP  growth  for  the  euro  area  countries  as  a 
whole at around 1% in 2014 and 1.5% in 2015, with this naturally against a background of 
price stability. 
With  specific  regard  to  the  Spanish  economy,  two  positive  indicators  have  just  been 
released. First, on the flash estimate available, GDP is expected to have grown by 0.1% in 
the third quarter compared with the second quarter. This is the first positive figure after nine 
consecutive  quarters  of  contraction.  The  primary  explanation  for  this  figure  lies  in  the 
contribution of the external sector, underpinned more by the export performance than by the 
containment of imports. 
As  to  the  composition  of  domestic  demand,  some  changes  are  appreciable:  private 
consumption spending is estimated to have grown slightly, albeit still against a backdrop of 
great weakness, the result of the decline in disposable income, the loss of household wealth 
and high household debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The second positive indicator stems from the latest Labour Force Survey, with a reduction in 
the  number  of  unemployed,  an  increase  in  numbers  employed  and  a  significant  fall  in  the 
rate of increase of unemployment, at 2%, compared with 16% a year ago and almost 5% in 
the second quarter. 
These signs of a possible change for the better in our economy must be placed against the 
background  of  the  correction  of  the  serious  imbalances  built  up  during  the  previous 
expansion. 
As to the most discussed and absolutely essential correction, that of the budget deficit, I will 
simply say that progress has been made under very difficult conditions, amid a recession: 
this  year,  2013,  we  will  run  a  surplus  on  the  structural  primary  balance  which  will  be 
maintained and widened, we believe, in 2014. But as well as budget deficit achievements, we 
should highlight the correction of the external deficit, the adjustment of competitiveness, the 
reallocation of resources from construction to other industries, and headway in deleveraging. 
The  buoyancy  of  exports,  along  with  the  sluggishness  of  purchases  from  the  rest  of  the 
world, in line with the fall-off in national demand, has allowed the contribution of the external 
sector  to  activity  to  reach  an  unprecedented  scale.  In  2013,  Spanish  export  penetration  in 
foreign markets increased notably in all geographical areas, markedly so in the emerging and 
developing  economies.  At  the  end  of  2013  the  Spanish  economy  will  have  a  net  external 
financing  position  of  over  2%  of  GDP,  above  the  related  1986  figure, which  was  the  peak 
recorded to date in our external sector statistics. 
As  to  our  main  customers  and  suppliers,  namely  the  euro  area  members,  the  recovery  in 
competitiveness has been achieved through the direct containment of costs and margins, 
and not, evidently, through the nominal depreciation mechanism. This route is more difficult 
and  slower,  but  the  gains  in  competitiveness  thus  obtained  are  more  structural,  i.e.  more 
durable. 
Wage  moderation  has  played  a  very  important  role  here.  The  sensitivity  of  wages  to  the 
cyclical  situation  has  stepped  up  since  mid-2012  which,  in  principle,  suggests  the  labour 
market  is  functioning  more  in  step  with  developments  in  the  economy  and  the  clearly 
declining trend of inflation. Indeed, in September the consumer price index posted a year-on-
year rate of 0.3%, resuming a favourable difference vis-à-vis our European partners. 
The excessive dependence of the Spanish economy on the construction sector in the 
previous expansion no doubt entailed a factor of vulnerability. From the onset of the crisis in 
2008, the deterioration of this sector was continuous; from then to the second quarter of this 
year, its real value added posted a cumulative decline of more than 40%, far higher than that 
recorded by the market economy as a whole, which did not exceed 10%. 
A major challenge facing the Spanish economy today is to have other industries, other than 
construction, take up the baton in terms of the creation of value added. And here, too, there 
are  positive  signs  in  recent  quarters.  The  industrial  sector  achieved  moderately  positive 
growth in the second quarter, helped no doubt by the sound performance of exports. And the 
same occurred with the services sector. 
Despite the containment of labour costs and while bearing in mind that the data show a less 
adverse trend in unemployment, this is the most serious of our macroeconomic imbalances 
and that showing most resistance to correction. Some analysts estimate – and at the Banco 
de España this appears to be a technically reasonable estimate – that, owing to the labour 
reforms,  the  economic  growth  threshold  for  job  creation  may  have  been  lowered,  which 
should impel the start of a correction in the unemployment rate with what are still moderate 
GDP growth rates. 
As  regards  private-sector  debt,  Spanish  households  strongly  increased  their  debt  in  the 
expansion preceding the crisis; their debt ratio rose from less than 70% of gross disposable 
income in 2000 to close to 130% in 2007 and 2008. Non-financial corporations moved on a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
similar path, which lasted longer over time, with their debt ratio climbing from over 60% of 
GDP in 2000 to a peak of over 140% in 2010. 
Here, too, there are signs of correction. Since 2010, households’ and firms’ debt has fallen 
by almost 10 pp and 20 pp, respectively. Admittedly, though, such restructuring is slow as a 
result of weak nominal growth in household and corporate income. 
But the soundness of the recovery will unquestionably also depend on the progress made in 
normalising financing flows. 
Since  2009,  outstanding  credit  extended  by  our  banking  system  to  Spanish  non-financial 
corporations and households has been contracting uninterruptedly. As at September 2013 it 
was  5.4%  lower  than  a  year  earlier,  but  the  decline  was  more  marked  for  firms  than  for 
households: a decline of somewhat more than 9% for the former, and of 4.5% for the latter. 
As  to  firms,  the  reduction  was  more  marked  in  the  case  of  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs), whose access to other financing sources is generally more limited. 
This fall-off in credit should be viewed set against the correction of the excess debt built up 
by  Spanish  households  and  firms  during  the  expansionary  phase  that  ended  in  2008. 
Deleveraging  has  been  necessary  both  on  the  part  of  lenders  and  of  borrowers.  But  this 
credit  contraction  should  also  be  viewed  in  relation  to  the  end  of  the  –  what  was 
unsustainable – expansion of the real estate development and construction sectors. And of 
no  little  importance,  moreover,  has  been  the  re-drawing  of  the  map  of  Spanish  credit 
institutions – I refer here to the disappearance or transformation of many savings banks – 
which has, in a good number of cases, necessitated the re-configuration of relations between 
lenders  and  borrowers  and  has  no  doubt  had  a  bearing  on  the  funding  difficulties 
experienced by viable firms with sound expansion projects. 
For  credit  to  flow  normally  again,  two  essential  conditions  must  be  met:  economic  growth 
must increase and the restructuring and recapitalisation of our banking system must – as is 
indeed under way – be completed. A strong, healthy banking system that acts transparently 
and  offers  full  guarantees  to  depositors,  borrowers  and  investors  is  an  absolutely  crucial 
condition for sustained economic growth and, therefore, for the correction of our very serious 
unemployment problem. 
I must not fail to mention that, since May, the figures – including those relating to the use of 
Official Credit Institute credit lines – point to a less sharp contraction in lending to companies, 
a trend that is all the clearer if, along with bank loans, other channels of corporate financing, 
such as securities issues, are included. 
In respect of the initiatives to promote an appropriate flow of credit to SMEs, which are so 
important throughout the European Union and, of course, in Spain, some of the ideas tabled 
are  rather  unrealistic,  owing  to  their  technical  complexity,  to  political  difficulties  or  to  both. 
However, certain corrections that can make a positive impact are indeed possible. 
On  the  national  regulatory  front,  certain  changes  have  been  adopted.  Further  to  Circular 
4/2013,  the  Banco  de  España  has  revised  the  definition  of  SMEs,  adopting  the  broader 
criterion recommended by the European Commission; moreover, with the entry into force in 
late September of the Entrepreneurs’ Law, the discount factor applied to capital consumption 
envisaged in the new Basel III and European regulations has been introduced early. 
I  would  also  like  to  clarify  that  the  contractionary  behaviour  of  business  lending  at  the 
aggregate  level  may  prove  and,  indeed,  is  proving  compatible  with  a  reallocation  of 
resources within the sector, meaning that the reduction in credit for some companies runs 
alongside an increase in credit for those which, in the opinion of credit institutions, are better 
placed to undertake profitable projects. 
Precisely in relation to the recovery in credit flows, I will focus in the rest of my address on 
the task at the forefront of the Banco de España’s priorities: the reform and strengthening 
of our banking system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In 2012, in accordance with the regulations approved in the February–May period that year, 
banks undertook a major provisioning drive; and the Memorandum of Understanding and the 
financial  assistance  facility  of  up  to  €100  billion  were  negotiated  with  the  European 
authorities. 
The  effort  by  banks  focused,  above  all,  on  setting  aside  provisions  to  strengthen  the 
coverage  of  loans  to  the  real  estate  development  and  construction  sector  and  of 
foreclosures.  Moreover,  in  keeping  with  the  Memorandum,  banks  under  restructuring  or 
resolution were obliged to transfer to Sareb, at an agreed price, the assets belonging to the 
above-mentioned balance sheets segments. As a result of this transfer, and bearing in mind 
the write-downs made, Spanish banks’ exposure to these risks has been drastically reduced, 
from €240 billion as at end-2011 to €115 billion at end-2012. 
Alongside  the  most  notable  clean-up  and  provisioning  drive,  a  recapitalisation  and 
restructuring strategy was applied based on the analysis of balance sheets and on the tests 
based on stressed macroeconomic scenarios which concluded a year ago. This was all done 
in collaboration with the European Commission, the ECB, the IMF and the European Banking 
Authority, in the presence of independent consultants and auditors, and with the participation 
of  the  Banco  de  España  supervisory  and  regulatory  teams,  which  was  technically  very 
important for the performance of the exercise. 
The recapitalisation of our banks has been carried out through private access to markets; the 
injection  of  capital  financed  via  the  financial  assistance  programme  agreed  with  the 
European authorities; the conversion of hybrid instruments into capital instruments; and the 
provision of funds by the FROB (Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector) 
and the Deposit Guarantee Fund. 
From May 2009 to last September, the public assistance afforded to financial institutions to 
reconstitute their capital amounted to a somewhat over €61 billion (6% of our 2012 GDP), 
close to €39 billion of which were under the Financial Assistance Programme approved with 
the European authorities in July 2012. 
The  essential  aim  of  these  recapitalisation  operations  using  public  funds  has  been  none 
other than to preserve the deposits in the institutions in question (as is widely known, these 
are  the  only  bank  liabilities  not  to  have  undergone  any  loss  throughout  the  process), 
providing for business continuity by these institutions’ own means or by their absorption by 
others. This is a crucial point I wish to highlight, as it is not always well-understood. 
Regarding transparency, I would signal the initiatives taken by the Banco de España, which 
have  been  favourably  viewed  by  the  European  and  international  authorities  and  by  the 
markets, on relevant exposures and refinanced loans. And mention should be made of the 
guidelines on accounting practices in respect of refinanced loans. 
Finally, I wish to underscore the approval of Law 9/2012 of 14/2012 on the restructuring and 
resolution of credit institutions. To a most significant extent, this legislation stole a march on 
the future Directive that will regulate these processes in Europe. 
Spanish banks’ solvency position has improved clearly in 2013. The average core capital in 
our banking system will stand at around 10.5% as at December 2013, more than 1 pp above 
the related figure a year earlier. And, at the same time, exposure to the real estate sector has 
diminished drastically. Our banks may face the asset quality analyses and stress tests to be 
conducted  by  the  ECB  before  the  effective  implementation  of  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism in November 2014 from a sound position. 
Conclusions 
 
Allow me to conclude. With all due caution, the data available allow us to think that we 
may  be  at  the  start  of  an  economic  recovery  in  the  EU  and  in  Spain.  This  will  never  be 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
something  mechanical,  but  rather  the  result  of  a  major  effort  to  correct  the  serious 
imbalances that our economy built up in the period to 2008.  
The  risks  of  this  expectation  not  being  fulfilled  are  not  only  and  strictly  in  the  economic 
sphere: legal security and political stability will be pivotal to the engine of recovery.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
