Ardian Fullani: Overview of recent economic developments in Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 25 September 2013. 
 Today, on 25 September 2013, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  most  recent  economic  and 
monetary  developments  in  Albania,  and  following  the  discussions  on  their  outlook,  the 
Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  decided  to  keep  the  key  interest  rate 
unchanged, at 3.5%. 
The  Council  notes  that  the  inflationary  pressures  from  the  real  and  financial  sector  of  the 
economy  are  weak  and will  remain  so.  This  setting requires  persistence of  the  stimulating 
monetary policy in the period ahead.  
The monetary stimulus, transmitted through the low key interest rate and continuous injection 
of liquidity, provides the required conditions for meeting our inflation target in the medium-
term period. 
Let me now proceed with an overview of economic developments and key issues discussed 
at today’s meeting. 
According to INSTAT's data, annual inflation fell to 1.2% in August. The rapid fall in inflation 
over  the  past  two  months  was  mainly  attributable  to  the  low  rise  in  food  prices,  and 
particularly  in  seasonal  food  prices.  The  negative  inflation  of  non-food  consumables  and 
housing prices also drove annual inflation down. Similar to the previous months, the inflation 
of other basket items' goods and services remained low and positive. 
Despite the generally weak inflationary pressures, the Supervisory Council notes that the low 
inflation rates of the past two months were driven by transitory supply-side factors. 
The  analysis  of  macroeconomic  factors  suggests  that  the  contained  consumer  prices 
continue to reflect, to a large extent, the low demand in the economy and the negative output 
gap. The low capacity utilisation rates have subdued the rise in wages, producer prices and 
profit margins. Imported inflation has also been low due to the low inflation rates in Albania's 
trading  partners  and  the  stable  exchange  rate.  Lastly,  the  performance  of  liquidity  and 
inflation expectations is in line with the low inflation rate. 
There is scarce new information about developments in the real economy in the second and 
third  quarter  of  2013.  The  analysis  of  available  indirect  data  signals  positive,  albeit  low, 
growth.  
Unlike  the  previous  quarters,  the  public  sector  was  the  main  driver  of  aggregate  demand 
growth  in  the  second  quarter,  whereas  net  exports  made  a  slightly  negative  contribution. 
Private  sector  demand  remains  weak,  signalling  sluggish  consumption  growth  and 
contracted investments. 
The performance of budget indicators reflected the expansionary fiscal policy pursued in 
the  first  half  of  2013.  As  at  August,  budget  expenditures  were  9.2%  higher  than  a  year 
earlier, considerably due to the increase in capital spending. On the other hand, revenues 
performed poorly, registering an annual decrease of 3.8%, which materialised into the budget 
deficit being around 1.3 times higher than a year earlier. The higher deficit is reflected in the 
further increase in public debt-to-GDP ratio to 63.5% at the end of the second quarter.  
The Supervisory Council notes that the adoption of a fiscal rule, which would effectively and 
transparently support the public debt sustainability, would be the right step toward lower risk 
premia and long-term fiscal policy discipline. The fiscal rule would also establish a consistent 
framework for drafting medium-term paths of budget expenditure and deficit, allowing in turn 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the simultaneous fulfilment of the cyclical needs of the economy and the long-term objective 
for fiscal stability. 
Data on the external sector of the economy point to the negative contribution of external 
demand to economic growth in the second quarter of 2013, due to the increase in net export 
deficit  by  1.5%  over  the  same  quarter.  On  the  other  hand,  July  data  show  that  the  trade 
deficit shrank 14.6% in nominal terms, driven primarily by the high annual increase in exports 
by  23.9%.  Despite  the  short-term  volatility,  the  external  position  of  the  Albanian  economy 
remains one of its structural weaknesses. It reflects both the low competitiveness of Albanian 
products in the global markets and the need for better long-term balance between savings 
and investments in the economy. 
The  financial  markets  saw  downward  inflation  and  liquidity  risk  premia,  and  fuller 
transmission of key rate cuts to different market segments. Interbank rates stood close to the 
key interest rate and showed low volatility. Government security yields in the primary market 
dropped  rapidly  across  all  maturities,  particularly  on  those  with  a  longer  maturity,  hence 
smoothing the yield curve slope. Interest rates on deposits decreased as well, whereas those 
on lek loans continued to show little response to the Bank of Albania's monetary stimulus. 
The  full  transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals  to  the  credit  market  was  subdued  by  the 
presence  of  high  default  risk  premia,  and  banks  and  businesses'  low  risk  appetite. 
Consequently,  lending  to  the  private  sector  shrank  1.5%  in  annual  terms,  due  to  some 
balance sheet adjustments in individual banks, poor performance of lending to households 
and contraction in corporate lending. 
New  available  information  keeps  our  baseline  projections  for  the  economic  outlook 
unchanged.  The  Albanian  economy  is  expected  to  record  low  and  positive  growth  rates, 
albeit  substantially  below  potential.  In  the  absence  of  room  for  stable  fiscal  stimulus,  the 
growth of aggregate demand in the short-term period is expected to be driven by the external 
demand.  In  the  long  run,  the  magnitude  of  economic  growth  will  be  determined  by  the 
performance of consumption and private investments. Below-potential growth will give rise to 
weak demand-side inflationary pressures. Supply-side pressures will also be subdued in the 
period ahead. In the absence of unexpected supply-side shocks, annual inflation is expected 
to be low in the quarters ahead. 
At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest 
rate  unchanged,  at  3.5%.  The  Council  notes  that  the  current  monetary  conditions  are 
appropriate to ensure our inflation target is met in the medium-term period, providing at the 
same time proper monetary stimulus to recover private demand. In particular, the rapid drop 
in the yields over the past month reflects the low key interest rate, low inflation expectations 
and the reduced Government borrowing from the domestic markets. The drop in the yields, in 
turn, provides room for lower rates on private sector credit. The projection of a similar setting 
for the future would allow better monetary policy transmission to the economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
