Erdem Başçi: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
press  conference  for  the  presentation  of  the  October  2013  Inflation  Report,  Ankara, 
31 October 2013. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Welcome to the press conference held to convey the main messages of the Inflation Report. 
I will now present an overview of the report, which will be published on our website soon. 
The report typically summarizes the economic outlook underlying monetary policy decisions, 
shares  our  evaluations  on  macroeconomic  developments  and  presents  our  medium-term 
inflation forecasts, which were revised in view of the developments in the last quarter, along 
with our monetary policy stance. In addition to the main text, the report includes ten boxes 
entailing interesting and up-to-date analyses on various topics. I strongly recommend that 
you read these boxes, which will soon be published on our website. 
Now,  I  would  like  to  convey  the  main  messages  of  the  report.  Firstly,  I  will  review  the 
global economic outlook given its undeniable influence on our policies. 
Global monetary policy developments continued to influence financial markets in the third 
quarter of the year. Ongoing concerns over global growth led to expectations that the US 
Federal  Reserve  might  soon  start  trimming  its  bond  purchases,  while  the  pullback  on 
bond  purchases  was  postponed  later  on,  causing  the  global  risk  appetite  to  remain 
volatile (Chart 1.1). Emerging economies witnessed capital outflows since the Fed’s first 
signal for tapering off bond purchases in May (Chart 2). In this period, all financial assets 
have been re-priced on a global scale. 
As  global  economic  activity  remains  weak,  we  expect  uncertainties  over  global  monetary 
policies to linger for some time. While the US economic recovery is yet to stabilize, financial 
volatilities  and  the  recent  budget  battle  have  posed  risks  to  the  recovery  by  tightening 
financial  conditions.  Despite  some  positive  signs  from  the  Euro  Area  economies,  both  the 
high  unemployment  rate  and  problems  in  the credit  transmission  mechanism  have  caused 
the economic outlook to remain weak. The fact that global monetary policies depend on high 
frequency data releases as well as the course of economic recovery, and that those data and 
recovery  indicators  are  volatile,  cause  the  uncertainties  about  global  monetary  policies  to 
persist. 
Monetary policy and monetary conditions 
1. 
Elevated uncertainties regarding global monetary policies since May led the CBRT to adopt a 
cautious monetary policy that took into account both inflation indicators and macro financial 
risks  fueled  by  global  uncertainties.  Accordingly,  we  continued  to  implement  additional 
monetary tightening to contain the negative effects of rising inflation on the pricing behavior. 
In  August,  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the  additional  monetary  tightening,  the  Bank 
widened the interest rate corridor by raising the overnight lending rate from 7.25 percent to 
7.75  percent.  In  addition,  the  effective  liquidity  management  helped  short-term  rates  to  be 
realized close to the upper band of the corridor. Hence, a front-loaded monetary tightening 
was  implemented  in  the  same  period,  which  compensated  for  the  distortion  in  inflation 
expectations.  As  of  August,  we  decided  to  enhance  the  predictability  of  the  Turkish  lira 
liquidity  policy  in  order  to  limit  the  impacts  of  global  monetary  policy  uncertainties  on  the 
domestic economy. To this end, we adopted a strategy of reducing interest rate uncertainty 
by creating a framework where the relationship between global interest rates and domestic 
interest  rates  has  largely  weakened  and  market  rates  have  become  more  sensitive  to 
domestic macroeconomic developments as they should be. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In the third quarter, we continued to provide the market with foreign exchange liquidity via 
foreign exchange selling auctions, which fed into the growing Turkish lira liquidity deficit in 
the  market  (Chart  3).  We  cut  the  share  of  one-week  repo  in  total  funding  in  this  quarter, 
which led to an increase in the share of funds from overnight and monthly lending facilities. 
Correspondingly,  the  CBRT’s  average  funding  rate  and  the  BIST  interbank  overnight  repo 
rate increased (Chart 4). 
Moreover, in line with its strategy of enhancing the predictability of liquidity management, we 
have  been  sharing  more  information  about  the  frequency  and  timing  of  the  additional 
tightening since August. Recently, due to our cautious monetary stance, the Interbank Repo 
Market  rates  have  been  mostly  hovering  between  6.75  and  7.75  percent.  We  are  able  to 
control  the  interest  rates  in  the  money  market  via  various  policy  instruments  through  an 
efficient liquidity management and affect the money market rates in the favored direction and 
to the required extent. Accordingly, I would like to underline that in addition to the average 
funding cost, Interbank Repo Market rates shown in the chart should be closely monitored for 
a better assessment of the monetary policy stance. 
We  will  gradually  raise  this  predictability  of  the  monetary  policy  in  the  period  ahead  and 
ensure that interest rates in the Interbank Money Market to hover around 6.75 percent except 
the days on which the EPS is implemented. To enhance predictability in the funding strategy, 
we will limit the stock amount of the weekly funding we provide through the quantity auction 
method  at  4.5  percent,  not  to  exceed  TL  10  billion  until  the  year-end.  Moreover,  issues 
regarding the implementation procedures besides the funding amount to be made under this 
method as of 2014 will be elaborated on in the Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for 2014 
to be published in December 2014. 
Under this outlook with a gradual increase in predictability, I would like to remind you that our 
monetary policy will remain cautious until the inflation outlook becomes consistent with the 
medium-term projections. 
In the third quarter, interest rates were down from the previous reporting period across all 
maturities, with a larger decrease in the shorter end, while the yield curve trended upwards 
(Chart  5).  This  is  due  to  the  slightly  improved  global  risk  sentiment  and  Turkey’s  falling 
country risk premium as well as the CBRT’s monetary policy strategy to reduce interest rate 
uncertainty  which  had  a  greater  impact  on  short-term  rates.  Meanwhile,  2-year  real  rates 
declined on falling nominal rates and rising inflation expectations (Chart 6). 
Loan rates that trended down in the first half of 2013 started to go up by the third quarter 
(Chart 7). This quarter-long uptrend reflects global financial developments and the CBRT’s 
July and August tightening of overnight lending rates via the interest rate corridor. Moreover, 
deposit rates, currency swap rates, the CBRT’s average funding rate as well as bill and bond 
rates issued by banks, which all represent the Turkish lira funding costs of banks, increased 
as well in the same period (Chart 8). 
After a more robust first half compared to the average of past years, loan growth has come 
down to levels similar to the average of those years as of August (Chart 9). Rising loan rates 
due to recent financial fluctuations and our cautious monetary stance have contributed to this 
slowdown. Yet, the annual rate of loan growth still recorded a striking 25 percent in the third 
quarter  (Chart  10).  We  envisage  the  cautious  monetary  stance,  recent  macroprudential 
measures and weak capital inflows to bring the loan growth rates gradually to more plausible 
levels in the forthcoming period. 
The current policy framework has a favorable impact on the current account balance. After 
hitting an all-time high at the end of 2011, the current account deficit saw a major correction 
in  2012.  Although  there  has  been  some  deterioration  in  the  12-month  cumulative  current 
account deficit since early 2013, this is largely due to the gold market dynamics, which is a 
temporary factor. In terms of the current account balance excluding gold, the correction that 
started in 2012 has continued into 2013, albeit more slowly (Chart 11). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We expect real exchange rate and credit developments to support the economic rebalancing 
over  the  upcoming  period.  The  real  effective  exchange  rate  depreciated  after  the  recent 
nominal exchange rate developments and largely retreated from the levels that can be called 
excessively overvalued (Chart 12). We expect the current account balance to correct further 
in  the  forthcoming  period  amid  expectations  for  a  more  acceptable  rate  of  loan  growth,  a 
moderate final domestic demand growth and developments in the real exchange rate. This 
will cushion the Turkish economy against the potentially high levels of global uncertainty in 
the upcoming period by strengthening its financial stability and supporting the re-balancing 
process. 
In sum, uncertainty continued to reign over financial markets in the third quarter of 2013 and 
financial conditions tightened (Chart 13). The tightening of the index is mostly due to weak 
capital inflows, rising loan rates and higher market rates. 
to 
Macroeconomic developments and assumptions 
2.  
Now,  I  will  talk  about  the  macroeconomic  outlook  and  our  assumptions  on  which  our 
forecasts  are  based.  First,  I  will  summarize  the  recent  inflation  developments,  and  then 
continue with the domestic and foreign demand outlook. 
Annual  consumer  inflation  fell  by  7.9  percent  in  the  third  quarter  of  2013,  slightly 
overshooting  the  July  Inflation  Report  forecasts  (Chart  14).  This  overshooting  was  mainly 
attributed to a weaker Turkish lira and higher unprocessed food prices. As a result, the main 
inflation indicators increased as well (Chart 15). 
The  higher-than-projected  inflation  in  the  previous  quarter  was  largely  induced  by  the 
additional  depreciation  in  the  Turkish  lira  (Charts  14  and  15).  I  think  it  shall  be  useful  to 
inform  you  about  how  the  exchange  rate  assumptions  are  made  in  the  Inflation  Report. 
Traditionally,  the  Inflation  Report  takes  the  exchange  rate  realizations  during  the  reporting 
month  as  given  for  the  current  quarter,  and  adopts  a  framework  where  exchange  rates 
respond  endogenously 
the  monetary  stance  and  other  economic  developments 
afterwards. Accordingly, the exchange rate estimations are based on the July average in the 
July Inflation Report. The Turkish lira depreciated following the July Inflation Report, and this 
depreciation caused inflation to be higher than projected in the third quarter. This additional 
depreciation put an upward pressure of about 0.4 points on the end-2013 inflation forecast. 
Exchange  rate  developments  affect  core  inflation  via  prices  of  core  goods  (Chart  16). 
Services inflation went up in the third quarter as well, but remained relatively more stable. 
Accordingly, core inflation indicators displayed an upward trend (Chart 17). 
Now, I would like to talk about developments in economic activity and the short-term outlook, 
on  which  the  inflation  forecasts  are  based.  Economic  activity  was  more  favorable  in  the 
second  quarter  of  2013  compared  to  the  outlook  set  in  the  July  Inflation  Report.  The 
stronger-than-expected  economic  activity  was  mostly  driven  by  changes  in  inventories. 
Private  consumption  demand  saw  a  dramatic  recovery,  while  final  domestic  demand 
remained almost flat due to slowing public demand (Chart 18). On the other hand, imports 
grew strongly, while exports increased only modestly due to weak global demand. 
Indicators  for  the  third  quarter  of  2013  suggest  that  economic  activity  will  grow  more 
moderately  than  in  the  second  quarter.  In  the  July-August  period,  production  of  consumer 
goods was down from the previous quarter, while imports of consumer goods continued to 
rise.  On  the  investment  side,  indicators  show  a  weaker  outlook  compared  to  consumption 
demand. While exports were flat, imports saw a remarkable decline. Therefore, we expect 
the negative contribution of net exports to growth to decrease in the third quarter. Meanwhile, 
the  export-weighted  global  growth  index  remains  virtually  unchanged  from  the  previous 
reporting period (Chart 19). 
Final  domestic  demand  is  likely  to  continue  to  recover  modestly  in  the  second  half  of  the 
year. Thus, we revised output gap forecasts slightly upwards for 2013. However, downside 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
forecasts  downwards 
risks  to  recovery  increased  following  the  latest  financial  developments.  Accordingly,  we 
revised  output  gap 
for  2014.  We  expect  domestic  demand 
developments to support the downtrend in inflation and the improvement in current account 
deficit in the months to come. 
To sum up, a co-analysis of domestic and foreign demand reveals that forecasts are based 
on  an  outlook  in  which  the  contribution  of  aggregate  demand  conditions  to  the  end-2013 
inflation has slightly increased compared to the previous reporting period. This revision drove 
the end-2013 inflation forecast up by 0.1 points. 
As you all know, food, energy and import prices also play a great role in inflation forecasts. 
Therefore, before moving on to forecasts, I will briefly talk about our assumptions regarding 
these variables. 
Import  prices  remained  below  the  assumptions  of  the  July  Inflation  Report  in  the  third 
quarter. On the other hand, oil prices materialized slightly above the assumptions (Chart 20). 
In  line  with  the  average  futures  prices  in  the  first  three  weeks  of  October,  the  average 
assumption for 2013, which was set as USD 107 in July, was revised upwards to USD 109. 
This revision added 0.1 percentage points to the end-2013 inflation forecast. 
We preserved our assumption for the annual rate of increase in food prices as 7 percent. In 
other words, it was assumed that the recent unfavorable course of unprocessed food prices 
would be temporary. 
Before  moving  on  to  forecasts,  I  will  talk  about  our  assumptions  regarding  public  finance. 
Medium-term projections are based on the assumption that no additional tax adjustments will 
be introduced to tobacco and energy products the rest of the year. Meanwhile, we assumed 
other tax adjustments and administered prices would be consistent with the inflation targets 
and  automatic  pricing  mechanisms.  Thus,  there  has  been  no  change  in  the  end-2013 
inflation forecast stemming from the fiscal policy. 
Regarding  the  fiscal  policy  stance,  recently-revised  MTP  projections  are  taken  as  given. 
Accordingly, we assumed that fiscal discipline would be preserved and the ratio of primary 
expenditures to GDP would gradually decline starting next year. 
Inflation and the monetary policy outlook 
3.  
Now,  I  would  like  to  present  our inflation  and  output  gap  forecasts based  on  the  outlook I 
have described so far. 
Medium-term forecasts perceive an outlook where a gradual increase in the predictability of 
the  monetary  policy  is  continued.  In  addition,  we  envisage  that  the  cautious  stance  of  the 
monetary policy is preserved and the liquidity policy remains tight and the annual growth rate 
of  credit  will  fall  to  15  percent  reference  value  by  mid-2014  owing  also  to  recent 
macroprudential measures. 
Accordingly, inflation is expected to be, with 70 percent probability, between 6.3 percent and 
7.3  percent  (with  a  mid-point  of  6.8  percent)  at  end-2013  and  between  3.8  percent  and 
6.8 percent (with a mid-point of 5.3 percent) at end-2014 (Chart 21). 
As  a  result,  we  revised  inflation  forecasts  for  2013  and  2014  upwards  by  0.6  and 
0.3 percentage points, respectively, in the inter-reporting period. 0.4 percentage points of the 
revision  in  2013  was  led  by  exchange  rate  developments,  while  0.1  percentage  points 
stemmed from the rise in average oil price assumption. Moreover, the output gap forecast, 
which  was  revised  upwards  owing  to  the  better-than-expected  growth  outlook  for  2013 
compared to the figures presented in the July Inflation Report, added 0.1 percentage points 
to  the  year-end  inflation  forecast.  Developments  in  the  exchange  rate  and  oil  prices  were 
also influential on the revision in the inflation forecast for 2014. When evaluated together with 
output gap forecasts, we expect these cost-side factors to push the inflation rate in 2014 up 
by 0.3 percentage points. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Although inflation is estimated to fluctuate in the short term due to the base effect on energy 
prices,  we  expect  it  to  remain  on  a  downward  track.  As  the  effects  of  the  hike  in  tobacco 
prices  in  January  2013  on  annual  inflation  taper  off,  we  expect  inflation  to  plunge  in  early 
2014, and come down to levels consistent with the target by the last quarter of 2014. 
In addition to these forecasts, alternative scenarios on the inflation outlook and the global 
economy are discussed in the Risks section of the Inflation Report. You can examine the 
Report for details. 
While concluding my remarks, I would like to thank all my colleagues who contributed to 
the Report, primarily those at the Research and Monetary Policy Department as well as 
the  members  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  and  thank  every  one  of  you  for  your 
participation. 
 
 
 
Chart 1 
Global Risk Appetite  
Chart 2. 
Portfolio Flows to Emerging Economies 
(12-Week Moving Average, Billion USD) 
Source: Bloomberg, Credit Suisse. 
Source: EPFR. 
  Chart 3 
CBRT Funding# (2-Week Average, Billion TL) 
Chart 4. 
Policy Rate and Liquidity Policies (Percent) 
# Other CBRT funding includes primary dealer repo transactions, repo transactions at the BIST Repo and the Reverse 
Repo Market and lending depo facility at the Interbank Money Market. 
* 18 basis points were added to BIST Interbank Overnight Repo Rate. For BIST Interbank Repo Market overnight rates 
see: http://borsaistanbul.com/veriler/verileralt/tahvil-ve-bono-piyasasi-verileri/piyasa-verileri 
Source: BIST, CBRT. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Chart 5. 
Yield Curve* 
(Percent)  
Chart 6. 
2-Year Real Interest Rates for Turkey* 
(Percent)  
*Calculated from the compounded returns on bonds 
quoted at the BIST Bonds and Bills Market by using ENS 
method. 
Source: BIST, CBRT. 
  * Calculated as the 2-year discounted bond returns derived 
from the 
yield curve, minus the 24-month ahead inflation 
expectations from the CBRT Survey of Expectations. 
Source: BIST, CBRT.  
 Chart 7. 
TL Loan Rates 
(Percent)  
Chart 8. 
Funding Costs of Banks 
(Percent)  
Source: CBRT. 
Source: PDP, CBRT. 
Chart 9. 
Growth Rate of Loans 
(Adjusted for Exchange Rate, 13-Week Average, 
Annualized, Percent) 
Chart 10. 
Annual Growth Rate of Loans 
(Percent) 
  Source: CBRT. 
Source: CBRT. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
   6 
 Chart 11. 
Current Account Balance (CAB)* 
(12-Month Cumulative, Billion USD) 
Chart 12. 
Real Effective Exchange Rate 
(CPI based, 2003=100) 
  * Third quarter data includes July-August realization and 
September forecast. 
Source: CBRT, TURKSTAT. 
The dotted lines show the 2 percent annual trend starting 
from June 2003=100 and June 2003=90. 
Source: CBRT. 
Chart 13. 
Financial Conditions Index * 
*For  further  details  on  financial  conditions  index,  see  CBT  Research  Notes  in 
Economics No.12/31. 
Source: CBRT. 
 Chart 14. 
July 2013 Inflation Forecasts and Realizations 
(Percent) 
Chart 15. 
Inflation Forecast and Realizations Excluding 
Unprocessed Food, Tobacco and Alcoholic 
Beverages (Percent) 
* Shaded region indicates the 70 percent confidence interval 
for the forecast. 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT.  
* Shaded region indicates the 70 percent confidence interval 
for the forecast. 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Chart 16. 
Core Goods and Services Prices 
(Annual Percent Change)  
 Chart 17. 
Core Inflation Indicators SCA-H and SCA-I 
(Annual Percent Change)  
Source: TurkStat. 
Source: TurkStat. 
   8 
 Chart 1.2.5. 
GDP and Final Domestic Demand 
 (Seasonally adjusted, Billion TL, 1998 prices) 
Chart 1.2.6. 
Export-Weighted Global Economic Activity Index* 
(2008Q2=100) 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
*  For  methodology,  see  Inflation  Report  2010-II,  Box  2.1 
“Foreign Demand Index for Turkey”. 
Source: Bloomberg, Consensus Forecasts, CBRT. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 20. 
Oil and Import Price Assumptions 
Oil Prices (USD/bbl) 
Import Prices (USD, 2010=100) 
 
* Shaded area indicates the forecast period. 
 
Source: Bloomberg, CBRT. 
 
* Shaded area indicates the forecast period. 
 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
Chart 21. 
Inflation and Output Gap Forecasts 
* Shaded region indicates the 70 percent confidence interval for the forecast. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
