Jörg Asmussen: The public and the private banking union 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  at  the  joint  conference  “The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  Limits  of  Bank-
Regulation”,  Humboldt  Universität/Financial  Risk  and  Stability  Net-work  in  Berlin,  Berlin, 
8 November 2013. 
 Dear Mr Aehling [Veranstalter], 
Dear colleagues, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Intro 
The  timing  of  today’s  conference  on  “The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  Limits  of 
Bank-Regulation” could not have been better chosen as the SRM is the dominating theme in 
all European fora at the moment. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  and  I  am  happy  to  share  a  view  on  banking  union  from  the 
European Central Bank with you. 
Banking union 
Looking  back  with  the  experience  of  the  crisis,  I  think  that  many  here  today  share  the 
assessment that the key problem in the past was that there was too little cooperation and too 
much diversity – we lacked a coherent European approach to financial sector policies. But 
there is clearly scope for more cooperation today as, particularly after the experience of the 
crisis, preferences are more aligned in Europe. We all want banks that are well supervised 
and that can be resolved at minimum cost to the taxpayer. 
To  achieve  this,  I  think  we  need  not  reinvent  the  wheel.  There  are  elements  of  the  US 
approach that have worked and that we can usefully borrow in Europe. Saying this, one has 
to  acknowledge,  of  course,  that  the  US  is  a  fully  integrated  federal  state  whereas  the 
European Union will remain a construction sui generis for the foreseeable future. Therefore, 
the US approach cannot serve as a blueprint for Europe, but its direction may prove right for 
Europe as well. 
The  elements  of  the  US  approach  fall  into  two  basic  categories: first,  what  I  call  the  US’s 
“public banking union” – its federal institutions for dealing with banking crises. Second, what I 
dub its “private banking union” – its integrated financial market that dissipates the costs of 
crises. 
Public banking union 
Clearly, the key difference between Europe and the US is that banking problems in the US 
have  been  mainly  taken  care  of  at  the  federal  level,  whereas  in  Europe  responsibility  for 
troubled banking has thus far remained national. 
During  the  crisis  in  the  US,  it  was  federal  institutions  that  stepped  into  the  breach.  The 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) resolved 490 unviable banks, using resources 
from  its  deposit  insurance  fund  financed  by  all  the  banks.  The  US  Treasury  provided 
recapitalisation support and guarantees through its Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). 
The Federal Reserve undertook a thorough stress-test, determining banks’ additional capital 
needs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
To understand the situation we are in in Europe, it is useful to make a thought-experiment, 
and  imagine  that  no  such  federal  institutions  exist  in  the  US.  Imagine  that  the  state  of 
California would have had to come up with the TARP money for Wells Fargo instead of the 
US Treasury. Imagine that the state of New York would have had to provide the guarantees 
to Citigroup. Think about how the markets, how would the rating agencies have treated these 
states? And how they would have treated these banks? The lesson for the euro area is clear: 
federal institutions can prevent local crises from becoming systemic. 
In Europe, we do not yet have these federal institutions that can act as shock absorbers. So 
far,  responsibility  for  dealing  with  bank  problems  lies  exclusively  with  the  individual  EU 
countries. The result is that – to quote an FT editorial – “national taxpayers subsidise banks 
implicitly in good times, explicitly in bad times, and suicidally in a sovereign debt crisis”. 
Indeed, the crisis in Ireland has shown that problems in domestic banks can overwhelm the 
fiscal capacity of national sovereigns. The causality can also be the other way around, as the 
case of Greece has shown, where fiscal problems have dragged down the banking system. 
These countries got caught in a vicious fiscal-financial feedback loop, which in the end also 
drags  down  the  economy,  breaks  up  the  internal  market,  and  impairs  our  monetary  policy 
conduct. Removing this vicious feedback loop is what Banking Union is all about. 
Creating a banking union will be good for the euro, good for the internal market, and good for 
the recovery. It will be good for the euro, because it will help to repair our monetary policy 
transmission mechanism. 
In other words, it will ensure that the ECB’s low interest rates will be effectively passed on to 
those  countries  that  probably  need  them  most.  It  will  be  good  for  the  internal  market, 
because it will be of help to reverse the significant financial fragmentation that we have seen 
so  far.  And  it  will  be  good  for  the  recovery,  as  banks  will  be  put  on  a  stronger  footing, 
confidence  will  be  improved,  and  ultimately  credit  will  start  to  flow  again  to  enterprises  on 
affordable terms. 
But  what  are the  necessary  elements  of  a  banking  union? To  our mind,  two  elements  are 
indispensable: a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and a Single Resolution Mechanism 
(SRM). 
Furthermore, it is important to have a single rulebook and the implementation of the Capital 
Requirements Directive and Regulation IV is key in this respect. A single European deposit 
insurance is not top on the regulatory agenda today and it may be tackled in the long term 
only.  In fact,  the  Bank Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  and  its  liability  cascade 
makes it clear that deposits will come in only at the very end in bank resolution and thus the 
need for a single deposit insurance scheme is less urgent and a better harmonisation could 
suffice at present. 
Let me start with the Single Supervisory Mechanism. The ECB has been asked to assume 
responsibility for this mechanism, and to mould the existing national supervisory authorities 
into an effective and efficient federal supervisory team. We are making good progress on this 
front, and the SSM should become fully operational in the last quarter of 2014. 
Before we take on this task, we want to get an adequate view of what we will be supervising. 
In the coming months, the ECB will therefore undertake a balance sheet assessment. 
The importance of this exercise cannot be overestimated. This comprehensive exercise will 
encompass three steps: 
First,  a  supervisory  risk  assessment  to  review,  quantitatively  and  qualitatively,  key  risks, 
including liquidity, leverage and funding. 
Second, an asset quality review (AQR) to enhance the transparency of bank exposures by 
reviewing  the  quality  of  banks’  assets,  including  the  adequacy  of  asset  and  collateral 
valuation and related provisions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Third, a stress test to examine the resilience of banks’ balance sheet to stress scenarios. 
These three elements are closely interlinked. 
The comprehensive assessment will conclude with an aggregate disclosure of the outcomes, 
at  country  and  bank  level,  together  with  any  recommendations  for  supervisory  measures. 
This  comprehensive  outcome  will  be  published  prior  to  the  ECB  assuming  its  supervisory 
role in November 2014, and will include the findings of the three pillars of the comprehensive 
assessment. 
We will not publish any preliminary or intermediate results and I am quite surprised about the 
noise you hear these days in all directions about the possible outcome of the exercise. If we 
knew  that  “banks  in  the  periphery  will  not  face  severe  problems”  or  if  we  knew  that  “the 
recapitalisation needs will be a double digit bn figure” we could spare the effort in conducting 
this exercise. All these statements are mere speculation. 
The comprehensive assessment is an extraordinary opportunity to rebuild confidence in the 
banking sector and promote the long overdue repair of bank balance sheets, which in turn is 
a precondition for a sustainable economic recovery. 
One particular point needs to be stressed: credible national backstops must be put in place. 
If  not,  the  credibility  of  the  whole  exercise  is  put  at  risk  as  the  outcome  will  then  almost 
certainly  be  negatively  perceived  by  market  participants.  Doing  this  balance  sheet 
assessment  without  a  backstop  in  place  would  be  a  bit  like  getting  on  a  boat  in  rough 
weather  conditions,  and  not  taking  a  life  jacket  on  board.  Any  recapitalisation  needs 
uncovered  by  the  exercise  should  of  course  first  and  foremost  be  covered  by  the  market. 
National  budgets  and  national  resolution  funds  may  intervene  as  a  second  line.  Finally,  a 
European  backstop,  the  ESM  with  its  existing  instruments,  meaning  a  banking  sector 
programme like in the case of Spain, may be available. 
The second key element of a banking union is the Single Resolution Mechanism, a European 
equivalent to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The crisis has shown that simple 
coordination among Member States has been inadequate to organise the resolution of cross-
border banks in an efficient, quick and least-cost manner. 
The Single Resolution Mechanism contains three essential elements: 
First,  a  single  regulatory  framework.  This  will  be  established  with  the  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution Directive (BRRD). The trilogue of the Council, the European Parliament and the 
Commission is currently ongoing and from an ECB perspective a desirable trilogue outcome 
would contain two elements. 
First, bringing forward bail-in to 2015 as markets will anticipate bail-in anyhow. Having the 
rules in place earlier will give investors’ bigger security. 
Second, the flexibility and scope for national solutions should be somewhat reduced so that 
market participants will have sufficient confidence about the rules of the game in Europe. The 
second element of the single resolution mechanism is the single resolution authority and the 
third,  a  single  resolution fund, funded  by  contributions from the financial  industry. The  last 
two elements are currently in the legislative process and we strongly support the envisaged 
timeline for their entering into force (1 January 2015), as it ensures that the establishment of 
the Single Resolution Mechanism would follow shortly after the effective start of the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism. 
Private banking union 
The  “private  banking  union”  in  the  US  is  created  by  its  integrated  financial  market,  which 
includes both the banking sector and capital markets. 
In the banking sector, the US has genuinely nationwide banks, which allows them to better 
diversify risk. If such a bank makes losses on loans in one state it can offset them with gains 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
in  another  – thus  at  least  in  part  internalising  the  costs.  In  the  euro  area,  however,  banks 
tend  to  have  a  more  domestic  focus,  meaning  losses  in  one  country  are  more  likely  to 
exhaust the capital of the domestic banks. 
In the capital markets, the US has integrated equity and debt markets, allowing losses from 
bank  failures  and  corporate  insolvencies  to  be  dispersed  across  the  whole  market.  In  the 
euro  area,  by  contrast,  cross-border  capital  markets  are  only  partially  developed,  which 
means the effect of a negative economic shock is fully concentrated at home. In Germany 
and France, for example, around 85% of equity is held domestically. 
One should not underestimate the importance of this: it has been estimated in a paper that 
two-thirds of economic shocks in the US are absorbed via the integrated financial market.1 
While the launch of the euro seems to have encouraged more private risk-sharing between 
EMU countries, it remains at much lower levels than between US states, and markets are 
vulnerable to fragmentation.2 
This point underscores that the private and public banking unions are to a significant extent 
interdependent. Having a strong set of federal institutions can stop market failures such as a 
fragmentation during a crisis. Similarly, having a single financial market can make the task of 
federal institutions easier, in particular for resolution, as it allows mergers and takeovers to 
be used as a primary resolution strategy. 
Indeed, 450 out of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s 490 bank resolutions since 
2008  have  involved  what  is  called  “Purchase  and  Assumption”  –  selling  parts  of  banks  to 
other banks, often located in different states. 
The conclusion from this is simple: completing the banking union and completing the single 
financial market go hand in hand. 
Ins and Outs 
This  brings  me  to  the  topic:  how  does  the  banking  union  relate  to  countries  inside  and 
outside the euro area? 
I will make three points here. 
First, the banking union is critical for the Euro Area countries. 
Second, it is also desirable for Member States, which do not share the euro. 
And third, the banking union should be about strengthening the internal market, rather than 
dividing it in two. 
Let me start with the first remark: the banking union is critical for the euro area countries. 
The  reason  why  we  are  building  it  is  to  break  the  vicious  circle  between  sovereigns  and 
banks, the manifestations of which are much more acute and disruptive in a monetary union. 
That is why we need the Banking Union in the single currency area. But one thing must be 
clear: putting the Eurozone on a stronger footing will also benefit the countries that are not in 
the  eurozone.  The  crisis  has  clearly  shown  that  in  Europe  a  receding  tide  lowers  all  the 
boats, not just the ones which are in trouble. 
                                                
1   B. Sørensen and O. Yosha (1996), “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States (1963–1990)”, The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, November, pp. 1081–1111. 
2   Y.  Demyanyk,  C.  Ostergaard  and  B.  Sørensen  (2008),  “Risk  sharing  and  portfolio  allocation  in  EMU”,  DG  Ecfin 
Economic Papers 334. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial  stability,  and  national  responsibility 
My second remark is that the banking union – whilst critical for the ins – is also desirable for 
the outs. The so-called financial trilemma.3 – in other words the impossible trinity of financial 
integration, 
for  crisis  prevention  and 
management – holds for the entire region, and not just for the euro area. For example, the 
Swedish and Danish banking system are not only large in proportion to your GDP, but they 
are also very closely integrated with the rest of Europe. 
Let me focus on the case of the Danish banking sector. Danish banks’ consolidated assets 
are almost four times Denmark’s GDP. 
The  biggest  banks  have  considerable  cross-border  activities.  For  these  reasons,  it  would 
make  perfect  sense  for  Denmark  to  join  a  Banking  Union  that  is  composed  not  only  of  a 
single supervision mechanism, but also a single resolution mechanism with a resolution fund 
that can serve as an insurance scheme in relation to systemic banks. 
Whilst  participating  in  the  banking  union  therefore  appears  desirable,  the  terms  of  that 
participation should also be right. 
Indeed, we at the ECB consider it of the utmost importance to ensure that the participation of 
the outs occurs on equal terms as the Euro Area countries. 
On resolution, we need to find creative solutions to ensure a level-playing field between ins 
and outs. 
This  holds  also  true  for  the  backstop  for  the  single  resolution  fund  which  is  currently  the 
subject of much discussion. 
Taking part in the Banking Union from the beginning would bring many benefits. Having a 
chair at the table now allows participants to steer the practical implementation of the SSM  
–  for  example  the  development  of  the  supervisory  manual,  guidelines  and  general 
instructions, as well as benefit from the “healing effect” that the comprehensive assessment 
should bring. 
Let me make a third remark: The banking union should be about strengthening the internal 
market, rather than fragmenting it. 
Both  the  single  currency  and  the  single  market  are  key  pillars  of  growth  and  prosperity  in 
Europe.  Both  should  be  maintained  and  enhanced.  Hence,  the  banking  union  should  not 
create new barriers within the internal market. 
If countries choose not to join, they should not be discriminated against. Two safeguards will 
be crucial in this regard: having a single rulebook that sets the same standards for all, and 
having  a  strong  and  effective  European  Banking  Authority  with  a fair representation  of  the 
outs. 
The relationship between banking and fiscal union 
Let me now turn to the relation between banking union and fiscal union. 
For  the  fiscal  union,  finding  the  balance  between  cooperation  and  diversity  is  difficult. 
National preferences for taxing and spending are stronger, and the case for elevating certain 
functions to the European level is more complex. 
And there can be no taxation without representation, meaning any shift to a more European 
fiscal policy must be accompanied by the same shift towards European democratic control. 
So  to  frame  the  discussion,  I  think  it  is  helpful  to  recall  the  taxonomy  of  economic  policy 
functions described by Richard Musgrave. He distinguished between stabilisation, allocation 
                                                
3   Schoenmaker, D., (2011). “The financial trilemma,” Economics Letters, vol. 111, pages 57–59, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
and distribution. Broadly speaking, stabilisation helps smooth the business cycle, allocation 
ensures that resources are used efficiently and distribution ensures an equitable sharing of 
income. 
Stabilisation 
Concentrating  on  stabilisation,  there  is  a  long-standing  debate  in  Europe  about  whether 
monetary union needs a federal budget to support counter-cyclical stabilisation. As you may 
know,  the  report  by  the  four  Presidents  on  a  genuine  EMU  suggested  that  a  small  fiscal 
capacity could be used for this purpose. 
I  do  not  want  to  comment  on  the  specifics  of this  proposal,  but there  are  questions  about 
whether national preferences are sufficiently aligned to permit it. For that reason, we have to 
think  carefully  about  whether  it  is  essential  for  the  euro  area.  In  particular,  we  have  to 
consider how having a genuine banking union might change the debate. 
As  you  know,  stabilisation  in  Europe  takes  place  through  national  budgets  and,  in  normal 
circumstances, they are sufficient to smooth the cycle. A recent study demonstrates that 47% 
of an unemployment shock is absorbed by the automatic stabilisers in the EU, compared with 
only 34% in the US.4 They were insufficient in some countries during the crisis only because 
they faced an exceptional circumstance: a very large shock from the financial sector. 
With a genuine banking union, however, the risk of this happening again should be lower. 
First,  we  expect  the  SSM  to  increase  the  quality  of  supervision  and  the  assessment  of 
systemic risk. Second, if a financial shock were still to appear, national budgets should be 
better insulated. The costs of banking sector repair would be shared with the private sector 
through the Single Resolution Mechanism and a more integrated European financial market. 
All this suggests that stabilisation at the national level could be more effective in future. Or 
put differently, the more successful we are in building a genuine banking union, the less we 
would need a central budget for stabilisation purposes. 
However, this does not mean I see no role for fiscal union in the stabilisation area. 
First, we would need the public backstop, namely for the future resolution fund, which would 
be fiscally neutral over the medium-term. In my view the ESM could play this role like the US 
Treasury does this for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation by providing a credit line. 
Since  there  has  been  some  confusion  in  the  past,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  this  would 
indeed require a change of the ESM Treaty but not of the EU Treaty. 
Second, we would need an insurance mechanism against tail events that may still arise and 
endanger euro area financial stability. Here we already have the ESM to act as lender of last 
resort to sovereigns. 
To sum up: a functioning banking union reduces the need for the stabilisation function of a 
fiscal union, but not to zero. 
Conclusion 
I  have  tried  to  give  you  the  ECB’s  view  on  the  various  aspects  of  the banking  union.  Our 
preparations  to  take  over  the  task  of  the  SSM  are  well  under  way.  We  are  adamantly 
                                                
4   A recent study demonstrates that automatic stabilisers absorb 38% of a proportional income shock in the EU, 
compared with 32% in the US. In the case of an unemployment shock 47% of the shock is absorbed in the 
EU, compared with 34% in the US. This cushioning of disposable income leads to a demand stabilisation of up 
to  30%  in  the  EU  and  up  to  20%  in  the  US.  See:  M.  Dolls,  C.  Fuest  and  A.  Peichl  (2012),  “Automatic 
stabilizers  and  economic  crisis:  US  vs.  Europe;  Journal  of  Public  Economics”,  Elsevier,  vol.  96(3), 
pp 279–294. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
convinced  that  banking  union  will  only  function  if  the  SSM  is  complemented  by  a  single 
resolution mechanism and that it is put in place without undue delay. Given the parliamentary 
recess as of May next year in view of the upcoming elections to the European Parliament, it 
is of utmost importance to have a political agreement on the Single Resolution Mechanism in 
the ECOFIN by the end of this year. 
To make this happen, all need to move. The following are the main open issues that need to 
be solved: 
First, the legal base: Article 114 of the EU Treaty on the establishment and functioning of the 
internal market is a possible legal base from our point of view, but it could also be based on 
the flexibility clause of Article 352. 
Second,  the  scope:  The  Commission  proposal  foresees  that  all  banks  in  countries 
participating in the SSM should be covered by the SRM as well. My personal view is that a 
compromise  should  be  possible  here.  Why  not  start  with  the  systemic  SSM  banks,  ie  the 
130 for which the ECB will be the direct supervisor, and progress further over time? 
Third,  the  resolution  authority:  It  must  fulfil  three  criteria.  It  has  to  be  in  a  position  to  take 
decisions  quickly,  if  needed  during  a  weekend.  That  said,  it  is  obvious  that  the  Council 
cannot be the resolution authority. The resolution authority must be established quickly. That 
means there is no time to wait for a treaty change to establish a new institution. The new 
authority must take a European perspective on financial stability. 
Let me  be clear that  I  do  not see the  task  of the  resolution  authority  with  the  ECB. There 
should be a clear division of labour between supervision and resolution. 
The fourth and last big open issue is how to finance the backstop for the single resolution 
fund as long as it is not sufficiently funded via levies from the banking sector. As mentioned 
before, I think the ESM including any non euro-area member states could provide a credit 
line to the resolution fund. That would guarantee a clear control over the resolution fund by 
the participating member states and their parliaments. 
A functioning banking union is in the best interest of Europe and it is in the best interest of 
Germany. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
