Sabine Lautenschläger: Current developments in macroprudential 
oversight 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at 
the  14th  Handelsblatt  Annual  Conference  “Update  on  Banking  Regulation”,  Mainz, 
6 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Mr Afhüppe, 
dear Professor Schulte-Mattler, 
ladies and gentlemen 
The flyer advertising this event invited us to “keep our finger on the pulse of developments in 
banking regulation”. In my opinion, the heartbeat of regulation cannot be overheard; it beats 
fast, almost a staccato – if you consider the wave of regulations over the past five years and 
the changes in the approach to supervision. Today, I would like to discuss one of the three 
major changes that face banks and supervisors – and will possibly get your pulse going in 
the future. 
What changes am I referring to? The first major change are the completely revised rules for 
banks, known as “Basel III”. The second change is the banking union. Both subjects have 
already been discussed at length and in great detail. I therefore propose to talk about major 
change  number  3  today,  “macroprudential  oversight”.  It  is  my  impression  that  banks  and 
market participants have, to date, paid too little attention to the ways in which this new type 
of supervision could affect them. However, the potential impact of the instruments available 
for this task should not be underestimated; on the whole, they are directed at banks, they 
may  affect  a  category  of  banks  or  a  national  banking  industry,  and  may  impact  all  of  the 
business or just individual business areas. This raises elementary questions such as that of a 
level playing field. 
Macroprudential oversight: definition and background 
2. 
What is macroprudential oversight anyway? Before the financial crisis, financial supervision 
dealt  mainly  with  individual  market  players  or  individual  institutions.  Put  simply,  the  motto 
was:  if  all  is  well  at  the  individual  institutions,  all  will  be  well  with  the  system.  Attention 
centred on the micro level; the macro level was not monitored and evaluated systematically, 
at least not at the national level. Macroprudential oversight is intended to do just that: its aim 
is  to  identify  and  assess,  in  a  timely  manner,  developments  that  could  jeopardise  the 
financial  system.  We  –  the  Bundesbank  –  define  financial  stability  as  the  ability  of  the 
financial system to fulfil its key economic functions at all times – in particular, to efficiently 
allocate  financial  resources  and  risks,  and  provide  an  efficient  financial  infrastructure. 
However, the objective of macroprudential oversight is not just to analyse and identify risks to 
financial stability: it should also warn those responsible and recommend measures that will 
contain any risks to the proper functioning of the financial market or – better still – nip them in 
the bud. 
The financial crisis has clearly demonstrated why macroprudential oversight is important. It 
showed that tensions and imbalances in individual areas of the market or at individual market 
players may jeopardise the system as a whole. For instance, we saw that developments that 
appeared harmless in relation to just one institution caused considerable systemic risk when 
a larger number of institutions were affected. However, the crisis also demonstrated that we 
need suitable international agreements to identify vulnerabilities in the financial system early 
and  combat  them  effectively.  This  is  particularly  important  in  a  world  in  which  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
globalisation  of  the financial  markets  and technical  progress  in  data  processing mean  that 
markets and market participants are increasingly interconnected. 
A key lesson from the crisis is therefore: a macroprudential perspective must be added to 
microprudential oversight. 
Objectives of macroprudential oversight 
3. 
However,  the  difficulties  start  with  the  question  of  what  concrete  goal  macroprudential 
oversight should have. As I said earlier, the main intention behind macroprudential oversight 
is to reduce dangers threatening the financial system as a whole. As I see it, macroprudential 
oversight  can  take  two  directions:  macroprudential  activities  may  focus  on  increasing  the 
resilience of individual systemically important market players. Alternatively, the goal may be 
to reduce procyclicality. 
The  aim  of  raising  market  players’  resilience  is  virtually  self-explanatory.  In  the  event  of  a 
crisis,  players  have  more  room  for  manoeuvre  if  they  are  more  stable.  They  become 
distressed less quickly and must, for instance, resort to fire sales less quickly; nor do they 
need to curtail lending as much. 
But what is procyclicality and why is it worth monitoring? Procyclicality in the financial system 
is  the  result  of  self-reinforcing  feedback  effects  between  the  financial  system  and  the  real 
economy. Financial markets may amplify the real economic cycle and thus lead to economic 
overheating  or  an  overall  recession.  Such  developments  are,  moreover,  frequently 
accompanied  by  destabilising  effects  for  the  financial  system.  Think,  for  instance,  of  a 
pervasive real estate crisis or a credit bubble. It is therefore absolutely vital not to lose sight 
of the financial system’s often procyclical behaviour. 
In  a  nutshell:  the  objective  may  be  to  prevent  a  bubble  emerging  or  to  prepare  market 
players  for  the  bubble  bursting.  Now,  you  might  interject  that  this  distinction  between  two 
objectives is somewhat artificial. After all, some measures address both goals. That may be 
true. Nonetheless, when deciding on a measure, it is important to consider not only where 
the  danger  is  coming  from  and  what  concrete  measure  would  be  suitable  to  combat  it. 
Macroprudential  supervisors  must  also  be  interested  in  the  size  of  the  potential  damage if 
they do not take the measure. Because that determines how much the measure can interfere 
with third parties’ rights – and that doesn’t only mean banks’ rights.  
However, not only the objectives of macroprudential supervision must be clear, but also what 
dangers  or  risks  macroprudential  supervisors  should  be  monitoring.  May  these  only  be 
domestic dangers or should they also include risks that emerge outside of the supervisor’s 
own  territory  but may  have  far-reaching  consequences  –  such  as  the  US  subprime  crisis? 
Must  harmful  incentive  structures  arising from  legislation,  say  tax  legislation,  be monitored 
alongside the infrastructure critical for the smooth functioning of the markets? The wider the 
circle of dangers to be monitored is drawn, the more important is international coordination, 
amongst other things. The wider the circle of dangers to be monitored is drawn, the more 
important are measures that target not only banks. And we have a long way to go in both 
areas, in international coordination and on the macroprudential toolkit for non-banks. 
Measures of macroprudential oversight 
4. 
The question that springs to mind is: what do we do after identifying a danger? What sort of 
measures  are  at  our  disposal?  Some  measures  target  individual  players,  others  affect 
cyclicality. I would like to give you a few examples. 
An almost trivial, but still important way to prepare market players for a crisis are measures 
focusing on capital levels. If they are sufficiently large, capital buffers strengthen the financial 
sector’s  resilience  to  systemic  events  and  reduce  contagion  risk.  Sufficiently  capitalised 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial institutions have more leeway in a crisis before they have to reduce risk assets or 
curtail lending. As a result, they are less cyclical in their actions. 
Banks  are  even  less  cyclical  in  their  actions  if the  capital  buffer  is  additionally  anticyclical. 
Such  buffers  “breathe”  with  the  economic  cycle.  They  are  established  in  “good”  times,  ie 
times  in  which  there  is  a  risk  of  a  credit  bubble  emerging.  They  consequently  have  a 
dampening effect on lending and ensure that banks have reserves in “bad” times. Measures 
aimed only at individual business areas are also conceivable. For instance, capital backing 
for real estate loans could be raised in order to dampen lending. 
If  capital  requirements  breathe  with  the  cycle,  they  act  in  two  ways:  they  strengthen  the 
individual market player and they dampen cyclical fluctuations. 
The appropriate use of macroprudential measures is anything but easy, however. And this is 
where  it  really  gets  difficult.  The  measure  must  not  only  be  suitable,  it  must  also  be  the 
mildest possible. The choice of instrument must be suitable and the timing must be right – 
the measure must not be deployed too soon. The dosage must also be correct; and there 
must  be  transparent  triggers, for  both  when  to  deploy  them  and  when  to  phase  them  out. 
Some  thought  must  therefore  also  be  given  to  how  long  they  should  be  in  place.  With 
anticyclical  instruments,  in  particular,  the  phase-out  period,  ie  when  the  dampening  effect 
stops, can be just as important as the phase-in period, ie the dampening itself. 
However,  another  area  is  also  vital  to  macro  policy:  the  macroprudential  toolkit  still  needs 
some work – at both the national and the international level, as the only measures currently 
available are those laid down in the CRR and the CRD IV; and those deal exclusively with 
credit  institutions.  We  lack  instruments  at  the  European  level  that  target  the  behaviour  of 
insurers or other market players. 
I will leave it at that, and now turn to the key players in macroprudential oversight. 
Responsibilities for macroprudential oversight 
5. 
As  critical  developments  on  financial  markets  know  no  national  borders,  macroprudential 
oversight and, in particular, any measures resolved, have to be harmonised internationally. 
Comprehensive and close cooperation between various national and international forums is 
necessary for measures to have any kind of effect and for the playing field to be as level as 
possible.  Early  warning  systems  that  lack  a  mechanism  to  exchange  information  across 
borders  or  are  not  harmonised  are  pointless.  “State  of  play”  reports  from  countries  facing 
critical  developments  can  provide  important  information  about  potential  vulnerabilities  in 
other countries.  
However,  in  the  macroprudential  area  too,  it  is  not  just  a  question  of  bilateral  cooperation 
between  the  individual  national  institutions.  Strategies  and  tools  have  to  be  developed  to 
enable  a  structured  exchange  of  information  to  take  place  and  to  harmonise  courses  of 
action. European and global forums are thus required. 
Which forums exist already? The Financial Stability Forum (FSF) was founded back in 1999. 
In  2009,  this  forum  was  expanded  to  include  all  of  the  G20  countries  and  has  been 
re-established  as  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB).  The  FSB  is  one  forum  active  in 
international macroprudential oversight. It deals with endogenous risks in the financial sector, 
ie vulnerabilities that either originate in the financial system itself or are amplified there. For 
instance, this could be shadow banking activities to generate liquidity in the financial system.  
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  began  its  macroprudential  oversight  duties  in 
2011. Its membership includes the European Central Bank together with the national central 
banks, the European Commission, representatives of ESRB committees as well as the three 
European financial supervisory authorities, namely the EBA, ESMA and EIOPA. The ESRB 
was primarily conceived as an advisory body. It can issue warnings and recommendations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
If 
the 
institutions 
information 
informally  about 
the  AFS  believes 
that  previously  shared 
issue  warnings  and  recommendations. 
The  “comply  or  explain  principle”  applies  to  ESRB  recommendations.  If  institutions  do  not 
follow recommendations issued, they have to state their reasons why. 
The  ESRB  has  an  additional  mandate,  namely  to  ensure  that  countries  do  not  take 
macroprudential  measures  at  the  expense  of  other  countries.  National  macroprudential 
forums therefore first have to check with the ESRB before proposing measures that have a 
cross-border effect. 
The macroprudential forum in Germany is the Financial Stability Committee (Ausschuss für 
Finanzstabilität or AFS). The AFS was set up this year. It provides an institutional framework 
for  the  cooperation  between  BaFin,  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Bundesbank, 
which  are 
the 
macroeconomic  situation  in  Germany  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  Within  the  AFS,  the 
Bundesbank is responsible for macroprudential oversight. The Bundesbank can propose that 
the  AFS 
that  certain 
developments pose considerable risks to financial stability at a national level, it can make a 
public statement to that effect – and, most importantly, it can do this when signs of the risk 
are emerging, meaning it does not have to wait until the risk has fully materialised. It can also 
recommend that macroprudential measures be implemented. Then, we – the Bundesbank – 
monitor and evaluate the implementation. 
But  why  do  we  need  our  own  national  infrastructure  when  we  already  have  the  ESRB? 
Despite the financial sector having a strong international focus, the nation-state is still of key 
importance.  Risks  to  financial  stability  are  heavily  affected  by  national  factors  such  as  the 
structure of the financial market, bank customers’ economic situation, financing requirements 
in  the  real  economy  or  the  national  legal  and  fiscal  system.  It  is  thus  essential  that 
macroprudential  oversight  gives  adequate  consideration  to  national  factors.  It  is  for  this 
reason that Germany, too, needs its own infrastructure. The major challenge here will be to 
strike the right balance between the need to address cross-border risks whilst at the same 
time ensuring that national factors are not short-changed. 
The European Central Bank (ECB) is also to be involved in macroprudential oversight. The 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) is currently being set up. The ECB will be given both 
microprudential  and  macroprudential  powers  which  it  can  exercise  over  institutions  in  the 
SSM member countries. 
While  national  authorities  will  retain  their  powers  to  deploy  macroprudential  instruments  at 
national level, they will have to inform the ECB of these measures in advance – and the ECB 
will have the power to make them stricter. Of course, there is no guarantee that the national 
supervisory  authorities  will  share 
the  SSM  supervisory  bodies’  conclusions  and 
recommendations – or the other way around for that matter. I therefore believe that we will 
see intensive discussions and a need for coordination between the two levels. 
Conclusion 
6. 
This  year  we  have  officially  begun  our  macroprudential  oversight  of  the  German  financial 
system. We have thus learnt a key lesson from the financial crisis, even if much still remains 
to be done before the mandate is fully implemented. I hope my talk has helped to keep your 
finger on the pulse of developments. 
There is no doubt that many a major challenge still awaits those involved in macroprudential 
oversight.  I  expect  the  implementation  of  macroprudential  measures  will  require  a  high 
degree of coordination, especially if European or international forums do not fully share the 
conclusions and recommendations of national authorities. 
Whatever challenges remain, I am certain that, through the institutional framework which we 
have  established,  for  instance,  by  setting  up  the  ASF  and  our  growing  expertise  in 
macroprudential oversight and policy, we have laid a solid foundation for ensuring financial 
stability in the future.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However,  we  must  not  forget  that  macroprudential  oversight  is  only  one  aspect  of 
safeguarding financial stability. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
