Peter Praet: Interview in La Stampa 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in La Stampa, published on 22 December 2013. 
 Draghi said recently that for the AQR the sovereign bonds will be treated as neutral, 
but that they will be considered as a risky asset for the stress test. What could it mean 
for Italian banks? 
“I can’t comment on this, as even the parameter have not been decided, yet and the stress 
test will be a joint exercise  with the European Banking Authority (EBA). What I can say is 
that, in general, banks have to manage their risks. The stress test by definition stresses the 
entire portfolio of the banks, thus including sovereign debt”.  
Don’t you think that the OMT should also change your perspective, when you judge 
government bonds detained by banks? 
“I would not link the two things. The OMT has obviously had a consequence on the pricing of 
sovereign bonds, to the extent that it has removed from the spread that certain governments 
have  to  pay  the  compensation  for  the  probability  that  a  “catastrophic  risk”  scenario  may 
materialise: the probability that they may leave the euro area. Stress tests are never made 
for dealing with “end-of-the world” scenarios, but with plausible events, as adverse as they 
can be”.  
The ECB mentioned the possibility of a conditioned LTRO, “British style”, a “funding 
for lending” LTRO, but what are you exactly thinking of?  
“It is clear that when a  central bank provides liquidity to the banking sector, it expects the 
banking sector to transmit the liquidity stimulus, in volume and in prices, to the economy. But 
on the other hand you cannot really force the banks to lend to the real economy when there 
is  a  problem  on  the  demand  side,  when  the  perceived  risk  that  banks  attach  to  a  loan  is 
simply  too  high.  You  also  don’t  want  that  the  liquidity  injections  lead  the  banks  to  take 
excessive  risks  elsewhere.  Analysts  often  mention  sovereigns,  but  I  am  not  thinking  only 
about that. I think, as also Draghi said, that putting “conditions” on LTRO is complicated for 
all these reasons. For me the essential is to analyse if and how risks are properly priced and 
managed by banks”.  
How’s the situation in the credit market? 
“On lending to the real economy, what in particular needs to be addressed is the issue about 
the lending to small and medium enterprises. Recently, we have some positive signs in the 
evolution of lending. The contraction of lending to non-financial corporation has been 2.9% in 
the 12 months to October. This had been falling consistently, but in the most recent period 
the  flows  of  new  loans,  while  remaining  negative,  have  shown  signs  of  stabilisation 
compared to the earlier part of the year. You have also to take into account that bank lending 
is in some cases only part of the total financing of a company. Large firms for example tend 
to borrow directly on capital markets, issuing corporate bonds, and this market for corporate 
bonds have been doing very well in terms of prices and new volumes. We also see that, on 
their asset side, euro area firms have accumulated more than two trillions in liquid assets, 
largely reflecting precautionary savings and reluctance to invest. As profits have been falling, 
distribution of income to the shareholders and owners has been cut. Large size corporations 
are better placed here than the smaller firms, particularly in countries like Italy” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
How can we address this problem? 
“In  contrast  to  most  other  countries  in  the  euro  area,  in  Italy,  you  have  a  marked  dual 
industrial structure: on the one hand there are many very small firms, and the other hand a 
rather small number of large and very large firms. This is important because credit supply 
constraints are particularly severe for the smallest firms, which are the first to suffer when 
banks contract lending”.  
But what would you suggest? 
“Italy has taken some measures that have improved the situation, like the moratoria, which 
make  credit  conditions  a  bit  easier,  but  you  still  have  long-standing  and  severe  structural 
issues to solve. You don’t escape the big question: it’s a structural problem and Italy has to 
make economic reforms. During the crisis Italy has done a lot in terms of correcting its fiscal 
weaknesses, but has not done enough in terms of economic reforms. The labour market, still 
needs more flexibility. Labour market legislation needs to facilitate – not hinder – the capacity 
of  businesses  to  deploy  their  labour  force  in  the  most  efficient  manner.  More  generally, 
competitiveness and the attractiveness of a country as a foreign direct investment destination 
depends  on  the  “easiness  to  do  business”,  on  its  bureaucratic  environment,  on  its  judicial 
system’s capacity to enforce the rule of law, on the country’s governance in general. Without 
good economic governance solidly in place, you cannot expect foreign investment to return 
to  Italy.  If  you  look  at  the  last  “Doing  business”  index  of  competitiveness,  Italy  is  again 
extremely badly placed”. 
So “easiness to do business” comes from labour legislation and, more in general, 
from laws and bureaucracy. But what else should be changed? 
“Also, unit labour costs are too high. This does not mean, of course, that salaries are too high 
in  absolute  terms,  in  fact  the  take-home  pay  is  low  in  Italy  on  average  in  international 
comparison. Unit labour costs are high because productivity growth has been too low in Italy. 
But salaries cannot increase unless productivity increases, and productivity cannot increase 
unless the overall level of competitiveness of the country improves dramatically. Among the 
countries  where  sovereign  bonds  have  been  under  pressure,  Italy  is  the  only  one  where 
labour cost competitiveness is not improving relative to the best performers in the euro area. 
This  is  a  concern,  also  for growth  perspective.  You  see,  Italy  is  a  country  with  a  fantastic 
human  capital,  some  of  the  best  universities,  a  lot  of  creativity  and  cultural  richness.  But 
more  worrisome  is  the  difficulty  of  society  to  work  together,  to  come  to  agreed  long-term 
solutions, to redress its governance. It seems to me that this is really the biggest issue”.  
How is the situation in public finances, in your opinion? 
“While still increasing, the public debt level is on a better medium term trajectory thanks to 
reduced annual fiscal deficits . To keep public debt on a sustainable path, it is essential that 
the  government  sticks  to  its  fiscal  commitments.  This  means  that  fiscal  efforts  cannot  be 
relaxed. For example: to have a debt/gdp ratio of 100% in 2025, you would need, from 2016 
on,  a  primary  surplus  of  about  4,5%  of GDP. It is  possible,  and  other  countries  have kept 
their primary balances at those levels in the past, but it requires efforts and commitment. In 
this  respect  a  major  achievement  is  to  have  put  the  Fiscal  Compact  into  the  Italian 
constitution.  I  would  also  like  to  stress  that  the  adoption  and  implementation  of  structural 
reforms  leading  to  a  path  of  higher  economic  growth  would  make  possible  a  stronger 
reduction of debt for a given fiscal effort.’’ 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But austerity has been questioned, also by the IMF: in some countries it even 
worsened the recession. 
“The  impact  of  fiscal  consolidation  greatly  depends  on  how  you  do  your  consolidation,  on 
whether you increase taxes or cut expenditures for example, and on what taxes you increase 
and what expenditures you cut. In Italy you have had so far a greater focus on taxes than on 
expenditures. One should also try to avoid penalising labour and enterprises. But taxes on 
labour can only be reduced if spending is curtailed and put under a very tight control. Now 
Italy needs to be attentive to and cut expenditures: from that point of view, it seems to me 
that the appointment of Carlo Cottarelli is good news, it gives the right signal”.  
Is Italy out of the recession? 
“Yes,  it  seems  that  also  Italy  is  getting  out  of  the  recession.  I  think  it  is  very  important,  it 
shows that efforts are paying off in the end, and that there is hope. In Italy the barometer of 
business  confidence  is  increasing,  there  is  a  very  important  turnaround  in  confidence 
indicators.  Societies  are  a  little  bit  like  human  beings;  you  have  waves  of  optimism  and 
pessimism,  and  confidence  is  very  important for firms  to  return  to  investment. The  turning 
point is still very fragile, we are only at the beginning of this. That’s why we always say that 
there  are  downside  risks,  especially  if  structural  reforms  are  stopped.  But  we  see  positive 
momentum  building  up.  Many  business  firms  say:  we  see  the  situation  improving, reforms 
are  being  carried  out,  but  it’s  still  not  sufficient  to  start  really  investing.  They  are  still  in  a 
waiting mood”.  
Italy’s coming out of a crisis that destroyed almost 25% of its industrial production, 
worse than in many countries of the Eurozone. 
“In Italy there has been a strong contraction of productive investments, which is restraining 
growth potential and income creation. Just to give you an idea, investment in the euro area 
has fallen by 20% since the beginning of the crisis, while in Italy by almost 30% since the 
beginning of 2008. We believe that investment will start to recover in 2014. In that recovery 
phase, the ECB will be  very attentive, and if there will be credit supply constraints holding 
back  the  recovery  momentum,  we  will  be  ready  to  act.  Contrary  to  what  happens  in  a 
recession, where the demand for credit normally shrinks, in a recovery phase credit demand 
will pick up; and if credit supply will not follow, that could be a problem for the recovery. We 
will remain attentive that credit supply constrains will not hinder the investment recovery”.  
Anti-euro parties are rising. Are you concerned?  
“There  is  a  fundamental  political  question  here:  do  we  need  more  or  less  Europe?  We 
created an internal market which is working, it was worth creating. But it has become clear 
that we had too little Europe in crisis management and crisis resolution, to deal in particular 
with  situations  where  a  State  is  in  difficulty.  EFSF,  ESM  and  the  Banking  Union  are 
enormous achievements, in that sense. The new institutional set up is still not complete, but 
it’s going to be completed over time. The crisis became so acute in Europe because we had 
too little Europe. And now we are addressing some of the major problems we have had to 
face”.  
Like with the recent agreement on the SRM. 
We welcome the deal reached by EU finance ministers on the single resolution mechanism, 
in particular as it allows for swift actions in critical situations. We deem this a fundamental 
step  towards  the  completion  of  banking  union.  But  the  process  is  not  yet  complete  and  it 
needs to be finalised soon.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In Italy there is an alarming tendency to question the euro. What scenario, if a country 
exits the euro? 
“As the President said at the European Parliament, there is no point in discussing a plan B. 
Furthermore, now that we have stabilised the euro, this discussion does not reflect the reality 
that the euro is an irreversible project. But let me say another thing: those dreaming of the 
world before the euro, tend to forget what it really was, before. You remember the inflation in 
Italy, the repeated competitive devaluations – which were also a consequence of the loss of 
competitiveness  caused  by  high  inflation  –  the  volatility  of  the  exchange  rate,  nominal 
interest  rates  that  were  in  double-digits,  and  inflation  that  was  persistently  higher  than 
elsewhere and eating up the purchasing power of wages and pensions. In Italy you should 
think about that. Younger generation maybe don’t know that, and older generations tend to 
forget  that.  Suppose  now  you  want  to  take  the  risk  of  changing  the  currency:  can  you 
imagine all the contracts you have, denominated in euro and signed by the parties becoming 
uncertain?  All  your  debts,  your  contracts,  at  private  and  public  level  becoming  uncertain? 
Who  pays  what,  in  what  currency,  when?  You  get  you  into  a  nightmare  of  widespread 
litigation. And even in a scenario where all people who are parties to a contract denominated 
in euro are allowed to pay back in new liras, can you imagine how costly that would be for 
the  borrower  to  discharge  his  or  her  debt  in  a  new  currency  which  in  the  meantime  has 
probably  devalued  dramatically  vis-à-vis  the  euro?  Instead,  we  need  trust  and  stability,  in 
Europe. And, besides, monetary solutions are never the real solutions. You should trust the 
lessons of history”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
