Karolina Ekholm: Why Swedish monetary policy needs to be more 
expansionary 
Speech  by  Ms  Karolina  Ekholm,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Almega 
(employer and trade organisation for the Swedish service sector), Stockholm, 15 November 
2013. 
 The views expressed in this speech are my own and are not necessarily shared by the other members of the 
Executive Board of the Riksbank. I would like to thank Björn Andersson who has helped in writing the speech. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Interest  in  central  banks  and  monetary  policy  has  been  greater  than  normal  since  the 
financial  crisis.  Here  in  Sweden,  much  of  this  interest  has  concerned  the  disagreement 
among the Executive Board on the level of the interest rate, where I have been one of those 
who has consistently voted for a more expansionary monetary policy. I have mostly voted for 
a repo rate that is 0.25 percentage points lower and a repo-rate path that rises more slowly. 
One might of course think that the difference between this and the repo rate and repo-rate 
path  decided  on  is  so  slight  that  it  would  not  have  any  effect  on  the  outcome.  However, 
behind this apparently marginal difference in the view of what the repo rate should be is a 
fundamental  difference  in  the  view  of  the  role  of  the  central  bank  and  the  route  monetary 
policy  should  take  in  the  new  economic  landscape  emerging  in  the  wake  of  the  financial 
crisis. It is this fundamental difference that I intend to talk about today. 
On a general level one can say that the difference concerns the view of the risks linked to 
financial imbalances and to what extent monetary policy should be used to counteract such 
risks. It is primarily the latter that has come to be a recurring theme in the discussions on 
Swedish monetary policy. 
Here  in  Sweden,  monetary  policy  has  deliberately  not  accelerated  more,  despite  the  low 
inflation and low resource utilisation, with reference to the claim that a more expansionary 
monetary policy increases the risks linked to high household indebtedness. One justification 
for this deliberation is that the financial crisis has shown how high costs can be if these risks 
are allowed to increase and that it is therefore worth deviating from the inflation target and 
allowing a somewhat poorer development of the real economy to avoid indebtedness soaring 
too high and creating problems further ahead. 
I can very well understand the wish to prevent new crises and I am not categorically against 
conducting monetary in this way; leaning against the wind as it is usually called. But if one 
weighs  the  advantages  of  conducting  this  policy  against  the  disadvantages,  I  reach  the 
conclusion that there is no justification for it in Sweden today. As I see it, the advantages are 
small.  We  do  not  have  a  general  credit  boom  in  the  Swedish  economy  that  needs 
dampening.  However,  we  do  have  problems  with  high  housing  prices  that  lead  to  high 
household  indebtedness  and  risks  associated  with  this.  But  it  is  difficult  to  use  monetary 
policy to influence household indebtedness without this having very negative consequences 
in the form of poorer target attainment for inflation and poorer stability in the real economy in 
the coming years. Poorer target attainment over a long period of time also entails costs and 
risks in itself which must be taken into account. 
The  framework  in  which  monetary  policy  is  conducted  in  Sweden  and  in  many  other 
countries is based on the mandate of maintaining price stability, often specified as a target 
for  inflation,  as  we  have  in  Sweden.  And  it  is  this  mandate  that  is  the  reason  why  central 
banks in general have been allocated a greater degree of independence than other public 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
authorities.  Over  the  past  two  decades,  the  clear  objectives  for  monetary  policy  and  the 
independent  work  by  central  banks  to  attain  them,  have  proved  effective  in  anchoring 
inflation expectations and creating stability in the economy. 
However,  the  framework  is  based  on  the  central  bank  actually  delivering.  If  inflation  is 
allowed  to  deviate  from  an  established  target  over  a  long  period  of  time  it  can  affect  the 
general public’s understanding of the policy conducted and their confidence in the inflation 
target. The more the central bank stretches its task of delivering the set objective, the more 
difficult it will be to understand and evaluate the policy conducted. And then the greater the 
risk will be that the general public’s attitude to the framework deteriorates. 
I intend to try to describe my opinion on these questions today and on how they tie in with my 
view of the role of the central bank and how monetary policy should be conducted within the 
current framework. It may be useful to start by describing the framework we have lived with 
for a good twenty years now. Why do we have an inflation target and an independent central 
bank? 
Why an inflation target and independence? 
From credibility problems for the fixed exchange rate... 
When the international monetary system of fixed exchange rates – what was known as the 
Bretton Woods system – collapsed at the beginning of the 1970s, Sweden needed to find a 
new nominal anchor for its economy. The predominant view was that a fixed exchange rate 
was the best means for a small, open economy to attain stable prices and set a framework 
for the stabilisation policy. This was one of the reasons why Sweden chose to continue with a 
system where the krona was pegged to other currencies. 
But when the economy suffered problems in the 1970s and 1980s it became clear that the 
target for the fixed exchange rate was not regarded as credible. The target often came into 
conflict  with  the  aim  of  bringing  down  unemployment,  which  became  an  increasingly 
important element of the stabilisation policy. This was resolved by means of recurring krona 
devaluations. The result was a negative spiral, where expectations of continued high inflation 
and new devaluations affected price-setting and wage formation. Wage increases in Sweden 
therefore showed a higher trend increase than other countries. This in turn led to cost crises 
in the manufacturing industry, which were resolved through devaluations of the krona. This 
fulfilled the expectations of devaluations and thus sowed the seeds for the next round.1 
In  the  middle  of  the  1980s,  the  Swedish  credit  market  was  deregulated,  which  was  the 
starting  point  for  a  rapid  credit  boom  and  sharply  rising  prices  for  financial  assets  and 
property.  The  economic  policy  conducted  could  not  withstand  the  pressure  and  the  result 
was a property market bubble and a very overheated economy. When the bubble burst in the 
early 1990s, it triggered a financial crisis and a deep recession. Many were assuming that 
the  old  pattern  would  be  repeated  and that the  krona  would  be  devalued.  But the  political 
stance on this occasion was instead to once and for all disperse expectations of devaluations 
and show that they were serious about the fixed exchange rate. As you all know, this proved 
unsuccessful, despite a policy rate of 500 per cent and explicit support for the defence of the 
krona. In November 1992 the Riksbank had to give up the fight and let the krona float freely, 
which meant that it weakened significantly.2 
 1   See,  for  instance,  Jakobsson  (1997)  and  Jonung  (1999)  for  descriptions  of  the  economic  policy  problems 
during this period.  
In just a couple of days, the exchange rate weakened according to the TCW index by just over 10 per cent, 
which increased to around 20 per cent after a few months. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2  
2 
 ... to a floating exchange rate, inflation target and independent Riksbank 
When the krona fell, there were probably not many people who believed that Sweden would 
change  its  monetary  policy  regime  entirely.  Most  people  probably  expected  that  we  would 
eventually return to a fixed exchange rate. However, it was clear that such a return would 
take time and during a transition period a new strategy would be necessary. At the end of the 
1980s, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand had begun to aim its monetary policy at trying to 
directly govern inflation and in 1990 they introduced an official inflation target as a means of 
creating a nominal anchor in the economy. Canada and the United Kingdom soon followed 
suit and Sweden joined the group in 1993. On 15 January, the Riksbank announced that its 
monetary policy objective would be to hold inflation around a quantified target: 2 per cent, 
measured as the change in the consumer price index. This target would begin to apply from 
1995. 
Twenty years have now passed. With hindsight, we know that it actually took a very short 
time  for  the  inflation  target  to  become  credible  and  for  inflation  expectations  to  become 
anchored around 2 per cent. But in the beginning, it was not entirely clear that the inflation 
target  would  be  a  success.  Monetary  policy  was  therefore  mainly  focused  on  creating 
confidence in the target initially. The repo rate was kept at a high level to bring down inflation, 
despite relatively high unemployment, which led to criticism from several areas.3 As inflation 
expectations became anchored, however, there was scope to include developments in the 
real economy in monetary policy. One could deliberately allow inflation to deviate from the 
target for a period of time if this would give a better long-run development in employment and 
unemployment. The inflation-targeting policy was thus flexible. 
The framework for the inflation-targeting policy has of course developed considerably over 
the  past  twenty  years,  much  due  to  academic  research.  Research  has  also  contributed 
insights into the economic policy problems faced by Sweden and several other countries in 
the 1970s and 1980s. It was difficult for decision-makers to inspire confidence in the long-run 
aim  to  hold  inflation  low,  as  participants  in  the  economy  understood  that  there  were 
incentives to deviate from the target in the short run, for example, to reduce unemployment. 
It could therefore be beneficial if monetary policy were conducted with a focus on a clearly-
formulated, long-run target for price stability and an arm’s length away from the current party 
politics. This was the starting point for the reforms implemented in many countries during the 
1990s  and  which  meant  that  monetary  policy,  in  slightly  different  ways  and  to  varying 
degrees, was delegated to central banks along with a more independent status and with a 
clear mandate to hold prices stable. 
In practice, the Riksbank conducted its monetary policy independently from the mid-1990s, 
but  formally  it  was  not  given  an  independent  status  until  1999.4  The  Instrument  of 
Government and the Sveriges Riksbank Act were then amended as part of the adjustment to 
the requirements in the EU treaty, requirements that were of course affected by the insights 
gained and by developments in the field of monetary policy. The changes in the regulatory 
framework  meant,  for  instance,  that  an  Executive  Board  was  appointed  at  the  Riksbank, 
consisting of six members and with the task of independently conducting monetary policy. At 
the same time it was confirmed by law that the objective of the Riksbank’s operations would 
be to maintain price stability. The independence thus concerned which interest rate decisions 
would  attain  the  price  stability  target  in  the  best  way,  not  what  objective  the  central  bank 
would have for its operations. 
                                                
3   Bäckström (2003). 
4   See Bäckström (1998). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Better development with an anchor in place 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  inflation  target  gained  credibility  relatively  quickly  and  inflation 
expectations  were  soon  anchored  around  2  per  cent.  The  severe  weakening  of  the  krona 
when it was allowed to float also stimulated exports, which made the consolidation of public 
finances easier in the mid-1990s and helped the Swedish economy to climb out of the deep 
recession. The new framework for both monetary policy and fiscal policy and more efficient 
wage-bargaining rounds contributed to the rate of inflation declining and moreover fluctuating 
much less from year to year in relation to the 1970s and 1980s. 
The  much  calmer  development  of  inflation  was  also  supported  by  more  stable  inflation 
abroad.  It  is  important  to  remember  that  developments  with  lower  inflation  and  reduced 
volatility  were  not  an  isolated  event  in  Sweden,  but  an  international  trend.  From  the  mid-
1980s there was a period when the fluctuations in many industrial nations’ economies were 
considerably dampened in relation to earlier decades. The reasons for this development, “the 
Great Moderation” as it came to be called, have been the object of considerable analysis and 
debate.  It  was  probably  the  result  of  a  number  of  interacting  factors.  But  there  are  many 
indications  that  the  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  field  that  took  place  on  a  broad  front 
during this period were an important reason why inflation began to fluctuate much less.5 
Inflation-targeting policy after the crisis 
As  in  the  early  1990s,  the  most  recent  financial  crisis  has  for  natural  reasons  triggered  a 
discussion  of  to  what  extent  and  in  what  way  the  current  framework  for  monetary  policy 
needs to be changed. Attitudes to change have varied, partly depending on what role one 
believes monetary policy played in the crisis. Was inflation targeting one of the perpetrators, 
contributing to interest rates being too low prior to the crisis; was it the bystander who could 
only  look  on  in  horror,  or  was  it  the  saviour  who  ensured  that  inflation  expectations 
nevertheless remained firmly anchored?6 
Personally, I do not believe that the argument that the financial crisis stems from an overly 
expansionary  monetary  policy  is  particularly  convincing.  As  I  see  it,  it  was  primarily  a 
combination of a lack of supervision and regulation of the financial markets.7 Two obvious 
lessons  are  that  there  was  over-confidence  in  the  ability  of  these  markets  to  regulate 
themselves  and  that  the  distortions  in  incentives  on  the  financial  markets  had  been 
underestimated.8 
Given the enormous socio-economic costs the financial crisis entailed, there is of course a 
strong will to correct what one perceived went wrong to ensure it cannot happen again – this 
applies in particular to the central banks, who had to deal with quite a few of the problems. 
There is thus an instinct to take on the task of ensuring that financial crises do not arise – not 
merely through advocating better supervision and regulation of the financial markets, but also 
through monetary policy. But there are a number of problems with this. 
Risks linked to household debt have held back monetary policy 
This leads me on to the situation in Sweden and how monetary policy has been conducted 
recently.  We  have  had  low  inflation  and  a  low  level  of  resource  utilisation  in  the  Swedish 
economy for a long period of time. During my first year as a member of the Executive Board 
from spring 2009 until some point in the middle of 2010, CPIF inflation was close to 2 per 
                                                
5   See, for instance, Summers (2005) and Giannone, Reichlin and Lenza (2008). 
6   This classification comes from Reichlin and Baldwin (2013). 
7   See also Ekholm (2009).  
8   See for example Bean (2009) and Bernanke (2010). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
cent.9  But  then  it  began  to  gradually  fall  to  its  current  level  of  around  1  per  cent  (see 
Figure 1). The Riksbank’s forecasts have shown, and still show, that it will take a couple of 
years  until  underlying  inflation  begins  to  approach  2  per  cent  and  resource  utilisation 
normalises. This means that for several years inflation has undershot the target, at the same 
time as resource utilisation has been low. 
In  this  type  of  situation,  a  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  could  have  been  used  to 
reduce unemployment without creating a risk of inflation being too high (see Figure 2). Today 
there is quite simply no conflict of interests between inflation and unemployment of the type 
that was so common in the 1970s and 1980s, when the ambition to hold back unemployment 
was  what  ultimately  pushed  up  inflation  to  levels  that  were  unsustainable  for  the  fixed 
exchange  rate.  On  the  contrary,  inflation  has  now  been  so  low  for  so  long  that  I  am 
concerned that it risks becoming a problem in itself, as inflation expectations are adjusted to 
a lower level. 
For  these  reasons,  I  have  considered  a  further  cut  in  the  repo  rate  to  be  justified.  But  a 
majority  of  Executive  Board  members  have  assessed  that  this  is  not  justified,  because  an 
even  lower  repo  rate  is  thought  to  increase  household  debt,  which  is  in  turn  assumed  to 
increase their vulnerability and thus the risk of shocks leading to a deep recession. 
It  is,  of  course,  important  to  consider  how  concerned  one  should  be  over  household 
indebtedness,  not  just  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank,  but  the  Government  and  the 
Riksdag  (the  Swedish  parliament),  as  well  as  the  banks  that  lend  money  to  Swedish 
households  and  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority),  which 
supervises  these  banks.  My  own  opinion  is  that  the  high  housing  prices  probably  mainly 
reflect a shortage of housing and are thus not to be regarded as a price bubble. However, if 
the supply and demand situation changes, this could very well lead to falls in house prices in 
some  situations.  And  even  if  such  price  falls  are  justified,  they  can  entail  problems  for 
macroeconomic  developments.  I  believe  that  the  high  level  of  debt,  combined  with  an 
unwillingness  to  have  higher  debts  than  assets,  could  in  such  a  situation  have  negative 
effects on growth in consumption.10 I would therefore feel more secure if the level of debt was 
lower, or at least was not increasing. 
But if I would feel more secure with a lower level of debt, why not use monetary policy to try 
to slow it down? The answer is simply that the disadvantages with using monetary policy in 
this way outweigh the advantages. 
A trade-off between target attainment at different horizons 
One  fundamental  problem  here  is  how  to  make  the  trade-offs  clear  to  economic  agents, 
which is necessary if one wishes to convince them of the need to lean against the wind. The 
policy the Riksbank has conducted for some time means that one deliberately allows longer 
time for both inflation and the real economy to return to normal levels. At the same time, this 
is  justified  by  the  Riksbank’s  mandate  to  stabilise  inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and 
production  and  employment  around  long-run  sustainable  levels.  It  is  probably  not  clear  to 
everyone how the actual aim of the policy is connected to the justification for it. The trade-
offs therefore need to be made concrete and clear – partly so that the Riksbank’s principal 
can assess its monetary policy, and partly so the general public can understand the basis for 
the  policy  the  Riksbank  conducts.  What  does  one  gain  by  conducting  a  policy  that 
                                                
9   As the CPI is to a great extent affected by repo-rate cuts in connection with the financial crisis, it has been 
natural to focus more on underlying inflation measured in terms of the CPIF. 
10   Households’ total assets are much higher than their debts. A large part of this concerns housing. But there is 
also a considerable part that consists of more liquid assets, the value of which need not fall if housing prices 
were to fall. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
deliberately  allows  it  to  take  longer  for  inflation  to  return  to  the  target  and  for  resource 
utilisation to return to a normal level? Is it worth the cost in terms of poorer target attainment? 
This is not easily illustrated. It is a question of a “new” type of trade-off being included in the 
material on which the analysis and decisions are based and it takes time to find good forms 
for this. It also involves illustrating risks and uncertainty and making them more concrete, and 
this is always a challenge. The Riksbank has been carrying out work on developing this for 
some time, and an outline as to how financial imbalances can be included in the monetary 
policy assessments has begun to take form. The July Monetary Policy Report included such 
an outline that shows how one can approach this question.11 
The reasoning concludes that one can regard recent monetary policy as a trade-off between 
target  attainment  in  the  coming  years,  that  is  the  period  for  which  the  Riksbank  normally 
makes forecasts, and target attainment in the long run, beyond the forecast horizon.12 The 
idea  is  that  a  monetary  policy  that  solely  focuses  on  target  attainment  a  couple  of  years 
ahead could miss the fact that financial imbalances are building up that risk leading to very 
poor macroeconomic outcomes in the longer run. 
According to this outline, decision-makers need to balance target attainment in the short and 
medium term against target attainment in the long term. Thus, there are two questions one 
needs to take a stance on: How does indebtedness affect the risk that shocks will lead to a 
really severe depression? And to what extent can monetary policy affect indebtedness and 
thus the risk  of this  type  of scenario? The  latter question,  in  particular,  is  important  in this 
type of trade-off. 
Unclear benefits but clear costs 
Monetary  policy 
is  the  most  effective  tool  we  have  for  influencing  general  price 
developments.  It  has  an  impact  through,  for  instance,  credit  growth  in  the  economy. 
Monetary policy can therefore be used to dampen credit growth when it appears alarmingly 
high,  even  if  this  does  not  appear  justified  on  the  basis  of  the  prospects  for  inflation. 
However, it is not alarmingly high credit growth that is visible in the Swedish economy now, 
but a high level of debt in the household sector that is primarily a consequence of high credit 
growth prior to the financial crisis (see Figure 3). At present, growth in household credit is 
only slightly higher than growth in disposable incomes. Growth in corporate credit is at the 
same time low.13 The increase in lending by the major banks over the past five years has 
consisted almost entirely of Swedish mortgages (see Figure 4). 
My assessment is that it does not have any major impact on household debt to hold the repo 
rate slightly higher for a limited period of time (see Figure 2). 14 To have an effect that is more 
than marginal, one would probably need to hold the repo rate so high that the costs in terms 
of poorer macroeconomic growth would be very high. So what one gains by monetary policy 
leaning against the wind in terms of dampening debt, reducing vulnerability in the economy 
                                                
11   Sveriges Riksbank (2013).  
12   This  is,  of  course,  a  simplification.  Actually,  an  unfavourable  scenario  could  also  occur  within  the  normal 
forecast period, that is, within the next three years. See also Sveriges Riksbank (2013). 
13   Companies’  market  borrowing  has  increased  in  recent  years,  which  to  some  extent  compensates  for  the 
downturn  in  growth  in  bank  loans.  However,  even  if  one  takes  this  market  borrowing  into  account,  credit 
growth in the corporate sector appears relatively low. 
14   Model estimates of the short-term relation between the repo rate and household indebtedness indicate that 
the average effects may be relatively small: a 1 per cent lower repo rate over a period of one year, and which 
gradually  reverts,  will  give  rise  to  an  approximately  4  percentage  points  higher  level  of  indebtedness  as  a 
percentage of disposable income. Similar estimates of the relation between housing prices and the repo rate 
also  show  small  effects  –  see  Sveriges  Riksbank  (2011)  Chapter  2.1.However,  estimates  of  short-term 
relations might underestimate the total effects of the repo rate on household indebtedness. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and having a potentially better target attainment in the long run is thus very unclear. On the 
other hand, the costs in terms of poorer target attainment a couple of years ahead are very 
clear. 
Other  tools  than  the  repo  rate  could  moreover  influence  household  debt  more  effectively. 
Various types of tax tools are probably particularly potent, such as tax deduction regulations 
and property taxation, but at the same time these are the most politically sensitive. So-called 
macroprudential policy tools are probably more effective than monetary policy in influencing 
debt  in  the  household  sector.  Finansinspektionen,  which  has  been  given  the  main 
responsibility for these tools, has already used several of them and has signalled that it will 
remain vigilant with regard to risks linked to household indebtedness. This should reasonably 
have  an  effect  on  the  monetary  policy  trade-offs.  Once  macroprudential  policy  is  in  place, 
monetary policy can focus on attaining the inflation target and stabilising resource utilisation 
a couple of years ahead. 
An analysis of the target versus the means thus does not advocate the repo rate as a tool for 
dampening household debt. It would be costly to society as a whole to use monetary policy 
for something it is not particularly well-adapted to influence. 
The trade-offs must also include the risks of deviating from the inflation target 
My final objection to the monetary policy conducted recently is that the trade-offs have not 
sufficiently taken into account the costs and risks linked to deviating from the inflation target 
over  a  long  period  of  time.  Flexible  inflation-targeting  means  that  the  central  bank  can 
deliberately allow inflation to deviate from the target out of consideration for developments in 
the real economy. This is possible as long as the deviation is assessed as temporary, and 
households and companies perceive that the central bank aims to bring inflation back to the 
target  level.  However,  a  situation  where  monetary  policy  leans  against  the  wind  does  not 
really fit into this description. Here the central bank allows target attainment for both inflation 
and the real economy a couple of years ahead to stand back, out of consideration for the risk 
of a really poor target attainment, probably far ahead in the future. 
Such  a  trade-off  needs  to  take  into  account  possible  costs  linked  to  households  and 
companies having made decisions over a long period of time on the basis of what turn out to 
be incorrect inflation expectations.15 Moreover, one must assess the risks that a low inflation 
rate in itself entails. I consider it important to keep a respectful distance when prices are not 
increasing  at  all,  so  that  one  avoids  deflation,  which  could  lead  to  major  problems  for  the 
economy. In addition, one must take a stance on how long inflation can be allowed to deviate 
from  the  target,  given  the  other  trade-offs,  without  having  consequences  for  inflation 
expectations,  for  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  as  a  whole  and  ultimately  for  target 
attainment in the long run. 
As I said, the inflation target has been an anchor in many countries for a long period of time – 
for  twenty  years  in  the  Swedish  economy  –  and  we  almost  take  for  granted  that  long-run 
inflation  expectations  will  be  around  the  target.  They  also  still  appear  to  be  well-anchored 
around the target of 2 per cent in Sweden, although expectations in the shorter run are lower 
(see Figure 5). However, a monetary policy that explicitly leans against the wind is in many 
ways  untested  as  a  strategy  and  it  is  not  clear  how  the  participants  in  the  economy  will 
interpret  inflation  deviations  in  this  context.  One  must  therefore  be  careful.  I  see  a  risk  in 
allowing monetary policy to continue to lean against the wind until one sees tendencies for 
                                                
15 I n a long-run perspective, inflation below the target could lead to unnecessarily high unemployment if inflation 
expectations are firmly anchored around the target (see Svensson, 2013). In the same way that unexpectedly 
high inflation benefits those who borrow and is a disadvantage to those who lend as the real value of the debt 
becomes  lower  than  anticipated,  unexpectedly  low  inflation  can  benefit  those  who  lend  at  the  cost  of  the 
borrowers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
inflation expectations in the long run to begin to adjust downwards. That is a situation that 
might be hard to turn around. 
Target attainment is important for credibility 
One  argument  that  is  sometimes  put  forward  is  that  the  differences  between  what  the 
majority  of  Executive  Board  members  and  the  minority  advocate  are  so  small  and  that  in 
practice it is not very important whether or not one cuts the repo rate a little more. And in a 
strictly  “mechanical”  sense,  it  is  perhaps  true  that  a  policy  rate  that  was  0.25  percentage 
points lower for a period of time would have a limited effect on the economy. But for the sake 
of credibility and target attainment in the long run, it is also important how households and 
companies perceive monetary policy. How seriously does the central bank view the inflation 
target? The longer inflation is deliberately allowed to deviate from 2 per cent, the greater the 
risk that one begins to question what target the bank really has. We have seen elements of 
this in the recent debate on monetary policy in Sweden. 
This  could  also  have  significance  for  how  the  central  banks’  principals  perceive  the  way 
monetary policy is conducted, which can ultimately affect the banks’ mandate and position. 
The Riksbank has a mandate to work independently to maintain price stability and, without 
prejudice  to  this,  to  support  the  goals  of  general  economic  policy.  On  the  one  hand,  this 
means that it is up to the Riksbank to determine which risks are relevant for its decisions. But 
on  the  other  hand,  the  Riksbank  is  accountable  to  the  Riksdag,  which  determines  the 
Riksbank’s  mandate.  The  Riksbank  therefore  needs  to  be  able  to  show  in  a  convincing 
manner  that  the  trade-offs  it  makes  are  anchored  in  its  mandate.  And  given  the  current 
mandate, it may be a problem if one accepts deviations from the inflation target over a long 
period of time. If the trade-offs in monetary policy are not clear and concrete, it will be difficult 
to assess whether it has been conducted in a reasonable manner and within the mandate. 
The costs are clear, but what have we gained? 
Of  course,  it  may  be the  case that  the  principal  understands the  difficulty  in  making  these 
trade-offs  concrete  and considers  it  desirable  that  the  central  bank  nevertheless  takes  the 
risks into account in a way that reduces the degree of target attainment a couple of years 
ahead. But in this case, it is desirable that the principal should make clear that the mandate 
is  worded  too  narrowly  and  therefore  needs  to  be  broadened.  And  one  question  that  also 
arises is to what extent such a broader mandate fits into the degree of independence granted 
to many central banks. There is some tension between the breadth of the mandate and the 
degree of independence. A high degree of independence assumes that it is fairly simple to 
assess whether the mandate is fulfilled, which could be difficult if the mandate is worded so 
broadly that it encompasses most potential outcomes. 
“Let the cobbler stick to his last!” 
Let me conclude by summarising my message today and perhaps unexpectedly I shall begin 
in  ancient  Greece.  It  was  said  that  the  famous  artist  Apelles  from  Kos  one  day  heard  a 
shoemaker pointing out a mistake the painter had made in his depiction of a sandal. Apelles 
corrected the mistake, which encouraged the shoemaker, who then continued his criticism of 
the  way  the  leg  of  the  person  in  the  picture  had  been  drawn.  An  indignant  Apelles  then 
reminded him that a shoemaker should not criticise above the sandal.16 The expression we 
use today in Sweden –  Let the cobbler stick to his last! – may sound outdated and rather 
negative as an attitude.17 But if one rewords it, and at the same time removes the critical 
tone, it could be: “The best thing is for everyone to stick to what they do best.” I think the 
interpretation of the old expression summarises my point fairly well. 
                                                
16   Pliny the elder, Naturalis Historia, book 35, chapter 36.  
17   A perhaps more commonly used English idiom with the same implication is “Every man to his own trade!”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
For  around  two  decades  we  have  had  a  framework  for  monetary  policy  that  has  proved 
effective  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  and  creating  stability  in  the  economy.  This 
framework has quite naturally developed and been refined over the years, but essentially it 
means that the central bank has a clear task of maintaining stable prices in the economy and 
the mandate to make decisions to attain this independently. Stable prices are something that 
benefits everyone in the long run, but are difficult to attain because there can be such great 
temptation to deviate from the target in the short run to attain other targets – such as lower 
unemployment. This is why many countries have chosen to put monetary policy – which is 
the most effective tool for influencing inflation – in the hands of independent central banks 
and  at  the  same  time  to  give  them  clear  mandates  to  hold  prices  stable.  Well-anchored 
inflation expectations also create scope for the central bank to stabilise the real economy. 
For understandable reasons, focus following the financial crisis has honed in on risks linked 
to financial imbalances and to preventing these imbalances. There is thus an instinct to also 
include these trade-offs in monetary policy. As I have tried to explain, I believe there are a 
number of problems with this. It is difficult to manage the new trade-offs, which in the case of 
Sweden  concern  high  household  indebtedness,  both  strategically  and  in  terms  of 
communication.  And  tensions  may  also  arise  between  these  trade-offs  and  the  original 
framework regarding price stability and the mandate the central banks currently have. 
One solution to this would of course be to change the framework and give the central banks 
an  extended  mandate.  But  then  one  would  need  to  have  a  political  discussion  on  what  it 
should actually include and on the possibility to assess the central banks and hold them to 
account. 
I  understand  and  sympathise  with  the  instinct  to  act  to  ensure  that  crises  like  the  one  we 
recently experienced never arise again. But using monetary policy for this purpose creates 
problems. Given the Riksbank’s current mandate, it is difficult to accept large deviations from 
the inflation target over a long period of time. The more the inflation target is stretched, the 
more important the question of the general public’s confidence in the target will be and our 
principal’s attitude to the framework. This worries me, as the framework with a focus on price 
stability and an independent central bank has been successful as a nominal anchor in the 
economy.  I  therefore  consider  it  important  that  we  “stick  to  our  last”  and  safeguard  the 
inflation target. This does not mean that I oppose a further development of the framework 
that could  lead  to  better  attainment  of  the  inflation  target.  However,  this  is  a  discussion to 
which I will have to return at a later point. 
References 
Bean,  Charles  (2009),  The  Great  Moderation,  the  Great  Panic  and  the  Great  Contraction. 
Schumpeter  Lecture,  Annual  Congress  of  the  European  Economic  Association,  Bank  of 
England. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2010),  Monetary  policy  and  the  housing  bubble.  Speech  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia on 3 January 2010, Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Bäckström,  Urban  (1998),  The  present  situation.  Speech  on  25  August  1998,  Sveriges 
Riksbank. 
Bäckström,  Urban  (2003),  “1990-talets  väg  till  prisstabilitet”  (the  1990s  route  to  price 
stability).  Chapter  6  in  Jonung  (ed.)  På  jakt  efter  ett  nytt  ankare.  Från  fast  kronkurs  till 
inflationsmål. (Hunting for a new anchor. From fixed exchange rate to inflation target) SNS 
Förlag. 
Ekholm, Karolina (2009), Some lessons for monetary policy from the financial crisis. Speech 
on 4 December 2009, Sveriges Riksbank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Giannone,  Domenico,  Reichlin,  Lucrezia  and  Lenza,  Michele  (2008),  Explaining  the  great 
moderation:  It  is  not  the  shocks,  Journal  of  European  Economic  Association,  6(2–3),  
pp. 621–633. 
Jakobsson,  Ulf  (1997),  Den  svenska  devalveringscykeln.  (the  Swedish  devaluation  cycle) 
Ekonomisk debatt, 25 (3), pp. 141–154. 
Jonung,  Lars  (1999),  Med  backspegeln  som  kompass  –  om  stabiliseringspolitiken  som 
läroprocess.  (with  hindsight  as  compass  –  stabilisation  policy  as  a  learning  process)  Ds 
1999:9, Swedish Ministry of Finance. 
Reichlin, Lucrezia and Baldwin, Richard (2013), Introduction. In Reichlin and Baldwin (eds) Is 
Inflation Targeting Dead? Central Banking After the Crisis. CEPR/VoxEU e-book. CEPR. 
Summers,  Peter  M.  (2005),  What  Caused  The  Great  Moderation?  Some  Cross-Country 
Evidence. Economic Review, third quarter 2005. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2013), The Possible Unemployment Cost of Average Inflation below a 
Credible Target, NBER Working Paper No. 19442, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Sveriges  Riksbank  (2011),  The  Riksbank’s  inquiry  into  the  risks  on  the  Swedish  housing 
market. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2013), Financial imbalances in the monetary policy assessment. Article 
in Monetary Policy Report, July 2013. 
 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 1. The CPIF 
Annual percentage change 
4
3
2
1
0
07
09
11
13
15
4
3
2
1
0
 Note. The broken line is the Riksbank’s forecast from the Monetary Policy Report in October 2013. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
 
 
Figure 2. More expansionary monetary policy 
Repo rate
11
15
Unemployment
13
07
09
5
4
3
2
1
0
9
8
7
6
5
5
4
3
2
1
0
9
8
7
6
5
CPIF
4
3
2
1
0
07
09
11
13
15
Household debt ratio
180
170
160
150
07
09
11
13
Main scenario Lower policy rate 
15
Own calculations
07
09
11
13
15
4
3
2
1
0
180
170
160
150
 Note. Forecasts from the Monetary Policy Report, October 2013. Repo rate, per cent, quarterly averages. The 
CPIF, annual percentage change, quarterly averages. Unemployment, percentage of labour force, 15–74 years, 
seasonally-adjusted  data.  Real  interest  rate,  1  year,  per  cent,  quarterly  averages.  Debt  ratio,  per  cent  of 
disposable  income.  Effects  on  CPIF  and  unemployment  according  to  the  Riksbank’s  macro  model,  Ramses. 
Effects on debt ratio according to own calculations – see footnote 14. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden, Riksbank and own calculations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Figure 3. Lending to households and companies 
Annual percentage change 
Note. Lending to households and companies according to financial market statistics. 
Source: Statistics Sweden. 
 
Figure 4. Annual change in the major banks’ lending 
Per cent and contributions in percentage points 
Swedish mortgages
Other lending to Swedish customers
Lending abroad
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
 25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
kv 3
-10
 Note. The coloured fields show how the different types of lending have changed in relation to the major banks’ 
total lending to the general public. No consideration is given to change in exchange rates. 
Sources: Bank reports, Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 5. Inflation expectations one, two and five years ahead, all 
participants 
Per cent 
Sources: TNS SIFO Prospera and Statistics Sweden. 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
