Stephen S Poloz: Monetary policy as risk management 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Club of 
Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, 12 December 2013. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for those kind words. It is a real pleasure to be here in Montréal. 
I am going to talk today about managing risks. 
This  is  something  that  we  all  do  in  all  aspects  of  our  lives  –  whether  we  are  running  a 
business, pursuing a career, or looking after a family. As we make plans in pursuit of a goal, 
we take into account what could go wrong – and what can be done to mitigate that. 
Of course, we can never fully eliminate risks – we can only manage them prudently. 
As  an  economist  and  a  central  banker,  I  think  a  lot  about  risk.  I’m  not  the  only  one.  In 
response  to  what  we  have  experienced  these  last  few  years,  central  bankers  around  the 
world are adapting the way they do business. At the Bank of Canada, in recognition of the 
increased uncertainty that surrounds us, we are adjusting our lens on risks, how we evaluate 
them  and  how  they  enter  into  decisions  about  monetary  policy.  That  is  my  topic  this 
afternoon. 
Monetary policy formulation 
Not everything has changed, far from it. The best way for the Bank of Canada to deliver on 
its  mandate  is,  as  always,  to keep  inflation  low,  stable  and  predictable.  In  1991,  the  Bank 
adopted  an  inflation  target  and,  since  1995,  our  target  has  been  2  per  cent  inflation.  The 
target is sacrosanct. 
And,  in  more  than  two  decades  of  inflation  targeting,  we  have  generally  succeeded:  on 
average, inflation has been very close to the target. 
This has not happened by itself. Like navigating a ship, we have had to adjust to the currents 
around  us  and  to  bouts  of  foul  weather.  Some  of  the  challenges  are  minor,  calling  for 
temporary adjustments in course or speed. Others may involve a major detour. In worst-case 
scenarios,  there  are  risks  of running  aground,  or  even  capsizing.  In  all  cases,  we  have  to 
anticipate as well as react. 
The Bank’s Governing Council sets the policy interest rate with the goal of achieving our 2 
per  cent  inflation  target.  Central  to  this  decision  is  our  view  of  the most  likely  path  for  the 
Canadian and global economies. Conditional on these forecasts, there is a unique path for 
interest rates that should bring us back to target, just like the captain who plots the intended 
course  for  his  ship.  At  that  point  in  the  process,  monetary  policy  can  seem  like  precision 
engineering. 
But  just  like  at  sea,  in  monetary  policy,  the  view  is  not  always  perfectly  clear.  Given  what 
we’ve  been  through  and  continue  to  experience,  our  forecasts  are  not  pinpoint  numbers; 
rather, they represent ranges of likely outcomes. Likewise, our economic models are a better 
source of questions than answers. 
To make sure that such uncertainty is not just acknowledged but is actually embedded in our 
policy  decisions,  we  have  incorporated  explicit  “rule-of-thumb”  ranges  around  the  most 
critical variables for our projection. 
In doing so, we are reminding ourselves – and those who watch us – that, especially in the 
wake of the crisis, economic projections are subject to considerable uncertainty. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Indeed, while Canada came through the global financial crisis and ensuing Great Recession 
better than our G-7 peers, we are taking longer than expected – or desired – to get home. 
Our economy still has not returned to full capacity, and inflation has been running persistently 
below our 2 per cent target. 
Because  of  the  unprecedented  nature  of  the  crisis  and  subsequent  recession,  the  global 
recovery has been anything but smooth or normal. As we navigate these uncharted waters, 
we are especially vigilant in our lookout for risks that could push us off course. 
Assessing risk through two lenses 
This lookout is an important element of our policy deliberations. We assess how risks could 
interact with each other. We gauge their potential impact. And we use judgment to determine 
the  balance  among them,  both today  and  in  prospect. In fact,  monetary  policy  formulation 
these days is more a process of risk management than one of precision engineering. 
It is important to stress that risks are not part of our baseline forecast – they are not what the 
Bank expects to see, but rather, they are the possible deviations from what  we anticipate. 
We work to avoid or, at least, mitigate them. 
The Bank of Canada looks at risks through two lenses: (i) the possible impact on the outlook 
for  real  economic  activity  and  inflation,  and  (ii)  the  possible  impact  on  the  stability  of  the 
financial system. 
These two sets of risks are related but, for the moment, let me discuss them separately. 
Targeting  inflation  is  necessarily  a  forward-looking  activity.  It  is  informed  by  the  work  of 
economic forecasters who crunch the data and use models to assess the most likely future 
path  of  inflation.  As  our  inflation  target  is  symmetric,  we  care  about  both  the  upside  and 
downside risks to inflation. Of course, when we are already below target, as we are today, 
we care more about downside risks than upside ones. 
The Bank’s projection for inflation and its assessment of the risks around that projection are 
published quarterly in our Monetary Policy Report (MPR). 
Risks  to  financial  stability  are  viewed  through  a  separate  lens.  The  risks  we  consider  are 
those that have the potential to disrupt or harm the financial system – namely, the downside, 
or bad, risks. Our primary objective is to determine the likelihood that they materialize and, if 
they were to occur, their impact on financial institutions and the functioning of markets. 
The Bank examines such risks in depth twice a year in our Financial System Review (FSR), 
the most recent of which was published just two days ago. 
While  we  examine  the  two  sets  of  risks  from  different  perspectives,  we  take  into 
consideration the interplay between them. We learned, through the painful experience of the 
recent crisis, that pursuing economic stability  without due regard for financial stability risks 
achieving neither. Both are necessary, but neither is sufficient. Both are central complements 
to each other, not substitutes. 
It  follows  naturally  that,  as  policy-makers,  we  consider  the  risks  to  economic  stability  and 
financial stability in an integrated fashion. Like the two lenses of binoculars, this adds depth 
to our understanding of the forces at play. 
Avoiding Disaster 
Let  me  use  a  couple  of  examples.  People  ask  me  every  day  about  the  potential,  in  our 
present  situation,  for  runaway  inflation  or  runaway  deflation.  Indeed,  sometimes  the  same 
person  is  worried  about  both!  These  risks  sit  at  the  extremes  of  the  distribution  of  what’s 
possible. I’ll address each of them in turn. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Runaway inflation 
Let’s  talk  first  about  the  risk  of  runaway  inflation.  This  happened  40  years  ago  here  in 
Canada and in most advanced economies. Prices spiralled up, economic growth was weak 
and  unemployment  was  rising.  Inflation  got  away  from  us.  People’s  expectations  of  future 
inflation became unanchored, pushing up actual inflation. Interest rates were also high, but 
savings were eroded by the high inflation. 
When  the  Bank  of  Canada  finally  made  a  determined  effort  to  bring  inflation  back  under 
control, our economy went through a major recession. 
Some wonder if today’s easy monetary policy in Canada – alongside quantitative easing in 
other countries – could lead to a similar outcome. Their fear is that all that money creation is 
eventually going to result in an explosion in inflation. 
They needn’t worry. The situation now is different from the early 1970s. Monetary stimulus 
today is offsetting the serious and still ongoing downside shocks resulting from the crisis. 
Of course, it is worth asking what will happen when those negative forces abate. Could all 
that additional liquidity fuel inflation then? My answer is: central banks will need to drain that 
extra liquidity from the system at some point, as the economy heals. While I don’t want to 
underestimate the challenge of getting that exit exactly right, I am confident that we have the 
ability to keep inflation from taking off. 
In short, we will remain vigilant. We are prepared to remove monetary stimulus when it’s no 
longer needed to offset the forces that currently are pulling inflation below target. But, right 
now, it looks to us like it will take around two years to get inflation back up to 2 per cent. 
Deflation 
Let’s  switch  gears  and  look  at  the  risk  of  outright  deflation.  Like  out-of-control  inflation, 
deflation  can  become  a spiral,  but  a  downward  one.  Expectations  become  unanchored  on 
the  downside,  and  people  put  off  their  purchases  because  they  expect  things  to  be  less 
expensive  later.  Demand  declines  with  prices,  while  the  weight  of  debt  on  the  economy 
grows. 
In  the  Great  Depression,  consumer  prices  in  Canada  fell  25  per  cent,  and  national  output 
dropped  by  almost  a  third.  The  human  cost  was  staggering,  with  unemployment  reaching 
20 per cent. A milder form of deflationary trap has nagged Japan for the past 20 years. 
What I am describing is an economy-wide process of deflation, which is quite different from 
individual  prices  falling  because  of  improved  competitiveness  in  an  economy  that  is  still 
growing strongly. 
Today,  the  concern  is  that  even  though  policy-makers  were  successful  in  avoiding  global 
deflation in the wake of the 2008 crisis, there is still a risk that inflation could creep down into 
deflationary territory as the aftershocks of this crisis persist. It is, at least in part, to counter 
that risk that central banks in a number of countries have kept interest rates very low and 
used  unconventional  monetary  policies,  such  as  quantitative  easing,  to  provide  additional 
stimulus to their economies. 
History has taught us that deflation usually comes in the wake of a financial crisis. This was 
true of the Great Depression, and of the Japanese deflation of the 1990s. Perhaps the most 
important  lesson  of  the  crisis,  then,  is  that  a  stable  financial  system  is  necessary  to  keep 
inflation low, stable and predictable – and limit the risk of falling into a deflationary trap. 
The policy response – Where does financial stability come in? 
This is why the G-20 Leaders launched a reform agenda in 2009 to make the global financial 
system  more  robust.  In  short,  we  never  want  to  go  through  this  again.  Since  the  crisis, 
central banks have also been focusing greater attention on financial stability issues. In fact, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
this is a return to our roots. Many central banks were created primarily to preserve financial 
stability.  This  includes  the  Bank  of  Canada,  which  came  into  being  during  the  Great 
Depression. 
The first line of defence against a buildup of financial imbalances is effective regulation and 
supervision.  In  Canada,  it  is  ultimately  the  Minister  of  Finance  who  is  responsible  for  the 
stewardship  of  the  financial  system.  Regulation  is  carried  out  by  the  Office  of  the 
Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions,  deposit  insurance  by  Canada  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation, and consumer awareness by the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada. The 
Bank of Canada’s assessment of financial stability risks is an important contribution to this 
team effort. 
It is also critical, as I mentioned earlier, to the Bank’s policy-making. Today, we are focused 
in particular on the risks associated with household imbalances. 
To explain, let me back up a bit. 
At  the  height  of  the  crisis,  although  our  financial  system  remained  sound,  our  exports 
collapsed,  causing  a  recession.  To  support  economic  growth,  we  have  relied  mainly  on 
household spending, supported by exceptionally stimulative monetary policy. 
But there are trade-offs, lots of them. Today, the most obvious is that prolonged low interest 
rates can result in the development of imbalances in the household sector. In Canada, we 
have  seen  rising  levels  of  household  indebtedness,  stretched  house-price  valuations  and 
overinvestment  in  housing.  To  address  these  imbalances,  the  Finance  Minister  tightened 
mortgage  insurance  rules  four  times,  among  other  measures,  and  the  Superintendent  of 
Financial  Institutions  introduced  stronger  mortgage  underwriting  standards  for  Canada’s 
banking institutions. 
In  the  wake  of  these  measures,  a  constructive  evolution  of  household  imbalances  began 
around  the  middle  of  last  year.  Growth  in  household  borrowing  has  moderated,  and 
residential investment is on a more sustainable track. Those indicators have picked up again, 
we think mainly because people pulled forward their plans when mortgage rates started to 
move  up  during  the  summer. We  expect  these  imbalances  to  stabilize  and  then  gradually 
unwind in coming years. 
In  our  base-case  scenario,  the  Bank  expects  a  soft  landing  in  housing  and  a  pickup  in 
exports  and  investment.  This  rotation  will  relieve  the  tension  between  low  demand  and 
household imbalances. Nonetheless, the risks around this base case need to be managed. 
There is a risk that household imbalances could keep building and set the stage for a sharp 
correction down the road. Such a correction would be a risk to both the Canadian economy 
and our financial system. 
Our current monetary policy weighs this risk against the risk of inflation falling even further 
below target. This zone of balance is relevant today and in prospect, as we expect both risks 
to  diminish  over  the  next  two  years  or  so.  This  is  what  I  mean  when  I  describe  monetary 
policy as an exercise in risk management. 
Credibility counts 
Our  flexible  inflation-targeting  framework  gives  us  the  room  to  manoeuvre  in  the  face  of 
unusual  shocks.  This  only  works  if  expectations  are  well  anchored:  the  public  has  to  be 
confident that we will get to the 2 per cent target. Our commitment to the inflation target must 
remain credible. 
Credibility is coin. It is earned only through years of sound policy. Without it, low and stable 
inflation could only be achieved at considerable short-run cost to the economy – as was our 
experience in the early 1980s, when we tackled runaway inflation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Credibility must be employed wisely. We think of it as an investment. By using credibility to 
exercise the framework’s flexibility, we are working to maintain stable financial conditions that 
will  support  the  expansion  of  capacity  and  return  the  economy  to  its  full  potential.  As  the 
process unfolds, we anticipate there will be a future payoff of enhanced credibility. 
As  we  decide  policy,  we  cannot  take  credibility  for  granted;  we  must  keep  earning  it  by 
ensuring,  first  and  foremost,  that  monetary  policy  remains  focused  on  keeping  inflation  on 
target. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. I’ve described how we manage a menu of risks in our policy decisions: We 
look at risks through two lenses. We are concerned with the big risks of runaway inflation and 
deflation and are acting to keep them remote. We have learned, the hard way, that financial 
stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  low  and  stable  inflation,  and  we  are  working  here  in 
Canada and around the world to improve the resilience of the financial system. Our current 
monetary policy balances the risk that inflation could drift even further below target against 
the risks of exacerbating financial system imbalances. 
As central bankers, here in Canada and globally, we are in new territory. It brings to mind the 
sailors of another era who were driven far off course by a nasty storm. When things calmed, 
they found themselves in the southern hemisphere. Suddenly the navigational chart that they 
relied on – the night sky – was completely different. 
We have every reason to believe that, after the experience of the crisis is behind us, central 
banking  will  be  defined  very  differently  than  it  was  just five  years  ago.  We know  now  that 
economic and financial stability are intrinsically linked, and we are figuring out as we go how 
to better integrate the two in our analysis and research, and in our policy. 
On  a  technical  level,  we  are  actively  building  new  models  and  adding  new  detail  to  our 
existing  ones.  We  are  spending  more  time  talking  to  real  people  making  real  economic 
decisions,  to  understand  better  the  forces  we  are  facing.  And,  we  are  communicating 
differently,  not  just  more,  but  with  more  transparency,  with  due  regard  to  the  uncertainty 
around us. 
I am confident that we’ve got it roughly right, given what we know and especially what we 
don’t. Just like those sailors on the open seas, we will adapt and thrive – and find our way 
home. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
