Jens Weidmann: Breaking the sovereign-banking nexus 
Guest article by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, entitled “Stop 
encouraging banks to load up on state debt” in the Financial Times, published on 1 October 
2013. 
 It appears to be another case of the “principle of unripe time” – the notion coined by the late 
English classicist F.M. Cornford “that people should not do at the present moment what they 
think  right  at  the  moment,  because  the  moment  at  which  they  think  it  right  has  not  yet 
arrived”. 
The  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis  have  underpinned  the  importance  of  breaking  the 
disastrous  sovereign-banking  nexus  –  in  which  shaky  bank  balance  sheets  degrade  the 
solvency of their sovereigns, and vice versa. A European banking union is an important step 
towards escaping this deadly embrace. To this end, and to complement the banking union, a 
reassessment of the regulatory treatment of sovereign exposures of financial institutions is 
crucial. 
The current  and  incoming regulatory framework  implies  preferential treatment  of  sovereign 
exposures  in  various  forms.  While  bank  exposures  to  a  single  counterparty  are  limited,  in 
principle,  to  a  quarter  of  their  eligible  capital,  exposures  to  sovereigns  are  exempted  from 
that large exposures regime. Sovereign exposures are also privileged by low or zero capital 
requirements. 
Preferential regulatory treatment makes it highly attractive for financial institutions to invest in 
government bonds – and those of their home countries in particular. During the crisis, this 
has  become  more  attractive  still.  The  share  of  euro-area  sovereign  bonds  in  total  bank 
assets in the eurozone increased over the past five years by one-third – from 4 per cent to 
5.3. And in most countries the home bias, which decreased over the first decade of monetary 
union, increased again during the crisis. 
Average  figures  mask  important  differences  from  bank  to  bank  and  country  to  country. 
Recent  studies,  including  one  by  the  Bundesbank,  find  that  larger  banks,  less  capitalised 
banks and banks that are dependent on wholesale funding invest more in sovereign bonds 
than  others.  Hence,  the  more  vulnerable  banks  are,  the  more  they  expose  themselves  to 
sovereign debt. 
Weak  banks  invest  in  high-yield  sovereign  bonds  and  refinance  at  currently  low  interest 
rates. Such “carry trades” sustain the low profitability of those banks and postpone necessary 
adjustments of their business model. 
The reasons for the increased exposures of banks to their domestic sovereigns may vary: 
the  search  for  yield,  moral  suasion,  the  endeavour  to  stabilise  their  own  respective 
sovereigns  or  simply  strategic  considerations.  In  an  economy  in  which  the  sovereign 
defaults,  banks  are  likely  to  default,  too.  Thus,  the  domestic  banks  have  an  incentive  to 
invest in sovereign’s bonds and earn the yield mark-up if things go well. What happens in the 
event  of  a  joint  sovereign-bank  default  is  not  relevant  for  them.  This  undermines  market 
discipline  for  governments  and  reduces  their  incentive  to  carry  out  necessary  structural 
reforms.  On  the  other  hand,  banks,  which  can  obtain  unlimited  cash  against  sovereign 
collateral  from  the  central  bank,  are  protected  from  discipline  from  investors  who  provide 
funding. 
Large sovereign bond exposures might also harm the real economy. Rises in sovereign risk 
are  transmitted  into  reduced  bank  lending.  Banks  that  were  highly  exposed  to  strained 
European sovereign debt have reduced their lending to the private sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Thus,  the  current  regulatory  treatment  is  incompatible  with  the  principle  of  individual 
responsibility; the market interest rate no longer reflects the riskiness of the investment. I am 
aware  that  banks  as  well  as  governments  are  afraid  of  rising  funding  costs  as  a  result  of 
ending the regulatory privileges afforded to sovereigns. The argument goes, moreover, that 
such a regulatory move risks considerable market turmoil. I do not think that this argument 
should keep us from doing the right thing. 
No  market  participant  would  judge  a  French  bond  to  be  as  risky  as  a  Greek  one:  the 
riskiness of each is reflected in their prices. Investors believe that sovereigns differ in terms 
of riskiness. So no one should be surprised when the regulatory treatment accommodates 
this fact. 
If  additional  capital  requirements  for  European  banks  were  imposed  to  cover  sovereign 
exposures, the extra capital would be almost negligible on aggregate – albeit with substantial 
differences between banks. Other measures, such as the inclusion of sovereigns in the large 
exposures  regime  might  lead  to  more  substantial  repercussions,  but  these  would  be 
manageable if introduced over a transition period – which undoubtedly has to be granted. 
When  it  comes  to  funding  costs  for  governments,  a  healthier  banking  system  with  better 
diversification  would  pose  less  of  a  burden  on  states.  The  contingent  liabilities  of  the 
government  would  shrink  which  –  all  other  things  being  equal  –  would  reduce  the  risk  of 
investing in sovereigns and, eventually lower the sovereign bond yields. 
The current regulation’s assumption that government bonds are risk-free has been dismissed 
by  recent  experience.  The  time  is  ripe  to  address  the  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign 
exposures. Without it, I see no reliable way of breaking the sovereign-banking nexus. 
 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
