Stefan Ingves: Central bank policies – the way forward after the crisis 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Royal  Bank  of  Scotland,  Stockholm,  4  October 
2013. 
 How  should  the  Riksbank  and  other  central  banks  act  to  contribute  to  the  best  possible 
development of the economy? This is a question that one might need to contemplate from 
time to time. Because at the end of the day, there is probably some truth in the old joke that it 
is not a problem if the questions in the Economics exam are the same year after year – the 
answers will change anyway. 
The international financial and debt crisis that started around five years ago, and which still 
afflicts many countries, makes it particularly important to consider whether the answer to the 
question has changed – whether the central banks should conduct their operations differently 
from before the crisis, and if so, how. This issue is currently being discussed internationally, 
both in research and in policy. We do not now know exactly where this discussion will lead, 
although it is possible to distinguish some main conclusions. 
Prior to the crisis – most of the pieces of the puzzle appeared to be in place 
Before the crisis, everything seemed quite simple. The global economy had experienced an 
unusually  long  period  of  good  growth,  relatively  minor  cyclical  fluctuations,  and  low  and 
stable  inflation.  This  coincided  with  monetary  policy  being  increasingly  aimed  at  holding 
inflation in check. A growing number of countries had introduced explicit or implicit inflation 
targets and monetary policy had increasingly been delegated to independent central banks. 
Once  inflation  expectations  had  been  anchored,  it  became  easier  to  stabilise  the  real 
economy as well. Many felt that an important reason for the favourable developments in the 
world economy was that these changed enabled monetary policy to be conducted in a better 
manner than before.1 
Moreover, during the period prior to the crisis financial stability was increasingly being taken 
for  granted.  It  was  assumed  that  the  financial  markets  were  on  the  whole  efficient  and 
functioning smoothly. Financial crises did occur, but most of the countries affected were able 
to get back on their feet relatively quickly. The successful management of the IT bubble at 
the  turn  of  the  millennium  supported  the  impression  that  if  crises  occurred,  they  could  be 
dealt with relatively simply and efficiently. Japan, where the problems following the crisis at 
the beginning of the 1990s nevertheless had been long-lasting, was regarded as a special 
case. Although developments in Japan were regarded as interesting, the lessons perceived 
were not thought to indicate that anything similar could happen in, for instance, the United 
States or Europe.  
In this apparently stable macroeconomic environment, interest in research into the interaction 
between the financial sector and the real economy gradually declined. As Jordà, Schularick 
and Taylor (2011, p. 1) observe, it was “an historical mishap that just when the largest credit 
boom  in  history  engulfed  Western  economies,  consideration  of  the  influence  of  financial 
factors on the real economy had dwindled to the point where it no longer played a central 
role in macroeconomic thinking.”  
                                                
1   See for example Taylor (1998) and Bernanke (2004). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Few traces of the debate on leaning against the wind  
A few years before the crisis a debate had arisen on whether central banks should raise their 
policy  rates  to  counteract  the  rapid  increases  in  asset  prices  that  had  been  observed  in 
several regions. Should central banks, as it was often expressed, “lean against the wind” to 
“burst bubbles” on the asset markets? But this debate made little mark on practical policy. 
The  dominant  opinion  at  this  time,  among  both researchers  and  representatives  of  central 
banks, was that the central banks should not try to take preventive action, but make do with 
“cleaning up afterwards” if a crisis did occur.2 It was considered too difficult and too costly to 
use  the  policy  rate  for  preventive  purposes.  Moreover,  it  was  considered  –  possibly  with 
Japan as the exception that proves the rule – that it need not be so difficult to clean up after 
a crisis. 
In other words, the situation around six or seven years ago was such that we were more or 
less prepared to believe we had found the final solution as to how monetary policy should be 
conducted, and that financial crises no longer offered a severe threat.  
An illustration 
The  international  financial  and  debt  crisis  made  it  painfully  clear  that  things  were  not  that 
simple.  There  are  several  lessons  that  can  be  learned  from  the  crisis.  But  if  one  were  to 
choose the most important, for me there is no doubt that it is that a substantial increase in 
indebtedness in society can entail major problems, particularly if it is linked to price increases 
on an important asset market, in particular the housing market. This danger was definitely 
underestimated prior to the crisis. 
The underlying problems can be illustrated using a stylised figure (see Figure 1). The red line 
represents the usual cyclical fluctuations in the economy – the business cycle.  
Figure 1 
Business and credit cycles 
Business cycle
Credit cycle
                                                  
2   This so-called Jackson Hole Consensus is described by, for instance, Issing (2009). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Let us, for the sake of simplicity, assume that inflation follows the business cycle, so that the 
curve  can  also  represent  developments  in  inflation.  Of  course,  the  business  cycle  and 
inflation do not normally coincide so well in reality, but this has no significance for the points I 
will make here.  
The  second  curve  in  the  figure  represents  variations  in  the  amount  of  credit  or  degree  of 
indebtedness in the economy. There are slightly different terms for these cycles in academic 
literature – credit cycles, leverage cycles or financial cycles.3 They can have slightly different 
meanings  in  different  contents,  but  essentially  refer  to  the  same  thing.  For  the  sake  of 
simplicity, I shall use the term credit cycles here. 
The  credit  cycle  and  the  business  cycle  may  occasionally  coincide  quite  well,  but  can  at 
times develop differently. In the figure, the two cycles are for illustrative purposes assumed to 
evolve rather differently. One occasion when the two cycles coincide, however, is when the 
credit cycle shows a rapid downturn, as at the end of the figure. Such a downturn is more 
likely  when  the  preceding  upturn  has  been  unusually  strong  and  characterised  by 
exaggerated optimism and risk has been underestimated and under-priced.  
Credit boom that “goes wrong” – credit and business cycles coincide 
At  some  stage  it  becomes  clear  that  the  large  amount  of  credit  and  the  high  level  of 
indebtedness are based on overly optimistic calculations. Interest in selling the asset, usually 
housing,  at  the  base  of  the  credit  expansion  suddenly  becomes  greater  than  interest  in 
buying it and a downward price spiral starts. The value of the collateral falls and the banks 
become cautious and reduce their lending. Households on the other hand see the value of 
their  assets  plummeting  while  the  size  of  their  loans  remains  unchanged.  In  other  words, 
their  balance  sheets  look  much  worse  than  they  had  anticipated.  Households  who  have 
found themselves in this situation in many other countries have reduced their consumption 
and  begun  to  save  to  achieve  a  better  balance  between  assets  and  debts.  Not  only  the 
supply,  but  also  the  demand  for  credit  thus  declines.  The  consolidation  of  households’ 
balance  sheets  gives  a  fall  in  demand  that  tends  to  be  fairly  long-lived.4  The  fall  in  the 
economy  can  be  reinforced  if  the  weaker  economic  activity  means  that  borrowers, 
households  and  companies,  experience  difficult  in  meeting  their  obligations  and  the  banks 
suffer  loan  losses. This process  often  leads to  a  substantial  weakening  in  public  finances, 
too, partly because of the rapid decline in economic activity and partly because the banking 
system may in a worst case scenario require support.  
In this way, one can say that the credit cycle and the economic cycle pull one another down. 
Sometimes  one  uses  the  expression  “credit  boom  gone  wrong”  to  describe  this  kind  of 
development.5  
Of course, not all credit cycles look like this, but history shows that it is difficult to avoid it 
happening now and again. There is fairly good empirical evidence to support this description. 
For  example,  Schularick  and  Taylor  (2012)  find  in  a  study  of  more  than  200  recession 
periods  in  14  economies  during  the  years  1870–2008,  that  the  more  households  and 
companies  borrow  during  an  economic  upturn,  the  greater  the  risk  that  the  upturn  will  be 
followed by a deep recession and a slow recovery – regardless of whether or not a financial 
crisis occurs. They also find that recessions linked to a financial crisis are more costly than 
normal recessions as production then falls more. An obvious example of a credit cycle that 
                                                
3   For a few examples, see Geanakoplos (2009), Aikman, Haldane and Nelson (2010) and Borio (2012). 
4   See, for example, Mian and Sufi (2010). There is a debate, so far mainly in the United States, on what has 
caused  the  main  problems  for  the  macro  economy  –  the  crisis  in  the  banking  system  or  households  debt 
overhang (see, for instance, Krugman, 2013). An increasing number of people consider it has been the latter. 
5   See, for example, Schularick and Taylor (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
went  wrong  close  to  home  is  the  boom that  contributed to  a  bank  and  property  crisis  and 
deep recession in the early 1990s. 
After the crisis – pay greater attention to the credit cycle! 
Figure 1 is a good basis when one wants to illustrate different questions regarding monetary 
policy  and  central  bank  operations  that  have  arisen  due  to  the  crisis  and  are  now  being 
discussed both internationally and in the debate here in Sweden.  
The  perception  prior  to  the  crisis  could  be  described,  in  a  rather  simplified,  but  not 
misleading, manner as central banks in principle being able to disregard the credit cycle and 
focus  solely  on  the  economic  cycle.  It  was  assumed  that  those  cases  in  which  the  credit 
cycle  pulls  down  the  economic  cycle,  which  were  presumed  to  be  fairly  rare,  would  be 
relatively easy to manage.  
Correspondingly, the current international discussion on how central banks should act from 
now on – the question I began with – can essentially be about how one should take the credit 
cycle  into  account  in  a  good  way  and  incorporate  it  into  the  economic  analysis  and  into 
practical policymaking. As the origin of the economic recession is the earlier excessive credit 
boom, much of the focus is on the question of how one can best ensure that this increase in 
credit becomes more balanced and that the credit boom thus does not go wrong. 
It is not merely a question of avoiding crises. A high level of indebtedness can cause what 
one  might  call  debt  dominance  in  the  economy,  which  put  constraints  on  economic  policy 
and leads to general unease over how debt will be reduced – whether this can be achieved 
in an orderly manner or whether it will be a rapid, abrupt process with substantial negative 
effects on the economy. 
Riksbank quick to point out the risks with a credit boom  
I mentioned earlier that prior to the crisis there was a discussion on whether central banks 
should try “leaning against the wind” to dampen the credit boom and the upturn in housing 
prices  that  could  be  observed  in  a  number  of  countries.  One  could  actually  claim  that  the 
Riksbank was one of the first central banks to clearly highlight the risks linked to household 
indebtedness and housing prices in its monetary policy agenda, and it was also one of the 
few central banks that in practice conducted a policy prior to the crisis that to some extent 
entailed “leaning against the wind”.6 I myself discussed the Riksbank’s policy at the annual 
conference in Jackson Hole in 2007.7 This was before the crisis had really made itself felt 
and there was considerable scepticism of a “leaning against the wind” policy. When the crisis 
came, opinion changed and as I see it, there is today considerably more understanding and 
acceptance  for  the  policy  we  conducted.  During  the  recovery  phase  after  the  crisis,  the 
Riksbank has also tried to reduce the risk of exaggerated indebtedness and overly-inflated 
housing  prices  by  conducting  slightly  less  expansionary  monetary  policy  than  would 
otherwise have been the case.  
                                                
6   See, for example, Mishkin (2007) and Cagliarini, Kent and Stevens (2010). Heikensten (2008), writes: “With 
house prices increasing drastically, risks for the real economy have been perceived to be bigger. On a few 
occasions in 2004–05 the Riksbank did for that reason not follow a strict inflation-targeting rule. We “leaned 
against the wind”, in the sense that we did not take rates down as quickly as we could have done considering 
the outlook for inflation alone.” The development of house prices and household debt have long been on the 
agenda of the Riksbank’s Executive Board, see for example Srejber (2002). 
Ingves (2007). I said, for instance: “[W]hen we observe long periods of high growth rates in asset prices and 
debt,  growth  rates  that  appear  to  be  unsustainable  in  the  long  run,  our  view  is  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to 
completely ignore that there may be risks associated with this[.]…What this view has meant in practice is fairly 
marginal  changes  in  the  timing  of  our  interest  rate  changes,  and  substantial  oral  and  written  focus  on  the 
issue.” This problem is also taken up in Ingves (2010). 
7 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The background to this policy is that debt in the Swedish household sector has shown a 
rising trend over the past 15–20 years and now appears high, both from an historical and 
an international perspective (see Figure 2). Unlike many other countries, housing prices in 
Sweden  have  not  shown  any  significant  fall.  In  terms  of  Figure  1,  it  can  be  said  that  in 
many  other  countries,  heavy  falls  in  housing  prices  have  led  to  a  downturn  in  the  credit 
cycle,  which  has  then  pulled  down  the  economic  cycle.  This  has  not  been  the  case  in 
Sweden,  where the slowdown  we have  experienced  in connection  with the crisis has so 
far largely stemmed from the weak developments abroad. If we were also to experience a 
severe  fall  in  housing  prices  and  a  rapid  decline  in  the  credit  cycle,  the  consequences 
would be much greater and probably about as difficult to manage as they have proved to 
be in other countries.  
Figure 2 
Household debt ratio  
Debt as a percentage of disposable income 
Ireland
Spain
Denmark
USA
United Kingdom
Sweden
97
99
01
03
05
07
09
11
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
95
Source: OECD 
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 Countries that have experienced a fall in housing prices in connection with the crisis have 
also had a fairly severe fall in unemployment (see Figure 3) and in many cases the recovery 
is still progressing very slowly.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Figure 3 
Unemployment  
Unemployed as a percentage of the labour force, index, 2007 = 100 
Ireland (-47.2 %)
Spain (-30.8 %)
Denmark (-27.6 %)
USA (-26.7 %)
United Kingdom (-12.9 %)
Sweden (0.0 %)
02
04
06
08
10
12
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
00
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
 Note. The figures in brackets refer to the fall in real housing prices from the peak to the trough. 
Source: OECD 
It is also worth emphasizing that the countries that have been hit hardest include ones with 
both stronger and weaker wealth positions than Sweden (see Figure 4).  
Figure 4 
Households’ total financial assets 
Per cent of disposable income 
Ireland
Spain
Denmark
USA
United Kingdom
Sweden
98
00
02
04
06
08
10
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
96
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
 Source: OECD 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Policy in line with international debate and our mandate 
The  policy  conducted  by  the  Riksbank  has  sometimes  been  characterised  as  “difficult  to 
grasp” and “strange” in the debate in Sweden – that we are conducting housing policy” and 
that  we  “are  not  following  our  mandate”.8  I  hope  that  this  description  has  put  forward  two 
points in particular. The first is that the policy conducted by the Riksbank has been well in 
line with the international discussion that arose after the crisis and concerns how best to take 
into  account  risks  linked  to  household  indebtedness  and  developments  in  the  housing 
market. If anything, as I noted earlier, the Riksbank was among the first to highlight these 
problems. 
The second point that I hope has come across is that the policy the Riksbank has conducted 
is  well  in  line  with  the  mandate  we  have  been  given.  The  Riksbank  has  not  acted  on  the 
basis of any hidden agenda to try to attain some other purpose, whatever that might be. The 
purpose of our policy has been to prevent Sweden falling into the deep recession suffered by 
many other countries in connection with the crisis.  
It has thus been a question of wanting to manage our task of maintaining price stability and 
macroeconomic  balance  in  the  best  way  possible.9  As  I  see  it,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the 
Riksbank’s  mandate  allows  us  and  even  requires  us  to  take  into  account  risks  linked  to  a 
credit  boom  and  rising  house  prices.  So,  neither  in  the  light  of  the  international  debate 
conducted today nor the mandate given to the Riksbank, has the monetary policy conducted 
been particularly “unusual” or “strange”. 
The  monetary  policy  strategy  the  Riksbank  has  applied  in  recent  years  is  also  worth 
mentioning.  What  we  have  tried  to  do  is  to  find  a  suitable  balance  where  we  support  the 
recovery, but at the same time do not accelerate as hard as we might have done if we did not 
need  to  take  into  account  housing  prices  and  indebtedness.  This  has  not,  as  one  might 
sometimes think, been a question of braking hard. When all is said and done, the repo rate is 
currently no higher than 1 per cent.  
Difficult balancing act if the repo rate is the only tool 
But  let  me  now  return to  Figure  1  and  the discussion  I  started  with.  Stabilising  two  cycles  
– the business cycle and the credit cycle – with the aid of only one tool – the policy rate – is 
of course not easy. In reality, the problem is further complicated by the fact that inflation must 
be stabilised. Here I assumed for the sake of simplicity that inflation would entirely follow the 
business cycle.  
As the credit cycle and the business cycle develop in different ways, a change in the repo 
rate  intended  to  affect  one  cycle  will  sometimes  have  an  undesired  effect  on  the  other. 
Although a stable credit cycle – one that does not “go wrong” – is ultimately necessary for a 
stable  business  cycle,  in  the  short  term  it may  be  necessary  to  make  a  trade-off  between 
them. This is not without its problems. An ambition to hold the credit cycle in balance may 
require a slightly higher policy rate. This would also dampen the economic cycle and inflation 
could undershoot the target. This can be regarded as normal and acceptable for a period of 
time.  But  if  the  period  becomes  prolonged,  it  may  sooner  or  later  become  difficult  to  gain 
understanding  and  support  for  this  policy  –  despite  its  purpose  being  to  prevent  a  much 
worse development further ahead. This could be a dilemma. 
                                                
8   One of many examples is Petterson and Hållö (2013). 
9  
It is not entirely clear how inflation will develop in connection with a recession. One possibility is that the krona 
would weaken substantially and that imported products would thereby become so much more expensive that 
one had a higher inflation rate in the short term. It is reasonable, however, to assume that the weak demand 
would  gradually  predominate  and  put  downward  pressure  on  inflation.  Preventing  a  recession  must  be 
regarded as one of the Riksbank's main tasks.   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The  equation  would  be  simpler  to  solve  if  there  were  further  tools  that  could  be  used  to 
stabilise the credit cycle. This is where the new policy area that has arisen after the crisis  
–  macroprudential  policy  –  comes  in.  The  international  discussion  of  how  the  credit  cycle 
should  be  taken  into  account  and  incorporated  into  the  analysis  and  policy  has  to  a  large 
degree centred on how macroprudential policy should be conducted.10  
In 
for 
the  United  Kingdom, 
for  macroprudential  policy. 
Decision on responsibility for macroprudential policy 
Many  countries  have  already  made  some  progress  here.  In many  cases,  the  central  bank 
has been allocated a central role in macroprudential policy, either as an important participant 
in  some  form  of  macroprudential  policy  organisation,  quite  often  as  chair  or  it  has  sole 
responsibility 
instance, 
macroprudential  policy  has  been  allocated  to  a  special  committee  within  the  Bank  of 
England,  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC).  The  governor  and  two  other  committee 
members are on both the FPC and the Monetary Policy Committee.  
In  Sweden  we  are  lagging  behind  somewhat  with  regard  to  the  development  of 
macroprudential policy. It has been unclear what framework politicians intended to establish. 
The  question  has  been  investigated  by,  for  instance,  the  financial  crisis  committee,  which 
presented an interim report at the beginning of this year.11 But the proposal presented by the 
committee still entailed a fairly unclear allocation of responsibility and the Riksbank assessed 
in its consultation response that this could lead to uncertainty over who should take action 
and thus weaken decisiveness too far.12 We advocated that responsibility should be given to 
one decision-making body with a clear responsibility for macroprudential policy. 
A  few  weeks  ago,  the  Government  came  to  a  decision.13  Many  details  still  remain  to  be 
decided, and it will take some time still before a complete framework is in place. But it is clear 
that Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority) will have the overall 
responsibility  for  macroprudential  tools.  The  Riksbank  will  be  part  of  a  financial  stability 
council that also includes the Government, Finansinspektionen and the National Debt Office. 
The council is to identify risks and discuss measures, but it should function as a discussion 
forum and not give explicit recommendations.  
The most important thing is that the uncertainty surrounding the allocation of responsibility 
has now been resolved in that it has been made clear and that responsibility will rest with 
one authority. I do not believe that the institutional set-up is otherwise of absolutely critical 
importance  –  within  reasonable  boundaries.  Various  solutions  may  very  well  prove  to 
function equally well in practice and provide equally good economic development. Ultimately, 
it remains to be seen how things work out – “the proof of the pudding is in the eating”. 
                                                
10   In addition to these cyclical risks, macroprudential policy is also assumed to need to manage what are referred 
to as structural risks, or cross-section risks, see the Riksbank (2012). The latter concern financial companies 
having become so closely interwoven and the degree of concentration in the financial system so high that if 
problems arise in one area they risk spreading rapidly. The effects on the real economy will be similar to those 
in Figure 1. Of course, these risks may also change over time. 
11   Financial Crisis Committee (2013). Parts of macroprudential policy are also discussed in Swedish Government 
Official  Reports  (2013),  Förstärkta  kapitaltäckningsregler[Stronger  capital  adequacy  rules],  which  was 
presented on 16 September. The potential design of a Swedish macroprudential framework is also discussed 
by  Goodhart  and  Rochet  (2011),  Bryant,  Henderson  and  Becker  (2012)  and  Vredin,  Flodén,  Larsson  and 
Ravn (2012). 
12   The Riksbank (2013). 
13   Ministry of Finance (2013). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Interplay between macroprudential and monetary policy important to consider 
In  principle,  of  course,  if  monetary  policy  were  initially  to  try  to  stabilise  both  the  business 
cycle and the credit cycle, and there arose a new policy area focusing on the latter – then 
this would almost by definition ease some of the earlier pressure on monetary policy.  
But even if we have now made some progress in attaining a framework for macroprudential 
policy,  there  are  some  questions  of  principle  that  still  need  consideration.  Something  one 
should  always  bear  in  mind,  but  which  I  do  not  intend  to  discuss  further  here,  is  that 
decisions we make regarding conditions in Sweden must also be incorporated into a broader, 
European  context.  There  are  also  a  number  of  questions,  particularly  with  regard  to  the 
interplay between macroprudential policy and monetary policy, that sooner or later may need 
to be dealt with in practice and it would be wise to have thought them through. 
Coordination... 
Some of the research into macroprudential policy – which is in general still in its infancy – 
tries to analyse the importance of coordinating macroprudential policy and monetary policy. 
The  idea  is  roughly  as  follows:  Monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  act  through 
largely  the  same  channels.  Both  the  policy  rate  and  most  macroprudential  tools  affect, for 
instance, credit growth in the economy and developments in various asset prices. This also 
means that the two policy areas affect one another’s objectives. Monetary policy affects the 
credit cycle – which was the whole point of “leaning against the wind”, and macroprudential 
policy has effects on the business cycle. It is therefore desirable to find the right policy mix – 
the combination of policy rate and macroprudential tools that give the best overall outcome 
for  the  economy.  The  conditions  for  finding  the  right  mix  are  normally  improved  if  the  two 
types of policy are coordinated, rather than determined separately.14   
The  importance  of  coordination  is  also  pointed  out  in  more  practical  economic  policy 
contexts. One example is the recently implemented review of the monetary policy framework 
in the United Kingdom. There, for instance, the fact that some members sit on both the Bank 
of England’s monetary policy committee and its committee for financial stability, is regarded 
as a means of fostering coordination between monetary policy and macroprudential policy.15  
In Sweden, it will not be possible to coordinate macroprudential policy and monetary policy 
as closely as in the United Kingdom, for instance, as we have chosen a different framework 
for responsibility. It is at present difficult to foresee what the consequences of this will be – 
and even if there will be any significant consequences. After all, neither research nor the so 
far  limited  practical  experiences  give  any  particularly  clear  answer  regarding  exactly  how 
important coordination is. It is once again quite possible that the solution we have chosen in 
Sweden will turn out to work very well in practice – only time will tell.   
...or at least concordance  
But  even  if  macroprudential  policy  and  monetary  policy  may  not  necessarily  need  to  be 
coordinated in a more formal sense, there may be reason to consider whether there should 
be a certain amount of concordance between them. My personal opinion is that there must 
                                                
14   For  an  intuitive  description  of  the  problems  concerning  the  coordination  of  macroprudential  policy  and 
monetary  policy,  see  Bryant,  Henderson  and  Becker  (2012).  Coordination  was  also  one  of  the  questions 
discussed in the report by a working group at the Bank for International Settlements, where I was chair, see 
the Bank for International Settlements (2011). 
15   See H M Treasury (2013), which points out, for instance, that "The Government intends that the frameworks 
for  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy,  operated  by  the  MPC  and  FPC  of  the  Bank  of  England 
respectively, should be coordinated” (p. 5), and “In order to foster coordination between monetary and macro-
prudential  policy,  there  is  overlap  between  the  membership  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  the 
Financial Policy Committee” (p. 10). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
be  what  one  can  call  a  holistic,  or  comprehensive,  view  when  formulating  both  types  of 
policy. If both the credit cycle and the business cycle are to be stabilised in a good way, I do 
not believe that they can be too far from the policy mix implied by full coordination, at least 
not over a long period of time. The two types of policy could then counteract or reinforce one 
another in ways that would be harmful to the economy. It is probably also the case that this 
interplay  is  particularly  important  in  sensitive  situations,  such  as  preventing  a  credit  boom 
going too far and ensuring that the credit cycle has a slow, soft downturn instead of a rapid, 
dramatic one.  
This  relates  to  an  international  discussion  on  whether  the  policy  rate  can  play  a  role  in 
stabilising the credit cycle, even when macroprudential policy is in place.16 One reason why it 
might play a role is that it can be difficult to design a system for macroprudential policy that 
functions efficiently enough and cannot be circumvented by innovative market participants. If, 
for  instance,  the  policy  rate  is  kept  low  for  a  long  period  of  time  at  the  same  time  as 
macroprudential  policy  is  relatively  restrictive,  there  is  a  risk  that  a  grey  credit  market  will 
arise. The interest rate is of course a blunt instrument to use in stabilising the credit cycle, as 
it  has  a  broad  impact  on  the  economy  and  a  substantial  effect  on  the  economic  cycle. 
However, one advantage of the broad impact of the policy rate is that it is therefore difficult to 
“avoid”,  even  for  those  who  might  be  able  to  circumvent  macroprudential  policy.17  Some 
countries  are  also  fairly  explicit  about  giving  the  policy  rate  a  role  to  play  in  subduing  the 
credit  cycle,  as  a  complement 
the  same  way  as 
macroprudential policy can help ease the pressure on monetary policy, monetary policy can 
give support to macroprudential policy by leaning against the wind. Thus, there are a number 
of questions regarding the interplay between macroprudential policy and monetary policy that 
require further consideration.   
to  macroprudential 
tools.18 
In 
Central banks after the crisis – increased differences and country-specific solutions  
Let me conclude by returning to the question I asked at the beginning – whether the central 
banks  will  conduct  their  operations  differently  after  the  crisis  than  they  did  before.  The 
answer to that question is that it all depends. It is quite clear that a general conclusion from 
the crisis is that greater effort must be made to stabilise the credit cycle by preventing overly 
rapid upturns. However, the role given to the central bank in this regard varies from country 
to country. In some countries, the task has been more or less entirely allocated to the central 
bank, while in other countries the central bank has a less prominent role.  
One consequence of this is that, while there was a trend prior to the crisis for central banks’ 
policy  to  look  increasingly  similar  –  with  flexible  inflation-targeting  as  a  basic  model  –  it 
appears as though the trend is towards greater differences after the crisis. Flexible inflation 
targeting  is  still  the  linchpin,  but  as  management  of  the  credit  cycle  differs  between  the 
                                                
16   See, for example, Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia and Mauro (2013), Carney (2013) and Stein (2013). 
17   Jeremy Stein at the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors has expressed it as the advantage of monetary 
policy being that it “gets in all of the cracks” (Stein, 2013, p. 17). The Riksbank has also raised this argument 
in various contexts, see for instance, Ingves (2010) and Nyberg (2011). Donald Kohn, former deputy chairman 
of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  of  Governors  and  now  member  of  the  Bank  of  England's  Financial  Policy 
Committee, recently put forward another aspect: “When one policy is leaning so hard in a particular direction, 
the other can’t compensate, can’t achieve its objectives. … So for example, the example that’s often used, 
very easy monetary policy builds imbalances that may be so large, that may become so large they can’t be 
countered by regulation.” (see Talley, 2013). 
18   For  example,  Norges  Bank  writes in  an article  about  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer:  “The  countercyclical 
buffer  will  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  banking  sector  during  an  upturn.  It  may  also,  to  some  extent, 
counteract  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances,  but  the  effect  is  uncertain.  Thus,  Norges  Bank  cannot 
disregard taking financial imbalances into consideration when setting the key policy rate.” (Norges Bank, 2013, 
p. 23) 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
central  banks,  one  could  say  that  one  consequence  of  the  crisis  has  been  an  increased 
divergence in central bank policies.  
As in other countries, we in Sweden must now try to find good solutions, on the basis of the 
conditions  applying,  for  designing  the  interplay  between  macroprudential  policy  and 
monetary policy. I am convinced that we will succeed in this task, with join efforts and as we 
gain  greater  knowledge  of  how  the  new  upcoming  framework  for  macroprudential  policy 
functions in practice.  
References 
Aikman, David, Haldane, Andrew G. and Nelson, Benjamin (2011), Curbing the Credit Cycle. 
Paper  presented  at  the  Columbia  University  Center  on  Capitalism  and  Society  Annual 
Conference “Microfoundations for Macroeconomics”, New York. 
Bank for International Settlements (2011), Central Bank Governance and Financial Stability. 
A Report by a Study Group. May 2011. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2004),  The  Great  Moderation.  Speech  at  the  Eastern  Economic 
Association, Washington, 20 February. 
Blanchard,  Olivier,  Dell’Ariccia,  Giovanni  and  Mauro,  Paolo  (2013),  Rethinking  Macro 
Policy II: Getting Granular. IMF Staff Discussion Note 13/03, International Monetary Fund. 
Borio,  Claudio  (2012),  The  Financial  Cycle  and  Macroeconomics:  What  Have  We  Learnt? 
BIS Working Papers No. 395. 
Bryant,  Ralph  C.,  Henderson,  Dale W.  and  Becker,  Torbjörn  (2012),  Maintaining  Financial 
Stability in an Open Economy. Sweden in the Global Crisis and Beyond. SNS Förlag. 
Cagliarini,  Adam,  Kent,  Christopher  and  Stevens,  Glenn  (2010),  Fifty  Years  of  Monetary 
Policy:  What  Have  We  Learned?  In  Kent,  Christopher  and  Robson,  Michael  (ed)  Reserve 
Bank of Australia 50th Anniversary Symposium. Proceedings of a conference held in Sydney 
on 9 February 2010. Reserve Bank of Australia. 
Carney,  Mark  (2013),  Monetary  Policy  After  the  Fall.  Speech  at  the  University  of  Alberta 
1 May 2013. Bank of Canada. 
Financial  Crisis  Committee  (2013),  Att förebygga  och  hantera finansiella kriser  [Preventing 
and  managing  financial  crises]  (only  in  Swedish).  Interim  report  of  the  financial  crisis 
committee, SOU 2013:6. 
Geanakoplos,  John  (2009),  The  Leverage  Cycle.  Cowles  Foundation  Discussion  Paper 
No. 1715. 
Goodhart, Charles och Rochet, Jean-Charles (2011), Evaluation of the Riksbank’s Monetary 
Policy  and  Work  with  Financial  Stability  2005–2010.  Reports 
the  Riksdag 
2010/11:RFR5. 
Heikensten,  Lars  (2008),  More  To  It  than  Just  “Leaning  Against  the  Wind”.  Article  in  the 
Financial Times, 5 June 2008. 
H M Treasury (2013), Review of the monetary policy framework. March 2013. 
Ingves,  Stefan  (2007),  Housing  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  View  from  an  Inflation-Targeting 
Central Bank. In Housing, Housing Finance and Monetary Policy, Jackson Hole Symposium 
Conference Proceedings, 433–443, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Ingves,  Stefan  (2010),  Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  –  some  future  challenges. 
Speech at the Swedish Economics Association, Stockholm, 17 May.  
Issing, Otmar (2009), Asset Prices and Monetary Policy. Cato Journal 29(1), 45–51. 
from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Jordà,  Oscar,  Schularick,  Moritz  and  Taylor,  Alan  M.  (2011),  When  Credit  Bites  Back: 
Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crises. Working Paper 2011–12, Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco. 
Krugman, Paul (2013), What Janet Yellen – And Everyone Else – Got Wrong. Blog in The 
New York Times, 8 August.  
Mian, Atif R. and Sufi, Amir (2010), Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007 to 2009. 
NBER Working Paper No. 15896. 
Ministry of Finance (2013), Ett förstärkt ramverk för finansiell stabilitet [A stronger framework 
for financial stability] (only in Swedish), memorandum, 26 August. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2007),  Housing  and  the  Monetary  Transmission  Mechanism.  In 
Housing,  Housing  Finance  and  Monetary  Policy,  Jackson  Hole  Symposium  Conference 
Proceedings, 359–413, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Norges Bank (2013), Monetary Policy Report with financial stability assessment. 1/13 March.  
Nyberg,  Lars  (2011),  Monetary  policy  and  financial  crises  –  some  reflections.  Speech  at 
Danske Bank, Stockholm, 21 December. Sveriges Riksbank. 
Pettersson,  Ola  and  Hållö,  Torbjörn  (2013),  Riksbanken  sköter  inte  sitt  uppdrag.  [The 
Riksbank  is  not  doing  its  job]  (only  in  Swedish)  Debate  article  in  Göteborgs-Posten 
newspaper, 14 August. 
Srejber, E. (2002), Inflation Targeting and Bubbles. Speech at Adam Smith seminars, Paris, 
9 July. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2012), Creating a Swedish  toolkit for macroprudential policy. Riksbank 
studies November 2012. 
Sveriges  Riksbank    (2013),  Consultation  response  to  the  report  Preventing  and  managing 
financial crises (SOU 2013:6). 
Schularick,  Moritz  and  Taylor  Alan  M.  (2012),  Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy, 
Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008. NBER Working Paper 15512. 
Swedish  Government  Official  Reports  (2013),  Förstärkta  kapitaltäckningsregler  [Stronger 
capital adequacy rules]. Interim report of the investigation New capital adequacy rules, SOU 
2013:65.  
Stein, Jeremy C. (2013), Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy 
Responses. Speech at “Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: 
Why  Household  Balance  Sheets  Matter”,  research  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri. 
Talley, Ian (2013), Fed Candidate Kohn Warns Easy Policy Leads to Imbalances. Real Time 
Economics, Wall Street Journal Blogs, 16 September. 
Taylor,  John  B.  (1998),  Monetary  Policy  and  The  Long  Boom.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
St Louis Review, November/December.  
Vredin,  Anders,  Flodén,  Martin,  Larsson,  Anna  and  Ravn,  Morten  O.  (2012),  Enkla  regler 
svåra tider – behöver stabiliseringspolitiken förändras? [Simple rules, hard times – does the 
stabilisation policy need to be changed?] (only in Swedish) Economic Policy Group Report 
2012, SNS Förlag. 
 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
