Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Global risks and the outlook for Thailand 
Address by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Fitch Ratings 
100th Anniversary Conference, Bangkok, 27 September 2013. 
 Distinguished speakers and panelists,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank Fitch Ratings (Thailand) for inviting me to give an opening address at 
this year’s annual conference. Much has changed both at home and abroad since I gave an 
opening address at this event two years ago. In retrospect, however, it is interesting to look 
back  over  the  past  two  years  and  notice  how  most  global  risks  we  talked  about  –  for 
instance, fiscal drag and political gridlock in the U.S., sovereign debt crisis in the Eurozone, 
among others – are still with us today. Most of the risks have reduced in terms of magnitude 
and  urgency,  but  they  certainly  have  not  disappeared.  In  fact,  each  of  them  took  turn  to 
appear in the media spotlight and became an object of market’s obsession. Victor Hugo once 
said, “No army can withstand the strength of an idea whose time has come.” And that sounds 
fitting for today’s financial market, where obsession with one idea could have a far-reaching 
implication for so many countries, at once, in an invasive way that is hard to shield against. 
The state of indecisiveness that we live in 
A.  
It has been almost six years since the beginning of the global financial crisis. But despite the 
extraordinary  policies  in  major  economies,  despite  reassuring  words  of  global  authorities, 
despite considerable reform efforts, the healthy state of full recovery seems to be constantly 
pushed away from us. At this point in time, the world is still struggling in what I would like to 
describe as the state of “indecisiveness”. 
First  is  the  indecisiveness  that  we  have  about  growth  prospects.  Mixed  signals  and 
counteracting forces abound, and it has become less obvious how global economic forces 
will -equilibrate. The talk of the two-speed or three-speed world, which was heard frequently 
earlier this year, proves to be an oversimplication of a much more complicated reality. 
Among  advanced  economies,  the  U.S.  and  Japan  seem  to  have  gathered  some  tangible 
traction as of late. But one should be reminded that the impact of sequestration in the U.S. is 
still yet to be felt fully. And one should also be reminded that for Japan, contradicting policy 
objectives  could  lead  to  considerable  trade-offs,  coupled  with  the  fact  that  the  public  debt 
situation there could become more sensitive to possible rises in bond yields given that we 
are already in the later stage of the global easing cycle. On the other hand, emerging Asia 
continues to post relatively high growth compared to the rest of the world. But in the absolute 
term, economic momentum seems to be losing some steam, and it is also possible that the 
extent of the shadow banking problems in China could be underestimated. 
Coinciding  with  uncertain  growth  prospects  is  the  indecisiveness  about  the  exit  from 
policy accommodation especially in the U.S. Global market sentiments since May have 
turned with the expectation about the Fed scaling back its asset purchases. While all of us 
know  that  the  exit  from  the  extraordinary  stance  in  the  U.S.  is  inevitable,  and  is  actually 
looming on the horizon, the timing and the pace remain uncertain and data-dependent. This 
could  actually  continue  to  disrupt  the  process  of  global  rebalancing  for  a  while.  Time  and 
again, taking away the punch bowl has always been a tricky task for central bankers. But the 
impact has never been more global, given today’s interconnected global financial market. 
Inconclusive clues about the future world, after all, lead to increased sensitivity to new 
pieces of information. Beliefs about the future world are shifting fast, and with that come 
bouts  of  volatility  due  to  successive  rounds  of  reassessing  and  repricing  risks.  To  some 
extent, the recent episode also served as a stress test for emerging market economies, who 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
had  to  deal  with  sudden  capital  movements  and  volatile  asset  prices.  It  also  served  as  a 
reminder for these countries to ensure that their economic stability is safeguarded as they try 
to benefit from the increased integration with the global financial market. And importantly, it 
also served as a reminder for these countries to re-examine the robustness of their growth 
strategy in the face of global headwinds and fickleness. 
Thailand’s outlook and BOT’s monetary and financial policies 
B.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Like the rest of emerging Asia, the Thai economy appears to soften in the near- term. 
On top of export recovery that could be more delayed, the vital contribution from domestic 
spending  is  also  viewed  to  lessen.  Part  of  this, of  course,  reflects  a  natural  reversion to  a 
more normal pace of growth following unusually strong growth last year. More specifically, 
the boost from the first-car scheme dissipated sooner than expected. Household debt, which 
has risen fast and is now in the ballpark of 80 percent of GDP, starts to weigh on durable and 
semi-durable purchases visibly. And businesses also seem to postpone investment awaiting 
better  economic  conditions  at  home  and  abroad.  In  light  of  these  factors,  the  Bank  of 
Thailand projected GDP growth to be around 4 percent this year, a downward revision from a 
more bullish view we had earlier. 
But  I  would  like  to  note  that  this  is  still  a  reasonable  growth  amid  weak  external 
environments,  coupled  with 
that  consumption  has  become  somewhat 
overstimulated already. Looking ahead, fundamentals of the economy remain sound overall. 
Monetary  and  fiscal  conditions  will  continue  to  be  supportive.  And  despite  some  delay, 
contribution  from  exports  is  also  bound  to  improve  as  the  global  economy  gains  a  firmer 
footing.  Some  concerns  that  I  have  about  the  outlook,  however,  are  the  possibility  of 
continued  sluggishness  in  private  demand,  and  the  possibility  that  supply-side  constraints  
– both in the labor market and the production sector – could hold back the future potential of 
investment and exports. 
Through this turbulent time, the Bank of Thailand has been steering its monetary and 
financial  policies  with  prudence.  The  flexible  inflation-targeting  framework  succeeds  in 
anchoring inflation expectation, thus fostering continued growth and stability. The managed- 
float regime accommodates baht movements that are in alignment with fundamentals, with 
policy  instruments  ready  to  curb  excessive  speculation  and  overshooting  if  needed.  The 
strong  international  reserves  position,  at  the  same  time,  helps  cushion  against  sharp  flow 
reversals. Efforts have also been expended on financial liberalization and regulatory reforms 
under  the  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan.  And  for  the  banking  sector,  banks’  capital  bases 
have  been  strengthened  well  above  international  standard,  while  granting  new  subsidiary 
licenses for foreign banks will ensure that the future banking system stays competitive and 
vibrant. 
fact 
the 
Lifting barriers to sustainable growth 
C.  
Distinguished audience, 
Sound  macroeconomic  and  financial  practices  have  been  instrumental  in  safeguarding 
economic  stability  and  helping  the  country  weather  through  numerous  shocks  that  have 
come its way. Sufficient policy spaces in monetary and fiscal policies provided buffers amid 
intense headwinds and supports in the times of need – notably in the aftermath of the global 
financial crisis and the flood devastation in late 2011. But now that the height of the global 
crisis is behind us, and the need for short-term macroeconomic management less pressing, 
a serious attention should also be given to the agenda of long-term competitiveness 
and sustainable growth. This calls strongly for structural reforms of the supply side of the 
economy,  where  the  constraints  are  particularly  binding  and  a  large-scale  upgrading  long 
overdue. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Pursuing demand management policies alone can only take us so far – somewhat akin to 
stepping  on  the  gas  pedal  without  upgrading  or  modifying  the  car  we  drive.  Pursuing 
demand–side  policies  can  also  come  with  a  steep  price  tag,  especially  when  the  policy 
borders  on  the  realm  of  populism.  Such  policy  would  add  to  micro-level  risks  by  making 
households undisciplined and addicted to “easy” money, while also add to macro-level risks 
by stretching fiscal resources without enhancing competitiveness in any meaningful way. 
The  Bank  of  Thailand  views  the  need  to  address  structural  issues  to  be  very  timely  and 
pressing.  “Lifting  barriers  to  sustainable  growth”  was  indeed  the  central  theme  of 
investigation of the Bank of Thailand Symposium this year, which was held at the Bangkok 
Convention  Center  last  week,  and  I  hope  some  of  you  had  a  chance  to  participate  in  the 
event. My comment today, however, is my personal view and is not intended to be related to 
the Symposium. 
Successful  reforms,  in  my  opinion,  will  need  concentrated  efforts  on  the  following  three 
areas:  relieving  labor  market  constraints,  engineering  a  “transformative”  upgrading  of  the 
supply side, and leveraging opportunities surrounding us. Let me elaborate on each of them. 
Relieving constraints in the labor market 
(1)  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Moving  the  country  forward  requires  taking  a  step  backward  to  examine  closely  what  is 
holding us back at the moment. The first area that has been particularly binding is the 
labor market – an issue that has been nagging us all along, but often fails to get attention 
amid  the  clamor  of  short-term  economic  issues.  Over  the  past  decade,  both  the  total 
workforce and labor productivity have been growing very sluggishly. Another related problem 
is that of skill mismatch, where workers with needed vocational training are in much shorter 
supply relative to university graduates. These pose serious limits to capacity expansion and 
innovation efforts of the private sector. 
To alleviate the problems in the near term requires that distorted incentives be corrected. 
Policy distortion such as the rice mortgage scheme and subsidy of other agricultural prices 
should  be  kept  to  a  minimum,  for  these  incentives  drive  workers  away  from  high  value- 
added sectors to the agricultural sector. To solve the problems in the longer term requires 
educational  reforms that  tackle  two  major  challenges:  namely, raising  the  supply  of 
workers with vocational training in demand and ensuring labor productivity upgrades. 
I  cannot  stress  enough  the  importance  of  having  a  future  generation  of  workforce  that  is 
capable and flexible enough to accommodate changes in production technology. In addition, 
fostering  close  collaboration  with  the  private  sector  could  also  be  an  essential  part  of  the 
solution, and it is very encouraging to see more involvement from large Thai corporates in 
the process of recruitment and training as of late. 
Engineering a “transformative” upgrading of the supply side 
(2)  
In  addition  to relieving  constraints  in  the  labor market, the second reform focus I would 
like to discuss is the urgent need for a “transformative” upgrading of the supply side. 
Pursuing growth from labor-intensive activities is no longer a viable option, due to the fact 
that Thailand would not be able to compete with lower-wage competitors, and also the fact 
that  such  strategy  is  simply  unsustainable  from  a  long-term  perspective.  More  importantly, 
failing to upgrade now will cost us an inestimable amount in the form of missed opportunities. 
Indeed, it was precisely the inability to engineer a large-scale upgrading, when the time was 
ripe, that separated our path from peer countries like Taiwan and Korea that started out at a 
relatively similar income position several decades ago. 
By using the word “transformative”, I mean that the upgrading process needs to go beyond 
mere efficient use of workers and capitals. It has to support firms to move up the value chain 
to higher value-added activities. It has to equip firms with capability to move toward higher 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
product sophistication and flexibility to cater to changing global consumer demand. It has to 
nurture  innovation,  given  that  meaningful  growth  spurt  tends  to  come  from  either  new 
products  or  new  ways  of  producing  and  delivering  them.  The  strategic  focus  is  thus  to 
create  the  right  environment  and  give  the  right  incentive  for  firms  to  invest  and 
innovate. 
Physical infrastructure is where we lack behind and suits to be the starting point. High-
tech,  capital-intensive  industries  tend  to  benefit  greatly  from  knowledge  spillovers  and 
concentration of economic activities. Therefore, more specialized hubs and clusters – in the 
spirit of, for instance, Singapore’s Biopolis and Japan’s Tsukaba Science City – are needed. 
For industries with lower capital intensity, establishing industrial hubs and zonings of related 
industries would be beneficial, so that these industries can reap localized benefits such as 
the  availability  of  specific  inputs  and  better  labor  market  pooling.  Supporting  these  less 
capital- intensive industries will also serve toward the agenda of inclusive growth, for these 
industries  contribute  significantly  to  employment  in  rural  areas.  Last  but  not  least,  well-
integrated and cost-efficient logistics systems are called for, in order to ensure connectivity 
and  efficiency  of  domestic  production  chains.  Along  with  physical  infrastructure 
upgrading, “soft” infrastructure has to be upgraded. In addition to educational reforms 
that  I  talked  about  earlier,  improvements  on  the  legal  front  are  also  needed.  Protecting 
intellectual property rights and minimizing regulatory burdens for businesses are the two key 
areas that continue to require reform efforts. 
I  would  like  to  note  that  several  moves  in  the  right  direction  are  already  in  place. 
Government’s massive investment plan in water management and long-term infrastructure is 
one  of  them.  At  the  very  least,  the  attempt  has  managed  to  elevate  the  urgency  of 
infrastructure  upgrading  to  the  status  of  a  national  reform  agenda.  On  a  related  note,  the 
government also has the plan to push Thailand toward an innovation-driven economy. While 
these are laudable initiatives, challenges still remain in the implementation phase, and more 
work remains to ensure that we get the biggest bang for the baht and that fiscal discipline is 
respected. 
Leveraging existing opportunities around us 
(3)  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  third  ingredient  I  would  like  to  discuss  today  is  the  importance  of  identifying 
opportunities surrounding us and leveraging them. Upgrading efforts that I spoke about 
at length should put the country in a better position to reap benefits from these opportunities, 
which can make the route to prosperity less arduous. 
The timing is still on our side. First is China’s changing role in the international trade – 
from a large manufacturer of export goods to a large import country of the world. Even with 
signs  of  losing  some  steam,  one  should  not  forget  that  even  a  6-to-7  percent  growth  of 
today’s Chinese economy still adds far more to global demand than the double-digit growth 
of  the  past  decade.  Taking  advantage  of  this  opportunity  wisely  can  benefit  exporters 
immensely. 
The second source of opportunities is the upcoming regional economic integration. With 
the advent of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC), intra-regional trade volume will grow 
given that more trade barriers are removed. With its geographical advantage, especially its 
proximity to the vibrant CLMV countries, Thailand gets a head start in positioning itself as an 
investment  and  production  hub  for  the  AEC,  although  this  requires  continued  efforts  on 
minimizing  regulatory  burdens  for  businesses  and  increasing  regional  connectivity  by 
strategic investment in logistics and transportation systems. After all, combining the capital 
and the technology of more advanced members with the cost advantage of newer members 
will result in a synergy that benefits the region as a whole. It should be noted, also, that the 
rising  significance  of  intra-regional  trade  will  serve  the  region  well  as  an  additional  buffer 
against weak global environments. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
To support Thai businesses to seek investment opportunities abroad, the Bank of Thailand 
continues to gradually relax capital flow regulations, initially on outward direct investment and 
more recently on portfolio investment for Accredited Investors. On a related note, to facilitate 
banking integration, ASEAN central banks are also in the process of negotiating the common 
standard of Qualified ASEAN Banks (QABs), which will allow qualified banks to expand into 
other ASEAN countries with greater ease. Freer flows of funds and closer financial ties within 
the region, after all, will provide much-needed support for investment activities and business 
dealings over the years to come. 
Concluding remark 
D. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to conclude my talk today by restating my firm belief in the promising future of the 
Thai economy, and stressing again the pressing need for the country to move forward to the 
long-term agenda of competitiveness and sustainable growth. In these days, once we get so 
used to reacting to new information in the marketplace, it does not take long before we get so 
involved in the battle scene that we might lose the long-term perspective. It also does not 
take long before we forget that meaningful upgrading takes a careful, deliberate planning to 
truly succeed and a considerable amount of time to unfold. 
Given  many  challenges  at  home  and  abroad,  moving  Thailand  forward  is  sure  to  be  an 
arduous task. As a non-crisis country this time, it is wise to stay vigilant since “good” time is 
still  the  time  when  bad  loans  are  made  and  imbalances  accumulate.  It  is  much  wiser, 
however, to also use this time to make a head start toward the brighter future. The world is 
moving toward greater speed and greater interconnectedness every second, and to thrive in 
such  environment,  a  balanced  mix  of  demand  management  and  structural  reforms  is  a 
prerequisite. They are entrance tickets to a safe, undisrupted trip on the road to prosperity 
over the years to come. 
Without further delay, I now would like to officially open the Fitch Ratings Annual Conference 
and  wish  everyone  a  fruitful  discussion  and  exchange  today.  Thank  you  Fitch  Ratings 
(Thailand) again for organizing the conference, and thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
