Brian Wynter: Promoting financial inclusion through public education 
and awareness 
Remarks  by  Mr  Brian  Wynter,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Jamaica,  at the JDIC Financial 
Markets Symposium, Kingston, 29 August 2013. 
 Inclusion 
“Promoting  Financial 
Moderator;  Minister  Peter  Phillips;  Mr  Thomas,  Chairman  of 
the  Jamaica  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation;  Ms  McKain,  CEO,  JDIC;  special  guests,  colleagues,  ladies  and 
gentleman,  good morning. 
Today,  we  are 
through  Public  Education  and 
Awareness.” According  to  the  United  Nations,  more  than  half  the  population  of  developing 
countries in 2010 was financially excluded. In the case of Jamaica, the World Bank’s Global 
Findex indicates that, for 2011, about 71 per cent of Jamaicans had some form of access to 
banking services. This is a lot better than the average of 57 per cent for Latin America and 
the  Caribbean  but,  clearly,  we  can  do  more  to  improve  the  ease  of  access  to  financial 
services  for  Jamaicans  and  promote  more  active and appropriate use of financial services 
for the un-banked and the under-banked. So, while I am delighted to bring greetings to the 
JDIC on this occasion marking their 15th  year of operation, Bank  of  Jamaica  is  especially 
pleased  to  have  the  opportunity  to  join  in  partnership  with  JDIC,  the Financial  Services 
Commission, and the Jamaica Stock Exchange, to host this Financial Markets Symposium 
and Fair. 
It  is  generally  thought  that,  through  increased  access  to  financial  services,  the  financially 
excluded  can  better  undertake  business  activities,  manage  risks,  and  build  financial 
security.  Financial  inclusion  thereby  helps  to  reduce  poverty  and  improve  economic 
opportunity; it promotes inclusive growth. 
So what are the elements of financial inclusion, and how do they intersect with the work of 
Bank of  Jamaica  and  JDIC?  Financial  inclusion  broadly  refers  to  the  offer  of  good-
quality  financial services  to  the  unbanked  in  a  timely  manner,  at  affordable  prices,  and 
through  appropriate,  effective  channels.  A  recent  popular  channel  for  this  type  of  delivery 
has  been  low  cost  technologies  such  as  mobile  phones.  Some  of  the  more  prominent 
models  of  this  form  of  service  are  to  be  found  in  the  Philippines,  Kenya,  Pakistan,  and 
Mexico,  and  we  in  Jamaica  are  making progress on our own models, with the release by 
Bank  of  Jamaica  of  the  Retail  Payment  Services  guidelines,  and  the  mobile  money  pilot 
project by Development Bank of Jamaica, that is currently in train with the approval of Bank 
of Jamaica. 
The  introduction  of  credit  bureaus  is  another  important  element  in  improving  access  to 
credit. 
One  of  the  two  recently-licensed  credit  bureaus  started  issuing  credit  reports  last  month. I 
am pleased to report that the other licensee is expecting to commence operations soon. 
But  financial  inclusion  is  only  possible  when  individuals  and  households  are  able  to 
make  informed  choices  about  how  they  can  use  financial  services  to  save,  borrow,  and 
invest. Financial literacy, therefore, is the second of the twin pillars of financial deepening. It 
stimulates  demand  for  financial  services  by  making  people  aware  of  what  services  are 
available, and how they can be used by them to improve their lives. 
At  the  same  time,  the  benefits  of  financial  inclusion  are  predicated  on  financial  stability. 
Much work  is  being  done  to  maintain  this  bedrock  for  successful  financial  inclusion  and 
financial  literacy  initiatives.  Amendments  to  the  Bank  of  Jamaica  Act  are  being  prepared 
which  will,  once approved,  assign  formal  responsibility  to  Bank  of  Jamaica  for  overseeing 
financial stability. The amendments will, among other things, facilitate effective coordination 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
amongst  financial  sector  regulators,  and  provide  a  statutory  basis  for  macro-prudential 
surveillance  aimed  at  the  early identification of systemic risks to financial stability. 
In  addition,  we  are  preparing  legislation  that  will  consolidate  into  one  the  various  statutes 
covering  deposit-taking  institutions  (mainly  banks  and  building  societies),  and  eliminate 
inconsistencies  and  opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage.  The  proposed  legislation  is 
expected  to  include  provisions  to  permit  some  banking  services  to  be  provided  through 
agents, which will facilitate the orderly and safe expansion of mobile money services. We are 
also including an enforceable code of conduct for deposit-taking institutions, which is aimed 
at advancing consumer protection in this area. These two innovations, I believe, are relevant 
to the topic that you will discuss today. 
In  closing,  I  wish  for  the  JDIC  a  successful  event  and  many  more  years  of  service  to  our 
nation. 
Thank you. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
