Jwala Rambarran: The road to independence – a Manley perspective 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  Twenty-Seventh  Dr  Eric  Williams  Memorial  Lecture,  Port  of  Spain, 
28 September 2013. 
 in  extremely  uncertain  and 
On behalf of the Board, Management and Staff, it is my pleasure to welcome you all to our 
Twenty-Seventh Dr. Eric Williams Memorial Lecture, the first in my capacity as Central Bank 
Governor.  As  you  may  be  aware,  this  Memorial  Lecture  Series  was  launched  in  1983  by 
Mr. Victor  Bruce,  our  first  local  Central  Bank  Governor,  following  Dr.  Williams‟  passing  in 
1981. 
Over  the  past  twenty  five  years  or  so,  the  Lecture  Series  has  emerged  as  a  high  level 
intellectual forum that critically examines issues relevant to Dr. Williams‟ legacy of Caribbean 
nationhood and identity. 
Tonight is no different. In fact, it may be even more poignant. I say this because tonight’s 
Twenty-Seventh  lecture  takes  place  against  the  brutal  reality  that  Caribbean  nations  must 
chart  a  new  economic  destiny 
incredibly  unforgiving 
circumstances. 
Just as Dr. Williams‟ doctoral thesis “Economic Aspects of Emancipation and Slavery in 
the British West Indies” challenged the prevailing orthodoxy that the causes of the abolition 
of slavery were not that the British had become morally offended at this sinful trade in human 
bodies, but was due to the fact that slavery was no longer profitable to British Capitalism, so 
too must post-colonial Caribbean nations challenge the prevailing defeatist attitude that they 
cannot  escape  the  forces  bedeviling  their  economies  and  societies  and  which  threaten  to 
permanently erase their uniquely crafted Caribbean identity. 
I  am  certain  that  tonight’s  lecture  entitled  “The  Road  to  Independence:  A  Manley 
Perspective”  will  be  one  of  those  big  conversations  about  the  future  of  Caribbean 
economies. 
Our Distinguished Speaker, Ms. Rachel Manley, aptly describes herself as of the transitional 
generation  –  the  last  to  experience  the  remnants  of  unfettered  colonialism  and  the  first  to 
experience the coming of age angst of a newly independent Jamaica. 
As  she  might  remind  you  all  tonight,  Rachel  Manley  was  only  15  years  old  when  she 
witnessed the Union Jack come down at midnight on August 2nd 1962 and the black, green 
and  gold  Jamaican  flag  shimmy  up  the  flagpole  to  unfurl  the  dreams  of  a  new  nation, 
Jamaica. 
Perhaps  more  importantly,  Rachel  Manley  is  the  granddaughter  and  daughter  of  three  of 
Jamaica’s  national  leaders  who  forever  changed  Jamaica’s  intellectual,  social  and  cultural 
landscape. 
Her grandfather Norman Manley or Pardi, as he was affectionately called, was the founder of 
Jamaica’s People’s National Party and one of the key figures in the Jamaican struggle for 
independence.  Norman  Manley  rose  to  the  post  of  Jamaica’s  Chief  Minister  in  1955  and 
became 
first  and  only  Premier  when  Jamaica  gained  self-government  before 
Independence. 
Her grandmother Edna Manley or Mardi, as she was affectionately known, was the wife of a 
National Hero and mother to Jamaica’s fifth prime minister. Her legacy is firmly entrenched in 
Jamaica’s  art,  sculpture  and  painting  and  poetry  and  prose.  Some  say  Edna  Manley  was 
nothing less than the mother of Jamaica’s artistic soul. 
its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Rachel  is  the  first  child  of  Michael  Manley,  Jamaica’s  charismatic,  controversial  Prime 
Minister who served between 1972 and 1980, and then again between 1987 and 1992, who 
attempted to refashion Jamaica’s unjust post-colonial economy and society into a democratic 
socialist mould while annoying the United States with his radical foreign policy, especially his 
friendship with Fidel Castro, and who passionately advocated a brave new world economic 
order. 
Even though she has been part of history in the making, lived close to history makers, and 
even  made  history,  Rachel  Manley  affirms  that  she  is  not  a  historian.  And  although  she 
experienced first-hand her family’s intriguing politics and its impact on Jamaican society and 
the region, Rachel Manley confesses that she is no politician. 
So tonight, Rachel Manley is here to speak to us as a writer, an award-winning author and 
poet  best  known  for  her  intimate,  captivating  non-fiction  trilogy  of  memoirs  about  one  of 
Jamaica’s most prominent and glamorous political families, her own Manley family. 
Yesterday,  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  meet  for  the  first  time,  Ms.  Rachel  Manley,  an 
absolutely  charming  and  endearing  woman  who  is  utterly  passionate  and  compassionate 
about  Caribbean  regionalism.  She  gifted  me  with  personally  signed  copies  of  her  award-
winning trilogy of memoirs, requested that I read them at my leisure, warning that afterwards 
she would quiz me on certain aspects of her three books. 
Well,  never  one  to  fail  an  exam,  last  night  and  early  this  morning  I  skimmed  through  her 
trilogy  and  found  them  very  relevant  to  the  on-going  discourse  on  the  future  of  Caribbean 
integration, nation building and development. 
The first book in the trilogy is entitled, Drumblair: Memories of Jamaican Childhood, which 
tells the story about the house that nurtured the brilliant and artistic Manleys. 
But to me Drumblair is not only a stunning biography about a house in which Rachel Manley 
grew  up  with  her  grandparents.  To  me  Drumblair  represents  a  deeper  narrative  about  a 
larger house, the West Indies Federation. 
When  Edna  Manley’s  own  cousin,  Alexander  Bustamante  –  Jamaica’s  first  prime  minister 
after Independence – pulled out of the just two-year old Federation in 1962 and caused the 
collapse of self-government for the entire West Indies, Dr. Eric Williams resorted to a new 
political arithmetic captured in his now famous utterance “one from ten leaves nought” and 
went on to take Trinidad and Tobago on the road to independence. 
Today,  Caribbean  leaders  must  consider  a  new  Drumblair,  a  new  house.  The  CARICOM 
integration  model  birthed  in  August  1973  by  the  leaders  of  the  then  four  independent 
countries  –  Dr.  Eric  Williams,  Michael  Manley,  Errol  Barrow  and  Forbes  Burnham  –  as  a 
consolation prize to the Federation has survived for more than 40 years. This is a significant 
achievement. In my respectful view, however, the CARICOM model which seeks to connect 
our small island states through trade and markets, has reached its limits. 
We need to build a new house – a new West Indian National Economy – that moves beyond 
trade and markets to one that powerfully unites all nations touched by the Caribbean Sea so 
that we can better respond to cross-cutting challenges that threaten the region’s future. 
Regional Central Banks with their powerful development mandate must orchestrate regional 
solutions  to  what  are  undoubtedly  regional  problems,  especially  devising  a  strategy  to 
permanently  exit  from  the  Caribbean’s  massive  public  debt  overhang  while  redefining  our 
love-hate relationship with the international financial institutions, particularly the IMF. 
In her second book entitled “Slipstream: A Daughter Remembers”, Rachel Manley offers a 
deeply moving personal account of her relationship with her father both as a child and as a 
woman, a father who is considered the most loved and feared, cherished and reviled, cursed 
and worshipped, and forgiven and unforgiven figure in Jamaica’s history. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In a most discerning passage about Michael Manley, that I find strikingly reminiscent of the 
charismatic  influence  of  Dr.  Eric  Williams  on  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  Rachel  Manley  writes 
“The  island  was  living  his  personality.  His  restlessness,  his  rapture,  his  rash 
impetuousness  –  his  causes  and  carings,  his  sudden  concepts  –  seemed  to  be  no 
different from the nation’s.” 
Again,  on  a  deeper,  more  compelling  level,  I  found  Slipstream  to  be  prescient,  perhaps 
foretelling  the  dismal  fate  that  could  befall  our  present  generation  of  Caribbean  leaders  if 
they fail to put aside their „macho‟ personal ambitions in favor of re-engineering our small, 
highly open vulnerable economies and societies to withstand mounting pressures, both from 
inside and outside. 
None other than Sir Shridath Ramphal, a Caribbean luminary and the Distinguished Speaker 
at last year’s Eric Williams Memorial Lecture, emphatically notes that leadership in the region 
has  „put  the  gears  of  the  CARICOM  Single  Market  in  neutral  and  the  gears  of  CARICOM 
Single Economy into reverse‟. 
Completing the trilogy is the book entitled, “Horses in Her Hair: A Granddaughter’s Story”, 
Rachel Manley’s ode to her grandmother, Edna Manley. As Rachel Manley writes “Looking 
for the meaning in Edna Manley’s life is baffling if the conundrum is approached head-
on.  She  was  always  more  in  the  weave  of  life  than  in  the  embroidery.  She  saw  the 
world  in  terms  of  the  symbolic,  most  things  open  to  her  interpretation.  She 
understood and lived her life between its lines rather than according to an accepted 
script.  Edna,  cousin  to  both  Norman  and  Bustamante,  crept  between  the  starker 
realities to claim another role – a role, some say, as mother of Jamaica’s artistic soul.” 
In  my  opinion,  Horses  in  Her  Hair  is  a  stark  reminder  that  as  we  seek  to  forge  a  new 
Caribbean home, as we seek to cast away the island hubris of our leaders, we must balance 
our quantity of life, with our quality of life. 
Culture must be an important vehicle that inspires our quest for greater Caribbean regional 
unity. 
We have seen the unifying strength of culture in our playwrights like Nobel Laureate Derek 
Walcott, in our folk poets like Louise Bennett, in our creators of dance like Beryl McBurnie, in 
our artistes like Bob Marley, and in our social commentators like the Mighty Sparrow. 
As  I  close,  it  is  my  view  that  Rachel  is  ideally  placed  to  render  judgment  on  whether  the 
Caribbean can withstand the existential clash between history and circumstances; to render 
judgment on whether the Caribbean can withstand the primordial battle between personality 
and destiny in order to advance the ideals of political and economic consciousness espoused 
by Dr. Eric Williams. 
It  is  therefore  with  great  pleasure  that  I  invite  Ms.  Rachel  Manley  to  deliver  the  Twenty-
Seventh  Dr.  Eric  Williams  Memorial  Lecture,  entitled  “The  Road  to  Independence:  A 
Manley Perspective.” 
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
