Luigi Federico Signorini: Building a strong financial system to assist 
innovative SMEs 
Remarks by Mr Luigi Federico Signorini, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, at the 
EU Finance Day for SMEs, Italy, Rome, 18 October 2013. 
 Small and medium-sized enterprises in the European economy 
1. 
Small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  are  a  key  feature  of  the  European  economic 
landscape. They account for 99 per cent of all EU firms, employ 67  per cent of all payroll 
workers  and  generate  58  per  cent  of  value  added.  Their  contribution  to  economic  activity 
varies  significantly  from  sector  to  sector;  in  2010  their  contribution  to  value  added  ranged 
from  under  25  per  cent  in  energy  to  over  80  per  cent  in  construction  and  real  estate. 
Cross-country  variability  is  also  significant:  SMEs’  share  was  lower  in  the  United  Kingdom 
(50 per cent) and higher in Portugal, Spain and Italy. 
In Italy SMEs account for about 80 per cent of total employment and 68 per cent of business 
value added. In 2011 micro enterprises – firms with fewer than 10 employees – accounted 
for around a third of the Italian firms’ total value added, 8 percentage points higher than the 
European average. 
SMEs rely heavily on internal sources (retained earnings) to finance ongoing activities and 
investment;  their  funding  consists  more  of  debt  than  equity  and,  among  debt  instruments, 
bank loans outweigh securities. The role of banks in SMEs’ financing is linked to their ability 
to  reduce  the  large  information  asymmetries  typical  of  small  firms.  It  is  favoured  by  firms’ 
inherent difficulty in going public, and sometimes their reluctance to do so, which limits their 
ability to place securities directly with non-bank intermediaries. Specifically, SMEs’ access to 
capital  markets  is  often  hampered  by  high  fiscal  and  administrative  costs,  lack  of 
transparency and the low propensity of family businesses to dilute control. 
Access to finance is a major challenge for SMEs in normal times; it has been much more so 
in Europe over the past five years. The deep recession that hit most countries – a double-dip 
recession  in  some  cases  –  dried  up  internal  resources;  recurrent  crises  of  confidence  in 
financial markets, which put a brake on funding flows, and mounting bad loans made banks 
tighten their lending policies. 
These problems have been addressed with a variety of economic policy measures. Central 
banks have used monetary tools to ease the liquidity crisis of the financial sector; European 
institutions  and  national  governments  have  used  public  resources  both  to  help  meet  the 
SMEs’ short-term financing needs and to fund guarantee schemes so as to mitigate credit 
risk. Regulators have envisaged specific provisions for SMEs in revising and strengthening 
the rules on banks’ capital requirements. Supervisory authorities have put pressure on banks 
to bolster their capital and thus their ability to withstand macroeconomic risks. 
In what follows I briefly summarize the effects of the crisis and recall the main contributions 
of  the  different  policies  to  facilitate  SMEs’  access  to  finance  in  these  circumstances,  with 
special attention to the Italian case. I conclude with some general thoughts on the financial 
architecture  of  SMEs,  with  a  view  to  making  them  more  robust  to  external  shocks  and  to 
promoting the long-term growth of our economies.  
The crisis 
2. 
The financial crisis in 2008 and the ensuing recession left a heavy legacy of joblessness and 
lost  growth  in  the  euro  area.  The  area  saw  a  mild  recovery  in  2010,  but  then  the  sharp 
worsening of the global growth outlook in the second part of 2011 and the EU’s slowness in 
shaping  policies  to  counter  the  crisis,  together  with  a  perceived  risk  of  a  break-up  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
monetary union, fuelled renewed tensions. The economic impact of the so-called sovereign 
debt  crisis  was  stronger  in  countries  with  larger  internal  or  external  imbalances  and  was 
further reinforced by financial markets’ fragmentation along national lines. 
The  crisis  quickly  affected  banks’  funding  conditions,  since  sovereign  spreads  have  a 
significant impact on banks’ funding costs, and hence on their ability to provide credit to non-
financial corporations. Cross-country disparities in both the growth and the cost of loans to 
firms mounted during 2011; they moderated somewhat in 2012 and the first half of 2013 but 
they remain significant to this day. 
The tightening of bank lending to firms was widespread, but findings drawn from qualitative 
and quantitative data consistently suggest that the effects were most severe for SMEs, owing 
to their limited ability to tap alternative sources of finance. 
In Italy, where the increase in the sovereign risk spreads was substantial and the share of 
bank-dependent SMEs very large, these developments had even heavier repercussions than 
elsewhere. The average interest rate on new loans up to €250,000, a proxy for the cost of 
credit to SMEs, rose more steeply than that on new loans greater than €1 million. Moreover, 
large industrial groups, most of them listed, had in principle the alternative of going to the 
market as at least a partial substitute for bank credit, an option that is not available to most 
SMEs. 
The  adverse  impact  on  credit  supply  conditions  of  banks’  difficulty  in  accessing  wholesale 
funds moderated in 2012, partly as a consequence of the extraordinary monetary measures 
adopted  by  the  ECB,  a  point  to  which  I  shall  return.  Meanwhile,  however,  the  crisis  had 
spread again to the real economy. The worsening macroeconomic outlook in Italy and the 
consequent increase in credit risk were again reflected in a credit tightening. In 2012 and in 
2013, the number of firms defaulting on loans increased substantially: in the second quarter 
of  2013  the  ratio  of  new  bad  debts  to  outstanding  business  loans  reached  4.7  per  cent, 
1.5 percentage  points  higher  than  a  year  earlier.  The  related  deterioration  in  banks’  asset 
quality has also contributed to the restrictiveness of lending standards. 
 Credit rationing hits SMEs disproportionately. While slightly less common in the immediate 
past, according to the latest qualitative data, rationing is still a constraint on the economy. It 
is important to understand that relaxing credit standards is not the solution. A robust, resilient 
banking system is a prerequisite for a functioning credit market. Prudence as regards banks’ 
assets  is  essential  to  ensure  safety  for  depositors  and  orderly  access  to  funding  markets. 
Confidence  is  indispensable.  What  is  necessary  is  to  ensure  orderly  funding  conditions, 
enhance banks’ resilience without imposing undue procyclical effects on the economy, and 
diversify  the  sources  of  finance  for  SMEs,  with  a  view  to  fostering  entrepreneurship, 
innovation and growth. 
Monetary policy 
3. 
The ECB moved swiftly to counteract the effects of the sovereign crisis on the economy and 
the impairment of monetary policy transmission across euro-area countries. 
First,  it  adopted  a  highly  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  reducing  official  rates  to 
their all-time low, with the rate on main refinancing operations now at 0.50 per cent. Second, 
it took a number of non-conventional monetary policy measures to reduce the fragmentation 
of financial conditions across the euro area and avoid an unprecedented credit crunch, which 
would  have  had  dire  consequences  on  the  macroeconomic  outlook  and  price  dynamics  of 
the euro area as a whole. 
In particular, in order to ensure more uniform wholesale funding conditions, on 8 December 
2011 the ECB announced two 3-year longer-term refinancing operations, to be conducted as 
fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment.  Further,  to  guarantee  wide  access  to  its 
refinancing operations, it also increased the range of eligible collateral by reducing the rating 
threshold for certain asset-backed securities and allowing national central banks to accept as 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
collateral  additional  performing  credit  claims  (i.e.  bank  loans)  that  satisfied  certain  criteria. 
The  set  of  eligible  collateral  was  further  increased  during  2012,  to  support  bank  lending. 
These  decisions,  together  with  the  announcement  of  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  in 
August  2012,  have  been  crucial  in  reducing  financial  segmentation  and  mitigating  banks’ 
funding difficulties. 
Within  the  policy  framework  defined  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  the  Bank  of  Italy  has 
taken several further steps to ease the difficulties in the Italian credit market for credit-worthy 
firms  that  depend  most  on  it.  In  February  2012,  the  Bank  began  to  accept  as  collateral, 
subject  to  strict  risk-control  measures,  so-called  Additional  Credit  Claims  (ACC),  that  is  to 
say,  performing  bank  loans  that  satisfy  eligibility  criteria  different  from  those  normally 
required  by  the  Eurosystem.  Specifically,  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  accepted  some  additional 
types  of  loans  and  allowed  banks  to  use  its  internal  credit  assessment  system  for  rating 
them,  which  has  made  it  easier  for  small  banks  to  participate  in  Eurosystem  refinancing 
operations.  Small  locally-based  banks,  which  typically  have  no  internal  rating  system, 
traditionally play an important role in lending to SMEs. Also, like other Eurosystem national 
central banks, the Bank of Italy has lowered the minimum amount accepted for both ordinary 
and additional bank loans from €500,000 to €100,000, to allow loans granted to smaller firms 
to  be  used  as  collateral.  We  are  working  to  enlarge  the  set  of  loans  that  comply  with  all 
Eurosystem eligibility requirements. 
The unconventional monetary measures adopted by the ECB in 2011–2012 were effective in 
easing  tensions  in  government  bond  markets  and  have  had  a  beneficial  impact  on  credit 
supply and money market conditions, supporting the economy and preserving price stability 
in  the  euro  area.  Our  econometric  analyses  suggest  that  the  effects  of  the  ECB’s 
extraordinary measures added more than two percentage points to the growth of Italy’s GDP 
in  the  period  2012–2013  and  were  transmitted  mainly  through  the  improvement  in  credit 
supply  conditions.  While  the  policies  did  not  prevent  the  Italian  economy  from  falling  into 
recession, they did keep the credit crunch from being still more severe and the fall in output 
even larger. 
Strengthening the banking sector 
4. 
A healthy banking industry is essential to maintaining a stable flow of financial resources to 
the  economy,  and  to  smaller  firms  in  particular.  Strengthening  banks’  capacity  to  absorb 
shocks has been a major concern of policy makers, regulators and supervisors. 
On the regulatory side, the changes have been far-reaching. Policy makers and the public 
are  well  aware  of  the  international  drive  to  improve  banking  prudential  standards  and  to 
overcome the regulatory failures that had become glaring with the financial crisis. The effort 
is ongoing. Capital rules have been strengthened. Liquidity rules, a serious blind spot of the 
previous international system of standards, will be introduced. Systemically important banks, 
whose failure may trigger widespread disruption, will be subject to stricter standards. 
On  the  supervisory  side,  these  have  been  times  of  severe  testing.  The  action  to  reinforce 
capital and liquidity standards was and is central. At the same time, however, it is essential 
that  banks  achieve 
to  credit.  Capital 
reinforcement is the key. 
From the very beginning of the financial crisis, the Bank of Italy has closely monitored the 
liquidity and the capital of Italian banks, prompting actions to increase high quality capital and 
cope with an increasingly risky environment. At the end of June 2013, the core tier 1 ratio 
had risen to an average of 11.2 per cent from 7.0 per cent in 2008. 
In  order  for  these  actions  to  take  place  without  aggravating  lending  conditions,  we  have 
insisted on the reduction of banks’ costs and the injection of new capital; we asked banks’ 
shareholders to forgo dividends, managers to reduce or cancel bonuses. 
this  strengthening  without  undue  restriction 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
This has not been without effect. As the IMF stated in its recent Financial System Stability 
Assessment  for  Italy,  the  provision  of  additional  domestic  resources,  both  deposits  and 
capital,  has  enabled  the  Italian  banking  system  to  withstand  the  dramatic  sequence  of 
external shocks to the global and the European economy since 2007 almost exclusively with 
its own resources. The IMF also noted that the impact of additional “downside risks” on the 
banking  system,  as  measured  by  several  stress  test  exercises,  would  be  “substantially 
cushioned  by  the  existing  capital  buffer”.  It  concluded  that  the  banking  system,  though 
hard-hit by the crisis, has managed to avoid capital shortfalls that would have had dramatic 
consequences for the real economy and, most importantly, is in a position to prevent capital 
shortages in the near future. 
During the crisis, the fragmentation of financial markets along national lines has also had a 
major  impact  on  Italian  banks.  This  has  entailed  high  costs  and  limited  availability  of 
wholesale  funding,  and  has  affected  domestic  credit  conditions.  While  the  ECB’s  actions 
have eased tensions in the short term, a more structural action is required to make Europe’s 
banks  work  as  one  system,  one  market.  In  a  heavily  regulated  industry  like  banking,  the 
single market requires a single framework for regulation and supervision; otherwise it cannot 
work properly, especially in difficult times. 
The creation of the Banking Union is a keystone of the institutional reform to ensure stability 
in the euro area and in the EU at large. It should eliminate fragmentation, leaving only that 
portion of extra funding costs for banks that is associated with genuine extra credit risk. 
The  Banking  Union  comprises  three  key  components:  a  single  supervisory  mechanism 
(SSM), centred on the ECB and based on the expertise of national supervisory authorities; a 
single resolution mechanism (SRM), which is central to ensuring that the responsibilities of 
supervising banks and managing their recovery or resolution are effectively aligned; and a 
harmonized  deposit  guarantee  fund  financed  by  the  industry,  whose  mission  is  to  prevent 
bank runs. 
In the summer of 2012 the European leaders decided to give priority to the construction of 
the  first  component,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  comprising  the  ECB  and  the 
national supervisory authorities. But this is a three-legged animal: it cannot be asked to stand 
on  one  foot.  The  resolution  part  is  already  under  development.  The  third  leg,  a  common 
deposit guarantee fund, must remain a target. 
The  purpose  of  the  Banking  Union  is  to  bring  substantial  benefits  to  the  Single  Market, 
improve  the  monitoring,  control  and  mitigation  of  the  systemic  risks  that  stem  from  the 
interconnectedness of banks and markets, break the perverse feedback loop between banks 
and sovereigns and counter the ring-fencing trends observed in the last years, thus fostering 
financial integration. 
SMEs and the financial sector 
5. 
Policies to improve the institutional environment must be complemented by actions to foster 
an  efficient and  diversified  financial  system  that  can  adequately  serve  a  set  of  enterprises 
whose financing requirements are quite heterogeneous, depending on firms’ characteristics. 
For  smaller firms,  which  will  continue  to  rely  heavily  on  bank  loans,  it is  essential that  the 
prudential  rules  on  bank  capital  be  designed  so  as  to  avoid  a  negative  impact  on  credit 
supply.  The  Basel  II  framework  (CRD  in  Europe),  which  went  into  effect  in  2007–08,  had 
already  envisaged  more  favourable  prudential  treatment  for  loans  to  SMEs  than  other 
corporate  loans,  justified  by  their  reduced  systemic  impact.  The  4th  capital  requirements 
directive/capital  requirements  regulation  has  introduced  a  further  reduction  in  capital 
absorption for this class of exposures, facilitating bank lending to SMEs. Such a discount will 
apply in the form of a “supporting factor”, an SME-specific coefficient that reduces – given 
specific conditions – capital requirements for lending to SMEs by around one fourth. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Loan  securitizations  represent  an  opportunity  for  smaller  firms  to  access  market  finance. 
These operations have got a bad name during the crisis. But there are good securitizations 
and  bad  ones.  Opaque,  complex,  multiple-stage  securitizations  have  shown,  beyond  all 
possible  doubt,  their  potential  for  wreaking  havoc.  They  must  be  avoided.  But  a  simple, 
transparent securitization framework can be useful to the growth of lending. The regulatory 
environment should encourage the adoption of two key features: first, risk retention, in order 
to  align  the  interests  of  all  parties;  second,  simplicity  and  transparency,  in  order  to  allow 
investors to assess the quality of the underlying assets. 
The  interest  of  investors  in  securitization  instruments  depends  critically  on  the  regulatory 
environment. The Basel Committee is working on a comprehensive review of the prudential 
treatment of the asset-backed securities held by banks, addressing the shortcomings of the 
current regulation by making capital requirements more prudent and risk-sensitive, reducing 
reliance  on  external  credit  ratings  and  easing  cliff  effects  when  credit  quality  deteriorates. 
The Committee is now reviewing the calibration of the new approach, following comments on 
a  preliminary  consultation.  In  setting  the  new  capital  charges  the  Committee  must  seek  to 
strike  a  good  balance.  The  Bank  of  Italy  is  taking  an  active  part  in  the  revision  of  the 
securitization framework. We also appreciate the international discussion on the recovery of 
securitization markets characterized by simple and transparent instruments. The promotion 
of these operations can bolster investor confidence and work to the direct benefit of the real 
economy. 
For  firms  with  higher  growth  potential,  the  financial  system  must  offer  non-bank  financing 
solutions, which fit their risk profile better. 
Although  bank  loans  will  certainly  remain  the  dominant  source  of  external  financing  for 
SMEs, long-term investments are better financed by equity capital. In particular, share capital 
is  preferable  to  foster  innovation  and  growth  in  businesses  with  uncertain  results  and 
pronounced information asymmetries. While banks can count on guarantees and long-term 
relationships  with  firms  to  reduce  the  information  asymmetries,  equity  capital  enables 
investors to benefit in full from the returns to successful innovation. Banks must understand 
that there is, here, a long-term benefit for them, too. 
As margins on traditional intermediation shrink and the need to contain leverage sets limits 
on  loan  growth,  banks  should  constantly  improve  their  ability  to  provide  more  diversified 
financial  services  to  firms,  especially  SMEs.  They  can  play  a  key  (and  profitable)  role  in 
accompanying  firms  along  a  path  to  a  better  balanced,  more  robust  and  flexible  funding 
structure.  Progress  in  this  direction  would  be  beneficial  both  for  banks  and  for  their 
customers. 
A  number  of  empirical  studies  have  found  a  strong  positive  causal  link  between  the 
availability of capital and investment in innovation. A recent study for Italy concludes that the 
issue of shares increases the probability of a firm’s undertaking R&D investment by around 
one third. 
Venture  capitalists  and  other  investors  specializing  in  financing  innovative  enterprises  are 
undersized in Europe by comparison with the US. 
Long-term  financing,  and  equity  financing  in  particular,  is  hampered  by  both  demand  and 
supply  factors.  On  the  demand  side,  the  costs  of  disclosing  the  relevant  information  to 
external investors are often very high compared to the scale of business; often small firms’ 
problems of asymmetric information are amplified by their family-based management model. 
On  the  supply  side,  access  to  market  financing  is  hindered  by  the  low  propensity  of 
institutional investors to invest in these companies’ securities. The high risk and low liquidity 
of SMEs’ securities do not fit the preferences of most institutional investors, which often lack 
the expertise to manage the risks associated with this asset class. 
Designing policies to foster investment in securities issued by SMEs is a difficult task, and in 
the past the results have often been disappointing. But the challenge is worth taking up. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Commission’s  March  2013  Green  Paper  on  long-term  financing  to  support  structural 
economic reform and return to a long-term trend of economic growth in Europe specifies a 
number  of  proposals  that  constitute  a  solid  basis  for  future  work.  The  essential  goal  is  to 
make small enterprises and the entire economy more resilient vis-à-vis shocks to banks and 
to enhance the capacity to finance growth and innovation.  
Conclusion 
6. 
Small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  in  Europe  have  been  hit  hard  by  the  crisis,  and  in 
several  countries  their  ability  to  raise  external  finance  has  been  and  still  is  constrained.  A 
good  many  counter-measures  have  been  taken,  ranging  from  monetary  policy  to  the 
allocation  of  resources  from  national  and  European  budgets.  More  are  in  the  pipeline. 
Regulatory  reforms  and  the  creation  of  a  European  Banking  Union  will  help  restore 
confidence in the financial system and in the banking industry. 
Once the damage done by such a deep and protracted crisis has been repaired, it will be 
vital  for  the  prosperity  of  Europe  to  build  a  thriving  business  environment  in  which  smart 
ideas can be readily transformed into entrepreneurial initiatives. 
SMEs are central to long-term economic development in many sectors. SMEs can be, and 
indeed often are, an engine for growth. Italy has seen a thriving system of small, innovative, 
enterprising firms, whose growth has been central to internal and external development. On 
the global level, most of the breakthrough innovations that have reshaped the world economy 
in recent decades have come from start-ups and SMEs. To stay successful, SMEs must be 
able to adapt, transform themselves and grow. 
The social, institutional, financial environment plays a fundamental enabling role. This is true 
for  all  firms,  but  even  more  so  for  SMEs,  which  have  a  limited  ability  to  internalize  the 
production  of  key  inputs  like  human  capital  and  interconnection  services.  We  need  to 
increase the proportion of dynamic small firms that work close to the technological frontier 
and whose smallness is just a stage of their life cycle. This requires action on several fronts: 
human capital, infrastructures and finance. 
Building  a  financial  system  that  can  meet  the  needs  of  innovative  SMEs  with  high  growth 
prospects is a challenge we must take up. We must look beyond the crisis. Even as we act to 
improve the traditional bank-centred model of business finance and to make it more resilient, 
we  need  to  create  more  scope  for  markets  and  non-bank  intermediaries.  There  are  no 
ready-made solutions. Best practices around the world and our own past experience must 
serve as our guide. All the key actors, the financial industry, policy makers and entrepreneurs 
must do their part.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
