Andrew G Haldane: The Commercial Property Forum twenty years on 
Remarks by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, 
at the Bank of England, London, 18 December 2013. 
 investors, 
I  would  like  to  thank  Oliver  Burrows,  Iain  de  Weymarn,  David  Gregory,  David  Learmonth,  Varun  Paul,  Rhys 
Phillips, Laura Piscitelli, Martin Taylor and Jack Worlidge for their help and comments. 
Tonight marks an important birthday. We are here to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the 
Bank’s Commercial Property Forum. I am delighted to welcome members, past and present, 
back to the Bank. 
The Forum met for the first time on 28th July 1993. It was hosted by my predecessor Pen 
Kent. Its aim, to use Pen’s words at the time, was “to bring all sides of industry together” – 
developers, 
lenders,  occupiers,  surveyors,  auctioneers, 
researchers  and 
regulators – to discuss developments in the commercial property sector. 
Since  then,  the  Forum  has  met  around  80  times.  It  has  done  so  under  three  external 
chairmen  –  Clive  Lewis,  Chris  Bartram  and  Ian  Marcus  –  and  I  am  particularly  grateful  to 
them for their efforts over the past 20 years. The Forum has drawn on around 300 experts 
from  across  various  sectors.  By  my  reckoning,  they  have  drunk  over  1500  cups  of  tea  or 
coffee and eaten over 2000 biscuits. I cannot think of a Bank committee whose caffeine and 
calorific intake could surpass the Forum’s. 
That  twenty  year  period  has  been  far  from  a  quiet  one,  for  the  Bank  or  the  commercial 
property  industry.  The  Bank  gained  operational  independence  for  monetary  policy  through 
the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  in  1997;  had  its  role  in  supervising  individual  firms 
first  stripped  from  it  in  1998  and  then,  earlier  this  year,  re-instated  through  the  Prudential 
Regulation  Authority  (PRA);  and,  most  recently,  has  taken  on  responsibility  for  so-called 
macro-prudential regulation through the new Financial Policy Committee (FPC). 
The  commercial  property  industry’s  fortunes  have  been  just  as  undulating.  But  throughout 
those ups and downs, the Forum has remained a key source of intelligence for the Bank and 
the industry and an important sign of cooperation between the Bank and the industry. Since 
1997,  the  Forum  has  helped  inform  the  deliberations  of  the  MPC  and,  over  the  past  few 
years, the PRA and FPC. And it was the success of the Forum that led me, three years ago, 
to set up a parallel Residential Property Forum, chaired by Nick Ritblat. 
Some of you will have heard me say that the Forum is one of the best meetings I attend at 
the Bank. And I know some of you, on hearing that, have been left wondering just what my 
other meetings must be like. Speaking on behalf of the Bank, I wanted to say how grateful 
we are to you all for those contributions. 
But what has the Forum achieved during its life? And, looking forward, what could it achieve 
in future? 
Cycles of the past 
Let me start with the bad news. The Forum has assuredly not solved the problem of boom 
and bust in the commercial property market. Indeed, the environment today – slow recovery 
from a jarring commercial property bust – is eerily reminiscent of the situation twenty years 
ago when the Forum began. As Yogi Berra reportedly said, it is a case of déjà vu all over 
again. 
The Forum was born out of the commercial property crash of the early 1990s. Between 1989 
and 1993, UK commercial property prices fell by 27%. This followed a long period of rising 
prices, high liquidity, expansive lending and weakening credit standards. These ingredients 
combined  to  create  a  classic  pro-cyclical  spiral.  Higher  valuations  supported  ever-larger 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
loans on ever-finer terms, boosting valuations still further. When that pro-cyclical spiral went 
into reverse, it left banks, developers and investors all licking their wounds. 
Today,  the  situation  is  much  the  same.  Commercial  property  prices  are  37%  below  their 
peak. For secondary properties, they are more like 50% below their peak. This fall-to-earth 
came after a long wave of rising commercial property prices, deeper liquidity and rapid and, 
in  many  cases,  imprudent  lending  practices.  The  subsequent  crash  has  left  banks, 
developers  and  investors  not  just  licking  their  wounds  but  in  some  cases  requiring  life 
support. The  commercial  property  bust  has  contributed  to  several  UK  banks  departing  the 
high street and the economy suffering its most painful contraction since at least the 1930s. 
This pro-cyclical, boom-bust pattern is, of course, neither new nor UK-specific. Over the past 
century, the UK commercial property market has experienced five distinct boom-bust cycles 
(Chart  1):  in  the  1930s,  the  1950s,  the  1970s,  the  1990s  and  then  again  in  this  century. 
Peak-to-trough, the average price decline was 26%. The commercial property cycle appears 
to be every bit as regular as the business cycle, but with one key difference: its amplitude is 
perhaps three times greater. 
That pattern is replicated internationally. During this crisis, commercial property prices fell by 
22% in Japan, 29% in Spain, 34% in the US and 67% in Ireland. Earlier, commercial property 
lay at the heart of the UK secondary banking crisis of the 1970s, the US Savings and Loans 
crisis of the 1980s, the Japanese and Scandinavian financial meltdowns of the early 1990s 
and  the  Asian  banking  crises  of  the  late  1990s.  During  those  crises,  commercial  property 
prices fell, on average, by around 40% and often by much more. 
The costs to the wider economy of these boom-bust cycles have been even more striking. 
Recessions that are accompanied by a property bust come with a much higher price tag. The 
cumulative  loss  of  output  from  a  residential  property-related  recession,  for  example,  is 
around three times greater than a plain-vanilla recession at around 10% of initial GDP. Its 
duration is also around a third longer. 
It may not be an over-statement to say that, historically, commercial property has probably 
been the most pro-cyclical sector on the planet. It has probably contributed more to financial 
crises,  and  associated  output  and  job  losses,  than  any  other  area  of  industry,  outside  of 
banking. This is all sobering context. 
Cycles of the future 
That naturally begs the question of what can be done to avert a next time? And what role, if 
any, the Forum might play? I think there are some positive developments to report. These 
hold  out  the  prospect  –  no  more  than  that  –  that  next  time  could  be  different.  But  to  be 
successful, these measures  will  need  both  industry  and regulators to  act  decisively  and  in 
concert. 
Let’s start with industry. It is clear to me from the Forum’s deliberations that the industry itself 
understands the need for change. That was brought home when a group of Forum members 
came together earlier this year, under the chairmanship of Nick Scarles, to produce “A Vision 
for Real Estate Finance in the UK”. This was published in October. The recommendations in 
this report make eminent sense. For example, they include proposals to improve loan-level 
commercial real estate data. This would improve monitoring of aggregate exposures to the 
sector and modelling of real estate risk. 
The recommendation that caught my eye related to valuation. Valuation lies at the heart of the 
pro-cyclical  spirals  we  have  seen  historically  in  the  commercial  property  market.  Peaky 
valuations can give the appearance of a safety margin for lenders, causing them to loosen their 
grip on credit conditions, thus driving valuations higher still. Chart 2 illustrates this spiral in the 
UK. Valuations lead lending by around a year, with a correlation coefficient of around 0.75. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
One way of slowing that pro-cyclical spiral would be to base lending decisions not on spot, 
but on medium-term or sustainable valuations. Any ramping-up of property prices above their 
sustainable  value  would  not  then  automatically  give  the  appearance  of safety  and  thereby 
encourage looser credit conditions. That, in a nutshell, is the aim of the recommendation in 
the “Vision” document. 
Needless to say, there is further work to be done by the industry to make these proposals 
operational. The very first minutes of the Forum highlighted property statistics and valuations 
as two areas where greatest improvement was needed. Twenty years on, that remains the 
case today. A continued effort will be needed by the industry to complete the job. 
Next, regulators. For much of the period prior to the financial crisis, credit and asset price 
cycles were only of interest to policymakers to the extent they posed a direct risk to inflation 
targets  or  to  the  solvency  of  individual  firms. Were  a  bubble  to  blow,  then  the  most  likely 
response was a combination of benign neglect on the upswing and lower interest rates in the 
downswing. The role of policy was to “mop” after the flood. 
That orthodoxy has been sunk by the crisis. After perhaps the largest credit boom in human 
history,  central  banks  globally  are  still  frantically  mopping  with  unprecedented  degrees  of 
monetary stimulus. Yet even that was insufficient to save the world economy from the “Great 
Recession”. And the recovery from recession has been both slower and lower than almost 
anyone expected. Neglect of the credit cycle has shown itself to be anything but benign. 
The lesson from all of this is very clear. As policymakers we must do a much better job of 
taking prompt corrective action to lean against financial swings which, if allowed to persist, 
would  otherwise  put  at  risk  the  financial  system  and  wider  economy.  We  need  to  build 
defences  to  protect  against  the  collateral  damage  from  financial  flood.  We  need  to  be 
popping, not mopping. 
Fortunately, that is exactly what is now happening. Regulators globally are pursuing a wholly 
new approach. It goes by the name of macro-prudential policy. And here in the UK, it is the 
responsibility of the Bank’s new Financial Policy Committee (FPC). 
Among the FPC’s tasks is to lean against pro-cyclicality in the financial system. That means 
smoothing  out  the  stomach-churning  highs  and  lows  in  the  credit  and  asset  price  cycle, 
which have characterised the past. As evidence of this approach, consider the FPC’s recent 
actions  in  the  UK  residential  property  market.  This  market  has  defrosted  at  pace  over  the 
past twelve months. The financial stability risks from this re-heating may not be immediate, 
but nor are they hypothetical. Take the position of UK households. 
Despite some post-crisis deleveraging households’ debt burden, relative to income, remains 
high  at  around  140%  –  almost  three  times  its  level  in  1980.  As  long  as  house  prices  rise 
faster  than  wages,  as  they  have  during  the  course  of  this  year,  this  upward  creep  in 
households’ debt burden will continue. And the higher this debt burden, the more sensitive 
will household spending be to any eventual upwards adjustment in mortgage rates. 
In  some  ways  more  important  from  a  financial  stability  perspective  is  the  distribution  of 
mortgage  debt.  Households  representing  almost  20%  of  this  debt  have  a  debt-to-income 
multiple  above  5  –  that is,  around  1 million  households.  Around  a third of  debt,  or  around 
1.6 million households, is owed by those with a debt-to-income multiple above 4. Just over a 
quarter of this debt is owed by households with £300 or less in monthly disposable income 
after essential expenditure is taken into account. And just over a half of all UK households 
say they would need to take corrective action (cutting spending, working longer hours etc) if 
mortgage rates were to rise by as little as 2.5 percentage points, if income were unchanged. 
None of this is to suggest an immediate problem, especially with interest rates so low. But 
financial stability is about protecting against future tail risks. It was against this backdrop that 
the authorities recently decided to reduce some of the stimulus being provided to mortgage 
lending – for example, stimulus provided by regulatory capital relief and the Bank’s Funding 
for Lending Scheme. As importantly, however, the FPC also set out its stall on what other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
macro-prudential  measures  could  be  taken  to  slow  the  accumulation  of  credit  and  debt,  if 
these at some point put the financial system or economy at risk. 
While  this  combination  of  measures  may  have  appeared  modest,  they  represent  a  big 
philosophical shift from the past and an important signal for the future. Regulators, certainly 
here  in  the  UK,  have  clearly  signposted  they  are  no  longer  willing  to  turn  a  blind  eye  to 
pro-cyclical swings in property, or any other sector, which risk tripping up the economy. We 
can no more eliminate the credit cycle than we can the business cycle. But can we do better 
than watch on in horror, mop in hand? We can and we must. 
The  virtue  of  having  this  second  set  of  instruments  is  well  illustrated  in  the  current 
environment. Macro-prudential measures can help guard against the financial stability risks 
otherwise  associated  with  extra-ordinarily  loose  monetary  policy.  In  the  UK,  the  FPC  can 
help  support  monetary  policy  in  its  task  of  driving  forward  recovery  in  the  economy,  by 
avoiding the MPC having to look over their shoulders for fast-approaching financial stability 
risks. 
In situations like these, two arms – monetary and macro-prudential policy – are surely better 
than one in securing macro-economic and financial stability. And having both arms attached 
to a single body, as here in the UK, can in turn help achieve greater coordination between 
monetary  and  macro-prudential  policies.  There  is  a  quiet  revolution  underway  in  the  UK’s 
macro-economic policy framework. 
Conclusions 
On its 20th birthday, it is clear that the Commercial Property Forum has never been more 
important. The boom-bust cycle in the sector is simply too damaging to be left to free-wheel. 
It  is  high  time  to  develop  some  properly  functioning  gears  and  brakes.  That  is  now  being 
done, as a shared effort between the industry and the authorities – in Pen’s words, “to bring 
all sides of the industry together”. If this is successful, the Forum could not ask for a better 
birthday present. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Long-run UK commercial property capital values(a) 
Chart 1 
 
Sources:  Scott  (1996),  Investment  Property  Database  and  Bank 
calculations. 
(a)  The  vertical  dotted  lines  indicate  the  discernable  booms  and 
busts. The attached labels indicate peak years. 
Chart 2 
UK commercial property debt and valuations 
 
Sources:  Association  of  British  Insurers,  Bank  of  England, 
Investment Property Databank, ONS and Bank calculations. 
(a) Based on end-year data 
(b) End-year stock of outstanding lending 
(c)  in  2010,  2011  and  2012  this  includes  an  adjustment  to 
include  CRE  loans  transferred  to  the  Irish  National  Asset 
Management Agency 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
