Takehiro Sato: Recent economic and financial developments, and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Hakodate,4 December 2013. 
 Introduction 
I. 
On April 1, 2013, the Bank of Japan’s Hakodate Branch celebrated its 120th anniversary. I 
would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  your  long-term 
cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the  Hakodate  Branch.  In  today’s  speech,  I  will  begin  by 
focusing  on  economic  and  financial  developments  in  Japan  and  abroad,  as  well  as  the 
Bank’s recent monetary policy. I will then touch briefly on the economy of southern Hokkaido. 
Following  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  hear  your  views  on  actual  conditions  in  the  local 
economy and on the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
II. 
Current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy and the global economy 
Outlook for the global economy 
A. 
The general outlook for the global economy had temporarily become somewhat cautious due 
to  the  instability  in  global  financial  markets  toward  this  summer.  The  global  economy, 
however,  is  expected  to  gradually  improve  as  global  financial  markets  as  a  whole  have 
regained stability, despite still showing nervousness. 
Specifically, with regard to the direction of U.S. monetary policy, speculation among investors 
about  an  earlier-than-expected  reduction  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the  pace  of  its  asset 
purchases became heightened from around late May 2013. This triggered instability in global 
financial markets, as evidenced by the simultaneous declines in stock prices, bond prices, 
and  in  the  value  of  currencies  in  some  emerging  economies.  The  forecast  for  global 
economic  growth  presented  in  the  World  Economic  Outlook  released  by  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), which had continued to be revised downward in the recent past, was 
revised further downward in October, mainly for emerging economies (Chart 1). This revision 
to  the  global  economic  forecast  was  mainly  due  to  the  revisions  made  to  the  outlook  for 
emerging economies while that for advanced economies as a whole was left unchanged, and 
this  seems  to  have  certain  implications  for  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy,  mainly  in 
terms of risk factors. 
More specifically, the U.S. economy is on a recovery path, albeit at a moderate pace, against 
the background of progress in households’ balance-sheet adjustments and an improvement 
in the housing market. The European economy is starting to pick up against the backdrop of 
the  amendments  in  the  fiscal  austerity  policy  and  the  bottoming  out  of  business  and 
household sentiment (Chart 2). The Chinese economy has also been expanding at a stable 
pace from this summer since the authorities – while taking the stance of pursuing a better 
quality of economic growth – have been implementing a small-scale economic package to 
prevent  the  economy  from  slowing  down  further  (Chart  3).  Emerging  economies’  financial 
markets  continue  to  show  nervousness  on  the  whole,  but  recently  have  regained  stability 
because the Federal Reserve’s reduction in the pace of its asset purchases was postponed 
(Chart  4).  Improvement  in  the  U.S.  and  European  economies,  as  well  as  positive 
developments  that  are  within  the  scope  of  stable  growth  in  the  Chinese  economy,  both  of 
which have gradually been exerting positive effects on economies such as those of South 
Korea  and  Taiwan,  have  contributed  to  somewhat  brightening  the  outlook  for  the  global 
economy in the short term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Under such circumstances, regarding risk factors in the short term, I am focusing especially 
on (1) the outcome of the postponed fiscal problem in the United States and (2) the possible 
destabilization  in  global  financial  markets  that  may  occur  at  around  the  time  when  the 
Federal  Reserve  reduces  the  pace  of  its  asset  purchases.  Regarding  the  first  factor,  the 
political situation in the United States continues to require vigilance. As for the second factor, 
I am concerned that, although global market participants have factored in the postponement 
of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  reduction  in  the  pace  of  its  asset  purchases,  the  timing  of  such 
reduction  is  uncertain  and  they  continue  to  speculate  on  when  the  Federal  Reserve  will 
actually make this move. 
In  the  medium  term,  I  am  concerned  about  the  recent  disinflationary  trends  and  possible 
declines  in  potential  growth  rates  both  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  A  disinflationary 
trend has recently become evident, especially in the euro area (Chart 5). As background to 
this, the fall-off of the effects of (1) the previous year’s energy price hike and (2) the increase 
in the value-added tax rate is often pointed out. Moreover, there are other factors, such as 
(1) a decline in wages seen in some peripheral countries; (2) financial institutions’ balance-
sheet  adjustments;  (3)  the  malfunctioning  of  financial  intermediation  due  to  the  decline  in 
asset prices; and (4) the sluggish economic activity, which in part reflects the effects of the 
aforementioned factors. All four of these factors are common to what Japan had experienced 
during the post-1990s period of deflation. 
Although  these  disinflationary  trends  have  exerted  some  effects  on  short-term  inflation 
expectations  so  far,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  intact.  Such 
expectations in the United States and the euro area seem to be stable at around 2 percent 
(Chart 6). In light of Japan’s experiences, however, a persistently low inflation rate entails a 
risk that people’s expectations might change, leading to a decline in medium- to long-term 
inflation  expectations  in  line  with  the  actual  inflation  rate.  Concerns  over  deflation  in  the 
United States are not yet as high as those in the euro area, but I consider it necessary to 
keep in mind the risk that not only short-term inflation expectations but also medium- to long-
term expectations for the United States might decline given that the actual inflation rate has 
recently been below the level in the Federal Reserve’s outlook, partly due to the declining 
trend in energy prices brought about by the so-called shale gas revolution. 
Regarding the potential growth rates that I have raised as another concern for the medium 
term,  it  has  been  pointed  out  from  various  quarters  that  there  is  a  possibility  of  potential 
growth rates in advanced economies being somewhat lower than those before the 1990s, in 
reflection  of  the  slowdown  in  the  pace  of  increase  in  labor  input  and  in  technological 
innovation.1 The recent growth rates in emerging economies are lower than those prior to the 
Lehman shock, and there is much argument on whether the low growth rates are caused by 
cyclical  or  structural  factors.  If  the  decline  in  the  potential  growth  rates  has  not  been 
particularly  significant,  the  current  disinflationary  trends  seen  in  the  United  States  and  the 
euro area are due to the slack persisting in production capacity and in the labor market. And 
thus  it  can  be  said  that  the  disinflationary  pressure  will  start  to  weaken  as  this  slack 
dissolves. But another interpretation is that the recent decline in the potential growth rates 
caused not only a decline in the natural rate of interest, but also a decline in the inflation rate 
that is consistent with developments in the natural rate of interest. 
As I have stated, depending on how the potential growth rates are understood, the inflation 
outlook – and consequently the implications for macroeconomic policy – can change. In this 
sense,  the  change  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  communication  regarding  the  aforementioned 
reduction  in  the  pace  of  its  asset  purchases  is  noteworthy.  Let  me  explain  this  in  detail. 
Although  the  Federal  Reserve  uses  the  unemployment  rate  and  inflation  rate  as  major 
                                                 
1  For a recent example, see Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox, “Aggregate Supply in the 
United  States:  Recent  Developments  and  Implications  for  the  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy,”  Finance  and 
Economics Discussion Series 2013–77, Federal Reserve Board, November 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
benchmarks to determine the reduction in the pace of its asset purchases, it had seemed to 
me  that,  considering  the  series  of  messages  from  the  Federal  Reserve,  it  did  not  initially 
place much emphasis on the fact that the actual inflation rate remained below the longer-run 
goal it had set. However, it caught my attention that the Federal Reserve pointed not only to 
the  general  economic  situation  and  fiscal  problem  as  the  reasons  for  postponing  the 
reduction in the pace of its asset purchases in September 2013, but also to the inflation rate 
undershooting its longer-run goal. Also, I find it interesting that the Governing Council of the 
European Central Bank (ECB) surprisingly decided to reduce its policy rates in November on 
the grounds that the inflation rate had declined by more than it expected, and that it revised 
the  price  outlook  downward.  Central  banks  in  major  economies  are  seeking  the  optimal 
policy mix in a low-inflation environment, but it looks as though they are on a path similar to 
the one that the Bank has followed for years to this point. 
Outlook for Japan’s economy 
B. 
Japan’s  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately.  While  it  will  be  affected  by  the  two 
scheduled consumption tax hikes, the economy is likely to continue growing at a pace above 
its potential, as a trend, on the assumption that the global economy will follow a moderate 
growth path (Chart 7). 
I  would  like  to  explain  this  assessment  of  the  current  situation  of  and  outlook  for  Japan’s 
economy  in  line  with  the  baseline scenario  presented  in  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity 
and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report) released on October 31, 2013. Japan’s economy 
registered high growth of around 4 percent on an annualized basis in the first half of 2013. 
This  growth  was  led  by  strong  domestic  demand;  for  example,  (1)  public  investment 
continued to increase as positive effects of various economic measures came to take hold 
fully and (2) private consumption remained resilient, reflecting an improvement in consumer 
sentiment supported by the depreciation of the yen and a rise in stock prices. According to 
the first preliminary estimate for the July-September quarter of 2013, the real GDP growth 
rate  decelerated  after  recording  high  annualized  growth  rates  of  around  4  percent  for  two 
consecutive quarters, mainly due to a decrease in exports, with private consumption being 
more or less flat on the whole. Since the turn of 2013, exports have been picking up at a 
somewhat  slower  pace,  reflecting  signs  of  weakness  observed  in  some  emerging 
economies,  and  there  has  been  a  contrast  between  the  performance  in  domestic  and 
external demand. In this regard, the current economic recovery is quite unique compared to 
the recovery phases after World War II, which typically were led by increases in exports and 
production. However, in the short term, exports are expected to increase moderately thanks 
to a pick-up in overseas economies, and domestic demand is likely to retain its resilience due 
to  the  front-loaded  increase  in  demand  prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike.  In  this  situation, 
real  GDP  growth  rates  are  expected  to  rise  again  from  the  October-December  quarter  of 
2013  through  the  January-March  quarter  of  2014,  and  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  fiscal 
2013 is expected to reach close to 3 percent. 
The growth rate for fiscal 2014 is likely to dip temporarily in the April-June quarter due to a 
decline  in  demand  subsequent  to  the  front-loaded  increase  in  the  previous  quarters. 
However, I do not expect an economic downturn such as what we experienced at the time of 
the previous consumption tax hike in 1997. This is because the current economic situation 
differs in some aspects from that of the previous tax hike. Specifically, (1) the government is 
preparing  an  economic  package  with  a  total  size  of  about  5  trillion  yen;  (2)  emerging 
economies, some of which suffered from simultaneous declines in stock prices, bond prices, 
and  in  the  value  of  their  currencies  this  year,  are  becoming  resilient  to  negative  shocks 
compared  to  1997,  when  the  Asian  currency  crisis  occurred,  due  to  the  establishment  of 
backstops  such  as  the  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves;  and  (3)  Japan’s  financial  system 
has  been  stable  as  a  whole.  Given  these  factors,  domestic  demand  is  likely  to  maintain 
firmness as external demand is expected to increase. After the second half of fiscal 2014, 
Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential  as  a  virtuous 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
cycle among production, income, and spending will be maintained. The median of the Policy 
Board members’ forecasts for fiscal 2014 remains more or less unchanged from that in the 
July 2013 interim assessment. This is because foreign and domestic factors are expected to 
offset  each  other;  while  a  decline  in  the  forecast  for  global  economic  growth,  mainly  for 
emerging economies, as shown in the IMF’s World Economic Outlook released in October 
2013,  will  exert  negative  effects  on  Japan’s  external  demand,  the  government’s  economic 
package  will  produce  positive  effects  on  the  economy.  Another  consumption  tax  hike  is 
expected  in  October  2015,  but  the  background  to  the  economic  outlook  for  fiscal  2015 
remains  basically  the  same  as  that  for  fiscal  2014,  and  the  median  of  the  Policy  Board 
members’  forecasts  for  fiscal  2015  is  unchanged  from  that  in  the  July  2013  interim 
assessment. 
It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  this  economic  outlook  is  based  on  the  assumption  that 
global financial markets will remain stable on the whole. Specifically, (1) the reduction in the 
pace  of  asset  purchases  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  which  was  postponed  once,  will  be 
smoothly  executed  and  will  not  cause  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets;  (2)  international 
commodity markets will remain stable despite retained geopolitical risks in the Middle East; 
(3) the European sovereign debt problem will not cause turbulence in the financial markets; 
and (4) the U.S. economy will not experience turmoil stemming, for example, from a long-
term  government  shutdown  or  default  on  government  debt.  If  any  of  these  assumptions 
collapses,  this  would  affect  Japan’s  economy  to  a  considerable  degree  through  turmoil  in 
global financial markets. In addition, I personally would like to keep paying close attention to 
the  possibility  of  declining  potential  growth  rates  in  major  economies,  including  the  U.S. 
economy, and the associated disinflationary trends in the U.S. and European economies. 
Outlook for prices in Japan 
C. 
As revealed in the minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, 2013, I cast a 
dissenting vote regarding the descriptions of the outlook for prices in the Outlook Report, so I 
may not be in the right position to explain the baseline scenario of the outlook for prices in 
Japan. Thus, in the following section, I would like to express my views on prices by pointing 
out the main differences between my views and the baseline scenario. 
Looking back at price developments up to the present, the year-on-year rate of change in the 
consumer  price  index  (all  items  less  fresh  food;  hereafter  prices)  has  been  moving  in  line 
with the baseline scenario against the backdrop of the depreciation of the yen, the hike in 
energy prices, and bottoming out in prices of digital appliances. Prices have already risen to 
close to 1 percent. 
However,  the  effects  of  these  factors  are  likely  to  wane  after  having  hit  the  peak  in  the 
July-September quarter of 2013, if we assume that foreign exchange rates and energy prices 
will be unchanged from the current level. Thus, even if the effects on prices of improvement 
in the output gap due to the high economic growth in the first half of 2013 appear in fiscal 
2014, it seems unrealistic to expect prices to continue rising significantly above the 1 percent 
level achieved in fiscal 2013 given the recent flattened Phillips curve (Chart 8). This is why 
my outlook for prices for fiscal 2014 and 2015 is weaker than the median of the Policy Board 
members’ forecasts. 
Of course, my cautious outlook for prices also contains upside risks. After the bursting of the 
bubble economy, Japan rarely experienced an “inflationary period” in which prices exceeded 
the 1 percent level on a year-on-year basis, except for a period of time in 2008. The cases of 
prices exceeding 1 percent were only temporary because these were examples of cost-push 
inflation caused by the depreciation of the yen and high energy prices. Accordingly, inflation 
expectations  did  not  shift  upward  at  that  time.  If  inflation  of  around  1  percent  lasts  for  a 
certain  period,  the  expectation  formation  of  households,  firms,  and  markets  might  change, 
leading  to  a  significant  upward  shift  in  inflation  expectations.  This  is  because  such 
expectations tend to be adjusted by the actual inflation rate. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This holds true in the case of relatively short-term inflation expectations, however, and it is 
highly uncertain whether a short-term rise in the actual inflation rate could affect medium- to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  (Chart  9).  On  top  of  that,  given  that  short-term  inflation 
expectations  might  have  become  stickier  due  to  the  deflation  that  has  lasted  for  nearly 
15 years, there is greater uncertainty over long-term inflation expectations. 
The  results  of  various  surveys  conducted  on  households,  firms,  economists,  and  bond 
market participants reveal a rise in their inflation expectations as a whole. However, in most 
of these surveys, it is hard to discern accurately the degree to which this is caused by the 
increasing probability of the consumption tax hikes. As for breakeven inflation (BEI) rates – 
that is, the expected inflation rates calculated from the yield differentials between fixed-rate 
and  inflation-indexed  bonds  –  my  personal  view  is  that  these  rates  are  not  necessarily 
appropriate  for  representing  the  inflation  expectations  of  Japan’s  economy  or  financial 
markets as a whole. This is because BEI rates are also susceptible to the aforementioned 
consumption tax hike problem. In addition, (1) they are possibly affected by changes in the 
liquidity risk premium on inflation-indexed bonds to a non-negligible degree due to the limited 
market  liquidity  of  those  bonds,  and  (2)  BEI  rates  are  also  affected  by  the  inflation 
expectations  of  some  foreign  investors  who  expect  a  rise  in  inflation  (Chart  10).  The  BEI 
rates of 10-year inflation-indexed bonds with a guarantee at maturity (deflation floor) issued 
from October 2013 have been around 100 basis points. It is worth noting that the BEI rates 
calculated by these bonds will remain at such a low level for the next ten years even with the 
two consumption tax hikes in 2014 and 2015 totaling 5 percentage points. 
Regarding  upside  risks  to  the  price  outlook,  I  am  paying  close  attention  to  wage 
developments  as  well.  Labor  unions  tend  to  put  emphasis  on  maintaining  their  employee 
headcount rather than increasing wages. Given this, it is a striking change to see both the 
progress of three-way discussions among the government, employers, and labor unions and 
the evidence that some business leaders who are influential in industry have recently taken a 
positive stance toward raising base salaries, reflecting the government’s persuasive efforts. It 
is  an  important  first  step  for  the  discussions  to  work  as  a  catalyst  to  change  the  negative 
expectations that “wages will not increase” into positive ones. 
However, in order to change people’s expectations, it is important that an increase in base 
salaries should not merely be a one-time event but continue for several years, and/or that 
people  form  expectations  for  such  a  continuation.  Taking  into  consideration  the  structural 
downward pressure on scheduled cash earnings that stems from the recent increase in the 
number of part-time employees who work for short hours and the rising trend in the ratio of 
part-time employees to total employment, it is doubtful whether a rise in base salaries, mainly 
of full-time employees at some large firms, will constitute a significant wage rate hike from a 
macroeconomic  viewpoint  (Chart  11).  Some  statistics  show  that  the  share  of  large  firms’ 
personnel  expenses  to  total  personnel  expenses  accounted  for  only  about  25  percent  in 
Japan as of fiscal 2012 (Chart 12). 
It  is  also  worth  mentioning  the  image  of  the  labor  market  if  wages  were  to  increase 
considerably  in  Japan,  even  if  such  increases  are  made  mostly  by  large  firms.  The  wage 
Phillips curves for Japan and the United States – with the unemployment rate on the x-axis 
and the wage inflation rate on the y-axis – imply the possible changes that could occur in the 
labor market when wages increase considerably in Japan (Chart 13). 
Generally speaking, in the United States, if employment adjustments are needed, firms cut 
their employee headcount instead of wages in order to close unprofitable businesses in an 
expedient  manner.  As  a  result,  nominal  wages  continue  to  grow  at  a  rate  of  about  2–4 
percent  irrespective  of  the  phase  of  the  economic  cycle,  and  the  U.S.  economy  has  a 
structure that makes it hard to fall into deflation, since excess labor supply is unlikely to be 
maintained.  In  Japan,  on  the  contrary,  employment  adjustments  through  dismissals  have 
been  limited  so  far,  and  adjustments  in  personnel  expenses  have  been  executed  mostly 
through  wage  reductions.  This  means  that  the  Japanese  labor  market  has  a  structure 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
whereby  the  consolidation  and  reorganization  of  inefficient  businesses  tend  to  take  longer 
and the share of labor in income distribution tends to remain at a high level; this slows the 
economy’s  metabolism  and  allows  excess  labor  supply  to  be  retained.  Thus,  in  Japan, 
sharing the cost of employment adjustments thinly and broadly in the labor market seems to 
be a factor of mild deflation. 
In  order  to  realize  sustainable  increases  in  base  salaries  in  Japan  regardless  of  the 
economic situation, business leaders should be aware that they will have to face an increase 
in  fixed  costs,  particularly  during  a  recession.  This  might  increase  their  incentives  to  cut 
employees, although not as drastically as in the United States, to realize increases in base 
salaries and avoid a rise in fixed costs at the same time. As a consequence, these moves 
might  lead  to  an  increase  in  volatility  in  the  unemployment  rate.  In  this  case,  the  wage 
Phillips curve for Japan may flatten as in the United States; that is, increases in fixed costs 
might be adjusted using the employee headcount rather than wages. 
Taking  into  account  these  points,  sustainable  increases  in  nominal  wages  may  raise  the 
inflation  expectations  of  households, 
turn  people’s 
deflationary mindset toward positive inflation expectations, and lead to overcoming deflation 
becoming more likely. At the same time, however, it should be noted that the social cost of 
employment  adjustments  might  increase  due  to  heightened  volatility  in  the  unemployment 
rate. There is no free lunch, because an increase in wages boils down to the problem of how 
to  distribute  national  income  between  compensation  of  employees  and  operating  surplus. 
Economic  growth  is  therefore  indispensable  to  raising  wages  in  a  society  as  a  whole 
(Chart 14). 
firms,  and  market  participants, 
III. 
Recent conduct of monetary policy 
Pursuing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
A. 
It  has  been  eight  months  since  the  Bank  introduced  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary 
easing  (QQE)  on  April  4,  2013.  Since  then,  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices  have 
basically followed the expected path, in line with the baseline scenario in the Outlook Report. 
It  should  be  noted  that,  although  price  developments  have  started  to  become  upbeat,  the 
inflation rate has only risen to close to 1 percent. Given the downside risks that I mentioned 
earlier, we are only halfway to realizing the price stability target. The Bank will continue with 
QQE steadily, with the aim of achieving the price stability target of 2 percent (Chart 15). 
With  regard  to  the  relationship  between  the  economic  outlook  and  monetary  policy,  the 
median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for economic activity provided in the October 
2013  Outlook  Report  factors  in  the  effect  of  the  two  scheduled  consumption  tax  hikes. 
Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  continue  to  see  high  growth  at  a  pace  above  its  potential 
through  fiscal  2014  and  2015,  even  taking  into  account  temporary  declines  due  to  the 
consumption tax hikes. As long as the effect of the consumption tax hikes on the real side of 
the economy is projected to be just a temporary swing in demand and within the scope of the 
Bank’s expectations, the Bank will not have to launch any additional preemptive measures. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  relationship  between  the  price  outlook  and  monetary  policy.  There  is  a 
large gap between the baseline scenario in the Outlook Report and market consensus, and 
many  market  participants  seem  to  be  expecting  that  a  future  downward  revision  to  the 
baseline  scenario  will  trigger  further  strengthening  of  the  monetary  easing.  It  might  not  be 
appropriate  for  a  policymaker  to  make  comments  on  every  single  view  held  by  market 
participants, but let me say just a few words to avoid any misunderstanding. The Bank does 
not assume a particular linear path toward reaching the 2 percent inflation rate. For example, 
the 1.3 percent inflation rate, which is the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for 
fiscal 2014 presented in the Outlook Report, is not an intermediate target toward achieving 
the  2  percent  target.  It  should  also  be  noted  that,  with  implementation  of  QQE,  the  Bank 
intends to shift people's expectations via a marked change in its monetary policy through an 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
initial bold move, after which it would adopt a wait-and-see stance to carefully monitor the 
permeation of policy effects. This means that the Bank is breaking away from the incremental 
approach adopted under the comprehensive monetary easing. That being said, I understand 
that this is the time to carefully monitor the emergence of policy effects, taking account of the 
future economic and price conditions. 
It should also be noted that, on April 4, the Bank took all possible policy measures that would 
be  available  for  the  time  being.  Therefore,  additional  easing  measures,  if  any,  could  be 
counterproductive  in  terms  of  shifting  people’s  expectations.  It  is  true  that  the  Bank  has 
reiterated in its statement released after Monetary Policy Meetings that it “will examine both 
upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  make  adjustments  as 
appropriate.” My understanding is that the downside risks described here refer to tail risks, 
including significant turbulence in global financial markets that would be comparable to the 
Lehman  shock  and  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis,  and  do  not  concern  such  trivial 
matters  as  a  small  divergence  of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  from  the 
baseline scenario. 
Price stability target and conduct of monetary policy 
B. 
Although I cast a dissenting vote on the introduction of the price stability target at the January 
2013  Monetary  Policy  Meeting,  I  have  approved  of  the  policy  commitment  regarding  the 
target  since  April,  with  the  exception  of  the  description  of  the  price  outlook  in  the  Outlook 
Report. This is because I understand that the price stability target should be regarded as a 
flexible framework, and that it is not necessary to consider 2 percent as a rigid target. 
Let me elaborate on this point. As noted in the policy statement, “the Bank will continue with 
quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing,  aiming  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner.” In terms 
of  “aiming  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target”  and  “maintaining  that  target  in  a  stable 
manner,” it is almost impossible to stably maintain the inflation rate specifically at 2 percent, 
given  the  time  lag  required  for  the  permeation  of  monetary  policy  effects  and  uncertainty 
regarding such permeation. Rather, the 2 percent price stability target should be regarded as 
a  flexible  concept  in  which  there  is  an  allowance  for  a  certain  range  for  upward  and 
downward deviations of the actual inflation rate from the target, similar to other central banks' 
frameworks of inflation targeting. In this regard, the Bank does not intend just to achieve the 
2 percent price stability target at all costs, but instead aims to bring about a situation where 
the national economy achieves sound development and prices rise moderately in a balanced 
manner  as  improvement  in  the  employment  situation  brings  wage  hikes.  I  understand  that 
the  2  percent  price  stability  target  should  be  regarded  as  representing  such  a  desirable 
situation. 
Challenges related to forward guidance 
C. 
As any policy is accompanied by both pros and cons, a policy is carried out based on the 
judgment  that  the  former  will  surpass  the  latter.  Similarly,  as  shown  in  the  minutes  of  the 
Monetary Policy Meeting on April 3 and 4, 2013, QQE was decided after carefully weighing 
the  associated  pros  and  cons.  This  weighing  reflects  the  subjective  value  judgments,  and 
therefore  some  who  put  emphasis  on  the  adverse  effects  of  QQE  criticize  it  as  reckless 
because  it  was  decided  without  discussions  on  an  exit  strategy.  Others  point  out  that  the 
Bank  should  explain  more  clearly  the  path  to  an  exit  –  that  is,  provide  clearer  forward 
guidance. 
Although these criticisms and comments are somewhat understandable, one of the purposes 
of QQE is to shift people’s expectations, which had been diminished by the chronic deflation. 
Discussions  on  an  exit  strategy  at  this  point  could  lead  to  a  contradiction  of  this  policy 
intention.  In  other  words,  discussing  an  exit  strategy  when  launching  a  new  policy  could 
create the same situation as making fire with one hand while at the same time extinguishing 
it with the other. It should also be noted that, as evidenced by the Federal Reserve’s decision 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
in September 2013 to postpone the reduction in the pace of its asset purchases, efforts to 
enhance  policy  transparency  and  secure  policy  flexibility  may  create  a  tradeoff.  That  is, 
improving  transparency  does  not  necessarily  yield  desirable  results.  Rather,  too  much 
information from a central bank might be difficult for market participants to digest, and could 
eliminate  the  central  bank’s  flexibility  in  responding  to  a  change  in  economic  and  price 
conditions. Based on this idea, I am of the position that the Bank should show its guidance in 
a flexible and appropriate manner in response to changes in the outlook for economic and 
price conditions. 
I should note that the Bank’s current attempt – namely, aiming to achieve the 2 percent price 
stability target within about two years to overcome deflation – is unprecedented. This attempt 
to  push  up  the  inflation  rate  within  a  fixed  timeframe  is  completely  different  from  the 
conventional philosophy of forward guidance, which expects to influence longer-term interest 
rates  by  committing  to  continuing  monetary  easing  as  long  as  necessary  and  thereby 
bringing forward future demand. Thus, it is not appropriate to categorize the Bank’s current 
monetary policy as “traditional” forward guidance, as currently implemented by other central 
banks such as the Federal Reserve and the ECB (Chart 16). 
In  addition, 
time 
inconsistency problem) – that is, even if a central bank commits to continuing the policy as 
long as necessary, this commitment might be broken at some point. The notable example is 
that  global  financial  markets  became  unstable  after  Chairman  Bernanke  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  indicated  a  specific  schedule  for  reducing  the  pace  of  its  asset  purchases  in  late 
May  2013.  In  this  regard,  other  major  central  banks  that  adopt  unconventional  monetary 
policies  are  facing  new  challenges  as  to  how  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  their  forward 
guidance.  That  is  to  say,  these  central  banks  will  keep  trying  to  determine  what  kind  of 
commitment  is  needed  to  make  the  public  and  market  participants  believe  that  such 
commitment will be fulfilled. 
inconsistency  problem  (or 
forward  guidance  entails 
the  dynamic 
Toward accumulating the monetary base 
D. 
The Bank has disclosed its monetary base target and balance sheet projections up until the 
end of 2014 as part of its efforts to achieve the price stability target with a time horizon of 
about  two  years.  According  to  the  projections,  the  expected  amounts  outstanding  of  the 
monetary  base  and  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  at  the  end  of  2014  are  around 
270 trillion yen and around 190 trillion yen, respectively. The amounts outstanding of both the 
monetary base and JGBs have been accumulated almost in line with the Bank’s projections, 
and  they  are  within  range  of  reaching  the  amounts  projected  for  the  end  of  2013,  to 
200 trillion yen and 140 trillion yen, respectively (Chart 17). 
However,  whether  or  not  the  Bank  will  be  able  to  accumulate  the  target  amount  of  the 
monetary  base  as  expected  depends  on  the  stance  of  financial  institutions  with  regard  to 
making bids for the Bank’s market operations. This stance could change, reflecting not only 
economic  factors,  such  as  economic  and  financial  developments  as  well  as  current  and 
future levels of interest rates, but also non-economic factors; for example, the extent to which 
financial institutions are allowed to increase their current account deposits at the Bank from 
the  viewpoint  of  their  investor  relations  policies.  Therefore,  there  is  substantial  uncertainty 
over the future accumulation of the monetary base in a situation where financial institutions 
already hold huge amounts of excess reserves at the Bank. Moreover, this uncertainty will 
heighten  as  the  level  of  excess  reserves  increases.  In  other  words,  QQE  is  not  a  kind  of 
monetary  policy  that  can  be  continued  forever.  Despite  these  difficulties,  the  Bank  will 
address  any  challenges  and  accumulate  the  amount  outstanding  of  the  monetary  base  to 
accomplish  the  commitment  it  announced  on  April  4,  2013.  I  appreciate  your  kind 
understanding regarding the Bank’s efforts. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
Lastly, I would like to touch on economic activities in southern Hokkaido. This region is rich in 
tourism resources including Hakodate, a popular tourist destination in Japan, as well as Lake 
Onuma at the base of Hokkaido-Komagatake, which is one of the so-called new three views 
of  Japan.  There  is  also  a  fishing  ground  –  one  of  the  major  grounds  in  Japan  –  that  is 
surrounded by four bodies of water: the Sea of Japan, Tsugaru Strait, the Pacific Ocean, and 
Funka  Bay.  Southern  Hokkaido  is  also  blessed  with  mild  weather  compared  with  other 
regions  in  Hokkaido,  owing  to  the  warm  ocean  currents.  Taking  advantage  of  these  rich 
resources, this region has a competitive edge in tourism, fishery, and agricultural industries. 
The  manufacturing  sector,  which  includes  (1)  seafood  processing  that  utilizes  marine 
resources; (2) ceramics, stone, and clay products taken from limestone quarries; and (3) a 
shipbuilding  industry  with  the  largest  dock  in  Hokkaido,  also  underpins  the  economy  by 
making the most of the regional characteristics. 
At the same time, I hear that the economy of southern Hokkaido faces the challenges of an 
aging  population  and  a  population  drain  from  the  region,  and  thus  developing  a  growth 
strategy that takes advantage of regional strengths and implementing such strategy promptly 
have  been  urgent  matters.  Efforts  in  this  regard  are  already  underway,  such  as  attracting 
foreign visitors from other Asian countries, hosting various conventions and events that make 
the most of regional characteristics, activating the urban district of Hakodate, and developing 
a  support  system  for  exporting  high-quality  agricultural  and  marine  products.  In  the 
meantime, the start of operations for the Hokkaido Shinkansen line in fiscal 2015 is expected 
to have a large impact on the region’s economy. To take advantage of this opportunity, the 
private and public sectors have already started making joint efforts to promote the tourism 
industry with a view to fostering future cooperation with Aomori Prefecture. 
In the medium- to long-term perspective, there have already been discussions about creating 
new industries and employment, such as (1) research regarding the marine energy business 
that  utilizes  the  tidal  currents  of  Tsugaru  Strait  and  (2)  the  Hakodate  Marine  Bio  Cluster 
program – a joint project by industries, government, and academia to enhance the value of 
marine resources in the region through technological innovations. To support these efforts, it 
is encouraging that financial institutions in this area are actively engaged not only in financing 
but also in providing solutions, such as business matching services. I hope each effort based 
on  your  ingenuity  and  hard  work  bears  fruit,  and  that  southern  Hokkaido  will  achieve 
prolonged economic growth. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19
    20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21
  22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23
 24 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 25
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 