Raghuram Rajan: The five Pillars of Reserve Bank of India’s financial 
sector policies 
Speech  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan, Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of India,  at  Bancon  2013, 
Mumbai, 15 November 2013. 
 is 
through 
and  well-connected 
also  well-educated,  well-fed, 
Good  evening.  I  thank  the  organisers  for  inviting  me.  These  are  challenging  times  for  the 
Indian  economy,  but  I  have  dwelt  on  those  near-term  challenges  elsewhere.  Let  me  turn 
instead  to  the  opportunities  we  have  to  make  India  a  far  better  place  than  it  is  today, 
focussing in particular on finance. 
Much of the world is ageing, facing the demographic tax of having to pay for an increasingly 
elderly population with a shrinking work force. Much of the world has run out of easy paths to 
growth. Having built infrastructure everywhere and exploited natural resources to their fullest, 
many  countries  are  left  with  building  bridges  to  nowhere  to  stimulate  growth.  Much  of  the 
world 
roads, 
telecommunications,  and  finance.  India  is  unlike  the  rest  of  the  world.  Our  population  is 
young, our infrastructure inadequate, and too many Indians are poorly educated, poorly fed, 
and poorly connected. But this is precisely why our low-hanging opportunities for betterment 
are plentiful in the coming years. All we need to do is to pluck them. 
So if it is so easy, why are we not there already? This is an important question, but I don’t 
want to go into the political economy of underdevelopment today. Suffice it to say that India 
is battling the internal interests that held it back in the past. While victory is not assured, we 
have made sufficient progress that we can look ahead to what we need to do in the next few 
years to put ourselves firmly back on the path of strong and sustainable growth. 
Some would say we need to focus on manufacturing. Others point to the industries we do not 
have,  such  as  electronics  or  computer  chips,  and  say  that  is  what  we  need.  Echoes  of 
industrial  planning  seem  to  be  heard  once  again  in  the  corridors  of  power.  I  am  worried 
because  we  seem  to  be  reverting  to  a  dialogue  of  protection  and  subsidies  that  we  left 
behind long ago. Our industrial sector is no longer an infant that needs to be molly-coddled. 
While  we  should  not  enter  into  free-trade  agreements  that  give  foreign  manufacturers  an 
undue advantage, that is no reason for us to now respond by giving domestic manufacturers 
protection. We  must  remember  that  one  domestic  producer’s  advantage  from  protectionist 
profits  is  paid  for  by  the  consumer,  or  shows  up  as  another  domestic  producer’s  cost 
disadvantage. 
Instead of targetting specific industries for governmental attention, which risks bringing back 
all the baggage of the Licence Permit Raj that we have left behind, let us focus on improving 
the conditions for growth for all. Our measure of success should be the jobs that are created, 
not  by  giving  government  subsidies  or  protections  to  labour-intensive  industries  or  sectors 
but  by  developing  a  facilitating,  though  competitive,  environment  that  will  result  in  the 
emergence of the best solutions. 
This requires a disciplined focus on four issues: 
1. 
We need to improve the quality of our infrastructure, especially the logistical support 
and power that industry and services need. Grand plans are on the anvil, such as, 
the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor. We need to complete such projects on time, 
and within budget. The success of the New Delhi Metro suggests that timeliness and 
cost control are not foreign to the Indian psyche. 
Our youth need education and training for the jobs that will be created. Some of this 
will  be  higher  degrees,  not  just  computer  science  but  also  design  or  civil 
engineering. Some of it will be appropriate vocational education that teaches them 
2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
3. 
4. 
to  be  good  plumbers  and  electricians  rather  than  unemployable  low-skilled 
engineers.  Teaching  our  citizens  can  be  a  stepping  stone  to  teaching  the  world. 
India can be at the forefront of providing mass technology-enabled education laced 
with appropriate human inputs to the world. 
We need better business regulation. This does not always mean less regulation but 
it means regulation that is appropriate to the objective and that is enforced. I am told 
that factories in one state are still required to have a snake trap on the factory floor 
by law, a law that has not been changed since the days factories were surrounded 
by  jungles.  The  lack  of  change  may  be  sheer  inertia,  but  it  may  be  more  sinister 
rent-seeking. All too often, we have too much regulation on the books and too little 
regulation  in  practice,  with  the  worst  of  the  regulated  finding  unscrupulous  ways 
around the regulation while the honest are stymied. 
We have strong labour laws in theory that are meant to protect employees, but in 
practice we have a very flexible system with no incentive for firms to invest in their 
workers  or  hold  on  to  them,  and  no  loyalty  towards  the  firms  from  workers.  This 
needs to change if we are to have more skilled manufacturing jobs. 
And  finally,  we  need  a  better  financial  system,  which  will  finance  the  needed 
infrastructure  and  the  expansion  of  every  producer  ranging  from  the  kirana  shop 
owner to the industrialist even as it allows households to save safely with positive 
real  returns,  insure  themselves  against  health  emergencies  or  old  age  costs,  and 
borrow at low cost to finance consumption. Importantly, the financial system should 
not require constant subsidies to bail it out. 
Five pillars of RBI's developmental measures 
In the rest of this talk, I want to focus on what we at the Reserve Bank are doing to improve 
the financial system. We plan to build the Reserve Bank’s developmental measures over the 
next few quarters on five pillars. These are: 
1. 
2. 
Clarifying and strengthening the monetary policy framework. 
Strengthening banking structure through new entry, branch expansion, encouraging 
new  varieties  of  banks,  and  moving 
into  better  regulated 
organisational forms. 
Broadening  and  deepening  financial  markets  and  increasing  their  liquidity  and 
resilience so that they can help allocate and absorb the risks entailed in financing 
India’s growth. 
Expanding  access  to  finance  to  small  and  medium  enterprises,  the  unorganised 
sector,  the  poor,  and  remote  and  underserved  areas  of  the  country  through 
technology, new business practices, and new organisational structures; that is, we 
need financial inclusion. 
Improving the system’s ability to deal with corporate distress and financial institution 
distress by strengthening real and financial restructuring as well as debt recovery. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
foreign  banks 
Let me elaborate on each of these measures a little. 
First, we are among the large countries with the highest consumer price inflation in the world, 
even  though  growth  is  weaker  than  we  would  like  it  to  be.  Much  of  the  inflation  is 
concentrated  in  food  and  services.  Our  households  are  turning  to  gold  because  they  find 
financial  investments  unattractive.  At  the  same  time,  many  industrial  corporations  are 
complaining about high interest rates because they cannot pass through their higher costs 
into higher prices for their products. 
We  can  spend  a  long  time  debating  the  sources  of  this  inflation.  But  ultimately,  inflation 
comes  from  demand  exceeding  supply,  and  it  can  be  curtailed  only  by  bringing  both  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
balance. We need to reduce demand somewhat without having serious adverse effects on 
investment and supply. This is a balancing act, which requires the Reserve Bank to act firmly 
so that the economy is disinflating, even while allowing the weak economy more time than 
one would normally allow for it to reach a comfortable level of inflation. The weak state of the 
economy,  as  well  as  the  good  Kharif  and  Rabi  harvest,  will  generate  disinflationary forces 
that will help, and we await data to see how these forces are playing out. No single data point 
or number will determine our next move. 
I think the market understands what we are trying to do. But we do need a more carefully 
spelled out monetary policy framework than we have currently. Action on the framework will 
follow the submission of the Dr. Urjit Patel Committee report, which is expected to submit its 
report by end December 2013. 
Second,  we  have  already  announced  measures to free  bank  branching, and  to  incentivise 
foreign banks to incorporate domestically. Going forward, we have to give our public sector 
banks,  which  are  a  national  asset,  the  means  to  improve  their  competitiveness.  Many  of 
them have made enormous strides in the last decade – for instance, the extent to which they 
have  digitised  their  operations  is  extremely  praiseworthy  –  but  because  competition  in  the 
banking sector is likely to increase in the next few years, they cannot rest on their laurels. In 
the  coming  months,  we  will  discuss  with  stakeholders  in  public  sector  banks  about  what 
needs to be done to further improve their stability, efficiency and productivity. 
Third, we need to enlist markets in the aid of banking. Liquid markets will help banks offload 
risks they should not bear, such as interest rate or exchange risk. They will also allow banks 
to sell assets that they have no comparative advantage in holding, such as long term loans to 
completed  infrastructure  projects,  which  are  better  held  by  infrastructure  funds,  pension 
funds,  and  insurance  companies.  Liquid  markets  will  help  promoters  raise  equity  which  is 
sorely  needed  in  the  Indian  economy  to  absorb  the  risks  that  banks  otherwise  end  up 
absorbing. Rather than seeing markets as being inimical to the development of the banking 
sector,  we  have  to  see  them  as  complementary  –  of  course,  this  requires  you  bankers  to 
build on your risk management capabilities so that you can use markets effectively. 
In the coming weeks, we will roll out more recommendations of the Gandhi Committee report 
to improve the liquidity and depth of the G-Sec market. We will then turn to money markets 
and  corporate  debt  markets.  We  will  introduce  new  variants  of  interest  rate  futures  and 
products like inflation indexed certificates, and work to improve liquidity in derivative markets. 
Fourth,  we  have  to  reach  everyone,  however  remote  or  small,  with  financial  services. 
Financial  inclusion  does  not  just  mean  credit  for  productive  purposes,  it  means  credit  for 
healthcare emergencies or to pay lumpy school or college fees. It means a safe means of 
remunerated  savings,  and  an  easy  way  to  make  payments  and  remittances.  It  means 
insurance and pensions. It means financial literacy and consumer protection. 
We have made great strides in inclusion, but we are still some distance from our goal. We 
have  adopted  a  branch  based  strategy  for  inclusion,  but  it  is  not  enough.  Too  many  poor 
people in so-called “over-banked” urban areas still do not have access to banking services. 
We  have  many  experiments  under  way  to  use  technology,  mobile  phones,  new  products 
such as mobile wallets, and new entities as business correspondents to link people up to the 
formal financial system. Much as with cell phones where we created a frugal Indian model, 
we  need  a  frugal,  trustworthy,  and  effective  Indian  model  for  financial  inclusion.  The 
Dr. Nachiket Mor Committee is helping us think through possible models, and I am hopeful 
that when we outline measures based on its recommendations, our fine banks, NBFCs, IT 
companies and mobile players will rise to the occasion. At a more detailed level, we have set 
up  committees  like  the  Sambamurthy  Committee  to  advise  us  on  how  to  expand  mobile 
banking in India through encrypted SMS based funds transfer in any type of handset. 
I  should  emphasise  the  need  for  banks  like  the  ones  represented  in  this  room  to  move 
beyond  simply  opening  bank  accounts  to  ensuring  that  poor  customers  are  confident  and 
comfortable  enough  to use  them.  Innovation  in reaching  out  to the  underserved  customer, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
rather than simply posting higher numbers in branches or bank accounts opened, has to be 
part of our efforts. 
And last but not least, with have to deal better with distress; The natural, and worst, way for a 
bank  management  with  limited  tenure  to  deal  with  distress  is  to  “extend  and  pretend”  to 
evergreen the loan, hope it recovers by miracle, or that one’s successor has to deal with it. 
The natural incentive for a promoter to deal with distress is to hold on to equity and control 
despite  having  no  real  equity  left,  and  to  stand  in  the  way  of  all  efforts  to  resolve  the 
underlying  project  while  hoping  for  an  ‘Act  of  God’  to  bail  him  out.  Not  all  bankers  and 
promoters succumb to these natural incentives but too many do. 
We have to ensure that the system recognises financial distress early, takes steps to resolve 
it, and ensures fair recovery for lenders and investors. We could wish for a more effective 
judicial process or a better bankruptcy system, but while we await that, we have to improve 
the  functioning  of  what  we  have.  In  the  next  few  weeks,  we  will  announce  measures  to 
incentivise early recognition, better resolution, and fair recovery of distressed loans. We will 
focus on putting real assets back to work in their best use. Here again, you bankers have a 
critical role to play by fighting the natural incentives that are built in to the system. You have 
to  help  those  with  genuine  difficulty  while  being  firm  with  those  who  are  trying  to  milk  the 
system. The RBI will help you with every means at our disposal. 
Let me conclude. We are going through a period of great cynicism about what India can do. 
That cynicism does not just permeate the foreign press and their audiences, but also infects 
our domestic debate. Every policy is greeted with suspicion and scrutinised for evidence of 
malfeasance. With no upside to making decisions, it is no wonder that decision making has 
slowed. The solution, however, cannot come through inaction but through action, action that 
is, and is seen to be, purposeful, unbiased, and effective. No doubt mistakes will be made, 
but  if  the  weight  of  clean  actions  builds  up,  the  miasma  of  suspicion  that  pervades  our 
society  today  will  ebb.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  intends  to  play  its  part  in  making  this 
happen. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
