Guy Debelle: Remarks on liquidity 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, Sydney, 17 December 2013. 
 Thank you to Fari for again organising a good conference. 
Today I will make a few points about liquidity. I have spoken about this on a number of other 
occasions, but one year out from the Basel III liquidity regime becoming fully operational, it is 
timely to do so again.1  
Why do we have liquidity regulation? 
The fundamental answer is that banks engage in maturity transformation. They borrow short 
and lend long. This is a service which society values. 
There is a demand for banks to provide liquidity services. Depositors place their savings with 
a bank but want to be able to withdraw some part of their funds at short notice. A corporate 
treasurer  wants  to  have  the  company’s  funds  in  an  account  where  they  can  be  accessed 
quickly to meet the needs of the firm. 
At  the  same  time,  we  prefer  to  have  our  loans  for  substantially  longer  periods  of  time.  It 
would be particularly inefficient and bothersome if we had to renegotiate our home loan on a 
monthly  basis.  More  importantly,  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  make  any  sort  of  long-term 
planning or investment decision if there were no long-term loans available. 
This desire for liquidity on the one hand and long-term lending on the other is intermediated 
by the financial sector and the banking sector in particular. But the maturity transformation 
this  entails  exposes  the  banking  sector  to  liquidity  risk.  If  all  the  depositors  wanted  their 
money  back  in  a  hurry,  the  bank  would  not  be  able  to  meet  that  obligation  without  either 
calling in their loans, which may be contractually impossible, or trying to sell them. The latter 
is often practically impossible to do at short notice, or even if it is possible, may only be able 
to be carried out by selling the assets (such as loan portfolios) at fire-sale prices. Neither of 
those outcomes is socially desirable. 
Fire sales run the risk of generating contagion to other financial institutions as the price of the 
asset  falls,  as  they  may  well  hold  that  same  asset  too,  and/or  may  use  it  as  collateral  in 
transactions themselves. Fire sales also limit the ability of the institution making the sale to 
make good on its obligations. So there are externalities to the asset that is being sold, as well 
as to the financial system as a whole. 
Liquidity regulation addresses this issue by ensuring that the banking system has some level 
of liquidity at hand to meet predictable liquidity demands. In the case of Basel III, banks need 
to have available sufficient liquidity to meet a 30-day stress scenario. In simple terms, a bank 
must have enough liquid assets that can be easily liquefied (not at fire-sale prices) to meet 
any  of  its  liabilities  that  fall  due  within  that  30-day  period.  In  Basel  III,  these  assets  are 
labelled high-quality liquid assets (HQLA).  
                                                
1  See Debelle G (2013), “The Impact of Payments System and Prudential Reforms on the RBA’s Provision of 
Liquidity”,  Address  to  the  Australian  Financial  Markets  Association  and  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  Briefing, 
Sydney,  16  August.  Also  see  Stein  J  (2013),  “Liquidity  Regulation  and  Central  Banking”,  Speech  at  the 
“Finding  the  Right  Balance”  2013  Credit  Markets  Symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Richmond,  Charlotte,  North  Carolina,  19  April.  Available  at  <http://www.federalreserve.gov/ 
newsevents/speech/stein20130419a.htm>;  Coeuré  B  (2013),  “Liquidity  Regulation  and  Monetary  Policy 
Implementation  –  From  Theory  to  Practice”,  Speech  at  the  Toulouse  School  of  Economics,  Toulouse,  3 
October. Available at <http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2013/html/sp131003.en.html>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This implies that more liquid liabilities, those with less than 30 days to maturity, will be more 
costly for the bank to provide. Hence, one would expect to see an increase in the cost to the 
customer of obtaining that liquidity service. We have seen this start to occur in Australia as 
the implementation date of Basel III, 1 January 2015, comes into sight. But my sense is that 
there is more of this repricing still to come. As I have said before, the rate of return available 
on at-call accounts does not seem to sufficiently reflect the cost to the bank of providing such 
liquidity.  Maybe  we  will  have  to  wait  for  31  December  2014  for  this  to  occur,  as  there  is 
potentially a large first-mover disadvantage from being the first to reprice the product. The 
lower  interest  rate  is  likely  to  see  customers  move  rapidly  to  a  competitor  who  has  yet  to 
reprice. In the online account world, the transactions costs of switching are very low, and the 
evidence is that the response rate to small interest rate differentials is rapid. 
While there may be more repricing to come, it is worth mentioning that as part of the Basel III 
liquidity  standards,  banks  are  required  to  demonstrate  to  APRA  that  they  have  an 
appropriate liquidity transfer pricing model. APRA is conducting a trial run of the new liquidity 
regime  over  the  coming  year  and  one  might  expect  these  new  liquidity  pricing  models  to 
come into effect as part of that. This will affect not just deposit pricing but pricing on the other 
side of the balance sheet, namely loans, as well. It will have a particular impact on contingent 
facilities such as lines of credit. 
To return to the issue of HQLA for a minute. As most of you are aware, there is a shortage of 
HQLA in Australia. The stock of government debt on issue, both Commonwealth and state, is 
well short of the liquidity needs of the banking system. Hence, as part of the liquidity regime, 
the Reserve Bank will be offering banks access to a Committed Liquidity Facility (CLF). For a 
fee,  the  Reserve  Bank  will  make  available  sufficient  liquidity  (against  eligible  collateral)  to 
address the shortfall of HQLA beyond the banking system’s holdings of Commonwealth and 
state government debt. The motivation for doing so reflects the societal gains that I talked 
about  earlier  from  the  banking  system  engaging  in  an  appropriate  amount  of  maturity 
transformation. The pricing of the CLF is aimed at replicating the cost of holding HQLA in the 
form  of  government  debt.  That  is,  it  is  designed  to  be  the  same  as  the  liquidity  premium 
embedded in government paper. 
The fact that  there  is  a cost to the  banking system  of  holding  HQLA,  either  in  the form of 
government debt or in the fee paid to have access to the CLF, is in keeping with one of the 
main  motivations  of  the  Basel  III  liquidity  regime,  namely  that  banks  engage  in  the 
appropriate amount of maturity transformation. Generally speaking, liquidity was underpriced 
prior to 2007 with the result that excessive maturity transformation was undertaken, manifest 
in some cases in highly unstable short-term funding structures. The new liquidity regulation 
increases  the  cost  of  liquidity,  but  it  is  not  designed  to  increase  the  cost  so  much  that 
insufficient maturity transformation is undertaken from society’s point of view. 
Having talked about liquidity from the banking system’s point of view, I will finish with a few 
thoughts on liquidity in the superannuation (pension) system. In many ways, liquidity issues 
in  the  super  sector  are very  similar  to  those  in the  banking  sector. While  the super  sector 
generally  thinks  of  itself  as  being  in  the  asset  management  business,  it  is  obviously  very 
much  in  the  intermediation  business.  It  takes  in  savings  and  then  invests  them  in  a  wide 
array of assets. 
Because  of  the  portability  of  super  accounts  as  well  as  the  ability  of  superannuants  to 
change  their  asset  allocation  at  relatively  short  notice,  the  super  sector  is  also  in  the 
business of maturity transformation. Some, potentially unknown, share of its liabilities may be 
called on at short notice. But some of its assets are long-dated and not easily liquefied at 
short notice, or if they can be, only at fire-sale prices. 
As with banks, society values the maturity transformation that the super sector undertakes, 
particularly in terms of the funds it provides for longer-lived projects. But as with the banking 
system,  there  is  an  optimal  degree  of  maturity  transformation  and  an  optimal  amount  of 
liquidity to be held. It is desirable that super funds don’t hold all their assets in highly liquid 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
form for the fear that all of its members may withdraw their funds all at once, just as banks 
don’t put all their assets in liquid form for the fear that a bank run might occur. But at the 
same time, it is not desirable for all of a super fund’s assets to be invested in highly illiquid 
assets. 
To  some  extent,  the  super  sector’s  relatively  large  allocation  to  equities,  which  are,  in 
principle, easily liquefied, but relatively small allocation to fixed income, which is not easily 
liquefied, may reflect some of these liquidity considerations. 
But at the heart of it, these liquidity management issues are very similar to those facing a 
bank. I think many of the principles of liquidity management translate from the banking sector 
to the super sector, although I have the sense that this is not yet fully appreciated.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
