Rodrigo Vergara: Global liquidity, spillovers to emerging markets and 
policy responses 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Rodrigo  Vergara,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the 
XVII Annual Conference on “Central banking, analysis and economic policies” of the Central 
Bank of Chile, Santiago de Chile, 14 November 2013. 
 I thank Claudio Raddatz, Luis Oscar Herrera, and Consuelo Edwards for helpful comments. 
Good morning. Welcome to the Central Bank of Chile’s Seventeenth Annual Conference on 
Central  Banking,  Analysis  and  Economic  Policies.  This  year,  our  conference  focuses  on 
“Global Liquidity, Spillovers to Emerging Markets and Policy Responses”. You will probably 
agree with me that this is a very timely topic. 
The  global  financial  crisis  that  started  in  2008  prompted  a  quick  and  decisive  reaction  of 
monetary  authorities  around  the  world.  The  central  banks  of  most  countries  soon  slashed 
interest rates to boost their economies, and implemented various types of facilities to inject 
liquidity  into  troubled  financial  markets.  However,  while  most  emerging  markets  reversed 
some of these policies as their economies recovered, advanced economies have maintained 
historically low interest rates and engaged in unconventional policies that last to these days. 
I will discuss today some of the policy issues around these developments and share some 
thoughts about the pending research questions along the way. 
These years of global liquidity expansion have coincided with a surge in gross capital inflows 
into emerging markets, a real appreciation of their currencies, and an increase in the prices 
of their main commodities, stocks, and houses. 
These  trends  have  been  particularly  visible  in  Latin  America.  During  2012,  annual  gross 
capital  inflows  to  the  seven  largest  Latin  American  countries  –  as  classified  by  the  IMF  – 
amounted  to  more  than  250  billion  dollars.  Sovereign  EMBI  spreads  shrank  to  around 
150 basis  points,  and,  with  a  few  exceptions,  stock  market  prices  recovered  or  surpassed 
their pre‐crisis levels.1 After the large depreciation suffered at the peak of the crisis, the real 
from the mid‐2000s. House prices in the region also experienced high annual growth rates, in 
many cases reaching two‐ digit figures. 
exchange rates of these countries persistently appreciated, continuing with a trend coming 
Chile was no exception to these patterns, although they were a bit less pronounced than in 
the  average  emerging  or  Latin  American  country.  Our  real  exchange  rate  appreciated  by 
about 15 percent between the peak of the crisis and the end of 2012, real house prices grew 
about 20 percent between 2009 and 2012, and our current account moved from a surplus of 
2 percent of GDP in the last quarter of 2009, to a deficit of 3.5 percent of GDP by the end of 
2012. 
Sure  enough,  these  patterns  could  be  explained  by  pull  factors.  The  faster  recovery  of 
growth  rates  in  emerging  markets,  the  quick  rebound  of  their  commodity  prices  after  the 
crisis, and the sounder policies being implemented by several of them during the last decade 
could give reason to allocate more capital to this group of countries. But even if we believe 
these factors to be important some key questions remain open. For instance, why did this 
time  emerging  markets  recover  relatively  quickly  from  the  global  shock,  while  advanced 
economies  stagnated?  Was  it  due  to  better  policies,  or  to  the  new  relevance  of  China  for 
their external demand, or to another factor? We need to know more of the ultimate causes of 
this two‐ speed recovery, and more research on this front would be helpful. 
                                                 
1  
IMF, Regional Economic Outlook, May 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Despite the likely role of pull factors, the fact that these phenomena coincided with the timing 
of the monetary expansion in advanced countries suggests there is a link between them. In 
fact,  many  believe  that  this  “push  factor”  played  a  major  role,  and  recent  research  lends 
some support to this view.2 This afternoon we will be discussing one avenue through which 
low interest rates in advanced countries may channel capital toward emerging markets: carry 
trade flows, whose relevance will be addressed in a presentation by Craig Burnside. 
The  likely  role  of  push  factors  is  not  a  total  surprise,  since  the  recovery  of  advanced 
economies in the context of a deleveraging process requires a rebalancing of global demand 
toward  emerging  economies.  This  rebalancing  needs  the  right  price  signals  and  quantity 
responses.  Two  presentations  this  morning  by  Philippe  Bacchetta  and  Gian  Maria  Milesi‐
Ferretti  will  touch  on  the  topic  of  global  rebalancing  and  external  adjustment  to  the  crisis. 
Nonetheless, identifying the role of pull versus push factors poses problems akin to those of 
separating supply and demand. There is still room for research that finds clever identification 
strategies to settle this question. 
Under most conditions, a situation of abundant capital inflows and low global interest rates is 
good for developing countries. Theory tells us that, in the absence of frictions, international 
capital  flows  not  only  contribute  to  expand  a  country’s  productive  capacity,  but  also  allow 
their  citizens  to  share  risk  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  However,  the  presence  of  pecuniary 
externalities,  of  inefficient  fluctuations  in  credit  standards,  or  of  other  types  of  financial 
frictions  may  lead  to  perverse  situations  where  these  inflows  result  in  excessive  credit 
growth, risk taking, or misallocation of capital. 
An  important  amount  of  recent  research  has  been  devoted  to  understanding  how  an 
may not be feasible, either because we are unsure about the presence, type, or magnitude of 
the frictions involved, or because first best policies cannot be implemented in the timeframe 
required. In such a situation, policymakers may have to resort to second best policies. We 
will address some of the roles of financial frictions in the transmission of foreign shocks in the 
economy may borrow in excess and miss‐allocate credit.3 Of course, if we believe that these 
frictions are present and strong, first‐best policy actions should aim to undo them. But this 
presentation by Javier García‐Cicco this afternoon. 
the session of tomorrow morning, the presentations by Jaume Ventura and Sebnem Kalemli‐ 
Ozcan will address some of the potential consequences of the capital inflows to financially‐ 
interventions in the forex market, capital‐account‐management and macroprudential policies 
On  top  of  the  difficulties  with  implementing  first  best  policies,  policymakers  may  feel 
compelled to act fast because past experience has led them to be wary of surges in capital 
inflows. History has taught us that these inflows have a tendency to end in sudden stops and 
sharp currency depreciations that for some countries may result in recessions and crises. In 
integrated emerging economies: the appearance of asset price bubbles and the transmission 
of foreign shocks. 
These concerns have led several countries inside and outside Latin America to implement 
to reduce the financial vulnerabilities that may arise from real exchange rate misalignments, 
fast  credit  growth,  maturity  or  currency  mismatches,  and  housing  price  increases.  These 
types  of  policies  have  been  more  prevalent  among  emerging  markets.  But  they  have  also 
been implemented by developed countries. For instance, Switzerland has actively intervened 
to  maintain  the  value  of  the  Swiss  franc  relative  to  the  Euro,  and  South  Korea  has 
                                                 
2   For  example,  Forbes  and  Warnock  (2012)  indicate  that  global  factors  were  the  most  important  drivers  of 
capital  flows  to  emerging  markets,  especially  debt  flows.  Fratzscher  (2012)  uses  an  event  study 
methodology  to  show  that  QE  announcements  had  an  effect  on  equity  and  debt  flows  to  emerging 
economies. 
3   See Bianchi (2011), Korinek (2011), Dell’Ariccia et al. (2013), among others. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
implemented  various  restrictions  to  the  use  of  wholesale  funding  and  foreign  exchange 
derivatives. 
Despite their prevalence, it must be said that the effectiveness of many of these policies, as 
well as their unintended costs, are still to be determined. Further research is needed here to 
eventually establish best practices in their conduct.4 Today we will see two examples of such 
research.  The  first  is  a  paper  by  Guido  Lorenzoni  that  looks  at  capital  controls  from  a 
different perspective and studies the role they have in the dynamic manipulation of terms of 
trade.  The  second  is  a  paper  by  Marcos  Chamon  that  studies  the  desirability  of  sterilized 
interventions under inflation targeting. 
The  worries  about  potential  reversals  in  capital  flows  have  been  partially  borne  out  by  the 
events of this year. After the Federal Reserve hinted earlier this year the possibility of starting 
tapering the purchases of long‐term bonds and MBS, financial markets quickly reacted with 
declines in the prices of US government bonds and increases in mortgage interest rates. At 
the same time, the spreads of emerging market debt increased importantly, their currencies 
depreciated  against  the  dollar,  and  capital  flows  into  these  countries  declined,  albeit  with 
some  heterogeneity  across  countries  that  seems  related  to  fundamentals.  While  more 
moderate  than  in  previous  occasions,  this  pattern  is  still  reminiscent  of  the  sudden  stop 
episodes I previously mentioned. The simultaneous increase in the yields of sovereign bonds 
of many countries, issued in different currencies, has captured the attention of researchers 
and  policymakers  alike.  Our  understanding  of  the  transmission  channels  behind  this 
synchronized increase is still limited.5 
These recent events have elicited mixed feelings in the international community. On the one 
hand,  there  is  the  view  that  the  longer  the  global  liquidity  persists,  the  more  likely  that 
vulnerabilities will build up in capital‐receiving countries. In this view, a gradual normalization 
of  international  liquidity  conditions  would  be  a  welcome  event  for  those  countries  where 
fundamentals are still strong. Furthermore, to the extent that the normalization comes with 
better  prospects  for  advanced  economies,  the  somewhat  tighter  access  to  international 
borrowing  would  be  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  external  demand.  On  the  other  hand, 
there is the view that a fast reversal of expansionary monetary policies in advanced countries 
would yield a sudden and important tightening of financial conditions and a surge in financial 
volatility.  Recent  years  have  taught  us  all  too  well  that  a  situation  like  this  may  have 
unforeseen consequences. 
All in all, the final impact of the tapering of QE policies on the rest of the world will depend on 
when it takes place, how it is done, and what countries do in the meantime. 
Let me first address the issue of when it will take place. After some speculation earlier this 
year  that  tapering  would  start  in  September,  subsequent  developments  indicated  that  the 
recovery  of  the  US  labor  market  had  been  more  sluggish  than  initially  expected.  This, 
together with the difficulties of the latest round of budget and debt‐limit negotiations, shifted 
the consensus to postpone the expected date of the beginning of tapering. Recent figures 
indicating  a  recovery  of  employment  in  October  stronger  than  expected  have  led  some  to 
bring forward again their forecasted date of tapering. Developments in coming weeks will be 
crucial  to  assess  whether  recent  data  mark  a  change  in  tendency  or  a  temporary 
phenomenon. 
The question of how the reversal will occur is the hardest to answer. If everything goes as 
planned, the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would be gradual and related to improved 
economic conditions in the US. But, the significant reaction of markets to the announcement 
                                                 
4   A few papers trying to quantify  the impact  of various macroprudential  policies include Lim et al. (2011) and 
Tovar et al. (2012). 
5   See for instance the article by Rey (2013) and the presentation by Smets (2013) at Jackson Hole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of the possibility of reducing the speed of purchases, gives us some reason to worry about 
the ability of authorities to guarantee a smooth transition to a scenario of normal monetary 
conditions.  Financial  markets  are  large,  and  even  the  Federal  Reserve  may  have  some 
transitory  trouble  taming  them.  For  instance,  it  is  estimated  that  about  two‐thirds  of  the 
outstanding stock of 10‐year treasuries is in private hands.6 It would not be surprising that 
those  private  bondholders  would  become  wary  of  the  possible  price  impact  of  a  reduced 
demand for these assets by the Fed, and decide to anticipate this move. Dealing with such a 
situation would be challenging for any authority. 
In  sum,  the  baseline  scenario  is  one  of  a  gradual  reversal  with  some  temporary  financial 
turbulence  taking  place  as  markets  take  notice  of  the  new  policy  stance.  However,  a  tail 
event of heightened and persistent financial volatility cannot be written off. Although there is 
some research estimating the impact of the implementation of QE on key interest rates in the 
US,  it  is  likely  that  the  impact  of  the  removal  of  QE  will  not  be  the  flipside  image  of  its 
implementation. 
Let me turn now to the last determinant of the impact of a reversal: what countries do in the 
meantime.  Recent  events  have  shown  us  that  even  a  gradual  normalization  of  global 
monetary conditions may not be welcome news for all countries. For various reasons, these 
conditions  have  bred  more  vulnerability  in  some  countries  than  in  others.  Those  countries 
that  have  been  running  large  current‐account  deficits,  where  these  deficits  have  been 
financed mainly with debt, where fiscal positions are weak, and where capital inflows have 
bred large expansions in credit, may have already become too dependent on abundant and 
cheap international funding. Thus, we have ended up in a somewhat strange situation where 
countries that not long ago were complaining about receiving too much capital inflows are 
now complaining about a potential shortage of funding. 
Countries  in  this  situation  should  consider  the  temporary  postponement  of  tapering  as  a 
welcome  opportunity  to  reduce  their  vulnerability  by  strengthening  their  fiscal  position  and 
addressing potential risks in their financial systems. There is still time, but the clock is ticking. 
Let  me  be  clear:  tapering  will  take  place,  global  monetary  conditions  will  and  should 
eventually normalize, and the times of extremely cheap and abundant international financing 
will end. 
In Chile, we are currently in a situation where we do not consider tapering as bad news. After 
declining for some quarters, our trade balance has gradually improved. Gross inflows are still 
concentrated in FDI, and an important part of foreign expenditure goes to investment goods. 
Furthermore,  Chilean  residents,  mainly  through  pension  funds,  have  large  gross  foreign 
asset positions, which have lately acted as a buffer against fluctuations in gross inflows by 
non‐  residents,  as  mentioned  in  the  latest  World  Economic  Outlook.  Our  fiscal  position  is 
solid. The on‐shore peso rates have not moved in tandem with the latest global increase in 
long term rates, but instead they have actually fallen. And we have maintained a regime of 
fully flexible exchange rate that has helped us deal with external shocks in an economy with 
small degrees of dollarization. 
Regarding  financial  markets,  credit  growth  in  Chile  has  been  robust,  although  it  has 
decelerated  recently,  and  house  prices  have  increased  at  a  steady  rate,  but  we  see  no 
reason to be especially worried about these developments in the short term. Nonetheless, as 
we  have  repeatedly  mentioned  in  our  Financial  Stability  Reports,  we  closely  monitor 
developments  in  financial  markets  to  act  in  coordination  with  the  other  members  of  the 
Financial Stability Council if needed. 
Under these conditions, we think a normalization of the global monetary stance is a welcome 
and necessary development and we believe we are in a good position to face it. 
6   Krishnamurthy and Vissing‐Jorgenson (2013). 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Nonetheless, these are not times to be complacent. There are various issues and risks to be 
aware  of.  First,  a  prolonged  persistence  of  the  global  liquidity  conditions  could  result  in 
sustained  capital  inflows  to  emerging  economies.  This  may  fuel  vulnerabilities  to  a  point 
where  they  become  dangerous,  especially  now  that  the  reduced  growth  prospects  in 
emerging economies may channel new capital inflows towards consumption rather than to 
investment.  Second,  as  I  mentioned  before,  a  volatile  exit  from  quantitative  easing  is  a 
relevant risk scenario. Market reactions to the announcements of future tapering have been 
relatively  moderate  so  far.  But  the  actual  tapering  has  not  yet  begun,  and  there  is 
considerable uncertainty about its exact timing and consequences. On this front we are still 
in  unchartered  territory.  Finally,  I  am  concerned  about  a  potential  interaction  between  the 
financial uncertainty associated with the tapering program and the political uncertainty about 
fiscal negotiations in the US in the coming months. 
To  close  our  conference,  tomorrow  we  will  have  a  policy  panel  where  three  distinguished 
economists: Guillermo Calvo, Vittorio Corbo, and Maurice Obstfeld, will share their thoughts 
on the end of QE and its consequences for emerging markets. 
We  have  navigated  through  challenging  times  in  recent  years.  The  decisive  action  of 
policymakers worldwide has spared the global economy from further trouble. In many cases 
policy has had to go ahead of research. But we should take time to think hard about these 
events;  their  causes;  their  mechanisms;  and  the  benefits  and  costs  of  the  policies  being 
implemented. This will allow us to finish the course and to derive important lessons for the 
future. I am confident that the discussion of the next two days will help us advance toward 
this goal. 
I  would  like  to  finish  this  presentation  by  thanking  Claudio  Raddatz,  Diego  Saravia,  and 
Jaume  Ventura  for  putting  together  an  exciting  program  and  all  of  you  for  coming  to 
participate and share in the discussion. 
Thank you 
References 
Bianchi,  J.  (2011)  “Overborrowing  and  Systemic  Externalities  in  the  Business  Cycle,” 
American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 101(7), pp. 3400–3426, 
December 2011. 
Dell’Ariccia, G., Laeven, L., and Suarez, G. (2013) “Bank Leverage and Monetary  Policy’s 
Risk‐  Taking  Channel:  Evidence  from  the  United  States,”  IMF  Working  Paper  13/143, 
Forbes,  K. and  Warnock,  F.  (2012)  “Capital  Debt ‐and  Equity‐Led  Capital  Flow  Episodes,” 
International Monetary Fund. 
Working Papers Central Bank of Chile N°676, Central Bank of Chile. 
Fratzscher,  M.,  Lo  Duca,  M.,  and  Straub,  R.  (2012)  “A  global  monetary  tsunami?  On  the 
spillovers of US Quantitative Easing,” CEPR Discussion Papers 9195, C.E.P.R. Discussion 
Papers. 
International Monetary Fund (2013) “Western Hemisphere Regional Economic Outlook: Time 
to  Rebuild  Policy  Space,”  World  Economic  and  Financial  Surveys,  International  Monetary 
Fund, May 2013. 
Korinek,  A.  (2011)  “The  New  Economics  of  Prudential  Capital  Controls,”  IMF  Economic 
Review, International Monetary Fund, 59(3), pp. 523–561, December 2011. 
Krishnamurthy,  A.  and  Vissing‐Jorgenson,  A.  (2013)  “The  Ins  and  Outs  of  LSAPs,” 
Proceedings Jackson Hole Symposium 2013, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Lim, C., Columba, F., Costa, A., Kongsamut, P., Otani, A., Saiyid, M., Wezel, T., and Wu, X. 
(2011),  “Macroprudential  Policy:  What  Instruments  and  How  to  Use  Them?  Lessons  from 
Country Experiences,” IMF Working Papers 11/238, International Monetary Fund. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Rey,  H.  (2013)  “Dilemma  not  Trilemma:  The  Global  Financial  Cycle  and  Monetary  Policy 
Independence,”  Proceedings  Jackson  Hole  Symposium  2013,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
