Stephen S Poloz: Opening statement before the House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Finance 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  before  the 
House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 29 October 2013. 
 Thank you for the opportunity for Tiff and me to be with you today to discuss the October 
Monetary  Policy  Report,  which  the  Bank  published  last  week.  The  Bank  aims  to 
communicate our objectives openly and effectively and to stand accountable for our actions 
before Canadians. One of the best ways to do this is through appearances such as this one. 
Allow me to spend a few minutes on the Report’s highlights. I’d like to flag some important 
changes introduced with this issue. 
• 
We  are  modifying  the  Report’s  format  and  style  in  order  to  explicitly  capture  the 
uncertainty  that  is  inherent  in  our  outlook.  The  goal  is  to  present  to  Canadians  a 
reflection of the evolution of the risks to the inflation outlook that are embedded in 
our policy, rather than simply compare a snapshot of the current forecast with that of 
our previous forecast. 
The picture is not always perfectly clear and so we have added new measures of ex 
ante, or before the fact, uncertainty to our five most critical projection variables. We 
have added “rule of thumb” ranges around the base-case projection for the growth 
of Canadian and U.S. GDP and for Canadian total CPI inflation, as well as for the 
current level of the output gap and the growth rate of potential output in Canada. 
With this, we are reminding ourselves – and those who watch us – that economic 
projections are subject to considerable uncertainty and are revised over time as new 
economic data become available. 
Our policy formulation process is more of a process of risk management rather than 
one  of  engineering.  In  our  policy  deliberations,  we  evaluate  and  assess  all  of  the 
risks,  both  positive  and  negative,  and  use  judgement  to  determine  the  balance 
among them. 
As  is  customary  in  October,  we  reviewed  the forecast for  potential  output.  Due to 
lower-than-expected labour productivity growth in the past year, as well as the delay 
in  the  expected  pickup  in  demand  for  exports  and  investment,  the  forecast  for 
potential output growth has been revised down slightly. 
Looking  forward,  we  expect  the  global  economy  to  expand  modestly  in  2013. 
However, its near-term dynamic has changed and the composition of growth is now 
slightly less favourable for Canada. 
Uncertain  global  and  domestic  economic  conditions  are  delaying  the  pickup  in 
exports  and  business  investment  in  Canada.  This  leaves  the  level  of  economic 
activity lower than the Bank had been expecting. 
While  household  spending  remains  solid,  and  various  indicators  in  the  housing 
sector  continue  to  rise,  slower  growth  of  household  credit  and  higher  mortgage 
interest rates point to a gradual unwinding of household imbalances. 
The Bank expects that a better balance between domestic and foreign demand will 
be achieved over time and that growth will become more self-sustaining. But this will 
take longer than previously projected. 
We are expecting investment growth to contribute to a rebound in the rate of labour 
productivity  growth  over  the  next  couple  of  years.  However,  demographic  factors, 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
primarily the aging population, are expected to put a drag on the growth rate of trend 
labour input. This drag will largely offset the effects of rising investment. This is why 
we expect that the growth rate of potential output will remain fairly stable at around 
2 per cent over the next three years. 
Real GDP growth is projected to increase from 1.6 per cent this year to 2.3 per cent 
next year and 2.6 per cent in 2015. The Bank expects that the economy will return 
gradually to full production capacity, around the end of 2015. 
Inflation in Canada has remained low in recent months. This reflects the significant 
slack in the economy, heightened competition in the retail sector, and some other 
sector-specific factors. 
With larger and more persistent excess supply in the economy, both total CPI and 
core inflation are expected to return more gradually to 2 per cent, around the end of 
2015. 
Although  the  Bank  considers  the  risks  around  its  projected  inflation  path  to  be 
balanced,  the  fact  that  inflation  has  been  persistently  below  target  means  that 
downside risks to inflation assume increasing importance. However, the Bank must 
also  take  into  consideration  the  risk  of  exacerbating  already-elevated  household 
imbalances. 
Weighing  these  factors,  the  Bank  judges  that  the  substantial  monetary  policy 
stimulus currently in place remains appropriate and last week decided to maintain 
the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. 
     With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
