Karnit Flug: The state of the Israeli economy and challenges ahead 
Main points of a speech by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the “Calcalist” 
Capital Markets Conference, Tel Aviv, 19 November 2013. 
 I will begin by presenting the state of the Israeli economy and the challenges we face in the 
short term, and will then provide a brief discussion of the long-term challenges as well. 
The Israeli market, as we know, is heavily influenced by the global environment. We are in 
an  environment  of  global  economic  moderation,  with  a  very  moderate  recovery  in  the 
advanced  economies,  and  expectations  are  that  this  process  will  continue  in  the  coming 
year.  With  that,  the  emerging  economies  are  in  a  slowdown,  and  the  expectation  is  that 
growth  will  continue  to  be  relatively  moderate  for  these  countries.  Global  trade,  whose 
influence  on  the  Israeli  economy  is  very  large,  is  growing  at  a  very  moderate  pace,  and 
despite  the  fact  that  we  expect  its  growth  to  accelerate  in  the  coming  year,  it  will  still  be 
relatively moderate. Inflation in the vast majority of advanced economies is low, and with this 
background,  we  are  witnessing  extremely  low  interest  rates  and  very  intensive  monetary 
accommodation in the major markets. 
Growth in the Israeli market is higher than in the other advanced economies over the past 
few  years,  including  during  the  crisis,  however  it  is  closely  correlated  to  them.  The  data 
published  for  the  third  quarter  point  to  moderate  growth  of  2.2  percent.  This  is  a 
disappointing  figure,  and  the  main  factor  pulling  growth  downwards  is  exports,  while 
consumption  is  what  is  currently  pulling  forward.  On  the  assumption  that  world  economic 
growth recovers as expected, we expect continued growth of 3.4 percent in 2014, but it is 
important  to  mention  that  excluding  the  effects  of  natural  gas  production,  lower  growth  is 
expected, and since natural gas production does not make a significant contribution in the 
short term to growth in employment, we expect growth in unemployment in the coming year. 
An overall view of the labor market shows that it is strong, as reflected in continued growth in 
the employment rate, and continued decline in the unemployment rate to such low levels that 
we  have  not  seen  in  many  years.  This  is  the  aggregate  picture,  and  it  is  certainly  a  good 
picture. At the same time, if we look a little closer, we see a picture that is somewhat less 
rosy: An assessment of the composition of the labor market shows that growth in the number 
of  employed  persons  is  concentrated  in  the  public  services,  while  employment  in  the 
business sector has been at a standstill for a long time. 
Another  shadow  is  the standstill  in exports.  Looking  at  a somewhat  longer  period,  we  see 
that  exports  have  not  grown  for  two  years,  and  have  recently  even  contracted.  This  is 
connected  first  of  all  to  moderating  global  demand,  and  also  to  problems  specific  to  large 
companies, but exports, as we know, are also affected by the exchange rate of the shekel, 
which  has  strengthened  in  the  past  year.  I  should  note  that  the  aggregate  sensitivity  of 
exports to the exchange rate is not high. The estimate of exports’ sensitivity to the exchange 
rate  is  just  0.2.  While  the  profitability  of  high  technology  companies  is  affected  by  the 
exchange  rate,  the  sensitivity  of  low  technology  industries  to  the  exchange  rate  is  much 
higher.  While  the  share  of  low  technology  and  mixed-low  technology  manufacturing  in 
exports  is  just  20  percent,  these  industries  comprise  about  60  percent  of  manufacturing 
employment.  We  take  this  fact  into  account  as  well  when  considering  monetary  policy 
decisions. 
Monetary policy is faced with a number of challenges. As we know, the shekel strengthened 
in the past year. There are real forces strengthening the shekel, including mainly the fact that 
the Israeli market is growing faster than other economies. But the forces for appreciation are 
also derived from the global monetary environment. Obviously, the production of natural gas 
in  and  of  itself  is  good  news  –  it  improves  the  energy  situation  in  the  economy  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
contributes to the balance of payments. But it also obviously has an effect on the exchange 
rate. 
As I noted, interest rates in the major economies are very low. The interest rate in Europe 
was  recently  lowered  to  just  0.25  percent,  and  the  major  central  banks  are  continuing  to 
pursue quantitative easing policies. This situation has led us to the low current interest rate of 
1 percent. The low interest rate environments – both domestic and global – obviously have 
an  effect  on  asset  prices,  including  home  prices.  The  lack  of  investment  alternatives 
increases the demand for homes for investment purposes, while the housing market is also 
affected by the low level of supply. The government is making efforts to increase the supply 
of homes, but in the meantime, these efforts are not leading to a moderation of prices. 
Monetary  policy  focuses  on  meeting  the  Bank  of  Israel’s  goals:  maintaining  price  stability, 
supporting economic activity, and  strengthening and maintaining financial stability. For this 
purpose the Bank of Israel uses a number of tools. The main tool is, of course, the interest 
rate tool, which has reached a very low level. The Bank of Israel has for the past few years 
been pursuing a policy of involvement in the foreign exchange market in cases of excessive 
volatility in the exchange rate that is not in line with the fundamental economic conditions. 
The Bank also purchases foreign exchange in order to offset appreciation pressures derived 
from market overshooting in reaction to the production of natural gas. It is important to note 
that our foreign exchange policy takes the long-term economic forces into account, and we 
are acting to give the business sector time to adjust to the trends derived from these forces. 
In order to deal with the risks derived from growth in the balance of housing credit, the Bank 
of Israel has for a number of years been placing various limitations on the mortgage market. 
These are prudential tools that reduce the risk both to the financial system and to borrowers. 
A few words on the long term. Over time, we see very slow growth in the rate of productivity, 
and  in  parallel  to  growth,  we  were  seeing  growth  in  poverty  and  in  inequality.  The  main 
challenge  facing  the  Israeli  economy  over  the  long  term  is  to  succeed  in  creating 
inclusive growth. I would like to explain what I am referring to by this term. I am referring to 
continued, sustainable growth whose results will be divided more equally among all parts of 
the population, such that they will support a higher standard of living for all sectors, and a 
reduction of poverty and inequality in the distribution of income. Inclusive growth cannot be 
driven by a narrow growth engine. It must be broad based over a variety of industries, so that 
it  can  provide  employment  to  all  parts  of  the  population  over  time.  These  include,  for 
instance, small and medium businesses, tourism, and low technology industries – industries 
that can provide employment and income to workers at all skill levels. Such growth, in the 
center of the country and in the periphery, will ensure that the labor market is able to also 
absorb  those  who  join  it  from  the  sectors  with  relatively  low  human  capital  or  with 
employment levels that are still low. 
The challenge in creating inclusive growth is immense. It is a goal that many countries are 
grappling with, and it is not easy to achieve. It is important that, in formulating its strategic 
plan  for  the  coming  years,  the  government  focus  its  policy  such  that  we  progress  in  this 
direction. Inclusive growth will contribute to strengthening the cohesiveness among various 
population groups and within the groups themselves. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
