Ipumbu Shiimi: Namibia’s Financial Sector Strategy – progress made so 
far and the way forward 
Statement by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the official opening of 
the Fides branch in Katutura, Windhoek, 24 October 2013. 
 Director of Ceremonies 
Your  Excellency  the  Ambassador  of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  –  Mr  Onno 
Huickmann 
Chairman of the Board of Fides Bank Namibia – Mr. Tom Newton 
CEO of Fides Bank Namibia, Mr. Michel Arnoult 
Managing Director of Hollard Namibia, Mr. Justice Hausiku 
Captains of the Industry 
Members of the Media 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
A very good morning to you all! 
1. 
I am delighted to join you this morning at the official opening of the Fides, Katutura 
Branch and the launch of the Dream Saver. I would like to start my remarks with a quote 
from  Clen  Sunter,  author  of  books  and  a  renowned  business  personality.  He  said:  “Poor 
people  are  poor  because  they  are  denied  the  opportunity  to  make  money  for 
themselves”. 
2. 
I believe Fides with its products such as the Dream Saver is creating opportunities 
for  the  poor  to  make  money  for  themselves.  I  would  therefore  like  to  commend  you, 
Mr. Arnoult and your team for making this product a reality, which allows low income earners 
to save, insure themselves and to achieve a higher living standard. This brings us closer to 
achieving the objective of the 10 year Namibia Financial Sector Strategy (NFSS) launched in 
August 2012 by the Honorable Minister of Finance. In this regard, allow me to share with you 
why Namibia crafted a Financial Sector Strategy, the progress we have made so far and the 
way forward. 
3. 
Why  a  Financial  Sector  Strategy?  The  aim  of  this  strategy  is  to  reform  Namibia’s 
financial  sector  to  ensure  that  Namibia  will  have  an  effective,  efficient,  stable,  competitive, 
resilient  and  inclusive  financial  sector  by  2021.  As  can  be  noted,  one  of  the  critical 
components  of  this  strategy  is  to  create  an  inclusive  Financial  Sector,  accessible  to  the 
majority  of  the  people  of  Namibia.  This  will  be  achieved  through  targeted  products  and 
services as well as having effective institutions in place that will provide sufficient support to 
users of financial services. 
4. 
Director of Ceremony, the next logical question that follows is what progress are we 
making in implementing the financial sector strategy to achieve financial inclusion? The good 
news  is  that  we  are  making  significant  progress.  First,  financial  exclusion  has  fallen  since 
2007 from 51% and it now stands at 31%. This progress is a result of the effectiveness of 
Government policy and concerted efforts by the financial services industry to bring services 
to the doorsteps of the previously unsaved and underserved people. 
Director  of  Ceremonies,  it  is  now  public  knowledge  that  the introduction  of a 
5. 
low-  cost  basic  retail  bank  account  by  all  commercial  banks  is  a  reality  since 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
November 2012. This account is treated as a necessity rather than a money making product 
for commercial banks, to allow more people to bank and its growth has been phenomenal. 
6. 
You may be aware that the Bank, together with the banking industry has agreed to 
implement standards for cash deposit fees in Namibia for all savings and investment 
accounts owned by individuals at banking institutions as well as to small and medium 
businesses, effective from 31 July and 31 October 2013 respectively. What this means 
is that currently individuals are able to deposit a cash amount up to N$2000, per month, into 
their  saving  and  investment  accounts  free  of  charge.  Similarly,  small  businesses  with  a 
turnover  of  not  more  than  one  million  N$  per  month  will  soon  be  able  to  deposit  up  to 
N$10 000 in the said accounts without paying cash deposits fees after 31 October 2013. 
7. 
Earlier this year we launched the Code of Banking Practice and the Guidelines for 
Lodging  Customer  Complaints  to  Bank  of  Namibia.  The  Code  defines  good  banking 
behaviours and the guidelines help users of financial services to complain about the violation 
of the Code. In addition to these actions undertaken so far, there are a number of initiatives 
in the pipeline with a view to improve access to finance. 
8. 
How  does  the  future  look  like?  Going  forward,  we  will  continue  to  work  hard  to 
achieve the target of 26% set in the NFSS in terms of improving access to financial services 
and  products  by  eligible  Namibians.  We  shall  forge  ahead  to  implement  the  remaining 
projects to make Namibia one of the countries in the world where Financial inclusion is not 
just a dream, but a dream come true. This includes reforming our regulatory framework to 
introduce  a  differentiated  regulatory  framework  for  micro  finance  banking  institutions.  The 
proposed amendments in this regard have been formulated and public inputs were called for 
recently. Further, we will continue to enhance financial infrastructure such as Credit Bureaus 
to support access to finance for the majority of our people. 
9. 
Director of Ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen, in conclusion, I would like to thank 
Fides once again for being a key partner and player in the financial inclusion game. I would 
like to encourage the Fides Bank to keep up this good work. Your Dream Saver and other 
services  are  testimony  to  the  fact  that  low-income  people  are  not  only  bankable,  but  they 
also insurable. 
Through the Dream Saver, you have made a difference in the lives of many people 
10. 
now  and  for  generations  to  come.  With  this  product  you  have  empowered  our  people. 
Congratulations! 
I thank you for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
