Haruhiko Kuroda: Public policy study and monetary policy management 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Graduate School of 
Public Policy, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 7 December 2013. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  at  the  Public  Policy  Seminar  of  the 
Graduate School of Public Policy, the University of Tokyo, and at the Global Public Policy 
Network Conference 2013. 
I graduated from the University of Tokyo Faculty of Law in 1967 and joined the Ministry of 
Finance the same year. In the more than 40 years since then, I have been engaged as a 
practitioner in a wide range of works that relate to public policies, such as fiscal policy, tax 
policy, foreign exchange policy, development policy, and now monetary policy. During that 
time,  I  also had  an  opportunity  to  study  economics  at  graduate  school  in  England.  What  I 
learned through such experiences was that, to be involved in public policies, it is critical to 
link academic knowledge of jurisprudence and economics with practical knowledge obtained 
through  the  accumulation  of  experiences  as  a  practitioner  in  a  coordinated  fashion.  From 
such a perspective, progress in public policy study seems to be a historical inevitability, and I 
am  quite  encouraged  by  the  fact  that  a  global  network  such  as  the  Global  Public  Policy 
Network has been established. 
Today, I would first like to provide my summary of the progress in public policy study and 
changes in monetary policy management. On that basis, I will then explain quantitative and 
qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE),  which  the  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  this  spring,  as  a 
specific  example.  I  will  conclude  by  expressing  my  views  about  the  future  of  public  policy 
study. 
Progress in public policy study 
I. 
Let me start with the progress in public policy study. First, I will cite two numbers: 30 in 2001 
and 2,200 in 2012. These are the numbers of economic papers that get a hit when doing an 
internet search with the keywords “quantitative easing (QE).” In 2001, the Bank introduced 
the  world’s  first-ever  QE.  In  academia,  those  within  the  field  of  economics  did  not  have  a 
particularly high interest in the QE at the time. It gradually attracted attention, however, and 
once the Federal Reserve (Fed) and the Bank of England (BOE) introduced their QE policies 
following the Lehman crisis, studies on QE increased dramatically. Progress in theories of 
economic policy, including monetary policy, has been made using policies that were actually 
implemented as important reference material. And actual policies were in turn designed while 
learning  from  those  theories.  In  my  view,  such  interaction  between  actual  policies  and 
theories is basic to economics, public policy studies, and social science in general. 
To  begin  with,  the  academic  knowledge  required  when  managing  economic  policy  is 
knowledge of economics itself. Economics has been making remarkable progress year after 
year,  both  on  the  theoretical  and  empirical  sides.  In  the  management  of  economic  policy 
including monetary policy, knowledge of economics has become essential. 
It is said that the Great Depression in the 1930s gave birth to a new macroeconomics, and 
economics  has  been  evolving  while  overcoming  failures  in  actual  economic  policies.  More 
recently,  from  the  mid-1980s  through  the  mid-2000s,  the  global  economy  enjoyed  high 
growth with low inflation, and that period was called the Great Moderation. With progress in 
economics,  and  macroeconomic  policies  based  on  such  progress,  fluctuations  in  the 
economy and prices were controlled, and even a view that recession had become a thing of 
the  past  was  rumored.  However,  things  drastically  changed  with  the  occurrence  of  the 
Lehman crisis in 2008. The Lehman crisis and the subprime loan problem, which was one 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
cause of the crisis, taught us that greater consideration needs to be paid to the possibility 
that  the  financial  sector  could  destabilize  the  real  economy.  In  addition,  the  fact  that 
economic growth in many countries has been extremely sluggish even 5 years after the crisis 
suggests  that  existing  macroeconomic  policies  might  not  necessarily  have  been  effective. 
More fundamentally, it suggests that our understanding of business cycles in economics has 
not been enough. Namely, we cannot sufficiently answer the following questions: what kind 
of impact does a plunge in economic activity or impairment in balance sheets have on the 
growth potential of the economy, and how should macroeconomic policies respond to such 
shocks? 
Meanwhile, the aggressive fiscal and monetary policies that were adopted by countries after 
the Lehman crisis, which were well outside the usual policy options in historical terms, seem 
to  have  revealed  that  there  is  considerable  fruit  to  be  harvested  with  regard  to  economic 
policy and economics. For example, during this financial crisis, unlike the Great Depression 
in the 1930s, a plunge in the real economy has been avoided. That was because once the 
crisis  was  recognized,  large-scale  fiscal  stimulus  measures  were  introduced  and  central 
banks lowered policy rates boldly and promptly, and after lowering the policy rates to almost 
0 percent, they invoked unconventional monetary policies without hesitation. These can be 
viewed as significant fruits, in that central banks turned a knowledge of economics that also 
took account of the experience of Japan after the bursting of a bubble into actual policies to 
overcome their challenges.  
In  such  a  manner,  economic  theory  and  actual  economic  policy  are  closely  or  even 
inseparably related, in that they are used to tackle challenges together, and are progressing 
given that new challenges will emerge one after another. Triggered by this global financial 
crisis,  it  is  expected  that  economics  will  continue  to  evolve.  At  the  same  time,  for  a 
practitioner  who  is  involved  in  public  policy,  there  seems  to  be  an  implication  that  policy 
should be pursued by utilizing knowledge of economics while understanding its limits.  
In actual economic policy management, it is not rare to choose a policy that can be regarded 
as  second  best  or  third  best.  Even  a  policy  that  can  be  considered  optimal  or  first  best  – 
namely,  the  most  efficient  one  from  the  standpoint  of  economic  theory  –  might  not  be 
suitable.  That  is,  not  suitable  in  terms  of  such  social  values  as  fairness  and  conventional 
wisdom, or it might be difficult to reach an agreement within the democratic political process. 
In addition, there were many cases in which a policy was considered desirable in theory but 
could  not  be  adopted  because  of  practical  difficulty.  Some  policy  needs  to  go  through 
procedures such as budgeting and legislating when it is to put into practice. Let me take an 
injection of public funds to deal with a nonperforming asset problem as an example. At the 
time  of  the  Lehman  crisis  in  2008,  the  importance  of  injecting  public  funds  as  soon  as 
possible to dispose of nonperforming assets was widely understood. By contrast, in Japan in 
the 1990s, it was quite difficult to gain support for such an assertion within the democratic 
process. In Japan, it was in 1999 when a full-fledged injection of public funds was made to 
major banks: several years have already passed since the problem in the financial system 
surfaced. Thus, it is difficult to use taxpayers’ money before actual pains materialize, and this 
phenomenon can happen in any country, albeit with differing degrees.  
Taking these points into account, in order to actually pursue policy, it is necessary not only to 
study economics but also political economy and public policy theory. Specifically, it becomes 
necessary to have staffers who understand the aforementioned difficulties in actual pursuit of 
public policy, and who on that basis plan policies and put them into practice. I believe that a 
variety  of  staffers  with  different  backgrounds,  who  not  only  studied  economics  or 
jurisprudence but also public policy theory, will be required as those in charge of economic 
policy, including monetary policy. I thus expect that public policy study itself will be further 
developed. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Changes in monetary policy management 
II. 
Based on the summary I have just presented, let us look back at changes in monetary policy 
among public policies. 
In  the  United  States,  Europe,  and  also  Japan,  a  central  bank’s  primary  mission  had  long 
been  to  secure  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  financial  system,  rather  than  ensure  price 
stability  or  economic  stability.  For  example,  the  United  Kingdom  experienced  repeated 
financial  crises  in  the  latter  half  of  the  19th  century.  Its  central  bank  –  the  BOE  –  was 
expected  to  play  the  role  of  preventing  disturbance  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  by 
providing liquidity as a “lender of last resort” to financial institutions on the verge of a crisis. In 
the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  was  established  with  the  aim  of  resolving 
financial system instability, based on the lesson learned from successive financial crises from 
the end of the 19th century into the early 20th century. This well represents the thinking at 
the  time  of  the  role  central  banks  should  play  on  the  financial  system  front.  The  Bank  of 
Japan was established in 1882. In addition to the purpose of sorting out the massively issued 
government banknotes, there was an aim to establish a modern financial system centering 
around  a  central  bank.  In  such  a  manner,  the  central  banks’  objective  at  the  time  was  to 
prevent the occurrence of a financial panic and to contribute to economic development  by 
ensuring stability of the financial system. 
This  situation  gradually  changed  after  the  start  of  the  20th  century.  In  particular,  the 
international gold standard collapsed in the 1930s and each country shifted to a fiat money 
system. As a result, the supply of central bank money was released from the constraints of 
their  gold  holdings,  and  the  extent  of  latitude  in  monetary  policy  increased  substantially. 
Partly  because  of  this,  the  idea  of  actively  aiming  to  achieve  economic  stability  –  notably 
price stability – through monetary policy spread among major countries. While many central 
banks  shouldered  the  role  of  supporting  government  bond  prices  amid  expansion  in  fiscal 
spending  during  World  War  II,  monetary  policy  after  the  war  was  separated  from  debt 
management policy, and thus recovered its autonomy. 
Since  the  mid-1980s  –  after  weathering  global  surges  in  commodity  prices  and  general 
prices due to two oil shocks – prices stabilized and business cycles became smooth in the 
United States and other major countries. For example, in the advanced countries, from the 
1980s  until  just  before  the  Lehman  crisis,  the  fluctuations  in  economic  growth  rates  were 
moderate, and the average inflation rate declined from 6.5 percent to 2.1 percent (Chart 1). 
Amid a situation of the global economy showing an unprecedented favorable performance, 
an idea gradually took hold that central banks should focus on playing the role of converging 
the  inflation  rate  to  a  certain  level.  In  addition,  institutional  frameworks  concerning  central 
banks on the back of such changes were gradually established. Namely, there were cases 
that occurred one after another in which, mainly through revisions of central bank laws, not 
only independence was given to a central bank but also it was clarified that a central bank 
should specialize in ensuring price stability. In monetary policy management, this trend led to 
major central banks’ adoption of price stability targets – namely, inflation targeting. 
Amid this global trend, the current Bank of Japan Act was enacted in 1997. At the same time, 
however, a somewhat different situation from other countries emerged in Japan. Since the 
1990s,  the  financial  system  destabilized  due  to the  nonperforming  loan  problem  stemming 
from  the  bursting  of  the  bubble,  and  Japan’s  economy  was  to  suffer  from  protracted  low 
growth  and  deflation.  The  Bank  implemented  ahead  of  other  countries  unprecedented 
unconventional monetary policies, such as the zero interest rate policy and the QE policy. 
The  government  often  carried  out  large-scale  fiscal  spending.  As  a  result,  an  economic 
depression  such  as  that  of  the  1930s  was  avoided,  and  there  were  periods  of  economic 
recovery. However, Japan was not able to overcome deflation for nearly 15 years. Various 
factors  could  be  considered  reasons  for  the  protracted  deflation  –  a  continuation  of  low 
economic growth, destabilization of the financial system, a rise of emerging economies, and 
structural changes in the labor market. However, whatever the reason might be, it has been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
my  view  that  the  Bank,  which  is  the  central  bank  of  Japan,  is  responsible  for  overcoming 
deflation  and  achieving  price  stability.  In  other  words,  I  have  thought  that,  because  its 
commitment  to  ensuring  price  stability  was  weak,  the  Bank  was  unable  to  sufficiently 
influence  economic  entities’  expectations,  which  is  an  important  transmission  channel  of 
monetary policy. Such thoughts led to the introduction of the QQE.  
Ideas of the QQE 
III. 
Let me next explain the QQE that the Bank has currently been pursuing. 
In April this year, the Bank introduced the QQE in order to achieve a 2 percent price stability 
target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years (Chart 2).  
A problem that Japan’s economy currently faces is that, amid protracted deflation, people’s 
inflation  expectations  have  declined  and  a  sense  that  prices  will  not  rise  –  namely,  a 
deflationary  mindset  –  has  been  embedded.  Against  such  a  backdrop,  raising  inflation 
expectations has become a policy agenda. Looking back at the history of central banking, 
raising excessively low inflation expectations through policy is a big challenge. Furthermore, 
in the case of Japan, short-term interest rates have already declined to close to 0 percent 
and long-term interest rates have also declined to a level below 1 percent. How should we 
raise inflation expectations through policy in a situation in which there is little room to further 
lower nominal interest rates? This is the challenge we are faced with, and the QQE is the 
prescription. 
Specifically, the QQE comprises two elements. First, demonstrate the Bank’s determination 
to  definitively  overcome  deflation  in  the  form  of  strong  and  clear  commitment,  in  order  to 
dispel deflationary expectations that have been embedded among firms and households. To 
this  end,  the  Bank  clearly  expressed  that  it  would  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) at 
the  earliest  possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years,  and  clearly  specified  a 
timeframe  to  achieve  the  target.  Second,  taking  into  account  that  deflation  has  been 
continuing for a protracted period, only exhibiting a strong commitment will not be enough to 
make people believe in the Bank’s strong will in the absence of a policy to underpin such 
commitment.  In  particular,  from  the  standpoint  of  “at  the  earliest  possible  time,”  it  was 
necessary  to  embark  on  a  new  phase  of  bold  monetary  easing  that  people  could  clearly 
understand was not an extension of the past policies. Therefore, the Bank decided to double 
the monetary base – money the Bank directly provides – in two years. In order to achieve 
this, it also decided to conduct massive purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) 
inclusive of those with longer-term remaining maturities. So far, the Bank has indeed been 
increasing the monetary base and purchasing JGBs as decided (Chart 3). 
The  QQE  aims  to  put  downward  pressure  on  the  yield  curve  as  a  whole  through massive 
purchases of JGBs, encourage investment in risk assets through portfolio rebalancing, and 
influence expectations of economic entities. In particular, as a major transmission channel, 
the Bank aims to lower real interest rates and stimulate economic activity through changing 
economic entities’ expectations and raising their inflation expectations on the one hand, and 
containing  long-term  interest  rates  through  massive  purchases  of  JGBs  on  the  other.  In 
addition, through a virtuous cycle, an increase in observed inflation rates resulting from such 
stimulation to economic activity is expected to lead to a further rise in inflation expectations.  
It has been eight months since the introduction of the QQE, and it has steadily produced the 
anticipated  effects  so  far:  favorable  turns  have  been  observed  in  the  financial  market, 
economic activity and prices, as well as in the public’s expectations. First, looking at financial 
markets,  stock  prices  have  risen  by  about  50  percent  since  the  beginning  of  the  year 
(Chart 4). While long-term interest rates in major advanced economies have risen across the 
board, those in Japan have been powerfully contained due to the massive JGB purchases by 
the Bank. Interest rates on 10-year JGBs have recently declined to around 0.6 percent from 
around  0.8  percent  at  the  beginning  of  the  year.  In  this  situation,  inflation  expectations 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
appear  to  be  rising  on  the  whole,  as  seen  in  various  surveys  showing  that  an  increased 
proportion  of  people  consider  that  prices  will  rise.  As  a  result,  real  interest  rates  have 
declined, and this has steadily stimulated private demand.  
Against  this  background,  Japan’s  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately  as  a  virtuous 
cycle among income and spending has been operating in both the household and corporate 
sectors.  In  terms  of  real  GDP  growth  rates,  the  economy  continued  growing  at  an  annual 
pace of about 4 percent in the first half of 2013, and has continued to grow at an annual pace 
of around 2 percent during July-September (Chart 5). As for prices, the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  excluding  fresh  food  turned  positive  in  June,  and  the  pace  of  increase 
expanded to 0.9 percent in October (Chart 6). A look at the detailed developments in the CPI 
shows that not only energy-related goods such as petroleum products have pushed up the 
index, but also that there have been price increases across a wide range of items as private 
consumption remains firm and the economy continues to recover moderately.  
With regard to the outlook, as shown in its latest Outlook Report published a month ago, the 
Bank  expects  the  economy  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  of  around  2  percent,  above  its 
potential growth rate, as a trend (Chart 7). This projection was made on the assumption that 
the consumption tax will be raised 3 percent in April 2014 and 2 percent in October 2015, as 
scheduled. Against this background, inflation in terms of the CPI excluding fresh food is likely 
to  gradually  accelerate  and  reach  around  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  toward  the 
latter half of the projection period through fiscal 2015.  
As  I  have  described,  the  QQE  has  been  producing  the  anticipated  results  and  Japan’s 
economy has been following the path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as 
expected. The Bank will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve that target, as long as it is 
necessary for maintaining it in a stable manner. It will thoroughly examine both upside and 
downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate.  
The  prescription  of  the  QQE  that  I  have  explained  is  in  line  with  the  basic  ideas  within 
economics and public policy theory. First, I firmly believe that, as a central bank is a public 
entity,  the  Bank  must  manage  its  policy  in  conformity  with  the  legally  given  mandate  of 
ensuring price stability. The Bank must clearly commit to this. Second, in the QQE, we took 
an  approach  of  raising  economic  entities’  inflation  expectations  by  combining  the  central 
bank’s clear commitment and underpinning large-scale monetary easing measures. This is 
putting  economics,  which  recognizes  the  importance  of  expectations,  into  practice.  Under 
such a basic framework, the QQE was designed by incorporating central banks’ experiences 
and practical elements of financial business practices. With this QQE, I believe that Japan 
can overcome deflation.  
Future of public policy study 
IV. 
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  speech  by  sharing  with  you  my  views  on  the  future  of  public 
policy study. 
First  is  the  importance  of  studies  on  political  and  administrative  feasibilities.  In  pursuing 
economic policy, including monetary policy, political and administrative feasibilities should be 
properly  recognized,  as  they  limit  the  space  of  policies  that  can  actually  be  pursued.  In 
recognizing  this  space,  it  is  necessary  to  have  an  accurate  understanding  of  people’s 
behavior and the values of stakeholders who are politically crucial, as well as the background 
to  how  the  current  administrative  system  and  practices  have  been  formed.  High-level 
judgment is required, as these factors are determined by each country’s history, culture, and 
social  systems,  as  well  as  the  social  and  political  situations  of  the  times.  I  expect  public 
policy  study  to  shed  further  light  on  political  and  administrative  feasibilities  of  economic 
policy. 
Second  is  the  importance  of  enhancing  studies  on  how  economic  policy  can  influence 
expectations. As mentioned earlier, influencing economic entities’ expectations is critical to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
monetary  policy.  That  has  become  increasingly  emphasized  in  the  recent  monetary  policy 
management  of  major  central  banks.  For  example,  the  Fed,  the  European  Central  Bank 
(ECB), and the BOE have adopted the so-called forward guidance one after another. This 
policy measure aims to reduce uncertainty and provide further monetary easing effects under 
the zero lower bound of nominal interest rates, by clearly indicating future management of 
monetary policy. However, to get market participants to form expectations just as a central 
bank  intended  –  namely,  expectation  management  –  is  not  an  easy  task.  This  is  because 
market participants’ expectation formation will be prescribed by various situations, such as 
their views on financial and economic conditions, past experiences, and portfolios they have 
created.  An  analysis  of  expectation  formation  in  various  social  and  economic  situations 
continues  to  be  an  important  issue  of  public  policy  study,  and  the  fruits  of  this  will 
substantially contribute to the management of monetary policy. 
Third is the importance of global policy interdependence. In a globalized world, not only do 
relations among countries become stronger but also the interrelationship of each country’s 
economic policy, whereby possibilities of policy coordination arise, becomes important. For 
example, after the Lehman crisis, each country’s government and central bank carried out an 
aggressive macroeconomic policy to prevent a plunge in economic activity. Many countries 
took  measures  to  inject  public  funds  to  financial  institutions  and  to  guarantee  financial 
institutions’  debt.  In  addition,  in  response  to  global  liquidity  tightening,  international 
coordination among central banks, such as dollar funds supplying operations using the dollar 
swap arrangement with the Fed, has been swiftly implemented. Such policy coordination can 
be assessed as being successful in preventing a financial crisis from developing into a full-
fledged economic crisis. However, in deploying public funds, the potential cost of taxpayers 
in  each  country  should  be  taken  into  account,  and  we  got  a  sense  of  the  difficulty  with 
international coordination in this regard. This is also the reality that policymakers are facing. 
To properly pursue policy coordination on the basis of such reality, it will be important not 
only  to  design  a  theoretically  optimal  policy  but  also  to  understand  each  country’s  legal 
system and behavioral principles of stakeholders, which could be a hurdle in pursuing policy 
coordination.  
Concluding remarks 
Today,  I  have  expressed  my  views  under  the  theme  of  public  policy  study  and  monetary 
policy management by incorporating my own experiences and providing examples of what is 
actually happening recently on the economic policy front. 
As  mentioned  at  the  outset  of  my  speech,  in  economic  policy,  academic  knowledge  and 
practical knowledge are close or even inseparable, and public policy study that bridges the 
two  has  become  extremely  important.  This  situation  is  common  in  any  country,  and  as 
interrelationships  among  countries’  economic  policies  have  been  deepening,  there  is  no 
doubt  that  the  global  network  has  increased  its  importance.  Therefore,  it  is  expected  that 
each country’s graduate schools of public policy will promote public policy study through an 
expansion of joint studies and exchanges between professors and between students. From a 
central bank’s perspective, I have great expectations for properly managing monetary policy 
by  thoroughly  utilizing  the  fruits  of  such  studies.  At  present,  there  are  not  many  economic 
papers  that  get  a  hit  when  doing  an  internet  search  with  the  keywords  “quantitative  and 
qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE).”  However,  a  few  years  from  now,  the  experience  of 
Japan and the Bank of Japan may have provided a new chapter for economics and public 
policy study. And I cannot help but expect that a theory worked out then will be one of the 
powerful weapons that central banks can use in the future to combat deflation. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
