Lesetja Kganyago: South Africa and the normalisation of world monetary 
policies 
Address by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at 
the  Merrill  Lynch  2nd  Annual  Fixed  Income  Investor  Conference,  Sandton,  27  November 
2013. 
 Introduction 
Since  the  onset  of  the  world  economic  crisis,  monetary  policy  in  the  major  advanced 
economies  has  been  extremely  loose.  This  has  been  helpful  in  supporting  economic 
recovery  in  those  economies,  which  has  had  positive  spillover  effects  for  developing 
countries,  including  South  Africa.  In  line  with  other  emerging  markets,  we  have  also 
benefitted from capital inflows which have boosted growth, lowered our borrowing costs and 
reduced  inflation,  through  a  stronger  currency.  However,  these  trends  have  started  to 
reverse following  signals from the  US  Federal  Reserve  that  it  plans to reduce  the  pace  of 
bond  purchases  and  ultimately  tightening  monetary  policy.  Today,  I  will  discuss  what  this 
change means for South Africa. 
The unmoved mover: US monetary policy 
The prospect of Fed tapering moved to centre stage in world financial markets on the 22nd of 
May,  when  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  told  the  US  Congress  that  he  envisioned  slowing  or 
tapering  the  Fed’s  quantitative  easing  programme  this  year.  The  result  was  a  worldwide 
increase  in  medium  and  longer  term  interest  rates  and  outflows  of  capital  from  emerging 
markets,  as  investors  responded  to  better  rates  of  return  in  advanced  economies.  For 
emerging  markets,  the  shock  appeared  most  visibly  through  weakening  exchange  rates, 
especially in the countries with large current account and fiscal deficits. 
By  September,  this  strong  market  reaction  had  achieved  a  de  facto  world  monetary 
tightening which had only to be validated by an actual Fed decision to taper. Yet this, to the 
surprise of many, was not forthcoming. The reasons the Fed declined to fulfill expectations 
were really quite persuasive. The Federal Open Market Committee had attempted to provide 
forward  guidance  on  interest  rates  using  unemployment  as  its  main  indicator,  with  7% 
unemployment as the guideline for ending QE and 6.5% the threshold for raising rates. By 
September,  unemployment  had  fallen  to  7.3%,  suggesting  that  tapering  would  need  to 
happen rather quickly if QE were to be finished when unemployment reached 7%. However, 
unemployment  was  actually  an  unreliable  indicator  of  the  health  of  the  US  economy.  This 
was because most of the improvement was being achieved not through people finding jobs 
but through people leaving the labour force. When unemployment hit 7.3% the labour force 
participation  rate  fell  to  63.2%,  the  lowest  level  since  1978.  The  Fed  therefore  seemed 
unwilling to reduce its stimulus when so many people remained without jobs. Furthermore, 
the  US  economy  was  threatened  by  a  fiscal  shock  from  the  budget  and  debt  ceiling 
standoffs, to which the Fed was reluctant to add a monetary shock. 
For  emerging  markets,  delayed  tapering  offered  some  respite  from  currency  depreciation. 
However,  it  remains  inevitable  that  advanced  economy  monetary  policy  will  start  to 
normalize, beginning in the United States. South Africa is in some ways vulnerable to this 
process, and I will detail our main weaknesses and the ways in which we might be affected, 
before discussing the proper policy responses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Vulnerabilities 
Our  most  important  vulnerabilities  are  the  twin  deficits:  the  fiscal  deficit  and  the  current 
account  deficit.  We  are  also  concerned  about  household  indebtedness  and  therefore 
exposure to higher interest rates. 
At the moment, South Africa is running a current account deficit worth more than 6% of 
GDP. In comparison with other emerging market deficit countries, our deficit is the product of 
both weak export and strong import performance. In Brazil and Indonesia, current account 
deficits  have  come  mainly  from  falling  prices  of  commodity  exports,  whereas  in  India  and 
Turkey deficits have grown mainly because of rising imports, with exports little changed. In 
South Africa, export performance has been disappointing and imports have been growing at 
a brisk pace. 
To fund the current account deficit we rely on capital inflows, and as they become scarcer 
the deficit will have to narrow. If this is to be achieved mainly through reduced imports the 
consequences for growth will be severe, especially as these imports include capital goods 
that are crucial to investment. It is therefore urgent that we improve on the country’s export 
performance. Furthermore, rising import penetration in the context of an output gap suggests 
that the tradeable sector as a whole has lost competitiveness, not just exporters. 
Regarding fiscal policy, the SARB’s repo rate stands at 5%, a more than three-decade low. 
Although we do not provide forward guidance on rates, should the rates rise, that will add to 
the  cost  of  government  borrowing.  National  Treasury  has  signaled  smaller  deficits  in  the 
future, as fiscal policy shifts from stimulus to consolidation, but smaller deficits will still add to 
SA’s debt. QE made borrowing much cheaper, with SA Government bond yields unusually 
closely  correlated  with  US  Treasury  bonds.  It  was  appropriate  to  capitalize  on  record  low 
rates and provide stimulus during the crisis, but these conditions are now passing. As rates 
rise,  interest  costs  will  consume  a  greater  portion  of  GDP.  Our  attempts  to  estimate  this 
effect point to an extra R11 to R30 billion in interest payments annually, averaged over the 
next four years and depending on the interest rate path. It is therefore important that fiscal 
policy  adjust  appropriately  to  more  normal  interest  rates.  National  Treasury’s  most-recent 
MTBPS shows that this exigency has been well-understood by the fiscal authorities, and we 
are confident that it charts a sustainable course for South Africa. 
In addition to the fiscal and current account deficits, South African consumers are also likely 
vulnerable  to  higher  interest  rates.  As  the  SARB’s  September  2013  Financial  Stability 
Review shows, households have used low rates to increase their debts, driving the ratio of 
debt  to  disposable  income  to  almost  76%.  The  number  of  consumers  with  impaired  credit 
records  has  climbed  steadily  since  2008,  to  nearly  half  the  total.  Although  South  Africa’s 
banks  are  well-capitalised  and  therefore  capable  of  withstanding  higher  default  rates,  this 
raises concerns both for consumer demand, an important driver of GDP growth, and the well-
being of these financially vulnerable households. 
Will South Africa experience a “sudden stop”? 
Given South Africa’s vulnerabilities, the question is not if world monetary normalization will 
affect us but rather how quickly and dramatically it will do so. The worst-case scenario is that 
we suffer a sudden stop, meaning inflows abruptly cease. 
One helpful definition of a sudden stop offered in the literature specifies a year-on-year fall in 
the  financial  account  greater  than  two  standard  deviations  from  the  mean.  Other  scholars 
have expanded this to a fall greater than one standard deviation, with the added requirement 
that  the  decline  in  inflows  must  exceed  5%  of  GDP,  to  exclude  cases  where  low  volatility 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
produces  small  standard  deviations.1  By  either  definition,  this  has  never  happened  in 
democratic  South  Africa.  Indeed,  some  of these  writers  pick  out  South Africa  as  a  special 
case, a country which has experienced large currency swings but no sudden stops. 
By contrast, other emerging markets have a long history of “sudden stops”, and these have 
often  been  growth  disasters;  Indonesia,  for  instance,  took  about  a  decade  to  recover  the 
GDP levels it had attained before the Asian Crisis of 1998. Sudden stops have also affected 
advanced  economies  –  although  some  of  them  stopped  being  advanced  economies  after 
suffering sudden stops. As Olivier Accominotti and Barry Eichengreen have recently argued, 
the economic crises in Europe after 1929 and 2009 should both be treated as sudden stops. 
In 1927, Austria, Germany and Hungary were running current account deficits of around 5% 
of GDP. In 2008, Greece, Portugal, Italy, Ireland and Spain had an average current account 
deficit  of  6.7%.2.  When  foreign  funders  suddenly  refused  to  finance  these  deficits,  crises 
resulted. 
Could  a  sudden  stop  happen  here?  We  consider  it  unlikely.  Partly,  this  is  because  world 
monetary  policies  are  likely  to  normalize  slowly,  with  very  low  rates  likely  to  persist  for 
several  years  in  the  United  States,  the  Euro  Area  and  Japan.  Perhaps  more  importantly, 
South  Africa’s  vulnerabilities  are  manageable.  The  literature  flags  three  main  domestic 
drivers  of  sudden  stops:  current  account  deficits,  fixed  exchange  rates  and  foreign 
currency denominated debt. I will discuss each of these in turn. 
The  main  reason  current  account  deficits  help  precipitate  sudden  stops  is  that  they  exert 
downward  pressure  on  the  currency.  Additionally,  as  a  matter  of  economic  identities  the 
Current  Account  is  equal  to  Aggregate  Demand  less  gross  national  product  (GNP).  If  the 
current account deficit closes suddenly demand has to fall as quickly, unless GNP expands 
enough to cover the gap, which it is unlikely to do in the short term. South Africa has a large 
current account deficit, but this is mitigated by our currency and debt policies. 
When  a  country  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate  experiences  capital  outflows,  the  peg  comes 
under  pressure  and  needs  to  be  defended. This  normally  entails  raising  rates  sharply  and 
selling reserves, which suppresses output, exacerbates local debt problems and often fails 
anyway, especially when speculators bet against the fixed exchange rate. Furthermore, an 
overvalued  exchange  rate  in  the  context  of  a  current  account  deficit  just  exacerbates  the 
problem,  because  imports  are  unrealistically  cheap  and  exports  are  penalized.  The  rand, 
however,  is  a  free-floating  currency.  This  liberates  us  from  vain  or  harmful  attempts  to 
manage  its  value,  and  ensures  that  there  is  liquidity  in  the  foreign  currency  market  at  all 
times.  Depreciation  also  provides  the  right  incentives  to  producers  and  consumers  of 
tradeables. The floating rand acts as a shock-absorber for the South African economy and is 
one of our best defences against a sudden stop. 
Foreign currency denominated debt, from the public or private sectors, may be an even more 
serious  problem.  Ricardo  Hausmann  has  described  it  as  the  “Original  Sin”  of  emerging 
markets,  by  which  he  meant  that  EMs  are  unable  to  borrow  long-term  in  local  currency, 
leading  to  debt  profiles  riven  with  currency  and  maturity  mismatches.  The  problem  with 
foreign currency debt is that if the exchange rate falls, the debt burden rises. The results can 
be likened to a bank run, with rising debt burdens deterring foreign lenders, weakening the 
currency and pushing debt burdens even higher, deterring more lenders, and so forth. South 
                                                
1   Guillermo A. Calvo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía, “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: The 
Relevance  of  Balance-Sheet  Effects”  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  10520,  http://www.nber.org/papers/ 
w10520.pdf, May 2004, See Pablo E. Guidotti, Federico Sturzenegger, Agustín Villar, José de Gregorio and 
Ilan Goldfajn, “On the consequences of sudden stops” Economía, Vol. 4, No. 2 (Spring, 2004), pp. 171–214; 
Calderon,  C.  and  M.  Kubota  (2013):  “Sudden  Stops:  Are  global  and  local  investors  alike?”,  Journal  of 
International Economics, Vol. 89, pp. 122–142 
2   See http://www.voxeu.org/article/mother-all-sudden-stops. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Africa’s debt, however, is mostly rand-denominated, so investors bear the currency risk. We 
do not suffer much Original Sin. 
South Africa is therefore equipped to handle a shock like the end of QE without suffering a 
sudden  stop.  Although  the  current  account  deficit  should  prompt  depreciation,  a  flexible 
currency and rand-denominated debt protect SA. 
This  confidence  that  we  can  avoid  a  sudden  stop  is  also  supported  by  independent 
measures of country vulnerability. Nomura Global Economics has recently compiled an index 
meant to show vulnerability to a currency crisis, meaning a shift of three standard deviations 
from the two year average. South Africa is comfortably within the safer group of countries, 
ahead  even  of  countries  like  China,  Israel  and  Chile.  In  September  2013  The  Economist 
magazine produced a similar index, measuring the likelihood of a capital freeze. This showed 
a  much  more  disturbing  result:  South  Africa  was  revealed  as  the  third-most  vulnerable 
country,  after  Turkey  and  Colombia.  But  this  bad  news,  it  turned  out,  was  thanks  to  a 
spreadsheet error. When corrected, South Africa suddenly moved to 16th out of 26, a much 
less precarious position. 
Thinking through the likely outcomes 
For these reasons, we feel reassured that a sudden stop is unlikely. This clears the way for 
us  to  think  about  the  more  plausible  outcomes  as  world  monetary  policies  normalise.  To 
assist with this task, we have modeled a range of scenarios, from growth in the advanced 
economies to renewed recession. The headline finding for this exercise is that the end of QE 
is neither good nor bad, in itself. What matters are the circumstances surrounding the exit. 
Advanced  economy  central  banks  are  most  likely  to  end  QE  and  raise  rates  as  growth 
improves  –  indeed,  this  is  the  whole  point  of  monetary  stimulus  and  the  basis  for  forward 
guidance. This outcome is good for SA as faster world growth translates into higher domestic 
growth. Stronger exports plus depreciation would also narrow the current account deficit. 
It is possible exit from unconventional monetary policies could occur with world growth still 
disappointing.  After  all,  this  remains  uncharted  territory  for  central  banks,  and  we  cannot 
assume they will definitely get the timing right, or that they will not be compelled to tighten 
monetary  policy  earlier  than  they  would  like  by  unacceptable  increases  in  asset  prices  or 
inflation.  In  this  case,  growth  would  be  weaker  but  a  depreciating  rand  would  still  boost 
inflation,  requiring  higher  interest  rates  (although  the  effect  is  muted  by  the  larger  output 
gap). A weaker currency would also shift the current account towards balance. 
Getting policy right 
How should policymakers respond to the end of QE and fast-depreciating currencies? There 
is a danger, during currency sell-offs, of losing focus. One mistake is to treat the exchange 
rate as a crucial indicator of prestige. Another may be to look back on previous exchange 
rate crises (such as India’s in 1991, Indonesia’s in 1997/1998 or Brazil’s in 1998), and worry 
about losing the last war again. It may even be that currency rates, which change throughout 
the  working  day,  are  reported  on  so  intensively  that  they  assume  outsize  importance. 
Nonetheless, the exchange rate should not dominate our thinking. 
For the Reserve Bank, our policy stance is clear. As flexible inflation targeters, the proper 
response to a weakening currency isn’t to defend its value, as the priority, but rather to target 
the pass-through from the exchange rate to inflation. The Bank’s normal estimate of this is 
20%, meaning about a fifth of the change in the currency’s value shows up in the CPI. The 
scale of the pass-through varies from time to time, however, and at present it appears to be 
lower, probably as a consequence of reduced pricing power in a subdued economy. 
Although inflation moved outside the target during the third quarter it has since returned to 
the  target  band,  as  forecast,  registering  6%  in  September  and  5.5%  in  October. We  have 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
therefore not changed rates so far this year, nor have we introduced other policy measures 
to influence the exchange rate. 
This contrasts with the responses seen elsewhere. Brazil has raised rates by 225 points this 
year,  Indonesia  by  150  and  India  by  50  points.  Central  banks  have  also  resorted  to  less 
orthodox  policies  including  tightening  overnight  rates,  implementing  some  capital  controls 
and creating new swap auctions – essentially, opening forward books. 
Comparing the performance of the rand with the currencies of these other countries, we see 
little  evidence  that  a  more  activist  and  experimental  approach  would  have  changed  the 
rand’s direction in a meaningful way. Furthermore, there are advantages to our approach, not 
the least of which is a less volatile output, inflation and interest rates. 
Conclusion 
In essence, South Africa is not a fragile country. Rather, our system is anti-fragile, like a well-
designed building in an earthquake zone: it moves with the shocks so it doesn’t collapse. 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Our monetary policy stance is clear and appropriate; 
Fiscal policy is vigilant in anticipation of the normalization of interest rates; 
A sudden stop is relatively unlikely for South Africa; 
The end of QE is not plainly bad for SA, and could be a good thing if it heralds a 
return to growth in the advanced economies. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
