Peter Praet: Steering the economy in a challenging environment 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the 16th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 19 November 2013. 
 I would like to thank Florian Heider and Jan Felix Hammermann for their contribution to preparing this speech 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to speak at the 16th Euro Finance Week here in Frankfurt. 
The  euro  area  economy  is  seeing  the  infancy  of  a  frail  recovery.  The  turn-around  in 
economic conditions that we have observed earlier in the year will bring citizens some relief 
after  an  exceptionally  long  phase  of  negative  growth.  But  it  will  be  some  time  before 
economic  conditions  will  normalise.  We  expect  credit  to  enterprises  to  lag  behind,  as  we 
have experienced in past recoveries. Probably, the retarded reaction of productive credit to a 
change  in  economic  conditions  will  be  even  more  delayed  this  time,  as  households  and 
companies, as well as banks, are trying to reduce their debt. Investment, as a consequence, 
has not bounced back yet – and probably  will not for a while – at the same speed that is 
customary to see in the early quarters of an economic upturn. Unemployment has settled at 
unacceptably high levels. Part of it will be reabsorbed as companies will start hiring on more 
favourable demand prospects. But a fraction will trail, as it will take time for the longer-term 
unemployed to adapt to the post-crisis dislocations in the labour market. 
Today,  I  will  share  my  views  on  the  challenges  the  euro  area  faces  in  these  conditions.  I 
would like to talk about our objective as monetary policy maker, particularly our duty to keep 
inflation in check. And the role we play in supporting the economy. In doing so, I will give you 
my perspective over the latest decision taken by the ECB in early November: to reduce our 
main  policy  rate  to  0.25%,  to  re-assert  our  forward  guidance,  and  to  extend  in  time  our 
pledge of unlimited supply of liquidity to banks against appropriate collateral until July 2015. 
But I will also be clear on the limits to monetary policy actions. The ultimate source of growth 
and employment is not monetary accommodation. It is a competitive environment, a highly 
skilled workforce and a sound financial system. 
Diagnosis: what are the challenges? 
The  economic  landscape  I  described  a  minute  ago  is  exceptionally  atypical. What  are  the 
challenges we face? 
First, the economic recovery is dependent on factors and events that are partly exogenous to 
policy  choices  taken  in  the  euro  area,  and  are  traditionally  uncertain.  Euro  area  economic 
activity should, in principle, benefit from a gradual strengthening of the external demand for 
exports. But despite the visibly growing sprouts of global recovery, there are cross-currents. 
Some emerging economies may need to curb domestic absorption, after a protracted interval 
of credit expansion and rising corporate leverage. And the transmission and side effects of 
an  eventual  withdrawal  of  accommodative  monetary  interventions  in  the  US  are  still 
unknown. 
Second, as I said, banks in the euro area are in a serious phase of deleveraging. Part of this 
process is cyclical: in recessions, the demand for credit falls and net credit redemption pulls 
down  credit  figures  in  the  aggregate.  But  part  of  what  we  observe  today  is  structural  in 
nature. What caused the financial crisis was primarily a debt overhang – private or public – 
going  into  reverse.  Banks  participated  in  the  excesses,  and  therefore  today  they  have  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
work off the consequences of the excesses. So, selling assets and paying off debt is for them 
a  precondition  for  a  return  to  a  healthy  and  sustainable  business  model.  Banks  need  to 
downsize and cleanse their balance sheets. But this structural transition may at some point 
represent a constraint on the expansion capacity of borrowing units: firms in the first place. 
Demand  for  finance  may  at  some  point  recover  as  corporate  borrowers  and  households 
respond to new profit and income opportunities. But credit may simply fail to be forthcoming 
on terms that reflect a fair evaluation of the borrower risk. In fact, loans (adjusted for sales 
and securitisation) to the non-financial private sector in the euro area have been shrinking on 
an  annual  basis  since  September  2012.  The  shrinking  mostly  affects  non-financial 
corporations  (–2.9% 
for  sales  and 
securitisation). At the same time, the growth of loans to households has been stagnating at 
subdued levels since the beginning of this year. 
The third challenge is the uncertainty around the on-going process of institutional reforms. 
While  necessary,  reforms  do  not  come  without  risks.  Setbacks  in  the  reform  agenda  are 
possible and could harm economic recovery, especially in those countries where growth and 
economic  reform  are  most  intimately  connected.  Any  delay  in  the  financial  reform  agenda 
towards a banking union, in particular, could be perceived as a signal of waning commitment 
and could severely undermine investor confidence. 
in  August  and  –2.7%  in  September,  adjusted 
Inflation and price stability 
All of this has coloured the complexion of our recovery, making it very pale and sickly. And 
inflation  –  a  thermometer  of  the  underlying  state  of  economic  strength  –  has  given  us 
warning signs. 
Inflation  has  been  on  a  downward  trend  since  early  2012.  Over  the  last  four  months,  the 
trend has accelerated noticeably. To be sure, neither the scale nor the composition of the 
recent disinflation has been very unusual: most of the recent fall in headline figures has been 
driven by an unwinding of past bouts of price increases in the most volatile components of 
the consumer basket. For example, fresh food in the very recent period saw the reversal of 
price tensions that were registered earlier in the year. Likewise, favourable base effects and 
moderate corrections in crude oil prices led to a sharp correction in the energy component. 
Nevertheless, if one corrects for these erratic effects, the downward trend in the non-energy 
and  no-food  part  of  our  inflation  index  –  the  HICP  –  was  no  doubt  a  rapid  one.  Also,  the 
negative  momentum  introduced  by  energy  prices  comes  at  a  point  in  time  where  the 
non-energy factors are also drifting down. None of the various components of the inflation 
index are below their historical lows, if taken in isolation. The fact that they are all at their 
minima at the same time is something that we have not observed in recent times. 
Why is this a source of concern? And why is it policy relevant? 
The  Treaty  that  has  established  the  ECB  has  given  the  new  central  bank  a  well-defined 
mandate: to maintain price stability. It did not say more than this. What is price stability? 
In  response  to  this  question,  at  the  very  start  of  monetary  union  in  October  1998,  the 
Governing Council of the ECB defined price stability as a positive rate of inflation below 2%. 
If inflation rates are kept within this range over the medium term – so was the thinking behind 
this  quantification  –  economic  decisions  will  not  be  distorted  by  the  pure  drifting  of  the 
nominal  scale.  Inflation  rates  within  this  range  are  sufficiently  low  to  not  interfere  with  an 
efficient allocation of resources. They do not promote that sort of arbitrary redistributions of 
wealth and income that has proved so disruptive in inflationary contexts. By implication, the 
central bank – which is responsible for determining inflation over longer horizons – does its 
best in terms of contributing to the economic welfare of society if it succeeds in delivering 
inflation that on average gravitates within this interval. 
Mind  one  thing.  The  definition  provided  in  1998  already  ruled  out  negative  inflation: 
de-flation.  Why  so?  Because  an  economy  with  positive  potential  growth  cannot  grow  at 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
potential  if  it  falls  into  a  self-sustaining  deflationary  spiral.  If  prices  are  expected  to  fall, 
demand will be deferred to a future point in time when prices will be lower. But the fact is: 
that point in time will never come. And demand, income and production will keep falling with 
prices. 
In  May  2003,  the  Governing  Council  went  beyond  this  numerical  characterisation  of  price 
stability.  The  Governing  Council  provided  more  clarity  on  its  policy  orientation  within  the 
range.  Indeed,  while  all  positive  inflation  rates  below  2%  may  be  equally  attractive  from  a 
pure  –  and  narrowly  static  –  welfare  perspective,  additional  considerations  regarding  the 
dynamic  stability  of  the  macroeconomic  system  argued  for  selecting  some  specific  values 
within the range. This is why  in  May 2003  it was decided that, over the medium term, the 
Governing Council would aim for inflation rates below, but close to, 2% in the medium term. 
In other words, within the price stability interval, a medium-term inflation rate not too far from 
2% was considered a superior goal for monetary policy. 
What  are  the  further  considerations  that  suggested  clarifying  a  policy  aim  within  the  price 
stability interval? Two main considerations led to that decision. 
The first was to make sure that the steady state inflation in the euro area as a whole would 
incorporate a sufficient buffer away from zero. If the steady state inflation is close to zero, the 
steady state nominal interest rate that the central bank has to set in order to keep inflation at 
that  level  on  average  is  also  not  too  far  from  zero.  But  then,  if  a  sharp  recession  hits,  a 
central  bank  rapidly  runs  out  of  space  for  an  effective  standard  easing  of  monetary 
conditions. If the distance between the steady state nominal rate and zero is small, there is 
not much scope for cutting rates to defend price stability in the face of a negative shock. If 
the aim is to maintain inflation within the price stability range, and avoid deflation, the central 
bank may find itself out of standard monetary policy ammunition in the face of falling prices. 
Of course, the central bank can always activate more unorthodox instruments of intervention, 
even when it exhausts the space for further rate cuts. But these unorthodox instruments are 
generally  untested,  less  effective  than  standard  measures,  and  probably  more  intrusive  of 
market  pricing.  If  deflation  is  detrimental  to  welfare,  as  I  tried  to  argue  before,  so  is  an 
inflation  rate  that  is  too  close  to  zero,  as  it  may  increase  the  probability  of  falling  into 
deflation. 
The second motivation for the May 2003 communication was associated with intra-euro area 
inflation differentials. In a heterogeneous currency area, inflation differentials across member 
economies  reflect  their  different  cyclical  conditions,  economic  structures,  and  policy 
frameworks. Some of these factors are equilibrium phenomena, others require a correction. 
A focal point for policy within the price stability range sufficiently away from zero allows the 
correction of cross-country relative prices to take place without forcing national inflation rates 
to excessively low or even negative levels. In current circumstances, many countries in the 
periphery with past competitiveness deficits have to strive for low inflation rates relative to the 
euro area average: there is no other way for them to redress their imbalances and restore 
their economies to growth. But the issue is the nominal anchor around which this correction 
in the relative prices of stressed countries should take place. If that anchor – the euro area 
average  inflation  –  is  too  low,  the  country  adjustment  may  run  against  major  structural 
impediments which can delay the process and make it more painful – for themselves and for 
the whole of the euro area. 
The  2003  definition  gives  us  clear  guideposts  for  assessing  risks  to  price  stability  and  act 
accordingly. 
Here, I can only cite what Otmar Issing said at the May 2003 press conference – where the 
clarification  of  the  ECB’s  strategy  was  announced  and  explained  to  the  media.  When 
questioned about the “below but close to 2%” notion, he said: “[I]f we were to identify a risk of 
inflation approaching very low levels on a sustainable basis and threatening to fall below 1% 
in a persistent way, then we should of course be extremely concerned. With our clarification 
now, that we aim to keep inflation at close to 2%, I think it is clear enough that we are not 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
blind  in  the  eye  which  identifies  deflationary  problems.  We  have  both  eyes  –  as  Paul 
Samuelson said in a slightly different context – watching deflationary as well as inflationary 
developments.” 
I  would  not  have  more  to  add.  Only  three  footnotes  to  explain  our  decision  to  reduce  our 
main policy rates in early November. 
First, although we had been surprised by a drop in inflation in October to 0.7%, that was not 
the  reason  we  lowered  the  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  on  7  November.  The 
reason was that we were expecting inflation to remain weak – around levels testing the lower 
half of our price stability range – for an extended period of time. As we had repeated before, 
we saw inflation weakness extending into the medium term. 
Second,  as  I  said  already,  the  decline  in  inflation  was  across  a  broad  spectrum  of 
components of the price index. It is a broad-based downward shift that was policy-relevant, 
and  its  association  with  weak  demand.  The  fragile  recovery  is  characterised  by  persistent 
spare capacity. Price pressure from the labour market is weak in the light of high levels of 
unemployment  and  low  labour  costs.  In  addition,  monetary  indicators  point  to  persistent 
subdued  dynamics  in  money  and  credit.  The  confluence  of  evidence  pointed  to  demand 
factors behind the fall in inflation. 
Third, we believe our decision has rebalanced the risks to price stability, which had become 
tilted to the downside. We think deflation was not in sight before, and has become even more 
unlikely after our decision. Our decision has increased the buffer against unwelcome price 
surprises. 
It  has  increased  the  probability  that  we  hit  our  objective  in  the  medium  term.  It  is  only  in 
conditions in which the economy is restored to steady growth, and demand develops solidly 
in line with the supply potential that interest rates can go back to levels that citizens would 
regard as fair remuneration for their savings. Prolonged stagnation in incomes and negative 
inflation  can  only  bring  destruction  of  income  and  saving.  As  Japan  teaches,  permanent 
stagnation brings decades of zero or even negative returns for savers. 
Standard and non-standard action 
As I anticipated already, at our last meeting in November we reduced the main refinancing 
rate to a record low of 0.25%. The reduction in our main policy rate to 0.25% can introduce 
additional accommodation through two channels. 
First,  under forward guidance,  its  diffusion  across  the  whole  spectrum of  term  rates  in  the 
money  market  has  been  empowered.  Monetary  policy  decisions  are  effective  only  to  the 
extent that they affect interest rates at longer maturities, starting from those longer-term rates 
that banks determine in their interbank transactions. It is the expectations of future money 
market overnight rates that play a key benchmark role in setting the basis for the pricing of 
the entire spectrum of credit contracts in the broader economy. Our forward guidance  has 
extended the horizon over which investors operating in the short end of the money market 
expect monetary policy to remain very accommodative – in tune with the fragile conditions of 
the economic recovery. This explains why the reduction in the rate on our main refinancing 
operations has determined a material shift in the entire term structure of money market rates. 
We trust these lower rates will be transmitted by banks and financial operators to the rates 
on mortgages and lines of credit for retail borrowers. 
Under guidance communication, we have been expressing our conditional expectation that 
the policy rates will remain at current or even lower levels in the future for an extended period 
of time. At our last meeting in early November we activated the easing bias that was implicit 
in our previous guidance communication, and we reconfirmed the guidance and its easing 
bias moving forward. We still have not reached the effective lower bound. And we still have 
not  exhausted  our  standard  policy  lever  in  conditions  in  which  the  risks  that  I  have 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
enumerated before could pose further threats to our price stability objective, and may thus 
call for more action. 
Second, within the fixed rate full allotment operational framework that we have prolonged in 
time, the rate on the main refinancing operations can act as a backstop for money market 
borrowing  and  lending  activity  over  an  extended  horizon.  This  effectively  can  cap  upward 
volatility in the money market rates. If banks expect to be able to draw central bank credit on 
demand over an extended horizon, the cost of interbank credit in the money market, even for 
longer tenors, will be unlikely to increase much beyond the rate at which the ECB is expected 
to lend under the main refinancing operations in the future. This, again, helps flatten the yield 
curve in the money market and keep the cost of credit in the broader economy constrained. 
This  latter  feature  of  our  current  system  of  liquidity  provision  is  important,  particularly  in 
conditions  –  like  at  present  –  in  which  excess  liquidity  in  the  money  market  is  shrinking. 
Indeed,  since  the  peak  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  summer  of  2012,  we  have 
witnessed  a  significant  reduction  in  the  amount  of  excess  liquidity.  Excess  liquidity  is  the 
amount  of  cash  over  and  above  the  level  that  banks  collectively  need  to  fulfil  reserve 
requirements, to meet the demand for currency by their customers and to cope  with other 
exogenous factors that drain liquidity from circulation occasionally. Banks participate less in 
new refinancing operations and are also using the option to repay liquidity obtained in our 
two  three-year  LTROs  in  late  2011  and  early  2012.  In  other  words,  banks  seek  less 
insurance  against  funding  shocks  from  public  sources  (the  ECB)  and  return  to  the  private 
market place to fulfil their demand for finance. 
This is all welcome. And we observe with relief the consequences that this process is having 
for  the  TARGET-2  balances,  which  have  dropped  by  30%  since  the  summer  of  last  year. 
With  our  decision  to  lower  the  rate  on  our  main  refinancing  operation  under  forward 
guidance, and extend the application of the fixed-rate with full allotment policy, we will allow 
this process to continue without negative implications for market rates. This combination of 
policies  will  make  money  market  conditions  less  dependent  on  excess  liquidity  and  its 
uncertain evolution. 
Institutional reform in the financial sector 
The challenges of conducting and implementing monetary policy in the current environment 
are a fitting reminder of a more general challenge. Monetary policy can support a recovery by 
shielding it from risks. But monetary policy cannot substitute for structural reforms that tackle 
problems at their root. The normalisation of money market conditions goes hand in hand with 
unstable rates because there is more need to improve the health of the banking sector. 
Much has already been achieved. Fresh capital has been raised, problematic legacy assets 
have been removed and, as a result, Core Tier 1 ratios of the largest euro area banks now 
stand at 11%, well above the new Basel III capital requirements. But more must be done and 
progress is on its way in the form of a European banking union. Before the first element of 
the  banking  union,  the  single  supervisory  mechanism,  takes  up  its  role,  a  comprehensive 
balance sheet assessment must be undertaken. This task has recently begun. 
The  asset  quality  review  has  three  specific  goals:  first,  to  achieve  transparency  about  the 
current  quality  of  balance-sheets;  second,  to  repair  balance  sheets  where  necessary;  and 
third, as a as a result of the first two, to regain the confidence of all major stakeholders in 
banks. Only then will banks be the financiers of the real economy. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Five years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers and one and a half year after the peak of 
the sovereign debt crisis, the worst seems over. A recovery has started, but it is still in its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
infancy and fragile. The global environment remains uncertain. Structural reform and fiscal 
sustainability are underway, but must be pushed to completion. Financial sector regulation is 
being thoroughly revamped. 
Steering the economy under these conditions presents formidable challenges. However, we 
have  a  clear  mandate:  to  maintain  price  stability.  Our  recent  decision  to  cut  rates  was 
warranted  by  our  mandate.  To  ensure  the  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy  we 
provide  forward  guidance  and  provide  ample  liquidity.  But  we  can  only  provide  an 
environment  conducive  to  long-term growth. Growth  itself  comes from  a  structurally  sound 
economy. The banking union and the forthcoming asset quality review are part of structural 
reforms whose success is key for the economic future of Europe.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
