Louis Kasekende: Developments in Uganda’s banking industry 
Speech by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, on the occasion of 
celebrating  forty  (40)  years  of  Tropical  Bank  Limited’s  banking  operations  in  Uganda, 
Kampala, 4 December 2013. 
 Your Excellency, The President of the Republic of Uganda 
The Hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
The Board of Directors, Tropical Bank Limited 
The Managing Director and Senior Management of Tropical Bank Limited 
Invited Guests in your respective capacities 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I wish to first and foremost, welcome and thank His Excellency the President of the Republic 
of  Uganda,  President  Yoweri  Kaguta  Museveni  for  taking  time  off  your  busy  schedule  to 
come and join us at this auspicious occasion when Tropical Bank Limited is celebrating forty 
(40) years of successful operations in Uganda and also launching its new corporate identity. 
I  also  wish  to  congratulate  the  Shareholders  (the  Governments  of  Libya  and  Uganda) 
together  with  the  Board  of  Directors,  Management  and  Staff  of  Tropical  Bank  upon  the 
attainment of 40 years of banking operations in Uganda. 
Tropical Bank, as you have already heard, opened its doors to the public in Uganda in 1973 
under the name the Libyan Arab Bank for Foreign Trade and Development. 
In order to suit the changing trends and maintain its competitiveness in the banking industry, 
Tropical Bank has rebranded a number of times since inception in 1973. In 1994, the bank’s 
name was changed from Libyan Arab Uganda Bank for Foreign Trade and Development to 
Tropical  Africa  Bank  Limited.  In  May  2006,  the  bank  again  changed  its  name  to  Tropical 
Bank Ltd. 
Your Excellency, please allow me also to point out that the bank has continued to work very 
closely with Bank of Uganda especially during its challenging times. In 2011, the UN Security 
Council  imposed  a  freeze  on  assets  of  the  Government  of  Libya  and  Associated  Entities 
including the Libyan Foreign Bank, the majority shareholder of Tropical Bank. Consequently 
Bank of Uganda on March 25, 2011 put in place measures that were intended to protect the 
interest of depositors. Tropical Bank continued to operate normally and remained in a safe 
and sound condition. The bank’s financial condition has remained strong with capital position 
of Shs.46.51 billion (well above the statutory requirement of Shs.25bn), branch network of 
ten (10) and sixteen (16) ATMs. 
The bank has also improved its IT platform in order to provide customized financial services 
in the areas of agriculture, manufacturing, construction, transport and tourism. 
The bank has been instrumental in supporting the development of small and medium sized 
enterprises in agriculture, industry and education sectors. The bank has recently partnered 
with  Agribusiness  Initiative  (aBi)  Trust,  whose  primary  objective  is  strengthening  the 
competitiveness  of  Uganda’s  agricultural  and  agro-processing  sector  through  improved 
performance of value chains. 
This is a clear demonstration that the Board of Directors and Senior Management of Tropical 
Bank are committed to contributing to one of the nation’s strategic development priorities; the 
modernization of agriculture. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Today, we also witness the launch of the bank’s new, fresher and more energised corporate 
identity which communicates the uniqueness and promise of offering simple and professional 
services  to  their  customers.  The  banking  sector  has  become  increasingly  competitive  with 
banks developing new and superior products and services to meet customer expectations. I 
believe this rebranding will enable Tropical Bank to attract new customers and widen their 
foot print in the banking industry. 
Your Excellency, I also wish to take this opportunity to state that the overall usage of financial 
services by the Ugandan population has greatly improved. According to the recently released 
2013 FINSCOPE Survey results, the share of the adult population accessing formal financial 
institution increased two fold from 28% in 2009 to 54% in 2013. The population of financially 
excluded  adults  in  Uganda  reduced  from  4.3million  (30%  of  adults  in  2009)  to  2.6  million 
(15% of adults in 2013). 
Your Excellency, Bank of Uganda together with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic 
Development has proposed amendments to the Financial Institutions Act 2004, to improve 
Agent Banking and Islamic Banking. Once these Amendments become law and coupled with 
the innovations in the mobile money transfer services, we hope that the financially excluded 
population of 15% will be in position to access financial services. 
The mobile money transfer services platform has already yielded positive results. Currently 
the number of mobile money transfer services users stands at 12million while the value of 
transaction through this channel for September 2013 is UShs.1.6trillion. 
The overall banking industry has greatly transformed with industry branch network of 509 as 
at 30 November 2013 compared to 382 branches as at November 30, 2010 while the number 
of  ATMs  has  grown  tremendously  from  590  as  at  30  November  2010  to  758  as  at 
30 November  2013.  Tropical  bank  has  been  part  of  this  transformation  in  the  banking 
industry.  I  therefore  thank  each  and  every  one  here  present  especially,  the  Board  and 
Management staff and customers for your important contributions that brought Tropical Bank 
to where it is today.  
Last  but  not  least,  Your  Excellency,  I  would  like  to  inform the  general public  that  the  East 
African  Cross  Boarder  Payment  System  (EAPS)  which  is  an  initiative  of  the  East  African 
Central  Banks  went  live  on  Monday  25  November  2013  and  is  now  operational  in  three 
countries namely; Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. Rwanda and Burundi are expected to join 
the integrated regional payment system at a later date when ready. EAPS is a multi currency 
system  in  which  payments  are  effected  using  any  of  the  currencies  of  the  EAC  Partner 
States. It will make cross boarder payments easier and facilitate safe and efficient transfer of 
monetary  value  within  the  region.  EAPS  will  also  be  vital  in  promoting  regional  trade  and 
enhancing economic integration. 
With these remarks, allow me once again to extend my heartfelt congratulations to Tropical 
Bank Limited on their 40th anniversary and wish them many more fruitful years of banking 
operations in Uganda. 
I thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
