Yves Mersch: Mastering the crux of defragmentation 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  SAFE  (Sustainable  Architecture  for  Finance  in  Europe)  Conference  on  Financial 
Market Policy, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 29 November 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
A key feature of the crisis was the fragmentation in financial markets in the euro area. The 
challenge of reversing this fragmentation is therefore a major crux on the climb out of crisis. 
Mountaineers would usually expect the crux of a climb to be somewhere close to the summit 
of the mountain. So what makes the situation of the euro area at this early point of the climb 
a  crux?  In  my  view  there  are  two  particular  features  of  a  crux:  First,  a  crux  is  a  difficult 
passage of the climb with various pitfalls that the mountaineer must master in order to arrive 
to the summit. If the climber cannot pass the crux, she or he must take a long and exhausting 
detour.  The  second  feature  of  a  crux  is  that  it  is  situated  in  exposed  terrain.  Hence,  the 
climber has to take appropriate safeguards and rope up to reduce the risk of an accident. 
The process of defragmentation 
As a first encouraging step forward in the climb out of the crisis, we see that fragmentation of 
financial markets in the euro area has come down significantly since its climax in the early 
summer of 2012. Deposits have grown, capital inflows have taken place, the claims on the 
Eurosystem  by  banks  continue  to  go  down  and  TARGET2  balances  have  declined.  Euro 
redenomination  risks  have  been  taken  off  the  table.1  Euro  area  banks  –  also  those  in 
non-core  countries  and  smaller  institutions  –  have  reported  to  the  ECB  a  continuing 
improvement across funding categories in the third quarter of 2013. 
This  process  of  receding  fragmentation  of  financial  markets  I  want  to  refer  to  as 
defragmentation.  Defragmentation  does  not  happen  overnight.  It  proceeds  gradually, 
supported by lower risk aversion, and requires time to feed through to the financial system 
and, finally, to the real economy. For example, we observe that bank loans to businesses are 
still subdued. Based on historical experience, we know that bank loans are one of the last 
financial indicators to pick up in a recovery. In the initial phase of the recovery, firms normally 
make use of internal or market-based sources of funding rather than banks. 
I will now focus on the first feature of the crux, the pitfalls on the climb towards recovery. I 
see three main pitfalls that may slow down the process of defragmentation or even reverse it: 
• 
• 
• 
In the following I would like to address each of the pitfalls one by one. 
competitiveness differentials across Member States, 
public and private deleveraging, and 
institutional barriers in financial markets. 
Competitiveness differentials across Member States 
Competitiveness  differentials  within  the  euro  area  –  but  also  globally  –  are  a  challenge 
because  they  can  lead  to  macroeconomic  imbalances.  The  recent  crisis  has  taught  us  a 
                                                
1  Al-Eyd,  A.  and  Berkmen,  S. P.  (2013).  Fragmentation  and  Monetary  Policy  in  the  Euro Area,  IMF Working 
Paper WP/13/208. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
lesson  how  imbalances  can  put  financial  stability  at  risk.  Therefore,  it  is  important  that 
existing imbalances are corrected. 
In  this  respect  I  see  remarkable  progress  in  some  areas.  All  periphery  countries  have 
recaptured some of the losses in competitiveness that had been incurred previously. There is 
no  single  best  indicator of  competitiveness,  as there  are many  dimensions  to  this  concept 
relating  to  both  price  and  non-price  factors.  This  notwithstanding,  nominal  unit  labour  cost 
developments provide a good indication of the extent to which an economy can effectively 
compete in terms of labour costs. 
But  we  should  also  focus  on  institutional  competitiveness,  that  is  to  say  the  quality  of 
governance, the cutting of red tape and efficiency of tax systems. These aspects have also 
formed part of the adjustment programmes that some countries are going through. 
Overall,  it  is  important  to  realise  that  one  reason  for  the  need  to  implement  adjustment 
measures was a lack of action in the time before the crisis. It is not “austerity” that leads to 
weak  growth,  but  structural  weaknesses  and  low  growth  potentials  caused  the  need  for 
consolidation.2 
Meanwhile  we  can  see  encouraging  signs  that these  measures  are  bearing  fruit.  Stressed 
countries  such  as  Ireland,  Spain  or  Portugal  –  but  also  other  euro  area  countries  –  have 
shown  significant  current  account  improvements.  Greece  has  improved  its  current  account 
position by over 14 percentage points since 2008. At first, only imports decreased but lately 
also exports have grown. 
Those countries that have reformed are being rewarded twofold: by their own success and 
the solidarity and support by the European community. 
As a result, imbalances within the euro area have decreased. Hence, the financial stability 
risks  emerging  from  imbalances  have  also  receded.  And  stressed  countries  have  a  much 
better and more sustainable growth perspective than some years ago. All this has important 
confidence effects on investors and encourages them to return to these markets. This in turn 
supports  defragmentation  in  the  euro  area. Indeed,  this analysis  is  shared  by  international 
investors as substantial capital inflows to the euro area in recent months show. In October, 
annual net capital inflows of 322 bn Euros were observed, mainly driven by current account 
surpluses  and  an  increased  weight  on  euro  area  equities  and  securities,  including  from 
stressed countries. 
At the same time, I want to note our efforts to reduce competitiveness differentials should not 
lead to a loss of competitiveness of the euro area as a whole. Competitors elsewhere in the 
world  are  not  sleeping.  The  model  of  the  euro  area  is  to  match  the  best  rather  than 
converging to the average. So far we are on the right track. Since the start of the financial 
crisis, the aggregate euro area current account has reversed from a deficit of 1.9% of GDP in 
the third quarter of 2008 to a surplus of 2.4% in the second quarter of 2013 – the highest 
since  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency.  This  being  said,  the  euro  area  should  also 
strengthen its domestic business investments. It is not only about exporting but also about 
investing  in  the  technology  and  equipment  that  will  deliver  competitive  advantages  in  the 
future. 
Public and private deleveraging 
Let me now turn to the second pitfall in the process of defragmentation: public and private 
deleveraging. Many euro area Member States are emerging from the crisis with high public 
and  private  debt  levels.  Persistently  high  debt  levels  could  severely  delay  the  process  of 
defragmentation.  At  the  moment,  deleveraging  is  underway  with  varying  progress.  To  be 
                                                
2  Bini Smaghi, L. (2013). Austerity and stupidity, VoxEU.org. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
more precise, let me take a closer look at different sectors of the economy: The public sector, 
the financial sector and the non-financial sector. 
In the public sector, gradual and continuous deleveraging has taken hold. The euro area has 
the  lowest  budget  deficits  and  debt  levels  of  the  large  advanced  economies  in  the  world.3 
Moreover,  the  divergence  within  the  euro  area  has  been  reduced.  At  the  European  level, 
mechanisms that ensure public deleveraging have been strengthened. In the field of public 
finances,  the  euro  area  is  on  track.  What  we  need  now  is  persistence  and  patience.  If 
governments  fail  to  deliver  in  the  deleveraging  process,  defragmentation  could  easily  be 
slowed down or even reversed. 
In the financial sector, balance sheet adjustments have also started. In many Member States 
impaired  assets  have  been  transferred  to  asset  management  companies.  Nevertheless, 
confidence in the health of bank balance sheets has not yet been fully restored. In the run-up 
to the SSM, the ECB will conduct a Comprehensive Assessment of banks’ balance sheets. 
This  assessment  will  increase  transparency  by  enhancing the quality  of  information that  is 
available  concerning  the  conditions  of  banks.  It  will  also  identify  weaknesses  and  entail 
corrective actions where necessary. It will therefore also play a pivotal role in displaying the 
progress of financial sector deleveraging. The Comprehensive Assessment will hence further 
support defragmentation. 
Deleveraging in the non-financial sector has so far been less discussed. The Economist has 
recently  termed  this  issue  “the  other  debt  crisis”.  In  particular  in  stressed  countries, 
businesses  suffer  from  high  debt  levels.  For  profitable  businesses  this  can  lead  to  a  debt 
overhang which inhibits them from financing new and value creating investment projects. For 
unprofitable  businesses,  the  question  is  even  more  unfortunate  from  a  macroeconomic 
perspective:  The  capital  bound  in  such  undertakings  could  probably  be  put  to  a  more 
profitable use elsewhere. 
Of course, deleveraging itself will consume profits and capital and weigh on economic activity 
for some time. We are still in a phase of disappointing growth dynamics of broad money, and 
loans to non-financial firms are only stabilising at weak levels. 
But  it  is  important  to  deleverage  in  order  to  allow  capital  and  labour  to  reallocate. 
Schumpeter once told his students in a university lecture that a depression is for capitalism 
like a good, cold shower. I would not go as far as him, because the economic adjustment in a 
crisis  is  much  more  painful  than  a  cold  shower.  But  it  is  true  that  we  must  seize  the 
opportunities that our current situation offers. We must avoid the pitfall of being complacent 
with high debt levels that will prolong fragmentation and ultimately hamper growth. 
Institutional barriers between financial markets 
And with this I would like to turn to the last of the three pitfalls that I listed at the outset. I 
believe  that  institutional barriers  between  national  financial  markets  remain  one  of  the key 
pitfalls in the quest to secure defragmentation. 
In the crisis the institutional responsibility for dealing with bank problems was exclusively with 
the individual EU countries. In some cases, as in Ireland, the problems of domestic banks 
overwhelmed  the  fiscal  capacity  of  the  sovereign.  In  other  cases  fiscal  problems  have 
dragged  down  the  banking  system.  The  result  was  the  well-known  vicious  feedback  loop 
between banks and sovereigns. In addition, the incentives of national supervisors were often 
not aligned with the European financial stability  objective. Some supervisors, motivated by 
uncertainty,  engaged  in  defensive  actions  such  as  national  ring-fencing  of  liquidity  and 
                                                
3  Comparison of US, Japan and euro area. See European Commission (2013), European Economic Forecast 
Autumn 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
national  asset-liability  matching.  This  may  have  been  rational  given  their  mandates,  but  it 
reinforced fragmentation of financial markets. 
With  these  remarks  on  the  three  pitfalls  competitiveness,  deleveraging  and  institutional 
barriers, I would like to turn to the second feature of a crux: The need to take appropriate 
safeguards  to  avoid  an  accident.  Edward  Whymper,  the  first  climber  of  the  Matterhorn  in 
Switzerland,  once  recalled  that  “courage  and  strength  are  nought  without  prudence”.  In  a 
fragile  situation  as  in  these  days  the  euro  area  must  indeed  act  very  prudently  and  not 
overestimate its strength. Concretely, this means to take precautions that fragmentation does 
not return. 
Banking Union 
One  very  important  precaution  is  currently  in  the  making:  The  Banking  Union.  It  will 
encompass the euro area as well as other EU Member States that may wish to participate. In 
our opinion, two elements of the Banking Union are key: a Single Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM) and a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). Both elements will be discussed in more 
depth  in  two  of  the  panel  discussions  later  on.  At  this  point  I  would  like  to  limit  myself  to 
pointing out three success factors that these two mechanisms should count with to ensure 
further defragmentation in the euro area. In the case of the SSM we already know that these 
success factors are by and large fulfilled. For the SRM this will depend on the final outcome 
of the legislative process. 
The  first  success  factor  is  common  access  to  information.  Both  SSM  and  SRM  will  have 
access to the relevant information of all banking institutions in participating Member States 
within their field of competence, ranging from full-scale supervisory information for the SSM, 
to  resolution  plans  for  the  SRM.  This  way  both  mechanisms  can  ensure  comparability  of 
information across national borders and have a sound basis for their actions. 
The  second  success  factor  is  common  decision-making  at  the  European  level.  Both 
mechanisms have a single European decision-making body: the Supervisory Board prepares 
the supervisory decisions to be decided by the Governing Council in the SSM and the Single 
Resolution  Board  prepares  the  resolution  decisions  to  be  taken  by  the  European 
Commission, if we consider the proposal currently on the table. As a result, and even if we 
have changes in the SRM, it is key that we remain in each of the mechanism with a single 
body at the European level that will be ultimately responsible for decision-making. 
The third factor is common tools: Both SSM and SRM will have their respective single tool 
box  to  achieve  their  mandates.  For  the  SSM  this  refers  to  the  harmonised  supervisory 
powers  of  the  Single  Rulebook  provided  for  by  the  CRDIV/CRR,  even  though  the  many 
options  and  prudential  filters  at  national  level  with  phasing-in  allowed  in  some  cases  until 
2029 need to be addressed. In addition, the SSM will make use of a Supervisory Manual to 
ensure harmonised supervisory practices across participating Member States. In the case of 
the  SRM  the  harmonisation  of  resolution  tools  is  provided  for  by  the  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution Directive. In its resolution activity, the SRM is foreseen to have access to a Single 
Resolution  Fund,  which  should  be  financed  by  the  industry  itself.  Therefore,  it  is  essential 
that discretion – when it is required for objective reasons – ought to be applied at the central 
level.  Otherwise  there  is  the  risk  of  re-fragmentation  under  the  pretext  of  national 
particularities. 
If these three success factors are put in place, the Banking Union can achieve its long-term 
objective:  to  create  a  single  financial  market.  This  would  enable  a  creditworthy  firm  or 
household to get a loan from any bank in the Union at comparable conditions – and location 
considerations would not be predominant. In this way Banking Union is a central safeguard 
against fragmentation. 
Banking Union will also be pivotal for the smooth functioning of Monetary Union because it 
will help to repair the monetary policy transmission mechanism. However, progress on the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
other three pillars to accompany Monetary and Banking Union – fiscal, economic and political 
union – is also needed. 
Establishing the SSM 
I  would  like  to  use  the  opportunity  to  address  in  more  detail  two  issues  related  to  the 
establishment of the SSM. 
As mentioned before the ECB will conduct a comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance 
sheets before officially taking up the new supervisory task. This exercise will include three 
components. The first  is  a  supervisory  risk  assessment  addressing key risks  in the  banks’ 
balance  sheets,  including  liquidity,  leverage  and  funding.  The  second  is  the  asset  quality 
review  that  will  assess  credit  exposures,  on-  and  off-balance  sheet  positions  and 
domestic/non-domestic exposures. The third component is the stress test that will build on 
and  complement  the  asset  quality  review  by  providing  a  forward-looking  view  of  banks’ 
shock-absorption capacity under stress. 
This process has already started. After a pilot phase during which the ECB called for – and 
subsequently integrated – feedback from the banks, the ECB recently sent out the templates 
for data collection. 
In  this  context,  let  me  also  touch  upon  the  treatment  of  sovereign  credit  risk  in  the 
comprehensive assessment. In line with the current legal situation in CRDIV/CRR the point-
in-time balance sheet assessment will apply a “zero risk” weighting for banks’ sovereign debt 
holdings. However, in the medium term it makes sense from a prudential point of view that 
assets  are  being  weighted  according  to  their  riskiness  and  not  according  to  conventions 
which  might  not  reflect  reality.  This  should  however  be  done  in  a  coordinated  fashion  at 
international  level  by  the  relevant  competent  forum,  the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking 
Supervision,  which  has  acknowledged  this  common  sense  principle  but  allowed  for 
exceptions at the local level, which were exercised in the EU. 
The second issue that I wanted to bring up in the context of the establishment of the SSM is 
the  separation  of  monetary  policy  and  supervision.  Starting  next  autumn,  both  monetary 
policy  and  banking  supervision  in  the  euro  area  will  fall  within  the  remit  of  the  ECB.  This 
situation  brings  several  possible  conflicts  of  interest  between  supervision  and  monetary 
policy.  The  discussion  on  these  possible  conflicts  is  sometimes  somewhat  blurred. 
Therefore, let me be clear on what these possible conflicts may entail: 
First, a banking supervisor may have an incentive to delay or avert an interest rate decision 
of  the  central  bank  in  order  to  disguise  interest  rate  risks  on  banks’  balance  sheets  or  to 
prevent those risks from materialising. 
Second, the banking supervisor may want to send an unviable bank into resolution which has 
large amounts of outstanding central bank borrowings. In this situation, the central bank may 
have an incentive to delay or object to the resolution of this bank to avoid a default on the 
outstanding  monetary  policy  operations.  Of  course,  all  Eurosystem  credit  operations  are 
collateralised but the resolution of collateral can be a lengthy process and a residual risk can 
never be fully excluded. Let me add that looking back the ECB has not lost a single cent. 
The  ECB  will  put  the  necessary  measures  in  place  to  avoid  these  conflicts  and  ensure 
separation of monetary policy and supervision. Many of these measures are already codified 
in the SSM Regulation which serves as legal basis for the set-up of the SSM. Allow me to 
outline a few of them. 
Most  importantly,  the  planning  and  execution  of  supervisory  tasks  will  be  conducted  by  a 
separate  body,  the  Supervisory  Board.  The  Supervisory  Board  also  prepares  the  draft 
decisions  that  are  presented  to  the  ECB  Governing  Council.  The  Governing  Council’s 
deliberations  on  supervisory  matters  will  be  strictly  separated,  including  separate  agendas 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
and meetings. A mediation panel will be set up and resolve possible differences regarding an 
objection of the Governing Council to a draft decision by the Supervisory Board. 
Furthermore, the SSM will also have its own accountability procedures towards the European 
Parliament,  the  Council  and  national  parliaments.  Accountability  will  be  rendered  by  the 
Chair of the SSM’s Supervisory Board and not by the ECB’s President. This is intended to 
avoid any confusion among the two sets of roles and to safeguard the ECB’s independence. 
In addition, the staff involved in carrying out supervisory tasks will be organised in separate 
Directorate  Generals  and  be  located  in  a  different  building  once  the  staff  responsible  for 
monetary policy has moved to the new ECB premises. 
Conclusions 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The euro area is early on in the climb out of the crisis. The summit is still far and covered in 
fog.  And  the  euro  area  has  to  master  the  crux  of  defragmentation.  Evident  pitfalls  are 
between  us  and 
top.  These  pitfalls  are 
competitiveness,  deleveraging  and  institutional  barriers.  But  at  the same  time I  believe  we 
are on the right track. If we act prudently and put in place the necessary safeguards, this crux 
before us is manageable. In this regard, the establishment of Banking Union represents an 
exceptional opportunity that will support further defragmentation and ensure financial stability 
in Europe. 
Thank you very much.  
the  rewarding  view 
the  mountain 
from 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
