Kikuo Iwata: Purpose and mechanism of quantitative and qualitative 
monetary easing 
Special lecture by Mr Kikuo Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, commemorating 
the  50th  Anniversary  of  the  Institute  of  Economic  Research,  Chuo  University,  Chuo, 
18 October 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor for me to give a special lecture to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the 
foundation of the Institute of Economic Research, Chuo University. I wish to extend my great 
respect to those who were involved in its foundation and activities, and thank you for inviting 
me to speak on such a distinguished occasion. 
On  April  4,  the  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  a  new  policy  framework,  called  quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing (QQE). It decided that it would continue with the QQE, aiming to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in 
the  consumer  price  index  (CPI),  as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for  maintaining  that  target  in  a 
stable manner. 
In my lecture today, I would like to answer the following three questions. First, why does the 
Bank aim to achieve and maintain the price stability target of 2 percent? Second, what is the 
transmission  mechanism  through  which  the  QQE  achieves  and  maintains  its  purpose? 
Lastly, is Japan’s economy moving along the path that the Bank has anticipated? 
Reason behind the price stability target of 2 percent 
I. 
Let me start with the first question – namely, why does the Bank aim to achieve and maintain 
the price stability target of 2 percent? 
The  first  answer  is  that  deflation  must  be  avoided  once  and  for  all.  It  squeezes  corporate 
profits  through  price  declines  of  goods  and  services.  For  this  reason,  unless  companies 
manage to sell more goods and services, they will be put in a situation where they cannot 
pay their debts. Put differently, the real value of debts will increase as deflation continues. In 
light  of  an  increasing  real  value  of  debts,  firms  become  cautious  in  terms  of  their  attitude 
toward  business  investment  that  requires  fund-raising.  As  a  result,  production  and  labor 
demands of the economy as a whole will decline, leading to a rise in the unemployment rate 
and a decline in wages; hence, people’s living standards will go down as well. On top of this, 
an inflation rate of about 1 percent is not necessarily enough as a buffer against the slightest 
risk of deflation. 
The second answer to the question is the upward bias in the CPI. The price stability target 
refers to the CPI (all items excluding fresh food), which is considered to contain an upward 
bias of nearly +1 percentage point. As for the reason behind such a bias, it is pointed out 
that, in general, while households are more likely to reduce their consumption of those goods 
and  services  for  which  prices  have  risen,  revision  of  the  CPI  only  takes  place  every  five 
years;  hence,  the  CPI  does  not  accurately  capture  changes  in  the  composition  of 
consumption until it goes through that revision. 
Assuming  that  such  an  upward  bias  of  nearly  +1  percentage  point  exists,  even  if  the  CPI 
registers 1 percent on a year-on-year basis, the inflation rate in practice is likely to be close 
to zero percent. In other words, targeting an inflation rate of 1 percent could suggest that the 
aim  is  to  achieve  a  deflationary  environment  or  something  close  to  it.  This  leads  one  to 
conclude that a target of a somewhat higher rate of change is necessary once the presence 
of such an upward bias is taken into account. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  third  answer  to  the  question  of  why  the  Bank  aims to  achieve  and  maintain  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  owes  much  to  the  fact  that,  from  the  1990s  up  to  now,  the 
advanced  economies  that  have  maintained  inflation  rates  of  about  2  percent  have  shown 
relatively  better  performance,  by 
lower 
unemployment rates. 
Taking  all  of  these  into  consideration,  it  is  also  appropriate  for  Japan  to  aim  for  the  price 
stability target of about 2 percent. 
registering  higher  economic  growth  and 
How to achieve the price stability target 
II. 
Based on such understanding, the Bank has set the price stability target of 2 percent, and in 
order to achieve that target, it has embarked on a new phase of monetary policy – namely, 
the  QQE.  Put  differently,  the  QQE  is  a  bold  means  through  which  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent. 
Based on the better understanding of the relationship between the price stability target and 
the  QQE,  I  will  next  talk  about  how  the  Bank  aims  to  achieve  that  target  through 
implementation of the QQE. 
Two pillars of the QQE 
The  QQE  consists  of  the  following  two  pillars.  The  first  is  a  “commitment”  to  early 
achievement  of  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  Specifically,  the  Bank  is  clearly 
committed to “achieving  the  price stability  target  of  2  percent  at the  earliest  possible  time, 
with a time horizon of about two years.” 
The  second  pillar  is  the  demonstration  of  “concrete  actions”  that  underpin  the  first  pillar’s 
commitment.  These  are  well  captured  in  the  words  “quantity”  and  “quality,”  and  changes 
have already been seen in the expansion (i.e., quantity) and composition (i.e., quality) of the 
Bank’s balance sheet. 
In terms of the expansion of the balance sheet, the Bank will  increase the monetary base 
massively through purchases of a variety of assets including Japanese government bonds 
(JGBs). It aims to almost double the amount outstanding of the monetary base in two years, 
from 138 trillion yen at end-2012 to 270 trillion yen at end-2014. 
In terms of the composition of the balance sheet, the Bank will increase assets with relatively 
high risks. It now purchases JGBs in all maturities including those with super-long maturities 
of 40 years. As a result of this, the average remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB purchases 
has been more than doubled, extending from slightly less than three years to about seven 
years. It is expected that the effects of policy accommodation on financial conditions and the 
real economy will strengthen through working on interest rates across the whole yield curve. 
On top of this, the Bank has increased the purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and 
Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) in order to suppress risk premiums associated 
with those types of assets. 
Impact on nominal interest rates and inflation expectations 
Consisting  of  the  two  pillars  that  I  have  just  explained,  the  QQE  permeates  the  economy 
through nominal interest rates and the inflation expectations of financial market participants. 
First of all, the Bank’s ample provision of liquidity to the private sector through the purchases 
of  JGBs  and  other  assets  will  lower  nominal  interest  rates.  Moreover,  the  QQE,  with  the 
commitment  to  the  2  percent  price  stability  target,  will  lift  market  participants’  inflation 
expectations. Let me come back to this point later. 
Both the downward pressure on nominal rates and upward pressure on inflation expectations 
will  contribute  to  declines  in  the  expected  real  interest  rates,  because  the  expected  real 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
interest  rates  are  derived  by  subtracting  inflation  expectations  from  nominal  interest  rates. 
This has an important implication for the economy. 
Nonetheless, the upward pressure on inflation expectations is a double-edged sword: on the 
one  hand,  it  is  a  factor  contributing  to  declines  in  the  expected  real  interest  rates;  on  the 
other, it can lift up nominal interest rates. As I will explain shortly, the overcoming of deflation 
and  the  achievement  of  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  require  that  the  expected  real 
interest rates be maintained at low levels. It is therefore important that the extent of a pickup 
in nominal interest rates due to a rise in inflation expectations be lower than that of a rise in 
inflation expectations itself. 
Why do inflation expectations rise? 
I said at the beginning that the QQE will lift market participants’ inflation expectations. The 
reason behind the lift in inflation expectations owes much to the market expectations that a 
sharp  increase  in  the  monetary  base  (i.e.,  the  monetary  base  defined  as  the  total  of 
banknotes  and  coins  in  circulation  and  the  amount  outstanding  of  financial  institutions’ 
current accounts held at the Bank) in order to achieve the 2 percent price stability target, with 
a  strong  commitment,  will  eventually  lead  to  an  increase  in  bank  lending,  and  hence  an 
increase in the amount of money (i.e., sum of cash and deposits) circulating in the economy. 
If the money in the economy increases, people will expect that it will be used partly for the 
purpose  of  purchasing goods  and  services,  and  eventually  the  rate  of  inflation  will  start  to 
pick up as well. 
What  is  important  in  this  context  is  that,  even  though  an  increase  in  money  through  an 
expansion  of  bank  lending  is  not  observed,  inflation  expectations  could  start  rising  on  the 
back of an anticipated increase in money in the future. 
Let  us  now  look  at  recent  developments  in  inflation  expectations.  While  it  is  difficult  to 
measure  those  expectations,  as  they  are  formed  by  a  wide  range  of  economic  entities, 
break-even inflation – that is, the yield spread between fixed-rate coupon-bearing JGBs and 
inflation-indexed  JGBs,  and  representative  of  the  expected  rate  of  inflation  in  the  market  
– and figures collected from the results of surveys summarizing the views of researchers and 
economists at home and abroad show that inflation expectations are gradually rising as the 
QQE proceeds. 
Moreover,  according  to  the  recent  Opinion  Survey  on  the  General  Public’s  Views  and 
Behavior conducted by the Bank, the share of respondents who expected that prices will go 
up  one  year  from  now  reached  as  high  as  83  percent.  This  suggests  that  inflation 
expectations in the household sector are also on the rise (Chart 1). 
Rise in inflation expectations generating rise in stock and foreign currency markets 
The  expected  real  interest  rates  are  derived  by  subtracting  inflation  expectations  from 
nominal  interest  rates. In  the  following,  I  simply  refer  to  “real  interest  rates”  instead  of the 
expected real interest rates. 
While  nominal  rates  are  those  that  can  be  seen,  real  rates  represent  the  extent  to  which 
money – i.e., purchasing power – will increase in reality, taking account of price changes. If 
people  expect  that  inflation  is  on  the  horizon,  the  expected  purchasing  power  of  those 
assets, such as cash – which does not yield any returns – as well as deposits and bonds 
– which have fixed returns – will go down. 
Suppose the nominal rate of JGBs is 0.5 percent and the inflation expectation for the next 
12 months is 1.0 percent. The real rate will then become minus 0.5 percent by subtracting 
the inflation expectation of 1.0 percent from the nominal rate of 0.5 percent. This example 
suggests that, even if the nominal rate is 0.5 percent, as long as the inflation rate remains at 
1.0  percent,  the  purchasing  power  of  JGB  holdings  after  a  year  will  go  down  by  minus 
0.5 percent. Likewise for cash, given that its nominal rate is 0 percent, the purchasing power 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
of cash holdings after a year  will decline by 1.0 percent if the inflation rate is 1.0 percent. 
Indeed, the real rates derived from the JGB yields have been declining moderately as a trend 
since end-2012 (Chart 2). 
As I explained, if people expect prices to go up down the road, the real rates of return from 
cash as well as deposits and bonds – for which interest rates are fixed – will decline. Holding 
those assets will become less attractive than in the past. 
In light of such developments, market participants with rising inflation expectations will shift 
part of their portfolios from cash, deposits, and bonds including JGBs to equities (including 
equity  trust funds),  real estate  and  homes (including  real  estate  investment  trusts  such  as 
J-REITs)  or,  alternatively,  foreign-denominated  assets  for  which  returns  are  higher  than 
those derived from yen-denominated assets. As a result of this, expectations would be for 
stock prices to rise, the yen to depreciate, and foreign currencies to appreciate (Chart 3). 
Increase in consumption and exports 
Both  rising  stock  prices and  the  yen’s  depreciation  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  value  of 
household assets that are held in the form of either equities or foreign-denominated assets. 
According to recent statistics, the financial assets of households at end-June 2013 increased 
by  5  percent  on  a  year-on-year  basis.  Looking at  this  in  detail,  while  bonds  decreased  by 
9 percent,  shares  and  equities  increased  by  31  percent  and  investment  trusts  rose  by 
29 percent. The portfolio rebalancing that I just explained is actually taking place (Chart 4). 
Households facing a rising value of assets are likely to increase their consumption, and this 
is called the “wealth effect.” In addition, a rise in asset values, such as those of stock prices, 
will  make  people’s  sentiment  more  upbeat.  This  improvement  in  sentiment  is  also  an 
important factor in households increasing their spending. Household expenditure has been 
increasing since the beginning of this year, and this is largely due to the wealth effect that I 
just explained to you and the improvement in sentiment (Chart 5). 
As for the appreciation of foreign currencies, while the first thing that comes to our minds is 
an increase in exports, one should be reminded of an increase in foreign tourists in Japan, 
which  is  also  an  important  factor  for  expanding  domestic  services  demand  (Chart  6).  We 
know that the number of foreign tourists has been rising more recently (Chart 7). 
Increase in business fixed investment 
Such favorable developments will also provide positive movements in firms’ business fixed 
investment through different channels. 
First, an increase in household spending will necessitate that firms produce more in line with 
increasing demand; thus, they will become more aggressive with their business investment. 
A rise in stock prices and the appreciation of foreign currencies will increase the net asset 
values  of  firms  –  mainly  exporting  firms  –  that  hold  other  firms’  equities  and  foreign 
currencies.  This  improvement  in  balance  sheets  will  contribute  to  an  increase  in  business 
fixed  investment  (Charts  8  and  9).  According  to  estimates  by  Nomura  Securities,  the 
unrealized  gains  stemming  from  equity  holdings  of  1,830  listed  firms  increased  by 
32 percent, adding 3.7 trillion yen, from end-March to end-September 2013. 
Moreover, the improvement in business sentiment on the back of an increase in corporate 
profits is another factor in increasing business fixed investment. The ratio of current profits to 
sales  in  the  corporate  sector  has  been  rising  since  2012  and  business  sentiment  has 
continued to improve (Charts 10 and 11). 
According to the recent data on business fixed investment, GDP statistics show an increase 
in such investment of 1.3 percent for the April-June quarter this year, thus marking the first 
such  increase  in  six  quarters.  Likewise,  based  on  the  Financial  Statements  Statistics  of 
Corporations  by  Industry,  Quarterly,  business  fixed  investment  for  all  industries  has  been 
increasing since the October-December quarter last year. More specifically, while the year-
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
on-year rate of change in business fixed investment in manufacturing declined by 0.6 percent 
for the April-June quarter this year, the extent of the decline narrowed. By contrast, that in 
nonmanufacturing registered a large increase – 4.7 percent – for the same quarter, buoyed 
by an increase in household spending (Chart 12). 
The relationship between cash flow and business fixed investment also shows that the latter 
is likely to follow an uptrend going forward (Chart 13). 
Changes in industrial structure and entities undertaking business investment 
Having said all this, it is likely that business fixed investment for large manufacturing firms 
will not increase at a pace as fast as those registered during the previous economic recovery 
phase in the early 2000s. 
The  recovery  after  the  1990s  was  driven  by  public  investment  and/or  by  the  export-led 
manufacturing  sector.  On  the  contrary,  economic  recovery  this  time  is  mainly  led  by  the 
domestic  demand-driven  nonmanufacturing  sector.  This  suggests  that  Japan’s  industrial 
structure,  like  those  of  other  large  economies,  is  gradually  changing  and  tertiary 
industrialization is in progress (Chart 14). 
In  consideration  of  this  point,  there  is  a  possibility  that  the  major  bearer  of  business  fixed 
investment will gradually shift from the manufacturing sector to the nonmanufacturing sector 
in  the  future.  From  the  perspective  of  improving  the  extent  of  productivity  enhancement 
through business investment, deregulation will become vital in the nonmanufacturing sector, 
in particular business sectors such as medical and nursing care, as well as agriculture, which 
is currently going through the sixth industrialization. 
In addition, it is important to facilitate infrastructure in the metropolitan areas for the tertiary 
industry  to  flourish.  Urban  revitalization  provides  important  underpinnings  to  start  up  new 
leading  businesses.  It  will  become  an  important  issue  to  liberalize  the  floor-space  ratio 
regulation as well as land-use regulation as part of a growth strategy. 
Should this kind of growth strategy be adopted, it could further reinforce the effects of the 
QQE. This does not mean, however, that the price stability target of 2% cannot be achieved 
without  the  growth  strategy,  as  the  Bank  is  equipped  with  powerful  means  to  achieve  the 
target. What I wanted to say here is that, if the growth strategy becomes successful, we can 
achieve a higher real growth rate even with the same 2 percent inflation rate. 
Improvement in labor supply-demand balance and increase in wages 
All  in  all,  against  the  background  of  increases  in  demand  through  consumption,  business 
investment, exports, and public investment, the real GDP for the January-March and April-
June  quarters  this  year  grew  at  a  brisk  pace  –  4.1  and  3.8  percent,  respectively,  on  an 
annual basis. In the April-June quarter, both consumption and exports each contributed to its 
quarterly  growth  rate  by  0.4  percentage  point,  and  business  fixed  investment  and  public 
investment each contributed by 0.2 percentage point. 
In this circumstance, the unemployment rate declined to just under 4 percent in July and the 
active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  reached  nearly  1  (0.95  in  August).  These  figures 
suggest that  the  supply  and  demand balance  in  the  labor  market  is moving  in  a favorable 
direction  for  employees  (Chart  15).  To  be  sure,  the  unemployment  rate  in  August  was 
4.1 percent, somewhat higher than that in July. However, this was due to the fact that entry 
into the labor market increased on the back of improvement in the labor condition and that 
some  people  left  their  jobs  voluntarily  in  an  effort  to  look for  better  job  offers.  In  sum, the 
uptick in the unemployment rate in August was a temporary phenomenon. The September 
Tankan  survey  also  shows  that  the  employment  conditions  DI  was  in  the  domain  of 
“insufficient  employment”  rather  than  “excessive  employment,”  and  this  suggests  that  the 
supply and demand balance in the labor market has been tightening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
As for wages, while scheduled cash earnings are yet to increase, the number of employees 
has  started  to  rise  and  both  non-scheduled  cash  earnings  and  special  cash  earnings 
(bonuses) have increased. As a result, employee income has started to increase (Charts 16 
and 17). Due to such tightness in the supply-demand balance in the labor market, wages are 
expected to rise even further. 
A  rise  in  income  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  consumption,  improving  the  supply-demand 
balance  in  the  labor  market  and  increasing  employee  income.  This  will  further  boost 
consumption; hence, the virtuous cycle prevails (Chart 18). 
Developments in the CPI 
As  for  prices,  along  with  a  rise  in  import  prices  and  energy  prices  due  to  the  yen’s 
depreciation, the extent of price declines for durable goods, which have continued to decline, 
has started to narrow against the backdrop of resilient consumption. As a result, the year-on-
year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  excluding  fresh  food)  registered  0.7  percent  and 
0.8 percent, respectively, in July and August. Excluding both fresh food and energy, the CPI 
declined by 0.1 percent in July and August year on year, and the extent of the decline since 
February  has  continued  to  narrow  (Chart  19).  Recent  developments  in  the  CPI  reflect  the 
narrowing of the output gap (Chart 20). 
As such, once the actual CPI starts to rise, the inflation expectations of households and firms 
will  be  reinforced,  and  this  will  accelerate  an  increase  in  consumption  and  investment. 
Furthermore,  a  rise  in  actual  inflation  will  shift  the  Phillips  curve  upward  through  a  rise  in 
inflation expectations (Chart 21). 
As I have explained based on a number of indicators, Japan’s economy is judged to be on 
the verge of escaping from the deflation that has lasted for a long time, and it is recovering 
moderately. 
Going forward, I expect that the continuation of the QQE, aiming to achieve the 2 percent 
price stability target on a stable manner, will help Japan’s economy recover steadily, lead to 
an inflation rate close to 2 percent accompanied by wage rises, and achieve the overcoming 
of the deflation that has lasted for nearly 15 years. 
Excess reserves and inflation 
III. 
From a somewhat different perspective, I will now respond to criticisms raised regarding the 
Bank’s  policymaking.  More  specifically,  I  would  like  to  examine  the  rationale  behind  the 
hypothesis  that  inflation  cannot  be  attained  no  matter  how  much  the  Bank  increases  the 
monetary  base  because  its  liquidity  injection  will  only  increase  the  excess  reserves  of 
financial institutions and not increase the amount of money in the real sector. 
First,  let  us  review  what  occurred  in  the  past:  inflation  expectations  observed  in  the  JGB 
market  declined  sharply  after  the  Bank  lifted  its  quantitative  easing  on  March  9,  2006 
(Chart 22). 
More recently in the United States, nominal rates went up, inflation expectations came down, 
and the expected real rates picked up after market participants started forming a view that 
the Fed would start tapering the pace of its asset purchases in light of Chairman Bernanke’s 
testimony on May 22, while in reality this was meant to slow the pace of increase in excess 
reserves.  By  contrast,  the  FOMC’s  decision  to  continue  with  its  quantitative  easing  on 
September 18 led to a decline in nominal rates, a rise in inflation expectations, and a decline 
in the expected real rates (Chart 23). 
What should we make of these episodes? In my view, they owe much to the fact that market 
participants  make judgments  on  the  monetary  policy  regime  after they  see  changes  in the 
monetary base and the excess reserves, and then form projections for the money stock, the 
future course of interest rates, and projections for prices. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What matters to interest rates and inflation expectations is the monetary policy regime of a 
central bank and market participants’ views on the prospects for the money stock based on 
such  a  regime.  The  current  level  of  money  stock  is  irrelevant.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the 
simple “quantity theory of money,” in which there is a one-to-one relationship between the 
current  money  stock  and  prices,  does  not  hold  in  practice.  Nonetheless,  there  is  a  close 
relationship  between  the  projected  future  course  of  the  money  stock  and  inflation 
expectations, and the present rate of inflation is determined based on inflation expectations 
formed in that way. 
Risks and monetary policy 
IV. 
Lastly, I would like to touch on risk factors that could suppress the effects of the QQE. These 
are mainly overseas factors, and they are regarded as downside risk. 
In the euro area, the real GDP growth rate finally turned positive in the April-June quarter of 
this year. As there is not a sufficient mechanism to segregate the negative feedbacks among 
fiscal policy, monetary policy, and the real economy, one cannot exclude the possibility that 
the worsening situation in financial markets – triggered by an event in peripheral countries  
– would put downward  pressure on the euro area, thereby leading to a decline in Japan’s 
exports to that area. 
As  for  the  U.S.  economy,  while  the  downside  risk  is  diminishing,  the  U.S.  federal 
government’s fiscal policy continues to be a major downside risk and a  constraint on U.S. 
economic  growth.  Discussion  pertaining  to  the  federal  debt  ceiling  and  the  effect  of  fiscal 
policy are uncertainties, and these could become another risk factor in financial markets and 
the real economy. 
In emerging economies, the risk of recurrence of the Asian financial crisis in the late-1990s is 
slim,  but  we  need  to  bear  in  mind  that,  among  economies  with  vulnerable  economic 
structures, the outflow of capital – triggered by such reasons as the Fed’s possible tapering  
–  may  induce  their  own  currencies  to  depreciate  and  stock  prices  to  decline  further.  The 
economic growth path of the Chinese economy also needs to be monitored closely. 
Concluding remarks 
Monetary  policy  exerts  effects  on  asset  markets  such  as  the  bond,  stock,  and  foreign 
exchange markets. However, it takes a considerable amount of time for monetary policy to 
have an effect on economic activity in terms of production, employment, prices, and wages. 
Considering  that  it  has  been  just  over  six  months  since  the  Bank  introduced  the  QQE,  its 
effects  on  economic  activity  have  in  fact  appeared  earlier  than  with  other  past  monetary 
policies. This is probably because when the framework of Abenomics was announced in mid-
November last year, expectations for a new phase of aggressive monetary easing grew and 
the  public  –  including  investors  –  had  already factored  in the  shift to  aggressive  monetary 
policy, and with this in mind they started taking action from around that time. In other words, 
the effects of the QQE had already started exerting effects from mid-November last year. In 
fact, the rise in stock prices and the depreciation of the yen had been observed from around 
that period. 
On this basis, the effective duration of the new phase of monetary easing has now reached 
eleven months, and it is only natural that it has already exerted effects on economic activity 
to the extent observed today. 
Japan’s economy has been recovering steadily so far, in line with the path envisaged by the 
Bank;  however,  taking  into  account  the  time  lag  that  accompanies  the  effect  of  monetary 
policy on economic activity, the effects of the QQE will actually start to gain momentum in the 
economy hereafter. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
There  are  remaining  downside  risks  such  as  overseas  factors,  but  by  continuing  with  the 
QQE,  we  can  overcome  the  deflation  that  has  continued  for  some  15  years  within  a 
timeframe of about two years, and achieve the 2 percent price stability target, accompanied 
by a rise in wages. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15 
  16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17 
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 