Barry Whiteside: Microfinance in the Pacific – increasing access, 
enhancing impact 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
4th Pacific Microfinance Week, Nadi, 22 October 2013. 
 Mr Benny Popoitai – Chairman, Microfinance Pasifika Network and Deputy Governor, Bank 
Papua New Guinea. 
Mr Clay O’Brien – Senior Sector Specialists, Financial Inclusion, AusAID 
Fellow Governors and Deputy Governors. 
Mr Robin Yarrow – Chairman, Fiji National Financial Inclusion Taskforce and Members of the 
Taskforce 
Representatives of our Pacific Microfinance Week sponsors – The Pacific Financial Inclusion 
Program; International Finance Corporation and Asian Development Bank. 
Distinguished Guests and fellow Participants. 
Bula Vinaka and a very good morning to you all! 
Introductory remarks 
Let me say how delighted I am to deliver the keynote address this morning. On behalf of the 
Reserve  Bank  and  our  National  Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce,  I  wish  to  extend  a  special 
welcome to our Pasifika family and to all our visitors who have travelled from other parts of 
the world to join us here on Denarau today. 
This year marks the fourth Pacific Microfinance Week and I wish to sincerely congratulate the 
organiser,  The  Foundation  for  Development  Cooperation  and  convenor,  Microfinance 
Pasifika  Network,  as  well  as  all  the  sponsors,  for  their  foresight  and  commitment  in 
advocating and promoting financial inclusion in the region. 
Our theme, “Microfinance in the Pacific – increasing access, enhancing impact” is just further 
acclamation of the tremendous drive we have seen in our region towards the inclusion of our 
many  underserved  and  unbanked  citizens.  The fact that  we  Pacific Island  states  have  our 
own Working Group in the global 87 member countries Alliance for Financial Inclusion (in fact 
we  are  the  only  region  to  do  so)  and that  at  least  six  of  our  central  bank  Governors  have 
attended  the  last  two  annual  meetings,  speaks  volumes  of  our  combined  and  individual 
commitment towards changing the lives of our poorest. I am extremely proud to report that 
the Pacific is seen to be a leader on the world stage in a number of things we have been 
working on towards financial inclusion. 
Financial inclusion – a global phenomenon 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  financial  inclusion  is  now  the  buzz  word  on  the  agenda  of  many 
global  fora.  In  the  September  2009  Pittsburgh  Summit,  the  G20  group  of  countries  had 
financial inclusion as an important agenda item. In the subsequent Mexico Summit of June 
2012, the G20 formed a Group Peer Learning Program on Financial Inclusion. The United 
Nations now has Her Majesty Queen Maxima of the Netherlands as their Special Advocate 
for Inclusive Finance for Development and she is also Honorary Patron for the G20 Global 
Partnerships for Financial Inclusion. The Alliance for Financial Inclusion held its latest annual 
Global Policy Forum in Malaysia in September. Major regional and donor organisations such 
as  the  OECD,  CGAP,  ADB,  AUSAID  and  GIZ  have  been  organising  workshops  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
discussions on financial inclusion and there have been inter-regional country meetings such 
as those in Africa and in Asia. 
At the highest global levels, there is the clear recognition that deliberate financial inclusion 
measures and initiatives are essential if we are to reach the 2.5 billion people who do not 
have access to any form of financial services and products and who remain in poverty. 
Regional coverage 
In  our  own  Pacific  region,  we  have  come  to  also  recognise  the  importance  of  embracing 
financial inclusion. 
In  2005,  the  United  Nations  Development  Programme  estimated  that  around  6.5  million 
Pacific  Islanders  and  80  percent  of  low  income  people1  did  not  have  access  to  formal 
financial  services,  making  it  one  of  the  most  neglected  regions  in  the  world  in  terms  of 
banking services. 
I am glad that the Microfinance Pasifika Network took on the advocacy role in the Pacific. In 
its vision statement, it says that “…the Network shall be committed to improving quality of life 
through the provision of inclusive and sustainable micro financial services, such as savings, 
credit, 
the  economically 
disadvantaged...” 
However, I am also glad to say that our own central banks and authorities together with other 
committed stakeholders, have also taken on the baton 
remittances  and  payment  services  and 
insurance, 
to 
Theme of forum – importance of access and impact 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  our  theme,  “Microfinance  in  the  Pacific  –  increasing  access, 
enhancing impact”, brings a number of questions to mind. How do we reach the unbanked or 
those that do not have access to microfinance or any form of financial service and how do we 
make a difference to their lives? 
Technological innovation 
Such  questions  require  the  capacity  to  think  outside  the  box.  The  problems  and  the 
difficulties are such that one cannot approach and derive a solvable position in many cases 
unless one takes a non traditional and non conventional approach to problem solving. This 
calls for innovative thinking. 
Our problems in the Pacific are fairly similar. We are small island countries that are dispersed 
over a wide area of sea. Our economic growth rates are generally low, we do not have many 
resources  nor  do  we  have  the  large  population  mass  (Papua  New  Guinea  would  be  an 
exception  of  course).  All  our  problems  require  us,  as  Pacific  Islanders,  to  be  innovative 
thinkers and to think beyond the traditional and conventional norms of doing things in order 
to succeed. 
Embracing  technological  innovation  is  important  for  this  advancement.  In  Fiji  we  have 
embraced  the  importance  of  adopting  technological  innovation  to  help  us  deliver  financial 
services to the unbanked. We have noted an increase around the country in the number of 
bank  agents,  ATMs  and  the  EFTPOS  machines  and  whilst  not  all  machine  access  points 
allow cash-in functions, the introduction of in-store or agent banking by commercial banks is 
beginning to see an increase in cash-in and cash-out points. 
                                                
1   UNDP www.undp.org/content/undp/en/.../pacific-islands-financial-services. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In 2007 there were an average of 7 ATMs per 1,000km² in Fiji and this had increased to 12 
by 2012. Similarly, there were an average of 72 EFTPOS machines per 1,000km² in 2007 
and this had increased to 208 in 2012. 
The introduction of mobile network operators into the financial services and products space, 
through e-money transfers and bill payments, have further increased the outreach of financial 
inclusion. Embracing technology has enabled us to increase delivery channels to reach our 
people. 
Affordability 
Given our similar problems in small island economies and the limited resources, the services 
provided will only be meaningfully utilised, and our efforts successful, if these services are 
affordable to the unbanked. All accessibility will be useless if our people are not in a position 
to pay for these services. The use of technology has brought about cost effectiveness in the 
delivery of these financial services. 
What does enhancing impact mean? 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  now  turn  to  the  “impact”  aspect  of  our  theme.  This  is  very 
important  and I  am glad  that  this  is  in the theme  of this forum  because  it  emphasises  the 
fundamental  reasons  why  we  are  doing  what  we  are  doing  in  this  area.  All  the  financial 
inclusion interventions we are embarking on must translate into a measureable outcome that 
impacts  and  enhances  the  lives  of  our  people.  All  our  strategies  and  policies  must,  in  the 
end, have a measurable impact on our own individual countries and our region. If this is not 
our  ultimate  aim,  then  all  we  are  undertaking  is  just  another  program  that  has  no  real 
purpose. 
Measurable  impact  should  be  realised  in  the  disposable  income  of  the  citizens  of  our 
respective  countries.  An  increase  in  disposable  income  can  lead  to  increased  savings, 
consumption and investments. This should have a positive effect on our economies. When 
we realise this impact, it would then have a flow on effect in our region. 
Microfinance and financial inclusion are really still in their “early” days in our countries. The 
time  from  intervention  to  realising  the  full  impact  is  yet  to  materialise  on  a  wide  scale, 
however, it is important to ensure that the benefits filter through. Having indicators linking the 
various phases to the ultimate benefits of individual disposable income and country income, 
is important and must be put in place. In Fiji we have only just started to document financial 
inclusion indicators to cover access and usage, but our goal must be to link the indicators to 
show the effects or impact on individual income and country income as a result of financial 
inclusion. 
Progress in Fiji 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  know  there  will  be  a  special  case  study  session  on  Financial 
Inclusion in Fiji on Thursday, where our recent experiences will be discussed in detail by the 
Chairpersons of the three National Taskforce working groups. However, it will be remiss of 
me if I did not at least give you a flavour of some of the important milestones in our journey 
so far. 
In November 2009, following a meeting of all stakeholders when we agreed to establish the 
National Financial Inclusion Taskforce, we had set ourselves a quantifiable target of reaching 
150,000 unbanked Fijians by the year 2014. At the time we felt this represented roughly a 
half  of  our  underserved  population  and  I  am  happy  to  say  that  we  have  now  reached 
93 percent of the initial target. 
But this has not been our only focus over the past three and a half years. In collaboration 
with our stakeholders some of our other achievements and initiatives include:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
      Getting the involvement of all stakeholders (ours is a model of team work with all 
wanting to participate); 
The establishment of a National Financial Inclusion Strategy; 
The completion of National Financial Competency Surveys; 
The development and establishment of a National Financial Literacy Strategy; 
The holding of Financial Inclusion Expositions to create awareness in remote parts 
of the country (we have completed 10 to date); 
The establishment of a set of Financial Inclusion Indicators to measure access and 
usage; 
Established  policies  around  Consumer  Protection  to  ensure  transparency  and 
fairness; 
The  integration  of  the  financial  education  (FinED)  into  the  existing  schools 
curriculum from Class 1 to Form 6 (year 1 to year 12); 
Establishment of Microfinance Units within each commercial bank branch; 
The development and implementation of micro insurance policies; and, 
The establishment of a policy framework for branchless (agent) banking 
We are also in the final phase of completing our mapping exercise of all financial 
service access points and coverage across Fiji. 
In the first half of 2014, we will be seriously reviewing our goals with the intention of raising 
the bar a bit higher. We are committed and resolved to achieving bigger results in order to 
make the impact needed for all Fijians. We will continue to make financial inclusion visible 
through  the  varying  levels  of  stakeholders  from  Government  to  the  very  people  that  are 
unbanked or underserved. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, at the heart of all our enthusiasm for financial inclusion is the passion 
to bring our people out of poverty and provide them the hand-up to make something better of 
their lives and the lives of their families. It is not about free hand-outs, rather it is all about the 
desire to provide the necessary tools and access to enable the underserved to make their 
own way. 
Maya declaration award 
Some of you may be aware of the Maya Declaration Award that was recently presented to 
the Reserve Bank of Fiji at the 5th Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) Global Policy Forum 
in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
The Maya Declaration is the first global and measurable set of commitments by developing 
and  emerging  countries  to  unlock  the  economic  and  social  potential  of  the  2.5  billion 
unbanked  people  that  I  had  referred  to  earlier.  More  than  80  countries  representing  over 
75 percent of the world’s unbanked population have supported the declaration and Fiji is one 
of them. 
This award given to Fiji simply confirms that, though we are small island nations, we can be 
voted ahead of the bigger nations because of what we believe in and how we set ourselves 
up  to  achieving  our  goals.  I  would  just  like  to  say  that  this  award  does  not  belong  to  the 
Reserve Bank, but to all the committed stakeholders, (those individuals, financial institutions, 
agencies, authorities, NGOs and donors) that we have working with us. We are a model of 
cooperation and this is why we are successful. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding statement 
To  conclude  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  financial  inclusion  is  a  key  step  in  building  the 
foundation of a prosperous nation. We have all recognised this and that is why we are here 
today. While we may be at different stages of development in this area, we all share what the 
ideal goal should be. 
I  am  encouraged  and  excited  about  the  program  the  organisers  have  put  together for  this 
Forum.  I  note  the  various  innovations  and  initiatives  that  will  be  shared  to  foster  financial 
inclusion in the Pacific. We even have choices in terms of which sessions to attend. In this 
Forum, we have the perfect platform to share, learn and affirm our commitment in advancing 
financial inclusion across the region. 
I  urge  you  all  to  ask  the  questions  that  will  assist  you  in  your  drive  to  build  on  financial 
inclusion  when  you  get  back  home.  Make  the  necessary  permanent  contacts  with  your 
Pacific  colleagues  and  other  agencies,  so  that  information  sharing  is  always  just  a  click 
away, at your fingertips. 
But through all this, don’t forget that you are in Fiji! Please take some personal time to enjoy 
what  our  country  has  to  offer.  We  are  known  to  be  pretty  friendly.  Spend  some  money, 
preferably supporting some of our small and micro entrepreneurs! 
Finally,  I  wish  you  all  a  safe  and  productive  stay  and  a  safe journey  home  when  the  time 
comes to say our goodbyes. 
Vinaka vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
