K C Chakrabarty: Credit scoring – an effective way to ensure availability 
of timely and adequate credit to Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Training  Workshop  on  Credit  Scoring  Model  with  support  from  IFC  for  MSE  Lending, 
Mumbai, 29 November 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Ms. Lily Vadera is gratefully acknowledged. 
Accompanying chart and tables can be found at the end of the speech. 
Ms.  Jennifer  Isern,  Manager,  South  Asia  Advisory  Services,  International  Finance 
1. 
Corporation (IFC); Shri S.K. Dubey, CMD, Canara Bank; Shri H.S.U. Kamath, CMD, Vijaya 
Bank; Smt. Archana Bhargava, CMD, United Bank of India; Shri Ashwini Kumar, CMD, Dena 
Bank;  Shri  S.R.  Bansal,  CMD,  Corporation  Bank;  Shri  Sushil  Muhnot,  CMD,  Bank  of 
Maharashtra; Dr. Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India; Executive 
Directors  and  other  senior  officials  from  various  commercial  banks;  Mr.  Suresh  Sankaran, 
Mr. Neil Ramsden and Mr. Cameron Evans, the resource persons from IFC ; colleagues from 
Reserve Bank of India; ladies and gentleman! It is, indeed, a pleasure for me to be amidst 
you this morning to deliver a keynote address on a very topical issue of ensuring availability 
of timely and adequate credit to Micro and Small Enterprises. It is a subject that is very close 
to  my  heart  and  hence,  I  am  extremely  happy  to  flag  off  this  workshop  on  credit  scoring 
models which is fundamentally aimed at capacity building in the banking sector by imparting 
practical knowhow to people who are expected to use it in their day-to-day operations. 
2.  
As  you  are  all  aware,  fostering  a  dynamic  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprise 
sector for sustenance of economic development is a priority for the policy makers, in both 
developed  and  emerging  economies.  In  India  too,  Micro,  small  and  medium  enterprise 
(MSME)  sector  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  generating  employment,  increasing  cross  –  border 
trade  and  fostering  the  spirit  of  entrepreneurship.  The  sector  contributes  to  economic 
development  in  a  variety  of  ways  such  as  creating  employment  opportunities for rural  and 
urban  population,  providing  goods  &  services  at  affordable  costs  by  employing  innovative 
solutions and supporting the export initiatives of the country. In fact, it is increasingly being 
recognized by the policy makers that if India has to regain its high growth trajectory, it needs 
a vibrant MSME sector. However, it is deplorable that despite recognizing a widespread need 
for supporting the sector, the progress on the ground is extremely lackluster and the extent of 
financial  exclusion  in  the  sector  is  very  high.  Part  of  this  reluctance  of the formal financial 
sector  to  reach  out  especially  to  the  MSEs  arises  from  their  own  inability  to  assess  the 
potential of companies in this sector. It is in this context that credit scoring models can prove 
to be a valuable tool in better understanding and appraising the sector. As you might have 
discerned from the schedule, the purpose of today’s training workshop is to drive home the 
advantages of credit scoring model in decision making for lending to the SME sector and the 
bevy of experienced practitioners from IFC would hold technical sessions through the day to 
help you understand the nuances of the process. In my address today, I intend to highlight 
the problems faced by the sector insofar as accessing institutional finance is concerned, give 
an  overview  of 
to  dispel  some  common 
misunderstandings surrounding credit rating and credit scoring models. 
3.  
The  statistics  compiled  in  the  Fourth  Census  of  MSME  sector  revealed  that  only 
5.18%  of  the  units  (both  registered  and  unregistered)  had  availed  of  finance  through 
institutional  sources,  2.05%  had  finance  from  non-institutional  sources  and  the  majority  of 
units i.e. 92.77% had no finance or depended on self finance (see Chart-1.1). 
the  credit  scoring  model  and  attempt 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Constraints in access to finance by micro and small enterprises 
A.  
4.  
As I mentioned earlier, the sector has been facing constraints in accessing finance 
from the banking sector. This has also partly to do with inadequate penetration of banking 
facilities  in  the  remote  unbanked/under  banked  areas  that  RBI  is  encouraging  banks  to 
bridge  through  structured  Financial  Inclusion  Plans.  Another  issue  which  is  a  constraining 
factor is the pricing of credit. In our view, the credit pricing for the MSE sector is not very 
transparent  and  also  not  very  affordable.  A  sample  study  of  the  median  interest  rates 
charged to borrowers by select major banks as on March 31, 2013 worked out to 13%. 
Lack of alternate source of finance 
B.  
5.  
The ability of MSMEs (especially those involving innovations and new technologies) 
to access alternate sources of capital like equity finance, angel funds/risk capital is extremely 
limited.  At  present,  there  is  almost  negligible  flow  of  equity  capital  into  this  sector,  which 
poses  serious  challenge  to  development  of  knowledge-based  industries,  particularly  those 
that  are  promoted  by  first-generation  entrepreneurs  with  the  requisite  expertise  and 
knowledge. Venture /Risk capital is, therefore, often a more appropriate financing instrument 
for  high-growth-potential  and  start-up  SMEs.  However,  access  to  this  type  of  financing  is 
often  not  available  to  them.  In  the  absence  of  alternate  sources  of  finance,  the  SMEs’ 
reliance  on  debt  finance  is  very  high.  The  availability  of  debt  finance,  however,  is  not 
adequate as viability of these small units is a major issue. Besides, the high reliance on debt, 
combined  with  high  cost  of  credit  adversely  impacts  the  financial  viability  of  start-ups, 
particularly in the initial years, thereby threatening their long-term survival and sustainability. 
Constraints of banks in lending to the sector 
C.  
6.   One of the major challenges faced by the MSMEs and more particularly, the micro and 
small enterprises (MSEs), is access to timely and adequate credit from the banking sector. 
The  lenders  are  reluctant  to  service  the  MSEs  for  a  number  of  reasons,  the  foremost  of 
which emanates from a general perception amongst banks that the credit risk in lending to 
small and medium borrowers is very high. This, in itself, is a wrong notion that I have been 
trying  to  dispel  through  my  presentations  supported  by  hard  data.  While  the  headline 
numbers of non-performing assets (Gross and Net NPAs) are higher in this segment, if one 
reckons the extent of restructuring and write-offs that are resorted to in the medium and large 
borrower  segments,  the  credit  risk  would  appear  to  be  much  lower  in  the  MSE  sector.  A 
comparative  table  indicating  the  extent  of  NPAs,  restructuring  and  cumulative  write-offs  in 
micro  and  small  vis-à-vis  medium  and  large  segments  during  the  last  five  years  is  given 
below: 
The data clearly highlights the fact that in the recent scenario of rising impairment of assets 
in the banking sector, it is the MSEs that have demonstrated better credit discipline resulting 
in lower impairment. 
7.   The  other  reasons  why  MSEs  are  regarded  as  high-risk  is  on  account  of  insufficient 
assets  and  low  capitalization,  vulnerability  to  market  fluctuations  and  high  mortality  rates. 
Information  opacity  arising  from  MSEs’  lack  of  accounting  records,  inadequate  financial 
statements  or  business  plans  also  makes  it  difficult  for  potential  creditors  to  assess  the 
creditworthiness of MSE applicants. Besides, high administrative / transaction cost of lending 
small  amounts  also  queers  the  pitch  for  banks  insofar  as  MSE  financing  is  concerned. 
Notwithstanding  the  merits  of  the  reasons  mentioned  above,  I  would  say  that  a  major 
constraint in the banks’ lending stems from the fact that the existing system of banks’ credit 
appraisal  and  related  processes  are  not  geared  to  appraise  the  financial  requirements  of 
MSE sector. 
8.  
Nonetheless,  over  the  years,  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  credit 
extended  to  this  sector  by  the  banks.  As  at  the  end  of  March  2013,  the  total  outstanding 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
credit  provided  by  all  Scheduled  Commercial  Banks  (SCBs)  to  the  MSE  sector  stood  at 
Rs.6847 billion as against Rs.5276 billion in March 2012, registering an increase of 29.77%. 
Despite the increase in financing to the sector there is still a considerable credit gap which 
needs to be bridged. In terms of the Report of the Private Sector Investment for MSME Sub 
Group  under Working  Group for the  12th  Five  Year  Plan  (2012–2017) the  credit gap  as  a 
percentage to total demand is estimated at 56% in 2013–14 for the MSME sector as may be 
seen from the table. 
9.  
In the absence of alternate source of funding for the sector, the role of banks is very 
crucial in bridging this funding gap. In this context, it is important for the banks to look beyond 
their existing customer base and the large corporates and to reach out to the vast number of 
micro and small enterprises which are presently deprived of bank credit. Alongside extending 
the  reach  of  their  banking  services,  there  would  be  a  need  to  improve  and  customize  the 
products  offered  ,  fine  tune  the  pricing  aspects  and  enhance  the  quality  and  efficiency  of 
services. For this, banks need to have a proper business plan and delivery model that would 
harness the benefits of technology. This would help in planning product delivery and building 
lasting customer relationships which will translate into higher revenues. The costs of banking 
transactions need to be dramatically reduced just as in so many other fields such as telecom, 
after the advent of technology. 
Need for alternate appraisal techniques 
D.  
10.  
Having  appreciated  the  criticality  of  the  sector  in  terms  of  its  contribution  to 
employment  generation,  manufacturing  and  exports,  it  is  important  for  us  to  ensure  that 
lending to the sector is appropriately stepped up. Here, we need to appreciate that the credit 
process  in  case  of  micro  and  small  entrepreneurs  cannot  be  identical  to  that  of  large 
corporations, where the borrower is able to provide detailed information about business plans 
and the firm’s financial statements and the lender carefully reviews the data using analytics 
that are time-consuming and expensive. In view of the relatively small size of the loan, banks 
do not find it worthwhile to conduct an elaborate appraisal of SME credit proposals both in 
terms of value and profit. Therefore, in order that the banks can quickly conduct appraisal of 
SME loan proposals without expending too much resources, it would be imperative to ensure 
the efficiency of the appraisal process. An important dimension to efficiency in the context of 
lending decisions is the speed with which any individual lending decision is taken. Efficiency 
is improved by better evaluation of future payment performance so that the lender is able to 
choose whom to accept and whom not to accept. 
11.  
Financial  institutions  in  the  developed  countries  use  a  number  of  different  lending 
techniques to address this challenge and provide funding to small firms. The banks, in these 
countries,  use  a  version  of  a  computerized  loan-evaluation  system,  referred  to  as  credit 
scoring, to assess would-be borrowers. The credit scoring approach, which is based on use 
of  computer  technology  and  mass  production  methods,  was  originally  designed  to  handle 
consumer  loans,  but  are  now  being  used  effectively  for  lending  to  small  businesses  by 
predicting their potential loan delinquency. Credit scoring offers a modern alternative for the 
traditional method of evaluating loans for small businesses where loans were approved on 
the basis of the banker’s qualitative judgment and the financial condition carried significant 
weight in the appraisal process. 
12.  
With a view to expediting the flow of credit to the  MSE firms, RBI, as a proactive 
measure,  issued guidelines  in  May  2009,  advising  banks to  start  using scoring  models for 
making  lending  decisions  in  case  of  all  advances  up  to  Rs.2  crore.  However,  despite,  our 
instructions  having  been  issued  nearly  five  years  back,  we  find  that  use  of  credit  scoring 
model in the real sense has not really taken off in India. Our assessment is that perhaps the 
lack of conceptual clarity on the subject could be one of the reasons for banks’ reluctance in 
using the credit scoring model for making MSE lending decisions. In fact, very often credit 
scoring is misunderstood or confused with credit rating. In the next segment of my talk today, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
I  would,  therefore,  attempt  to  answer  three  questions  viz.  What  is  credit  scoring?  How  it 
works? And what are its benefits? 
technique 
is  a  statistical 
that  combines  several 
What is credit scoring? 
Credit  scoring 
E.  
13.  
financial 
characteristics to form a single score for assessing a borrower’s credit worthiness. The score 
does  not  predict  a  company’s  ability  to  pay,  but  rather  its  willingness  to  pay  in  a  timely 
fashion.1  The  probabilities  of  delinquency,  as  estimated  by  the  model,  are  based  on  the 
analysis of previous applicants with similar characteristics. Credit scorecards are “tools used 
to predict the behavior of new applicants based on the performance of previous applicants” 
(U.S.  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  1998).  Scorecards  can  also  be  used  to  predict  the 
performance  of  existing  accounts,  based  on  past  experience  of  accounts  with  similar 
characteristics. 
14.  
Credit  scoring,  is  a  model  applied  by  banks  in  their  assessment  and  approval  or 
decline  of  the  loan  requests  by  SMEs.  As  there  is  a  strong  link  between  the  payment 
behavior of the business owner and that of the business, SME credit scores usually include 
financial  characteristics  from  both  the  business  and  the  business  owner.  Credit  scoring  is 
based upon information like how the repayment of the previous loans has gone, what is the 
current income level of the enterprise, what are the outstanding debts, if any? It focuses on 
the  credit  history  of  the  enterprise.  As  part  of  the  process,  the  lenders  see  whether  the 
enterprise/ business owner has the reliability and honesty to repay the loan. It also examines 
how the enterprise has used credit before, its record for repayment of bills, including utility 
bills, how long the enterprise has been in existence, assets possessed by the enterprise and 
sustainability and viability of the activities that the unit is engaged in. Credit scoring model 
draws  inputs  from  historical  information  on  the  performance  of  loans  with  similar 
characteristics. 
Background of credit scoring 
15.  
Credit  scores  have  been  widely  used  for  many  years  in  consumer  credit  markets 
e.g., mortgages, credit cards, and auto loans. The model has facilitated lending procedures 
leading  to  availability  of  low  cost  credits  and  faster  decision  making  yielding  significant 
growth in consumer credit availability. Owing to the similarities of the small business in terms 
of  being  individual  centric,  the  principles  utilized  for  making  lending  decisions  to  individual 
borrowers under the credit scoring model were extrapolated to meet the credit requirements 
of small businesses. In the mid-1990s, Fair Isaac and Company introduced one of the first 
credit scoring models developed exclusively for SMEs, the Small Business Scoring Service 
(SBSS).  Since  then,  many  SME  banks  in  the  U.S.,  as  well  as  in  Canada,  the  U.K.,  and 
Japan, have implemented some type of credit scoring for SME borrowers. 
Difference between credit scoring and credit rating 
Quite often, I have seen bankers talking about credit scoring and credit rating in the 
16.  
same breath. Therefore, before I move any further, let me attempt to clarify the difference 
between credit scoring and credit rating. I would like to emphasize that these are two entirely 
distinct  concepts  and  to  be  employed  in  distinctly  different  scenarios.  So  what  are  these 
differences?  Credit  scoring  is  a  statistical  technique that  combines  several  pre  determined 
characteristics  to  form  a  single  score  to  assess  a  borrower’s  credit  worthiness.  The  score 
                                                
1   Credit Scoring and the Small Business: A Review and the Need for Research (Longenecker, Carlos W. Moore 
& J. William Petty). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
To  put 
it  simply,  credit  scoring  uses  a  retail 
allocated to any application is the sum of the appropriate weights given by the values that the 
included characteristics take for that application. 
Any two identical applications will always receive the same score. Credit rating, on the other 
hand, is based more on the experience and judgment of the credit officer and uses financial 
indicators  as key. The  objective  of  scoring  is  to replicate  manual  analysis  and  approval  of 
loans at a lower cost, with greater speed, while the use of credit rating is reliant on manual 
analysis by credit officers to supplement the rating provided by the tool. 
17.  
to  credit 
screening/decision  making  and  is  recommended  for  smaller  ticket  size  loans,  where 
adequate  reliable  financial  data  about  the  borrower  is  not  available.  Credit  Rating,  on  the 
other hand, is a more appropriate tool for larger, mid-segment or corporate loans which have 
relevant financial data/ business plans that provide the basis for further credit analysis and 
information.  Again,  credit  scoring  is  usually  a  100%  automated  mechanism  for  screening 
loan applicants on the basis of a pre-defined set of parameters while credit rating is a more 
subjective and manual method for determining a borrower’s ability to repay, based on a pre-
determined set of criteria. Further, credit scoring enables clear decision matrix like immediate 
approvals,  declines  or  gray  area  loans,  which  can  be  reviewed  in  greater  depth.  Declined 
loans  are  “knocked  out”  quickly  while  strong  proposals  get  quick  approval.  Additional 
assessment, if any, would only need to be made in respect of gray area loans or proposals 
which are neither an unqualified “yes” or an unqualified “no”. On the contrary, credit rating 
requires a similar level of credit analysis for all loan applications and is more comprehensive 
in nature, hence increasing the transaction cost per loan. 
lending  approach 
How scoring model works? 
F.  
18.  
The objective of a scoring model is to use a relevant and representative sample to 
measure loan performance and then develop characteristics that predict performance. The 
resulting  model  is  integrated  into  the  decision  making  process.  A  scoring  model  applies 
different  weights  to  the  characteristics  used  to  predict  the  performance.  The  weights,  or 
values,  measure  the  influence  of  that  characteristic  on  the  outcome.  The  weights  and  the 
level of influence are determined by statistical analysis. Only those characteristics that exert 
a “significant” influence are included in the final model. The score allocated to any application 
is the sum of the appropriate weights given by  the values that the included characteristics 
take for that application. Under this model, any two identical applications will always receive 
the same score, unlike in the manual underwriting where the decision could change from one 
lender to the other or also by the same lender depending on the interpretation on a given 
day. 
Benefits of credit scoring 
G.  
19.  
When used appropriately, credit scoring can benefit multiple stakeholders, including 
lenders,  borrowers,  and  the  overall  economy.  For  the  lender,  scoring  leads  to  process 
automation  which  facilitates  process  improvements  leading  to  many  by  products  such  as 
improved management information, control and consistency. It also increases the profitability 
of  SME  lending  by  reducing  the  time  and  cost  required  to  approve  loans  and  increasing 
revenues  by  expanding  lending  opportunities  as  lenders  can  safely  approve  marginal 
applicants that an individual underwriter might reject. International evidence has shown that 
credit  scoring  can  assist  in  overcoming  the  inherent  benefit/cost  trade-off  that  banks  face 
when  deciding  whether  or  not  to  invest  in  obtaining  information  regarding  a  potential 
borrower. A study that was meant to test the credit scoring situation in US estimated that the 
cost  of  evaluating  micro  loan  applications  in  the  US  using  credit  scoring  was  reduced  to 
around $100 compared to a range of $500–$1800 prior to the introduction of credit scoring. 
The time saving involved meant that banks could focus more time on marginal applications, 
existing loans that are showing signs of distress and processing more loan applications. Use 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
of  credit  scoring  has  also  meant  that  the  marginal  benefits  of  taking  and  maintaining 
collateral are not justified for small loans. 
20.  
The Bank of England has also acknowledged that there is some evidence of banks 
being more willing to lend on an unsecured basis when using credit scoring, which potentially 
improves  the  access  to  bank  finance  for  very  small  and  start-up  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises. 
21.  
For the borrower, the benefits from credit scoring include increased access to credit 
and, in some cases, lower borrowing costs. In its study of SME credit  scoring’s impact on 
access to credit, the Federal Reserve Bank (FRB) of Atlanta found that, in general, the use of 
credit  scoring  increased  the  amount  of  credit  banks  extended  to  the  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises.  It  found  that  banks  using  scoring  were  more  likely  to  lend  to  the  Small  and 
Medium  Enterprises  that  lacked  sufficient  financial  information  for  approval  through 
traditional  underwriting  methods.  Presumably,  this  is  due  to  the  inclusion  of  the  business 
owner’s personal information in the scoring process. The study also found that banks using 
scoring were more likely to lend in low-income areas, a fact it attributed to greater objectivity 
in the underwriting process. 
H.  
Conclusion 
22.  
Before,  I  conclude  let  me  re-emphasize  that  given  the  extent  of  exclusion  in  the 
SME sector and the criticality of the sector for the economy, banks urgently need to step up 
lending to the sector. For evaluating loan proposals and for facilitating SME financing, banks 
would  need  to  employ  low  cost  and  quick  decision  making  alternatives.  The  use  of  credit 
scoring  models  can  go  a  long  way  in  facilitating  lending  decisions  by  reducing  costs  and 
increasing  service  levels,  which  can  deliver  great  benefits  for  both  the  lenders  and  MSE 
borrowers. 
I do hope that the technical session by IFC resource personnel would help clarify 
23.  
your  doubts  about  the  credit  scoring  model  and  encourage  you  to  adopt  a  suitable  model 
which would help accelerate credit flow to this sector. Like all new concepts, there needs to 
be  a  buy-in  of  the  concept  at  the  Top  Management  level  and  today’s  conference  is  an 
attempt  in  that  regard.  I  believe  by  the  end  of  today’s  conference,  you  would  have  ample 
clarity about the concept and usage of credit scoring model in financing to the SME sector. 
The  purpose  of  organizing the  Conference  would  have  been  well  served  if  we  are  able  to 
bring about a change in mindset and willingness of the banks about the way they view SME 
financing. If banks consider lending to SMEs to be a viable business proposition and show 
the  willingness  and  determination  to  expand  credit  coverage  to  this  sector,  then  credit 
scoring models can be employed effectively to achieve this objective in a meaningful way. 
This  promises  to  be  a  win-win  proposition  for  all  the  stakeholders:  the  small  and  medium 
enterprises, the lending financial institutions and the overall economy. I once again thank the 
IFC resource personnel who have enthusiastically supported our endeavour and wish you all 
a successful deliberation. 
Thank you! 
References 
Justin  G.  Longenecker,  Carlos  W.  Moore,  J.  William  Petty  Credit  Scoring  and  the  Small 
Business: A Review and the need for Research. 
Charles B. Wendel and Matthew Harvey (March 2010) SME Credit Scoring: Key Initiatives, 
Opportunities, and Issues – Access Finance, A newsletter Published by the Financial Sector 
Vice-Presidency, March 2006, Issue No. 10 – World Bank Group – Access Finance. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Latimer  Asch,  Senior  Vice  President,  Fair,  Isaac  and  Co.,  San  Rafael,  Calif.,  USA  “Credit 
Scoring: A Tool for More Efficient SME Lending”, SME /Issues, New Ideas from the world of 
small and medium enterprises, Vol.1, No.2, November 2000. 
Making  Small  Business  Lending  Profitable:  Proceedings  from  the  Global  Conference  on 
Credit Scoring April 2–3, 2001, Washington, D.C. – International Finance Corporation – The 
Importance of Credit Information and Credit Scoring for Small Business Lending Decisions-
Andrew Jennings, Vice President, Fair, Isaac and Company Inc. 
The Potential for credit scoring for SME Lending in Kenya, October 2008, Financial Sector 
Deepening, Kenya, This study was undertaken for FSD Kenya’s Growth Fin programme by: 
Microfinance Risk Management, L.L.C in collaboration with sBa. 
The  credit  risk  in  SME  loans  portfolios:  Modeling  issues,  pricing,  and  capital  requirements 
Michel  Dietsch,  Joel  Petey,  university  Robert  Schuman,  47  avenue  de  la  Forêt  Noire, 
67000 Strasbourg, France Journal of Banking and Finance 26 (2002) 303–322. 
Allen N. Berger and W. Scott Frame: Small Business Credit Scoring and Credit Availability, 
Working Paper 2005–10, May 2005, Working Paper Series, Reserve Bank of Atlanta. 
 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
