Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, for the 
Hearing at the Committee on Economic and  Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, 
Brussels, 16 December 2013. 
 Madam Chair,  
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a pleasure for me to be back in your committee at such a decisive moment. The next 
days and weeks until the end of this legislature will show whether the euro area will be able 
to take another key step towards banking union. I believe your institution can play a crucial 
and constructive role in ensuring that this next step will entail a truly European dimension. 
This is also the last time that I will discuss  with you  in detail matters related to the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism. Pending the appointment by the Council, Danièle Nouy will become 
the Chair of the Supervisory Board as of 1 January 2014. She will then also become your 
primary interlocutor with regard to the SSM. 
Today, I will first review recent economic and monetary developments in the euro area. I will 
then explain in greater detail our more recent monetary policy decisions and will present the 
progress in the preparations of the SSM. 
Economic and monetary developments 
Since our meeting in September, incoming information has confirmed the ECB’s assessment 
that  underlying  price  pressures  remain  subdued  over  the  medium  term.  The  economic 
recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  fragile.  Real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  expanded  in  the  last  two 
quarters: From July to September, it grew by 0.1% – quarter on quarter – following 0.3% in 
the second quarter of this year. Developments in survey-based confidence indicators up to 
November point toward a modest growth rate also in the last quarter of the year. At the same 
time,  unemployment  remains  high.  Necessary  balance  sheet  adjustments  in  financial  and 
non-financial sectors continue to weigh on economic activity. 
Looking  further  ahead,  we  expect  output  to  continue  to  recover  at  a  slow  pace.  This  is  in 
particular due to some improvement in domestic demand supported by our accommodative 
monetary policy. Euro area activity should, in addition, benefit from a gradual strengthening 
of  demand  for  exports.  Moreover,  the  improvement  in  financial  market  conditions  and 
reduced  uncertainty  seems  to  be  gradually  transmitted  to  the  real  economy.  Finally,  the 
progress  made  in  fiscal  consolidation  has  strengthened  the  confidence  of  markets  in  the 
resilience of the euro area. This should also positively affect the recovery. 
Nevertheless, the risks to the outlook remain on the downside. They are mainly related to 
uncertain developments in global money and financial market conditions. Higher commodity 
prices, weaker than expected domestic demand and export growth, and insufficient structural 
reforms in euro area countries could also negatively affect economic conditions. 
Annual HICP inflation increased in November to 0.9%, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, 
following an unexpectedly strong decline in October to 0.7%. Underlying price pressures in 
the euro area are expected to remain subdued over the medium term. We might experience 
a prolonged period of low  inflation to be followed by a gradual upward  movement towards 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% later on. This reflects the modest pace of the recovery 
and the fact that medium to long-term inflation expectations continue to be anchored in line 
with price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Monetary  and,  in  particular,  credit  dynamics  remain  subdued.  The  annual  growth  rate  of 
loans to the private sector has stabilised at negative levels. Weak loan dynamics continue to 
reflect  primarily  the  current  stage  of  the  business  cycle,  credit  risk  and  the  ongoing 
adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. 
Recent monetary policy decisions 
Based  on  this  assessment  of  the  current  economic  outlook,  let  me  now  explain  in  greater 
detail  our  more  recent  monetary  policy  decisions.  In  July  this  year,  we  introduced  forward 
guidance to clarify the orientation of our monetary policy going forward in an exceptionally 
uncertain environment: we stated that we expected key interest rates to remain at present or 
lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  This  statement  was  conditional  on  an  overall 
subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, which is currently the case, as 
I have just explained. 
In  line  with  our  forward  guidance,  we  decided  in  November  to  lower  the  key  ECB  interest 
rates further. The interest rate on the main refinancing operations was lowered by 25 basis 
points to 0.25% and the rate on the marginal lending facility by 25 basis points to 0.75%. The 
rate on the deposit facility was left unchanged at 0.00%. 
Our forward guidance still remains in place: we continue to expect ECB key interest rates to 
remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time. Thus, monetary policy will 
remain accommodative for as long as necessary. 
Adjusting  interest  rates  is  not  always  sufficient  to  maintain  price  stability.  In  this  crisis, 
interest  rate  cuts  have  been  transmitted  more  slowly  and  unevenly  across  euro  area 
countries due to the fragmentation of financial markets. To address this problem, we adopted 
in recent years a series of non-standard measures. The purpose of these was – and remains 
– a more effective transmission of the ECB’s interest rate cuts, so that our monetary policy 
can reach companies and households throughout the euro area. 
This  was  also  the  purpose  of  our  decision  in  November  to  continue  conducting  all  our 
refinancing operations as fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment at least until July 
2015. Thus, we have helped to alleviate funding concerns of banks, which are still hesitant to 
lend to households and firms. 
Two  years  ago,  we  provided  funding  support  to  euro  area  banks  through  two  Long  Term 
Refinancing Operations with a maturity of three years each. As the funding situation of banks 
has improved significantly since then, banks have this year opted to repay about 40% of the 
initially  outstanding  amount.  Accordingly,  excess  liquidity  in  overnight  money  markets  has 
been gradually receding. We are monitoring the potential impact of these developments on 
our monetary policy stance. We are ready to consider all available instruments. 
As usual, it takes time before our policy decisions work their way through financial markets 
and affect the economy. The November decisions on interest rates, on forward guidance and 
on prolonging full allotment in all refinancing operations are working their way through. 
Financial markets have taken up our conditional commitment to an accommodative monetary 
policy stance for an extended period of time. Money market term interest rates and yields on 
bank bonds declined. 
On the other hand, we are fully aware of the downward risks that a protracted period of low 
inflation  entails.  Consistent  with  its  forward  guidance,  the  Governing  Council  is  ready  and 
able to act if needed, as I mentioned at the most recent press conference . 
Furthermore,  we  currently  see  no  signs  of  risks  of  financial  imbalances  related  to  the  low 
interest  rate  environment. What  we  observe  is  still  a  very  subdued  trend  in  monetary  and 
credit developments in the euro area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Nevertheless, if we were to observe the build-up of such imbalances, this would be the field 
where macro-prudential authorities would have to intervene with market-specific instruments. 
Local risks have to be addressed by local instruments. This is why supervisory authorities, 
including the SSM, are now being equipped with the appropriate micro- and macro-prudential 
policy tools. I am confident that these will be used if necessary. 
State of play of SSM preparations 
Let  me  now  update  you  on  the  latest  developments  establishing  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM), which are well underway. 
Our  internal  preparations  aim  at  ensuring  that  the  ECB  will  be  ready  to  assume  its 
supervisory responsibilities in November 2014. We will make sure that the ECB’s monetary 
policy mandate focused on price stability will not be affected by considerations and decisions 
related  to  banking  supervision.  Internal  rules  are  therefore  being  developed  for  the 
separation  of  monetary  policy  and  supervisory  functions:  The  units  involved  in  decision-
making will be clearly separated. We are putting in place an organisational set-up whereby 
the  information  flow  between  the  two  functions  will  be  limited  to  a  “need  to  know”  basis. 
However,  we  will  avoid  unnecessary  duplication  of  structures  not  involved  in  the  decision-
making process. This is cost-efficient, and I am sure you will appreciate this. 
As regards recruitment of staff, I can say that the process for senior and middle managerial 
positions is well underway. Further recruitment initiatives will start in due course. 
An  important  element  of  our  preparations  is  the  comprehensive  assessment,  which 
comprises  a  supervisory  risk  assessment,  an  asset  quality  review  and  a  stress  test 
performed  in  cooperation  with  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA).  This  exercise  will 
increase transparency by enhancing the quality of information available. It will facilitate the 
repair  of  the  sector  by  identifying  the  necessary  corrective  actions.  And  it  will  build 
confidence  by  assuring  all  stakeholders  that  banks  are  fundamentally  sound.  It  will  be 
concluded shortly before the ECB assumes supervisory responsibilities. 
The ECB convened a series of meetings in November in Frankfurt with the banks that will 
undergo  the  comprehensive  assessment.  These  meetings  were  positively  received  and 
provided the useful opportunity to have a first exchange of views, to receive feedback on our 
communication,  and  respond  to  questions.  We  also  explained  that  we  would  welcome 
prompt action from the banks, beginning now, to strengthen their balance sheets including 
profit retention and equity issuances. 
Other  elements  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  are  on-going.  The  process  for  the 
selection  of  asset  portfolios  to  be  reviewed  for  the  asset  quality  review  was  initiated  in 
November, based on specific data collections. Furthermore, we expect to announce the key 
parameters of the stress test exercise together with the European Banking Authority (EBA) 
towards the beginning of next year. 
In  this  context,  let  me  explain  again  the  treatment  of  sovereign  bonds:  The  Asset  Quality 
Review is a valuation exercise where we will apply the current regulatory framework. It is not 
for us to change this framework – this is a global discussion, and the Basel Committee is the 
right forum for it. That said, we will of course “stress” a wide range of assets as part of the 
stress tests: Sovereign bonds will be among them. 
To ensure the credibility and rigour of the comprehensive assessment, backstops should be 
well  specified  and  in  place  as  soon  as  possible.  The  pecking  order  should  be  first  private 
sources, then national public backstops and, as a last resort, European instruments. 
Turning now from supervision to resolution, I understand you have reached agreement with 
the Council on the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive. Let me again strongly welcome 
this agreement, as it is an important step towards to the completion of the Banking Union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
However, for the credibility of the Banking Union, another step must be taken too: The SSM 
needs  a  strong  and  credible  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  as 
its  counterpart. 
Responsibilities  for  supervision  and  resolution  need  to  be  aligned  at  the  European  level. 
Thus, I urge you and the Council to swiftly set-up a robust Single Resolution Mechanism, for 
which  three  elements  are  essential  in  practice:  a  single  system,  a  single  authority,  and  a 
single fund. We should not create a Single Resolution Mechanism that is single in name only. 
In  this  respect,  I  am  concerned  that  decision-making  may  become  overly  complex  and 
financing arrangements may not be adequate. I trust that the European Parliament, together 
with the Council, will succeed in creating a true Banking Union. 
Thank you for your attention. I am now looking forward to your questions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
