Thomas C Baxter, Jr: Financial stability – the role of the Federal Reserve 
System 
Remarks by Mr Thomas C Baxter, Jr, Executive Vice President and General Counsel of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Future of Banking Regulation and Supervision in 
the EU Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 15 November 2013. 
 Today  we  gather to  celebrate the career  of  a great central  bank  lawyer,  Antonio  Sáinz  de 
Vicuña, who is retiring from his position as general counsel of the European Central Bank. 
The accomplishments of the European Central Bank (ECB) in a short period of time are a 
huge credit to the people who built the organization. Antonio is one of those people. He was 
there even before the very beginning, given his position as general counsel of the European 
Monetary Institute back in 1994. 
Many here have heard Antonio talk about those seminal first days, when European monetary 
union was considered nothing more than a remarkable experiment that would never become 
a  reality.  Of  course,  monetary  union  within  the  Eurozone  has  become  reality,  and  the 
success of the ECB has inspired the ECB’s latest challenge. As Antonio retires, the ECB is 
taking  the  first  important  steps  toward  becoming  a  pan-European  banking  supervisor.  The 
fact that banking supervision is being entrusted to the ECB is perhaps the best evidence of 
its overwhelming success as a European institution. 
Of course,  it  is rare that  great success comes without  hardship. The global  financial  crisis 
has  tested  both  the  ECB  and  the  organization  that  I  am  privileged  to  serve,  the  Federal 
Reserve. The Federal Reserve’s financial stability role, my topic for today, was at the center 
of the response to the crisis in the United States. Because this was the worst financial crisis 
in  the  United  States  since  our  Great  Depression,  conditions  within  our  national  economy 
produced instability, which naturally provoked a reaction from the Federal Reserve. 
From  my  personal  perspective,  one  of  the  most  inspiring  moments  was  when  Chairman 
Bernanke spoke in February of 2009 at the National Press Club. There, he said “the Federal 
Reserve  has  done,  and  will  continue  to  do,  everything  possible  within  the  limits  of  its 
authority to assist in restoring our nation to financial stability and economic prosperity . . . .”1 
No statement encapsulated the financial stability objective as succinctly and as clearly. 
In speaking here at the ECB, I would be remiss if I did not mention a substantially similar 
statement by ECB President Mario Draghi in July of 2012. President Draghi said that “[w]ithin 
our mandate, the ECB is ready to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro”.2 Whenever I 
have referenced President Draghi’s “whatever  it takes” statement, Antonio is quick to note 
that  President  Draghi,  unlike  Chairman  Bernanke,  appended  a  forecast  to  his  version  of 
“whatever it takes”. He assured everyone that “it will be enough”. 
Now  this  audience  of  lawyers  will  pay  special  attention  to  both  quotations,  because  each 
notes that the central bank must act within the bounds of its legal authority. It is not simply 
“whatever it takes” come hell or high water; it is “whatever it takes” within the central bank’s 
mandate, thereby turning attention to the limits set by the substantive law. The Bernanke and 
Draghi  statements  are  consequential  not  only  because  they  highlight  objectives  of  critical 
importance  to  each  central  bank,  namely  financial  stability  for  the  Federal  Reserve  and 
preservation  of  the  euro  for  the  ECB.  The  statements  also  highlight  that  the  central  bank 
                                                
1   Ben  S.  Bernanke,  Chairman,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Speech  at  the  National 
Press Club Luncheon, February 18, 2009. 
2   Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Speech  at  the  Global  Investment  Conference  in 
London, July 26, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
objective is to be achieved within the boundaries set by the rule of law. Who is it that is called 
upon to declare and interpret the boundaries of the central bank mandate? It is the central 
bank’s legal counsel. 
I  am  asked  periodically  about  the  legal  basis  for  the  Federal  Reserve’s  financial  stability 
objective. Students of the Federal Reserve read our nearly 100-year-old enabling statute, the 
Federal  Reserve  Act,  and  cannot  find  the  words  “financial  stability”  anywhere  in  the  Act. 
How, then, can financial stability be a part of the Federal Reserve’s mandate? My response 
is that you do not need to see the words “financial stability” in the Federal Reserve Act for 
that to  be  a key  part  of our  mandate. The  Federal  Reserve’s financial  stability  mandate  is 
seen in the penumbra of the Federal Reserve Act, and that is legally sufficient. Without trying 
to cover this important topic exhaustively as in a formal legal opinion or a brief filed with a 
court, let me outline here the essence of the analysis. 
The starting point in every discussion of the Federal Reserve’s mandate is Section 2A of the 
Federal Reserve Act, known to many as the dual mandate. It directs the Federal Reserve “to 
promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate  long-
term interest rates.”3 While there are actually three discrete objectives in the dual mandate, 
most  economists  would  say  that  moderate  long-term  interest  rates  are  a  tool  to  produce 
maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  Such  economic  reasoning  also  involves  some 
clever and simple arithmetic – it reduces a tripartite mandate to a dual mandate. With respect 
to financial stability, leading economic thinkers would now say, and the financial crisis seems 
to offer us the perfect illustration, that price stability and maximum employment are possible 
only in a context of financial stability. This is an implicit part of what Chairman Bernanke was 
communicating  at  the  National  Press  Club  –  until  financial  stability  could  be  restored,  the 
ability to achieve the goals of maximum employment and price stability through the monetary 
transmission mechanism were beyond the Federal Reserve’s reach. Accordingly, the Federal 
Reserve  used  its  monetary  policy  tools  to  lower  the  targeted  Fed  funds  rate  to  zero.  In 
addition, the Federal Reserve used its lender of last resort authorities in new and creative 
ways to restore financial stability to the U.S. economy. 
When the crisis in the United States abated in late 2009, following the successful introduction 
of  stress  testing,  the  Federal  Reserve  began  to  speak  about  terminating  some  of  its 
emergency facilities. These facilities had been introduced during the “whatever it takes” era, 
and  when  the  Federal  Reserve  was  executing  the  delicate  task  of  winding  these  facilities 
down,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  made  clear  that  financial  stability 
remained a key objective. For example, the Committee said in its release of December 16, 
2009 that “[t]he Federal Reserve is prepared to modify these [wind down] plans if necessary 
to support financial stability and economic growth.”4  
The legal basis for deriving implied powers from the penumbra of other express powers is 
best seen in Justice Douglas classic opinion in Griswold v. Connecticut.5 In the Griswold 
case, the United States Supreme Court struck down a Connecticut law prohibiting the use of 
contraception.  Justice  Douglas’  opinion  struck  that  law  down  as  inconsistent  with  a 
Constitutional right of privacy, notwithstanding that the U.S. Constitution nowhere mentions 
any such right, let alone even using the word “privacy”. Justice Douglas noted that individual 
privacy  concerns  were  protected  by  a  series  of  express  Constitutional  provisions,  like  the 
Third  Amendment’s  prohibition  on  quartering  soldiers  during  peacetime,  the  Fourth 
Amendment’s  right  to  be  free  from  unreasonable  search  or  seizure,  and  the  Fifth 
Amendment’s  right  against  self-incrimination.  He  also  reasoned  that  “the  First  Amendment 
                                                
3   12 U.S.C. § 225a. 
4   Federal Open Market Committee statement, December 16, 2009. 
5   381 U.S. 479 (1965). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
has a penumbra where privacy is protected from governmental intrusion,”6 in particular the 
right of association. 
Similarly, the Federal Reserve Act has a penumbra where the Federal Reserve derives its 
mandate to ensure financial stability, such that it may achieve the Section 2A dual mandate 
of price stability and maximum employment. The key point here is that the Federal Reserve’s 
financial stability mandate is derived from what lies in the penumbra, not from any express 
reference to financial stability in the Federal Reserve Act itself. Of course, in the wake of the 
financial  crisis,  the  scope  of  Federal  Reserve  power  was  directly  affected  by  remedial 
legislation. 
The remedial legislative response to the financial crisis in the United States was the Dodd-
Frank Act.7 While the Federal Reserve Act did not use the words “financial stability”, this was 
not the case with the Dodd-Frank Act. Instead of being observed in the penumbra, financial 
stability is an open and obvious topic of the new law. Title 1 of the Dodd-Frank Act is named 
the “Financial Stability Act of 2010.” 
One of Title 1’s most consequential provisions is Section 165, which empowers the Board of 
Governors  to  develop  enhanced  prudential  standards  for  systemically  important  financial 
institutions.8 In a provision directly affecting central bank powers, the Congress instructs the 
Federal Reserve to develop prudential standards “to prevent or mitigate risks to the financial 
stability of the United States that could arise from the material financial distress or failure, or 
ongoing activities, of large interconnected financial institutions.”9 There are other provisions 
of the Dodd-Frank Act granting new powers to the Federal Reserve with respect to financial 
stability, and time does not permit me to review all of them here. One very obvious provision 
is the Dodd-Frank Act’s Section 604, which amends the Bank Holding Company Act to direct 
the Federal Reserve to consider, when it evaluates an application for approval of a proposed 
acquisition, merger, or consolidation, whether it “would result in greater or more concentrated 
risks to the stability of the United States banking or financial system.”10 In commenting during 
a  recent  press  conference  about  the  Federal  Reserve’s  objective  as  a  consolidated 
supervisor  of  the  holding  company  of  many  systemically  important  financial  groups, 
Chairman Bernanke said “the primary goal of the consolidated supervision by the Fed is to 
make sure that the firms – the firm doesn’t in any  way endanger the stability of the broad 
financial system.”11  
Today, both the penumbra of the Federal Reserve Act and the express terms of the Dodd-
Frank  Act  place  financial  stability  within  the  Federal  Reserve’s  legal  mandate.  During  the 
crisis, the Federal Reserve needed to restore financial stability so that the Federal Reserve 
could  work  to  achieve  price  stability  and  maximum  employment.  The  effort  at  restoration 
caused  us  to  explore  techniques  we  had  never  used  before,  and,  as  Chairman  Bernanke 
exhorted us, to do “whatever it takes.” To succeed with this mission, lawyers at the Federal 
Reserve needed to interpret our authority in new and different ways, and we did so. 
I  hope  that  my  remarks  today  reflect  on  that  important  function  of  counsel.  The  role  of 
counsel,  of  course,  does  not  end  with  interpreting  legal  authorities  to  address  new  and 
unanticipated  challenges.  It  also  involves  patrolling  the  frontiers  of  our  powers  and 
Id. at 483. 
                                                
6  
7   Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 111–203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010). 
8   12 U.S.C. § 5365. 
9   12 U.S.C. § 5365(a)(1). 
10   12 U.S.C. § 1842 (c)(7). 
11   Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 18, 2013, Press 
Conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
recognizing  where  and  when  the  rule  of  law  forecloses  options.  This  is  essential  to  the 
credibility of the central bank, a concept closely connected with the public’s trust. 
To  conclude,  I  hope  these  remarks  about  financial  stability  also  reflect  on  what  our  legal 
colleagues have accomplished at the ECB. In this regard, I pay tribute to the leadership of 
Antonio Sáinz de Vicuña, and to his work not only in presiding at the birth of the euro, but 
guiding  the  ECB  to  take  the  extraordinary  actions  necessary  to  preserve  the  euro.  As 
President Draghi accurately forecast, they have been enough. Antonio, as you step down as 
general counsel, I congratulate you on the accomplishment of the mission, and applaud you 
for a job well done. 
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen, for your kind attention. 
Disclaimer: The views expressed are the views of the author and do not necessarily reflect 
the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  or  any  component  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
