Fernando Restoy: Regulation and banking reform 
Closing address by Mr Fernando Restoy, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Spain, at “The new 
financial  regulatory  system  and  its  implications”  event,  University  of  Oviedo,  Oviedo, 
28 October 2013. 
 Good  morning.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Dean,  Manuel  González,  for  his  kind  words  of 
introduction and for inviting me to deliver the closing address at this event in the University of 
Oviedo. I would also especially like to thank Julio Segura for “brokering” my participation in 
this session today. I don’t always have to say yes to everything my former mentor and boss 
proposes to me, but I have never regretted doing so. 
Given  the  academic  profile  of  this  forum,  allow  me  to  step  back  from  the  immediate 
challenges of supervisory policy – which, as can be imagined, are numerous and complex in 
the midst of a financial crisis – and to take this opportunity to reflect, from a more general 
perspective, on the profound transformation taking place in the regulatory framework of the 
banking sector in response to the international financial crisis. 
As  usually  occurs  with  crises  triggered  by  significant  shocks  affecting  the  stability  of  the 
financial system, this crisis is very costly in terms of welfare. In the case of Spain, we have 
suffered a double-dip recession associated with the collapse of the real estate sector against 
a  backdrop  of  profound  macro-financial  imbalances  and  marked  turmoil  in  international 
markets. This double-dip recession has pushed us off the growth path we were on just five 
years back and halted the process of real convergence. GDP per capita in Spain currently 
stands  at  90%  of  the  euro  area  average,  after  having  exceeded  95%  in  2007.  Or,  if  you 
prefer,  production  per  capita,  after  rising  notably  in  the  pre-crisis  years,  today  scarcely 
exceeds the levels of a decade ago. 
Fortunately,  the  latest  data  support  expectations  of  a  gradual  recovery  of  the  Spanish 
economy, which might have already begun in the third quarter of this year according to data 
published  by  the  Banco  de  España  last  week.  However,  the  task  ahead  of  returning  to 
sustainable  growth  to  place  us  back  on  track  to  regaining  forgone  prosperity  remains 
formidable. This includes progressing further with the major reforms already undertaken in 
various areas, including the financial sector. In this latter field, nevertheless, the significant 
measures to be adopted in our country are closely linked to the regulatory reforms designed 
at European and international level. 
In  fact,  the  crisis  has  underlined  noticeable  deficiencies  in  the  regulatory  framework  of 
banking. I imagine that during today's seminar you will have analysed them in detail. In short, 
I think that the regulatory system was not conducive to adequately measuring the significant 
risks  taken  by  institutions;  to  providing  the  necessary  incentives  for  controlling  them;  to 
ensuring  sufficient  capacity  for  absorbing  losses  when  they  materialised;  and,  finally,  to 
avoiding contagion to the sector and to the economic system as a whole with the subsequent 
adverse consequences on public finances, growth and unemployment. 
In  response  to  these  deficiencies,  the  main  international  authorities  have  agreed  and,  in 
some cases, already implemented important reforms affecting nearly all significant aspects of 
financial activity. 
Allow me today to focus on what I consider are the three pillars of global regulatory reform of 
the  credit  sector:  first,  measures  to  strengthen  the  solvency  of  banks;  second,  reforms  to 
facilitate the orderly resolution of non-viable institutions; and, finally, the structural measures 
to set limits on credit institutions’ business model. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Solvency legislation 
Let us begin with the solvency rules. The new solvency rules, known as Basel III, introduce 
significant  changes  in  prudential  requirements  which  envisage  not  only  an  increase  in  the 
amount and quality of capital required, but also supplementary prudential oversight aimed at 
strengthening  the  resilience  of  banks  and  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  This  new 
framework  has  been  incorporated,  as  you  know,  into  European  legislation  through  the 
Capital  Requirements  Directive  and  Regulation  which  will  be  implemented  on  1  January 
2014. 
Basel III includes far-reaching changes. First, it requires banks to considerably increase their 
loss-absorbing capacity. The basic instrument used is the introduction of a minimum level of 
top  quality  capital  (core  capital  or  common  equity  tier  1)  which  amounts  to  4.5%  of  risk-
weighted assets. On top of this minimum, an additional capital conservation buffer of 2.5% is 
introduced,  which  must  be  built  up  once  the  transition  periods  envisaged  have  ended, 
although  it  may  be  used  in  times  of  need.  Thus,  banks,  as  a  rule,  will  have  to  maintain  a 
minimum level of top quality capital of 7% in terms of their risk-weighted assets. 
This  CET1  capital  ratio  is  calculated,  furthermore,  using  more  stringent  criteria  than  those 
currently used. Thus, the admissibility requirements for eligible instruments have been made 
significantly  more  restrictive  and  deductions  have  been  increased;  for  example,  those 
relating to goodwill, qualifying holdings and deferred tax assets. For an idea of the overall 
impact of these measures, it suffices to say that the minimum CET1 requirement of 2% under 
the  previous  legislation  could  be,  on  average,  around  1%  if  the  new  requirements  are 
applied.  Therefore,  effectively,  the  minimum  CET1  requirement,  increases  by  around  six 
percentage points in relation to risk-weighted assets. And this aside from the supplementary 
requirements which may be made of each institution based on its specific risk profile under 
the so-called Pillar 2 of the Capital Accord. 
In this way, credit institutions will have more and better quality capital to withstand the losses 
which  might  be  caused  by  their  activity.  Nevertheless,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  crisis,  the 
availability of a large volume of capital does not per se guarantee an institution’s resilience in 
the face of sufficiently adverse shocks. That justifies the introduction of further restrictions, 
such as those setting a maximum leverage ratio and minimum liquidity, which are currently 
subject to an observation period that will culminate in them being definitively parameterised 
and incorporated into the new regulatory requirements. 
Finally, the new legislation includes macroprudential tools which seek to complement the 
requirements aimed at strengthening each institution's solvency with obligations directed at 
protecting  the  system  as  a  whole.  Two  measures  stand  out  among  the  macroprudential 
measures envisaged: those seeking to reduce the procyclicality of microprudential regulation 
by  introducing  a  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  and  those  aimed  at  mitigating  the  systemic 
effects of the possible insolvency of individual banks. The second set of measures includes 
an  additional  capital  buffer  for  systemically  important  banks,  which  is  complemented  by 
supplementary  requirements  for  those  institutions  with  the  capacity  to  affect  the  global 
financial  system.  Further, 
the  adoption  of  additional 
macroprudential controls (in the form of capital buffers, changes in risk weightings, etc.) for 
banks on the basis of their exposure to specific sectors where marked imbalances can be 
identified. 
Undoubtedly, these regulatory changes will exert a noticeable positive effect on the capacity 
of banks to withstand periods of stress and that will result in less frequent and milder crises 
which, furthermore, should entail lower costs for the public. 
That said, the new prudential legislation admittedly entails considerable challenges as to its 
implementation, and its introduction will restrict the capacity of banks to run risks. For this 
reason, it is appropriate, especially taking into account the relatively weak economic activity 
in Europe at present, to consider prudent implementation timetables taking advantage of the 
flexibility in the Basel Accord and in the new European solvency legislation. 
legislation 
the  new 
includes 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We  should  apply  the  same  prudence  in  the  introduction  of  the  new  leverage  and  liquidity 
requirements.  The  observation  periods  currently  in  force  should  be  used  to  painstakingly 
assess the resulting effects and, in particular, to better understand the possible interaction 
between the two tools. 
Finally, in the area of the implementation of Basel III, we should not forget that there is still 
one issue to be resolved. It is important to ensure that the application of the new capital rules 
yield  results  which  are  comparable  and  consistent  across  institutions  and  countries. 
Specifically, the capital requirements for two institutions with a comparable risk profile should 
be similar, irrespective of the jurisdiction or jurisdictions in which they operate. In particular, 
although progress has been made recently in this area, additional effort is required to ensure 
that the internal models used by institutions and authorised by their supervisors to calculate 
risk weightings do not produce uneven results which question the robustness of the solvency 
ratios and introduce competitive distortions. 
Legislation on resolution 
The second major reform I would like to comment on refers to rules on the resolution of non-
viable institutions. 
Traditionally,  the  principle  of  constructive  ambiguity  has  prevailed  when  action  is  taken  by 
authorities  in  the  face  of  problems  of  bank  solvency.  Under  this  approach,  financial 
institutions’ liabilities – except for guaranteed deposits – do not formally qualify for specific 
legal treatment, aside from the seniority established in the case of bankruptcy in accordance 
with conventional commercial law. However, the authorities have used discretionary power to 
protect  the  holders  of  banks’  debt  instruments  –  through  capital  injections  which  have 
prevented the winding up of such banks – when they have considered that their bankruptcy 
could entail undesired systemic effects. 
In the recent past, it has become evident that the systemic effects of banking crises can be 
very marked, even when they affect institutions of no great size. Consequently, constructive 
ambiguity has resulted, at least in the first stage of the crisis, in widespread public action to 
assist ailing institutions. This has confirmed the existence of an implicit public guarantee of 
bank  liabilities  which,  when  activated,  has  generated  considerable  costs  for  the  public 
finances  of  the  countries  most  affected.  Constructive  ambiguity  generates  an  incentives 
system  which  makes  it  difficult  for  institutions  and  their  creditors  to  manage  risk 
appropriately. 
Thus,  the  restoration  of  an  effective  incentives  system  needs  to  limit  confidence  in  public 
support schemes being activated across the board. That requires striking a suitable balance 
between measures to minimise the probability of the bankruptcy of systemic institutions – by 
imposing supplementary capital buffers – and, in the case of more complex institutions, the 
design of contingency action plans which ensure orderly resolution if a state of non-viability is 
reached. This is, in essence, the content of the work undertaken recently by the Financial 
Stability Board. 
In any event, the essential ingredient of orderly bank resolution schemes is the specification 
of a bail-in arrangement establishing a clear order of priority for the claims of shareholders 
and the various types of creditors that can be activated before insolvency proceedings are 
commenced and before any State aid is made available. The credibility of this framework will 
favour the appropriate perception of the risk effectively entailed by each liability instrument 
and will minimise the bill to be borne by taxpayers to prevent the disorderly winding-up of 
banks. 
In  the  European  arena,  we  have  progressed  greatly  in  the  definition  of  a  regulatory 
framework for the resolution of non-viable banks. There is already political agreement on a 
proposed  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  which  will  establish  a  clear  burden-sharing 
system for insolvent banks and thus minimise the possible cost of rescue for taxpayers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
This  Directive  is  also  a  first  step  in  the  creation  of  a  single  resolution  mechanism  to 
supplement  the  nascent  single  supervisory  mechanism  which  will  enable  a  real  banking 
union  to  be  set  up  in  Europe.  This  project  is  essential  to  overcome  the  problems  of 
fragmentation  which  still  beset  European  markets  and  which  cause  the  perception  of  risk 
associated  with  banks’  liability  instruments  to  differ  depending  on  the  jurisdiction  in  which 
they operate. 
However, as you know, to ensure that non-viable banks are resolved in the same way in the 
various  Member  States  of  the  euro  area,  it  does  not  suffice  to  have  a  set  of  common 
regulations;  rather,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  single  resolution  authority  to  ensure  that  the 
regulations are applied uniformly in all countries. 
Similarly, the financial support needed for orderly bank resolution must be available under 
similar  conditions  whenever  required.  Clearly  the  lack  of  a  full  European  resolution 
mechanism (including uniform rules, a single authority and a common fund) would limit the 
effectiveness  of  the  single  supervisory  mechanism.  In  that  case,  the  single  supervisory 
mechanism  would  have  to  resort  to  a  complex  system  of  interaction  with  the  national 
authorities (which would have to continue using their resources to cover the fiscal effects of 
the problems of non-viability detected by the supervisor) to ensure financial stability. 
In this respect the draft legislative proposal submitted by the European Commission (EC) last 
July for the establishment of a single resolution mechanism is very timely. The EC proposes 
the creation of a single resolution agency or authority, which would manage a common fund 
fed by contributions from the industry and ultimately report to the European Commission.  
It is true that some countries have expressed doubts as to the legal basis of the proposal. 
Moreover,  this  initiative  may  possibly  assign  excessive  protagonism  to  the  EC  in  some 
cases. Nevertheless, it is important that a political agreement be reached rapidly, allowing 
the  creation  of  a  scheme  which  will  contribute  not  only  to  remedying  the  current 
fragmentation of the bank instrument market in Europe, but also, as I mentioned earlier, to 
the effectiveness of the single supervisory mechanism.  
Structural measures 
Finally,  the  third  pillar  of  global  regulatory  reform  I  wish  to  briefly  inform  you  of  is  the 
measures aimed at restricting the business model of financial institutions. Here I refer to the 
Volcker rule in the United States, to the conclusions of the report drafted by an independent 
commission  chaired  by  John  Vickers  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  the  proposals  in  the 
European Union by a group of experts chaired by the governor of the Bank of Finland, Erkki 
Liikaanen.  
The  rationale  of  these  reforms  leaves  little  room,  conceptually  speaking,  for  discussion.  In 
the years leading up to the crisis, banks devoted a substantial amount of funds to proprietary 
trading  and  own-account  investment  activities  which  notably  increased  the  size  and 
complexity of their balance sheets. This expansion of business may be partly related to the 
ease with which banks can access funds in a setting in which, as I described earlier, bank 
liabilities (and particularly the most traditional type, such as deposits) enjoy a kind of implicit 
public  guarantee.  That  is  to  say,  some  banks  have  been  able  to  use  the  taxpayers’ 
guarantee  to  assume  excessive  risks  which  have  made  it  increasingly  likely  that  the 
guarantee will be called upon. Structural measures are intended, in this respect, to prevent 
risky activities such as proprietary trading from being pursued by banks which simultaneously 
take deposits from the public.  
Unfortunately, 
international 
coordination  and,  more  specifically,  lie  beyond  the  remit  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB), which has given rise to a lack of uniformity across jurisdictions.  
For  example,  although  the  US  proposal  permits  deposit-taking  institutions  to  engage  in  a 
wider  range  of  activities  than  the  European  proposal  does  (including  market-making 
initiatives  have  remained  outside 
the  bounds  of 
these 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
activities),  it  does  require  the  activities  of  unrelated  entities  to  be  totally  separated.  The 
proposal  currently  under  discussion  in  Europe  would  permit  the  creation  of  financially 
independent  subsidiaries  to  accommodate  the  activity  of  investment  within  a  group  also 
authorised to engage in traditional commercial banking. We are therefore confronted with the 
need  to  achieve  closer  international  coordination  to  ensure  the  consistency  of  the  reforms 
under way in the various jurisdictions. Otherwise the cross-jurisdictional inconsistencies may 
encourage regulatory arbitrage which would reduce the effectiveness of the reforms adopted 
and put at risk the sought-after simplification of banking. 
In  any  event,  the  implementation  of  measures  of  this  type  affecting  the  specialisation  of 
banking  activity  should  be  accompanied  by  an  appropriate  cost-benefit  analysis.  In  this 
respect, it should be kept in mind that the crisis has not demonstrated the superiority of any 
specific  model  and  that,  by  contrast,  it  has  witnessed  the  collapse  of  all  manner  of 
institutions, whether they be specialised in traditional business, in investment banking or in a 
combination  of  the  two.  Moreover,  given  that  the  introduction  of  restrictions  on  banking 
activity means forgoing the potential benefits of diversification, it is essential to ensure that 
these are smaller than the risk of combining traditional banking and own-account investment 
activities, even after the entry into force of solvency regulations which strengthen and step up 
prudential  controls.  Finally,  it  is  necessary  to  assess  as  precisely  as  possible  the  impact 
structural measures may have on the location of risk outside the regulated sector and on the 
liquidity and efficiency of securities markets.  
More generally, we still lack an overall analysis of the diverse regulatory changes envisaged 
in the three areas in question, of their internal consistency and of their combined impact on 
the  financial  system  and  on  the  economy  in  general.  For  example,  at  the  limit  it  could  be 
argued that structural measures (perhaps those having the greatest impact on the business 
strategy of the main banks) are the least necessary if we are confident that the combination 
of the new solvency requirements and the reform of resolution regimes will really minimise 
the government support required to protect deposits. Furthermore, although the soundness 
and  solvency  of  banks  tend  to  strengthen  their  capacity  to  grant  credit,  it  is  true  that  the 
combined effect of all the measures will (by their very nature) tend to reduce the profitability 
of banking and banks’ ability to channel savings to business activities involving risk. Further 
evidence on the quantitative importance of this effect would be useful for assessing the key 
parameters of each measure. 
Effects in Spain 
Against this background, how do the regulatory changes affect the Spanish banking sector? 
It is true that the regulatory avalanche represents a huge challenge for Spanish banks, but I 
do not think that it is greater than that faced by other banking systems, especially after all the 
financial reforms adopted in Spain over the past year. 
Currently,  we  have  confirmation  that  Spanish  banks  are  reasonably  capitalised,  that  they 
have substantially improved their liquidity situation and that their leverage ratios are relatively 
low, in comparison with those of other European banks. In addition, the bank business model 
in  Spain  continues  to  be  based  on  traditional  commercial  activity  so  that  own-account 
investment  securities  portfolios  are  generally  moderately  sized.  As  a  result,  the  structural 
measures that may be approved by the European Union will have a more limited impact on 
Spanish  banks  than  on  banks  in  other  jurisdictions.  Moreover,  international  banks  have 
established a model of independent subsidiaries that is conducive to the application of simple 
resolution arrangements. 
At the same time, unlike in most jurisdictions, we have already had for more than a year very 
advanced legislation on resolution that has been applied in the process of restructuring our 
financial system and that has entailed a significant saving of public funds.  
That  said,  it  is  true  that  some  specific  aspects  (especially  associated  with  the  deductions 
introduced  for  regulatory  capital)  could  be  specially  demanding  for  certain  Spanish  banks, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
which are already responding in their strategic plans. More generally, the pressure exerted 
by  the  market  on  the  availability  of  capital  (beyond  the  new  minimum  regulatory 
requirements)  requires  an  on-going  effort  to  preserve  capital  and,  specifically,  to  maintain 
prudent cost containment and dividend policies.  
Also,  it  is  clear  that  the  productive  specialisation  of  our  economy  and  its  dependence  on 
bank financing make it vulnerable to any adverse impact of the new regulation on the ability 
of banks to finance the real economy. To counter this, all we can do is take advantage of the 
timetables  established  to  ensure  our  institutions  gradually  adapt  to  the  new  requirements 
and, above all, work at the same time to promote the development of our capital markets in 
order to increase their capacity to intermediate the economy’s financial flows. 
All told – and I will finish here – the main challenge we face, as I have already mentioned, is 
the persistent fragmentation of European markets (despite the recent improvement) and the 
consequent link between sovereign risk and banking risk. Accordingly, our financial system 
will be significantly strengthened by the setting up of an effective banking union with all the 
important components, including the single resolution mechanism. Once again, it is clear that 
defence of the national interest requires unreserved support for initiatives that tend to deepen 
and speed up the process of European integration. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
