Andreas Dombret: Holistic approaches to solve the “euro crisis” 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Global Economic Symposium, Kiel, 1 October 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for the invitation to this year’s global economic symposium; it is a pleasure to be 
here. The “euro crisis” has certainly been, and it still is, a defining moment in the history of 
European Monetary Union – though I would add that we are dealing with a sovereign debt 
crisis  rather  than  a  crisis  of  the  euro.  Let  me  kick  off  the  discussion  by  offering  some 
thoughts on how to solve the crisis. 
What  we  need  is  a  holistic  approach.  Since  the  European  Monetary  Union  is  a  highly 
interdependent  system,  any  solution  must  not  only  remedy  the  problem  at  hand  but  also 
improve the working of the system as a whole. Unfortunately, many of the proposed solutions 
fall short of this requirement. 
Instead, they are prone to what is known as the “cobra effect”. The cobra anecdote is set in 
colonial India. Trying to stop a plague of cobras, the British government offered a bounty for 
every  dead  snake.  The  plan  seemed  to  be  working  at  first.  High  numbers  of  dead  cobras 
were presented to the colonial administration. Unfortunately, this did not get the plague under 
control. Most of the dead cobras were not wild ones – they had been bred by enterprising 
locals in order to claim the bounty. When the governor finally caught wind of the practice, he 
scrapped the reward, causing the cobra breeders to set the now worthless snakes free. As a 
result, the plague was worse than ever. 
Every policy not only addresses a problem, but changes the nature of the game as well. This 
has to be taken into account when evaluating the overall merit of any measure. And when we 
look beyond instant effects, many policies lose their lustre. 
Eurobonds are a case in point. Granted, eurobonds would offer temporary relief to heavily 
indebted member states of the euro area. But the introduction of eurobonds would distort the 
already lopsided balance between liability and control even further. While spending decisions 
would essentially remain a national prerogative, liability would become European. Incentives 
to incur further debt would thus be strengthened, not weakened. This would strain rather than 
smooth the working of the system. 
Only  if  common  liability  were  matched  by  common  control  would  incentives  be  aligned 
sufficiently, as the IMF pointed out in a recent report.1 But even though the fiscal pact has 
stiffened the rules, genuine European control of fiscal affairs still requires a quantum leap in 
terms of ceding sovereignty to the supranational level. 
As this seems to be out of reach at the moment; steps are needed that encourage each part 
of the system to behave responsibly, while at the same time making the system more robust 
against failures of its constituent parts. 
Severing  the  overly  close  link  between  banks  and  sovereigns  is  a  crucial  example  in  that 
regard. The banking union goes a long way towards ensuring that taxpayers do not foot the 
bill  in  the  event  of  a  bank  failure.  Defining  a  clear  hierarchy  of  creditors  is  crucial  in  that 
regard. Shareholders and creditors have to be first in line when it comes to bearing banks’ 
losses. The proposed Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive is a big step forward, but the 
                                                 
1 
“Toward a Fiscal Union for the Euro Area”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, September 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
current  proposal  still  allows  for  discretionary  exemptions  from  bailing  in  creditors.  In  the 
interest of market discipline, this should change. 
And  to  further  strengthen  market  discipline,  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  will  have  to 
ensure that banks without a viable business model can exit the market in an orderly fashion. 
Such a regime is crucial not only for financial stability, but for sustainable growth as well. A 
functioning  resolution  regime  strengthens  incentives  for  effective  credit  monitoring  and 
moderates  banks’  risk  appetites.  In  so  doing,  it  enhances  the  allocation  of  capital  and 
reduces the risk of a bubble emerging. 
But the sovereign-bank-nexus goes both ways. We also need to make sure that worsening 
public  finances  do  not  infect  the  financial  system.  The  banking  union  still  has  a  sovereign 
virus, as Daniel Gros from the Centre for European Policy Studies puts it. 
To strengthen the banking union’s immune system, we need to end the preferential treatment 
for sovereign debt. Sovereign bonds have to be adequately risk-weighted, and exposure to 
individual sovereign debt should be capped, as is already the case for private debt. 
At present, sovereign bonds are treated by European regulators as risk-free – an assumption 
that stands in contradiction both to the no-bail-out clause and to recent history. An adequate 
risk weighting of sovereign bonds would make banks more resilient if the fiscal position of the 
respective sovereign were to deteriorate. And it would bring spreads more into line with the 
underlying risk, thus giving a disciplining signal to the sovereign. 
But sovereign bonds pose a threat to financial stability not only because of preferential risk-
weighting. The most important rule in risk management is diversification. Yet when it comes 
to  sovereign  bonds,  banks  all  too  often  neglect  this  principle.  In  many  cases,  European 
banks  hold  bonds  from  one  sovereign  only  –  their  home  country.  Large  and  undiversified 
exposure  is  what  makes  a  sovereign  systemically  relevant.  Hence,  the  large  exposure 
regime which caps the investment in one single debtor has to be applied to sovereigns as 
well. 
Only then will the failure of a part not equal the failure of the system as a whole. 
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
