Tiff Macklem: Management and financial reform 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, presented to 
Autorité des marchés financiers, Montreal, Quebec, 18 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
Good morning and thank you for the invitation. It is a pleasure to be here in Montréal, where I 
was born and raised. 
Sound  risk  management  in  Canada  by  both  the  private  and  the  public  sectors  played  a 
definitive role in steering us through the financial crisis. As you well know, none of our banks 
failed and none had to be rescued. 
And  importantly,  our financial  system  continued  to  function.  So  when  the  Bank  of  Canada 
injected  exceptional  liquidity  and  monetary  stimulus,  and  the  federal  and  provincial 
governments  undertook  extraordinary  fiscal  stimulus,  credit  flowed  to  households  and 
businesses and they responded. As a result, we had the shortest recession and the fastest 
recovery in the G-7. 
But I am not here to boast. Lest we forget, we had our own risk-management failures here in 
Canada. I am sure I don’t need to remind you that our non-bank asset-backed commercial 
paper market froze in the summer of 2007, at the onset of the crisis. 
And the crisis reminded us that keeping our own house in order is not enough. Even if our 
financial  system  proved  resilient,  our  exports  plummeted  21  per  cent  in  the  wake  of  the 
global  recession.  And  still  today,  our  exports  remain  below  their  pre-recession  level.  The 
global financial crisis continues to cast a long shadow. 
This  underscores  the  importance  of  completing  the  global  financial  reforms  that  were 
launched exactly five years ago this week at the first G-20 Leaders Summit. Convened by 
President George W. Bush following the Lehman failure, it was held in Washington on the 
14th and 15th of November in 2008. 
At the Summit, the Leaders agreed on a set of common principles for the reform of the global 
financial  system.  And  five  months  later,  at  the  London  Summit  in  April  2009,  the  Leaders 
elaborated  on  those  principles  by  committing  to  a  sweeping  and  comprehensive  reform 
agenda.  Their  fundamental  objective  was  to  build  a  resilient  global  financial  system  that 
would serve households and businesses in good times and in bad. To do this, the Leaders 
created the Financial Stability Board (FSB), and gave it four core tasks: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Since the London Summit, a great deal has been accomplished. And the financial system is 
much safer as a result. 
But there are still some important elements that remain to be completed, and we need to get 
these across the finish line. 
Today, I want to quickly review the highlights of what has been achieved and then turn to 
four  areas  that  need  further  work:  leverage  limits;  bail-inable  securities;  core  funding 
markets; and finally, risk disclosure, governance and culture. 
make banks safer; 
end “too big to fail”; 
mitigate bank-like risks in the shadow banking sector; and 
ensure continuously functioning core financial markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In a nutshell, my message is that while the roots of this crisis were in complex instruments 
and  interactions,  the  foundational  elements  for  a  more  resilient  financial  system  are  not 
complex: bigger capital and liquidity buffers combined with a leverage backstop, rigorous and 
proactive supervision, and robust financial system plumbing. 
But  risk  is  complex.  Completing  the  reforms  and  then  ensuring  ongoing  healthy  vigilance 
requires  investments  in risk  management  by  both  the  private  sector and  the  public  sector. 
Risk  management  is  hard  work.  It  can't  be  replaced  by  simplistic  rules.  There  are  no 
shortcuts. And risk does not take holidays – it only hides. 
The  completion  of  the  ambitious  reforms  laid  out  five  years  ago  is  within  reach.  This  is 
essential to a return to sustainable, natural growth in the global economy. Let's get it done. 
What’s been achieved 
To  make  banks  safer,  reform  started  by  strengthening  the  bank  capital  regime.  Under  the 
new Basel III rules, the minimum capital requirement is being raised, the capital requirements 
for riskier activities are being increased and the definition of capital is being strengthened. All 
in, the largest banks will have to hold at least seven times as much high-quality capital as 
they did before the crisis. 
While Basel III calls for these changes to be implemented over the next six years, banks are 
not  waiting  to  rebuild  confidence  in  their  creditworthiness.  Since  the  end  of  2007,  major 
banks  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  have  increased  their  common  equity  capital  by 
$615 billion and their common equity capital ratios by almost 30 per cent. 
National  legislation  has now  been  adopted  to  implement  the  Basel III capital framework  in 
virtually all G-20 jurisdictions. Canada was one of the first jurisdictions to implement it. By the 
beginning of this year, all major Canadian banks had met the stringent Basel III requirements 
– six years ahead of the generous deadline of January 1st, 2019. 
To end the problem of “too big to fail,” a three-pronged approach has been agreed upon. 
First, banks whose failure would pose a risk to the global financial system will face a capital 
surcharge. This framework has also been extended to domestic banks. Here in Canada, our 
six  largest  banks  have  been  designated  as  domestic  systemically  important  banks  by  the 
Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions.  And  in  Quebec,  the  Autorité  des 
marchés financiers has designated Desjardins as a domestic systemically important financial 
institution. All seven are required to hold 1 per cent more capital. 
Second,  standards, known  as  the  “Key  Attributes,”  have  been  established for  the  effective 
resolution of financial institutions. Under the Key Attributes, bondholders, shareholders and 
management – rather than taxpayers – will have to bear the brunt of losses. 
Third,  systemically  important  institutions  are  facing  more  intense  and  more  effective 
supervisory  oversight.  This  includes  recovery  and  resolution  plans,  a  cross-border  co-
operation agreement between relevant authorities, and a resolvability assessment. 
Work  is  also  well  advanced  to  extend  this  framework  to  other  systemic  financial  firms, 
including global insurance companies, non-banks and core financial market infrastructure. 
On shadow banking, the goal is to transform it from a source of vulnerability to a source of 
market-based finance that adds competition, diversity and resilience to the financial system. 
Here, too, we have made good progress. 
At  the  most  recent  G-20  Summit  in  St.  Petersburg  this  past  September,  the  Leaders 
endorsed a set of recommendations to increase transparency, reduce moral hazard, and limit 
maturity and liquidity transformation. 
Finally, on strengthening the resilience of core financial markets, more than half of the FSB’s 
member  jurisdictions  now  have  legislative  frameworks  in  place  to  ensure  that  derivatives 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
transactions  are  reported  to  trade  repositories;  that  standardized  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
derivatives  are  cleared  through  central  counterparties;  and  that  non-centrally-cleared 
derivatives have higher capital and margin requirements. 
There is more, but I want to turn to the four issues that deserve particular attention. 
Leverage limits 
In  an  ideal  world,  regulators  would  accurately  measure the  riskiness  of  bank  assets  when 
setting capital requirements. But risks, of course, are not known with certainty nor can they 
be measured with precision. 
As a complement to the risk-based capital framework, a simple, but effective, leverage ratio 
was therefore imported from Canada into the global standard. This leverage ratio sets a cap 
on the value of the assets a bank can hold for each dollar of equity. It protects the system 
from risks that we might think are low but in fact are not. 
We are big fans of a leverage limit here in Canada. We had one going into the crisis, and it 
served  us  well.  But  as  the  leverage  ratio  is  finalized  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision over the course of next year, it will be important to get its calibration right. 
The  belt  and  suspenders  approach  of  the  new  capital  standards  and  leverage  ratios 
establishes two tests for the maximum amount of assets that financial institutions may hold 
relative to equity. At issue is which of these should typically bind first. 
The  leverage  ratio  was  initially  conceived  as  a  backstop.  Risk-weighted  assets  would 
normally be the binding constraint. The role of the leverage ratio is a simple, fail-safe second 
line of defence. 
Some,  however,  are  arguing  that  the  Basel  III  capital  framework  is  too  complex  and  are 
reluctant to put their faith in risk-weighted assets. They point to recent studies by the Basel 
Committee  that  show  significant  variations  in  risk  weights  applied  by  banks  across 
jurisdictions for similar portfolios of assets. They argue that the simpler leverage ratio should 
be calibrated as the binding constraint. 
While  this  appeal  to  simplicity  may  be  ostensibly  attractive,  it  is  likely  to  have  a  perverse 
effect. 
If  the  leverage  ratio  normally  binds,  the  incentives  for  banks  to  manage  their  risks  will 
diminish. Banks will load up on riskier assets and push other assets off their balance sheets. 
The result will be more risk, not less. 
We need to embrace risk management, not avoid it. In practice, this means three things. 
First,  the  industry  has  to  invest  in  risk  assessment  and  analysis,  including  robust financial 
modelling. 
Second,  supervisors  need  to  invest  in  strong  oversight  of  all  elements  of  good  risk 
management, including the risk culture and risk-governance framework. 
Third, there is work to be done at the Basel Committee and on the ground to improve the 
consistency of risk-weighted assets across jurisdictions. With a determined investment in risk 
management, this is achievable. 
Bail-inable securities 
The higher capital standards in Basel III, combined with a well-designed leverage ratio and 
appropriate liquidity requirements, will substantially reduce the probability of failure, but since 
failures will still happen, we must also reduce their impact. 
Bail-inable securities are part of the solution. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
A  bail-in  regime  can  help  authorities  maintain  critical  banking  operations  by  returning  to 
viability  institutions  that  are  perceived  as  being  too  big  to  fail.  Bail-in  debt  will  give  the 
authorities the power to recapitalize a failed bank by rapidly converting certain bank liabilities 
into regulatory capital. This reduces the risk that the burden will fall on taxpayers, and helps 
to eliminate any unfair advantage that institutions might enjoy from the markets’ belief that 
they are too big to fail. 
The  FSB  is  currently  developing  an  international  approach  on  the  adequacy  of  loss-
absorption capacity in bank resolution. In the March 2013 budget, the Canadian government 
announced  its  intention  to  institute  a  bail-in  regime  for  systemically  important  banks. 
Canadian authorities are considering the appropriate amount and nature of loss absorbency 
required  for  Canadian  institutions.  Public  consultations  will  take  place  on  how  best  to 
implement  the  regime,  and  implementation  timelines  will  allow  for  a  smooth  transition  for 
affected institutions, investors, and other market participants. 
We will need the help of the private sector to design marketable financial contracts that can 
be bailed-in to resolve a major bank. 
robust 
Continuously functioning core funding markets 
Let me now turn to financial market infrastructure. 
For the financial system, ensuring that core funding markets are continuously open in times 
of stress is essential to managing liquidity risk. 
In  Canada,  a  central  counterparty  (CCP)  service  to  centrally  clear  repo  transactions  was 
launched  last  year  by  the  Canadian  Derivatives  Clearing  Corporation  (CDCC),  which  is 
based here in Montréal. 
The  repo  market  is  a  major  source  of  funds  for  financial  institutions.  By  becoming  the 
counterparty to all trades, a CCP minimizes counterparty credit risk and mutualizes losses. 
CCPs  also  promote 
risk-management  practices  and  default-management 
mechanisms. 
For  financial  institutions  subject  to  regulatory  capital  and  leverage  requirements,  CCPs 
improve balance sheet netting, which, in turn, should benefit other users through deeper and 
more liquid markets and better pricing. 
The CDCC worked closely with the Investment Industry Association of Canada, stakeholders 
in the financial industry, the Bank of Canada and other regulatory authorities to create this 
new CCP, which began operating on a modest scale in February 2012. 
A  second  phase  of  the  CCP  for  repos  was  launched  in  December  of  2012.  It  added  the 
possibility  for  members  to  trade  and  clear  “blind”  repos.  Since  then,  the  clearing  of  cash 
trades has been added. And very recently, provincial securities have been included as well. 
To increase the new CCP’s share of overall repo activity, the CDCC and the industry have 
engaged  in  discussions  with  “buy-side  participants”  that  are  significant  players  in  the 
Canadian  repo  market.  Having  these  market  participants  join  the  repo  CCP  is  important 
because it will enhance the resilience of this core funding market in times of stress. This is 
important to the Bank of Canada. In addition, greater participation would reinforce the overall 
benefits  of  the  CCP  since  more  members  would  generate  higher  clearing  volumes,  more 
market 
transactions  and  deeper  netting 
opportunities. 
The reality is that Canada is ahead of the world in this initiative. It is tough being in the lead, 
but we have done it before. We have an opportunity here to create a CCP model for others to 
follow. We are making good progress. Let’s keep the focus. 
liquidity,  broader  ability 
to  conduct 
term 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Risk disclosure, governance and culture 
I know I have already asked for a lot from the private sector, but before I wrap up, I want to 
speak more directly to the private sector’s responsibilities. 
First,  risk  disclosure.  Supervisors  work  with  banks  to  assess  riskiness.  But  it  is  equally 
important that markets have adequate information so that analysts can better evaluate risk 
themselves.  That  is  why  I  welcome  the  report  that  the  Enhanced  Disclosure  Task  Force 
published  last  autumn.1  This  private  sector  effort,  the  result  of  a  unique  collaboration 
between  users  and  preparers  of  financial  reports,  recommends  that  banks  improve  their 
disclosure of business models, key risks and risk-measurement practices. I strongly support 
OSFI in encouraging banks to implement these recommendations. 
Second, risk governance. A peer review of risk management undertaken by FSB members 
and published earlier this year found that the private sector has been addressing the gaps in 
risk governance that came into glaring focus during the crisis. Increasingly, firms are: 
• 
assessing the collective skills and qualifications of their boards of directors as well 
as board effectiveness; 
instituting  stand-alone  risk  committees  that  are  composed  only  of  independent 
directors and operate with a clear definition of independence; 
establishing  a  group-wide  chief  risk  officer  (CRO)  and  risk-management  function 
that is independent from revenue-generating responsibilities; and 
integrating  the  discussions  among  the  risk  and  audit  committees  through  joint 
meetings or cross-membership. 
   The  report  also  made  a  number  of  recommendations  to  strengthen  risk-governance 
practices, including: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
improving the skill sets of individuals appointed to boards of directors; 
holding board members accountable for oversight of risk governance; 
elevating the stature, authority and independence of the CRO; and 
obtaining  an  independent  assessment  of  the  risk-governance  framework  on  an 
annual basis. 
Third,  and finally,  the  internal  culture  in financial  institutions  is  critical.  In  the run-up  to the 
crisis,  banking  became  too  much  about  banks  connecting  with  other  banks.  Clients  were 
replaced by counterparties, and anything that made good money and was legal was a good 
idea. Sadly, even some things that were not legal were considered a good idea. The focus 
needs to return to serving clients to support the real economy. 
For companies, responsibility begins with their boards and senior management. They need 
to clearly define the purpose of their organizations and promote a culture of ethical business 
practices throughout. 
Conclusion 
The role of the financial sector is to channel savings to productive investment, and to help 
households and businesses manage the risks they face. 
As long as there is leverage, maturity and liquidity transformation, and credit intermediation, 
there will be risk. Managing risk is at the heart of financial services. Sound risk management 
is also essential to the public good of financial stability. 
                                                
1   Enhanced Disclosure Task Force. 2012. Report: “Enhancing the Risk Disclosures of Banks” 29 October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
A great deal has been accomplished to improve the resilience of the financial system since 
the first G-20 Leaders Summit in Washington five years ago. 
But as the urgency of the crisis begins to fade in our collective memories, there is a risk that 
countries  and  institutions  will  stray  from  the  common  sense  of  purpose  and  determination 
that inspired the sweeping G-20 reform agenda. I have highlighted several areas where there 
is more work to be done by both the public and private sectors to complete the G-20 financial 
reforms. This is within reach. Let’s get it done. 
Finally, let me draw a link to monetary policy. Risk management is also an important element 
in monetary policy. In our policy deliberations, we evaluate and assess the most important 
risks, both positive and negative, and strive to balance them. 
The substantial progress achieved in implementing the G-20 financial reforms has made the 
global  financial  system  safer.  This  has  reduced  the  tail  risk  that  a  financial  collapse 
somewhere in the world will affect the global and Canadian economies. Correspondingly, this 
risk  is  now  weighing  less  on  our  monetary  policy  decisions.  For  me,  at  least,  that’s  one 
measure of progress. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
