Philip Lowe: Productivity and infrastructure 
Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the IARIW 
(International Association for Research in Income and Wealth) - UNSW (University of New 
South  Wales)  Conference  on  “Productivity:  measurement,  drivers  and  trends”,  Sydney, 
26 November 2013. 
 I would like to thank David Jacobs and Michelle Bergmann for their excellent assistance in preparing this talk. 
I  would  like  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  you  all  to  Sydney  for  this  conference  on 
Productivity Measurement, Drivers and Trends. You are meeting in one of the world’s great 
cities and I hope you enjoy your time here. You are also discussing one of the world’s great 
challenges – boosting productivity and increasing people’s living standards. The conference 
organisers  have  put  together  a  distinguished  array  of  speakers  to  help  us  make  some 
progress on this critically important issue and I am delighted to be able to participate in those 
discussions. 
I  would  like  to  divide  my  remarks  this  morning  into  two  parts,  both  of  which  will  have  a 
distinctly  Australian  perspective.  First,  I  will  discuss  recent  trends  in  productivity  growth  in 
Australia and the significant challenge that lies ahead of us. And then second, I will discuss 
the important role that investment in infrastructure can make to boosting productivity growth 
and our standard of living. 
Productivity: the challenge that lies ahead 
I would like to start with a graph that I am fond of presenting (Graph 1). It has two lines. The 
first shows how real income per hour worked in Australia has increased over the past two 
decades (the green line) – this is a pretty good proxy for the growth in our real purchasing 
power per hour worked. The second line shows how the amount of output produced per hour 
worked  has  increased  over  this  same  period  (the  blue  line)  –  this  is  the  conventional 
measure of labour productivity growth. 
Graph 1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1
There are two main observations that I would like to make based on this graph. 
The  first  is  that  over  the  past  two  decades  we  have  seen  unusually  strong  growth  in  the 
average real income generated by each hour of work in Australia. Since 1993, our effective 
purchasing  power  for  each  hour  of  work  has  increased  by  a  cumulative  55  per  cent,  or 
around 2¼ per cent per year on average. This is much faster than in the previous decade 
and faster than in almost any other industrial country.  
The second observation is that the source of this very strong growth in real purchasing power 
has  changed  over  time.  In  the  1990s,  the  source  was  strong  productivity  growth,  as  is 
evident from the relatively steep slope of the blue line. Over these years, we benefited from a 
noticeable  pick-up  in  productivity  growth,  partly  due  to  a  period  of  substantial  economic 
reform.  
However,  the  story  over  the  past  decade  is  quite  different,  with  productivity  growth  being 
noticeably  slower.1  The  good  news  is  that  this  did  not  lead  to  slower  growth  in  our  living 
standards (this is apparent in the two lines moving apart gradually). The reason for this is the 
very substantial increase in Australia’s terms of trade over this period. With rapid growth in 
Asia pushing up the prices of commodities, Australia’s export prices increased substantially 
relative to our import prices. As Glenn Stevens has pointed out, over time we have been able 
to  buy  more  and  more  flat  screen  televisions  for  each  ton  of  iron  ore  that  we  have  sold 
overseas.2 It is this increase in the average value of what we produce per hour of work – not 
so  much  an  increase  in  the  average  amount  that  we  produce  per  hour  –  that  has  been 
central to the increase in our living standards over the past decade.  
Before  I  discuss  the  implications  of  this,  I  would  like  to  add  one  further  line  to  this  graph 
(Graph 2). This third line shows how real income per capita (the orange line) – as opposed to 
per  hour  worked  –  has  increased  over  time.  As  you  can  see,  the  rise  in  real  income  per 
capita has been even faster than the rise in real income per hour worked, which has been 
faster than the rise in productivity. Since 1993, average real income per capita has increased 
by almost 70 per cent, or nearly 2¾ per cent per year on average. Again, this is much faster 
than  we  experienced  in  earlier  decades  and  faster  than  in  other  advanced  economies 
(Graph 3).  By  way  of  comparison,  over  this  same  period,  there  has  been  a  cumulative 
increase in real income per capita across the G7 economies of just 28 per cent, or around 
just 1¼ per cent per year on average. 
                                                 
1  The  slowdown  in  productivity  growth  is  discussed  in  D’Arcy  P  and  L  Gustafsson  (2012),  “Australia’s 
Productivity  Performance  and  Real  Incomes”,  RBA  Bulletin,  June,  pp  23–36,  and  Connolly  E  and 
L Gustafsson (forthcoming), “Australian Productivity Growth: Trends and Determinants”, Australian Economic 
Review, December 2013.  
2  See Stevens G (2010), “The Challenge of Prosperity”, Address to the Committee for Economic Development 
of Australia (CEDA) Annual Dinner, Melbourne, 29 November. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 2 
 Graph 3 
 An  important  factor contributing  to  the  strong  growth  in  per  capita  income  in  Australia  has 
been  our  favourable  demographics.  Over  the  past  couple  of  decades,  we  have  been  in 
somewhat of a sweet spot. While the population has been ageing, there has been a steady 
rise  in  the  share  of  the  population  in  the  15  to  64  age  group  due  to  a  decline  in  the 
percentage of children in the population (Graph 4). In addition, there has been a substantial 
rise in the share of the working-age population that is in employment, as the unemployment 
rate has trended down and the participation rate has trended up. As a result of these trends, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
there  has  been  a  noticeable  increase  in  the  number  of  hours  worked  relative  to  the 
population, which has boosted growth in measured output.  
Graph 4 
 So in summary, the past two decades have been very good ones for the Australian economy. 
While  not  everybody  in  the  community  has  benefited  equally,  there  has  been  a  very 
substantial  improvement  in  our  average  standard  of  living  since  the  early  1990s.  This 
improvement has exceeded growth in productivity by a substantial margin. For this to occur 
over such a long period is very unusual as growth in productivity and  living standards are 
typically closely linked. We have found ourselves in this rather fortunate position because of 
both our favourable terms of trade and our favourable demographics.  
Looking forward, it is unlikely that these favourable developments will be repeated. While we 
can’t  be  sure,  it  is  more  likely  that  the  terms  of  trade  will  decline  from  here  rather  than 
increase  further  from  what  is  a  very  high  level  by  historical  standards.  And  in  terms  of 
Australia’s  demographics,  the  sweet  spot  is  now  behind  us.  At  some  point  over  coming 
years, the share of the working-age population in employment is likely to decline, given the 
ageing of the population that is occurring.3 
A hint of what could lie ahead can be seen in Graph 2. Looking at just the past few years, 
some increase in productivity growth is apparent, but at the same time, there has been little 
increase in real income per capita – the top and bottom lines are starting to come together 
again. Recently, we have been producing more output per hour worked, but the decline in 
our terms of trade and slower growth in hours worked have weighed on growth in our per 
capita income.4 
                                                 
3  See  Australian  Government  (2010),  Australia  to  2050:  Future  Challenges,  Intergenerational  Report  2010, 
Commonwealth  of  Australia,  Canberra.  For  a  further  discussion  of  demographic  trends  in  Australia,  see 
Productivity Commission (2013), An Ageing Australia: Preparing for the Future, Commission Research Paper, 
Canberra. 
4  Some of this slower growth in hours is cyclical in nature. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
If this pattern were to continue, as seems likely, the Australian economy faces a substantial 
challenge. Over the next decade or so, if we are to achieve anything like the type of growth in 
real  per  capita  income  that  we  have  become  used  to,  then  a  substantial  increase  in 
productivity growth will be required. We can no longer depend on a rising terms of trade and 
favourable  demographics  to  make us  richer.  If  this  lift  in  productivity  growth  does not  take 
place,  then  we  will  need  to  adjust  to  some  combination  of  slower  growth  in  real  wages, 
slower  growth  in  profits,  smaller  gains  in  asset  prices  and  slower  growth  in  government 
revenues  and  services  –  in  short,  slower  growth  in  our  average  living  standard.  So  the 
debate  about  productivity  should  not  be  seen  as  an  esoteric  one  just  for  economists. 
Productivity growth matters and it matters a lot to our future living standards. 
On the positive side, we have seen some signs that productivity growth has picked up a bit 
recently. Many firms that we talk with – particularly those affected by the high exchange rate – 
report that they have made serious efforts over recent years to make their operations more 
efficient. And, as the resources investment boom transitions to the resources exports boom, 
stronger  growth  in  productivity  is  expected,  as  the  production  phase  is  often  less  labour 
intensive than the investment phase.  
There  is  thus  some  basis  for  optimism.  Even  so,  the  task  of  generating  a  sustained  and 
widespread  pick-up  in  productivity  needs  to  be  high  on  our  national  agenda.  It  is  a  task 
where monetary policy can make a contribution by keeping inflation low and stable so that 
people can make decisions without having to worry about the distorting effects of high and 
variable inflation. Our medium-term inflation targeting framework – which has been in place 
for  two  decades  now  –  has  achieved  this  and  we  are  committed  to  making  sure  that  we 
continue to deliver. 
But  realistically,  the  additional  contribution  of  monetary  policy  to  improving  productivity 
growth is only modest. The solutions clearly lie elsewhere, in the hands of both the private 
and the public sector. Improving productivity is not simply a matter of the “government fixing 
the problem”. The private sector has a central role to play too, as it is the private sector that 
is the main developer of new products, the main source of innovation and the main employer 
of people. Of course, the environment in which private businesses take and implement their 
decisions is heavily influenced by the public sector. As Gary Banks, the former head of the 
Productivity  Commission,  has  pointed  out,  the  public  sector  has  an  important  influence  on 
the incentives that firms face and on their ability to respond to those incentives. In effect, it 
helps set the “rules of the game”.5 
There is no shortage of ideas on how to boost our productivity. Last year Gary Banks also 
provided  us  with  a  very  useful  “to  do”  list  and  the  Business  Council  of  Australia  has  also 
recently contributed to the debate.6 The difficulties are in deciding which ideas to pursue and 
in  generating  the  political  support  for  changes  that  are  in  the  national  interest  but  may 
disadvantage some sections of the community. 
Investment in infrastructure 
Rather than recite the long list of possibilities, I instead want to focus on just one issue – and 
that  is  infrastructure.  This  is  not  to  imply  that  infrastructure  is  necessarily  the  most  critical 
issue. But it is an important one and it is one that is quite closely connected to the world of 
finance. I also want to make it clear that my comments are primarily about the medium term, 
rather than being focused on the short-term cyclical situation. 
                                                 
5  See Banks G (2012), “Productivity Policies: The ‘To Do’ List”, Speech at the Economic and Social Outlook 
Conference, “Securing the Future”, Melbourne, 1 November. 
6  See Business Council of Australia (2013), Action Plan for Enduring Prosperity, July. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
I  suspect  few  of  you  would  disagree  with  the  idea  that  improving  our  infrastructure  is 
important if Australia is to compete successfully in international markets in the years ahead. 
Over recent times, we have done quite well in building the infrastructure needed to export 
resources to the rest of the world. But we need to do more if we are to achieve that same 
success elsewhere. In the years ahead, it is unlikely that Australia’s comparative advantage 
will lie in the production of standardised mass-produced manufactured goods for the global 
market.  Instead,  we  have  tremendous  opportunities  in  a  range  of  more  specialised  high 
value-added goods and services, where it is the quality of our ideas and the quality of our 
execution that is the key. Whether or not we can seize these opportunities depends critically 
on our human capital and our infrastructure.  
Looking  back  at  our  recent  experience  with  infrastructure,  I  find  it  difficult  to  escape  the 
conclusion that we are falling short in some areas, particularly in parts of our transportation 
system – both private and public. Many of you have no doubt felt the frustration of moving 
around our cities. In my own case, when I am experiencing this frustration, I sometimes feel 
the economist side of my brain turn on. When this happens I can’t help but think that surely 
there  are  investments  in  transport  infrastructure  that  would  yield  a  social  rate  of  return 
greater than the cost of financing. At other times, I think that better use could be made of the 
existing  infrastructure  with  a  different  pricing  regime.  I  suspect  that,  on  both  scores,  the 
economist part of my brain is right.  
The  benefits  of  investment  in  transportation  infrastructure  are  well  known.7  Some  of  these 
are quite obvious, while others are more difficult to see, although no less important. Among 
the more obvious benefits is a reduction in travel times and costs for both people and goods. 
There can also be favourable social impacts through reducing travel stress and increasing 
the connectedness of communities. And there are environmental benefits as well. 
One of the less obvious benefits is what economists sometimes call agglomeration spillovers. 
Effective  transportation  networks  deepen  markets.  They  bring  consumers  closer  to  more 
businesses,  and  they  bring  workers  in  contact  with  more  opportunities.  These  deeper 
markets and connections promote competition. They promote greater specialisation by both 
firms and workers. And they promote innovation and a more dynamic economy. While the 
internet has some of these same effects, person-to-person contact remains an essential part 
of  business,  education  and  innovation.  Poor  transportation  makes  this  contact  difficult  and 
hurts our national productivity. 
Another less obvious effect of transportation systems is on the cost of housing. There are 
many factors that contribute to the cost of housing, but among these is the nature of a city’s 
transportation system.  When housing prices are high, it is largely because land prices are 
high. And, land prices are high when there is a “shortage” of well-located land. We cannot do 
much about the physical supply of land, but investment in transportation infrastructure – by 
making it easier to move around the city – can increase the supply of “well-located” land. And 
when  supply  increases,  prices  adjust.  This  means  that  underinvestment  in  transportation 
networks tends to put upward pressure on housing costs.8 
Given  these  various  effects,  my  own  view  is  that  there  are  significant  opportunities  for 
additional investment in transportation infrastructure and for using the existing infrastructure 
                                                 
7  For example, see Venables, AJ (2007) “Evaluating Urban Transport Improvements: Cost-benefit Analysis in 
the  Presence  of  Agglomeration  and  Income  Taxation”,  Journal  of  Transport  Economics  and  Policy,  41(2), 
173–188, and SGS Economics and Planning (2012), “Productivity and Agglomeration Benefits in Australian 
Capital Cities”, Final Report, COAG Reform Council, June. Infrastructure Australia’s approach to the appraisal 
of  wider  economic  benefits  is  outlined  at  <http://www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/reform_investment/ 
submissions/appraisal.aspx>. 
8  Kulish  M,  A  Richards  and  C  Gillitzer  (2011),  “Urban  Structure  and  Housing  Prices:  Some  Evidence  from 
Australian Cities”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2011–03. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
more efficiently. Doing  so would promote productivity growth in Australia and contribute to 
advancement of the overall welfare of our citizens.  
The potential challenges in this area are, however, significant. I would like to highlight three 
of these.  
The first is the governance of project selection. Clearly, not all investments in transport are a 
good  idea,  and  some  ideas  are  much  better  than  others.  There  is,  I  detect,  a  deal  of 
scepticism  in  the  public’s  mind  about  how  projects  are  selected.  This  scepticism  weakens 
public support for large-scale investment in infrastructure. Many people are concerned that 
money will be wasted and that political considerations will trump economic considerations.  
So strong governance is critical to make sure money is spent wisely in this area. There is no 
substitute  for  rigorous  and  transparent  cost-benefit  analysis.  In  Australia,  we  have  made 
some  progress  in  this  area  over  recent  times  through  bodies  like  Infrastructure  Australia. 
Building  public  confidence  in  the  governance  process  not  only  helps  ensure  that  the  most 
pressing projects are selected, but also helps build public confidence that the money is being 
spent wisely.  
This brings me to the second potential challenge – that of financing. It is no use identifying 
infrastructure projects with large potential gains if a way cannot be found to finance them. 
The  financing  challenge  arises  not  because  of  a  lack  of  money  available  to  invest  in 
infrastructure. Many private sector investors tell us that there are plenty of funds sitting on 
the sidelines waiting to be invested in infrastructure assets. The issue is more a reluctance of 
investors to take on the construction and patronage risks and/or the difficulties of charging for 
the use of infrastructure. 
Given these challenges, the public sector can play an important enabling role, either through 
use of its own balance sheet directly or through risk-sharing arrangements with the private 
sector. Over recent times, we have seen a number of innovative public-private partnerships 
that have helped build important pieces of infrastructure in Australia, although some of these 
have had problems. More broadly, I suspect that one reason that the public sector has been 
a bit reluctant to play an even larger role is an aversion to public debt. In many important 
respects, this aversion to public debt has served Australia very well, but it has also limited 
the appetite to borrow to build public infrastructure. 
Looking  forward,  we  need  to  find  a  sustainable  way  in  which  to  finance  our  infrastructure 
needs. Regardless of whether it is the private or public sector that does the financing, it is 
likely  to  be  easier  if  we  have  mechanisms  that  generate  a  flow  of  revenue  from  the 
infrastructure. One obvious option is user charging that promotes the public good. Not only 
does  this  provide  a  revenue  source  to  pay  for  the  infrastructure  over  time,  but  it  can  help 
ensure that the infrastructure is used efficiently. Another option is the use of levies and other 
mechanisms to generate revenue from those who benefit most from the infrastructure. 
Both of these options face obvious political difficulties – few of us like paying tolls or giving up 
part of a financial benefit that a piece of infrastructure might give us. So, I do not want to 
underestimate the challenge. But as a society, we have a lot riding on finding a way to pay 
for the infrastructure that we need to boost our productivity and improve our living standards. 
Hopefully, the work currently being undertaken by the Productivity Commission will point us 
in the right direction. And, in an international context, infrastructure financing will be one of 
Australia’s priorities when we chair the G20 next year.  
The third potential challenge is that of capacity constraints. Not only do we need to identify 
the  best  projects  and  find  a  way  of  financing  them,  but  we  also  need  to  have  the  skilled 
workers to undertake them. Over recent times, private business investment has been at a 
record  high  level  as  a  share  of  GDP  because  of  the  resources  boom.  At  times,  this  has 
created pressures in parts of the labour market, including for workers with engineering and 
specialist building skills. This has meant that we simply have not had the capacity to do much 
more investment in infrastructure. However, over the next few years, resources investment is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
expected to decline significantly as we move from the investment to the export phase of the 
boom.  This  creates  an  opportunity  for  infrastructure  investment  to  rise  as  a  share  of  GDP 
without  putting  undue  pressure  on  domestic  capacity.  Such  a  rise  could  assist  in  the 
necessary rebalancing of the economy and help create the basis for a further boost to our 
national productivity.  
In  conclusion,  Australia  faces  a  significant  challenge  over  the  coming  years.  While  our 
exports  are  set  to  grow  strongly,  we  will  need  to  lift  our  rate  of  productivity  growth 
substantially if we are to continue to enjoy the type of increases in our living standards that 
we have become used to. Meeting this challenge will require innovation by both the private 
and public sectors. Infrastructure is just one of the many areas that can play a role here. But 
if we are to maximise the benefits of our investment in infrastructure, that investment needs 
to be surrounded by strong governance, sound financing and pricing arrangements and due 
regard to the capacity constraints in the economy.  
Thank you for listening and I look forward to your questions.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
