Yves Mersch: Towards a European Banking Union 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the Bridge Forum Dialogue, Luxembourg, 30 September 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues and friends, 
It’s a pleasure for me to be back at the Bridge Forum Dialogue that we established in 2000. 
13 years later, the original goal to bring together EU institutions established in Luxembourg 
and the actors and institutions of Luxembourg financial, economic and legal life with an EU 
outlook and to foster constructive dialogues across countries is more relevant than ever. 
My speech today is about the advancement towards a banking union in Europe. This step is 
essential to unravel the legacy of the financial crisis and will also be a cornerstone of a new 
Europe.  It  goes  beyond  re-establishing  the  indispensable  financial  health  of  banks  and 
securing the robustness of the banking system. 
No  other  economic  activity  touches  upon  so  many  aspects  of  our  lives  as  banking  does. 
Banks must again become the dynamic engines of modern economies. But they must shed 
past  excesses  to  fit  in  a  new  world  with  new  regulations,  new  instruments  and  new 
institutions. 
Yet, in recent years, banks have been under tremendous stress. Those at greatest risk have 
caused much pain, public outrage and destruction of wealth. But, most banks did not engage 
in directly hazardous activities. Neither did the majority of bankers receive sky-high bonuses. 
Still, over the last two decades the global banking system has grown increasingly vulnerable. 
Most banks were undercapitalised, had fragile funding structures and – in hindsight – many 
engaged in unsound lending practices. Several banks, primarily based in the US, thrived on 
complex  structured  investments,  whose  risks  were  not  truly  understood.  Rating  agencies 
underplayed the potential risks. Furthermore, a small number of banks plunged into dubious 
acquisitions.  During  this  period,  regulators  and  supervisors  around  the  world  did  not  keep 
pace  with  the  complexity  of  financial  innovation.  Neither  did  they  recognise  the  riskiness 
embedded in ever larger volumes of derivative instruments. Moral hazard, adverse incentives 
and – in some cases – sheer greed and anti-social behaviour resulted. 
Michael  Sandel  in  his  book  “The  moral  limits  of  markets”  asks:  “Why  worry  that  we  are 
moving  towards  a  society  in  which  everything  is  up  for  sale?”  and  the  answer  is  “For  two 
reasons: one is about inequality, the other about corruption.” 
When systemic risks materialised in 2007- 2008, the world was struck by a sudden systemic 
financial  crisis:  unprecedented  when  measured  by  financial  losses  and  fiscal  costs; 
unprecedented  when  measured  by  its  geographical  reach;  and  also  unprecedented  when 
measured  by  the  collapse  in  worldwide  trade,  economic  output  and  financial  activity.  We 
were on the brink of a global financial meltdown. The ensuing “Great Recession” hit the euro 
area  hard  due  to  its  high  economic  openness  and  financial  exposures  to  a  bank  financed 
system.1  It  triggered  the  euro  area’s  sovereign  debt  crisis,  for  which  several  distinct  root 
causes were to blame. 
As Tony Judt put it, we saw: “Uncertainty elevated to paroxysms of collective fear – which 
had corroded the confidence and institutions of liberalism.” 
Today  I  have  two  messages.  The  first  is  that  banks  mirror  their  environment,  but  also 
contribute to shaping it in many respects. Over long periods of time the soundness and credit 
                                                
1   See  also:  Shambaugh,  J.C.  (2012),  “The  Euro’s  Three  Crises”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity, 
Spring. And Schoenmaker, D. (2011), “The financial trilemma”, Economic Letters, 111 (2011), pp. 57–59. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
standing  of  banks  depends  on  good  governance,  shrewd  planning,  and  their  spirit  of 
initiative. But, it also hinges on the dynamism of the economy, the sustainability of public and 
private  finances,  and  the  coherence  of  EMU’s  architecture  and  political  economy.  Sound 
banking regulation and supervision are also key: prevention must be the first line of defence. 
However, if adverse shocks hit or bank failures arise, there needs to be an effective crisis-
management and resolution framework with credible backstops. Several of these elements 
were  either  weak  or  altogether  missing  in  Europe  and  in  Member  States  with  a  strong 
banking presence. At the same time, monetary union needs banking union because sound 
banks  are  an  essential  complement  to  sound  money.  Banks  are  the  main  transmission 
channel of monetary policy to the real economy. 
The  second  message 
important  similarities  between  banking 
there  were 
developments and the evolution of the crisis across the Atlantic. But there were also relevant 
differences. The crisis is now practically over in the US and other parts of the world, whereas 
it is only slowly tapering off in the euro area. To understand how a European Banking Union 
can  succeed  we  need  to  understand  how  we  are  now  addressing  all  root  causes  of  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis  across  countries  and  completing  EMU’s  architecture.2  I  will  now 
address the following two questions, while offering some reflections along the way: 
• 
• 
What is being done to fix the root causes of the crisis? 
How do we shore up banks and what will the European Banking Union achieve? 
that 
is 
What is being done to fix the root causes of the crisis? 
An important lesson from the sovereign debt crisis is that the “uniqueness of EMU” embeds 
systemic  risks.  It’s  not  possible  to  partake  in  a  strong  single  market  and  a  strong  single 
currency vis-à-vis weakly coordinated national fiscal policies, economic policies and financial 
arrangements.  For  example,  at  present,  the  single  monetary  policy  is  still  transmitted  in  a 
regime of national banking regulation, supervision and resolution settlement. Another lesson 
is that we need to secure consistency between the various institutions, rules and instruments 
which  now  shape  our  political  economy.  Thus,  while  the  crisis  was  still  unfolding,  policy-
makers started to redesign the euro area. 
The most visible elements are a crisis management and resolution framework. There are five 
adjustment  programmes  for  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal,  Spain  and  Cyprus.  They  are  jointly 
supported financially by the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the permanent 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM), plus the IMF. 
Such risk-sharing in turn requires a strengthening of the governance framework to counter 
the moral hazard inherent in such an insurance scheme. And this is precisely what we have 
seen over the last three years. There is a new governance to restore fiscal sustainability and 
prevent  or  correct  macroeconomic  imbalances.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  has  been 
tightened  up  by  the  so-called  “six-pack”  of  economic  governance  measures,  including  the 
Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure. They, in turn, have been complemented by the “two-
pack”. Programme countries are undertaking painful domestic adjustment programmes which 
show first signs of getting them back on a sustainable track. 
Something  new  emerged  at  the  June  2012  Summit  of  euro  area  leaders:  glimpses  of  a 
shared European vision for a coherent and viable architecture of EMU. The Presidents 
of the European Council (Herman Van Rompuy), the Eurogroup (then Jean-Claude Juncker), 
the European Commission (José Manuel Barroso) and the ECB (Mario Draghi) drew up what 
                                                
2   See also Mongelli (2013) “The mutating euro area crisis: is the balance between “sceptics” and “advocates” 
shifting?”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 144, at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbocp144.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is  known  as  the  “Four  Presidents’  Report”.3  The  report  backs  a  new  architecture  for 
European Economic and Monetary Union by creating four unions over the next decade: 
• 
a banking union, comprising an integrated financial framework, including the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism or SSM and a bank resolution framework; 
a fiscal union, comprising an integrated budgetary framework that will go beyond 
the fiscal compact; 
an economic union, comprising an integrated economic policy framework; and 
a  political  union,  enhancing  the  democratic  legitimacy  and  accountability  of  all 
decision-making bodies within the EU. 
  These “four unions” are envisaged to mesh and engage with each other, like cogwheels in a 
mechanical apparatus. Think of a finely crafted automatic watch: the spin of one wheel sets 
the others in motion. Conversely, when the momentum of one decreases, that of the others 
follows suit. The banking union, the fiscal union, the economic union and the political union 
can transmit and reinforce the dynamics of European integration. 
Last  year’s  announcement  concerning  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  reassured  markets. 
Confidence is slowly returning. Recent data show that growth and – following with a lag – job 
prospects are slowly improving. Imbalances are gradually receding, while deleveraging and 
recapitalisation  have  started.  European  countries  can  turn  themselves  around.  Yet,  while 
risks of extreme outcomes have receded, the situation is still very fragile. We must exploit 
this room for manoeuvre. 
Hopefully, Jean Monnet was right when he noted that “Europe will be forged in crises, and 
will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those crises”. 
How do we shore up banks and the banking system, and what will a European banking 
union do? 
Looking  ahead,  how  can  we  secure  a  level  playing  field  for  the  banking  system  across 
Europe, reduce the risks of financial crises, reduce their impacts if they occur, and ensure 
that banks contribute to financial stability and prosperity? I will split this question into three 
parts.  
First, how do we fix the problems which all banks faced globally? 
We have  seen that  there  were  relatively  similar  global failings  in  banking governance, risk 
management and capital adequacy. Basel III is the basis for global banking reform efforts to 
increase the resilience of the banking system, recover market confidence and provide a level 
playing field for the industry. Basel III will provide the opportunity to ensure a harmonised set 
of prudential rules for all credit institutions across every country. 
In  the  EU,  Basel  III  is  transposed  through  two  pieces  of  legislation,  namely  the  Capital 
Requirements  Directive  and  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation.  Negotiations  on  these 
items of legislation, which will enter into force in January 2014, were very intense. 
We welcome the availability of uniform rules and standards but will have to make sure that 
they are also implemented in a common way. Thus we need to overcome all the  waivers, 
exceptions as well as grandfathering claims and options. Andrea Enria, the Chair of the EBA 
                                                
3   “Four  Presidents”  of  the  European  Council,  European  Commission,  Eurogroup  and  the  ECB.  European 
Council (2012), “Towards a Genuine Economic and Monetary Union”, June http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ 
uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/131201.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
with whom I shared a panel at a conference in Frankfurt last week, mentioned that more than 
100 of such “flexibilities” still exist even in the new framework. 
Second, what will a European banking union do and how will it work? 
The  crisis  has  shown  that  an  economic  and  monetary  union  cannot  function  without  a 
banking union. We are now building one, from the ground up, to tackle the “doom loop”, curb 
financial fragmentation and enable banks to rebuild trust and provide a sustainable supply of 
credit to the real economy in every country and for every sector.4  
About the SSM: first part – the micro-prudential 
The regulation for establishing a single supervisory mechanism (or SSM) has recently been 
approved  by  the  European  Parliament.  It  is  in  the  process  of  being  finally  agreed  by  the 
European Council. The ECB will be the central authority of the SSM and it will be supported 
by national supervisory authorities. Its mandate will be to supervise the whole banking sector 
of the euro area, plus those of any non-euro area Member State wishing to join. The ECB will 
be  entrusted  with  the  whole  toolbox  for  banking  supervision  including:  authorising  and 
withdrawing  bank  licences,  collecting  on  and  off-site  information,  undertaking  on-site 
inspections in cooperation with the national supervisors, and validating banks internal models 
and risk controls. Whenever necessary, the ECB will also be able to solicit additional capital, 
liquidity and other prudential requirements. 
This  is  a  huge  set  of  responsibilities  for  which  the  SSM  will  draw  extensively  upon  the 
expertise  of  national  supervisors.  The  basis  for  SSM  activity  will  be,  as  for  any  other 
supervisor in the EU, the Single Rulebook. But this is at a very high level. Embedded will be 
the  ECB  Supervisory  Manual  to  install  a  single  supervisory  approach  with  sufficient 
granularity to overcome a fragmented regulation. 
At the moment it appears that the ECB will directly supervise approximately 130 banks that 
are found to be “significant” according to the criteria laid down in the SSM Regulation.5 This 
is  less  than  5%  of  all  active  euro  area  banks  which  are  our  counterparts  in  monetary 
operations. Nevertheless, these cover around 85% of the total banking assets. 
What about all the other banks? Would it be realistic – or even desirable – for the ECB to 
supervise  6,000  additional  credit  institutions?  Given  also  the  wealth  of  expertise  at  the 
national  level,  and  the  advantages  stemming  from  proximity  in  supervision,  the  answer  is 
clearly  “No”.  An  efficient  decentralisation  of  supervisory  activities  within  the  SSM  will  bring 
about effective decision-making. But does a “two-tier system” imply different treatment? No. 
The  difference  between  the  two  groups  of  banks  will  concern  only  the  degree  of 
centralisation of supervisory action within the SSM. The “singleness of the SSM” is ensured 
by applying the same common supervisory approach to all banks: 
• 
First, the Supervisory Manual will be binding for all Banks under SSM supervision, 
although  some  alleviated  reporting  might  be  envisageable  for  less  significant 
institutions. 
                                                
4   See  Mersch,  Y.  (2013),  “A  regime  change  in  supervision  and  resolution“,  Speech  at  European  Supervisor 
Education (ESE) Conference, Frankfurt, 26 September 2013. 
5   The methodology was devised by the ECB. Included are at least (i) those banks having a total value of assets 
of  more  than  €30  billion,  (ii)  those  banks  representing  more  than  20%  of  domestic  GDP  (unless  less  than 
€5 billion in assets), (iii) the three most significant banks in each country and (iv) those banks receiving direct 
assistance from the EFSF/ESM. Furthermore, the ECB can, at any time, decide to exercise direct supervision 
of any other bank if considered necessary. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Second,  the  national  supervisory  authorities  will  have  to  comply  with  ECB 
regulations, guidelines or general instructions; 
Third, the ECB will have access to all data of all banks; and 
Finally, the ECB, can decide to exercise supervisory powers directly. 
• 
• 
We are facing a huge logistical challenge. There is a vast amount of preparatory work which 
has to be ready 12 months after the regulation enters into force, including: selecting highly 
skilled staff; drawing up the final list of significant banks to be directly supervised by the ECB; 
harmonising  supervisory  approaches  and  reporting  requirements;  mapping  the  euro  area 
banking  system;  developing  a  supervisory  manual  and  publishing  a  framework  regulation 
within  six  months  after  public  consultation.  These  tasks  are  already  completed  by  around 
ninety  per  cent.  The  next  big  challenge  is  the  design  and  undertaking  of the  asset quality 
review (AQR). 
The comprehensive balance sheet assessment is essential for ensuring that the SSM gets 
off to a good start and avoids reputational damage stemming from the possible emergence of 
problem banks in the early days of operation. It is like a due diligence before the actual start 
of the banking union. It consists of a risk assessment which will be the basis of AQR, and the 
AQR will flow into a stress test to be jointly taken with EBA. 
All three elements must be completed before the SSM becomes operational. Together they 
will allow a comprehensive view of banks’ balance sheets, bringing together quantitative and 
qualitative aspects of banks’ outstanding risk. 
Which risks? Risks already present, or ones that may emerge over time. The AQR should 
therefore  be  a  rather  static,  point-in-time  exercise  according  to  rigorous  standards  on  all 
aspects  of  asset  quality  and  with  an  emphasis  on  the  level  of  provisions.  More  forward 
looking assessments could then be provided in the baseline scenario of the stress test. 
For  us,  this  is  an  exercise  on  an  unprecedented  scale,  and  we  will  also  call  on  external 
experts to enhance its credibility. 
About the SSM: second part – accountability and independence 
The SSM Regulation provides a clear separation between monetary policy and supervisory 
tasks,  the  latter  entrusted  to  the  newly  established  Supervisory  Board.  This  organisational 
separation  is  necessary  to  comply  the  increased  accountability  requirements  of  the 
supervisory function and still respect the independence of the monetary policy function. 
The  Governing  Council’s  deliberations  on  supervisory  matters  will  be  strictly  separated, 
including separate agendas and meetings. 
The SSM will also have its own accountability framework vis-à-vis the European Parliament, 
the Eurogroup and national parliaments. It will apply to the Chair of the SSM’s Supervisory 
Board of the SSM, and not to the ECB’s President. This is intended to avoid any confusion 
among the two sets of tasks, also in the public  perception, and further protects the ECB’s 
independence. 
Last, over and beyond such clear separation of mandates, decision-making processes, rules 
and instruments between the two functions of the ECB – there need to be an exchange of 
information  to  reap  synergies.  Having  for  example  the  financial  stability  function  and  thus 
macro-prudential tasks under the roof of the central bank is of course nothing new. Different 
from the micro-prudential perspective it is there mostly docked at the National Central Banks. 
It  therefore  makes  sense,  to  have  different  institutional  arrangements  for  macro-prudential 
decision-making  within  the  SSM  than  those  that  are  foreseen  for  micro-prudential.  In  the 
latter case there is a need for a clear separation of functions between the ECB as monetary 
policy-maker and supervisor. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The SRM – a necessary complement to the SSM 
For  banking  supervision  to  be  effective,  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  is  also 
indispensable to resolve non-viable banks. Without an SRM, we might face a misalignment 
of  incentives  between  the  supervisory  and  the  resolution  functions.  Moreover,  the 
supervisor’s judgments must also be enforceable. The Commission recently proposed setting 
up a single resolution authority backed by a single bank resolution fund. The authority and 
the  fund  must  be  separate  from  the  SSM,  independent  and  supranational.  Jointly,  they 
constitute  a  single  resolution  system  with  the  ability  to  intervene  directly  in  banks  losses, 
dividing them among shareholders and creditors. 
Please  note  that  if  we  are  not  going  to  have  a  joint  SRM,  beware  that  presently  not  all 
countries have a national resolution authority and fund: those ones have to set one up very 
rapidly. 
In  fact,  supervisors  could  face  a  dilemma.  On  the  one  hand,  there  may  be  a  danger  of 
contagion and financial market panic. On the other, supporting insolvent banks with central 
bank liquidity might give rise to “zombies” and weaken the credibility of banking supervision 
and  resolution,  and  thus  the  banking  union  as  a  whole.  Therefore,  I  strongly  support  the 
timeline envisaged for the SRM to start functioning on 1 January 2015. 
An important prerequisite for the SRM is the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive. The 
Directive still has to be agreed with the European Parliament. In my view we should push for 
a start date of 2015 for bail-in so that we have the full resolution toolbox available from the 
outset – instead of over-extending the State Aid rules as a proxy. 
In  the  future,  the  burden  of  a  bank’s  failure  will  be  shifted  away  from  the  public.  How? 
Shareholders and creditors will be first to bear the resolution costs. Only if this is insufficient 
should  the  banking  industry  as  a  whole  step  in  via  resolution  funds  –  making  the  fiscal 
backstop the very last resort. To ensure adequate loss-absorbing capacity, each bank has to 
fulfil a minimum requirement of own funds and eligible liabilities for bail-in. 
investment  and 
Third, what do we expect from banks and genuine banking integration? 
The banking union is not an end by itself. Is it instrumental? Yes. And why? Because in the 
euro area about 80% of the financing of the real economy originates from the banking sector. 
Genuine banking integration is important in many respects. Why? Because a more integrated 
banking market intensifies competition by changing the focal point of the strategies of banks 
and  other  financial  market  participants.  More  competition  means  that  existing  capital  is 
allocated more efficiently. This promotes access to new funding opportunities for companies, 
encouraging 
to  growth.  Small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises with no direct access to capital markets may benefit most. 
For  the  ECB,  an  integrated  banking  space  eases  monetary  policy  transmission  and  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. A successful European banking union will also relieve the 
ECB  of  some  of  the  tasks  undertaken  during  the  crisis  and  the  need  for  non-standard 
measures. 
Moreover,  financial  market  integration  helps  smooth  the  effects  of  asymmetric  shocks 
through income insurance when a country’s residents hold claims to dividends, interests and 
rental revenue from other countries. In the US, such risk sharing has been shown to be far 
more important than federal budget transfers. 
thus  contributing 
Some final reflections 
Talking about flaws in EMU’s design is a bit reductive. It certainly doesn’t capture the depth 
of the “repair work” going on in Europe and the euro area in particular. We are in fact adding 
new foundations to a framework that has brought us as far as it could, and that couldn’t cope 
with a systemic crisis: it actually aggravated it. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Now, we need determination in completing the constitutional framework envisaged under the 
“four unions”, the four cogwheels that must work together in a synchronised manner and in 
one direction. There must be no complacency: no “wait and see what happens next”. 
In recent years, a significant part of the banking system in several countries has been kept 
alive by public capital injections and state guarantees, plus the liquidity support of the ECB. 
Most banks were no longer masters of their destiny. In hindsight, many of them generated 
instability  and  became  part  of  the  problem.  Now,  we  need  them  to  be  active  parts  of  the 
solution.  Hence  the  call  for  a  European  banking  union:  the  biggest  cogwheel  that  we  can 
complete right now. 
I hope that you agree that we have come a long way since the start of the crisis. But we still 
have further to go! Implementing the banking union will take a great deal of hard work and 
cooperation. However, once it’s in place we shall have a healthier financial system. 
To conclude, let me quote Alexis de Tocqueville here: “I cannot help fearing that men may 
reach  a  point  where  they  look  on  every  new  theory  as  a  danger,  every  innovation  as  a 
toilsome trouble, every social advance as a first step toward revolution, and that they may 
absolutely refuse to move at all.” 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
