Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business 
leaders, Nagoya, 2 December 2013. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to have this opportunity to address such a distinguished gathering of 
business leaders in the Chubu region today. I would like to express my sincere gratitude to 
you for your cooperation with our Nagoya branch.  
The greatest challenge facing Japan’s economy is overcoming deflation that has lasted for 
nearly  15  years.  Amid  protracted  deflation,  corporate  profits  and  wages  have  been 
compressed, the spending of firms and households has declined accordingly, and Japan’s 
economy has become oriented toward contraction. Under deflation, as the real value of cash 
rises with a decline in the prices of goods and services, saving cash at hand will be relatively 
advantageous,  rather  than  making  investment  that  pursues  new  opportunities.  In  such  a 
situation,  the  incentive  to  take  on  challenging  new  business  opportunities  will  decline  and 
people’s mindset as a whole will become pessimistic, thereby depriving Japan’s economy of 
vitality. 
In response, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 3 and 4, the Bank of Japan made a 
clear commitment to achieving a 2 percent price stability target at the earliest possible time, 
with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years,  and  introduced  a  new  phase  of  “quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing” (QQE) to underpin that commitment. So far, the QQE has been 
steadily  exerting  its  intended  effects,  with  an  improvement  in  the  real  economy,  financial 
markets, and people’s expectations and mindsets, and Japan’s economy has been following 
the path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target, as expected. 
Today,  before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  would  like  to  explain  the  Bank’s  view  on  the 
current situation and outlook for economic activity and prices as well as effects of the QQE, 
in part by referring to the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report) released 
at the end of October. 
Current situation and outlook for Japan’s economy 
I. 
Japan’s economy has been recovering moderately as domestic demand has been firm and 
overseas economies as a whole have been picking up moderately. Compared with what was 
anticipated  at  the  time  of  the  April  Outlook  Report,  the  economy  as  a  whole  has  been 
developing almost as expected, with external demand slightly weaker, as exports have been 
picking up at a somewhat slower pace, and domestic demand slightly stronger. 
Looking  ahead,  as  external  demand  is  expected  to  increase,  albeit  moderately,  while 
domestic demand is likely to maintain firmness, a virtuous cycle among production, income, 
and spending is likely to be maintained. While the economy will be affected by a swing in the 
front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the two scheduled 
consumption tax hikes, it is likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential, which is 
estimated  to  be  around  0.5  percent,  as  a  trend.  In  terms  of  the  median  of  the  real  GDP 
projections by the nine Policy Board members in the Outlook Report released at the end of 
October, it is 2.7 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.5 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.5 percent again for 
fiscal 2015 (Chart 1). 
As for price developments against such a backdrop, the year-on-year rate of change in the 
consumer price index (CPI, all items excluding fresh food) turned positive in June 2013 and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
recently  accelerated  to  0.9  percent  in  October  (Chart  2). While  it  is  true  that  a  rise  in  the 
prices of energy-related goods such as petroleum products and electricity has contributed to 
lifting  the  index,  improvement  has  been  spreading  in  a  wide  range  of  items  as  domestic 
demand, including private consumption, has been firm. This can be confirmed by the fact that 
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items excluding food and energy) has turned 
positive and that the number of items for which prices are increasing has surpassed that of 
items for which prices are decreasing (Chart 3). 
Looking ahead, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to follow an increasing 
trend,  as  an  improvement  in  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  brought  about  by 
economic  recovery  will  contribute  to  lifting  prices,  and  as  people’s  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations are likely to rise, due partly to an increase in the observed inflation rate. 
In terms of the median of the CPI growth projections by Policy Board members, on the basis 
of  excluding  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hikes,  it  is  0.7  percent  for  fiscal  2013, 
1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.9 percent for fiscal 2015 (Chart 1). Namely, it is likely to 
reach  around  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  toward  the  latter  half  of  the  projection 
period up to fiscal 2015. 
Outlook for Japan’s economy and overcoming of deflation 
II. 
Let  me  next  talk  about  points  that  warrant  attention  with  regard  to  achieving  the 
aforementioned outlook after confirming the features of economic recovery this time around. 
Unlike  the  typical  pattern  of  exports  and  large  manufacturing  firms  leading  economic 
recovery, this economic recovery features the nonmanufacturing sector recovering ahead of 
the manufacturing sector, led by private consumption and public investment. In fact, while the 
Indices of Tertiary Industry Activity, which show the level of activity in the nonmanufacturing 
sector, have recovered to a level close to that seen prior to the Lehman shock, production in 
the manufacturing sector has remained at about 80 percent of its peak prior to the Lehman 
shock. Looking at the diffusion index (DI) for business conditions in the Tankan survey, the 
DI for the nonmanufacturing sector has been improving ahead of that for the manufacturing 
sector (Chart 4). 
Given the pattern of economic recovery this time, in looking to the sustainability of economic 
recovery, the sustainability of firm domestic demand that has led the economy so far will be a 
key.  Another  key  will  be  whether  overseas  economies  recover  and  exports  see  a  smooth 
increase while domestic demand underpins the economy. Let me touch on developments in 
overseas  economies,  followed  by  those  in  households’  employment  and  income  situation 
and in firms’ business fixed investment in relation to the sustainability of domestic demand. 
Overseas economies 
Overseas  economies  as  a  whole  are  picking  up  moderately,  although  there  are  partly 
lackluster movements. 
They are expected to continue to pick up, led mainly by advanced economies. In its World 
Economic Outlook, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects that the world economy 
will grow 2.9 percent in 2013 and moderately accelerate its pace of growth to 3.6 percent in 
2014, and to 4.0 percent in 2015 (Chart 5). Looking at respective regions, the U.S. economy 
is expected to gradually see an acceleration in its pace of recovery, led mainly by domestic 
demand,  as  the  fiscal  drag  will  gradually  fade.  The  European  economy  is  expected  to 
gradually pick up on the back of recovery in exports in tandem with a  pick-up in domestic 
demand.  In  addition,  the  Chinese  economy  is  likely  to  maintain  stable  growth,  as  the 
government, while progressing with reforms to address structural problems, is expected to 
pursue  policy  measures  that  take  due  account  of  economic  activity.  Meanwhile,  there  are 
partly  weak  movements  in  other  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  and  thus 
those  economies  will  likely  lack  growth  momentum  for  the  time  being,  from  a  longer-term 
perspective; however, growth rates are expected to pick up again. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Of course, uncertainties remain high regarding the outlook for overseas economies, such as 
consequences of the government debt problem in the United States, the debt problem and 
efforts to restore financial soundness in Europe, outcomes of structural reforms to address 
problems  such  as  excess  production  capacity  in  the  manufacturing  sector  in  China,  and 
efforts 
in  other  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies, all of which warrant attention. However, even bearing in mind such uncertainties, 
the  baseline  scenario  is  that  overseas  economies  will  continue  to  pick  up  and  Japan’s 
exports will accordingly increase moderately. 
to  address  structural  problems 
Developments in employment and income 
From the perspective of a sustainable recovery in domestic demand, I would like to talk next 
about developments in employment and income. As mentioned earlier, Japan’s economy is 
expected to recover moderately in a virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending, 
and  will  achieve  the  2  percent  price  stability  target.  To  this  end,  it  is  critical  to  have  an 
improvement in income in order to underpin private consumption. 
Looking at current employment and income developments, supply and demand conditions in 
the  labor  market  continue  to  recover  steadily,  albeit  moderately,  due  partly  to  resilient 
domestic demand, and the unemployment rate has declined to the level observed prior to the 
Lehman  shock,  of  around  4  percent  (Chart  6).  This  improvement  in  supply  and  demand 
conditions in the labor market has started to influence nominal wages. The year-on-year rate 
of  change  in  nominal  wages  per  regular  employee  has  become  slightly  positive,  partly 
reflecting  growth  in  summer  bonuses  for  the  first  time  in  three  years  and  an  increase  in 
overtime pay. In addition, the year-on-year rate of growth in hourly nominal wages per part-
time employee has been modestly accelerating (Chart 7). 
Going  forward,  as  the  improvement  in  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market 
continues, nominal wages are expected to be put under upward pressure gradually. While 
scheduled  wages  per  employee  have  remained  negative  year-on-year,  due  partly  to  an 
increase in the proportion of part-time workers, if these stable wages start to increase, this 
will contribute to a sustainable increase in household spending. Amid increasing corporate 
profits, partly due to ongoing initiatives through cooperation among the government, workers, 
and employers, we anticipate an increase in scheduled wages, including an increase in base 
wages. 
Developments in business fixed investment 
Turning to the corporate sector, to achieve an economic recovery accompanied by a virtuous 
cycle  among  production,  income,  and  spending,  it  is  critical  that  an  increase  in  corporate 
profits  lead  to  an  increase  in  business  fixed  investment.  Corporate  profits  have  been 
recovering, due partly to a correction of the past yen appreciation (Chart 8). Business fixed 
investment  has  been  resilient  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector,  and  there  also  are  signs  of 
improvement in the manufacturing sector, which has been lagging (Chart 9). 
Going forward, business investment is likely to follow a moderate increasing trend, reflecting 
an improvement in corporate profits as well as effects of monetary easing. In the context of 
investment  profitability,  profitability  from  business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to  improve  and 
monetary  easing  effects  are  likely  to  strengthen,  reflecting  a  rise  in  the  rate  of  return  on 
capital due to economic recovery together with declining real interest rates under the QQE. 
In addition, reflecting past restraints on firms’ investment, pent-up demand in business fixed 
investment is likely to surface (Chart 10). Furthermore, firms’ medium- to long-term growth 
expectations are likely to rise moderately, due partly to the positive initiatives to strengthen 
competitiveness and growth potential, such as the government’s regulatory and institutional 
reforms  and  various  tax  reduction  measures,  as  well  as  firms’  restructuring  efforts.  Given 
such  an  environment,  business  fixed  investment  is  more  likely  to  increase  as  the  level  of 
economic activity further elevates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Looking back, amid nearly 15 years of deflation, firms have been accumulating cash in order 
to  prepare  for  the  worst  by,  for  example,  containing  business  fixed  investment  relative  to 
cash flow (Chart 11). As a result, firms’ cash at hand has reached 230 trillion yen, which is 
almost 50 percent of nominal GDP. Given the deflationary economy, it seems rational for a 
firm to increase its cash at hand as a relatively better investment; however, as a result of a 
firm not effectively using precious cash, Japan’s economy as a whole has been deprived of 
vitality.  In  an  economy  that  has  overcome  deflation,  it  will  be  better,  unlike  in  the  past,  to 
effectively use cash in the form of business fixed investment, research and development, and 
staffing, rather than to save it. I expect firms to gauge such a change in environment as a 
business opportunity that will lead them to take positive economic actions. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
Lastly, I would like to talk about the conduct of monetary policy. In April this year, the Bank 
committed to achieving the 2 percent price stability target at the earliest possible time, with a 
time  horizon  of  about  two  years,  and  introduced  the  QQE  to  underpin  the  commitment. 
Specifically, it would increase the monetary base at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion 
yen  and  double  the  monetary  base  in  two  years.  In  order  to  do  so,  it  would  purchase 
Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that the amount outstanding of JGB holdings would 
increase  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  50  trillion  yen  (Chart  12). While  the  chart  shows  the 
outstanding amounts of the monetary base and JGB holdings as of end-2013 and end-2014, 
these are projected amounts under the current policy and do not suggest in any way a time 
limit of the policy conduct. As I will mention later, the Bank will continue with the QQE, aiming 
to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining the 
target in a stable manner. 
The  effects  of  the  QQE  are  expected  to  carry  through  the  economy  via  several  different 
routes, and the most important of these is to lower real interest rates. To be specific, first of 
all, by committing to achievement of the 2 percent price stability target at the earliest possible 
time and announcing the continuation of a new phase of monetary easing into the future to 
underpin  that  commitment,  the  Bank  aims  to  drastically  change  people’s  expectations  and 
raise  inflation  expectations.  Second,  it  will  put  strong  downward  pressure  on  nominal 
long-term  interest  rates  through  massive  purchases  of  JGBs.  Consequently,  real  interest 
rates could be lowered if the extent of a pick-up in nominal rates can be contained within the 
extent of a rise in inflation expectations. And the decline in real interest rates is expected to 
have the effect of stimulating business fixed investment and household spending. 
For  the  last  eight  months,  our  endeavor  on  this  front  has  been  successful.  According  to 
surveys on households and economists, inflation expectations seem to have been rising on 
the  whole  (Chart  13).  By  contrast,  long-term  rates  have  remained  stable  at  a  low  level  of 
around  0.6  percent  in  Japan  despite  the  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates  in  other  advanced 
economies  (Chart  14).  Therefore,  real  interest  rates  have  been  declining.  Under  such 
stimulative effects, Japan’s economy has been recovering moderately and the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI has turned positive. What contributes to a rise in people’s inflation 
expectations is not just the Bank saying that it will achieve the 2 percent inflation, but also the 
fact that actual prices have been rising. In such a manner, the QQE has been exerting its 
intended effects. 
Concluding remarks 
As  I  have  explained  to  you  today,  Japan’s  economy  has  been  following  the  path  toward 
achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  as  expected.  The  Bank  will  continue  with  the 
QQE, aiming to achieve that target, as long as it is necessary for maintaining it in a stable 
manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and 
make adjustments as necessary to achieve the price stability target. I would like to conclude 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
my speech by promising that the Bank will surely manage to overcome deflation, which is the 
largest challenge facing Japan’s economy, through such conduct of monetary policy. 
Thank you for your attention.  
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
