Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas’ policy directions in 
a challenging landscape 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  ACI  Phils-FMAP-IHAP-MART-NASBI-TOAP  Joint 
General Assembly, Manila, 24 September 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
Let me begin by thanking the organizers of this event for the opportunity to speak before your 
membership.  I  sometimes  have  the  chance  to  speak  individually  with  a  number  of  the 
associations  and  I  always  welcome  those  one-on-one  exchanges,  which  are  often  very 
informative and insightful. 
But your Annual General Meeting is a clear upside for everyone. By holding a joint general 
assembly, we benefit from not having to repeat messages across several forums. We also 
benefit  from  coming  together  as  a  market  with  a  commitment  towards  ensuring  that  we 
continue to build on the gains we have made so far. 
Introduction 
Let me take you to a quick game of WORD ASSOCIATION. 
Is everyone familiar with this game? For example, when I say BLUE. What comes to your 
mind? 
I  debated  whether  I  should  use  words  or  the  Rorschach  Test  of  inkblots.  In  the  end,  I 
concluded “words” would be easier for a crowd like this. It should be easier to find some kind 
of  consensus  in  a  room  full  of  traders  than  it  would  among  economists.  [Two-handed 
economist.] 
Here goes: Uncertainty, Communication, Volatility, Normalization, P44.00, Maintain, Spread 
Narrowing, Market Infrastructure, Client Suitability, Client Protection, Real Growth, Inclusive 
Growth. 
As  expected  there  are  differing  appreciations/meanings  associated  with  words.  Our 
associations  are  defined  by  where  we  are  right  now  (in  dealer  parlance,  your  current 
“POSITION”)  and  what  we’ve  learned  from  the  past  (Ika  nga  nila  –  kailan,  kung  saan  at 
gaano kalaki ang talo or panalo mo!) 
In  other  words,  ladies  in  gentlemen,  your  associations  and  ultimately  your  behavior  are 
defined by facts and perception. 
Tonight I’d like to lay down some “facts” before you. 
After which, I’ll briefly touch on some of the “risks” that could color our perception. 
My goal tonight is to help ensure that there is a convergence between your appreciation and 
the actual intent of the BSP’s policy thrust. A strong positive consonance between the two 
will certainly make our monetary and banking policies even more effective.  
In  the  end,  our  hope  is  that  the  resulting  market  conditions  would  create  wealth  and 
prosperity not only for you, as intermediaries, but also for the Filipino people, who are, after 
all, the BSP’s and your ultimate stakeholder. 
Fact 1:   We have buffers against known vulnerabilities.  
First, our strong macrofundamentals yield solid growth and low inflation. 
GDP growth (left slide) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  GDP grew robustly by 7.5 percent in Q2 2013, supported by strong household and 
government spending, as well as increased investments in capital formation on the 
expenditure  side.  These  drivers  of  growth  offset  the  negative  contribution  from 
exports. On the production side, GDP growth was led by the services sector. 
4th consecutive quarter of above 7 pct growth, 58th consecutive quarter of positive 
growth. 
Inflation (right slide) 
• 
Inflation pressures remain manageable. Headline inflation expected to fall within the 
4.0 percent + 1.0 percentage point target range for 2013–2014 and the 3.0 percent 
+ 1.0 percentage point target range for 2015. 
 Second,  we  have  a  comfortable  cushion  of  FX  reserves  which  buffers  the  country  against 
external shocks 
• 
The country’s GIR stood at US$83.2 billion as of end-August 2013. 
– 
adequate  to  cover  12  months’  worth  of  imports  of  goods  and  payments  of 
services and income;  
equivalent to 8.0 times the country’s short-term external debt based on original 
maturity;  
5.5 times based on residual maturity. 
– 
Comfortable margins from historical and international standards. 
• 
Third,  the  BSP’s  consultative  style  and  clear  effort  to  understand  market  behavior  have 
helped us calibrate regulation appropriately. The graphs prove that this proactive approach to 
oversight of the banking sector contributes to healthy asset quality and credit growth. 
KB Lending (left slide) 
• 
The  Philippine  banking  system  has  been  exhibiting  strong  lending  growth  since 
2011. As of July 2013, bank lending growth stood at 12.3 percent. 
Growth in bank lending has been fueled by both supply and demand factors:  
– 
 Supply side: encouraged by steady growth in domestic liquidity and improved 
asset quality 
Demand  side:  explained  by  increased  financing  needs  of  businesses  and 
households, plus  
Relatively low interest rates 
Attractive terms of financing offered by banks 
 GNPL Ratio (right slide) 
• 
The  Gross  NPL  (GNPL)  ratio  of  U/KBs  has  broadly  declined  and  remains  low  at 
2.68 percent as of June 2013. While GNPL ratio has been on a downtrend, the Net 
NPL (NNPL) ratio has remained nearly constant. As of end-June 2013, the NNPL 
ratio was at 0.39 percent and the year-to-date ratios have been within a very narrow 
band between 0.43 percent and 0.45 percent. 
Fourth, the BSP has the surveillance tools to allow us to respond pre-emptively to emerging 
threats.  A  review  of  our  indicators  shows  that  none  of these  indicators  have  breached  set 
critical thresholds. None of these are emitting signals that raise alarm bells. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Indicators 
A.  
1.  
The EWS on currency crisis utilizes a set of macroeconomic indicators to assess the 
probability  of  a  currency  crisis.  Deviations  of  these  variables  from  their  normal  threshold 
levels (estimated based on previous crises) are taken as warning signals of a possible crisis 
occurring within a specified time frame. 
2.  
The Philippine Financial Stress Index (PFSI) measures the degree of stress in the 
financial system with the use of 10 high-frequency data on bonds, foreign exchange, equities 
markets in both external and domestic markets. A positive PFSI thus indicates that the level 
of financial stress is above the historical average, while a negative value signifies that the 
level of financial stress is below the historical average. 
3.  
The  BES  Confidence  Index  (CI)  presents  the  prospective  outlook  of  the  business 
sector  on  the  macroeconomy.  It  depicts  entrepreneurs’  views  of  the  general  business 
situation in the Philippine economy. 
4.  
The  Consumer  Expectations  Survey  (CES)  is  a  quarterly  nationwide  survey  of  a 
random sample of 5,000 households in the Philippines. Results of the CES provide advance 
indication of consumer sentiment for the current and next quarters and the year ahead as 
reflected in the overall CI, as well as in selected economic indicators. 
5.  
6.  
activity from an expansion to a contraction and vice versa. 
Senior loan Officers Survey 
Business  Cycle  Analysis  provides  an  indication  of  on  turning  points  of  economic 
Committees 
B.  
1.  
The  Advisory  Committee  was  established  as  an  integral  part  of  the  institutional 
setting for inflation targeting. It is tasked to deliberate, discuss and make recommendations 
on monetary policy to the Monetary Board. Starting in 2012, the Committee will hold eight (8) 
monetary policy meetings in a year. 
2.  
The Financial Stability Committee (FSC) was created in September 2010. The FSC 
is tasked to determine the appropriate market vision and work plan to adequately mitigate the 
build-up of systemic risks in the financial system. 
3.  
The  BSP  believes  in  a  holistic  and  well-coordinated  approach  in  pursuing  its 
financial  inclusion  agenda.  Toward  this  end,  a  high-level  Inclusive  Finance  Steering 
Committee  was  constituted  on  27  February  2012.  The  Committee  provides  direction  and 
oversight in all BSP policies and programs related to financial inclusion. 
4.  
which broadly endeavor to strengthen and protect the country’s financial sector. 
BSP’s membership in EXTERNAL committees includes the FSF and FSCC, both of 
Reports 
C.  
1.  
The Inflation Report is published quarterly as part of the BSP’s efforts to improve the 
transparency  of  monetary  policy  under  inflation  targeting  and  to  convey  to  the  public  the 
thinking and analysis behind the Monetary Board’s decisions on monetary policy. 
2.  
The  Quarterly  Report  on  Economic  and  Financial  Developments  (Letter  to  the 
President)  outlines  the major  developments  in  the  real,  monetary  and  fiscal  sectors  of the 
Philippine economy. 
3.  
The  Financial  Stability  Report  is  published  two  times  a  year.  It  provides  a 
comprehensive  assessment  of  the  robustness  as  well  as  vulnerabilities  of  the  domestic 
financial system against emerging economic and financial developments both in the global 
and domestic environment. 
Fact 2:   We are reform-minded and have a strong reform agenda in place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
We are geared up for the Basel 3 Capital Framework. 
This  slide  shows  a  comparison  of  the  minimum  requirements  under  our  old  Basel  2 
framework, the Basel 3 framework of the BIS and our own requirements in 2014. 
You will see that our minimum CAR has not changed. It is still 10 pct. What has changed, 
however, is the composition of qualifying capital. From a requirement of minimum Tier 1 of 
5 pct under Basel 2, we will now be requiring at least 6 pct of Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1). 
The minimum Tier 1 shall now be 7.5 pct. It's not on the slide, but we will also be requiring a 
2.5 pct Capital Conservation Buffer, all of which must be CET1. 
In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  what  has  changed  is  the  composition  of  capital  to 
improve its loss absorbing capacity. 
I have been asked why  we appear to be in a hurry to implement Basel 3. It’s true we are 
ahead of the Basel timeframe of 2019, but we are actually behind our EMEAP counterparts. 
(Australia  and  NZ  have  implemented  in  full  in  2013.)  Are  we  being  stricter  than  other 
jurisdictions? Not really, when you consider that our minimum CAR remains at 10 pct. 
I am also asked what’s the benefit of implementing this now instead of later. 1) To reduce 
regulatory uncertainty, 2) Minimal impact on banks, because banks are ready, 3) It’s a credit 
positive. 
In addition, we are gearing up for the rest of the reform Agenda under Basel 3. This slide 
gives a quick view of the packages of Basel 3 reforms in the pipeline What will come into 
play in Jan 2014 is part of the capital framework in Basel 3. 
The  other  major  reforms  will  fall  under  Liquidity  Standards  and  Systemic  Risk  and 
Interconnectedness.  Experience  has  taught  us  that  when  it  is  crunch  time,  often  what 
becomes the binding constraint is liquidity. Bank failures often result from a lack of liquidity. 
Moreover,  this  crisis  has  taught  us  that  looking  at  individual  firms  is  not  sufficient. 
Interconnectedness is at times even more important. 
As you can see from this slide, the capital market reform agenda is a full topic by itself that 
deserves its own treatment. I’ll leave that as a topic for a future speech. 
Another part of our reform agenda covers the ongoing efforts towards regional integration. 
The BSP is supportive of the AEC 2015 and ABIF 2020 dialogue. The benefits of technology 
transfer  and  broadening  of  markets  and  market  access  are  clear.  But  of  course  there  are 
costs, including perhaps loss of market share and volatility if one thinks of the region as a 
zero sum game. We don’t believe this is so. The principles are clear. The key principles are: 
1)  acknowledgement  of  various  initial  conditions  of  member  states,  2)  agreement  on 
milestones,  and  3)  agreement  that  compliance  with  milestones  is  state-dependent.  At  the 
end of the day, we see this as a window of opportunity. It’s a cooperative effort. 
Fact 3:   There is a strong show of faith from third-party recognition. 
The  stable  macrofundamentals  and  sound  banking  system  have  not  gone  unnoticed.  Our 
investment grade credit rating clearly reflects these. 
In  addition,  the  institutionalization  of  our  governance  reforms  continues  to  be  reflected  in 
improvements in our international competitiveness. 
Based on the results of the Global Competitiveness Ranking of the World Economic Forum, 
marked improvements were noted in the areas of management of our fiscal position, financial 
market regulation, and a turnaround in the area of labor market efficiency. 
Clearly, ladies and gentlemen, the BSP has its eyes on the ball and its ears to the ground. 
Importantly, we have policy space to respond to the brewing pressures we observe. 
Often times, however, it is in the perception of the brewing pressures where the BSP and the 
market could have a conceptual difference. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Should we be concerned with the Rest of the World? 
What comes after the Fed Action (or No Action)?  
Liquidity and Credit Growth post IMA – Are there inflationary and financial Stability 
Let me just cite three risks that we see as possible points of pressure: 
1)  
2)  
concerns?  
3)  
Risk 1:   How prepared are we for a Fed Tapering? 
The Fed taper is an issue that is quite familiar to the market. And I am sure you have read 
with  critical  interest  all  the  analyses  by  eminent  Fed  watchers  of  the  recent  Fed 
pronouncements. 
I don’t want to stir that pot of confusion and I also don’t want to comment on what the Fed 
should or shouldn’t have done. 
But  one  thing  I  know  is  clear,  and  I  can  attest  to  this:  the  BSP  is  ready  to  respond  to 
“excessive” market exuberance or disappointment (whichever case will apply) to any surprise 
action (or the lack thereof) of the Fed. 
I  know  I  don’t  need  to  remind  you,  that  we  are  watching  market  conduct  very  carefully, 
closely, and critically. 
Should  market  reaction/sentiment  lead  to  a  loss  of  overall  business  confidence  or  a  dis-
anchoring of inflation expectations, the BSP has the room to adjust policy interest rates or 
other monetary policy tools, as appropriate. 
Should market action lead to instability in the non-financial (or the real asset) markets, we 
can further tweak existing macroprudential measures or release new ones, as appropriate to 
target problem asset areas. 
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, our policy actions will always be guided by our price 
and  financial  stability  objectives.  Barring  any  unforeseen  threats,  I  think  we  have  room  to 
keep policy rates steady for the balance of the year. 
Risk 2:   Should domestic liquidity growth be a concern? And the flip-side of this, should we 
be concerned with credit growth? 
Our assessment is that both liquidity and credit are rising consistent with the growth in the 
economy and financial deepening. 
Strong  liquidity  and  credit  growth  feeds  the  economy’s  growth  potential.  Structural  reform 
milestones that began in the early 1990s and 2000s and continue to gather stronger pace 
today have translated to productivity gains over time, as reflected in higher potential output 
growth.  If  the  current  investment-led  growth  and  institutional  reforms  are  sustained,  a  5 to 
7 percent potential output growth for the medium-term is highly feasible. 
There is sufficient liquidity to fuel this, and banks are able to intermediate these funds safely. 
You could also ask should the market be concerned post-SDA IMA? 
If  the  market  concern  is  on  the  headline  liquidity  growth  number  of  over  30  percent,  my 
answer would be no. 
The  BSP  has  always  anticipated  there  will  be  some  liquidity  growth  after  the  funds  under 
SDA-  IMA  are  “released”.  That  was,  after  all,  the  game  plan.  We  fine-tuned  the  SDA 
operations  so  the  funds  could  find  more  productive  homes  in  industry,  manufacturing  and 
other sectors of the economy. In addition, our anticipation is that the period of high liquidity 
growth coming from SDA-IMA will not persist. 
If the concern is whether the liquidity will fuel an asset bubble, the answer again is no. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
And I think you, who know your SDA clients well, will agree with me on this one. The profile 
of an SDA investor is very different from the profile of a real estate investor. 
Finally, Risk 3:   The Rest of the World? 
Because of 1) trade ties with, 2) workers deployed to, and 3) tourists expected from Europe, 
Japan, China, we watch these countries with great interest. 
At the moment, the consensus seems to be that 1) Europe can possibly keep its growth rate 
level,  2)  Japan  will  calibrate  its  stimulus,  learning  from  the  experience  of  the  Fed  on  the 
problems of exit from unconventional monetary policy, and 3) China will continue to grow at a 
steadier pace. 
We are monitoring these economies, but we are also mindful that our own domestic demand 
conditions, particularly consumption and capital formation, remain quite strong. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I’ve  laid  out  for  you  the  “facts”  and  the  “perceived  risks”  –  three 
buffers  against  three  vulnerabilities.  I  know  I’ve  gone  thru  a  lot  of  information.  I  am  not 
worried though because I know dealers are experts at multi-tasking, and are able to filter thru 
a lot of information quickly! 
My bottom line is this: the country has what it takes to move forward amidst the uncertainty in 
the short-term, because we have put up buffers. I know you have heard this said over and 
over and over but ladies and gentlemen, this is not a trivial matter. It is the very presence of 
these buffers that has enabled you to enjoy the positions that you are currently in. We are 
where  we  are  because  we  did  our  homework.  To  you,  the  vital  players  in  the  market,  my 
message is – Do NOT get stuck in the short-term. Just because we have the buffers, doesn’t 
mean  it  should  be  “business  as  usual”  You  should  always  look  to  enlarge  your  business 
opportunities, and not just go for the quick trade. I encourage you to think “long-term”. I know 
LONG-TERM TRADER (unless natatalo yung position) is an oxymoron. But think about it, to 
survive in this business, you NEED to think long-term. 
The BSP has a full market reform agenda. The agenda, as you will learn quickly enough, is 
not a mechanical duplication of the international reforms. Our agenda is a calibrated adoption 
of  the  principles  of  the  international  agenda  to  suit  our  idiosyncratic  requirements  as  an 
economy. It is also informed by lessons learned from years of dealing with earlier crises. 
The BSP needs you, the market, to partner with us, in the full development of this agenda, 
and in its eventual implementation. Reform will work only if we work on it together. 
I avoided using “ink blots” at the beginning of my remarks. But I think for my conclusion, I 
shall put one up. 
This picture is the word “CRISIS”, written in Chinese. It is said that one character represents 
danger, the other opportunity. 
I am not an expert, but I don’t think the Chinese meant to say that “Opportunity plus Danger 
equals Crisis”. 
Although to an undisciplined trader, working in a dealing room without the appropriate controls, 
he might see an “OPPORTUNITY” which could then bring “DANGER “to the firm, and result  
in  CRISIS.  As  a  true  market,  we  don’t  ever  want  to  find  ourselves  in  a  “FIX”  like  this.  
The BSP is always ready to sanction such activities to the full extent of regulations and the law. 
But I digress, what I hope we all will come away with from this picture is this: that with every 
crisis  comes  an  opportunity  to  grow.  In  the  Philippines,  we  can  achieve  that  if  we  look 
beyond the short-term volatilities, and consider the bigger picture of what lies ahead. 
I hope I can count on all of you, as we work from the same page, of the same game plan. 
Thank you, and have a pleasant evening. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
