Mario Draghi: Money and monetary institutions after the crisis 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Conference on 
“Money  and  monetary  institutions  after  the  crisis”,  in  memory  of  Curzio  Giannini,  Bank  of 
Italy, Rome, 10 December 2013. 
 Summary 
Central  banks  should  continue  to  focus  primarily  on  what  they  can  and  are  mandated  to 
achieve, which is price stability over the medium term.  
Delivering  on  their  mandate  is  the  only  way  for  central  bankers  to  maintain  public  trust. 
Pursuit of this mandate must be backed indirectly by public preferences, seen from a longer-
term perspective. 
The  actions  undertaken  by  the  ECB  have  not  represented  a  departure  from  the  ECB’s 
mandate  but  rather  the  opposite,  namely  its  pursuit  by  all  the  means  demanded  by  the 
situation. 
It  is  now  crucial  to  complete  the  reform  agenda  at  European  and  national  level.  With  this 
agenda there can be no place for withdrawing into nationalism and protectionism. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  very  much  appreciate  having  the  opportunity  to  intervene  in  this  conference,  not  only 
because it honours Curzio Giannini, but also because the issues that were close to his heart 
have turned out to be fundamental questions concerning the role of central banks in the post-
crisis environment. 
The morning session has touched upon topics of vital importance for central banks. I would 
summarise them along two main lines. First, should the objectives (though not necessarily 
the mandate) of central banks be broadened? Second, and related, how can central banks 
retain and increase public trust and preserve their legitimacy and independence? 
Although  these  are  issues  that  affect  all  central  banks,  I  will  naturally  speak  from  the 
perspective of the ECB and our specific institutional context. 
The objectives of monetary policy 
Claudio Borio has presented a thought-provoking paper on the question of whether central 
banks had too narrow a focus in the decades preceding the global financial crisis. He now 
asks  whether  they  should  widen  their  horizon,  in  particular  towards  addressing  financial 
imbalances. 
Claudio first documents that there is a financial cycle of credit booms and busts that overlaps 
with the more usual business cycle, but which has a longer duration, in particular in the build-
up  phase.  Although  not  always  easy  to  detect,  this  cycle  is  often  characterised  by  the 
interplay  between  soaring  real  estate  prices  and  easy  credit,  and  both  are  in  principle 
observable.  
Second,  Claudio  argues  that  monetary  policy  (possibly  in  combination  with  other  policies 
such as macro-prudential policies) can do something to prevent costly booms and busts – 
although  it  has  less  leverage  than  commonly  thought  in  a  balance  sheet  recession  which 
often characterises the “bust” phase. Hence, by being more aggressive in preventing risks ex 
ante, the central bank may have an easier life ex post, and avoid being over-burdened with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
excessive  expectations  in  the  bust  phase.  A  distinct  advantage  of  monetary  policy  as 
compared  with  macro-prudential  policies  is  its  robustness  to  regulatory  arbitrage  and  its 
ability to “get in all the cracks”. 
Note that Claudio is careful not to argue that central bank mandates should be changed. A 
stronger  focus  on  the  financial  cycle  could  be  justified  based  on  central  banks’  traditional 
mandate of maintaining price stability.  
At  the  ECB,  we  are  definitely  sympathetic  to  these  views.1  The  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
strategy  with  its  medium-term  orientation  and  emphasis  on  monetary  analysis  explicitly 
involves looking beyond short-term price developments and taking into account the medium-
term implications of booming asset prices and credit markets for price stability.  
Ultimately, however, the answer to the question how actively monetary policy should be used 
to “lean against the wind” will depend on the answer to two other questions: i) How effective 
will  the  new  macro-prudential  policy  framework  be  in  reining  in  the  financial  cycle  and 
maintaining financial stability?; and ii) What is the effect of monetary policy on risk taking and 
financial stability?  
Regarding the first question on the effectiveness of macro-prudential policies, let me just say 
that the  experience  with  those  policies  as  a  stabilisation  tool  is  relatively  scarce  and  often 
confined  to  emerging  market  economies.  In  the  euro  area,  the  Spanish  experience  with 
dynamic provisioning shows that increasing buffers during the credit boom can increase the 
resilience of banks; this was visible in the first phase of the financial crisis. However, at the 
same  time  it  did  not  prevent  the  large  run-up  in  credit  and  real  estate  prices  and  its 
subsequent  painful  and  protracted  bust,  suggesting  that  a  more  intrusive  macro-prudential 
policy  may  be  necessary.  I  trust  that  the  new  macro-prudential  tools  created  under  the 
Capital  Requirements  Directive  IV,  combined  with  the  new  role  of  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism in macro-prudential decision-making, will help provide that intrusiveness. 
Regarding  the  second  question,  there  is  by  now  considerable  research  on  the  effect  of 
monetary  policy  on  risk  taking  in  the  financial  sector  (also  by  ECB  researchers),  but  the 
quantitative importance and hence policy relevance of this channel is still unclear and subject 
to  a  lot  of  debate.  It  is  also  unclear  whether  monetary  policy  can  have  an  influence  on 
financial stability that would be predictable and systematic enough to allow it to be exploited.  
There  are  additional  elements  to  be  considered  when  conducting  monetary  and  macro-
prudential policy in a still heterogeneous economy such as the euro area. Dealing with the 
financial cycle from a purely national perspective can be detrimental to financial integration, 
but  the  common  monetary  policy  cannot  fully  deal  with  a  financial  cycle  that  is  not 
synchronous across countries. In order to manage this trade-off, the responsibility for macro-
prudential  policies  will  in  future  be  shared  between  the  centre  (the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism for the euro area and the ESRB for the entire EU) and the Member States (the 
national macro-prudential authorities).  
In sum, there are many uncertainties associated with the ability of both monetary and macro-
prudential policies to rein in the financial cycle. As a policy maker, being confronted with a lot 
of uncertainty is not new. It is, however, important to acknowledge those uncertainties and 
draw the necessary implications.  
First, central banks should continue to focus primarily on what they can and are mandated to 
achieve, which is price stability over the medium term. As I will mention later, delivering on 
this mandate is essential to maintain public trust in the long term.  
Second, we need to continue and further strengthen the financial sector reform agenda and 
build more resilience in the financial system. While our knowledge to fine-tune the financial 
                                                
1  See, for example, Issing (2006) and Trichet (2006). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
cycle  may  be  limited,  the  financial  system  must  be  made  more  robust  to  shocks  by,  for 
example, increasing capital and liquidity buffers. As Don Kohn recently said, “We may not be 
able to make better drivers, but we can make cars and roads safer to reduce damage when 
accidents  happen”.2  The  creation  of  a  banking  union  and  the  comprehensive  assessment 
leading up to it are essential steps in improving the governance of the financial sector in the 
euro area and increasing its resilience.  
Trust in central banks 
Let me turn now to the question that was perhaps the most fundamental for Curzio, namely 
how  central  banks  can  build  trust.  Indeed  Curzio  viewed  not  only  central  banks,  but  also 
money itself, as an institution backed by public trust. Let me quote from him: “The mistake 
that neo- classical theories make is to consider money a commodity. Instead, it is really an 
institution  that  is  held  up  by  trust:  trust  in  its  future  purchasing  power  and  trust  in  the 
continued convention that payment is complete when money changes hands (even if this is 
now something of a metaphor)”. 
Trust is important not only as an end in itself, but also because it contributes to economic 
efficiency. This view, which is now shared by many economists and that Curzio expressed in 
particularly  eloquent  terms,  stipulates  that  the  ultimate  objective  of  institutions  such  as 
central banks is to reduce transaction costs. High public trust, by reducing transaction costs, 
raises economic efficiency and citizens’ welfare.  
A high degree of trust by citizens is ultimately the most important safeguard of central bank 
independence  in  the  long  term.  Legal  provisions  for  central  bank  independence  are 
important,  but  not  as  important  as  public  trust  over  the  long  term.3  With  a  high  degree  of 
trust, central banks will be able to successfully deal with any potential risks for central bank 
independence stemming from the use of non-standard measures, for example. 
Transparency and accountability are also important pillars of central bank independence and 
the ECB places a high value on them. Together with delivering on the mandate, they also 
form  the  cornerstone  of  public  trust  in  central  banks.  The  ECB  enjoys  a  high  degree  of 
independence  in  the  international  comparison, which  is  matched  by  stringent transparency 
and accountability requirements. Indeed, we regard accountability as just “the other side of 
the coin” of central bank independence.  
Looking  ahead,  central banks  should get  used  to  receiving  closer  scrutiny  and  in  my  view 
should not eschew even higher standards of transparency. It is not surprising that the use of 
new and non-standard tools attracts closer attention and sometimes even criticism. 
How do these considerations apply to the unique case of the euro area? The monetary union 
is an example of what  Curzio called a “consortium regime”  where monetary sovereignty is 
permanently transferred to a supranational level. As a consequence, price stability is defined 
for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  The  challenge  for  the  ECB  is  to  maintain  public  trust  in  a 
multinational environment, in particular when there is a significant degree of heterogeneity in 
economic structures and preferences.  
Trust  is  intimately  linked  to  acting  within  the  mandate.  The  ECB  is  operating  and  shall 
operate only within this mandate. A key part of the ECB’s aim to retain and build trust is to 
respect this political legitimization by focusing and delivering on its mandate. Of course, price 
stability  is  not  important  just  because  it  is  written  in  the  Treaty.  It  is  also  beneficial  for 
economic  growth  and  social  cohesion,  and  indeed  available  surveys  indicate  that  citizens 
attach a high value to price stability. 
                                                
2  See Kohn (2013). 
3  See, among others, Posen (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
During  its  15  years  of  existence,  the  ECB  has  consistently  delivered  on  its  mandate  to 
maintain price stability, with average HICP inflation standing at 2.0% between 1999 and now. 
Moreover,  long-term  inflation  expectations  suggest  that  citizens  have  a  high  degree  of 
confidence in the ECB’s ability and determination to maintain price stability in the future. 
In sum, we have here two aspects which are both essential. On the one hand delivering their 
mandate  is  the  only  way  for  central  bankers  to  maintain  public  trust;  on  the  other,  their 
pursuit of their mandate must be backed indirectly by public preferences, seen from a longer 
term perspective.  
I  would  be  the  first  to  acknowledge  that  there  can  be  a  tension  between  these  two 
dimensions in the short run, and that delivering price stability has been more challenging in 
recent  years,  in  part  due  to  financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area.  The  ECB  has  been 
addressing financial fragmentation in the euro area since its beginning in 2011. This effort 
has included the provision of liquidity to the banking system in abundant and uniform terms 
across the whole euro area, against good quality collateral and subject to risk management 
limits;  as  well  as  securities  market  purchases,  the  Securities  Market  Programme  and  the 
covered  bonds  purchase  programme,  and  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT) 
programme. 
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  these  efforts  do  not  represent  a  departure  from  the  ECB’s 
mandate, but rather the opposite – namely, the pursuit of price stability by all the necessary 
means that the situation has required. 
In short, the ECB has preserved price stability and the necessary conditions for sustainable 
growth,  fought  redenomination  risks  and  the  fragmentation  of  financial  markets.  Time  has 
been  gained  for  other  actors  to  contribute  their  part  in  crucial  policy  domains  that  do  not 
belong to the competence of ECB as defined by its mandate. The European reform agenda 
has been put on a new footing.  
It is now crucial to complete this agenda at the European and national level. In this agenda 
there is no place for retreating into nationalism and protectionism. We know better than this 
and  should  stay  focused  on  the  key  reform  priorities:  completing  the  banking  union, 
implementing  growth-friendly  fiscal  consolidation,  and  structural  reforms  in  labour  and 
product markets. I have little doubt that all these reforms are beneficial and trust-enhancing, 
even though some of them may be opposed by vested interests or entail adjustment costs in 
the short term. 
Our  common  responsibility  for  the  euro  area  strengthens  the  case  for  reform.  As  I  said 
recently in Berlin, it is never the case that sound economic policies are good for some in the 
euro area but not for others, even though they are sometimes portrayed in that way.  
A great deal of progress has been made, but more needs to come. Let me conclude by again 
quoting  Curzio:  “The  EMS  crisis  could  have  marked  the  end  of  EMU.  Instead,  it  sparked 
efforts  to  acquire  sufficient  institutional  capital  to  support  confidence  in  the  new  European 
currency” (p. 213). The crisis has identified some weaknesses in our European construction. 
But I am convinced, like Curzio, that together we will be able to repair these weaknesses and 
emerge from the crisis with a stronger Europe.  
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Kohn, D. (2013): “The interactions of macroprudential and monetary policies: A view from the 
Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee”, speech at the Oxford Institute of Economic 
Policy, 6 November. 
Issing,  O.  (2006):  “The  ECB’s  Monetary  Policy  Strategy:  Why  did  we  choose  a  two  Pillar 
Approach?”, intervention at the Fourth ECB Central Banking Conference “The role of money: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
money  and  monetary  policy  in  the  twenty-first  century”,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  10  November 
2006. 
Posen,  A.  (2010):  “When  Central  Banks  Buy  Bonds:  Independence  and  the  Power  to  Say 
No”, Speech presented at Barclays Capital 14th Annual Global Inflation-Linked Conference, 
New York, 14 June. 
Trichet, J.-C. (2006): “The role of money – money and monetary policy in the 21st century”, 
panel  intervention  at  the  Fourth  ECB  Central  Banking  Conference  “The  role  of  money: 
money  and  monetary  policy  in  the  twenty-first  century”,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  10  November 
2006. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
