Jens Weidmann: The institutional and economic-policy challenges posed 
by the sovereign debt crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  to  the  Economic 
Forum 2013, Darmstadt, 30 October 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Professor Frömel 
Mr Sellner 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for your invitation. I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak to 
you here today. 
I have many good memories of Darmstadt. In particular, I look back fondly on my time as 
guest  lecturer  at  the  Technische  Universität.  I  greatly  enjoyed  discussing  matters  of 
economic and monetary policy with students while I was Secretary General of the German 
Council of Economic Experts and Head of the Monetary Policy Division at the Bundesbank. 
Besides  what  I  personally  associate  with  Darmstadt,  the  city  is  also  a  leading  centre  of 
science. This is clearly demonstrated by the fact that Darmstadt is the only city in Germany 
to have a chemical element named after it – the element Darmstadtium. 
And  of  course,  Darmstadt  is  also  home  to  the  European  Space  Operations  Centre  of  the 
European  Space  Agency,  ESA.  Darmstadt  might  therefore  be  said  to  have  something  in 
common with Frankfurt. Whereas in Darmstadt, watch is kept over the 60 or so European 
satellites circling Earth, the European Central Bank in Frankfurt watches over the circulation 
of money throughout the euro area. 
Reports such as “GOCE satellite mission completed” are acknowledged with interest by the 
experts without causing very much concern, because it means that the research satellite has 
successfully  accomplished  its  mission.  The  fact  that  a  satellite  of  this  particular  European 
joint project will break up upon entry into Earth’s atmosphere in a few days’ time is unlikely to 
plunge us into a state of shock. 
It would be an altogether different situation if the European joint project known as the euro 
were about to crash. Thus, while European satellites are, from the outset, projects of limited 
duration, the euro is intended as our permanent common European currency – and a stable 
one  at  that.  Despite  this  major  difference,  there  is  one  key  trait  that  the  GOCE  research 
satellite  and  the  euro  share.  How  well  they  function  depends,  among  other  things,  on 
circumstances over which neither the  ESA operations centre nor the Eurosystem have any 
influence. 
Allow  me  to  explain.  The  GOCE  satellite  was  able  to  operate  for  a  particularly  long  time 
because its fuel lasted longer than originally expected. This was thanks to the recent lull in 
the sun’s activity, which caused Earth’s atmosphere to expand less. As a result, there was 
less  drag  on  the  GOCE  satellite  as  it  orbited  our  planet.  Believe  you  me  –  we  at  the  ECB 
Governing Council would have preferred a lull in activity for the euro, too. 
However, the fates of the euro are dictated not only in Frankfurt but, above all, in the capitals 
of the euro area. Political decision-makers lay out the course for the institutional framework 
of  monetary  union,  but  they  also  have  a  strong  say  in  the  economic  and  fiscal  policy 
environment of monetary policy. 
Now,  after  one-and-a-half  years  of  recession,  the  euro  area  is  again  experiencing  growth. 
Though this may be a reason for good cheer, I probably would not be a proper central banker 
if  I  did  not  seek  to  dampen  the  euphoria.  As  a  former  Federal  Reserve  chairman  once 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
remarked, we central bankers are notorious for wanting “to take away the punch bowl just as 
the party gets going”. 
Indeed  it  would  be  premature  to  declare  that  the  crisis  is  over,  for  even  if  the  economic 
situation is picking up, many structural challenges still lie ahead. That applies to Germany, 
too. The economic situation is more favourable than that of other euro-area countries, yet a 
number  of  structural  challenges  –  like  the  ageing  of  the  population  –  are  actually 
considerably greater in Germany. 
Good progress has been made with the reforms in the crisis-hit countries, as the improved 
position  in  their  current  accounts  and  public  finances  demonstrates.  Yet  further  efforts  are 
needed in many areas, particularly to effectively combat the oppressively high unemployment 
levels in some countries. The euro area can only be strong and economically successful if its 
individual member states are, too. That is what makes the debate about the right reforms for 
each individual country so important. 
But  apart  from  that,  we  should  not  forget  one  central  insight  we  learned  from  James 
Buchanan, the Nobel laureate in economics who passed away in January. Just as important 
as  the  discussion  about  economic  policy  itself  is  the  discussion  about  the  right  framework 
conditions and incentives under which economic policy is conducted. 
What I am referring to is regulatory policy. Each of us knows from our day-to-day life how 
difficult it can be to establish the right framework conditions and incentives. Our intentions 
are good, but we have difficulty putting them into practice. The author and economist Hanno 
Beck described this predicament with the following words: “Whether we want to cut down on 
calories,  stop  smoking,  make  provision  for  retirement  or  take  up  sport  –  the  decision  we 
make today all too often falls prey to the weaknesses of tomorrow.” 
One way of overcoming this time inconsistency is to establish a realistic commitment device. 
We find a classic commitment device in one of the tales of Ulysses, who wanted to hear the 
song  of  the  Sirens.  Knowing  full  well  the  dangers  that  entailed,  he  had  himself  tied  to  the 
mast of his ship, had his sailors stuff their ears with wax and ordered them not to untie him, 
no matter how hard he pleaded. 
Commitment devices are useful ways of resisting dangerous temptations in economic policy, 
too,  although  the  perils  may  not  be  quite  as  dramatic  as  those  Ulysses  faced.  The 
independence  of  the  central  banks  and  the  focus  of  their  mandate  on  price  stability  is  an 
excellent example. The fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact are another, even if the 
extent of their success is open to dispute. 
However, time inconsistency is only one of the reasons why decision makers sometimes find 
it difficult, when they make their decision, to choose what will be right in the long run. 
Economic policy challenges 
2. 
And this brings me to the challenges that Germany will have to cope with in the medium to 
long term. Germany is doing comparatively well – partly because of the reforms of the past 
decade.  It  has  a  balanced  government  budget,  low  unemployment  and  a  high  level  of 
competitiveness. However, there are no grounds for complacency, particularly as Germany is 
faring  well  in  many  areas  only  in  relative  terms,  which is  to  say  relative  to  other  countries 
which are currently burdened by great difficulties. 
Advancing globalisation, shifts in energy policy, high government debt and the ageing of the 
population will present challenges to Germany, as well – perhaps to Germany in particular – 
even if the current crisis and its burdens are rapidly overcome. 
Ladies and gentlemen, ten years ago Germany was referred to as the “sick man of Europe”, 
a sobriquet given by the Economist magazine. At that time, the economic situation Germany 
found itself in prompted the Bundesbank, in a paper entitled Ways out of the crisis, to write, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
“Germany has fallen far behind European partner countries in terms of key data such as GDP 
growth, employment and the government deficit.”  
Far-reaching reforms were initiated in Germany to tackle this period of structural weakness. 
Among  them  was  the  Agenda  2010  reform  programme,  which  included  the  so-called 
“Hartz IV” legislation. Moreover, in view of the location-related problems that key industries 
faced  and  the  high  level  of  entrenched  unemployment  at  that  time,  the  wage  bargaining 
partners steered a course of wage moderation over a prolonged period of time. 
Both  of  these  measures  helped  improve  the  situation  on  the  German  labour  market 
significantly. The number of persons in work has risen by three million since 2005 and now 
stands at an all-time high. The number of registered unemployed has fallen from almost five 
million in 2005 to less than three million today. And the average duration of unemployment 
has declined sharply. This has played a part in Germany’s becoming the anchor of stability in 
the euro area. 
Looking forward, however, it quickly becomes clear that the healthy condition of the German 
economy is certainly not assured on a long-term basis. Disregarding migration effects for the 
moment, there will be one-and-a-half million people fewer on the labour market in 2020. That 
is a decline of 2.5%. In 2020, economic output will thus be nearly €70 billion lower than it 
would be without this demographic effect. 
According to estimates by the OECD in its report entitled “Looking to 2060”, Germany will post 
the second slowest growth of all 42 countries in the study by 2030, and the slowest growth 
by 2060 – mainly owing to demographic trends. The prospects for per capita growth, which is 
a  crucial  driver  of  prosperity,  look  somewhat  better  because  of  the  falling  population. 
However, here too, Germany will only occupy a mid-table position in Europe, according to 
the  OECD.  What  is  more,  weak  economic  growth  will  also  have  a  negative  impact  on,  for 
instance, the country’s innovation and adjustment capacities. 
There  are  two  ways  to  combat  this  deceleration  of  economic  momentum  –  either  by 
increasing the number of persons who work or by increasing the productivity of those who 
work.  To  increase  the  number  of  those  who  work  we  can  raise  labour  force  participation 
among  women  and  older  people,  and  we  can  further  increase  the  influx  of  labour  from 
abroad, given that employment in Germany recently reached a new all-time high largely due 
to immigration. That is why a systematic approach to attract foreign labour whose skills we 
need  here  would  represent  a  major  contribution  towards  helping  cushion  the  impact  of  an 
ageing society on the labour market. 
In addition, a further expansion of childcare and care for the elderly could improve options for 
women  in  particular  to  take  up  or  increase  their  paid  employment.  However,  the  present 
system of taxes and transfers can, in some cases, stand in the way of higher labour force 
participation.  For  example,  non-contributory  inclusion  in  statutory  health  insurance  makes 
having a job less worthwhile. 
On  the  other  hand,  these  instruments  are  being  used  to  pursue  other  political  objectives 
which have to be weighed against the employment effect. Only policy makers can find the 
balance. My point is to remind people that these measures make it less attractive to take on 
paid employment and can therefore cost us growth. This is a price we need to be aware of. 
No matter how policy makers and society at large decide, a better work-family balance on its 
own is not enough to maintain, far less to increase, economic strength in an ageing society. It 
is  just  as  important  that  we  do  not  surrender  any  of  the  progress  that  has  already  been 
achieved on the labour market. 
This applies, in particular, to the current debate on the wider application of minimum wages. 
Opinions  are  divided  on  whether  minimum  wages  increase  unemployment.  That  depends 
decisively on the size of the wage and the other components of the framework, such as the 
social safety net for unemployment and job protection. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  2007,  the  economists  David  Neumark  and  William  Wascher  took  stock  of  the  status  of 
research on minimum wages by looking at 102 individual studies. Two-thirds of the studies 
examined  suggest  that  minimum  wages  have  a  negative  impact  on  employment.  The  33 
studies  which,  in  their  view,  were  sound  in  terms  of  their  methodology  conclude  that  the 
effects  on  employment  are  very  predominantly  negative.  Furthermore,  it  is  shown  that 
binding minimum wages affect the low-skilled and the long-term unemployed to a particular 
extent. 
The high youth unemployment levels in the crisis-hit countries in the south of the euro area 
are partly attributable to minimum wages. This is because, even if a minimum wage does not 
affect unemployment directly, it may still have a negative impact on employment dynamics. 
There is a risk that enterprises will hire fewer new staff in periods of economic upturn. And 
that primarily affects those sections of the labour market that a minimum wage would actually 
be intended to help. Thus, there is a danger that the minimum wage may have the opposite 
effect to the one intended. 
According to recent surveys, 83% of Germans are in favour of introducing a blanket minimum 
wage.  But  in  this  question,  too,  it  has  to  be  said  that,  however  policy  makers  and  society 
decide,  they  need  to  be  aware  of  the  economic  risks  to  employment  in  Germany  that  this 
entails. These risks will be higher, the more a minimum wage is prescribed in employment 
contracts.  That,  in  turn,  would  depend  on  the  amount  of  such  a  minimum  wage  and  on 
whether any differences were made between eastern and western Germany or young and 
old employees. 
Of  course,  the  fortunes  of  German  economic  performance  are  not  shaped  on  the  labour 
market alone. Action needs to be taken in other areas, too; education policy is certainly one 
of them. If, in future, fewer workers will be at our disposal, it is all the more important for them 
to have the best possible qualifications. Energy policy is another such area. We also need an 
effective infrastructure. And another area I would like to mention is tax policy – and here, in 
particular, corporate tax laws. It would be a significant step forward if a financing-neutral tax 
system were introduced which affords equal treatment to corporate profits instead of giving 
preferential treatment to debt financing. 
The right framework for monetary union 
3. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  some  may  not  consider  Germany’s  challenges  to  be  particularly 
pressing  at  first  glance.  This  inevitably  makes  it  more  tempting  to  postpone  politically 
uncomfortable  decisions  or  to  revoke  decisions  which  are  controversial  but  economically 
necessary. 
The euro area is not an island – we are in competition with countries like the United States 
and Japan. Little would be gained from getting the crisis countries back on track to growth 
thanks to successful reforms only to find that the largest member state had lost steam. It is 
not  merely  about  shifting  competitiveness  within  the  euro  area.  The  euro  area  as  a  whole 
needs to become more competitive. 
To  put  an  end  to  the  crisis  in  the  euro  area  once  and  for  all,  we  need  to  address  the 
weaknesses  and  false  incentives  which  led  to  its  onset  in  the  first  place.  All  17  euro-area 
countries are governed by a single monetary and foreign exchange policy. Yet each member 
state determines its own national economic and, above all, fiscal policy. 
This  arrangement  further  compounds  the  tendency  of  governments  to  finance  government 
spending through debt. This is because part of the cost of additional debt can be passed on 
to other countries. And, as we have seen over the course of the crisis, excessive debt can 
put pressure on monetary policy to plug fiscal gaps by printing money. 
Institutional arrangements, such as the Stability and Growth Pact and the no bail-out clause, 
were,  of  course,  put  in  place  to  prevent  a  build-up  of  excessive  debt  by  member  states. 
Unfortunately,  however,  these  fiscal  rules  lacked  the  necessary  punch,  not  least  because 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
they led to a situation in which potential sinners were passing judgment on fellow sinners, to 
paraphrase Otmar Issing. 
It was hoped that the financial markets would have a disciplining effect, but this, too, proved 
not to be the case. For many years, Greece was highly indebted, but paid little more for its 
debt than Germany or France. It seems that investors simply couldn’t imagine that the other 
member  states  would  allow  one  of  the  euro-area  countries  to  default  –  and  they  weren’t 
entirely wrong about that, as we now know. 
One  reason  for  this  was  probably  that  the  international  capital  rules  adopted  in  the  early 
1990s  allow  banks  to  treat  government  bonds  in  their  domestic  currency  as  a  risk-free 
investment requiring no capital backing. This applied regardless of how risky financial market 
investors considered the bonds to be or how bad the fundamentals really were. Of course, 
this  regulatory  treatment  not  only  encouraged  banks  to  buy  government  bonds,  it  also 
stopped the no bail-out clause from being taken that seriously. 
Although the founding fathers of monetary union provided for the risk of undesirable fiscal 
developments,  no  corresponding  institutional  arrangements  were  made  for  other  factors, 
such as the erosion of competitiveness or excesses in the financial sector.  
That  was  fine  for  a  while,  but  the  shortcomings  at  a  national  level  became  increasingly 
apparent when the global credit bubble burst. A number of euro-area countries were pushed 
to the brink of insolvency by the crisis. This gave rise to significant risks to financial stability 
in the euro area, particularly as it became clear just how quickly the effects can spread from 
one vulnerable country to another. 
The  bailout  funds  helped  to  stabilise  the  euro  area,  but  did  not  address  the  underlying 
problems. What’s more, the very existence of the bailout fund creates new false incentives. 
That  is  why  I  am  in  favour  of  using  it  only  as  a  last  resort  and  advocate  structuring  the 
conditions in such a way that countries are not encouraged to take advantage of them. 
In effect, however, the numerous crisis measures increased mutual liability within the euro 
area  without  establishing  any  sufficiently  effective  control  rights  in  return.  This  upset  the 
balance between liability and control. This balance must be restored to safeguard the long-
term stability of monetary union. 
One option for redressing the balance would be to make greater mutual liability conditional 
on  greater  mutual  control.  The  member  states  would  ultimately  have  to  be  prepared  to 
relinquish  national  sovereign  rights  to  the  European  level  and  thus  combine  the  existing 
monetary union with a fiscal union. This echoes the sentiment of Bundesbank President Karl 
Blessing, who in 1963 said that: “A common currency and a federal central banking system 
are  feasible  only  if,  apart  from  a  common  trade  policy,  there  is  also  a  common  fiscal  and 
budgetary policy, a common economic policy, a common social and wage policy – a common 
policy all around.” 
In my opinion, however, such a far-reaching transfer of national sovereignty to the European 
level requires the backing of both policy makers and the public at large. There was no such 
support when the monetary union was created and little has changed since. In the midst of 
the  crisis,  I  do  not  see  sufficient  willingness  on  the  part  of  EU  governments  or  citizens  
– neither in Germany nor elsewhere – to actually transfer sovereign rights on budget issues 
to the European level. 
Merely  increasing  mutual  liability  –  by  introducing  eurobonds,  for  example  –  without 
establishing greater mutual control in return, would only provide additional incentive to incur 
debt. After all, you wouldn’t entrust your credit card to someone if you weren’t able to control 
their spending. 
For  the  time  being,  therefore,  the  only  answer  to  the  crisis  is  to  strengthen  the  Maastricht 
framework.  In  doing  so,  more  needs  to  be  done  to  render  the  fiscal  rules  more  binding  – 
rules which have too often been stretched and ignored in the past. New agreements, such as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the revised Stability and Growth Pact and the Fiscal Compact, are steps in the right direction 
in this regard. However, it is vital that the new rules are applied in actual practice rather than 
existing only on paper. 
But  the  essence  of  a  strengthened  Maastricht  framework  is  that  member  states  be  held 
responsible  for  the  consequences  of  their  financial  policy  decisions.  In  this  connection,  it 
must  also  be  possible  –  as  a  last  resort  –  to  declare  governments  insolvent  without 
endangering the stability of the European financial system as a whole. 
To improve financial stability, the heads of state and government in euro-area countries have 
agreed to establish a European banking union. If implemented properly, this banking union 
can rectify deficiencies in competition in the banking sector through a strict single European 
supervisory  mechanism.  With  an  appropriate  recovery  and  resolution  regime,  it  can  also 
strengthen the disciplinary effect which capital markets have on governments. 
The  banking  union  once  again  puts  the  focus  more  squarely  on  the  principle  of  liability. 
However, regulation must also be adapted if the vicious circle of reeling states and struggling 
banks is to be broken and not simply passed onto the European level. After all, as I have 
already mentioned, government solvency problems have hit the banking sector head on until 
now at the risk of triggering a financial crisis. This is because banks are not required to hold 
capital backing for investments in government bonds. And, unlike loans to enterprises, there 
is no upper limit for loans to a particular government. 
That is why, over a medium-term horizon, government bonds should be treated just like other 
bonds or loans to enterprises. Obviously, new regulations such as these require appropriate 
transition periods so as not to further exacerbate the funding problems that some countries 
are  experiencing.  However,  they  are  essential  in  ensuring  that  governments  bear  more 
responsibility for their own decisions in future and should therefore be adopted as quickly as 
possible. 
In the long term, it must be possible to declare both governments and large banks insolvent 
without  endangering  the  financial  system  or  without  taxpayers  having  to  foot  the  bill. 
Providing the right incentives is therefore not only important for fiscal and economic policy 
decision-making processes; it is also the key challenge for financial market reform. 
Here,  too,  the  aim  must  be  to  ensure  that  banks  and  their  investors  once  again  bear 
responsibility for their own actions. With the implementation of Basel III, banks will have to 
hold more and better-quality capital to better absorb losses. It is also important that if a credit 
institution needs to be restructured or wound up, its owners and creditors bear a fair share of 
the losses. As I have mentioned, this will be the job of the European recovery and resolution 
mechanism. However, the current proposals for creditor involvement still allow for too many 
exceptions. This runs contrary to the principle of market discipline and should be addressed 
in the course of the legislative process. 
In addition to resolution regimes, shadow banking is another particularly important topic at a 
global level. The specific recommendations for regulation and the clear schedule agreed at 
the recent G20 summit in St Petersburg were a definite step forward in this regard.  
Progress is therefore being made in the regulation of financial markets, both at an European 
and a global level. But a great deal remains to be done to ensure the individual elements 
come together to form a cohesive system. 
Summary 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Despite  imbalances,  Germany  is  now  in  better  shape  than  it  was  ten  years  ago.  It  is  no 
longer the “sick man” of Europe. That said, we should not forget that adjustments will always 
be necessary to safeguard prosperity. This is especially true for the European crisis states. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But more is required to ensure that monetary union can once again function properly as a 
whole. From now on, it must not be possible for the problems of individual countries or banks 
to jeopardise the entire system. An operational framework which reinforces the principle of 
liability  and  reduces  mutual  dependencies  brings  us  a  good  deal  closer  to  achieving  this 
goal. 
I would like to thank you for your attention today – but, then, this is something I have always 
been pleased to receive in Darmstadt. 
I am now very much looking forward to our discussion! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
