Benoît Cœuré: The economic consequences of low interest rates 
Public lecture by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  International  Center  for  Monetary  and  Banking  Studies,  Geneva,  9  October 
2013. 
 I wish to thank Giovanni Lombardo and Oreste Tristani for their contributions to these remarks. I remain solely 
responsible for the opinions contained herein. Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here at the ICMB. 
In recent years, monetary policy interest rates have been reduced to exceptionally low levels. 
The  main  reason  for  maintaining  highly  accommodative  monetary  conditions  has  been  to 
avert the risk of an economic depression and to counter deflationary pressures. At the same 
time,  given  the  financial  disruptions  which  led  to  what  is  now  widely  called  “the  Great 
Recession”,  the  reduction  of  interest  rates  has  helped  to  offset  the  excessive  increase  in 
borrowing  costs  caused  by  the  widening  of  financial  spreads.  From  this  perspective, 
monetary policy actions have favoured borrowers. 
Over the same period, returns on safe financial assets have been very depressed. This has 
implied that on the one hand, savers in search of safe investment opportunities have found 
themselves  having  to  accept  extremely  low  rates  of  return  –  possibly  negative  when 
corrected for  inflation  – while  on  the  other  hand  low  rates  have  boosted  asset  prices  and, 
hence, have favoured households and firms with a positive net wealth. Yet, given the length 
of  the  economic  slowdown  and  the  persistence  of  the  low  interest  rate  environment,  the 
media on both sides of the Atlantic have been reporting on the difficult investment climate for 
savers.1  
The correlation between these two facts – low monetary policy interest rates and low returns 
on safe financial assets – may suggest a causal explanation. After all, low nominal yields on 
safe, long-term bonds are the result of current and expected low interest rates as well as of a 
term premium. It is tempting to conclude that, facing a choice between helping borrowers and 
supporting  lenders,  central  banks  have  chosen  the  first  group.  The  reduction  of  monetary 
policy interest rates would thus be seen as aiming to reduce borrowing costs for consumers 
and firms. Savers would simply have to suffer the collateral damage from a policy aimed at 
other objectives. 
In my remarks today, I wish to argue that this conclusion is unwarranted.  
Specifically,  I  will  maintain  that  persistently  low  asset  returns  or,  more  generally,  poor 
investment opportunities are simply one of the many manifestations of a deep recession. In 
such  an  environment,  looser  monetary  policy  conditions  are  not  the  result  of  a  desire  to 
favour  borrowers,  but  rather  the  necessary  response  to  bring  the  economy  back  on  to  a 
sustainable growth path in an environment of price stability. Far from helping savers, higher 
monetary policy interest rates would only have depressed the economy further, delayed the 
recovery and contributed to downside risks to price stability. Asset returns would have been 
dampened for longer and savers would have suffered for longer. 
Policy rates at historically low levels 
Let me start by summarising the facts. 
                                                
1  See,  among  others,  Süddeutsche  Zeitung,  “Niedrigzinspolitik  der  EZB:  Zinstief  kostet  deutsche  Sparer 
Milliarden”, 3 August 2013; New York Times, “As Low Rates Depress Savers, Governments Reap Benefits”, 
10 September 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  key  ECB  policy  rates  are  at  a  historical  low.  After  being  cut  to  1%  in  May  2009,  the 
interest rate on the main refinancing operation (MRO) has remained at low levels over the 
past four years. It currently stands at 50 basis points. The deposit facility rate is at zero and 
the marginal lending facility rate is at 100 basis points, which implies that our interest rate 
corridor is also unprecedentedly narrow.  
Even if the MRO rate stands at 50 basis points, the effective cost of funds for some banks 
has fallen even further. Banks in countries under stress have faced higher borrowing costs, 
on both retail and wholesale sources of funding, and in some cases have become altogether 
unable to raise funds in the interbank market. They have therefore had to rely on the ECB for 
their liquidity needs. The ensuing increase in the overall amount of liquidity available in the 
system has led to a fall in the overnight rate on unsecured borrowing– the refinancing rate for 
banks perceived as safe. The average overnight rate, or EONIA rate, has hovered around 
levels very close to the rate on the deposit facility over the past four years. It currently stands 
below 10 basis points.  
At  the  same  time,  returns  on  long-term  safe  assets  have  never  been  so  low  since  the 
creation  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  For  example,  ten-year  German  government 
bonds pay a nominal interest rate of just above 170 basis points. This is partly the result of a 
slight downward trend in euro area safe asset returns over the past decade, and mostly the 
consequence of the worsening sovereign debt crisis in 2011, when risk-free real rates were 
pushed  into  negative  territory  as  investors  adjusted  their  portfolios  towards  the few  assets 
which  were  perceived  as  safe.  Since  long-term  euro  area  inflation  expectations  are  well 
anchored at just below 2%, consistent with our definition of price stability, these low nominal 
rates translate into expected real returns on safe assets that are slightly negative. 
From  the  perspective  of  a  saver,  these  returns  are  obviously  very  low,  compared  with 
average historical conditions. Over the very long run, real rates are determined by investors’ 
time preference rate and expectations about the trend growth rate of the economy. At more 
intermediate  maturities,  however,  returns  on  safe  assets  are  affected  by  current  and 
expected future monetary policy conditions, with the addition of term premia mainly reflecting 
the maturity of the assets and the expected volatility of inflation. Expectations of persistently 
low  short-term  policy  rates  will  tend  to  lower  yields  at  medium-term  maturities.  As  long  as 
inflation expectations remain well anchored, real medium- to long-term yields will also tend to 
edge  down.  Monetary  policy  is  therefore  contributing  to  keeping  real  yields  at  low  levels 
along a good part of the yield curve. 
Real interest rates during a prolonged economic downturn  
But are interest rates currently excessive low? To answer this question, one needs to define 
a  benchmark.  In  practice,  this  is  a  very  difficult  task,  both  conceptually  and  in  terms  of 
quantitative measurement. Indeed, the overall assessment of the risks to price stability in all 
central  banks  can  be  understood  as  a  way  of  operationalizing  this task,  through  extensive 
analytical information and a good deal of judgement.  
Theory, however, offers some guidance on how to think of a benchmark for the neutral level 
of  interest  rates  within  simple  modelling  frameworks.  This  is  a  useful  starting  point  for  my 
discussion.  
The  natural  starting  point  for  an  economist  is  the  Wicksellian  natural  rate  of  interest:  the 
“certain rate of interest on loans which is neutral in respect to commodity prices, and tends 
neither to raise nor to lower them”.2 A more precise definition of the natural rate of interest 
has been provided in the context of dynamic economic models.3 In this context, the natural 
                                                
2  See K. Wicksell, Interest and Prices, Royal Economic Society, 1936. 
3  See M. Woodford, Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press, 2003. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
rate  of  interest  is  the  short-term  real  interest  rate  which  would  prevail  in  an  ideal  “real 
economy”, where nominal variables play no role. In such an economy, monetary policy would 
have no reason to exist. All economic variables would be determined independently of the 
actions of the central bank.  
In this ideal world, a prolonged economic contraction would be accompanied by an initial fall, 
and then by a gradual recovery of the natural rate of interest. The level and the persistence 
of  the  natural  rate  of  interest  are  linked  to  the  pace  of  the  economic  recovery.  Various 
economic forces would contribute to this outcome. On the one hand, the contraction would 
be associated with a persistent fall in the profitability of new investment. Expected returns on 
all  investment  opportunities  would  therefore  tend  to  remain  low.  On  the  other  hand, 
uncertainty  would  also  tend  to  increase  during  the  recession.  As  a  result,  precautionary 
saving would also increase, exerting further downward pressure on the natural interest rate.4 
Investment in new projects would also be discouraged in this situation of greater uncertainty.5 
All in all, the demand for new borrowing in the economy would fall and, other things being 
equal, the excess supply of funds would exert further downward pressure on the real interest 
rate.  
More  specifically,  compared  with  the  rates  of  return  which  can  be  earned  under  normal 
conditions,  the  low  interest  rate  would  be  disadvantageous  for  savers  and  lenders,  and 
relatively  more  favourable  for  borrowers,  also  in  this  ideal  economy.  These  conditions, 
however,  would  not  be  the  result  of  a  special  monetary  policy  objective  favouring  one 
economic group over the other, but rather part of the automatic rebalancing of the economy 
after  the  recession.  Of  course,  relative  advantages  would  be  reversed  during  economic 
expansions, when real interest rates would become higher, to the relative benefit of savers 
as opposed to borrowers. On average, over many expansions and recessions, lenders and 
borrowers would be treated symmetrically.  
Let me emphasise that the scenario I just described is related to an ideal economy.  
Nevertheless, the described scenario mimics quite well actual developments since the Great 
Recession. From a qualitative perspective, therefore, a low-interest-rate environment is fully 
warranted in the real world as well. Had we at the ECB not pursued a policy of low interest 
rates, we would have impaired the fragile recovery of the European economy and delayed 
the return of real rates to levels motivated by genuine, sustainable growth. 
It remains unclear, though, whether actual interest rates in the real world are excessively low 
from a quantitative perspective. How can we assess whether this is the case? 
Once  again,  the  theoretical  natural  rate  benchmark  can  help  to  answer  this  question.  An 
economy in which nominal variables play no role is in fact equivalent to an economy in which 
inflation is always constant at zero. The natural rate benchmark therefore indicates the ideal 
interest  rate  setting  for  a  central  bank  aiming  to  maintain  price  stability  in  a  monetary 
economy.  Taking  a  Wicksellian  perspective,  policy  interest  rates  below  the  natural  level 
would  produce  inflationary  pressures,  while  higher  rates  would  push  the  economy  into 
deflation.  
It follows that a simple gauge of whether the level of actual policy interest rates is consistent 
with  an  ideal  natural  level,  or  instead  excessively  high  or  low,  is  to  look  at  inflation 
expectations. The latest ECB Staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area foresee a 
rate of annual inflation in 2014 of only 1.3%, down from 1.5% in 2013 – both rates somewhat 
below  our  own  definition  of  price  stability,  which  is  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  Inflation 
                                                
4  For a discussion of the determinants of saving during the Great Recession, see Mody, Sandri and Ohnsorge 
(2012)  “Precautionary  savings  in  the  Great  Recession”,  Voxeu,  http://www.voxeu.org/article/precautionary-
savings-great-recession. 
5  See N. Bloom, The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks, Econometrica, Vol. 77, No. 3 (May, 2009), 623–685. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
projections  therefore  do  not  support  the  hypothesis  that  ECB  policy  interest  rates  are 
excessively low.  
If anything, our staff estimates that real output in the euro area will contract by 0.4% in 2013, 
and  return  to  a  timid  1%  growth  in  2014,  justify  an  easing  bias  to  future  monetary  policy 
decisions.  
Such a bias is an integral part of the design of the recent and unanimous Governing Council 
decision to provide forward guidance. While our MRO rate is still strictly above its zero lower 
bound,  giving  us  some  scope  for  further  reductions  if  deemed  appropriate  in  the  light  of 
incoming economic and monetary data, our forward guidance is primarily intended to reduce 
uncertainty  about  future  policy  decisions.  This  act  of  policy  transparency  strengthens  the 
effectiveness  of  our  accommodative  policy  stance  by  exerting  downward  pressure  on 
medium-term interest rate expectations.6  
Heterogeneity across countries 
I have so far argued that ECB policy interest rates are appropriate for the euro area economy 
as  a  whole,  and  not  specifically  geared  to  improving  funding  conditions  for  borrowers.  In 
particular, ECB policy decisions over the past five years were dictated by the inflation outlook 
for the euro area, in line with past historical regularities in our interest rate settings.7  
The euro area average, however, is neither representative of the conditions prevailing in all 
Member  States,  nor  of  the  distribution  of  funding  costs  across  borrowers  within  countries. 
Especially since the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis, borrowing costs for private lenders 
have  become  increasingly  heterogeneous  across  countries  and  sectors.  Profitable  firms 
located  in  stressed  euro  area  economies  have  faced  increasing  funding  costs  as  the 
sovereign debt crisis has escalated, with small  and medium-sized firms hit harder. Only in 
some euro area countries have firms been able to take full advantage of the decline in key 
ECB interest rates. At the ECB, we have referred to this situation as “financial fragmentation” 
– that is, a type of financial disruption characterised by fault lines shaped by national borders, 
with  ramifications  within  national  borders,  capital  repatriation  and  sharp  increases  in  the 
home  bias  in  all  market  segments.  Financial  fragmentation  results  in  renationalisation  of 
savings, which in turn prevents euro area households and companies from reaping the full 
benefits of the single market for goods and services. 
For example, a consequence of this fragmentation is that the average cost of borrowing for 
non-financial  corporations  in  Germany  in  the  first  quarter  of  2013  was  slightly  more  than 
2.5% per year, while it was about 4% in Italy. This gap also reflects the limited pass-through 
of our policy decisions in stressed countries: the 75 basis point reduction in MRO between 
the  third  quarter  of  2011  and  the  first  quarter  of  2013  brought  about  a  100  basis  point 
reduction in the average cost of borrowing for non-financial corporations in Germany but only 
a 50 basis point reduction in Italy.8  
Within countries, our interest rate cuts have also benefited different firms to different extents, 
increasing  the  heterogeneity  of  borrowing  costs.  For  example,  in  Germany  since  January 
                                                
6  See 
Praet, 
also 
P. 
2013; 
http://www.voxeu.org/article/forward-guidance-and-ecb; and B. Cœuré, “The usefulness of forward guidance”, 
speech  given  before  the  Money  Marketeers  Club  of  New  York,  New  York,  26  September  2013; 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2013/html/sp130926_1.en.html. 
guidance 
“Forward 
August 
ECB”, 
Vox, 
and 
the 
6 
7  This statement can be corroborated by looking at the empirical relationship between key ECB interest rates 
and developments in inflation and other indicators of broad macroeconomic conditions, the so called “Taylor 
rules”, named after the economist John Taylor, who first analysed it in the early 1990s. 
8  See “Assessing the retail bank interest rate pass-through in the euro area at times of financial fragmentation” 
Monthly Bulletin, August 2013, European Central Bank. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2012 the interest rate on new loans to non-financial corporations (over 5 years’ duration) has 
dropped by about 81 basis points for smaller loans (up to €1 million) and by about 56 basis 
points  for  larger  loans  (down  to  280  and  283  basis  points  respectively).  For  Italy,  the 
reductions amount to about 29 basis points and 140 basis points respectively (down to 577 
and  353  basis  points  respectively).  So  while  larger  firms  in  stressed  countries  are 
experiencing improvements in their financing costs, smaller and medium-sized firms in these 
countries are still lagging behind.  
This  picture  of  heterogeneity  within  and  across  countries  can  be  linked  to  the  difficulties 
encountered  by  banks  during  the  financial  crisis.  The  dramatic  fall  in  asset  values 
experienced  during  the  crisis  has  worsened  the  balance  sheet  of  financial  intermediaries, 
leading  to  a  sharp  contraction  in  credit  in  a  number  of  euro  area  countries.  The  ensuing 
deflationary  pressure  has  further  exacerbated  the  balance  sheet  contraction  through  the 
Fisher effect on the real value of outstanding liabilities of banks.9  
There  is  a  two-way  relationship  between  financial  fragmentation  and  the  heterogeneity  in 
economic fundamentals across the euro area.  
We  have  observed  sharp  cross-country  dispersion  in  the  cumulated  changes  in  real  GDP 
since the start of the crisis. In 2012 the level of real GDP was around 20% lower than in 2007 
in the country most affected, while it was around 10% higher in the country least affected by 
the  crisis.  European  labour  markets  offer  a  similar,  well-known  picture.  The  diverging 
distribution  of  economic  and  financial  conditions  within  the  euro  area  has  mainly  been 
exacerbated by the ailing fiscal conditions at national level. In particular, banks’ funding costs 
have remained persistently high in some countries despite cuts in the ECB’s policy rate, in 
part reflecting fundamental- as well as non-fundamental risks associated with large sovereign 
debt. In stressed countries, the limited and costly availability of credit has further hampered 
hiring  and  investment,  while  in  the  other  countries,  borrowing  conditions  have  been 
favourable, making the fault line even deeper. 
Lenders  in  stressed  countries  as  well  as  savers  in  all  countries  have  suffered  from  the 
consequences  of  financial  fragmentation.  The  ensuing  flight  to  safety  has  led  to  soaring 
yields  and  lending  rates  in  stressed  countries.  But  the  resulting  excess  demand  for  safe 
assets  has  also  squeezed  yields  in  core  countries.  Therefore,  financial  fragmentation  has 
negatively  affected  both  borrowers  in  stressed peripheral  countries  and  savers  in  the  core 
euro area. 
Furthermore, a key ingredient in conducting a single monetary policy for several countries is 
capital  mobility.  Through  capital  mobility,  real  ex  ante  returns,  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
same consumption units, are equalised across countries. When this condition holds, there is 
only one reference Wicksellian natural rate against which we can assess the neutrality of our 
policy  stance.  When  financial  markets  are  fragmented,  the  efficient  allocation  of  capital 
across countries is impaired and monetary policy ceases to have a single reference rate to 
pursue: the natural rate itself is fragmented. 
In  this  light,  the  ECB,  acting  within  its  mandate,  has  had  to  re-establish  the  allocative 
efficiency  of  financial  markets.  Consequently,  we  have  implemented  a  number  of  non-
standard  monetary  policy  measures  specifically  designed  to  offset  financial  impairments. 
Such  measures  have  had  their  effects,  mainly  by  boosting  the  ability  of  the  financial 
intermediation  sector  to  provide  funds  to  households  and  firms.  The  revitalisation  of  local 
financial  conditions  has  significantly  reduced  euro-area  financial  fragmentation,  thus 
repairing  the  transmission  channel  of  standard  monetary  policy.  By  lowering  short-term 
interest rates and signalling, through forward guidance, our willingness to keep rates low for 
                                                
9  See  M.  Brunnermeier  and  Y.  Sannikov,  “The  I  Theory  of  Money”,  unpublished  working  paper,  Princeton 
University (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
an extended period of time, we are aiming to reactivate the real economy and to avoid the 
deflationary pressures that can undermine the fragile recovery of the financial intermediaries. 
In this respect, it has been argued that reducing fragmentation can imply a redistribution of 
risk  in  times  of  crisis,  and further,  that  it  is the redistribution  of  risks  that  makes  monetary 
policy  effective.10  For  example,  by  relaxing  collateral  requirements  for  their  lending 
programmes,  central  banks  can  insure  against  a  tail  event  in  which  the  borrower  and  the 
collateral fail to cover the borrowed amount. The main insight here is that the redistribution of 
risk  is  not  a  zero-sum  game,  but  that  the  overall  risk  in  the  economy,  in  our  case  in  the 
monetary union, can be reduced. I agree with this view, but I  would like to stress that the 
redistribution  of  risks  is  only  a  means  to  an  end  –  achieving  price  stability.  And  any  such 
insurance provided by the central bank should come with appropriate safeguards to mitigate 
moral hazard, or we would be trading short term stability against long term instability. 
In terms of impact on our balance sheet, our main non-standard measure is represented by 
the unlimited provision of liquidity at maturities up to three years and the enlargement of the 
set of eligible collateral within our risk control framework. Banks’ recourse to ECB’s unlimited 
provision of liquidity has been particularly intense in countries under pressure in sovereign 
bond markets. This measure has helped to ease bank funding constraints. In countries facing 
stress  in  sovereign  bond  markets,  this  has  made  it  possible  for  banks  to  ease  lending 
standards and foster better credit conditions for borrowers. 
In  parallel  to  the  unlimited  provision  of  liquidity  to  banks,  we  have  designed  our  Outright 
Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  programme  to  rule  out  self-fulfilling,  deflationary  equilibria 
associated  with  unjustified  fears  of  currency  redenomination.  The  OMT  programme  has 
successfully  contributed  to  the  normalisation  of  Europe’s  financial  market  and  largely 
restored  the  attractiveness  of  a  broader  set  of  saving  opportunities.  Thanks  to  the 
introduction of the OMT, the strong divergence in funding costs across countries has been to 
some extent reduced. The reduction in sovereign risk premia towards levels consistent with 
economic fundamentals can generate positive dynamics; first and foremost by improving the 
balance sheet of sovereign bondholders (in particular banks). These bondholders, in turn, will 
see  their  creditworthiness  increase  and,  at  the  same  time,  be  able  to  invest  in  riskier,  yet 
more profitable, projects. Therefore, while our non-standard measures were designed for the 
euro area as a whole, their use has varied among counterparties and across countries. In 
this  regard,  our  non-standard  measures  have  helped  restore  the  distributional  neutrality  of 
our monetary policy by mitigating distortions in certain asset classes or sectors. Their impact 
has  prevented  extreme  economic  outcomes  for  certain  sectors  and  countries.  However, 
permitting  cross-country  divergences  to  linger  bears  the  risk  of  turning  temporary  wounds 
into permanent scars, thus undermining the effectiveness of a single monetary policy for our 
monetary union in the long run.  
That  said,  there  is  only  so  much  that  the  central  bank  can  do.  Many  sources  of  financial 
impairment  have  a  structural  nature,  having  to  do  with  lack  of  convergence  across 
economies,  exposure  of  banks  to  sovereign  credit  risk  and  vice-versa,  and  regulatory  and 
supervisory ring fencing. The ECB cannot support the solvency of profligate sovereigns, nor 
can it build up the capital of banks that have extended unprofitable loans, or the own funds of 
companies  whose  business  models  have  become  outdated.  This  is  about  generating  and 
allocating of capital in the economy, a task that does not belong to the central bank remit and 
which ultimately determines the natural rate of interest and the distribution of wealth between 
borrowers and savers. 
                                                
10  See M. Brunnermeier, and Y. Sannikov, 2012. “Redistributive Monetary Policy”, paper prepared for the 2012 
Jackson Hole Symposium, Princeton University. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusions 
Let me now conclude.  
Five years of financial crisis and economic contraction have had far reaching implications for 
the euro area. 
First, the deep recession in the euro area has been manifested in low asset returns or, more 
generally,  poor  investment  opportunities.  In  such  an  environment,  looser  monetary  policy 
conditions are the necessary response to bring the economy back on to a sustainable growth 
path  in  an  environment  of  price  stability.  Far  from  helping  savers,  higher  monetary  policy 
interest  rates  would  only  have  depressed  the  economy  further,  delayed  the  recovery  and 
contributed to downside risks to price stability. Additionally, asset returns would have been 
dampened for longer with negative implications to the net wealth of savers. 
Second, borrowers in stressed countries as well as savers in all countries have suffered from 
the  consequences  of  financial  fragmentation.  The  ensuing  flight  to  safety  has  led  to 
(i) soaring yields and lending rates in stressed peripheral countries, and (ii) squeezed yields 
in core countries. As a result, financial fragmentation has negatively affected both borrowers 
in stressed peripheral countries and lenders in the core euro area. Therefore, non-standard 
monetary policies, which aim at improving the transmission of monetary policy by reducing 
financial fragmentations in the euro area, have mitigated the negative implications of financial 
fragmentation on both borrowers and lenders. 
Third, the economic contraction has been accompanied by rising unemployment and lower 
incomes. Undoubtedly, the pain has not been evenly shared. The distribution of income has 
widened in the euro area as well as in other OECD countries, with poorer households and 
young people being hit harder.11  
However, it is not the mandate of the ECB, or of any modern central bank, to address rising 
inequalities or to steer the distribution of income, whether between rich and poor or between 
lenders and borrowers. Our mandate is to preserve price stability. This is our contribution to 
the efficient working of our market economy. In the current phase of the European business 
cycle,  characterised  by  disruptions  and  fragmentation  in  euro  area  financial  markets,  our 
mandate  is  best  served  by  tackling  the  malfunctioning  of  markets  and  ensuring  a 
homogeneous  and  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy  across  sectors  and  countries. 
Any re-distributional effect of our policies must be read as a means to an end that is price 
stability.12 These effects are bound to be temporary, as such are the real effects of monetary 
policy interventions. In the long run, real rates are determined by natural economic forces, by 
productivity-enhancing  public  intervention  and  by  the  quality  of  our  market  institutions  that 
are beyond the reach of monetary authorities.  
Looking forward, the welfare of euro area savers will depend on efforts to reduce financial 
fragmentation by building a proper banking union, with its supervision and resolution arms, 
by  strengthening  euro  area  governance  and  by  enforcing  rules  that  ensure  that  member 
countries run sustainable policies. It will depend on efforts to lift productivity by investing in 
technologies and skills – more than on any decision the ECB has taken and will take in the 
future. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
11  See OECD, 2013. “Crisis squeezes income and puts pressure on inequality and poverty”, New Results from 
the OECD Income Distribution Database, 15 May 2013. 
12  See my speech: “Monetary policy in a fragmented world” delivered at the 41st Economics Conference of the 
Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  Vienna,  10  June  2013,  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2013/html/ 
sp130610.en.html 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
