Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 30 October 2013. 
 Today, on 30 October 2013, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  most  recent  monetary  and 
economic  developments  in  Albania,  and  following  the  discussions  on  their  outlook,  the 
Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, 
at 3.5%. 
The Council notes that the inflationary pressures deriving from the real and financial sectors 
of the economy are weak and will continue to remain so. These circumstances require the 
stimulating  monetary  policy  to  persist  in  the  period  ahead.  The  monetary  stimulus, 
transmitted through the low key interest rate and continuous injection of liquidity, provides the 
required conditions for meeting our medium-term inflation target. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
 The  Albanian  economy  was  characterised  by  slow  economic  growth  and  weak  inflationary 
pressures throughout 2013. Economic growth slowed down to 1.1% in the second quarter, 
while available information suggests weak economic activity will continue in the third quarter. 
The  weak  private  demand  offset  the  increasing  positive  impulses  generated  by  the  fiscal 
stimulus  and  foreign  demand,  in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  Consumption  and  private  sector 
investments  were  weak,  whereas  foreign  demand  continued  to  slow  down,  given  the 
economic situation in our trading partner countries. 
The private agents’ uncertainty about the future was reflected in low propensity to spend and 
weak credit demand. This uncertainty prevented the transmission of the monetary stimulus to 
the  economy.  Moreover,  banking  system  conservative  policies  maintained  the  lending 
standards  tight,  and  prevented  the  normal  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. 
Against this backdrop, economic and financial stability of the country was preserved. Private 
agents’ expectations on inflation were anchored around Bank of Albania’s target, showing a 
good  perception  of  monetary  policy  signals,  and  effective  communication  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania.  The  banking  system  remains  sound  and  well  capitalised  with  ample  liquidity  to 
ensure  the  return  of  financial  intermediation  to  adequate  levels,  in  spite  of  credit  quality-
related problems. 
Average  annual  inflation  continued  the  decelerating  trend  in  the  third  quarter,  settling  at 
1.5%. The profile of inflation was determined almost entirely by the contribution of inflation 
from prices of agricultural products. 
Beyond the seasonal effect related to satisfying demand with domestic agricultural produce, 
these prices fell thanks to the drop in import prices for processed foodstuff in the countries of 
origin.  Prices  of  other  consumer  goods  categories  provided  low  contribution  to  headline 
inflation, hence offsetting each other. 
Low  inflation  rates,  especially  in  the  long-term  component,  point  to  the  presence  of  the 
negative  output  gap.  The  weak  domestic  demand  has  created  spare  capacities  in  the 
economy,  and  has  led  to  weak  pressures  for  higher  production  costs  and  wages. 
Additionally,  stable  prices  and  exchange  rates  in  global  markets  resulted  in  contained 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
pressures  from  imported  inflation. Developments  in  the  real  economy,  especially  the  weak 
domestic demand and low monetary expansion, will condition low inflation rates to continue 
even  in  the  period  ahead.  Inflation  expectations  remain  anchored  and  in  line  with  price 
stability. 
During the second quarter, economic growth was driven by public sector demand, whereas 
other components were weak. Though higher than in the first quarter, consumer spending 
did not manage to provide significant contribution to economic growth. The performance of 
this domestic demand component continues to be affected by high uncertainties and limited 
financing resources. 
Against the low consumer demand, presence of spare capacities, and relatively tight lending 
standards, private investments remained low.  
Developments  in  fiscal  indicators  during  the  first  nine  months  of  the  year  point  to  a 
stimulating  fiscal  policy,  especially  in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  Stimulating  features  were 
present both in terms of expenditure and revenues. During this period, budget expenditure 
increased  8.3%  from  a  year  earlier,  driven  by  both  current  and  capital  expenditure.  At  the 
same  time,  revenues  marked  a  4%  annual  decrease,  reflecting  the  decline  in  most  of  its 
constituent  items.  The  performance  of  revenues  and  expenditure  led  to  the  budget  deficit 
amounting about 1.25 times higher than a year earlier, most of which was funded through 
domestic long-term instruments. Budget deficit dynamics was reflected in further expansion 
of public debt.  
Data from the external sector of the economy show that foreign demand, net, was weak in 
the  second  quarter.  Real  exports,  net,  narrowed  by  1.5%  during  this  period,  contributing 
negatively to aggregate demand. 
Their performance was determined simultaneously by increase in imports and deceleration of 
exports, in real terms. Foreign trade data for goods, for July-August, reveal that trade deficit 
narrowed 15.1% in annual nominal terms, during this period. Exports surged 15.8% during 
this period in annual terms, whereas imports dropped 3.0%.  
Financial markets continue to reflect low risk and inflation premia. In the interbank market, 
trading  volume  increased  and  interest  rates  fell,  showing  lower  volatility.  In  the  primary 
market,  yields  fell  further,  especially  on  securities  with  longer  term  to  maturity.  The  yields 
curve  moved  downward  and  its  slope  was  reduced.  Interest  rates  continued  to  fall  in  the 
deposits market, while, in August, interest rates on credits fell as well. In spite of this, credit 
performance was weak during these months.  
Following  the  persisting  deceleration  over  the  first  half  of  the  year,  private  sector  credit 
contracted  in  July  and  August.  As  at  end-August,  it  stood  2.0%  lower  than  a  year  earlier. 
Credit performance reflected the weak credit demand from both businesses and households, 
as well as the tight standards of the credit supply.  
In the last months, a positive factor observed, and encouraged by the Bank of Albania was 
the write-off of non-performing loans having no hope of recovery from banks balance sheets. 
Beyond its statistical effect in the short run, cleaning the banks’ balance sheets is part of a 
complex process of non-performing loan portfolio management. 
If  implemented  efficiently  and  actively,  in  the  long  run,  this  process  may  establish  the 
premises to release lending capacities in the economy and recover healthy credit increase. 
The  monetary  indicators  analysis  attests  to  weak  monetary  inflation  pressures  in  the 
economy.  Annual  growth  of  monetary  supply  decelerated  significantly,  to  2.7%  in  August. 
The  deceleration  was  driven  by  the  weaker  performance  of  foreign  currency  inflows  and 
lower demand for borrowing from the private sector. On the other hand, increased lending to 
the public sector through the banks supported the growth of money in the economy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Economic growth is expected to be weak for the rest of the year, in the presence of sluggish 
foreign demand and absence of the fiscal stimulus. Meanwhile, available data insofar do not 
signal recovery of consumption or investments in the near future. 
Below-potential  growth  of  the  economy  will  condition  contained  consumer  price  rise  in  the 
period  ahead.  In  the  absence  of  unexpected  supply-side  shocks,  one-year  ahead  annual 
inflation is expected to range between 0.4%–3.1%, with 90% probability. 
Taking into account the above forecasts, the stimulating nature of the monetary policy will 
continue  in  the  quarters  ahead.  The  Bank  of  Albania  will  continue  to  supply  the  banking 
system with adequate liquidity for the smooth functioning of financial markets. 
 At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest 
rate  unchanged,  at  3.5%.  The  Supervisory  Council  deems  that  the  current  monetary 
conditions are adequate to meet our medium-term inflation target, and provide the monetary 
stimulus necessary to recover the domestic private demand.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
