Emsley Tromp: The significance of innovation for the central bank 
against the background of a changing kingdom 
Speech by Dr Emsley Tromp, President of the Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten, at 
the National Economic Forum, organized by Fundashon Pro Inovashon Nashonal, Curaçao, 
14 October 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
Fundashon  Pro  Inovashon  Nashonal  has  made  an  excellent  choice  in  recognizing  the 
importance  of  innovation  in  tonight’s  event.1  The  world  in  which  we  live  is  changing  in 
fundamental ways, and our traditional models for understanding it no longer work very well. 
Innovation  can  provide  us  with  new  models  for  adapting  to  our  changing  world.  We  all 
experience innovation in our day-to-day lives without being fully aware of its significance, its 
potential, and its challenges. 
What  is  innovation?  The  Conference  Board  of  Canada  defines  innovation  as  “the  process 
through  which  economic  and  social  value  is  extracted  from  knowledge  through  the 
generation,  development,  and  implementation  of  ideas  to  produce  new  or  improved 
strategies,  capabilities,  products,  services,  or  processes.”  Simply  put,  innovation  can  be 
described as the introduction of something new. The something new can be a new idea, a 
new device, or a new method of doing something. Something new does not necessarily have 
to be something entirely new; it can be an improvement of something that already exists. In 
addition, innovations can be tangible or intangible. Tangible innovations include, for example, 
new  or  improved  products,  such  as  a  tablet  computer,  a  smart  phone,  and  LED  bulbs. 
Examples  of  intangible  innovations  include  new  or  improved  computer  programs,  and 
business,  industrial,  and  biotechnology  processes.  A  new  product  or  process  cannot 
automatically  be  considered  an  innovation.  An  innovation  must  contribute  to  something 
useful, such as increasing productivity, reducing costs, improving our health, protecting the 
environment, or using fewer fossil fuels. We also must realize that a successful innovation in 
one  country,  industry,  or  company  does  not  automatically  translate  into  success  when 
applied  in  another  country,  industry,  or  company.  Different  circumstances  will  produce 
different results, one of which can be failure. 
Therefore,  it  is  very  important  to  make  sure  that  the  necessary  conditions  exist  or  can  be 
created  to  increase  the  chance  that  innovations  will  produce  the  desired  results.  I  see  an 
important role for Fundashon Pro Inovashon Nashonal in promoting research and increasing 
awareness among the government, the business community, and the general public to make 
innovation a conscious part of our lives. This awareness will contribute to a strengthening of 
our  competitiveness  and,  hence,  to  higher  economic  growth  and  prosperity  for  our  young 
country. 
My address tonight consists of two rather different parts. First, I would like to discuss with 
you the role of innovation in the central bank. As a central banker, this is a topic that is close 
to my heart. Second, I would like to share some of my thoughts on necessary innovations in 
the  relations  between  the  four  countries  comprising  the  Kingdom  of  the  Netherlands  to 
improve the Kingdom’s functioning in a mutually beneficial way. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in the central bank, innovation plays a role from things as basic as 
the central bank’s office operations to new ways of fulfilling our main tasks laid down in the 
Central  Bank  Charter. In  our general  office  operations,  we  are  constantly  seeking  ways  to 
reduce  costs.  Some  recent  examples  are  internet  phone  services,  the  replacement  of 
                                                
1  
It would be remiss if I did not mention the establishment of Innovatie Centrum Curacao in 1991. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
fluorescent light bulbs by LED light bulbs, and the placement of solar panels. Furthermore, 
as  we  are  the  central  bank  of  Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten,  we  have  to  meet  regularly  with 
financial institutions and government departments in Sint Maarten and Curacao. Innovation 
has made it possible, where and when appropriate, to reduce our travel expenses by video 
conferencing using Skype. 
The  internet  has  become  essential  in  dealing  with  the  financial  institutions  under  our 
supervision and international organizations, such as the IMF. The banking institutions report 
all required data through a secured website of the central bank. 
From  there  the  data  are  uploaded  to  our  systems  for  further  processing.  Also  our  data-
reporting obligations for the IMF are met by uploading the data to a secure IMF website. In 
addition,  most  of  our  business  contacts  are  handled  through  e-mail.  These  examples 
demonstrate  that  we  have  made  significant  progress  in  reducing  costs  and  improving 
efficiency by using new techniques (innovations) now available to us. 
Innovation is also a driving force in effectively fulfilling the main tasks of the central bank. In 
article 3 of the Central Bank Charter, these tasks are defined as (1) promoting the stability of 
the currency, (2) promoting the soundness of the financial system, and (3) promoting a safe 
and efficient payments system. Let me elaborate on the role of innovation for each of these 
tasks beginning with the third one – promoting a safe and efficient payments system. 
A  safe  and  efficient  payments  system  has  two  parts:  the  cash  system  and  the  noncash 
system. The role of the central bank in the cash system is to issue and bring into circulation 
bank notes and coins. Innovation plays a major role in the design and composition of bank 
notes. Security features to minimize counterfeiting are constantly evolving. Also the materials 
of which bank notes are made are evolving to prolong durability and, hence, reduce the cost 
per  note.  For  example,  bank  notes  made  of  polymers,  better  known  as  plastic,  instead  of 
paper  are gaining ground  and  were  recently  introduced  in  Canada.  Also  the processing of 
used bank notes has become fully automated. We have a sophisticated machine that selects 
bank  notes  still  fit  for  circulation  and  bank  notes  to  be  destroyed  based  on  set  quality 
parameters. Innovation contributes to new machines that work faster and make fewer errors. 
The Bank is currently evaluating all those new features to include in the long overdue new 
bank notes. The current paralyses in the decision-making with regard to the new bank notes 
are causing unnecessary risks to the current system. 
The noncash payments system comprises cheques, written bank transfers, and all electronic 
payments such as the use of debit cards, credit cards, and internet banking. The transactions 
between clients of different banks are cleared daily through the central bank. This process is 
largely automated through the Netherlands Antilles Clearing system (NACS), which all local 
banks  (including  those  on  the  BES  islands)  are  connected  to.  The  system  is  updated 
regularly  by  adding  new  functionalities  with  the  aim  of  a  fully  automated  clearing  process. 
Noteworthy is that the local banks have indicated that they want to gradually phase out the 
use  of  cheques,  which  require  very  costly  and  labor-intensive  processing,  and  phase  in 
electronic  forms  of  payment.  We  welcome  this  development.  The  central  bank  also 
supervises  the  payment  systems  at  the  individual  banks  to  make  sure  that  they  meet 
international standards for security and reliability. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the task of promoting the stability of the currency – the first main task 
in the Central Bank-Charter – is executed by the central bank’s monetary policy. The fixed 
peg  of  the  Netherlands  Antillean  guilder  to  the  US  dollar  can  be  maintained  only  by 
guaranteeing  that  sufficient foreign exchange  is always  available  to  settle  our  international 
payments. Our benchmark is foreign exchange reserves sufficient to cover at least 3 months 
of  goods  and  services  imports.  This  brings  me  to  a  simple  explanation  of  the  monetary 
transmission mechanism: if the banks extend more credit, the result will be more spending, 
more imports, and the use of more foreign exchange, which ultimately could lead to a decline 
in  foreign  exchange  reserves.  The  central  bank’s  monetary  policy  tries  to  influence  the 
growth  rate  of  credit  extension  by  the  banks  to  reverse  a  downward  trend  in  foreign 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
exchange reserves to prevent the reserves from reaching a level at which the stability of the 
peg is questioned. 
During the past decades, the main innovation in the central bank’s monetary policy has been 
a  shift  from  direct  credit  controls  to  liquidity-driven  instruments.  Before  the  1990s,  credit 
ceilings were applied to control credit growth at the commercial banks. In the nineties, these 
ceilings  were  replaced  by  a  more  flexible  credit  measure,  the  monetary  cash  reserve 
arrangement. For example, excess credit growth was allowed but at a penalty, and unused 
growth  margins  could  be  traded  among  banks.  Nevertheless,  prolonged  use  of  credit 
measures  causes  rigidities  in  the  banks’  balance  sheets  and  hampers  new  banks  from 
expanding,  thereby  stifling  competition  in  the  banking  sector.  Also  in  the  nineties,  the  first 
steps  towards  liquidity  driven  instruments  were  taken  with  the  introduction  of  the  reserve 
requirement and auctions of certificates of deposit (CDs). Under the reserve requirement, the 
banks have to hold a blocked non-interest-bearing deposit at the central bank determined as 
a percentage of their domestic liabilities, limiting their access to liquidity for credit extension. 
The  reserve  requirement  was  supplemented  by  the  bi-weekly  auctioning  of  CDs,  tradable 
interest-bearing  securities,  to  steer  banking  liquidity  during  the  fixed  reserve  requirement 
period.  As  of  the  beginning  of  this  century,  the  reserve  requirement  and  the  auctioning  of 
CDs became the central bank’s main monetary policy instruments. 
The  reserve  requirement  and  CD  auctions  worked  well  under  normal  circumstances. 
However, the debt relief provided by the Dutch government during 2009 and 2010 as part of 
the constitutional reforms caused significant excess liquidity in the banking sector. In the year 
after the debt relief, the unsustainable high deficit on the current account of the balance of 
payments again became prominent, combined with high credit growth and a declining trend 
in foreign exchange reserves and the import coverage. These developments prompted the 
central bank to tighten its monetary policy by increasing the reserve requirement beginning 
September  2011.  Given  the  high  excess  liquidity,  the  increase  of  the  reserve  requirement 
was not effective in reducing credit growth and, hence, moderating the decline in our foreign 
exchange  reserves.  That’s  why  we  temporarily  revived  the  credit  control  measure  as  of 
March 2012. 
This action has proven successful in attaining our monetary objectives. In February 2012 our 
balance of payments recorded a deficit of over NAf 500 million; today, as a consequence of 
those credit control measures, the deficit stands at NAf 62.6 million. 
Ladies and gentlemen, innovation is not always easy. Fear of the unknown often generates 
resistance  to  new  ideas.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  create  an  environment  conducive  to 
innovation by creating champions to help overcome resistance. 
We live in a period of Unconventional Monetary Policy. To quote Jean-Claude Trichet2 the 
former  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank:  “…we  all  have  had,  since  mid-2007,  the 
great privilege to experience extraordinary demanding and difficult times…” He went on to 
say:  “The  widespread  introduction  of  so-called  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  by 
major central banks has been a defining characteristics of the global financial crisis.” Most of 
my professional life I spent thinking and practicing monetary policy. The basic tenet of my 
thesis  was  that  in  a  small  open  economy  as  ours,  fiscal  consolidation  is  an  indispensible 
condition for monetary stability. The debt relief program in the context of the constitutional 
changes was the fulfilment of that expectation. However, suddenly in the blink of an eye, the 
market for government bonds dried up, depriving the Bank of an important policy instrument, 
namely,  the  ability  to conduct monetary  policy  through  open market  operations. To fill that 
vacuum,  we  embarked  on  the  development  of  the  corporate  bond  market.  While  the 
                                                
2   Unconventional Monetary Policy Measures: Principles-Conditions-Raison d’être. Speech delivered at the IJCB 
conference “Central Banking: Before, During, and After the Crisis” held on March 23–24, 2012 at the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, DC. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
corporate  bond  market  has  been  gaining  new  momentum  elsewhere,  the  development  is 
being viewed with apprehension here. It baffles the mind to observe that in the aftermath of 
the Great Recession of 2008, there are still some people who advocate strict adherence to 
conventional monetary policy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me expand on how innovation relates to the final main task of the 
central bank – promoting the soundness of the financial system—which is the responsibility 
of  our  prudential  supervision.  The global financial  crisis  has  triggered  major  innovations  in 
financial sector supervision. These innovations should minimize the chance that such a crisis 
would happen again in the future, and they comprise not only reforms in financial regulation 
in areas such as capital, liquidity, provisioning, accounting, and compensation, but also and 
more important, a more comprehensive macro approach to supervision. 
The financial crisis revealed several weaknesses in the way supervision was executed pre-
crisis. These weaknesses included, first, a backward-looking approach that focused on the 
financial  institutions’  historic  data.  The  second  weakness  was  an  overreliance  on  financial 
firms’  own  risk  analyses  and  internal  controls.  Third,  new  complex  financial  products  and 
their risks were not fully understood. Fourth, the general microprudential approach that was 
used  focused  on  individual,  regulated  entities,  and  not  enough  attention  was  paid  to  the 
sector as a whole or to risks from outside the regulated system. The fifth weakness was a 
hesitation to act quickly when the first signs of undesirable developments were detected. 
Modern  post-crisis  supervision  is  focused  on  risk  management,  a  system-wide  approach, 
and coordination between prudential, monetary, and macroeconomic frameworks. This new 
macroprudential  approach  will  complement  the  traditional  microprudential  supervision.  For 
optimal coordination between micro- and macroprudential supervision, these functions ideally 
should be under one roof. In our central bank, this is already the case. I modestly have to 
admit that this arrangement is not because we had a great vision of what the future would 
call  for,  but  rather,  for  economies  of  scale.  Due  to  our  small  scale,  it  is  much  more  cost 
efficient  and  effective  to  concentrate  the  supervision  of  the  entire  financial  sector  at  the 
central bank instead of separating it among different agencies. 
Macroprudential  policies  are  directed  at  achieving  greater  financial  stability.  An  important 
element  of 
to  get  a  good 
understanding  of  the  risks  building  up  in  financial  institutions  and  the  sector  as  a  whole. 
These analyses are forward-looking, and they include simulations of the impact of economic 
shocks  on  the  soundness  of  the financial  sector  and  its  institutions,  so-called  stress  tests. 
Based  on  the  results  of  these  tests,  macroprudential  policies  are  developed  aimed  at 
strengthening the resilience of the financial sector against shocks. 
Macroprudential tools are typically counter-cyclical, building buffers in good times to absorb 
losses in bad times. These tools can be divided between tools to influence lenders’ behavior, 
such as cyclical capital requirements, leverage ratios, and dynamic provisioning, and tools to 
influence  borrowers’  behavior,  such  as  ceilings  on  loan-to-value  ratios  that  determine  the 
maximum  loan  amount  relative  to  the  value  of  real  estate,  and  debt-to-income  ratios  that 
determine  the  maximum  allowed  amount  of  accumulated  debt  relative  to  the  income  of  a 
borrower.  Given  their  characteristics,  these  tools  also  can  complement  the  available 
monetary policy tools to achieve the monetary objectives of the central bank. 
The  central  bank  adopted  this  broader  approach  to  financial  sector  supervision  with  the 
establishment  of  a  Financial  Stability  department  in  July  of  this  year.  During  this  year  and 
next year, the department will be built up to full strength to give financial stability a prominent 
place within the Bank’s organization. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  devote  the  final  part  of  my  address  to  an  entirely 
different topic from that of the central bank, namely, my view of some necessary innovations 
in the relations between the Kingdom partners. I think this is a proper moment after we have 
just celebrated the third anniversary of the country status of Curaçao and Sint Maarten in the 
Kingdom of the Netherlands. 
the  macroprudential  approach 
is  conducting  analyses 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Three  years  of  new  constitutional  relations  have  been  overshadowed  by frequent  tensions 
between  the  new  Kingdom  partners  and  the  Netherlands.  These  tensions  included  the 
intended  limitations  on  settlement  in  the  Netherlands  for  citizens  from  the  Caribbean 
Kingdom  partners  and  instructions  by  the  Kingdom  Council  of  Ministers  to  balance  the 
government  budget  and  improve  public  governance.  During  these  periods  of  tensions, 
emotional  calls  to  leave  the  Kingdom  and  become  independent  usually  arise.  These 
incidents  demonstrate  that  we  are  still  searching  for  an  acceptable  balance  between  the 
autonomy of the countries and the responsibilities of the Kingdom for safeguarding human 
rights, the rule of law, and good governance. 
As mentioned in my introduction, we are living in a changing world that includes a changing 
Kingdom.  We  tend  to  assume  that  Holland  is  a  static  country  about  which  we  know 
everything there is to know. We forget that over the past two decades, Holland has changed 
as  much  as  any  region  in  the  world.  The  European  Union  has  been  created  and  has 
expanded beyond Western Europe to bring in diverse new members. In many ways, Holland 
is now a very different place. This new reality, I think, requires a different mindset. It requires 
a more sophisticated understanding of the complexity of this change. We need stewardship 
based  on  a  society  that  has  to  understand  its  responsibilities  and  not  be  rushed  into  rash 
decisions, which can only isolate us and make us very vulnerable. We have to engage this 
changing Holland rather than react defensively to it. We have to restore a confident, forward-
leaning country and not become hunkered down behind cultural walls. If a problem arises, 
we do not have to fight the problem but rather, we have to understand the problem and solve 
it. Instead of looking through one end of the telescope, both sides tend to look through the 
other end at a myriad of little problems. 
In my  opinion,  some  innovations  are  necessary in  the  way  we  deal  with  each  other  in  the 
Kingdom to improve the functioning of the new constitutional structure. In this context, it is 
important to realize that although we are equal partners in the Kingdom, we are not similar. 
The Netherlands has a long tradition as a democratic constitutional and welfare state and a 
much larger population and economy than the  Caribbean Kingdom partners. For example, 
the  combined  population  of  the  Caribbean  Kingdom  partners  is  less  than  2%  of  the 
population of the Netherlands, while the combined economies are less than 1% in terms of 
GDP. This asymmetric reality has created a cultural misunderstanding which has led us to an 
excessively one-directional reliance on Holland to solve problems that are deeply rooted and 
not fully understood. A great deal of time and patience will be required to work out a more 
balanced relationship. 
Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten  are  microstates,  but they  have  to  build  up  and  maintain  all  the 
institutions necessary to function as a democratic constitutional state. This institution building 
began  only  three  years  ago  in  Sint  Maarten.  Curaçao  has  a  longer  tradition  in  this  area 
because  the  former  central  government  was  concentrated  in  Willemstad,  but  it  is  still 
struggling to merge the central and island administrations. Moreover, the distance between 
politicians,  civil  servants,  and  citizens  is  much  smaller  than  in  the  Netherlands.  These 
differences imply that the strength of governance can never meet the standards common in 
the Netherlands. However, we have to be mindful of the dangers of exceeding the limits of 
this  argument.  Recent  events  have  reminded  us  that  self-serving  arguments  can  extract  a 
huge historic price. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  tend  to  recur  too  frequently  to  international  law  and  regulation 
standards  when  calling  for  necessary  improvements  in  the  Caribbean  Kingdom  partners. 
However,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  domestic  moods  are  driven  by  where  the  shoe 
pinches,  and  they  can  be  exaggerated  by  fears  and  ignorance.  Therefore,  local  capacity 
limitations and differences in culture must be taken into account. 
I think we can work together in the Kingdom in a constructive way that will produce additional 
benefits  for  all  individual  partners  and  for  the  Kingdom  in  its  entirety.  To  achieve  that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
constructive working relationship, some innovations are required in the relations between the 
Kingdom partners that take into account our differences. 
The bottom line is, we have to act together in some systematic way. As became abundantly 
clear  during  the  last  visit  of  Prime  Minister  Mark  Rutte,  we  have  to  generate  a  shared 
strategic direction. We have to find an equitable balance between the sharing of decisions 
and the sharing of burdens. We have to define goals that are not just self-serving but which 
address  the  larger  dimensions  of  the  Kingdom. Here  is  where  innovations  at  the  Kingdom 
level have to play a pivotal role. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  innovation  is  an  ongoing  process  that  influences  our  daily  lives 
whether we like it or not. We can’t and shouldn’t hide from innovation but rather, we should 
embrace it to improve the way we live, work, run our country, and shape our future. I wish 
you some inspiring and fruitful workshops in the days ahead to make innovation a way of life. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
