John Murray: Price puzzles and the exchange rate 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  Mount  Allison 
University, Sackville, New Brunswick, 19 November 2013. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Thank you for having me here today. 
I expect that in New Brunswick you are well aware that there are large and persistent gaps 
between  the  prices  charged  in  the  United  States  and  in  Canada  for  similar  goods.  Many 
Canadians feel the same way. 
We can’t blame Canadian consumers for being both puzzled and annoyed. Isn’t free trade 
supposed to close this price gap? Shouldn’t competitive market forces cause domestic and 
foreign  prices  to  converge?  And  if  prices  can’t  move,  shouldn’t  our  flexible  exchange  rate 
adjust  to  offset  any  differences?  And,  finally,  if  neither  prices  nor  the  exchange  rate  are 
moving to close these gaps, is something wrong with the system? 
These are good questions, and they deserve good answers. In my speech today, I’ll try to 
provide  them.  But  I  face  two  challenges.  First,  there  is  a  great  deal  that  remains  to  be 
learned,  so  I  won’t  be  able  to  provide  complete  and  conclusive  answers.  Second,  I  don’t 
have enough time to adequately review everything that has been learned, so I’ll have to hit 
the highlights. 
Let’s first get a sense of what we’re dealing with. 
How egregiously is the law of one price being violated? 
Let’s start with what things would look like in a perfect world. 
In a fully competitive world, free of impediments to trade, one would expect to see what we 
economists call the law  of one price (LOP) enforced. Cross-border arbitrage would ensure 
that  the  prices  of  identical  goods  sold  at  home  and  abroad,  and  expressed  in  a  common 
currency, were the same. 
To what extent has this “law” been observed? 
Chart  1  shows  two  different  measures  of  the  price  gaps  between  Canada  and  the  United 
States. The first compares the cost of living in the two countries over the past 30 years. This 
is  a  less-stringent  condition  than  the  LOP,  since  it  doesn’t  test  whether  the  same  price  is 
observed in Canada and the United States on each and every good, but rather whether the 
general level of prices in the two countries is the same. 
To do this, it compares the cost of a similar basket of consumer goods and services north 
and south of the border. If the levels of the aggregate consumer price indexes (CPIs) were 
found to be the same, adjusted for the US$/Can$ exchange rate, the blue shaded area in 
Chart  1  would  collapse  to  a  single  flat  line  and  lie  on  the  zero  axis.1  In  other  words,  the 
purchasing  power  of  the  Canadian  dollar  in  each  country  would  have  been  equalized.  For 
this  reason,  the  relationship  is  often  referred  to  as  the  purchasing-power-parity  (PPP) 
condition. 
                                                
1   The price gap – or the shaded blue area – in Chart 1 is defined as the ratio of Canadian to U.S. CPI (the U.S. 
CPI converted to Canadian dollars) benchmarked to 2007 using the Bank’s Internet survey. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The second measure in Chart 1, shown as a series of black Xs, reflects data that the Bank of 
Canada  has  been  tracking  since  2002.  It  compares  the  posted  prices  on  the  Internet  of 
roughly 150 different goods in Canada and the United States.2  
Although differences exist between the two measures, the picture that emerges in both cases 
is similar, and seemingly incriminating. The lines are not where they are supposed to be and 
the deviations from PPP are, as suggested earlier, large and persistent. 
Two important points are worth noting here. First, for much of the past 30 years, prices in 
Canada have actually been significantly lower than those in the United States. This isn’t to 
say  that  each  and  every  price  in  Canada  was  lower  over  most  of  the  sample  period. 
Obviously,  there  is  considerable  variation  among  goods  and  services,  but,  in  aggregate, 
prices  were  often  much  lower  in  Canada.  Things  have  changed  over  the  past  10  years, 
however. 
The second point to note in Chart 1 is that the price gaps appear to be highly correlated with 
the level of the U.S.-Canada exchange rate (the red line). Indeed, while we might expect the 
exchange rate to act as a buffer, it seems to be driving prices in the two countries away from 
each other. 
This raises several questions. 
• 
Why does the exchange rate seem to be exacerbating price differences rather than 
offsetting them? 
Shouldn’t  the  Canadian  dollar  depreciate  if  Canadian  prices  are  generally  higher 
than foreign prices, and appreciate if they are lower? 
Shouldn’t the exchange rate be preserving competitiveness and correcting any trade 
imbalances that might arise if large deviations were allowed to persist? 
  In short, the question is: has the exchange rate been misbehaving? 
Has the exchange rate been misbehaving? 
The  answer?  It’s  complicated.  First, many  of the  goods  and  services  included  in  the  price 
indexes are not traded (e.g., haircuts), so one would not expect their prices to be the same 
between  countries.  Second,  there  are  many  real-world  frictions  that  prevent  goods  from 
trading  freely.  Transportation  costs  and  other  expenses  related  to  the  distribution  and 
marketing of goods, once they arrive onshore, are often significant (especially in a country 
the size of Canada). These expenses can drive a substantial wedge between domestic and 
foreign  prices.  In  addition,  sizable  trade  barriers  associated  with  tariffs  and  quotas  do  still 
exist, despite a general trend towards freer trade in the global economy. Finally, markets for 
certain goods are often less than perfectly competitive. 
Although the frictions that I have just listed are important, and can explain  why  large level 
differences frequently exist between domestic and foreign prices, shouldn’t exchange rates 
at least move in the right direction in response to any shift in prices? 
Shouldn’t  we  expect  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  to  offset  changes  in  prices,  thereby 
limiting any further widening in the price gap and preserving a form of relative PPP? 
So what is going on? 
The main answer is that the exchange rate is driven by many forces other than differences in 
the overall level of domestic and foreign prices. If these broad price discrepancies were the 
                                                
2   Although  individual  surveys  compare  prices  for  identical  products  in  Canada  and  the  United  States,  a 
shortcoming of this approach is that it is not possible to track the exact same products over time. Therefore, 
the size and composition of the sample tends to vary across surveys. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(ii)  
only  thing  that  mattered,  the  real  exchange  rate  would  be  a  flat  line.  In  other  words,  the 
nominal exchange rate, adjusted for prices, would be constant. This is clearly not the case, 
however, as shown in Chart 2. 
The blue line is the nominal exchange rate that we actually observe in the market. The red 
line is the real exchange rate, which adjusts the nominal rate for differences in domestic and 
foreign prices. As you can see, most of the movements observed in the exchange rate are 
real rather than nominal. 
Although  some  of  these  movements  are  caused  by  temporary  –  and  occasionally, 
speculative  –  forces,  research  at  the  Bank  has  shown  that  most  of  the  broad  trends  in 
Canada’s exchange rate are tied to other fundamental determinants that can’t and shouldn’t 
be suppressed. 
What are these determinants? It is impossible to identify all of them, but three in particular 
stand out: 
(i)  
changes  in  Canada’s  terms  of  trade  driven  by  changes  in  the  relative  price  of 
energy; 
changes in the terms of trade driven by changes in the relative price of non-energy 
commodities; and 
changes in the Canada-U.S. interest rate differential. 
(iii)  
Results  from  a  simple  estimated  model,  which  includes  these  three  series  as  explanatory 
variables, are shown in Chart 3.3  
But this begs another question. If movements in the real exchange rate are responsible for 
the price gaps reported in Chart 1, why don’t officials simply intervene to stabilize the value 
of  the  real  exchange  rate  and  push  Canadian  and  U.S.  prices  into  proper  alignment? The 
short  answer  is:  it  wouldn’t  work.  These  movements  are  driven  by  fundamental  forces  of 
demand and supply that can’t be suppressed forever. They will simply re-emerge. 
As  an  example,  let’s  say  that  domestic  prices were  seen  to  be  higher than foreign  prices. 
One way of fixing this would be to lower the exchange rate (i.e., cause it to depreciate). This 
could be done by lowering interest rates and easing monetary policy. However, if this pushed 
the economy beyond its capacity limits and created excess demand, it would simply generate 
domestic inflation. 
What would happen then? 
Canadian  prices  would  rise  faster  than  foreign  prices.  We  would  be  chasing  our  tail.  The 
same would be true with the directions reversed – that is, if we tried to correct a negative 
price gap by raising the exchange rate. The real exchange rate ultimately reasserts itself and 
moves to the level that is consistent with all the fundamentals that are at play. 
Does  this  mean  that  exchange  rates  and  aggregate  prices  bear  no  relationship  to  one 
another? Does it undercut the arguments in favour of a flexible exchange rate regime? 
Macroeconomic evidence of long-run PPP and exchange rate past-through 
The short answer is no. There is evidence that, over time, exchange rates tend to move in a 
manner consistent with PPP. Moreover, it is a two-way street. Prices at home and abroad are 
affected by movements in the exchange rate – a process referred to as exchange rate pass-
through  (ERPT).  In  other  words,  prices  affect  exchange  rates  and  exchange  rates  affect 
                                                
3  
I.  Ramzi,  R.  Lafrance  and  J.  Murray,  “The  Turning  Black  Tide:  Energy  Prices  and  the  Canadian  Dollar,” 
Canadian Journal of Economics 41, 3 (2008): 737–59. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
prices.  These  variables  are  not  only  connected,  but  more  importantly,  they  move  in  the 
desired direction. At times, however, it is not easy to observe them. 
Most of the early empirical work in this area looked at broad macroeconomic variables for 
evidence  of  PPP  and  ERPT.  For  the  ERPT  tests,  this  typically  involved  running  simple 
reduced-form equations. 
A  price  index,  such  as  the  CPI,  or  a  broad  measure  of  import  prices  (denominated  in  the 
currency of the importer), would be put on the left-hand side of the equation, as a dependent 
variable,  with  the  exchange  rate  and  other  control  variables  on  the  right-hand  side,  as 
explanatory variables. Using this formula, researchers expected to observe a coefficient on 
the exchange rate somewhere between zero and 1. A value of 1 would represent complete 
pass-through,  while  a  value  of  zero  would  indicate  no  pass-through.  Since  the  conditions 
necessary for complete pass-through, such as perfect competition and the absence of any 
trade barriers or other economic frictions, were unlikely to be satisfied, something between 
these two extremes was anticipated. 
In  practice,  researchers  found  that,  for  most  countries,  the  pass-through  coefficient  was 
extremely small. This was especially true in the short run, since prices take time to adjust. 
Imported  products,  and  the  domestic  goods  and  services  that  compete  with  them,  were 
usually found to be more sensitive to exchange rate movements. For this reason, one would 
expect to see a stronger relationship when looking at import prices alone as opposed to the 
entire CPI. Even here, however, the evidence was often relatively weak. 
There are a number of possible explanations for this. First, the estimated coefficients were 
likely biased towards zero because of econometric problems that arise whenever one uses a 
simple reduced-form equation to estimate a relationship that is inherently endogenous. Since 
prices and the exchange rate are believed to influence each other’s behaviour, an obvious 
simultaneity bias exists. 
Second, it is also possible that effective countercyclical monetary policy and the adoption of 
an  explicit  inflation  target  in  countries  such  as  Canada  have  made  it  harder  to  observe 
ERPT.  Some  researchers  have  argued  that  a  credible  inflation  target  makes  prices  less 
sensitive to exchange rate movements in the short run because producers are reluctant to 
adjust prices unless they are sure the exchange rate changes are going to persist. 
Efforts  to  identify  and  quantify  the  effects  of  ERPT  in  Canada  have  faced  an  additional 
challenge, however, one that is beyond the countercyclical influence of monetary policy. Until 
recently, the absence of a reliable data series for most import prices meant that researchers 
had to use the CPI to test for ERPT. But, as already noted, the pass-through effects onto the 
CPI are likely to be quite muted. 
Although evidence could be found of near-complete pass-through of exchange rate changes 
into  the  prices  of  homogeneous  and  widely  traded  goods  such  as  oil  and  other  primary 
commodities, evidence for highly differentiated manufactured goods and speciality products 
was hard to find. 
Another  result  common  to  many  macro  studies  was  a  noticeable  declining  trend  in  ERPT 
over time. The increasing adoption of inflation-targeting frameworks by both advanced and 
emerging-market  economies  may  explain  this  phenomenon,  along  with  the  growing 
importance of differentiated manufacturing goods relative to raw materials in global trade. 
Several other explanations have also been put forward for weak and declining estimates of 
ERPT, but unfortunately there isn’t time to discuss them here. The bottom line, in any event, 
is  that,  although  the  estimated  macroeconomic  effects  might  not  appear  to  be  very  large, 
exchange rate pass-through does exist and is operating in a predictable, helpful, way. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
More convincing microeconomic evidence of ERPT 
Happily,  much  stronger  and  more  convincing  results  have  recently  become  available  by 
taking a micro approach. Researchers using rich micro databases have been able to analyze 
detailed information on individual commercial transactions and can now test for ERPT at the 
level of individual firms and products. 
This  micro  approach  means  researchers  can  overcome  the  problems  associated  with 
endogeneity and heterogeneity in the earlier macro studies. Bringing it down to the level of 
the  firm  and  specific  transactions  provides  a  clearer  picture  and  allows  a  more  sensible 
pattern to emerge. 
Several  such  studies  have  recently  been  completed  by  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank,  and 
others are in progress. What I would like to do in this, the concluding section of my talk, is 
give you a quick overview of some key results from two of these studies. 
The  first  study  uses  data  from  the  Canadian  Border  Services  Agency  on  every  single 
shipment of apparel imported into Canada between July 2002 and August 2008 – more than 
6.5 million transactions.4 Early results from this study show that the degree of pass-through 
depends  importantly  on  two  things:  the  currency  in  which  the  imports  are  invoiced,  and 
whether  the  goods  are  shipped  directly  from  the  country  that  produced  them  or  through  a 
third country that served as an intermediary. 
In this regard, it is important to note that the pass-through literature distinguishes between 
what  is  called  “producer-currency  pricing”  and  “local-currency  pricing.”  The  difference 
between  the  two  is  this:  with  producer-currency  pricing,  producers/exporters  choose  to 
invoice goods in their own country’s currency. Think of a Chinese exporter that decides to 
invoice  clothing  to  be  shipped  to  Canada  in  Chinese  renminbi.  Local-currency  pricing,  in 
contrast,  refers  to  a  situation  in  which  this  same  exporter  chooses  to  invoice  in  Canadian 
dollars (i.e., the local currency of the importing country). 
Some interesting results emerge from this study. First, short-run ERPT was much higher for 
transactions  priced  in  the  producer’s  currency;  second,  pass-through  was  much  higher  for 
goods shipped directly from the producer’s country (regardless of which currency they were 
invoiced in), as opposed to through a third country. 
One reason why imports invoiced in local currency exhibit much less pass-through could be 
that  exporters  who  price  in  local  currency  tend  to  be  more  concerned  about  preserving 
market share in the foreign country. They are prepared to absorb some of the higher costs 
associated with adverse currency moves to avoid passing them along to their customers. 
A similar logic might explain the lower pass-through numbers observed on imports that come 
to Canada through a third country, such as the United States, as opposed to directly from the 
exporter’s country. Foreign exporters who are less familiar with the Canadian market, or who 
feel that they have less leverage with local customers, may want to rely on the distribution 
networks of other, more experienced firms and be more flexible in the  prices they charge. 
However, in almost every case – whether they involved producer- or local-currency pricing – 
the estimated pass-through coefficients were higher than those reported in previous macro 
studies,  indicating  that  the  endogeneity/heterogeneity  problems  discussed  earlier  were 
significant. ERPT, in other words, is more important than previously believed. 
The second study that I’d like to describe asks whether gaps between domestic and foreign 
prices that are larger than normal can be used as predictors of future exchange rate moves.5 
                                                
4   M.  Devereux,  W.  Dong  and  B.  Tomlin,  “Exchange  Rate  Pass-Through,  Currency  Invoicing  and  Trade 
Partners,” mimeo, Bank of Canada, 2013. 
5   W. Dong and D. Nam, “Exchange Rates and Individual Good’s Price Misalignment: Evidence of Long-Horizon 
Predictability,” Journal of International Money and Finance 32 (2013): 611–36. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The authors collect goods-level data for Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States, 
calculate deviations from the LOP and test to see if the size of the deviations has what they 
termed  “superior  predictive  ability”  with  regard  to  future  movements  in  the  exchange  rate. 
The results for the United States and Japan were particularly encouraging. They showed that 
the price deviations had significant predictive power, which was positively correlated with the 
degree of price misalignment and which improved with the length of the forecast horizon (i.e., 
the performance got better the further out you went). In other words, exchange rates seemed 
to be moving in the right direction, helping to reduce the deviations from the LOP. 
Conclusion 
What  can  we  conclude  from  all  of  this?  Looks  can  be  deceiving.  Casual  observation  and 
evidence  gleaned  from  simple  charts  would  seem  to  raise  serious  questions  about  the 
functioning of domestic and foreign markets, and about the international trading system more 
generally. Recent studies, however, paint a far more positive picture of the role of exchange 
rates  in  influencing  relative  prices  and  facilitating  the  international  adjustment.  Despite  the 
large and persistent price gaps that are frequently observed between Canadian and foreign 
prices at the aggregate level, more detailed work suggests that deviations from the law of 
one price and purchasing-power parity are not as large or as persistent as many believe. 
While significant price discrepancies exist, the reasons for them can largely be explained and 
are  not  evidence  of  serious  market  failure.  Market  forces  are  at  work  and  are  generally 
pushing prices and the exchange rate in the right direction. 
However,  they  do  not  operate  in  a  vacuum.  Their  movements  are  affected  by  other 
fundamental forces, and what we pay in Sackville compared with what we pay in Bangor is 
the end result of many competing pressures. This is not to say that markets are perfect or 
that  there  is  no  room  for  improvement.  Significant  trade  restrictions  and  barriers  to 
competition exist, and anything that can be done to reduce them – free trade agreements, for 
example – is all to the good. Nor am I suggesting that exchange rates are always at their 
equilibrium or at fundamentally justified levels. As with any asset price, bouts of temporary 
overshooting and excess volatility are common. However, the broad trends and behaviour of 
these markets are more positive than many believe and earlier evidence might indicate. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
