Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Sri Lanka’s peace dividend and recipe for growth 
and stability 
Presentation by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 
25th Anniversary Convention of the Association of Professional Bankers “Beyond growth – a 
formula for success”, Colombo, 8 October 2013. 
 President of the Association of Professional Bankers, Mr. Aravinda Perera. Guest of Honour 
and Immediate Past Governor, Reserve Bank of India, Dr. D. Subbarao, Deputy Governors 
of  the  Central  Bank,  Distinguished  delegates  at  the  25thAnniversary  Conference  of  the 
Association of Professional Bankers, My dear friends. 
At the outset, I wish to thank the Association of Professional Bankers for inviting me 
this  evening  to  share  a  few  thoughts  on  the  occasion  of  their  25th  Anniversary 
Conference. I am also delighted that a highly accomplished and eminent scholar who has 
held the esteemed offices of Secretary to the Ministry of Finance of India and the Governor 
of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Subbarao is here to deliver the Keynote Address, at this 
august  Conference.  I  am  sure  his  scholarly  inputs,  spiced  with  his  rich  experiences  would 
add immense value to the deliberations of your Conference, and that such foundation would 
provide the most appropriate platform for the timely Conference Theme: “Beyond Growth – 
A  Formula  for  Success”.  Knowing  the  high  technical  prowess,  vast  experience  and 
wonderful oratorical skills of Dr. Subbarao, I do not think I need to offer any comment on the 
theme  of  the  Conference,  since  he  would  do  ample  justice  to that topic. Therefore,  I shall 
merely  concentrate  on  the  subject  area  that  the  President  of  the  APB  invited  me  to  dwell 
upon, namely “Sri Lanka’s Peace Dividend and Recipe for Growth and Stability”. 
My dear friends, when  any person looks around our country they  will  witness the massive 
and rapid infrastructure development taking place. They will also experience the phenomenal 
changes  that  have  taken  place,  and  are  taking  place  in  our  economy.  The  past  major 
drawback in our country and economy, namely, the terrorism conflict, is now over, and we 
have  so  far  enjoyed  about  four  and  a  half  years  of  peace  and  tranquility.  Much  has 
happened during that period, which really is the peace dividend, although sometimes 
we  do  not  think  of  it on  those  terms. Therefore,  in  order  to  set  the  background  for  my 
address, let me quickly reflect on some of these achievements. 
In  the  post-conflict  economy,  Sri  Lanka  recorded  many  important  milestones.  Per 
capita  income  doubled to  reach  over  US  dollars  2,900  in  a relatively  short  period, thereby 
elevating the country to an “emerging market economy” status; the economy grew to a robust 
US dollar 59 billion, from about US dollars 24 billion in 2004; Inflation was controlled at single 
digits for more than four and a half years; Poverty levels reduced to around 6 percent from 
about 15%; Unemployment reduced to less than 4 percent; The quality of infrastructure was 
enhanced to a level comparable with many emerging market economies; Foreign reserves 
were maintained at over 6 billion US dollars; The public debt was managed prudently so as 
to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio from a high of 105 percent in 2003 to about 78 percent; An 
over 8 percent economic growth was achieved in successive years 2010 and 2011; Private 
foreign investment inflows into the government has exceeded US$ 7 billion; The Fiscal deficit 
was  limited  to  6.4%  in  2012,  from  a  high  of  9.9%  in  2009;  The  country’s  Doing  Business 
global rank has reached the 81st level, up from 102nd in 2010, while being poised to jump 
about  10  places  this  year;  Regional  development  has  made  tangible  progress  and  the 
Western Province share of GDP reduced to around 43% from 51% in 2005; Regular foreign 
investment has flowed into banks and the stock market; The banking system was maintained 
in a stable condition even in the midst of very difficult global circumstances. 
Needless  to  say,  the  collective  efforts  that  we  have  all  put  together  to  improve  and 
sustain  the  positive  outlook  for  our  nation,  have  ensured  a  conducive  investment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
atmosphere.  In  that  regard,  the  stable  inflation  and  the  comparatively  lower  interest  rate 
regime prevailing today, serves as an important support to businesses, by reducing the risk 
factors.  Moreover,  the  country’s  peaceful  environment,  complemented  by  political  stability, 
has been able to ensure the continued safety of investments, while providing a reasonable 
yield.  In  this  context,  the  robust  investment  framework  along  the  lines  of  the  “5+1”  hub 
concept,  has  now  opened  out  new  ventures  in  promoting  maritime,  aviation,  energy, 
knowledge  and  commercial  sectors,  while  tourism  is  emerging  as  a  further  thrust  industry 
with great promise. 
My  dear  friends,  those  in  the  banking  sector  know  very  well  that  there  were  many 
special initiatives that were taken over the past several years at various times, in order 
to fashion and support this transformation. For purposes of completeness, let us quickly 
recollect a few such major initiatives that helped us in this regard. 
We established consultative and advisory committees from the private sector for monetary 
policy and financial system stability; We opened out Sri Lanka Treasury Bills and Bonds to 
foreign  investors;  We  issued  international  Sovereign  Bonds;  We  introduced  mandatory 
corporate governance practices for banks and NBFIs; We developed resolution schemes to 
stabilize  systemically  important  banks  and  NBFIs,  and  when  needed,  we  applied  such 
schemes practically; We established a Deposit Insurance and Liquidity Support Scheme; We 
fashioned the current “virtuous cycle” – low inflation to low interest rates to higher investment 
to  higher  growth,  etc.;  We  accessed  an  IMF  SBA  on  our  terms,  and  completed  the 
programme;  We  intervened  in  the  application  of  certain  fiscal  policies,  which  were 
sympathetic to inflation behavior and other macro-economic factors; We implemented tough 
monitoring  of  inflation  control  measures;  We  introduced  some  far-reaching  stabilization 
measures whenever needed; We relaxed Foreign Exchange Regulations on a planned basis. 
That list of “Have dones” is therefore an impressive one. But, we would be the first to 
admit that, that is the past. The challenge now would be as to what more we should do 
in our journey into the future. How do we reach a US$ 100 billion economy? How do we 
proceed beyond the US$ 4,000 per capita income level? How do we ensure that we do not 
fall prey to the deadly “middle-income trap” that has snared many countries in the past? How 
do we ensure that our transformation is sustainable and long lasting? How do we maintain 
momentum?  In  short,  what  is  the  “recipe”  that  Sri  Lanka  must  have  for  growth  and 
stability, in the next decade and beyond? 
I believe all those questions are important ones, for the economic policy planners to reflect 
upon, and to share with other key stakeholders of the economy. While doing so, there would 
also be many matters and issues that all stakeholders of the economy would need to give 
their  continuous  attention,  and  share  with  policy  makers.  It’s  a  two  way  process!  In  that 
context, I believe your 25th Anniversary Conference would provide a useful opportunity for a 
broader  discussion  on  this  all  important  “recipe”,  so  that  we,  as  policy  makers  would  also 
benefit by your rich and professional contributions. 
My dear friends, in my view, Sri Lanka’s long term growth and stability recipe would 
need to contain several key ingredients. 
First, the maintenance of sound macro fundamentals and the continuous movement of 
those macro fundamentals in a positive and benign direction. What that would mean, in 
a practical sense, is that we will have to maintain inflation at low and stable levels for the next 
decade.  That  would,  in  turn,  mean  that  the  demand  side  management  would  have  to  be 
carefully  anticipated  and  managed,  while  the  required  interventions  in  the  supply  side  will 
also need to be promoted and encouraged. At the same time, the fiscal consolidation would 
need  to  be  sustained,  so  that  the  positive  effects  of  such  effort  would  enable  the  debt 
dynamics to improve constantly. Those efforts would also have to be supported by on-going 
improvements  in  productivity,  with  the  resulting  benefits  influencing  the  exchange  rate  as 
well.  Businesses  will  have  to  become  more  productive,  competitive  and  efficient,  and  the 
overall expansion of the economy through new fronts, particularly the 5 Hubs and Tourism, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
would  need  to  continue  in  a  focused  fashion.  By  constantly  improving  our  enabling 
environment and economic structures, as well  as by ensuring that the private sector stays 
vibrant,  motivated  and  well  financed,  the  economy  should  be  able  to  consistently  grow  at 
over  7%  per  annum,  and  in  certain  years,  even  exceed  8%.  By  maintaining  such  a 
momentum, our economy would become more resilient and diversified, thereby enabling us 
to face whatever new risks that could emerge from an unpredictable global environment. 
Second,  Sri  Lanka  would  need  to  attract  regular  capital  from  outside  our  shores  in 
order  to  bridge  our  current  savings/investment  gap  so  as  to  sustain  the  over  7% 
growth momentum. In the past, some persons have been pre-occupied with the notion that 
foreign  direct  investments  and  investments  into  the  Government,  are  the  only  channels 
through which foreign savings could enter our country. However, we have taken a broader 
view,  and  we  believe  that  our  savings/investment  gap  could  be  bridged  through  several 
sources  in  addition  to  the  traditional  sources.  As  a  result,  we  have  encouraged  foreign 
inflows into the banking sector, foreign inflows into the stock and corporate bond markets, 
and  foreign  inflows  as  loan  capital  into  eligible  businesses.  All  these  channels  have  now 
been  made  transparent  and  convenient,  thereby  making  it  easy  for  overseas  investors  to 
make  their  investments.  These  convenient  inflows,  with  appropriate  safeguards  for  the 
providers of capital would enable the country to enjoy a sustained inflow of savings, which 
would, in turn, support the high growth momentum envisaged by the economy. 
Third,  we  need  to  continuously  ensure  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  In  this 
regard, the banking and the NBFI sectors, as well as the insurance sector would play very 
important roles, and over the next few years, we are keen that a consolidation takes place in 
these sectors, in order to have strong institutions within these sectors. In today’s hostile and 
volatile  environment,  it  is  necessary  for  the  banks  and  NBFIs  to  at  least  have  a  minimum 
critical mass, in order to be competitive, resilient and strong. That would necessarily mean 
that some of the smaller and less stronger institutions would need to merge with each other, 
or become the targets of strategic acquisitions in order to create large and strong institutions 
in this sector. Such a consolidation would also enable the governance structures to improve, 
as well as reduce today’s rather high “cost per transaction”, as a result of the enhanced scale 
of  operations.  Therefore,  over  the  next  few  years,  it  would  be  necessary  to  fashion  and 
encourage  such  a  consolidation  outcome,  and  the  policies  that  would  lead  to  such  an 
outcome would need to be encouraged. 
Fourth,  the  country  will  have  to  sustain  its  poverty  reduction  strategies  as  well 
continue with strategies that are designed to foster balanced regional growth. Over the 
past four and a half years, an enormous investment has been made in the North, which has 
resulted in the Northern Province reaching a reasonable parity viz-a-viz the other provinces. 
This  has  been  an  amazing  achievement,  and I believe  we  have  now  been  able  to  set  the 
stage  for  a  more  gradual  improvement  of  all  provinces,  so  that  we  could  bring  all  the 
provinces  closer  to  the  standard  of  the  Western  Province,  which  has  already  comfortably 
surpassed  a  US$  4,000  per  capita  income. The  recent  infrastructure  development  drive  at 
rural  level,  particularly  the  construction  and  upgrade  of  the  rural  roads  and  the  supply  of 
electricity to every household in the country, together with the massive strides we have made 
in making finance accessible to all people in all parts of the country, have greatly helped to 
fulfill  these  objectives.  Therefore,  the  stage  is  now  well  set  for  the  constant  upgrade  of  a 
variety of services at Provincial level, and the effective integration of all areas of the country, 
with better roads, technology, communication, business services and banking services. Such 
improvements would serve to reduce provincial disparities, and thereby allow the country to 
achieve its ambitious goal of less than 3% poverty by 2016. At the same time, as a result of 
the fast tracked development of the provinces, we could probably reach a situation where the 
GDP contribution from the advanced Western Province would only constitute around 33%, by 
the  year  2025.  Such  an  outcome  would  indicate  a  sustained  revival  of  the  8  lagging 
Provinces, which collectively accounted for less than 50% of the GDP contribution in the year 
2005.  Accordingly,  if  within  20  years,  2005  to  2025,  the  Western  Province  share  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
country’s GDP could be reduced from one-half to one-third, I believe we would be  well on 
track to balanced regional growth, whilst also not depriving the Western Province of the fruits 
of rapid development. Such a transformation would mean that the cry which led to two bloody 
revolutions, namely, “kolombata kiri, gamata kekiri” would be a slogan which could then be 
comfortably relegated to the dust-bin of history. 
Fifth,  we  would  need  to  enhance  the  productivity  levels  of  the  country,  whilst  also 
managing the migration of a large work force from the current traditional sectors to 
some of the new sectors that are opening out in our economy. Over the next few years, 
large numbers of youth and other skilled persons would need to form the new back-bone of 
the labour force that is needed for the 5 Hubs and Tourism, as well as in some of the other 
growth sectors such as health and education. Where would this new work force come from? 
Obviously, some will need to migrate from the agricultural sector, while others would need to 
shift from their present activities to the new areas of activities. Such a shift would necessarily 
demand that the existing economic activities would have to robustly improve its’ productivity 
levels,  through  the  use  of  better  techniques  and  methods,  including  the  application  of  IT. 
That transformation would also suggest that a massive education and training effort would be 
needed, whilst also requiring the enhancement of the levels of productivity and work ethnic, 
particularly in the agriculture sector. Those changes would be vital, as well as, good for our 
economy.  Vital,  because  when  such  a  shift takes  place  towards  the  new  thrust  areas, the 
transformation  of  the  economy  will  take  place  as  planned.  Good,  because  some  of  the 
economic  sectors,  particularly  agriculture,  where  we  had  been  used  to  very  low  levels  of 
productivity, would have to get its act together and quickly transform itself to new and better 
methods of resource use so as to do more with less! In that scenario, exciting opportunities 
will emerge towards the realization of overall higher levels of productivity, and I believe the 
bedrock  for  our  future  sustainable  development  would  be  this  productivity  improvement 
across all sectors of our economy. 
Sixth, Sri Lanka must continuously improve its global rankings. As is well known, our 
country had been lagging behind in the world scene on many fronts, mainly as a result of our 
focus for nearly 30 years, being on just keeping body and soul together in the face of the 
deadly terrorist threats. As a result, up until a few years ago, our global rankings were quite 
dismal and low. Of course, our rankings were somewhat high on health and education and 
very high on cricket! But unfortunately on many business related indices, we were lagging far 
behind  many  countries,  and  our  scores  in  Doing  Business,  economic  freedom,  global 
competiveness, etc. were certainly not flattering. However, about 2 years ago, we started an 
initiative to carefully examine the criteria that is used to rank countries in relation to various 
indices, and taking the necessary steps to improve in each of these areas, and prove to the 
world that we really mean business! I believe if our efforts continue to prove successful over 
the next few years, and Sri Lanka materially improves its global rankings on many business 
indices,  we  would  stand  out  as  an  economy  with  great  promise  and  potential.  That  would 
also help us to be well positioned to truly gain recognition as a global Hub. 
In this connection, let me relate a little story that may indicate Sri Lanka’s growing promise 
and potential. A few days ago, a high ranking official of one of a major multinationals met 
with me, and he told me that they are becoming increasingly frustrated by the very high costs 
that  they  have  to  bear  in  the  top  Asian  capitals  of Tokyo,  Beijing,  Singapore,  Hong  Kong, 
Jakarta, Manila and Kuala Lampur, which is making it increasingly expensive for them to do 
business  in  those  cities.  According  to  this  official,  their  Head  Office  is  therefore  actively 
searching for alternate cities in Asia with good quality infrastructure, high standards of law 
and order, efficient communication, convenient sea and air connectivity and excellent living 
conditions, in order to consider re-location of some of their regional offices. In that regard, he 
said  to  me  that  within  the  next  few  years,  if  Sri  Lanka  is  able  to  display  a  high  degree  of 
improvement in each of these areas of interest to multinationals like them, Sri Lanka could 
very  well  be  a  strong  candidate  for  consideration  by  such  global  giants,  to  locate  their 
regional offices. In this conversation, what struck me first was that such a conversation would 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
never have been even remotely possible, just five years ago. What struck me second, was 
the fact that Sri Lanka is today moving into the radar screen of global giants, which shows 
that  we  are  being  taken  seriously.  That,  my  dear  friends,  to  my  mind,  is  one  of  the  best 
indications that Sri Lanka is gradually reaping the peace dividend after its 30 year conflict! 
Seventh,  Sri  Lanka  would  need  to  show  progress  of  its  political  stability  on  a 
sustained basis, over the next several years. As we all know, high norms of democracy 
have been maintained and peaceful conditions exist, in our country, compared to many other 
countries. However, a strong negative publicity has been drummed up by a certain segments 
of the overseas Sri Lankan diaspora, through which such groups have been able to portray 
Sri  Lanka  as  a  country  with  political  and  human  rights  deficiencies.  Unfortunately,  the 
massive progress Sri Lanka has made in recent years with regular elections, terrorism and 
violence  free  conditions,  rapid  economic  development,  large  scale  investments,  large 
numbers of newspapers, TV and radio stations publishing and beaming news almost every 
second  without  any  censorship  whatsoever,  have  not  been  given  sufficient  credit, 
internationally,  as  a  result  of  the  outside  world  being  bombarded  with  the  false  claims  by 
these anti-Sri Lanka forces. Although the efforts of these inimical groups are gradually losing 
steam  in  the  face  of  the  Sri  Lankan  political  structures  being  continuously  strengthened, 
there  is  however  a  vital  need  for  Sri  Lanka  as  a  country,  and  for  all  Sri  Lankans  as 
individuals,  to  work  towards  developing  our  external  image  on  a  continuous  basis.  In  that 
context, we must constantly remind our overseas friends that Sri Lanka is a country that has 
a  2,500  year  history  with  strong  political  institutions  and  an  educated,  politically  savvy 
population, and that the people of different castes, creeds, and ethnicity, interact lot better 
than in many other countries. By doing so, we could effectively challenge and deal with the 
build up of various false myths that may have the potential to threaten the political stability in 
our country over the next few years. If we are able to respond successfully, and convey this 
reality to the outside world in a comprehensive manner, we could put to rest, many of the 
unfair and false allegations that have been leveled against the country. 
My  dear  friends,  what  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  so  far  are  the  key  ingredients  that 
would  need  to  be  used  in  the  recipe  for  growth  and  stability.  However,  as  we  all  know, 
ingredients alone won’t provide us with a tasty, wholesome dish. To turn out a tasty dish, we 
need  to  use  the  ingredients,  in  the  right  quantity  and  quality,  prepare  and  temper  those 
ingredients  properly,  mix  them  appropriately,  and  cook  them  at  the  right  temperature 
according  to  the  required  method.  It  is  only  then  that  the  dish  will  be  tasty,  attractive  and 
wholesome. 
What then  is  our  next  challenge?  In  my  view,  the  special  ingredients  that  I  have  so  far 
spoken  of,  as  well  as  the  other  elements  that  are  needed  to  develop  a  good  economy, 
namely,  basic  common  sense,  good 
timing,  sound  policy  mix,  sensible  political 
considerations, continuous well-being of the people, would all need to be generously used as 
flavours in the preparation of the final dish of growth and stability. We would also need to 
maintain the balance of all the ingredients at the right “temperature” if the outcome is to be 
right. After all, a dish, if it is overdone or half done, is not going to be edible. In the same way, 
if  economic  planners  do  not judiciously  give  consideration  to  developing  and  matching the 
right mix of policies which work, and being sensitive to the timing and sequence of the flow of 
the policy implementation, the growth and stability of the economy would not be attainable. 
Mr. Chairman, my dear friends, over the past 7 years, I believe we have been able to 
deal with many challenges from within and outside, and that is why we have been able 
to deliver stability and growth to our economy. Nevertheless, we must all remember that 
yesterday’s  tasty  meal  will  not  necessarily  mean  that  tomorrow’s  meal  will  also  be  tasty. 
Tomorrow is another fresh challenge with different considerations, and circumstances. If we 
are able to assess these conditions cleverly, and develop our plans properly, (and I believe 
we are well positioned to do so), Sri Lanka would truly be on course to deliver growth and 
stability on a sustained basis to our people and our economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Mr.  Chairman,  permit me  to  conclude  by  making  the  simple  remark  that  there  is  no 
path to success or prosperity, other than via careful planning and hard work. Sri Lanka 
has so far progressed with promise, because we have “walked the talk”. Many of the goals 
that  we  set  in  the  past  and  the  major  projects  that  we  set  our  sights  upon,  have  been 
realized, or are taking shape before our very own eyes, because of dedicated and committed 
actions.  Let’s  be  encouraged  and  inspired  by  those  successes.  Let’s  also  step  up  for  the 
future, and get ready to deliver growth and stability on a consistent basis. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
