Lucas Papademos: Monetary policy and the “Great Crisis” – lessons and 
challenges 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the 37th 
Economics  Conference  “Beyond  the  Crisis:  Economic  Policy  in  a  New  Macroeconomic 
Environment”, organised by the Austrian National Bank, Vienna, 14 May 2009. 
 Introduction  
I.  
In  less  than  three  months,  two  years  will  have  passed  since  the  eruption  of  the  financial 
market turbulence which progressively evolved into the deepest and broadest financial and 
economic crisis since the 1930s. There is no doubt that the global and European economies 
are  going  through  a  “great  crisis”,  one  of  exceptional  proportions,  in  terms  of  its  impact, 
scope and duration. Moreover, the crisis appears to be “beyond compare” because although 
it does share important features with previous crises, it is also characterised by some unique 
ones relating to both its causes and its dynamics. I should like to thank you for inviting me to 
address this prestigious conference and talk about the lessons from this crisis for monetary 
policy and the challenges that lie ahead in the new macroeconomic environment that is likely 
to emerge. 
The  current  crisis  has  raised  a  number  of  important  issues  concerning  the  prevention  and 
management of crises and allows us to draw relevant lessons for both market participants 
and policy-makers. The analysis of the underlying causes and contributing factors as well as 
of  the  events  and  processes  that  determined  its  evolving  nature  and  intensity  over  time 
points to several conclusions about the role of public authorities – central banks, supervisors 
and  governments  –  in  safeguarding  financial  stability  and  about  the  effectiveness  of  the 
existing institutional framework and available policy instruments in achieving this objective. It 
also  raises  questions  on  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  and  institutions,  in  particular 
their capacity to price, allocate and manage risk efficiently. 
In my remarks, I will focus on the role monetary policy can play and the contribution it can 
make to prevent a financial crisis and – if one occurs – to minimise its impact on the financial 
system and the broader economy. More specifically, drawing lessons from the current crisis, 
I will address the following questions: 
• 
what is the role of monetary policy in dealing with a financial crisis and in helping to 
safeguard  the  stability of  the  financial  system,  while  at  the  same  time  ensuring  the 
preservation of price stability? 
what  has  been  the  effectiveness  of  the  monetary  policy  instruments  and  the  other 
“non-standard”  measures  taken  by  central  banks,  and  notably  the  ECB,  in  order  to 
mitigate the effects of the crisis on the economy, by promoting the orderly functioning 
of money markets and fostering the provision of credit to the private sector? 
as conditions normalise, we need to look beyond the crisis – indeed the theme of the 
conference  invites  us  to  do  –  and  a  crucial  issue  is:  what  is  the  appropriate  exit 
strategy and its implementation modalities that can ensure the preservation of price 
stability and the gradual return to conditions where markets do not need to rely on the 
unprecedented measures of central bank financing and government bank support? 
finally,  what  is  the  appropriate  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  the  post-crisis 
macroeconomic  environment  that  is  likely  to  emerge?  In  particular,  what  can 
monetary policy do to reduce the likelihood that a financial crisis, like the current one, 
occurs  again  and,  thus  help  to  prevent  its  potential  adverse  effects  on  economic 
activity and price stability? 
   BIS Review 59/2009 
 1
II.  
Dealing with the financial crisis: the role of monetary policy and liquidity 
management 
Let  me  now  first  concentrate  on  the  role  of  monetary  policy  –  and  more  generally  central 
bank  policies  –  in  dealing  with  a  financial  crisis  and  how  this  role  can  be  performed  in  a 
manner that is compatible with the preservation of price stability. In doing so, I will highlight 
the actions taken by the ECB during the current crisis and I will assess their effectiveness. 
The ECB and the Eurosystem have as primary objective the maintenance of price stability. At 
the same time, the Eurosystem aims to safeguard financial stability.1 The two policy goals 
are, in general, positively related. Price stability is a necessary condition for financial stability, 
which in turn is essential for the effective transmission of monetary policy. Disturbances that 
result in a severe financial market turbulence, which disrupts the intermediation process and 
threatens the stability of the financial system, are likely to have adverse consequences for 
economic  activity  and  price  stability.  But  this  is  not  always  the  case,  as  other  factors  or 
processes  can  counteract  the  impact  of  financial  market  stresses  on  price  developments. 
There are occasions when the constellation of disturbances affecting the economy can lead 
to situations that pose policy trade-offs. 
When assessing the role of central bank policy in supporting financial stability, it is important 
to  distinguish  between  a  change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance  –  that  is,  a  change  in  the 
policy  rate  and/or  an  expansion  of  central  bank  money  –  and  the  management  of  liquidity 
that aims to mitigate the impact of shocks on the interbank money market so as to ensure its 
orderly  functioning  and  the  efficient  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses  to  the 
economy.  This  distinction  is  crucial  both  for  substantive  reasons  and  in  order  to  better 
understand the rationale of the policies pursued by the ECB – the various measures taken, 
be they standard or non-standard – aimed at counteracting the effects of the crisis on the 
financial system, economic activity and price stability. 
Since 
financial  and  economic 
developments  as  well  as  central  bank  policy  responses  can  be  usefully  examined  and 
assessed over two time periods. During the first period, from early August 2007 until early 
October 2008, the ECB did not ease the stance of monetary policy – as defined by its key 
policy rates – to address financial market tensions. On the contrary, in July 2008, it raised its 
key policy rates by 25 basis points to counter increasing inflationary pressures and medium-
term inflation risks. But from the onset of the crisis in August 2007, the ECB took swift and 
decisive  action  to  provide  liquidity  in  the  interbank  money  market  to  alleviate  the  stresses 
and  ensure,  to  the  maximum  extent  possible,  that  liquidity  problems  would  not  turn  into 
solvency problems, and that systemic risk would be effectively contained.  
During  this  period  the  Eurosystem  engaged  in  active  liquidity  management  adjusting  the 
intertemporal  distribution  of  liquidity  provision  within  the  reserve  maintenance  period,  but 
without changing the total supply of bank reserves over the entire maintenance period (of, in 
most  cases,  28  days).  At  the  same  time,  the  maturity  profile  of  the  refinancing  operations 
was altered, with more central bank liquidity provided to banks for periods up to 3 months 
(and as of March 2008, also up to 6 months), and correspondingly less in the weekly main 
refinancing  operations,  so  that  the  overall  supply  of  central  money  was  kept  broadly 
unchanged. As a result, between the end of June 2007 and the end of September 2008, the 
balance sheet of the Eurosystem increased only moderately by about 100 billion euro.2
To  sum  up,  for  more  than  a  year  since  the  eruption  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  the 
unfavourable combination of, on the one hand, persisting and increasing inflation risks and, 
turbulence  erupted 
in  summer  2007, 
financial 
the 
                                                 
1   See Mission Statement of the Eurosystem (www.ecb.europa.eu). 
2   At the end of September 2008, the size of the balance sheet of the Eurosystem  was EUR 1013 billion, an 
increase of 11% compared to its size at the end of June 2007, before the turmoil erupted. 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2009
in 
financial  market  conditions  and 
on the other, substantial stresses in the financial systems and risks to its stability required a 
“separation” of the monetary policy stance from the management of liquidity. The former was 
defined so as to achieve the primary objective of preserving medium-term price stability. The 
latter aimed at, and was effective in, mitigating pressures in the money market and tensions 
in other financial markets, as measured, for example, by CDS spreads and corporate bond 
risk premia, which gradually eased. 
With  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  last  year,  the  crisis  entered  a  new 
phase: it intensified greatly and abruptly, spread across economic sectors, and broadened 
globally,  affecting  advanced,  emerging  and  developing  economies.  Risk  aversion  rose 
dramatically  and  confidence  plummeted,  as  shown  by  several  indicators,  stresses  in  the 
banking  system  increased,  the  money  market  became  dysfunctional,  and  world  economic 
activity weakened substantially accompanied by a sharp drop in world trade and a marked 
decline in commodity prices.  
The  sudden  and  substantial  deterioration 
the 
macroeconomic  environment  changed  the  outlook  for  price  stability  and  inflation  risks 
diminished significantly in the euro area and globally. At the same time, the risks to financial 
stability  increased.  In  response,  the  ECB  and  other  major  central  banks  eased  monetary 
policy and injected large amounts of liquidity, also employing non-standard policy measures. 
Over the past seven months, since the financial crisis deepened and broadened, the ECB 
has reduced its key policy interest rate by 325 basis point, to now 1%. The magnitude of the 
monetary policy easing over such a short period of time is unprecedented and highlights the 
exceptional policy response to the crisis. Equally unprecedented has been the expansion of 
liquidity provided by the ECB in the interbank money market.  
Indeed,  the  provision  of  liquidity  by  the  ECB  to  the  euro  area  banking  system  has  been 
extraordinary in size and scope, and has involved implementation of non-standard measures. 
Following  the  Lehman  Brothers  bankruptcy  last  September,  banks  became  ever  more 
reluctant  to  lend  to  each  other  as  a  result  of  a  sharp  increase  in  the  perceived  risks  of 
counterparty default and a continued lack of transparency about the health of banks’ balance 
sheets.3 To reduce banks’ severe funding problems, the ECB took unprecedented steps and 
increased  its  intermediation  activity.  Since  last  October,  the  ECB  has  provided  unlimited 
funding in euro at fixed interest rates over periods up to six months against an expanded list 
of eligible assets for use as collateral in Eurosystem refinancing operations. In addition, the 
ECB  has  supplied  liquidity  in  other  currencies,  notably  US  dollars,  on  a  basis  of  a  swap 
agreement  with  the  Federal  Reserve.  This  extraordinary  expansion  of  liquidity  provided  to 
euro area banks is reflected in the growth of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. Between the 
end of June 2007 and the end of April 2009, the balance sheet increased by about EUR 600 
billion, and had reached EUR 1.51 trillion which is equivalent to 16% of the nominal GDP in 
the euro area. By comparison, the size of the Federal Reserve System balance sheet had 
reached 14% of the US nominal GDP at the end of April.  
Have the policy actions taken by the ECB been effective? They have resulted in a significant 
improvement in money market conditions, which contributes to the financing of the economy 
and helps contain the impact of the crisis on economic activity and price developments. The 
spread  between  the  three-month  unsecured  rate,  Euribor,  and  the  three-month  overnight 
index  swap  rate  (Eonia  swap  rate),  a  widely-used  measure  of  interbank  market  tensions, 
declined by almost 130 basis points over the past seven months, from the highs of above 
180 basis points recorded in October 2008 to just below 60 basis points in mid-May 2009. 
Moreover,  the  levels  of  money  market  rates  have  declined  even  more  from  the  peaks 
reached last October. For example, the three-month Euribor rate was 1.27% in the middle of 
                                                 
3   The effects of asymmetric information and counterparty credit risk on the structure of the interbank market and 
various policy responses are analysed in Heider et al. (2009). 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 3
this  week  (13  May),  more  than  400  basis  points  lower  that  its  peak  value  (5.39%)  last 
October. These are favourable developments also relative to those observed in other major 
money markets, where interest rate spreads and levels have been declining sharply as well.4  
The transmission of the policy rates to money market interest rates is an important step but it 
is  also  an  intermediate  one.  The  structure  of  the  euro  area  financial  system,  with  the 
dominant role played by the banking system in the financing of the economy, implies that the 
transmission  of  the  ECB’s  policy  rates  to  the  euro  area  bank  lending  rates  is  of  utmost 
relevance for economic activity. Until October 2008, the borrowing costs of households and 
firms  seemed  to  have  increased  compared  to  the  policy  rate,  as  bank  lending  standards 
tightened and bank interest rates followed the path of the Euribor rate. But the substantial 
reduction in policy rates and the unlimited provision of liquidity to the banking system over 
the  past  seven  months  have  resulted  in  a  decline  in  bank  lending  rates,  particularly  as 
regards short-term credit.  
Nevertheless,  financing  conditions  have  remained  tight  and  credit  growth  to  the  private 
sector  has  decelerated,  partly  as  a  consequence  of  the  deleveraging  of  banks’  balance 
sheets  and  persisting  stresses  in  the  bank  wholesale  funding  markets.  After  a  prolonged 
period  of  “search  for  yield”  by  investors  and  the  accompanying  excessive  growth  of  credit 
and  leverage,  the  large  writedowns  on  bank  assets,  the  reduced  bank  profitability  and  the 
low  confidence  in  the  health  of  the  banking  system  have  forced  banks  to  embark  on  a 
process of deleveraging. Needless to say, the ongoing structural adjustment in the banking 
sector  and  low  confidence  cannot  be  counteracted  by  monetary  policy.  To  address  these 
developments  and  help  strengthen  banks’  balance  sheets,  governments  have  provided  a 
significant amount of support to banks in Europe and elsewhere, through capital injections, 
the provision of government guarantees on new bank debt as well as asset relief schemes 
aiming  at  removing  troubled  assets  from  banks’  balance  sheets.5  The  common  goals  of 
these government measures are to safeguard financial stability, help restore the provision of 
credit to the economy and bolster confidence in the soundness of the financial system and in 
the prospects of the economy.  
At the current juncture, a key feature of the current crisis is a mutually reinforcing interaction 
between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  weakening  of  economic  activity  and  rising  unemployment, 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  process  of  deleveraging  of  banks’  balance  sheets  and  the 
persisting bank stresses in some bank funding markets. The weakening of economic activity 
could  lead  to  a  further  deterioration  in  bank  balance  sheets  and  prolong  the  deleveraging 
process.  This  could  limit  the  willingness  of  banks  to  supply  credit,  which  would  adversely 
affect economic activity and increase the likelihood that banks will suffer further credit losses 
and  tighten  their  lending  standards.  The  deleveraging  process  and  the  emergence  of  a 
strong  adverse  feedback  loop  between  the  real  economy  and  the  financial  sector  will 
undoubtedly  affect  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  and  will  make  it  harder  to  assess  its 
effectiveness.  This  also  underscores  the  importance  of  the  effective  implementation  of  the 
government measures to strengthen bank balance sheets and other policy actions that can 
improve the functioning of funding markets. 
At its most recent meeting on 7 May, the Governing Council decided to lower the interest rate 
on the main refinancing operation of the ECB by 25 basis points to 1% and keep the interest 
rate on the deposit facility unchanged at 0.25%. We also agreed on important measures of 
“enhanced  credit  support”,  aimed  at  encouraging  banks  to  expand  credit  to  the  private 
sector, improve market liquidity and funding conditions for banks and enterprises and, more 
                                                 
4   For example, the corresponding US money market spread, three-month Libor rate minus the OIS, declined to 
just under the 100 basis point mark last month. 
In  the  euro  area,  banks  had  received  just  over  EUR  113  billion  of  capital  injections  from  governments  and 
around EUR 300 billion of government guarantees until early May 2009. 
BIS Review 59/2009
5 
4 
 generally, enhance the transmission of monetary policy actions to the real economy. These 
measures include the purchase of euro-denominated covered bonds issued in the euro area, 
the provision of central bank liquidity to the banking system with a maturity of 12 months, and 
making  the  European  Investment  Bank  an  eligible  counterparty  in  the  Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy operations. 
III.  
The exit strategy from the extraordinary policy measures taken during the 
financial crisis 
To sum up, the monetary policy responses of the ECB and the other major central banks to 
the  current  crisis,  especially  since  its  deepening  and  broadening  last  October,  have  been 
extraordinary  –  indeed,  they  can  be  labelled  “unprecedented”.  But  they  have  been 
appropriate in the light of the severity and scope of the crisis, and its potential effects on the 
financial  system  and  price  stability.  Unprecedented  has  been  the  size  of  monetary  policy 
easing since last autumn; unprecedented has been the amount of liquidity provided by the 
Eurosystem to the banking system at different maturities and in different currencies and the 
related  expansion  of  its  balance  sheet;  and  unprecedented  has  been  the  use  of  “non-
standard” measures to provide central bank liquidity and support the provision of credit to the 
private sector. These facts underscore the importance of the adoption on an appropriate exit 
strategy  from  the  extraordinary  macroeconomic  stimulus,  the  government  bank  support 
schemes and the non-standard monetary policy measures. 
The features of the appropriate exit strategy and the pace of its implementation will depend 
on  several  considerations,  but  let  me  emphasise  two:  The  first  is  the  overriding  goal  to 
effectively counter any risks to price stability over the medium to longer-term and ensure that 
medium-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored to price stability. The second is 
the need to progressively reduce the reliance of the banking system, and more generally of 
the financial sector and the economy, on support mechanisms and non-standard measures 
which  are  of  exceptional  and  temporary  nature,  and  to  restore  the  normal  functioning  of 
markets.  To  this  end,  once  financial  conditions  and  the  macroeconomic  environment 
improve, the non-standard monetary policy measures taken should be quickly unwound and 
the liquidity provided should be absorbed in a timely manner. 
The  effective  implementation  of  the  exit  strategy  will  have  to  address  a  number  of  issues. 
The ease with which the central bank can revert from the non-standard to normal operating 
procedures in a smooth manner will depend on the resolution of the underlying reasons for 
the  dysfunctioning  of  the  money  market.  In  particular,  transparency  and  confidence  in  the 
reliability of the reporting of market participants’ exposures to toxic assets and highly risky 
loans  must  be  such  that  adverse  selection,  which  has  been  a  cause  of  dysfunction  of  the 
money market, ceases to be a problem. Moreover, any changes in the operational framework 
should be clearly communicated by the central bank with sufficient lead time to allow market 
participants to prepare and adjust their liquidity management. The ECB and the Eurosystem 
are committed to pursuing such a timely and transparent communication policy. 
Another issue of relevance for the implementation of the appropriate monetary policy stance 
in the context of an exit strategy is the careful assessment of the extent to which parts of the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  have  been  affected  by  the  financial  market 
turbulence,  and  the  implication  of  this  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  For  example, 
during the crisis the ratio of the broad monetary aggregate M3 to the monetary base M0 has 
dropped rapidly and substantially because the provision of liquidity by the central bank is only 
partly transmitted – and to a much lesser extent than in normal times – to the bank credit 
market and the real economy. Once the economy recovers and the deleveraging of banks’ 
balance sheets is complete, the value of this “money multiplier” will start reverting to normal. 
Vigilance  and  appropriate  policy  responses  are  therefore  needed  to  avoid  an  excessive 
expansion  of  credit  to  the  economy.  These  concerns  may  seem  premature  at  the  present 
juncture of tight financing conditions, but is important to be prepared so that the exit strategy 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 5
is  implemented  effectively  and  we  avoid  sowing  the  seeds  of  credit  and  asset  market 
excesses in the future that could constitute a risk to price stability. 
One attractive feature of most non-standard measures used by the ECB is that they can be 
easily unwound and that the liquidity provided can be withdrawn automatically at the maturity 
of  the  refinancing  operations.  Of  course,  the  relative  advantages  of  different  non-standard 
measures  with  regard  to  their  unwinding  should  be  judged  against  their  effectiveness  in 
providing  the  necessary  credit  support  during  the  crisis.  And  the  effectiveness  of  different 
measures depends on the economy’s financial structure, for instance the extent to which the 
financing of the economy relies on the banking system, as is the case in the euro area, or it 
is market-based, as is the case in certain other advanced economies. 
Finally, the timing of implementation of an exit strategy will clearly depend, first and foremost, 
on the outlook for price stability, which is partly related to the pace of economic recovery and 
the  return  to  normality  in  financial  markets.  Recently,  we  have  observed  an  increasing 
number  of  positive  signs  suggesting  that  the  economy  is  stabilising  and  that  the  recovery 
may  start  sooner  than  previously  envisaged,  despite  the  further  strong  deterioration  of 
economic activity in the first quarter of this year. However, the available economic data and 
survey indicators point to a stabilisation at very low levels and economic activity in the euro 
area is likely to gradually recover in the course of 2010. The monetary policy stance and the 
non-standard measures taken so far will ensure the preservation of price stability over the 
medium term and will progressively provide further support to economic activity. 
Financial crisis prevention and monetary policy 
IV.  
The  uncertainties  associated  with  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  when  the  financial 
system  is  under  stress  and  the  implementation  challenges  of  the  exit  strategy  that  I 
previously mentioned are only two reasons which highlight the need to prevent the build-up 
of financial imbalances in the first place. One of the lessons from the current crisis, which is 
also supported by recent research findings6, is that monetary policy tools should be among 
the  instruments  to  be  employed  to  prevent  asset  market  excesses  and  the  systemic  and 
deflation  risks  they  entail.  The  events  of  the  past  two  years  have  revived  the  debate  on 
whether,  and  to  what  extent,  monetary  policy  can  be  used  to  “lean  against  the  wind”  of 
emerging asset price bubbles; or whether monetary policy can indeed be conducted in what 
could be called a “symmetric” manner over the financial cycle, that is, being accommodative 
in  an  environment  of  falling  asset  prices,  while  being  commensurately  restrictive  during  a 
financial market boom.7
Let  me  elaborate  on  these  issues  by  first  looking  at  periods  when  financial  markets  are 
declining sharply. In general, market participants will expect public authorities, including the 
central bank, to take measures to mitigate the impact of a major crisis once it occurs. From 
the perspective of the central bank, a monetary policy easing, in all likelihood, would not only 
be  supportive  of  financial  stability,  but  it  would  also  be  appropriate  for  achieving  the  price 
stability  objective,  as  inflationary  pressures  could  be  expected  to  diminish  during  a  severe 
financial  market  downturn  associated  with  a  weakening  of  economic  activity.  For  financial 
institutions, however, the expectation of being “bailed out” in a crisis is likely to encourage 
excessive  risk-taking  during  boom  times,  or  even  fuel  an  asset  price  boom.  The  available 
evidence and recent research show that a higher, possibly excessive, level of risk-taking has 
been  observed  in  the  past  during  periods  of  persistently  low  interest  rates.8  In  order  to 
                                                 
6   E.g. Diamond and Rajan, 2008; Adrian and Shin, 2008; Maddaloni et al., 2008; Alessi and Detken, 2009; De 
Fiore and Tristani, 2009; Cecchetti et al, 2000; see also Taylor, 2009. 
7   See pertinent discussion in Kohn, 2006 and 2008. 
8   See Jiménez et al. (2007). 
6 
 BIS Review 59/2009
reduce  such  potentially  dangerous  side-effects  of  non-standard  measures  of  liquidity 
provision and of the very low policy rates during a crisis, monetary policy would have to be 
sufficiently tightened during the financial boom phase. Such a policy would dampen financial 
market excesses through two channels. It would tend to reduce asset prices by increasing 
the  rate  at  which  an  asset’s  future  income  stream  is  discounted.  Most  importantly,  the 
anticipation of  such  a  policy  response  would  reduce  the  likelihood  of  a  speculative  bubble 
emerging in the first place, by affecting investment behaviour and reducing the level of risk 
incurred by financial intermediaries in their lending.9  
Can such a “symmetric” monetary policy response to financial market cycles be effectively 
implemented? The ECB’s monetary policy strategy offers an appropriate framework, and one 
that  seems  better  suited  than  the  traditional  inflation  targeting  framework,  for  two  main 
reasons:  First,  the  ECB  defines  quantitatively  its  price stability  objective  –  an  inflation  rate 
below,  but  close  to,  2%  –  in  a  manner  that  would  allow  the  conduct  of  a  more  restrictive 
monetary  policy  during  a  period  of  buoyant  financial  markets,  even  in  an  environment  of 
relatively  subdued  inflationary  pressures.  In  other  words,  “leaning  against  the  wind”  of 
booming asset prices by raising the policy interest rates would, even in the short to medium 
term,  be  compatible  with  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  aiming  at  consumer  price 
(HICP) stability. “Leaning against the wind” would likely result in lower inflation over the short 
term, but would be expected to be more effective in maintaining price stability over the longer 
term,  by  helping  to  prevent  the  materialisation  of  deflation  risks  when  the  asset  bubble 
bursts. 
Second,  the  ECB’s  analysis  of  monetary  and  credit  developments  aimed  at  identifying 
longer-term  inflation  risks  can  also  provide  signals  of  growing  financial  imbalances,  which 
could  in  principle  be  used  to  implement  a  policy  of  “leaning  against  the  wind”.10  Even  if 
“leaning  against  the  wind”  would  not  be  an  explicit  policy  aim,  the  greater  reliance  on 
monetary  and  credit  developments  when  defining  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance 
would  result  in  pursuing  a  tighter  policy  during  times  of  booming  financial  markets  and  a 
more accommodative one in less favourable conditions. This is because asset price booms 
are often associated with strong money and credit expansion. Recent research, also by ECB 
colleagues, has shown that financial imbalances – especially the more “costly” ones – are 
usually related to a large build-up of leverage in the economy, which, in turn, is reflected in 
money  and  credit  growth.11  That  said,  a  policy  of  “leaning  against  the  wind”  can  not  be 
implemented  in  a  mechanical  way  in  response  to  developments  in  monetary  and  credit 
aggregates. Not least because the recent experience has shown that rising asset prices are 
not  necessarily  closely  associated  with  a  significant  increase  in  inflationary  pressure  that 
would call for a tightening of monetary policy. Structural factors, such as increases in trend 
productivity  growth,  technological  innovation  or  the  inflation-dampening  effects  of  global 
competition  can  contribute  to  keeping  inflation  low  when  asset  prices  are  rising.  This  can 
lead to situations where the use of the single monetary policy instrument, the interest rate, to 
pursue the objective of price stability might require a change in one direction, but financial 
stability considerations might point to a different direction. 
Moreover,  it  has  been  argued  that  monetary  policy  is  “too  blunt  a  tool”  to  be  effective  in 
preventing the build-up of imbalances, because interest rate increases might need to be very 
large  in  order  to  have  any  effect  on  asset  prices  and  risk-taking  in  periods  of  “irrational 
exuberance” in financial markets. Recently, three arguments, based on empirical evidence, 
have been advanced that would alleviate this traditional concern. First, the experience during 
                                                 
9   See Diamond and Rajan, 2008; Cao and Illing, 2008. 
10   See Alessi and Detken (2009) and Gerdesmeier et al. (2009). 
11   See  Detken  and  Smets,  2004;  Adalid  and  Detken,  2007;  Goodhart  and  Hofmann,  2008;  Christiano  et  al., 
2008); Baumeister et al., 2008. 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 7
the current crisis with off-balance sheet structured investment vehicles (SIVs) suggests that 
the  profitability  of  such  entities  based  on  high  leverage  and  maturity  mismatch  is  very 
sensitive even to small changes in the spread between long and short-term interest rates. To 
the extent that the central bank is able to affect the slope of the yield curve, such a maturity 
mismatch  and  leverage  would  be  curtailed.12  Second,  while  central  bank  warnings  about 
observed  excessive  risk-taking  might  not  always  trigger  immediate  corrective  action,  their 
explicit communication in conjunction with small changes in the key policy rate could have 
the desired effect. This is because a change in the policy rate would serve as a signalling 
device and increase the credibility of the central bank’s risk assessment.13 Third, by slightly 
increasing  the  price  of  leverage  at  an  early  stage  of  a  developing  boom,  the  central  bank 
could  break  herding  behaviour  when  the  development  of  a  bubble  depends  on  investors 
observing other investors purchasing the bubble-prone asset.14 Thus the view that monetary 
policy is too blunt a tool to lean against the wind of asset price booms could be challenged. 
But  no  consensus  on  this  issue  has  yet  emerged.  The  effectiveness  of  implementing  a 
symmetric monetary policy will have to be assessed in practice. 
My remarks have focused so far on lessons and challenges for monetary policy. However, 
other policies should certainly also be at the centre of attention when drawing lessons from 
the “Great Crisis”, not least because other policies can complement and support the efforts of 
central banks to prevent and manage a crisis. The experience over the past two years has 
revealed several weaknesses in the financial system and highlighted important inadequacies 
in the regulatory and supervisory frameworks. Strengthening and broadening the regulatory 
framework as well as conducting macro-prudential supervision at the global and European 
levels are important priorities. In particular, the establishment of an effective framework for 
macro-prudential supervision and the development of the relevant analytical underpinnings, 
such as financial stability indicators as well as early risk warning and stress-testing models 
would greatly contribute to financial crisis prevention.  
Conclusion 
V.  
I started by characterising the current crisis as “great” and one “beyond compare”. The crisis 
has also been a learning experience “beyond compare”, for market participants and policy-
makers, including central banks. What is essential now is to make sure that the lessons that 
have  been  identified  from  this  experience  are  actually  learnt,  and  that  public  policy  and 
market behaviour adapt accordingly to benefit from those lessons. For monetary policy, this 
implies that financial stability considerations should be taken into account when formulating 
policy  aimed  at  preserving  price  stability  over  the  medium  and  longer  term.  In  particular, 
close  monitoring  and  deeper  analysis  of  asset  price  movements,  monetary  and  credit 
developments, and the build-up of financial imbalances and the emergence of systemic risk 
can  provide  valuable  information  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  ECB’s  monetary 
policy strategy provides the framework for such an analysis. The more immediate challenge 
for monetary policy in the short and medium term is to strike a balance between, on the one 
hand, responding in a timely and effective manner to incipient risks to price stability as the 
economy recovers and market conditions normalise, and, on the other hand, winding down in 
a  proportionate  manner  the  support  schemes  and  non-standard  measures  that  have  been 
implemented to mitigate the adverse effects of the crisis on the banking system and certain 
financial market segments. Finally, just as a crisis is a multi-faceted phenomenon, the public 
policy response cannot rely only on one policy instrument or the actions of one authority. The 
joint efforts and cooperation of central banks, supervisors and regulators are necessary for 
                                                 
12   Adrian and Shin, 2008. 
13   Hoerova et al., 2008. 
14   Loisel et al., 2009. 
8 
 BIS Review 59/2009
effective crisis prevention and management. In this manner, we will also better address the 
challenges that lie ahead.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
References 
Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007), “Liquidity Shocks and Asset Price Boom/Bust Cycles”, ECB 
Working Paper, No. 732. 
Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2008), “Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability and Monetary 
Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole. 
Alessi, L. and C. Detken (2009), “‘Real Time’ Early Warning Indicators for Costly Asset Price 
Boom/Bust  Cycles:  A  Role  for  Global  Liquidity”,  Paper  presented  at  EABCN  and  CREI 
Conference on Business Cycle Developments, Financial Fragility, Housing and Commodity 
Prices, Barcelona, 21-23 November 2008, ECB Working Paper, forthcoming.  
Altunbas  Y.,  L.  Gambacorta  and  D.  Marqués-Ibáñez  (2009),  “Securitisation  and  the  Bank 
Lending Channel”, European Economic Review, forthcoming, available as the ECB Working 
Paper No. 838. 
Baumeister, C., Durinck, E. and G. Peersman (2008), “Liquidity, Inflation and Asset Prices in 
a Time-Varying Framework for the Euro Area”, paper presented at 2008 colloquium of the 
National Bank of Belgium.  
Cao, J. and G. Illing (2008), “Liquidity Shortage and Monetary Policy”, CESifo Working Paper 
No. 2210.  
Cecchetti, S.G., H. Genberg, J. Lipsky and S. Whadwani (2000), “Asset Prices and Central 
Bank Policy”, Geneva Report on the World Economy 2, CEPR and ICMB. 
Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2008), “Monetary Policy and Stock Market Boom-
Bust Cycles”, ECB Working Paper, No. 955. 
Diamond,  D.W.  and  R.G.  Rajan  (2008),  “Illiquidity  and  Interest  Rate  Policy,”  available  at 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/conference/2009/cblt/Diamond_Rajan.pdf. 
De  Fiore,  F.  and  O.  Tristani  (2009),  “Optimal  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Model  of  the  Credit 
Channel”, ECB Working Paper, No. 1043. 
Detken, C. and F. Smets (2004), “Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy”, ECB Working 
Paper, No. 364. Published in H. Siebert (ed.) Macroeconomic Policies in the World Economy, 
Springer: Berlin. 
Di  Noia,  C.  and  G.  Di  Giorgio  (1999),  “Should  Banking  Supervision  and  Monetary  Policy 
Tasks be Given to Different Agencies?”, International Finance, 2:3, 361-378. 
Gerdesmeier, D., B. Roffia and H.-E. Reimers (2009), “Monetary Developments and Asset 
Prices”, ECB Mimeo. 
Goodhart,  C.  and  B.  Hofmann  (2008),  “House  Prices,  Money,  Credit  and  the  Macro-
economy”, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 888. 
Heider, F., M. Hoerova and C. Holthausen (2008), “Liquidity Hoarding and Interbank Market 
Spreads: The Role of Counterparty Risk,” available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1362113. 
Hoerova, M., C. Monnet and T. Temzelides (2008), “Money Talks: Information and Monetary 
Policy”, ECB Working Paper (forthcoming). 
International Monetary Fund (2009), “World Economic Outlook”, April. 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 9
Jiménez, J., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydró-Alcalde and J. Taurina (2007), “Hazardous Times for 
Monetary  Policy:  What  do  Twenty-Three  Million  Bank  Loans  Say  About  the  Effects  of 
Monetary Policy on Credit Risk?”, CEPR Discussion Paper 6514. 
Kohn,  D.  (2006),  “Monetary  policy  and  asset  prices”;  speech  delivered  at  the  European 
Central  Bank  Colloquium  on  “Monetary  Policy:  A  Journey  from  Theory  to  Practice”  held  in 
honour of Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, Germany, 16 March. 
Kohn, D. (2008), “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices Revisited”; speech delivered at the Cato 
Institute’s 26th Annual Monetary Policy Conference, Washington, D.C., 19 November 
Loisel, O., A. Pommeret and F. Portier (2009), “Monetary Policy And Herd Behaviour In New-
Tech Investment”, mimeo. 
Maddaloni, A., J.L. Peydró and S. Scopel (2008), “Does Monetary Policy Affect Bank Credit 
Standards?”, mimeo. 
Papademos, L. “The dual crisis: economic impact, policy response and exit strategy”, speech 
at  the  High-Level  Panel  Debate  on  “Europe  in  the  Economic  and  Financial  Crisis:  How  to 
bring back prosperity for everyone?”, Brussels, 4 May. 
Taylor, J.B. (2009), “The Financial Crisis and the Policy Responses: An Empirical Analysis of 
What Went Wrong”, NBER Working Paper Series No. 14631. 
10 
 BIS Review 59/2009
