V K Sharma: Supervising in a crisis environment 
Address by Mr V K Sharma, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Annual 
Regulators’  Roundtable,  organized  by  the  International  Credit  Union  Regulators’  Network, 
Barcelona, 30-31 July 2009. 
 I  thank  International  Credit  Union  Regulators  Network  for  inviting  me  to  this  Regulators 
Roundtable  to  share  our  experience  of  Supervising  in  Crisis  Environment.  I  greatly 
appreciate  the  selection  of  the  topic,  the  relevance  of  which  cannot  be  over  emphasized 
today.  Urban  Cooperative  Banks  (UCBs)  in  India  are  akin  to  Credit  Unions  as  they  are 
member-driven and are essentially community-based. However, unlike credit unions, UCBs 
are  also  permitted  to  accept  deposits  from  non-members  and  are  part  of  the  payments 
systems.  
As the banking, including the urban cooperative banking, sector in India was not affected by 
the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  I  will  share  today  with  this  distinguished  and  august 
audience the learning curve experienced, not long ago, in dealing with our own kind of crisis. 
However,  I  would  presently  demonstrate  how  the  Reserve  Bank,  instead  of  adopting  any 
well-trodden course of action, customized its response, keeping in view the sector-specific 
problems. I would then review the impact of RBI’s approach and strategies for the UCBs and 
also discuss the ongoing efforts for strengthening the sector. But I must admit that regulating 
and supervising the UCB sector has been a far more formidable challenge than regulating 
and supervising the commercial banking sector.  
Background 
In  the  year  2004,  38%  of  the  approximately  1926  urban  cooperative  banks  in  India  were 
assessed as weak or sick. The deposits of the sector began to show a declining trend and by 
2005  the  Non  Performing  Assets  rose  to  23.2%.  In  order  to  address  this  rather  critical 
situation, several measures were initiated which were both short term as well as long term 
and far-reaching in nature and which also I propose to discuss today.  
Genesis of the crisis  
Rapid growth of the sector 
A. 
In  the  period  of  15  years,  between  1991  and  2004,  the  UCB  sector  had  witnessed 
unprecedented growth. From 1306 urban cooperative banks in 1991, the number of banks 
increased to 1926 in the year 2004, representing a growth of 47 percent i.e. 620 banks were 
added in 15 years (not counting for the banks that collapsed in that period). As against this, 
in the previous 25 years i.e. between 1966 and 1991 only 200 new banks had come up.  
This  spectacular  growth  of  UCBs  since  1991,  resulted  in  increasing  their  penetration,  but 
ironically,  also  led  to  certain  weaknesses  in  the  sector  that  adversely  affected  public 
perception and thereby, their competitiveness. The weakening of public confidence in UCB 
sector began with a crisis in 2001 faced by a large multi-state bank in the prosperous state of 
Gujarat, when there was a sudden “run” on the bank, following rumours of its large exposure 
to a leading stock broker who had suffered huge losses in the stock market. The large-scale 
withdrawal of deposits within a short time resulted in severe liquidity problems for the bank 
which at that time held about US $ 160 million equivalent of inter-bank deposits from over 
200 UCBs in the State and from other States, which obviously posed a systemic risk. The 
Gujarat episode was followed by another major crisis in the state of Andhra Pradesh in 2002, 
BIS Review 111/2009 
 1
when one of the largest banks in the state faced a run, following a newspaper report of an 
inquiry into the affairs of the bank by the State Registrar of Cooperative Societies. The bank 
was  in  a  weak  position,  and  ultimately,  after  attempts  at  its  revival  failed,  its  license  was 
cancelled by the Reserve Bank in 2004.The decline in public confidence in the UCB sector 
deepened in the aftermath of the crisis in Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh and concomitantly, 
the  position  of  UCBs  generally  deteriorated  which  was  reflected  in  the  RBI’s  on-site 
assessment of the banks.  
In  this  context,  I  may  mention  that  as  part  of  its  on-site  inspection,  Reserve  Bank  has  a 
system  of  categorizing  banks  into  four  grades  based  on  parameters  of  capital  adequacy, 
asset  quality,  earnings,  compliance  with  CRR/SLR  requirements  and  adherence  to  RBI 
guidelines.  While  Grade  I  &  II  banks  have  no  major  supervisory  concerns,  the  other  two 
grades indicate presence of supervisory concerns to varying degrees. As on June 30, 2004, 
732 out of 1919 UCBs were categorised in Grade III or IV, signifying weakness and sickness. 
The deteriorating position of UCBs was reflected in the public perception and deposits of the 
sector declined for the first time since its documented history in 2004-2005 by 4.7%.  
In addition to the impact of too rapid a growth, discussed above, there are certain structural 
aspects of the sector which were a cause of concern for supervisors and as I discuss these, 
you will notice, that some of these are also, not unique to India. 
Heterogeneity 
B. 
There  is  significant  degree  of  heterogeneity  in  terms  of  size,  geographical  distribution, 
performance,  financial  strength  as  also  in  the  IT  and  human  resources  endowment  of  the 
UCBs.  While  on  the  one  hand,  there  are  a  number  of  small  neighbourhood  unit  banks 
functioning for mutual interest of their members, there are several large UCBs with a wide 
network of branches, large number of depositors and borrowers on the other, many of whom 
are medium/large corporates. In the latter, while the cooperative structure exists only as an 
organizational arrangement, their business model and goals are more like commercial banks. 
The  extent  of  heterogeneity  can  be  gauged  by  the  fact  that  30.7%  of  the  UCBs  hold  only 
2.2% of deposits while at the top end, only 16 banks account for 28.8% of the total deposits 
of  the  sector.  Incidentally,  despite  the  differences  in  size,  a  “one  size  fits  all”  approach  to 
regulation and supervision existed with all UCBs being subjected to the same regulatory and 
supervisory framework as it was for commercial banks. 
Dual control  
C. 
Another feature of the UCB sector in India is the duality of control. UCBs are regulated and 
supervised by both the State Governments, through the Registrars of Co-operative Societies, 
and by the Reserve Bank of India. While the State Registrars exercise powers with regard to 
incorporation, registration, management, amalgamation, reconstruction or liquidation, in the 
case of banks having presence in more than one state, the Central Registrar of Co-operative 
Societies, on behalf of the Central Government, exercises such powers. The banking related 
functions such as issue of license to start new banks, or branches, matters relating to interest 
rates, policies on loans and investments, prudential norms etc. are regulated and supervised 
by the Reserve Bank of India. It was often our experience that the effectiveness of regulatory 
and  supervisory  measures  got  diluted  because  of  inadequate  response  from  State 
Government. Reserve Bank’s requisition to State Government to supersede the board of a 
bank,  for  example,  would  get  acted  upon  with  inordinate  delay  by  the  Registrar  of 
Cooperative Societies, in case the State Government did not share RBI’s perception about 
the competence of the board. There was thus no doubt that this was another issue which 
needed to be addressed as part of the strategy for effectively handling the crisis in the sector. 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2009
Business model – corporate governance issues  
D. 
Most of the problems faced by the sector arose from lack of good governance in UCBs, as 
indeed, incidentally, but significantly, was also the case, in the recent global financial crisis, 
with  large  global  banks.  Besides,  in  India,  unlike  a  company,  shareholders/members  of  a 
UCB, are generally the debtors of the bank. While this would be an appropriate framework 
for  governance 
from 
members/shareholders,  it  leads  to  distortion  in  the  business  model  when  applied  to  a 
cooperative bank, which solicits deposits from non-members as well. As majority of the share 
holders are borrowers in UCBs, the elected management would have an incentive to pursue 
policies  which  are  more  borrower  oriented  that  may  not  always  be  in  the  best  interests  of 
depositors. Also, unlike in the case of companies, the shares of which are listed on a stock 
exchange and can change hands without affecting the capital base, in the case of UCBs, the 
shareholders can withdraw their contribution to capital and shrink the capital of the bank and 
thereby limit its ability to increase risk weighted assets and expand business.  
for  a  cooperative  society,  which  accepts  deposits  only 
Response strategy 
Keeping  in  view  the  characteristics  of  the  UCB  sector,  Reserve  Bank  initiated  a  series  of 
measures to resolve the structural problems and strengthen the banks. In what follows, I set 
out the initiatives of the Reserve Bank in dealing with the crisis. 
Withholding of new bank and branch licenses  
A. 
Licensing norms for UCBs were eased in May 1993 and within 8 years i.e. by June 2004, 
more  than  800  banks  mushroomed  and  close  to  one  third  of  these  newly  licensed  UCBs 
became  financially  weak  within  a  short  period  of  2-3  years.  There  was,  thus,  a  need  to 
moderate the pace of growth of this sector and it was, therefore, decided in June 2004 to 
stop issue of licenses for new banks and branches until a suitable framework for regulation 
and supervision was in place for the already large number of UCBs. 
Vision document for UCBs 
B.  
Recognizing  the  systemic  risk  concerns,  Reserve  Bank  reviewed  the  entire  gamut  of 
legislative,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  these  banks,  and  in  March  2005, 
brought  out  a  draft  “Vision  Document  for  UCBs”.  The  vision  document,  discussed  the 
characteristics  of  the  sector,  analyzed  the  problems  afflicting  the  banks  and  proposed  the 
following  regulatory  and  supervisory  strategies  for  dealing  with  the  problems  affecting  the 
sector:  
Nuanced and granular approach to supervision and regulation  
a) 
Highlighting the heterogeneity of the sector, the Vision Document observed that the “one size 
fits all” approach to regulation and supervision of UCBs needed to be abjured and a multi-
layered regulatory and supervisory approach be adopted keeping in view the heterogeneity 
of  the  sector.  Accordingly,  it  was  decided  that  banks  with  deposits  less  than  Rs.1  billion 
(equivalent  to  US  $  20 million),  and  whose  branches  are limited  to  a  small  area  i.e.  Tier-I 
banks  which  more  closely  epitomized  the  cooperative  spirit,  be  placed  under  simplified 
prudential regulation for some time in order to enable them to gradually gain in strength so 
that  over  a  period  of  3  years  they  could  be  brought  at  par  with  all  other  banks  for  the 
purposes of regulation. Accordingly, the Tier-I banks have been placed under the 180-day 
delinquency norm while Tier II banks are under the 90-day norm as applicable to commercial 
banks.  The  Tier-I  banks  are,  however,  required  to  make  adequate  provisions  in  the 
intervening  period  to  enable  them  to  migrate  to  the  90-day  norm  in  future.  Further,  lower 
provisioning requirements were stipulated for Tier-I compared to Tier-II banks which is also 
intended  to  provide  a  measure  of  relief  to  the  small  UCBs,  as  lower  provisioning  would 
BIS Review 111/2009 
 3
translate into higher profits that could, in turn, be used, during the transition period, to shore 
up the capital base of the banks.  
Consultative approach to supervision – TAFCUB 
b)  
In order to address the problem of Dual Control, Reserve Bank in 2001-2002, suggested that 
a new Apex Supervisory body be constituted for the UCB sector, comprising representatives 
of  Central  /  State  Governments,  RBI  and  experts  from  the  field.  However,  since  it  did  not 
materialize, Reserve Bank proposed the amendment of Banking Regulation Act for providing 
powers  to  RBI  over  the  UCBs  similar  to  those  that  are  available  in  respect  of  commercial 
banks. When even the 2nd suggestion did not materialise, the Reserve Bank in the Vision 
document for UCBs proposed the adoption of a coordinated approach to deciding the future 
set up of weak and sick banks in each state. To this end, Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) was signed between RBI and respective state governments and Central Government, 
in  the  case  of  multi-state  urban  cooperative  banks,  to  achieve  greater  convergence  of 
approach of the two agencies tasked with the regulation and supervision of UCBs. As part of 
the MoU, it was decided to set up of State Level Task Force for Urban Co-operative Banks 
(TAFCUBs)  comprising  representatives  of  RBI,  State  Government  and  national  and  state 
level  federation/association  of  UCBs.  TAFCUB  was  tasked  with  the  responsibility  of 
identifying the potentially viable and non viable UCBs in the state and providing a revival plan 
for the former, and a non disruptive exit route for the latter, set of banks. The exit route could 
include  merger/amalgamation  with  stronger  banks,  conversion  into  societies,  or  ultimately, 
only  as  a  last  resort,  through  liquidation.  Based  on  recommendations  of  TAFCUBs, 
supervisory actions that have been initiated include merger of unviable banks with financially 
strong UCBs, cancellation of license of unviable banks and rejection of license applications 
of  unlicensed  cooperative  banks,  which  were  being  allowed  to  conduct  banking  business 
pending rejection of license application by RBI, as per the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (As 
Applicable to Cooperative Societies (AACS). Significantly, the number of unlicensed banks 
dramatically dropped from 1066 in 1977 to a mere 58 as of date! 
The  access  to  consolidated  information  from  local  and  national  level  federations  of  the 
banks, as also from the regulators and supervisors, made TAFCUB an effective instrument 
for  consolidating  the  sector  through  quick  and  non-disruptive  exit  of  unviable  banks  and 
revival  of  the  viable  ones.  As  recommendations  of  the  TAFCUBs,  had  the  consent  of  all 
stakeholders  including  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  they  lent  themselves  to  speedy 
implementation by all concerned. The first TAFCUB was set up in June 2005 and its success 
in taking of difficult decisions in a transparent manner and the consequent turning around of 
banks, has led to its adoption practically in all the states. 
Information technology 
c) 
As part of the MoU signed with the states, RBI committed itself to facilitating IT and human 
resources development initiatives in UCBs. On the technology front, a beginning was made 
by  RBI  with  the  development  of  software  that  facilitates  compilation  and  submission  of  all 
supervisory and regulatory returns by UCBs to RBI, electronically. The software also allows 
banks to analyse their own data and it is, therefore, being used as a powerful management 
information tool by many banks. The data submitted by banks are subjected to analysis by 
supervisors, inter alia, with the objective of tracking incipient stress faced by banks as also 
for  identifying  outlier  banks.  This  off-site  surveillance  mechanism  also  acts  as  a  Decision 
Support System, as data presented in an analysed form facilitates informed decision-making 
in addition to facilitating a technology-driven system for focussed and continuous supervision 
of  UCBs,  which  was  one  of  the  important  objectives  set  out  by  the  Vision  Document.  I 
understand that a presentation on the Off-site surveillance system for UCBs was also made 
before this group in July 2008 at Hongkong.  
Recognising  the  vast  scope  for  use  of  IT,  the  Reserve  Bank  constituted  a  Working  Group 
comprising members from State Government, UCB Sector and RBI to examine “the various 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2009
areas where IT support could be provided to the UCBs by the Reserve Bank.” The report of 
the  Group  is  being  examined  for  implementation  and  I  hope  that  the  same  would  give  a 
major fillip to the competitiveness and strength of the UCBs through extensive use of IT.  
Human resources initiatives 
d) 
In  order  to  upgrade  the  skills  of  officials  of  UCBs  and  enhance  professionalism,  training 
programs  are  conducted  by  RBI  in  all  important  areas  of  banking  for  Directors,  Chief 
Executive  Officers  and  other  officials  of  UCBs.  Training  programmes  are  organized  at 
Regional  centres  and  training  imparted  in  local/regional  languages  to  enable  local  staff 
absorb training without any difficulty. These programs for UCBs are conducted free of cost 
and by now over 2000 officials have so far been trained under this major initiative. 
Measures for improving corporate governance 
C.  
While  extending  necessary  support  for  up-gradation  of  professional  skills  of  Directors,  the 
Reserve Bank also advised banks to induct at least 2 professional directors on their Boards, 
with a view to ensuring that Boards have the requisite skill and competence to review and 
assess management performance. In states that have signed MoU with the Reserve Bank, 
guidelines  for  adopting  “fit  and  proper”  criteria  for  appointment  of  CEOs  have  also  been 
implemented.  These  emphasize  the  track  record  and  integrity  of  the  candidate  apart  from 
certain  eligibility  criteria  like  minimum  qualification  and  age  for  being  CEO  of  an  urban 
cooperative bank. 
An indicative list of dos and don’ts has also been formulated to serve as a guide to directors 
to  enable  them  to  play  their  role  more  effectively.  The  need  for  the  directors  to  maintain 
“arms” length from the day-to-day operations of the bank is also highlighted in the dos and 
don'ts  prescribed  by  Reserve  Bank.  Connected  lending  to  directors,  their  family  members 
and  associated  business  firms,  in  UCBs  has  been  banned,  except  for  loans  against 
securities  like  fixed  deposits  etc.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  also  circulated  a  list  of  best 
practices followed by well-run banks for others to emulate. 
Further, banks have also been advised to constitute Audit Committee of the Board and State 
Governments, as per the MOU signed with RBI, are committed to get statutory audit of larger 
UCBs conducted by Chartered Accountants. In order to ensure that the financial statements 
reflect  a  true  and  fair  picture  of  banks’  financial  position,  not  only  is  RBI  emphasizing  on 
professionalization of audit, but is also providing training to state government auditors. 
Consolidation in the UCB sector 
D.  
Consolidation in the sector through the process of merger  of weaker entities with stronger 
ones was set in motion in 2005 by providing transparent and objective guidelines for granting 
no-objection  to  merger  proposals  as  a  strategy  for  providing  non-disruptive  exit  for  the 
weaker  banks.  A  four-member  external  Expert  Group  has  been  set  up  to  vet  merger 
proposals, with a view to providing a transparent mechanism and impartial inputs. TAFCUBs 
have representatives from the sector who also provide local level inputs on banks that are on 
the lookout for taking over other weak banks as part of their inorganic growth strategy. In all 
82  merger  proposals  have  been  approved  so  far,  of  which  71  mergers  have  already 
materialized in the last 4 years. 
Problem bank resolution: customized solutions 
E.  
Apart from encouraging voluntary mergers, various other strategies have been adopted for 
problem  bank  resolution.  Restructuring  of  liabilities  involving  conversion  of  a  part  of  the 
deposits into equity has been done recently in the case of systemically important banks.  
BIS Review 111/2009 
 5
In one case, the depositors of a bank were encouraged to convert entire interest credited to 
the deposits, from the date of placing the bank under restrictive directions, into equity. As a 
result,  the  extent  of  outside  liabilities  was  reduced  and  the  bank  became  solvent.  As  this 
conversion included amount eligible for insurance cover from Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
it was also agreed to allow the capital contribution by the small depositors to be added back 
to  their  deposits  for  reckoning  insurance  cover  should  a  need  arise  to  liquidate  the  bank 
before it attained full solvency. 
In another case, a part of the deposits were allowed to be converted to equity/ perpetual debt 
instruments. Also, to ensure that the net worth of the bank turned positive after re-structuring 
and it had liquid assets adequate to meet the statutory pre-emption, the cash pay outs were 
suitably adjusted with different levels of sacrifice by the depositors. 
Another strategy for problem bank resolution was drawing up schemes for acquisition of a 
weak UCB by a strong UCB and exploring possibilities of funding the gap between valuation 
accepted  by  the  acquiring  bank  and  the  actual  deposit  liabilities  by  the  Deposit  Insurance 
and  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation.  In  certain  cases,  UCBs  have  also  been  able  to  turn 
around  by  taking  advantage  of  the  property  boom  and  disposing  of  surplus  land  and 
buildings. 
Incentives for good banks 
F. 
While  tackling  the  weak  banks  was  one  part  of  the  response  strategy,  it  was  felt  that 
encouraging strong banks with incentives by way of newer/additional business opportunities 
could complement the efforts in building up a strong sector. With this objective in view, the 
Reserve  Bank  has  been  encouraging  financially  sound  and  well  managed  UCBs  in  the 
States that have signed MoU, with business development opportunities, such as opening of 
new branches (including offsite and onsite ATMs), currency chests, opportunities for forex, 
insurance,  mutual  fund  businesses,  extension  of  area  of  operations  to  the  entire  state, 
besides providing training in I.T and support for upgrading human resources for all banks in 
MoU states, including the strong ones. 
New initiatives for strengthening UCBs 
G. 
In  India,  UCBs  are  working  on  stand-alone  basis  at  the  grassroots  level  of  the  financial 
system. Being comparatively small, it is difficult for such entities to compete with commercial 
banks  and  establish  market  share.  Looking  at  various  successful  federal  models  existing 
internationally,  especially  in  Europe  and  USA,  a  need  was  felt  for  strong  inter-cooperative 
bonding  and  co-operation  and  a  centralized  apex  institution  that  will  be  in  a  position  to 
channelize  their  resources,  aggregate  their  needs  and  also  lend  credibility  through  mutual 
support in the financial markets. Besides, the federated model gives options to UCBs to raise 
capital  through  subsidiaries  etc.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  examining  the  prospect  of  such  an 
arrangement  which  may  further  act  as  a  bulwark  in  crisis  situation  and  strengthen 
supervision through Self Regulatory Organizations.  
Impact of recent initiatives: restoration of public confidence 
A quick analysis of the impact of the above measures shows that there is a positive change 
in public perception about the UCBs. Consequently, not only the larger depositors but also 
better  quality  borrowers  are  getting  attracted  to  these  banks.  The  quality  of  assets  and 
grade-wise distribution of UCBs over the last few years reflect the improvement in the overall 
position of the UCB sector: 
6 
 BIS Review 111/2009
Changing profile of urban cooperative banking sector 
Year 
(as at 
end-
March) 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
No of 
UCBs 
1919* 
1872 
1853 
1813 
1770 
Gross 
NPAs 
(Rs. 
billion) 
154.06 
154.86 
135.06 
145.41 
145.83 
No. of banks in Grade 
IV 
III 
II 
I 
Gross 
NPA 
as % of 
total 
advances
% of 
banks in 
Grade III 
& IV 
22.7 
23.2 
18.9 
18.3 
16.4 
880 
807 
716 
652 
748 
307
340
460
598
526
529 
497 
407 
295 
258 
203 
228 
270 
268 
238 
38 
39 
37 
31 
28 
(*out of 1926 UCBs , ratings of 1919 available) ; NA: data under compilation  
 
The enhancement of public confidence in the sector is reflected by the growth in the deposit 
base, which increased from Rs.1140.60 billion as on March 2006 to Rs. 1213.91 billion (US $ 
25.1 billion) as on March 31, 2007 and to Rs.1384.96 billion (US $ 28.64 billion) in 2008 i.e. 
showing a rise of 6.4% and 14.1% respectively, over and above the increase of 8.6% during 
the year ended March 31,2006, thereby reversing the declining trend of previous years, as 
shown in the next table: 
 
Year 
ended 
March 31, 
Number  of 
UCBs 
1991 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
1306 
1618 
1854 
1941 
1926 
1872 
1853 
1813 
1770 
Deposits 
(Rs.billion) 
101.57 
808.40 
930.69 
1015.46 
1102.56 
1050.21 
1140.60 
1213.91 
1384.96 
Growth 
%)  
(in 
Advances 
(Rs. billion) 
Growth 
%)  
(in 
 15.1 
9.1 
8.6 
-4.7 
8.6 
6.4 
14.1 
80.03 
543.89 
620.60 
648.80 
679.30 
668.74 
716.41 
797.33 
889.81 
 14.1 
4.5 
4.7 
-1.6 
7.1 
11.3 
11.6 
 
The progress so far in handling the crisis of UCBs is on account of having adopted a flexible 
approach and being sensitive to the ground realities. We recognized the risk of distancing 
ourselves from the regulated entities and sought to develop close communication not only 
with other stakeholders but also with the banks. This gave us an intimate feel of the sector 
and facilitated formulation of realistic and customized responses. Our next policy goal is to 
raise  the  awareness  among  UCBs  of  the  need  for  the  induction  of  depositors  as  regular 
members,  at  least,  those  with  deposits  above  a  threshold,  which  would  make  for  a  better 
balance  in  the  governance  of  urban  cooperative  banks  and  help  further  boost  public 
confidence.  The  key  to  the  success  of  the  UCB  model  would  appear  to  lie  in  not  only 
adopting a member centric approach, but also taking depositors on board.  
BIS Review 111/2009 
 7
Concluding remarks 
I  have  traced  the  evolution  of  UCBs  over  time,  their  unique  structure,  strengths  and 
weaknesses. I also discussed the crisis that the sector faced and the multi-pronged response 
strategy  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  dealing  with  the  same.  Once  again,  I  would  like  to  thank 
ICURN for inviting me to share the lessons/takeaways from the Indian experience in handling 
the  crisis  of  the  UCB  sector.  I  welcome  your  views  on  our  response  strategy  towards 
strengthening  this  important  sector  of  the  Indian  financial  system  and  would  take  any 
questions that you may have now or anytime during the course of this conference. 
Thank you all so very much. 
8 
 BIS Review 111/2009
