Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The new financial architecture and the role of 
Europe 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  panel  discussion  organised  by  the  German  Office  of  the  European 
Commission, Berlin, 19 May 2009. 
 Introduction  
I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to this highly interesting discussion.  
Since August 2007 we have been in a financial and economic crisis that has developed into 
one of the most severe since 1929. Although we cannot yet speak of an end to the crisis, the 
crisis that we are currently experiencing has made one thing very clear: the need for reform 
in the financial sector. While financial markets have developed rapidly in the last decades, 
the  financial  and  regulatory  architecture  has  been  unable  to  keep  pace  with  such 
developments.  
The ongoing crisis has undermined the modes of operation of the private sector worldwide. 
Risks were undervalued and there was a lack of transparency. This has resulted in markets 
being faced with uncertainty and mistrust which has severely hampered market activity.  
Authorities have  reacted  swiftly  to  these  challenges  in  order  to  restore  market  confidence. 
Central banks around the world have stabilised markets by providing liquidity to the banking 
sector and have lowered policy rates to historically low levels. National governments have 
also  demonstrated  their  capacity  to  react  rapidly  to  exceptional  circumstances  and  have 
provided  support  to  the  banking  system  through  recapitalisation  and  guarantees  for  bank 
debt.  
In the longer term, however, we need to improve the resilience of the financial system, so 
that  we  have  better  possibilities  to  prevent  a  crisis  of  this  nature  from  reoccurring  in  the 
future.  Therefore,  the  most  demanding  challenge  is  to  develop  long-term  plans  for  crisis 
prevention  and  crisis  resolution.  For  this  we  need  above  all  "better"  regulation  and 
supervision, which takes account of the increasing interlinkages in the financial sector and 
places a greater emphasis on systemic risks.  
In my remarks today, I will restrict my focus to developments in, and initiatives for, financial 
markets.  As  I  am  convinced  that  only  global coordination can  bring  effective  results  in  the 
current crisis, I will start with the global initiatives. I will then discuss the role of Europe in 
sculpting the future of financial markets. I will finish with some words on the possible future 
role of the ECB in macro-prudential supervision. 
Global policy initiatives  
Let  me  start  with  the  global  policy  initiatives.  The  way  the  crisis  has  impacted  all  major 
economic areas has clearly demonstrated the limits of national responses in handling the 
activities  of  cross-border,  systemically  important  institutions,  markets  and  instruments. 
Therefore,  no  initiative  targeting  these  activities  can  be  fully  effective  without  global 
coordination. 
The  international  community  has  shown  remarkable  unity  during  the  financial  crisis.  A 
common  understanding  on  the  broad  response  to  the  challenges  has  indeed  been 
achieved  at  the  global  level.  Let  me  name  a  few  examples.  Last  year,  the  report  by  the 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 1
Financial Stability Forum (FSF) on enhancing market and institutional resilience was a key 
achievement that set the priorities for action.1 The agreed principles targeted banks’ capital 
and liquidity risk management, standards for valuation and transparency, and the role and 
the  uses  of  credit  ratings,  in  particular  for  structured  finance  instruments.  The  authorities 
were  in  addition  called  on  to  review  their  responsiveness  to  risks  and  arrangements  for 
central banking operations in crisis situations.  
Up until October 2008 the G7 had been steering the efforts to deal with the financial crisis, 
which  was  up  to  that  time  also  primarily  a  crisis  of  the  financial  system  in  advanced 
economies.  The  aftermath  of  the  Lehman  Brothers’  collapse  saw  this  financial  crisis 
spreading  across  the  globe.  In  November  last  year,  therefore,  the  Heads  of  State  or 
Government of the G20 countries met in Washington to step up international cooperation to 
address the ongoing crisis. They agreed not only on urgent actions to restore global growth 
and stabilise financial markets, but launched a major reform agenda to strengthen financial 
markets and regulatory regimes so as to avoid such crises in the future. 
The process continued at the recent G20 leaders’ meeting in London in April this year. For 
example,  the  new  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  the  successor  to  the  FSF  with  an 
expanded membership, was given a mandate to provide early warnings in collaboration with 
the  IMF.  Moreover,  it  was  agreed  to  extend  regulation  and  oversight  to  all  systemically 
important institutions, instruments and markets.  
All this shows that many decisions have been made at the global level, many of which have 
already also been put into practice. For example, several international fora (such as the FSB 
and  the  Basel  Committee)  have  been  enlarged  through  the  inclusion  of  new  Member 
Countries.  Moreover,  the  Basel  II  capital  framework  will  be  strengthened  in  a  number  of 
areas,  including  the  treatment  of  securitisation  activities,  trading  book  exposures  and 
exposures  to  off-balance  sheet  vehicles.  In  addition,  principles  for  sound  liquidity  risk 
management and supervision have been published, also by the Basel Committee.2  
It is now very important to maintain the momentum of implementation for the remaining 
issues. Let me just mention three areas that I think are of particular importance:  
First, we must pay more attention to financial stability and systemic risk considerations; 
this  applies  particularly  to  the  global  monitoring  of  system  stability  and  the  supervision  of 
cross-border  systemically 
the  supervision  of  cross-border 
systemically important institutions we need strong international cooperation and clear rules, 
in particular regarding potential burden sharing. For the global monitoring of systemic risks, 
the envisaged close cooperation between the International Monetary Fund and the Financial 
Stability Board in the conduct of early warning exercises has a crucial role to play. 
Second, the pro-cyclicality of the financial system must be limited. In this regard, it will be 
crucial that the Financial Stability Board, the Basel Committee and other bodies develop and 
implement appropriate regulatory and supervisory tools to promote the build-up of reserves 
in good times to be used in times of stress. It will also be important to reduce the probability 
of individual bank’s insolvencies by making appropriate provisions of capital. 
And third, regulation and oversight must be improved and expanded. In this respect, let 
me particularly stress in this context that all systemically important institutions, markets and 
instruments  should  be  subject  to  an  appropriate  degree  of  regulation  and  oversight.  This 
includes  in  particular  systemically  important  hedge  funds,  credit  rating  agencies  and  OTC 
institutions.  For 
important 
                                                 
1  
“Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience”, published on 12 
April  2008.  Note  that  the  FSF  has  been  recently  renamed  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  with  expanded 
responsibilities and membership. 
“Principles  for  sound  liquidity  risk  management  and  supervision”,  endorsed  on  25  September  2008;  and 
Consultative papers on the enhancements to the Basel II capital framework, issued on 16 January 2009. 
BIS Review 61/2009
2  
2 
 derivatives markets, whose inclusion in the regulatory net has been already endorsed by the 
G20  leaders.  It  is  only  thus  that  we  can  in  future  prevent  regulatory  arbitrage  between 
sectors and markets as well as the emergence of “shadow markets”.  
The role of Europe 
But let me now move to the key question of this panel discussion: What should Europe’s role 
be in this new financial architecture?  
In my opinion, Europe has a chance to act as a powerful force in shaping the future of 
financial markets, if it acts in a coordinated and cooperative manner. I think that the first 
foundation stones for this have been laid. Just think of the determination that the EU leaders 
showed  last  autumn  in  addressing  the  financial  crisis;  together  they  produced  a  common 
European action plan, the Paris Declaration. At this very moment, important changes in the 
European  supervisory  architecture  are  being  discussed,  notably  based  on 
the 
recommendations  of  the  De  Larosière  Report.  These  include  the  recommendation  to 
transform  the  so-called  level  three  committees  of  national  supervisors  into  European 
authorities. In the field of macro-prudential supervision, moreover, a European Systemic Risk 
Council (ESCR) is recommended to be established, under the auspices of the ECB/ESCB. 
Allow me to take a brief look at an aspect that has moved somewhat into the background of 
the policy debate at present. The policy initiatives should be coupled with a further striving for 
financial market integration in Europe.  
History has shown that a tendency towards national retrenchment may increase in times of 
uncertainty.  The  recent  crisis  has  indeed  confirmed  this.  Our  current  measurement  of  the 
state  of  financial  integration  shows  some  signs  of  segmentation  along  national  borders, 
particularly for the interbank market.3  
It is thus important not to forget that integrated financial markets can help financial stability. 
They offer their participants a more efficient environment than a market divided by national 
borders ever could. Integrated markets are more liquid and offer better opportunities for risk 
diversification,  and  therefore  reinforce  the  shock-absorption  capacity  of  the  system. 
Therefore, financial integration is directly linked to our objective of improving the resilience of 
markets and contributes to financial stability in the long term. 
Cross-border  financial  risks  are  becoming  more  and  more  important  in  Europe.  Therefore, 
while  we  need  to  remain  firmly  committed  to  financial integration  in  Europe,  the European 
financial architecture, i.e. the supervisory and regulatory framework, needs to adjust to this 
evolution and reflect a more integrated market with more cross-border activities. Therefore, 
the recommendations of the De Larosière report form a good basis for discussion.  
The role of the ECB 
Let  me  turn  to  the  ECB’s  role  in  this  regard,  specifically  with  regard  to  macro-prudential 
supervision. What the current crisis shows us is that we must attach greater importance to 
systemic risks. The creation of a European Systemic Risk Council under the auspices of the 
ECB/ESCB  – as proposed in the De Larosière report – would be an important step in the 
right direction.  
Systemic  risk  is  something  that  by  nature  reaches  beyond  the  consideration  of  individual 
institutions and tries to capture interlinked risks in the financial system as a whole. This is 
clearly in the global public interest, and public institutions must address it. For this reason the 
                                                 
3   See  the  ECB  report  entitled  “Financial  Integration  in  Europe”,  April  2009,  for  a  preliminary  analysis  of  the 
effect of the financial crisis on financial integration. 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 3
creation of the ESRC will be able to make an important contribution to financial stability in the 
EU and help to make a significant improvement to the present financial stability analysis at 
EU  level.  The  ESRC  could,  in  particular,  noticeably  improve  the  identification  and 
assessment  of  systemic  risks  affecting  the  EU  financial  system  by  analysing  the 
interconnections among financial institutions and markets on the basis of both macro- and 
micro-prudential supervisory information.  
The provision of the logistical and analytical support to the ESRC by the ECB/ESCB would 
allow the existing knowledge and skills in monetary and financial stability analysis, which are 
traditional central banking activities, to be exploited. The views of the supervisory authorities 
could be integrated in the process by ensuring, for instance, their adequate representation in 
the ESRC whenever their presence is deemed useful. 
But of course there are conditions for the success of such an undertaking, which deserve 
thorough consideration. 
First, the effectiveness of the ESRC will crucially depend on the access of central banks to 
relevant data and information for risk assessment and monitoring of vulnerabilities in the EU 
financial  system.  The  ESRC  will  need  to  rely  on  efficient  and  effective  institutional 
mechanisms  ensuring  adequate  information-sharing  with  micro-prudential  supervisors  and 
the European authorities.  
Second, the risk warnings should be effectively translated into concrete recommendations on 
macro-prudential  policies  requiring  follow-up  actions  by  competent  authorities.  This  would 
require  adequate  mechanisms 
for  monitoring  and  enforcement.  The  ESRC 
recommendations  should  concern  mainly  supervisory  action  by  competent  supervisory 
authorities.  They  should  not  address  either  monetary  policy  (as  this  would  contravene  the 
Treaty  principles)  or  fiscal  policy  (which  is  taken  care  of  by  existing  EU  economic 
surveillance procedures). 
And third, the global dimension of the financial system and the resultant risks call for swift 
and comprehensive coordination between the ESRC the IMF and the FSB.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The financial markets have been shaken to their foundations, which has 
revealed  gaps  in  risk  management,  transparency,  and  scope  and  geographical  reach  of 
regulation and supervision. Restoring confidence by maintaining the momentum in the 
implementation  of  the  ongoing  global  initiatives  is  crucial  in  the  current  situation.  In  this 
sense we need a sensible framework that ensures global monitoring of risk, mitigation of pro-
cyclicality and the prevention of regulatory arbitrage between sectors and markets. Let me 
once  again  stress  that  the  effective  coordination  of  all  policy  initiatives  is  key  for  ensuring 
global consistency and success.  
Europe  can  play  an  important  role  in  defining  the  steps  towards  a  new  global  financial 
architecture. Integrated European financial markets – and let me emphasise at this point that 
the  process  of  integration  must  continue  to  be  pushed  forward  –  mean  that  coordinated 
European  solutions  must  be  found  for  the  supervision  of  cross-border  banks  and  the 
monitoring of systemic risks.  
The next step is now the publication of a concrete proposal by the European Commission for 
discussion in the ECOFIN Council in June. I would therefore like to stress once more that the 
ECB in collaboration with the national central banks, the supervisory authorities and 
the European Commission stands ready to assume the new tasks in macro-prudential 
supervision that I have mentioned. We will need to identify and analyse systemic risks and 
make precise and concrete suggestions to the relevant authorities. This must be done at a 
European or global level!  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2009
