Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Conventional and unconventional monetary policy 
Keynote lecture by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies (ICMB), Geneva, 
28 April 2009. 
 Introduction1
1.  
It is a pleasure to be at the Centre International d'Etudes Monétaires et Bancaires to deliver 
this keynote lecture on unconventional monetary policy measures. 
This topic has not featured prominently in the speeches given by central bankers in recent 
decades. But the escalating financial crisis since last autumn has pushed the theme to centre 
stage. Central banks throughout the world have been responding to the crisis by taking both 
conventional  and  unconventional  policy  measures.  It  is  important  to  have  a  good 
understanding of the unconventional policies and how they differ from the conventional ones. 
I would like to focus on four groups of questions: 
1. 
issue 
to  consider 
instance,  an 
First, why and when should central banks resort to such measures? There is no tried-
and-tested  timetable  or  sign-posted  pathway  for  moving  from  conventional  to 
unconventional  measures.  For 
is  whether 
unconventional measures should or can be implemented only after the nominal short-
term  interest  rate  has  reached  its  lower  bound  and  while  downside  risks  to  price 
stability prevail, or be adopted while interest rates are still positive. 
Second, what are the main characteristics of unconventional measures? 
Third, how are unconventional measures implemented if and when they are needed? 
To  answer  this  question,  we  have  to  distinguish  between  different  types  of 
unconventional  measures,  from  quantitative  easing  to  credit  easing.  Each  measure 
has different effects and counter-effects, depending on the structure of the financial 
system or other factors. 
Fourth, how and when do central banks need to unwind the extra monetary stimulus? 
By definition, unconventional measures are not what is generally done, so they are 
not supposed to become the standard mode of monetary policy. When deciding on 
them, monetary policy-makers have to think ahead and ask themselves: “We can get 
in,  but  how  do  we  get  out?”  They  need  to  consider  carefully  the  timing  of  their 
withdrawal of such monetary measures – for there are risks in doing it too early, and 
there are risks in leaving too late. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
As you might know, the ECB Governing Council will be discussing and taking decisions on 
the use of unconventional measures on 7 May. My remarks here today, made on a strictly 
personal basis, in no way prejudge those decisions. Both my visit here and the subject of my 
lecture  were  arranged  some  time  ago.  My  intention  today  is  to  offer  a  rationale  for  such 
measures, not to pre-announce them.  
Why implement unconventional policy measures?  
2.  
Let  me  start  with  the  first  question:  why  and  when  do  central  banks  need  to  resort  to 
unconventional policy measures?  
                                                 
1  
I thank T. Blattner, C. Brand, A. Consolo and I. Jaccard for their input in the preparation of these remarks, 
which reflect the views of the author. 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 1
Let me first clarify what we mean by “conventional” measures. Nowadays, monetary policy 
mainly acts by setting a target for the overnight interest rate in the interbank money market 
and  adjusting  the  supply  of  central  bank  money  to  that  target  through  open  market 
operations. To minimise the risk exposure of the central bank’s balance sheet, all liquidity-
providing operations normally take place in the form of reverse transactions against a menu 
of eligible collateral. In other words, in normal times the central bank is neither involved in 
direct  lending  to  the  private  sector  or  the  government,  nor  in  outright  purchases  of 
government bonds, corporate debt or other types of debt instrument. By steering the level of 
the key interest rates, the central bank effectively manages the liquidity conditions in money 
markets  and  pursues  its  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium 
term. This has proved to be a reliable way of providing sufficient monetary stimulus to the 
economy  during  downturns,  of  containing  inflationary  pressures  during  upturns  and  of 
ensuring the sound functioning of money markets.  
But in, so to speak, abnormal times conventional monetary policy tools may prove insufficient 
to achieve the central bank’s objective. Generally, there may be two reasons for this.  
• 
First, the economic shock is so powerful that the nominal interest rate needs to be 
brought down to zero. At that level, cutting policy rates further is not possible, so any 
additional monetary stimulus can be undertaken only by resorting to unconventional 
monetary policy tools. Broadly speaking, the additional monetary stimulus when the 
policy  interest  rate  is  at  zero  can  be  achieved in  three  complementary  ways:  (i)  by 
guiding  medium  to  long-term  interest  rate  expectations,  (ii)  by  changing  the 
composition of the central bank’s balance sheet, and (iii) by expanding the size of the 
central bank’s balance sheet.2 All of these measures have one element in common: 
they  are  designed  to  improve  financing  conditions  beyond  the  very  short-term 
interbank interest rates.  
Second, non-conventional measures may be warranted even when the policy interest 
rate  is  above  zero  if  the  monetary  policy  transmission  process  is  significantly 
impaired.  Under  these  circumstances,  central  banks  have  two  (not  necessarily 
mutually exclusive) alternatives, namely (i) to reduce the short term nominal interest 
rate even further than in normal conditions, and (ii) to act directly on the transmission 
process by using non-conventional measures.  
 The  experience  of  the  past  year  and  a  half  –  a  very  stressful  time  for  the  global  financial 
system – have shown that non-standard tools might be needed even before policy rates have 
been cut to their lower bound. When the turmoil started in summer 2007 and central banks 
worldwide  stepped  in  to  provide  additional  liquidity  to  financial  markets,  it  appeared  that 
conventional measures could still do the job. Although markets were not operating normally, 
far  from  it,  tensions  in  the  euro  area  interbank  market  were  considerably  eased  by 
supplementary  longer-term  refinancing  operations.  But  things  changed  as  the  crisis 
intensified  in  September  and  October  last  year.  Shortly  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers, the spread between the three-month Euribor and the overnight interest rate EONIA 
– which in normal times would on average be around 10 basis points – rose to an all-time 
high of 156 basis points on 13 October. Market liquidity virtually dried up, and the sudden 
loss  of  confidence  among  market  participants  threatened  to  have  a  lasting  effect  on  the 
orderly functioning of the euro area money market.  
Under these circumstances, easing monetary policy by simply lowering official interest rates 
would  not  have  been  enough.  Whenever  the  transmission  channel  of  monetary  policy  is 
severely  impaired  conventional  monetary  policy  actions  are  largely  ineffective.  Any  policy 
decision therefore needed to take account of the extraordinary situation in money markets. 
Central  banks  have  different  tools  to  cope  with  the  extraordinary  situation  in  interbank 
                                                 
2   See Bernanke and Reinhart (2004). 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2009
markets, and their choice largely depends on institutional characteristics, but not only. The 
situation of the banking sector and the types of shock hitting it are also important. So while it 
is tempting to draw cross-country comparisons among such non-conventional measures, it is 
also rather misleading.  
An issue to consider when implementing non conventional policies is the risk of hindering the 
functioning of markets by substituting or interfering with them. Agents’ refinancing needs may 
become excessively dependent on operations settled with the central bank. In other words, 
financing conditions may become overly attractive as a result of central bank operations and 
may  crowd  out  other  channels,  reducing  the  incentives  for  restarting  normal  market 
conditions. 
Main characteristics of unconventional measures  
3.  
When conventional tools can no longer achieve the central bank’s objective, policy-makers 
are confronted with a number of issues.  
• 
First,  the  unconventional  tools  include  a  broad range  of  measures  aimed  at  easing 
financing conditions. Having this menu of possible measures at their disposal – which 
are not mutually exclusive ones – monetary policy-makers have to clearly define the 
intermediate  objectives  of  their  unconventional  policies.  These  may  range  from 
providing  additional  central  bank  liquidity  to  banks  to  directly  targeting  liquidity 
shortages  and  credit  spreads  in  certain  market  segments.  The  policy-makers  then 
have to select measures that best suit those objectives.  
Second, they should be wary of the possible side-effects of unconventional measures 
and,  in  particular,  of  any  impact  on  the  financial  soundness  of  the  central  bank’s 
balance sheet and of preventing a return to a normal market functioning. 
 In general, unconventional measures can be defined as those policies that directly target the 
cost and availability of external finance to banks, households and non-financial companies. 
These  sources  of  finance  can  be  in  the  form  of  central  bank  liquidity,  loans,  fixed-income 
securities  or  equity.  Since  the  cost  of  external  finance  is  generally  at  a  premium  over  the 
short-term  interbank  rate  on  which  monetary  policy  normally  leverages,  unconventional 
measures  may  be  seen  as  an  attempt  to  reduce  the  spreads  between  various  forms  of 
external  finance,  thereby  affecting  asset  prices  and  the  flow  of  funds  in  the  economy. 
Moreover, since these measures aim to affect financing conditions, their design has to take 
into account the financial structure of the economy, in particular the structure of the flow of 
funds. Let me elaborate on the possible measures.  
One  way  to  affect  the  cost  of  credit  would  be  to  influence  real  long-term  interest  rates  by 
impacting  on  market  expectations.  Expectations  may  work  through  several  channels.  For 
instance, the central bank can lower the real interest rate if it can induce the public to expect 
a higher price level in the future.3 If expected inflation increases, the real interest rate falls, 
even if the nominal interest rate remains unchanged at the lower bound. Alternatively, policy-
makers  can  directly  influence  expectations  about  future  interest  rates  by  resorting  to  a 
conditional commitment to maintain policy rates at the lower bound for a significant period of 
time.4  Since  long-term  rates  are  prima  facie  averages  of  expected  short-term  rates,  the 
expectation channel would tend to flatten the entire yield curve when policy-makers commit 
to stay at the lower bound. Moreover, a conditional commitment to keep the very short-term 
rate  at  the  lower  bound  for  long  enough  should  also  prevent  inflation  expectations  from 
falling, which would otherwise raise real interest rates and curtail spending. In either case, if 
                                                 
3   This is the type of policy analysed by Krugman (1998) and Svensson (2004). 
4   See Eggertsson and Woodford (2003, 2004). 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 3
the management of expectations is successful, it would – ceteris paribus – reduce the real 
long term rate and hence foster borrowing and aggregate demand.  
Another way in which the central bank can influence the cost of credit is by affecting market 
conditions of assets at various maturities – for instance, government bonds, corporate debt, 
commercial paper or foreign assets. Two different types of policies can be considered. The 
first aims at affecting the level of the longer term interest rate of financial assets across the 
board, independently of their risk. Such type of policy would operate mainly by affecting the 
market  for  risk  free  assets,  typically  government  bonds.  This  policy  is  typically  known  as 
“quantitative easing”. The second policy is to affect the risk spread across assets, between 
those whose markets are particularly impaired and those that are more functioning. Such a 
policy would be usually referred as “credit easing”. The two types of policies affect differently 
the  composition  of  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet.5  Another  difference  is  that  “credit 
easing”  can  generally  be  conducted  also  at  above-zero  levels  of  the  short-term  nominal 
interest rate, while quantitative easing should make sense only when the interest rate is at 
zero or very close to zero. However, both operations aim at increasing the size of the central 
bank balance sheet and therefore expanding its monetary liabilities.  
Let me now consider quantitative easing and credit easing in turn. 
How are unconventional measures implemented? 
4. 
How  can  the  size  and  composition  of  the  central  bank  balance  sheets  be  modified?  The 
straightforward  way  is  for  the  central  bank  to  directly  purchase  assets  in  the  relevant 
markets. 
Direct quantitative easing  
4.1  
When  the  central  bank  decides  to  expand  the  size  of  its  balance  sheet,  it  has  to  choose 
which  assets  to  buy.  In  theory,  it  could  purchase  any  asset  from  anybody.  In  practice, 
however,  quantitative  easing  has  traditionally  focused  on  buying  longer-term  government 
bonds  from  banks.  The  idea  is  twofold:  first,  sovereign  yields  serve  as  a  benchmark  for 
pricing riskier privately issued securities. When long-term government bonds are purchased, 
the  yields  on  privately  issued  securities  are  expected  to  decline  in  parallel  with  those  on 
government  bonds.  Second,  if  long-term  interest  rates  were  to  fall,  this  would  stimulate 
longer-term investments and hence aggregate demand, thereby supporting price stability.  
This is where banks play a critical role in the success of any quantitative easing policy. If the 
aim  is  to  ensure  that  new  loans  are  provided  to  the  private  sector,  central  banks  should 
mainly purchase bonds from the banks. The additional liquidity would then be used by the 
banks  to  extend  new  credit.  However,  banks  may  choose  to  hold  the  liquidity  received  in 
exchange  for  the  bonds  in  their  reserves  at  the  central  bank  as  a  buffer.  In  this  case,  the 
liquidity provided by the central bank remains within the financial sector; it does not flow out 
of it. This risk can be minimised if the central bank conducts this type of operation only at the 
lower bound – that is, when it has fully exploited the standard interest rate channel. At the 
lower bound the remuneration of deposits is null (or almost null) and there is hence little or 
no incentive for banks to park excess reserves with the central bank. Deploying a policy of 
quantitative easing at a policy rate different from the lower bound may necessitate a larger 
expansion  of  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  and  thus  increase  the  risk  exposure  of  the 
monetary authority.  
In light of the above considerations, the soundness of the financial system is critical to the 
success of quantitative easing. When banks stop intermediating loans, this policy no longer 
                                                 
5   See Bernanke (2009). 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2009
works. Quantitative easing is successful if it narrows the market spreads between the rates 
paid on selected credit instruments and policy rates, thereby limiting the risks of a liquidity 
shortfall and encouraging banks to extend credit to higher interest-paying parties. 
The Bank of Japan’s policy between 2001 and 2006 provides one example of quantitative 
easing. It had the following key features: first, it involved a shift in the operational target for 
money  market  operations  from  the  uncollateralised  overnight  call  rate  to  the  outstanding 
balance  of  current  account  deposits  at  the  Bank  of  Japan,  or  in  short  the  bank  reserves; 
second,  it  entailed  outright  purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds  to  meet  the  target 
balance  of  current  account  deposits  at  the  Bank;  and  third,  it  involved  an  explicit,  public 
commitment  to  maintain  these  open  market  operations  until  the  CPI  did  not  fall  on  a 
sustainable basis.  
During that period, the Bank of Japan had discussions with academics about strategies for 
avoiding  prolonged  deflation.  These  talks  repeatedly  gave  rise  to  one  particular  question: 
why didn’t the Bank of Japan simply allow the yen to depreciate in order to stop the fall in 
consumer  prices?  This  is  the  essence  of  Lars  Svensson’s  prominent  suggestion  of  “The 
Foolproof Way” out of deflation.6 But if it were so simple, why did the Japanese authorities 
apparently fail to take the necessary measures to prevent deflation? The answer is: it wasn’t 
that simple. What “The Foolproof Way” underestimates is the enormous difficulty of turning 
around  expectations  of  prices  and  economic  activity  when  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
system  is  seriously  impaired.  The  failures  to  restructure  Japan’s  financial  and  corporate 
sector  and  to  recapitalise  banks  have  been  widely  documented  as  key  reasons  for  the 
country’s anaemic growth rates and declining prices7 – factors over which the Bank of Japan 
had little control.  
Let  me  just  add  something  on  that  matter:  “The  Foolproof  Way”  wouldn’t  work  in  today’s 
context  either.  Given  the  global  dimension  of  the  current  financial  crisis,  it  would  not  be 
possible  for  all  countries  to  depreciate  their  currencies  at  the  same  time  in  order  to  push 
inflation  up.  Such  a  beggar-thy-neighbour  policy  would  be  ineffective  in  the  present 
circumstances;  worse,  it  would  aggravate  them  by  unleashing  a  protectionist  backlash.  In 
fact, the leaders of the G20 recently agreed to refrain from competitive devaluation of their 
currencies, and it is important to stick to this objective in both words and deeds. Although not 
all countries belong to the G20, I am confident that all advanced economies will comply with 
this principle. 
There are some important lessons we can learn from the experience of quantitative easing in 
Japan: 
• 
To begin with, it cannot be taken for granted that an increase in the monetary base 
results  in  easier  monetary  conditions.  In  fact,  the  money  multiplier  has  significantly 
decreased during the last decade. This has, to a certain extent, reduced the effect of 
injecting money into the economy.8 
Second,  as  mentioned  before,  the  banking  system  is  crucial  for  the  success  of  a 
quantitative  easing  policy.9  However,  given  the  high  degree  of  de-leveraging  which 
the Japanese economy, and the banking sector in particular, was undergoing, banks 
did  not  find  themselves  in  a  position  to  pass  on  the  additional  liquidity  to  the  non-
financial sector. 
                                                  
6   See Svensson (2006). 
7   See Kashyap (2002). 
8   See Hiroshi (2006) for an evaluation of quantitative easing in Japan. 
9   See Caballero, Hoshi and Kashyap (2006). 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 5
    Third,  one  of  the  expected  effects  of  quantitative  easing  is  a  flattening  of  the  yield 
curve  at  longer  maturity  which  improves  the  medium  to  longer-term  financing 
conditions  for  the  private  sector.  But  what  ultimately  matters  for  investment  and 
spending decisions is the real interest rate and hence inflation expectations. Strictly 
speaking,  an  increase  in  the  money  supply  should  have  implications  for  the 
expectations of the future price level. But quantitative easing will only affect expected 
inflation  if  the  increase  in  the  size  of  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  is  not  only 
sizeable  but  also  perceived  as  being  permanent.10  The  experience  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan provides a clear-cut example of a temporary expansion of the monetary base 
that did not affect private sector inflation expectations. 
Fourth,  it  is  not  clear  how  it  is  possible  to  increase  inflation  expectations  in  a 
significant way while avoiding a rise in the nominal long-term interest rate after some 
time.  Setting  the  real  long-term  interest  rate  as  the  operational  target  for  monetary 
policy  seems  to  be  rather  challenging  in  an  environment  with  developed  financial 
markets.  
Fifth, if quantitative easing is perceived as being long-lasting then it could also have 
an  expansionary  effect  by  relaxing  fiscal  constraints.  Expansionary  fiscal  policies 
represent  a  sound  instrument  to  stimulate  aggregate  demand  during  a  deflationary 
period.  In  this  respect,  outright  purchases  of  government  bonds  by  the  monetary 
authority  could  further  strengthen  fiscal  effects  i)  by  accommodating  the  supply  of 
governments bonds, ii) by affecting the long-end of the yield curve – the risk premium 
– and iii) by re-anchoring inflation expectations to a positive target. In particular, the 
transition to a positive inflation regime reduces the burden on the future fiscal budget 
by  guaranteeing  its  financial  sustainability.11  Of  course,  the  relevance  of  this  effect 
crucially depends on the duration of the quantitative easing policy and on a credible 
commitment  to  a  well-defined  exit  strategy.  In  this  respect,  the  broad  effects 
stemming  from  the  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  mix  have  been  quite  muted  in 
stimulating the Japanese economy.  
Finally,  it  should  be  recognised  that  a  government  bond  purchasing  programme 
involves the risk of accumulating significant losses for the central bank. Government 
bonds would be purchased at rather high prices. If the easing measure turned out to 
be a success, the ensuing economic recovery would gradually entail an increase in 
long-term interest rates; this would bring down government bond prices, so that the 
central  bank  would  eventually  face  losses.  Concerns  about  central  bank’s  balance 
sheet  and  financial  independence  can  seriously  impede  monetary  policy.12  Such 
constraints  may  be  one  reason  why  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  government  bond 
purchasing programme has failed to restore positive inflation rates.  
Let me also mention that in the context of the euro area the design of such unconventional 
policy measures poses some intricate challenges, due to its unique institutional framework. 
In the first place, we need to be mindful of the Treaty requirements relating to the prohibition 
of  monetary  financing  and  the  granting  of  privileged  access,  as  well  as  of  the  consistency 
with  the  Treaty  principle  of  open  market  economy  and  the  preservation  of  the  disciplining 
function of markets for borrowers and lenders.13 Although purchases of government bonds 
are possible in the secondary market, there is a risk to eventually become a market maker 
for  public  debt,  which could  be construed  to be  against  the  Treaty  prohibition of monetary 
                                                 
10   Krugman (1998). 
11   See Auerbach and Obstfeld (2003). 
12   See Bernanke (2003), Stella (2005) and Jeanne and Svensson (2007). 
13   Articles 101 and 102 of the Treaty. 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2009
financing.  Moreover,  we  have  more  than  just  one  fiscal  authority  in  the  euro  area.  The 
Eurosystem  would  have  to  decide  how  to  spread  purchases  of  government  bonds  across 
euro area countries. If, for example, the Eurosystem only concentrated on public bonds with 
the  best  credit  rating,  it  would  risk  providing  privileged  access  to  some  countries, 
contravening Article 102 of the Treaty. If it spread purchases according to a specific key and 
ended up affecting cross-country differences in yields, it would be seen as granting privileged 
access,  as  financing  conditions  for  some  governments  would  be  supported  to  a  greater 
extent  than  for  others.  It  may  also  be  the  case  that  the  risk-free  component  of  corporate 
bonds would not move exactly in tandem with the risk-free component of government bond 
yields. This would be tantamount to giving preferential treatment to government debt. These 
issues  would  need  to  be  addressed  before  implementing  a  government  bond  purchasing 
programme in the euro area.  
Direct credit easing  
4.2  
Credit  easing  is  a  policy  that  directly  addresses  liquidity  shortages  and  spreads  in  certain 
(wholesale) market segments through the purchase of commercial paper, corporate bonds 
and asset-backed securities. The effectiveness of measures which are aimed at wholesale 
financial  markets  depends  on  their  importance  in  the  financing  of  households  and  firms, 
which varies considerably from country to country. (It is notably lower in the euro area than in 
the US, for example). It is also a more attractive strategy in times of acute bank distress, for 
obvious reasons. 
Two  things  need  to  be  noted  here.  First,  buying  privately  issued  securities  is  not 
fundamentally different from buying government bonds in terms of the impact on the money 
supply  or  the  monetary  base.  Second,  buying  privately  issued  securities  implies  that  the 
central bank interacts directly with the private sector and is thus stepping into the realm of 
credit risk – just as any normal commercial bank would do. Outright purchases of privately 
issued  securities  affect  the  risk  profile  of  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet.  In  order  not  to 
compromise the financial independence of the central bank, policy-makers need to carefully 
assess the eligibility of all assets on account of the implications they could have for the risk 
exposure of the central bank’s balance sheet.  
Caution is also called for in another respect. Outright purchases of privately issued securities 
need  to  be  carefully  planned  to  avoid  allocative  distortions  in  terms  of  industries,  firms  or 
regions.  Also  the  size  of  the  issuer  matters.  While  it  is  easy  to  see  how  large  firms  can 
benefit from the central bank’s purchases of privately issued securities, it is more difficult to 
ensure that small and medium-sized companies get equal treatment. Given the limited depth 
of  corporate  bond  markets  in  many  economies,  purchases  of  privately  issued  securities 
might therefore be a difficult endeavour for policy-makers.  
The Federal Reserve’s approach since December 2007 has been a high-profile example of 
credit easing. The Fed has established several lending programmes to provide liquidity and 
improve the functioning of key credit markets. The Term Auction Facility, for instance, helps 
to  ensure  that  financial  institutions  have  adequate  access  to  short-term  credit,  while  the 
Commercial  Paper  Funding  Facility  provides  a  backstop  for  the  market  for  high-quality 
commercial  paper.14  More  recently,  the  Fed,  in  cooperation  with  the  US  Treasury 
Department,  has  begun  to  purchase  asset-backed  securities  such  as  mortgage  securities 
backed by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs).  
How effective have these measures been? It’s too early to say. Moreover, with a wide range 
of  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  –  since  March  the  Fed  has  also  been 
purchasing government bonds in parallel – it is extremely difficult to single out the impact of 
                                                 
14   These programmes belong to a group of policy responses associated with the lender-of-last-resort function of 
monetary policy. 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 7
any  specific  measure.  That  being  said,  the  spreads  on  eligible  commercial  paper  in  the 
United  States  have  come  down  following  the  introduction  of  the  Fed’s  Commercial  Paper 
Funding Facility (see Chart 1). Also, the Fed’s purchases of GSE debt and GSE-guaranteed 
mortgage-backed securities have resulted in a decline of the 30-year conforming mortgage 
rates by more than one percentage point following the announcement of this programme in 
late November 2008, and have continued to decline since its expansion on 18 March 2009 
(see  Chart  2).  The  narrowing  of  the  spread  between  mortgage  rates  and  Treasuries  also 
suggests that the Fed’s programme of purchasing agency-related mortgage securities may 
have been effective in easing mortgage market conditions.  
Indirect (or endogenous) quantitative/credit easing 
4.3 
The  measures  described  above  foresee  the  direct  acquisition  by  the  central  bank  of  the 
assets, in exchange for central bank money. This implies that the central bank directly holds 
the assets, until maturity or resale, and thus the risk on its balance sheet. An alternative way 
is to increase the size of the balance sheet by lending to banks at longer maturities, against 
collateral which includes assets whose markets are temporarily impaired. This policy affects 
directly  the  yield  curve  over  the  horizon  at  which  policy  operations  are  conducted  or 
committed  to  be  conducted.  For  instance,  monetary  policy  operations  with  maturity  of  6 
months directly affect the 6 months interbank money market. This is particularly the case if 
the  operations  are  conducted  at  a  fixed  rate,  full  allotment.  The  horizon  of  the  yield  curve 
which is affected may be lengthened to the extent that the central bank commits to conduct 
such type of tenders for a given period of time. For instance, if the central bank commits to 
conduct 6 months refinancing operations with fixed rate tenders for 2 years, the yield curve 
over the two and a half year horizon is likely to be influenced.  
The  increase  in  the  monetary  base  is  determined  endogenously  by  the  banking  system, 
based  on  banks’  preference  for  liquidity  and  thus  on  the  state  of  stress  of  the  banking 
system. In normal conditions, when financial markets function properly, the size of the central 
bank balance sheet would be such that the overnight rate would coincide with the short term 
refinancing  rate  of  the  central  bank  and  excess  reserves  are  negligible.  Under  stress,  the 
size  of  the  central  bank  balance  sheet  would  increase,  on  the  basis  of  banks’  increased 
demand  for  excess  reserves,  to  the  point  that  the  overnight  rate  would  be  lower  than  the 
short term main refinancing rate.  
Another aspect of such a policy relates to the quality of the collateral. By enlarging the pool 
of the collateral accepted for the refinancing operations with the central bank, the financing 
conditions by banks to these sectors are facilitated, which should be reflected in the credit 
spreads that banks charge in particular to the corporate sector. This technique also enables 
the  counterparties  of  the  central  bank  to  choose  the  collateral  to  use  in  their  refinancing 
operations.  In  times  of  market  stress  there  will  be  a  natural  tendency  for  banks  to  use  a 
greater amount of assets of a lower quality. The overall collateral deposited with the central 
bank will vary endogenously, depending on the state of stress of the financial markets. The 
eligibility  of  certain  categories  of  assets  for  monetary  policy  operations  will  facilitate  their 
creation and trade among market participants.  
In  the  euro  area,  the  ECB  decided  to  adopt  a  “fixed-rate  full-allotment”  procedure:  since 
October 2008 eligible counterparties in the euro area have had access to unlimited liquidity 
for periods ranging from one week up to six months at a fixed rate. At the same time, we 
implicitly  eased  monetary  conditions  further  by  expanding  the  list  of  assets  eligible  as 
collateral in Eurosystem refinancing operations. The Eurosystem accepts a broad range of 
assets  as  collateral  in  all  its  credit  operations.  This  feature  of  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral 
framework,  together  with  the  fact  that  access  to  Eurosystem  open  market  operations  is 
granted to a large pool of counterparties, has been key to supporting the implementation of 
monetary policy in times of stress. The in-built flexibility of its operational framework allowed 
the Eurosystem to provide the necessary liquidity to address the impaired functioning of the 
money  market  without  encountering  widespread  collateral  constraints  throughout  much  of 
8 
 BIS Review 52/2009
2008. It was only towards the end of the year that, in the light of the extension of refinancing 
for terms longer than overnight in euro and in US dollars as well as the recourse to fixed rate 
full allotment tender procedures, the Governing Council decided to expand the list of eligible 
collateral on a temporary basis until the end of 2009.  
In 2008 the average amount of eligible collateral increased by 17.2%, compared with 2007, 
to a total of €11.1 trillion. As regards the composition of collateral put forward, the average 
share  of  asset-backed  securities  increased  from  16%  in  2007  to  28%  in  2008,  overtaking 
uncovered  bank  bonds  as  the  largest  class  of  assets  put  forward  as  collateral  with  the 
Eurosystem. Uncovered bank bonds accounted on average for slightly less than 28% of the 
collateral put forward in 2008. The average share of non-marketable assets increased from 
10% in 2007 to 12% in 2008. By contrast, the average share of central government bonds 
dropped from 15% in 2007 to 10% in 2008.  
In  my  opinion,  these  changes  to  our  monetary  policy  implementation  can  be  better 
characterised as “endogenous credit easing” rather than “quantitative easing”, since the main 
aim  is  to  relax  banks'  collateral  and  funding  liquidity  constraints,  so  that  they  will  expand 
credit supply. Moreover, it is a policy that has been implemented at above-zero level of the 
short term nominal interest rates. 
It should also be emphasised that, given the importance of the banking channel in providing 
credit to the economy, the unconventional policy measures that would best suit the euro area 
are  likely  to  differ  in  terms  of  scope  and  depth  from  those  in  the  US  or  other  advanced 
economies where a more market-based financial system prevails, a consideration that is too 
often overlooked. This is the main reason why our policy response so far has been tailored to 
the  specific  nature  of  Europe’s  financial  structure.  A  few  figures  will  give  an  idea  of  the 
differences in the financial systems of the US and the euro area. For example, at the end of 
2007, the stock of outstanding bank loans to the private sector amounted to around 145% of 
GDP in the euro area, but only to 63% in the United States. By contrast, outstanding debt 
securities – a measure of the depth of financial markets – amounted to 81% of GDP in the 
euro area as against 168% in the United States. 
The  ECB  operations  have  eased  financing  conditions  for  the  private  sector  and  allowed 
banks  to  refinance  loans  more  easily  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case.  The 
evidence on the extent of these policy measures on market interest rates and money market 
conditions is quite encouraging. While the spread between the three-month Euribor and the 
EONIA is now at levels well below 100 basis points as well as at comparable levels or below 
the corresponding spreads seen in the US and the UK, ECB refinancing operations are also 
down from a peak of €857 billion at the beginning of the year to 676 billion last Friday. There 
is  also  mounting  evidence  that  the  Eurosystem’s  policy  measures  have  been  effective  in 
averting a dramatic contraction in credit volumes, though credit developments certainly need 
a close monitoring in the period ahead.  
Exit strategy  
5.  
Let me now turn to the last of the four questions that I posed earlier on: how and when do 
central  banks  need  to  unwind  the  extra  monetary  stimulus?  The  simple  answer  to  this 
question would be – of course – when the economy rebounds and inflationary prospects are 
back  in  line  with  the  central  bank’s  price  stability  objective.  Unfortunately,  for  a  number  of 
reasons,  formulating  an  adequate  exit  strategy  is  not  such  an  easy  task.  Why?  Let  me 
mention two choices that need to be made: first, devising the right sequence for the phasing 
out  of  the  conventional  and  unconventional  monetary  policy  accommodation;  second, 
deciding on the speed at which the unconventional accommodation is removed.  
Let  me  first  clarify  what  it  means,  in  practice,  to  unwind  unconventional  monetary  policy 
operations. In the case of quantitative easing and credit easing policies, it normally implies 
selling  assets  outright,  and  in  significant  amounts.  In  the  case  of  the  endogenous  easing 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 9
measures, the unwinding happens automatically, since banks should naturally reduce their 
demand for central bank money and increase interbank lending as their situation normalises. 
Starting with the problem of the right sequence, it should be reminded that an environment of 
extremely low interest rates and ample liquidity aims at favouring borrowers and penalising 
lenders, over the medium term, when the policy is reversed. On the other hand, most of the 
unconventional measures put in place are designed to stimulate lending, to convince savers 
to  hold  risky  longer-term  assets.  The  effectiveness  of  these  measures  therefore  mainly 
depends  on  the  readiness  of  banks  to  go  back  to  their  main  business  of  lending  to 
households and firms rather than parking excess reserves with the central bank. Clearly, an 
increase  in  policy  rates  –  and  in  particular  in  the  deposit  rate  –  risks  undermining  banks’ 
incentive  to  re-engage  in  funding  the  private  sector.  In  a  similar  vein,  prospects  of  rising 
interest  rates  may  discourage  private  savers  from  purchasing  longer-term  assets,  as  a 
tightening  of  monetary  policy  inevitably  implies  a  capital  loss  for  those  who  bought  these 
assets.  Raising  policy  rates,  or  the  expectation  of  such  increases,  when  confidence  is  not 
fully restored could therefore be counterproductive.  
What,  then,  are  the  implications  for  the  sequencing  of  unwinding  conventional  and 
unconventional policy measures? In simple terms, it means that non-standard measures that 
aim  mainly  at  restoring  the  orderly  functioning  of  money  markets,  such  as  supplementary 
longer-term refinancing operations or an extended menu of eligible collaterals, might have to 
be rolled back before interest rates are increased again. Why?  
First  of  all, because  raising  interest  rates  in  an  environment  in  which such  unconventional 
measures were still judged to be necessary would risk undermining a sustained recovery by 
money markets. If concerns about the required and available amounts of short-term funding 
still prevailed among market participants, raising rates might reinforce these fears and could 
lead  to  further,  unwarranted  upward  pressure  on  overnight  rates.  Second,  supplying  extra 
liquidity to the markets through non-standard measures while, at the same time, tightening 
monetary policy would send mixed signals on the effective monetary policy stance. Measures 
to alleviate the strains in money markets could in fact be seen as a continued easing of the 
monetary policy stance. Third, with non-standard measures such as the unlimited provision 
of  liquidity  still  in  place  it  might  be  more  difficult  for  the  central  bank  to  steer  the  level  of 
market  rates  consistent  with  its  policy  target.  For  example,  a  fixed  rate  tender  with  full 
allotment usually leaves the banking sector with a large daily liquidity surplus, which needs to 
be  mopped  up  by  additional  fine-tuning  operations  towards  the  end  of  the  reserve 
maintenance  period  in  order  to  avoid  a  sharp  drop  in  the  overnight  interest  rate.  This, 
however, causes extra volatility in the markets as well as large interest rate fluctuations that 
are undesirable from the point of view of an effective signalling of the monetary policy stance. 
Fourth, with markets still in need of additional non-standard measures, the pass-through of 
an  increase  in  policy  rates  would  probably  be  hampered.  The  orderly  transmission  of  any 
monetary tightening would only resume once trust among market participants has had been 
restored and money markets were operating normally again. Finally, in any bank-dominated 
system of fund intermediation, in which the recovery of the economy largely depends on the 
soundness of the banking system, inflationary pressures that would require a tightening of 
monetary policy are likely to appear only when the banks take up their normal lending activity 
again. This, in turn, implies that non-standard measures should ideally be rolled back before 
interest rates were increased.  
This  reasoning  might  not  hold  for measures  taken  to  revitalise  the  flow  of  credit  in  certain 
market segments – such as through the purchase of corporate bonds. These measures are 
primarily  designed  to  bypass  the  financial  sector  and  to  ensure  that  non-financial 
corporations  still  have  access  to  external  financing.  Now,  in  theory,  by  stimulating  longer-
term investments and hence aggregate demand, these measures might induce inflationary 
pressures in the medium to long-term, independent of the functioning of money markets and 
lending by banks. The strength of this channel depends on the depth of the corporate bond 
market. If policy-makers were to react to these inflationary pressures by raising interest rates 
10 
 BIS Review 52/2009
pre-emptively  while  money  markets  were  still  weak,  the  consequences  for  the  banking 
channel of intermediation could be severe – for the reasons I have just given. If, however, 
markets  were  to  function  properly  again,  there  would  be  no  reason  to  postpone  the 
unwinding  of  “credit  easing”  policies  to  a  date  longer  than  needed.  Taken  together,  this 
reasoning suggests that purchases of privately issued securities should be unwound before 
or at the same time as interest rates are raised back to normal levels.  
This raises the question of the reaction that financial markets might have to the start of the 
unwinding  of  the  direct  easing  measures.  For  instance  how  would  markets  react  to  the 
central bank starting to sell the government bonds it purchased under the direct quantitative 
easing policy? Such a start would signal presumably that the tightening cycle is close and 
could  affect  yields.  Furthermore,  if  the  amount  of  assets  to  be  sold  is  significant,  this  can 
have  an  impact  on  the  market  conditions  of  the  underlying  assets,  possibly  further 
depressing its price.  
Naturally, the question remains: how quickly should policy-makers reverse their policies? On 
the  one  hand,  withdrawing  liquidity  in  such  large  quantities  will  trigger  a  substantial 
contractionary monetary policy shock. The large size of many easing programmes will make 
it  difficult  to  sell  assets  without  a  significant  market  impact.  If  it  happens  too  quickly  or 
abruptly,  policy-makers  risk  choking  off  the  economic  recovery  or  imposing  heavy  capital 
losses  on  lenders.  For  instance,  in  the  corporate  bond  or  commercial  paper  market,  even 
small sales of securities by the central bank could cause spreads to widen considerably and 
to sharply tighten credit conditions for firms. On the other hand, with policy rates at record 
low  levels  and  additional  liquidity-providing  measures  adopted  in  so  many  countries,  the 
possibility of inflation risks emerging sometime later is not something that can be excluded. 
Retaining such exceptional policy measures for too long might aggravate the upside risks to 
price stability and sow the seeds for future imbalances in financial markets.  
Getting the timing right in withdrawing additional liquidity is likely to be decisive in order to 
ensure a non-inflationary recovery. Generally speaking, the lower the reversibility of the non-
conventional  operations,  the  larger  the  risk  of  being  behind  the  curve  when  the 
macroeconomic and financial market situation improves. 
Indeed, to a large extent the speed of unwinding of unconventional measures would depend 
on  their  degree  of  reversibility.  As  I  already  noted,  some  of  the  unwinding  would  happen 
automatically  as  central  bank  programmes  become  increasingly  unattractive  as  financial 
conditions normalise. For instance, many lending facilities provide liquidity at a premium over 
the main policy rate or with a high haircut applied to the required collateral, making interbank 
lending the more attractive option once normal lending activity among market participants is 
restored.  As  a  result,  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  would  decline  automatically  as 
demand for its funds decreases. As noted, the ECB’s current liquidity-providing operations 
imply an “endogenous” exit strategy as banks would automatically seek less credit from the 
ECB when tensions in financial markets ease. The speed of the reversibility would therefore 
largely depend on the speed of the resurgence of the financial system. In the euro area, the 
revitalisation of money markets is key to the ECB’s exit strategy and any future interest rate 
decision  should  therefore  avoid  a  further  disruption  of  money  markets.  In  this  context, 
bringing the main policy rate too close to zero would risk hampering the functioning of the 
money markets as it would reduce the incentives for interbank lending. This, in turn, could 
blur the important signals coming otherwise from the resurgence of interbank lending and the 
associated positive effect on the ECB’s balance sheet.  
Obviously, the speed of tightening would also depend on the maturity of the assets bought by 
central banks within the framework of their easing programmes. Differences in the maturity of 
assets  will  ensure  that  a  tightening  of  the  accommodative  stance  would  come  in  gradual 
tranches. This is important to avoid any abrupt tightening of credit conditions in the middle of 
the recovery. At the same time, measures centered on assets that are longer-term in nature 
and less liquid could pose challenges to the future unwinding of these measures. If market 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 11
conditions were to improve faster than expected, an increase in the average maturity of the 
central bank’s portfolio would make it more difficult for financial markets to return to normal 
private sector functioning and would also heighten medium-term inflation risks.  
Overall,  special  operations  other  than  the  traditional  repurchase  agreements  might  be 
needed to sterilise the effects of unconventional policy measures at the appropriate time in 
the  future.  One  option  would  be  to  have  the  fiscal  authority  issue  debt  certificates  to  the 
market  and  deposit  the  proceeds  with  the  central  bank.  The  switch  in  the  ownership  of 
government  debt  from  the  private  sector  to  the  monetary  authority  would  alleviate  the 
inflationary  pressures  arising  from  the  additional  liquidity.  Another  option  would  be  for  the 
central bank to issue debt certificates itself, as the ECB for example can do according to its 
Statute.  In  this  way  the  central  bank  would  essentially  change  the  composition  of  the 
liabilities  side  of  its  balance  sheet,  moving  away  from  excess  reserves  and  towards  less-
liquid  debt  securities.  The  effect,  compared  with  government  debt  issuance,  would  in 
essence be the same.  
An  important  final  element  related  to  the  exit  strategy,  but  which  should  be  considered 
carefully  already  when  deciding  to  embark  on  unconventional  measures,  is  that  when  the 
central  bank  sells  the  assets  their  value  is  likely  to  have  declined  considerably,  given  the 
higher rate of interest. This implies a financial loss for the central bank. The consequences 
for the financial – and overall – independence of the central bank should not be downplayed. 
Conclusions  
6.  
To  conclude,  the  decision  whether  to  embark  on  non-conventional  monetary  policy 
measures,  which  specific  ones  and  for  how  long  depends  on  a  series  of  considerations, 
including  the  overall  conditions  of  the  economy,  in  particular  the  presence  of  deflationary 
pressures and the effective constraint provided by the zero lower bound for interest rates, the 
structure  of  the  financial  flows  in  the  economy,  the  medium  term  incentives  that  would  be 
created  for  the  private  sector  and  the  risks  entailed  in  the  exit  strategy,  including  for  the 
independence  and  credibility  of  the  central  bank.  Some  measures  present  greater 
advantages,  in  terms  of  providing  the  right  incentives  and  being  easily  reversible.  Others 
present  more  risks  and  have  to  be  well  targeted  and  used  under  specific  circumstances. 
Considering the pros and cons of the various measures requires deep thinking. I have tried 
to develop tonight some of the considerations underlying such a reflection. Hopefully this has 
been  useful  in  understanding  why  the  ECB  has  proceeded  speedily  in  some  areas  while 
taking the necessary time to reflect on others.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
References  
Auerbach, A. and Obstfeld, M. (2005), “The Case for Open-Market Purchases in a Liquidity 
Trap”, American Economic Review, Vol. 95, No 1, March 2005. 
Bernanke,  B.  S.  (2003),  “Some  Thoughts  on Monetary  Policy  in  Japan”,  Before  the  Japan 
Society of Monetary Economics, Tokyo, Japan, 31 May 2003. 
Bernanke, B. S. (2009), “The Crises and the Policy Response”, Stamp lecture at the London 
School of Economics, 13 January 2009, London, England.  
Bernanke, B. S. and Reinhart V. R. (2004), “Conducting Monetary Policy at Very Low Short-
Term  Interest  Rates”,  American  Economic  Review,  Papers  and  Proceedings,  94(2),  2004, 
pp. 85-90. 
Bullard, J. (2009), “Effective Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate Environment”, The Henry 
Thornton Lecture, Cass Business School, London, 24 March 2009.  
12 
 BIS Review 52/2009
Caballero  R.  J.,  Hoshi  T.  and  Kashyap  A.K.  (2008),  “Zombie  Lending  and  Depressed 
Restructuring in Japan”, American Economic Review, Vol. 98, No 5, December 2008. 
Eggertsson, G.B. and Woodford M. (2003), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal 
Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003, No 1, 139-211, 230-233. 
Eggertsson,  G.B.  and  Woodford  M.  (2004),  “Policy  Options  in  a  Liquidity  Trap”,  American 
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94, May 2004, 76-79. 
Hiroshi,  U.  (2006),  “Effects  of  the  Quantitative  Easing  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Empirical 
Analyses”, Bank of Japan WP Series, July 2006. 
Jeanne,  O.  and  Svensson  L.E.O.  (2007),  “Credible  Commitment  to  Optimal  Escape  from 
Liquidity Trap: The Role of the Balance Sheet of an Independent Central Bank”, American 
Economic Review, Vol. 97, No 1, March 2007. 
Kashyap, A. (2002), “Sorting out Japan’s financial crisis”, 4Q/2002, Economic Perspectives, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. 
Krugman,  P.  (1998),  “It’s  Baaack!  Japan’s  Slump  and  the  Return  of  the  Liquidity  Trap”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1998, (2), pp. 137-87. 
Stella, P. (2005), “Central Bank Financial Strength, Transparency and Policy Credibility”, IMF 
Staff Papers 52(2).  
Svensson, L.E.O. (2004), “Comment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2004, No 2, 
84-93. 
Svensson, L.E.O. (2006), “Monetary Policy and Japan’s Liquidity Trap”. 
Annex 
Chart 1 
  BIS Review 52/2009 
 13
Chart 2 
 14 
 BIS Review 52/2009
