Linah K Mohohlo: 2009 Monetary Policy Statement 
Speech  by  Linah  K  Mohohlo,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Botswana,  Gaborone,  23  February 
2009. 
 Honourable Speaker of National Assembly 
Honourable Minister of Finance & Development Planning & your Colleagues in Cabinet & 
Parliament 
Your Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic Corps 
Chairman of the House of Chiefs 
PSP, Senior Government Officials & Heads of Parastatal Organisations 
Members of the Board of the Bank of Botswana 
Members of the Banking Fraternity, representatives of the wider financial sector & Captains 
of Industry 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good evening. 
By  way  of  introduction,  I  welcome  you  to  this  ceremony,  marking  the  launching  of  the 
Monetary  Policy  Statement  for  2009.  As  you  know,  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement  is  a 
means  through  which  the  Bank  informs  the  nation  and  other  stakeholders  about  the 
monetary  policy  framework  and  its  implementation.  In  doing  so,  we  seek  to  reinforce  the 
credibility  of  the  Bank’s  determination  to  anchor  expectations  of  low,  predictable  and 
sustainable level of inflation. This is the primary objective of the Bank, and rightly so. I hasten 
to stress that the focus on controlling inflation should, in no way, be taken to imply that other 
considerations concerning the health of the domestic economy are ignored. 
As always, on this occasion the Bank reviews economic and inflation developments in the 
past year, and explains the actions taken in response to those developments. This includes 
an assessment of the success or otherwise of meeting the medium-term inflation objective. 
The  Statement  also  updates  the  economic  and  financial  outlook,  and  proposes  a  possible 
strategy for addressing the challenges in the period ahead. 
You  may  recall  that,  last  year,  the  Bank  introduced  important  modifications  to  the  policy 
strategy,  which  reinforced  then  medium-term  as  the  time  horizon  in  which  to  meet  the 
inflation objective. This approach is based on more rigorous inflation forecasting. 
Before I delve into the main business of this evening, I feel it is always useful, even for those 
who regularly attend this event, to highlight the other core functions of the Bank, in addition 
to keeping inflation in check. 
The  other  major  function  of  the  Bank  is  to  provide  financial  and  economic  advice  to  the 
Government, which is done through regular consultations with the Ministry of Finance and 
Development  Planning.  It  is,  of  course,  appropriate  that,  in  most  cases,  this  advice  is 
provided on a privileged and confidential basis. 
The  supervision  and  regulation  of  the  banking  sector,  which  is  essential  for  maintaining  a 
sound,  stable  and  efficient  financial  system,  is  another  critical  function  of  the  Bank. 
Prudential  supervision  and  monitoring  of  licensed  financial  institutions  ensure  that  they 
comply with the regulations designed to protect the interests of customers and the financial 
system for the benefit of the economy as a whole. 
The  Bank  is  also  responsible  for  designing,  printing  and  distributing  currency  to  the  wider 
economy to facilitate payment for transactions, usage as a unit of account and store of value. 
Related to this function is ensuring that Botswana has a secure and efficient payments and 
settlement  system,  which  is  critical  for  the  stability  of  the  financial  sector  and  its  ability  to 
BIS Review 40/2009 
 1
promote economic activity. Moreover, as Banker to the Government and commercial banks, 
the Bank of Botswana serves as the lender of last resort. 
Yet  another  important  function  of  the  Bank  is  operating  a  foreign  exchange  market  with 
commercial banks, so that residents can engage in transactions with the rest of the world. 
The Bank also manages the exchange rate in order to ensure international competitiveness 
of  domestic  exports,  by  stabilising  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  through  a  crawl  of  the 
nominal effective exchange rate. When domestic inflation is higher than the forecast inflation 
of trading partner countries, a downward crawl is implemented; the reverse is true when the 
inflation objective is lower than forecast trading partner countries’ inflation. 
Last but not least, the Bank is responsible for investing a portfolio of the country’s foreign 
exchange reserves, which is a major part of the country’s wealth. This involves buying and 
selling a wide range of investment instruments in international financial and capital markets, 
while strictly observing acceptable risk parameters. 
In carrying out all these functions, which contribute to the sound economic and financial well-
being  of  the  country,  the  Bank  is  committed  to  maintaining  the  highest  level  of  corporate 
governance and professional excellence. 
Before I share with you a summary of this year’s Monetary Policy Statement, I wish to make 
some  observations  on  the  rapidly  unfolding  global  financial  and  economic  crisis.  This  is  a 
matter of national importance and, inevitably, it forms a backdrop for the review of monetary 
policy; it also has an impact on the policy strategy in the period ahead. 
The  Bank  has  been  monitoring  the  deteriorating  outlook  for  the  world  economy  since  the 
emergence of the crisis in late 2007, and we have willingly shared our thoughts at regular 
economic briefings and in the Bank’s publications; please be assured that this process will 
continue in the course of this year. 
Crises have been, and will continue to be a feature of the global economy. Almost 250 years 
ago,  Adam  Smith,  who  is  known  as  the  father  of  capitalism,  wrote  perceptively  about  the 
dangers of speculative excess. Indeed in a system that encourages dynamic development, 
imbalances  requiring  correction  are  inevitable;  but  the  severity  of  the  current  economic 
slowdown  is  the  worst  since  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s,  in  part  because  of 
globalisation of national economies. That is why the International Labour Organisation has 
warned that some 50 million jobs worldwide could be lost; that is why all countries including 
Botswana  are  affected;  and  that  is  why  the  responses  have  to  be  coordinated,  to  some 
extent. 
It is now widely acknowledged that the current crisis can be attributed to three major factors. 
First, the sharp rise in commodity prices, especially oil and food, was always likely to put a 
brake on economic expansion. Second, the uneven global growth resulted in unsustainable 
huge  deficits  in  some  countries  and  corresponding  chronic  surpluses  in  others.  Therefore, 
painful  adjustment  was  inevitable.  Third,  risk  management  in  financial  sectors  of  major 
economies  was  lax,  so  much  so  that  some  of  the  most  respected  names  in  banking 
accumulated large volumes of non-performing assets. 
These factors were also substantially interlinked. The virtual disregard for prudential lending 
by  the  financial  sector  led  to  the  emergence  of  unsustainable  macroeconomic  imbalances 
and rising commodity prices. Central Banks, too, were on the wrong side of the action, as 
their formulation and implementation of monetary policy paid insufficient attention to the risks 
of over-valuation of assets, particularly in the housing market(s). 
In  the  event,  the  consequences  have  been  traumatic,  especially  since  September  2008, 
when the global banking system risked collapse starting with the erstwhile US headquartered 
Lehman  Brothers.  Although  this  has  been  averted  through  unprecedented  action  by 
governments  and  central  banks,  the  subsequent  curtailment  of  lending  has  aggravated 
economic  slowdown.  The  seriousness  of  the  “credit  crunch”  is  such  that  the  International 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2009
Monetary  Fund  has  revised  its  economic  growth  forecast  for  2009  repeatedly,  from  3.8 
percent to only 0.5 percent. The economies of advanced countries are forecast to shrink by 
an average of 2 percent this year. For sub-Saharan Africa, the 2009 outlook has fallen from 
6.8 percent to 3.5 percent, and the volume of global trade is expected to fall for the first time 
since the early 1980s. 
To address the problems, many central banks have reduced interest rates to historic levels, 
while  governments  have  undertaken  unprecedented  spending  and  financial  support  of 
private sector entities. It is not surprising, therefore, that the G20 and similar groupings are 
considering proposals to coordinate revisions to financial sector regulation. 
So  far,  efforts  to  stabilise  the  banking  system  have  not  resulted  in  a  resumption  of  bank 
lending; for this reason, it is feared that economic recovery may take longer, possibly way 
into 2010. There is also concern that countries will increasingly resort to protectionist trade 
policies, a trend that would be self-defeating since no economy can resolve its problems in 
isolation. 
Fortunately, commercial banks in Botswana are not yet impaired by the impact of the “credit 
crunch”  that  is  afflicting  other  countries.  Bank  deposits  far  exceed  loans;  and  banks  have 
generally avoided accumulating unmanageable risk. In this connection, it is worth mentioning 
that Batswana should learn from the mistakes of over-borrowing, the dire consequences of 
which  have  hit  households  elsewhere  in  the  world  very  hard.  Nevertheless,  the  Bank  of 
Botswana  is  monitoring  possible  situations  of  exposure  to  offshore  parent  financial 
institutions on an ongoing basis. 
While  the  domestic  financial  sector  is,  to  some  extent  untroubled,  international  diamond 
markets  have  deteriorated  rapidly  and  unexpectedly.  As  highlighted  by  the  Honourable 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Development  Planning  in  this  year’s  budget  speech,  this 
development has adversely affected government revenue. 
As at the end of January 2009, which is three months after diamond exports were seriously 
curtailed, the foreign exchange reserves amounted to 69.7 billion Pula (provisionally), which 
is a 19 percent growth from the December 2007 level of 58.5 billion Pula. When the effect of 
the  Pula  depreciation  is  excluded,  the  reserves  fell  by  6.4  percent  in  terms  of  Special 
Drawing Right (SDR) and by approximately 12 percent in US dollar terms. The decrease in 
reserves was due to the fall in equity market prices, a slowdown in diamond export receipts 
and payments for government and other transactions. 
The  pressure  on  the  reserves  is  expected  to  continue  during  2009,  although  at  the  level 
equivalent to 27 months of import cover, they should remain relatively adequate. I believe it 
should take little persuasion to acknowledge that managing the country’s reserves prudently 
has  served  the  country  well,  given  the  current  severe  financial  and  capital  markets 
difficulties. 
I  now  turn  to  the  core  business  of  this  evening’s  event:  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy 
framework and strategy for 2009. 
As I said earlier, last year’s modifications to the framework focused on the medium-term, a 
period  considered  appropriate  for  monetary  policy  to  take  effect  and  anchor  the  inflation 
objective, based on rigorous inflation forecasting that is now taking root at the Bank. 
For the sake of emphasis, the Bank’s monetary policy objective is to achieve a sustainable, 
low  and  predictable  level  of  inflation  within  a  range  of  3-6  percent  over  the  medium  term. 
Maintaining  inflation  within  this  range  supports  broader  national  objectives  of  sustainable 
economic growth and development, through promoting savings mobilisation and productive 
investment, as well as sustaining international competitiveness of domestic producers. 
However,  the  process  of  keeping  inflation  in  check  is  not  in  one  direction;  for  instance, 
sustained periods of low or rapidly falling inflation could indicate subdued economic activity; 
BIS Review 40/2009 
 3
it 
takes  account  of  expert 
is  not  mechanical;  rather, 
in  which  case,  monetary  policy  would  need  to  be  eased  to  stimulate  economic  growth, 
without re-igniting inflationary pressures. 
It  is  well  known  that  Botswana’s  inflation  is  affected  by  domestic  demand  conditions  and 
other factors such as foreign inflation, the exchange rate, as well as changes in administered 
prices  and  taxes.  Public  expectations  of  rising  or  falling  inflation  also  influence  pricing 
behaviour of businesses and wage adjustments. The Bank then responds by adjusting the 
Bank  Rate  and  conducting  open  market  operations  to  affect  demand  conditions  in  the 
economy and, ultimately, the rate of price changes. Therefore, the Bank estimates the impact 
of  various  factors  in  forecasting  inflation  over  the  medium  term  which,  in  turn,  informs 
monetary  policy.  I  wish  to  stress  that,  in  this  regard,  the  Bank’s  response  to  inflation 
forecasting 
judgement  and 
supplementary analysis. For more information, I suggest you read the technical annex to this 
year’s Monetary Policy Statement, copies of which will be made available at the end of my 
remarks. 
With respect to inflation trends and related developments in 2008, you will recall that, for the 
first half of the year, global inflation was mostly driven by the steep increase in oil and food 
prices; the same applied to Botswana. 
To put the situation in perspective, global inflation increased from 4.3 percent in 2007 to 6.4 
percent in 2008; this affected the outlook for global economic growth, which slowed from 5.2 
percent to 3.4 percent. As a result, international oil prices fell sharply in the latter half of the 
year,  especially  following  the  escalation  of  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  in 
September. The combined effect was that, thereafter, international inflation began to decline. 
Here  at  home,  inflation  rose  during  most  of  2008,  and  far  exceeded  the  medium-term 
inflation objective of 3-6 percent at 15.1 percent in August, before declining to 13.7 percent at 
year-end.  Although  the  average  trade-weighted  inflation  in  Botswana’s  trading  partner 
countries was unchanged between 2007 and 2008 at 6.5 percent, inflation in South Africa 
rose from an average of 6.5 percent in 2007 to 11.3 percent in 2008, and was well above the 
target range of 3-6 percent. 
Successive  increases  in  fuel  prices  contributed  about  4.4  percentage  points  to  domestic 
inflation between February and June 2008, but this was virtually reversed following fuel price 
reductions. Since August, inflation has fallen by less than expected due to a further increase 
in food prices and lingering second-round effects arising from the earlier period of oil price 
increases. 
Bilateral exchange rates too had an impact on inflation in the year to December 2008. The 
Pula  depreciated  by  about  20  percent  against  the  Special  Drawing  Right  (SDR),  but  it 
appreciated by 10 percent against the rand. 
There  was  also  rapid  growth  in  government  expenditure,  which  had  accommodated  the 
sharp  increase  in  prices.  With  the  higher  development  spending  and  the  increase  in  civil 
service  emoluments,  it  is  estimated  that  fiscal  year  2008/2009  will  see  government 
expenditure  rising  by  approximately  43  percent  over  that  of  2007/2008,  which  is  triple  the 
estimated initial spending increase of 14.7 percent. 
In  turn,  the  higher  government  expenditure  and  personal  incomes  led  to  an  increase  in 
private sector spending and credit. In the event, credit rose by about 32 percent in the year to 
September 2008, before slowing to 28 percent in December. Household borrowing increased 
by approximately 22 percent, while credit expansion to businesses more than doubled at 37 
percent,  thus  reflecting  the  robust  growth  in  the  non-mining  private  sector  during  most  of 
2008. On the whole, however, overall GDP growth slowed due to the fall in mining output, a 
trend that continued into the first quarter of 2008/2009. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  2008  took  account  of 
various  factors  that  influenced  prices.  For  this  reason,  monetary  policy  action  was  not 
expected  to  have  an  immediate  impact  on  inflation.  Instead  (and  this  is  key),  the  policy 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2009
focused on containing second-round price increases arising from the shock of food and oil 
prices; it also focused on keeping inflation expectations anchored around the price stability 
objective in the medium-term. Accordingly, as inflation rose in the first half of the year, the 
Bank  Rate  was  increased  by  half  a  percentage  point  each  in  May  and  June  2008  to  15.5 
percent. 
With  improvement  in  the  inflation  outlook,  the  Bank  Rate  was  reduced  by  the  same 
magnitude to 15 percent in December. 
Correspondingly and as appropriate, commercial bank prime lending interest rates mirrored 
the Bank Rate adjustments; in addition, the management of excess bank liquidity reinforced 
the policy stance. Nevertheless, high inflation resulted in lower real interest rates, some of 
which, unfortunately, became negative in real terms. 
With respect to the Bank’s outlook for inflation for this year and a reasonable period ahead, 
both domestic and global inflation is expected to abate, as a result of lower economic activity 
and subdued demand. Commodity prices, including the cost of oil, are likely to be low, and 
world inflation is forecast to decrease from 6.4 percent in 2008 to 3.1 percent in 2009. 
In South Africa, inflation is expected to decline to 5.5 percent in 2009, and fall within the 3-6 
percent  target  range.  Therefore,  foreign  prices  will  dampen  domestic  inflation.  Since  the 
Bank’s inflation objective is 3-6 percent and trading partner countries’ inflation is forecast at 
3-5  percent,  the  downward  crawl  of  the  Pula  should  be  marginal  in  2009,  and  the  real 
effective exchange rate should be stable. 
Overall,  economic  performance  is  expected  to  slacken  significantly,  due  to  the  depressed 
mining activity. It is also anticipated that despite the decline in government revenue, due to a 
fall  in  mining  production,  public  spending  will  increase  in  support  of  economic  growth. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  estimated  that  output  will  be  below  trend,  particularly  in  the  short  term. 
This should put downward pressure on inflation. 
In  this  environment,  it  is  unlikely  that  increased  government  spending  will  be  inflationary, 
particularly in the absence of a public sector wage increase. However, it is worth mentioning 
that  any  large  increase  in  administered  prices,  such  as  electricity  tariffs  and  Botswana 
Housing Corporation rentals, would be inflationary. Be that as it may, the probability is that 
price increases will be subdued in 2009 compared to 2008. It is, therefore, anticipated that, 
by  the  end  of  the  year,  inflation  will  be  closer  to,  if  not  within,  the  medium-term  objective 
range of 3-6 percent. 
Honoured Guests: 
You may very well ask: What about the monetary policy stance in 2009 in the circumstances! 
Well,  we  at  the  Bank  consider  that  monetary  policy  action  this  year  will  take  into 
consideration the following scenarios: first, the increase in government spending is unlikely to 
be inflationary; second, the exchange rate is expected to be stable; and third, it is hoped the 
inflation trend will continue to be downward. These developments suggest that there is scope 
for  easing  monetary  policy  alongside  fiscal  expansion,  in  order  to  address  the  imminent 
decline in economic activity. 
It is also important to entrench expectations of low and sustainable inflation by containing the 
secondary effects of any transitory price shocks. Furthermore, care will have to be taken to 
ensure that the foreign exchange reserves remain sustainable. 
Distinguished Ladies & Gentlemen: 
Let me conclude by reiterating that monetary policy in 2008 was conducted in conditions of 
international volatility of unprecedented dimensions. Accelerating inflation in the first half of 
the year was replaced by the spectre of financial meltdown and global recession, and as a 
small  open  economy,  this  situation  presented  enormous  challenges  for  Botswana  in  2008 
and will continue to do so this year. 
BIS Review 40/2009 
 5
Fortunately,  the  task  of  meeting  the  inflation  challenge  has  been  made  easier  by  the 
adoption of a more comprehensive medium-term framework for policy implementation, which 
has been made possible by ongoing capacity building in inflation forecasting. 
Once again, I would like to reassure you, and all stakeholders, that the Bank of Botswana is 
committed  to  the  maintenance  of  medium-term  price  stability  due  to  its  benefits  for  the 
country  as  a  whole.  In  this  regard,  the  key  lesson  from  the  current  difficult  international 
situation is that it pays to be prudent in financial and economic management. Otherwise, the 
Government  would  not  have  been  able  to  accumulate  savings  in  the  form  of  foreign 
exchange reserves, which should enable the country to weather the unfolding storm. 
Honourable  Speaker,  Honourable  Ministers,  Honourable  Members  of  Parliament,  Your 
Excellencies  Members  of  the  Diplomatic  Corps,  Distinguished  Guests,  that  prudence;  that 
strategy;  will  continue  to  guide  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  this  year  and  in  the  period 
ahead. 
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2009
