Glenn Stevens: Financial crisis developments – impact on the Australian 
economy 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Canberra, 20 February 2009. 
 Mr  Chairman,  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  meet  again  with  the  House  Economics 
Committee. 
Shortly after the Committee last met, the global financial system took a serious turn for the 
worse. On 15 September 2008, the American firm Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy. It 
was the biggest actual failure of a major American financial institution for many years. While 
it  had  been  widely  known  that  Lehmans  was  under  immense  pressure,  when  it  came  the 
event was still a shock. It triggered a massive re-appraisal of risk, and ushered in a period of 
the most intense financial turmoil seen in decades. 
The worst of the turmoil was actually fairly short-lived – a matter of weeks. But in that time a 
number of events occurred that have had a significant bearing on the outlook for the global 
economy.  These  included  the  incipient  failure  and/or  public  support  of  a  number  of  major 
financial  institutions  in  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom  and  continental  Europe, 
effective closure of many important capital markets and a worldwide decline in equity values 
of a quarter, leaving them around 50 per cent lower than their peak. 
I believe that the extraordinary actions of governments and central banks in that period – in 
supporting key institutions, supplying huge quantities of liquidity and offering guarantees on 
various obligations of banks – helped to stabilise what could have been a catastrophic loss of 
confidence in the global financial system. This remains a work in progress, and sentiment in 
financial markets remains fragile. Nonetheless, since October we have seen term spreads in 
money  markets  decline  (back  towards  the  pre-Lehman,  though  still  elevated,  levels).  We 
have  seen  long-term  markets  re-open  to  banks  (by  virtue  of  the  guarantees),  public 
confidence  in  the  security  of  the  banking  system  maintained  and  the  exceptional  volatility 
abate somewhat. 
Inevitably, however, the turmoil of September and October took a large toll on household and 
business  confidence  around  the  world.  Observing  those  events  in  real  time,  people 
everywhere  understandably  became  much  more  cautious.  We  are  now  seeing  the  effects. 
Consumers have pulled back their discretionary spending sharply, are more inclined to save 
and  are  looking  to  repay  debt.  Businesses  have  seen  the  fall  in  demand,  and  have 
responded  very  quickly  to  cut  production  and  costs,  as  well  as  putting  on  hold  plans  for 
expansion.  Nowhere  is  this  more  evident  than  in  the  automobile  sector,  where  global 
demand has fallen by around 20 per cent since August and production has declined equally 
sharply.  Global  trade  has  fallen  away,  driven  by  these  trends  in  demand  and  also  a 
significant disruption in trade finance. 
For  many  of  the  world’s  largest  economies,  the  contraction  in  output  in  the  last  quarter  of 
2008 was the sharpest in decades. Nor is the weakness confined to the major economies. 
Emerging economies around the world, relatively little affected by the problems in the major 
economies until September, are now suffering the effects of both the weaker demand in the 
developed  world  and  the  shock  to  domestic  demand  as  their  own  citizens  respond  in  the 
same  way  to  the  financial  turmoil.  Many  indicators  for  Asian  economies  stepped  down 
abruptly in the last few months of 2008. China’s economy recorded little GDP growth in the 
last quarter, and industrial production declined for several months. There are some tentative 
BIS Review 21/2009 
 1
indications of a turn for the better in China in some of the most recent data, though it is too 
soon to know yet whether this will continue. 
It is all this news that bodies such as the IMF have factored into their growth forecasts for 
2009, which put global GDP growth at just half of 1 per cent, which would be a very weak 
outcome. As recently as October, the forecast was 3 per cent. 
Needless to say, this amounts to a very major change in the international environment for 
Australia. As one metric, our terms of trade, which rose by 65 per cent over five years, look 
like  they  will  fall  by  up  to  20  per  cent  during  the  next  year.  That  would  still  leave  them 
historically  high,  and  several  important  commodity  prices  have  stabilised  over  the  past 
couple  of  months  after steep  falls. At  these  levels,  the  stronger  mining  companies  will still 
earn good profits. But the confidence seen in mid 2008 has given way to a much more sober 
outlook, at least for the near term. Internationally, the availability of risk capital has declined. 
Local  businesses  are  anticipating  tougher  times  ahead.  Measures  of  business  confidence 
have diminished sharply. Firms are altering their strategies quite quickly, looking to conserve 
cash, pay down debt and reduce costs. They are also experiencing tougher credit conditions. 
Indications are that investment plans, which had been exceptionally strong in the middle of 
last year, are being quickly curtailed. 
Households,  for  their  part,  are  affected  by  a  significant  loss  of  wealth,  especially  over  the 
latter part of last year,  and are understandably tending to save  more and, in many cases, 
looking  to  get  their  debt  levels  down.  That  said,  measures  of  consumer  confidence  and 
consumer spending in Australia have held up much better than in many other countries over 
recent months. 
Six months ago, our judgment was that Australia was experiencing an economic slowdown 
that  would  turn  out  to  be  not  unlike  that  of  2001  in  magnitude,  and  that  inflation  would 
gradually decline. Absent the events of September and October, that would still have been a 
reasonable expectation. But the financial turmoil, and the real economic impacts that have 
flowed  from  it,  altered  the  balance  of  risks  for  the  world  and  Australian  economies 
significantly. The Board quickly came to the judgment that the gradual easing of monetary 
policy that appeared to be in prospect six months ago should be accelerated. It moved to 
reduce the cash rate quite aggressively. The total decline of 400 basis points since August – 
as  rapid  an  easing  as  any  in  Australia’s  history  –  takes  monetary  policy  to  a  clearly 
expansionary setting. The Government has also implemented a major discretionary easing of 
fiscal policy, and the exchange rate is significantly lower. 
The deterioration in international economic conditions was so rapid that no policy response 
could  prevent  a  period  of  near-term  weakness  in  the  Australian  economy.  We  are  being 
affected by the global downturn, and cannot realistically expect other than weak conditions in 
the first part of 2009. But the very large reduction in interest rates, the lower exchange rate 
and the major fiscal initiatives will work to support demand, increasingly so as the year goes 
on. Inflation is likely to continue its moderation that began in the December quarter, and to do 
so faster than expected six months ago. 
Compared with the sorts of growth we enjoyed until fairly recently, this is a weak near-term 
outlook. But if the outcomes we see turn out to be even close to these, Australia will have 
done well in comparison with most other countries. We have claimed all along that Australia 
was  better  positioned  than  many  countries  to  ride  out  the  international  difficulties.  Credit 
standards do seem to have tightened further over recent months and banks are seeing the 
inevitable increase in bad debts as the economy slows. But our major financial institutions 
are still in a strong condition, have access to debt and equity markets, are still earning good 
profits, and are in a position to lend for sound proposals. Our housing sector is not overbuilt; 
instead there is considerable pent-up demand, and affordability is improving quickly. Most of 
the  corporate  sector  is  not  over-geared.  Going  into  this  episode,  the  scope  to  use 
macroeconomic stimulus was bigger than for most countries – and that scope is being used. 
Moreover, our transmission channels are still working: interest rates paid by borrowers have 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2009
fallen  when  the  cash  rate  has  been  reduced.  In  contrast,  mortgage  rates  in  the  United 
Kingdom and the United States did not fall through much of 2008, as margins rose by about 
as  much  as  the  central  banks  cut  their  policy  rates.  Only  quite  recently  have  UK  and  US 
mortgage rates begun to decline. 
So there are reasonable grounds at this stage to think that the Australian economy will come 
through this very difficult episode – certainly not unscathed, but well placed to benefit from a 
renewed expansion. Things will be difficult over the next year. But as I have said before, the 
long-run prospects for Australia have not deteriorated by as much as we may all be feeling 
just now. China’s emergence, for example, has not finished. It has years to run and Australia 
will  benefit  from  it.  We  should  not  lose  sight  of  that  or  other  positives.  We  can  have 
confidence  in  our  long-run  future  and  in  our  demonstrated  ability  to  adapt  to  changing 
circumstances. If we retain that, there is no reason for any downturn to be a deep one. 
The Board is, of course, continually assessing whether the stance of policy is the right one to 
foster a durable expansion, consistent with the inflation target. A very large easing of policy 
has been put in place, on the basis of the anticipated effects of the global downturn and more 
risk-averse  behaviour  at  home.  Those  effects  are  yet  to  be  seen  in  many  of  the  figures, 
though  they  are  being  felt  in  businesses  around  the  country.  The  effects  of  the  policy 
adjustments are only beginning. 
So  in  evaluating  the  information  we  receive  in  the  months  ahead,  our  task  will  be  to 
distinguish  between  that  which  confirms  the  anticipated  trends  to  which  we  have  already 
responded, and that which tells us something genuinely new about the prospects for demand 
and  prices  over  the  medium  term.  Our  objective,  however,  remains  the  same:  sustainable 
growth and low inflation. 
Perhaps  I  should  also  make  one  or  two  comments  about  payments  matters,  given  the 
impending  changes  to  arrangements  for  ATMs.  The  new  arrangements  seek  to  remove 
several undesirable features of the existing system. In particular, fees paid between banks 
when their customers use each others’ ATMs – “interchange” fees – are not transparent, and 
are not clearly related to costs; fees paid by customers using ATMs other than those owned 
by  their  own  banks  –  so-called  “foreign”  fees  –  are  not  always  properly  disclosed  (and  in 
many  cases  are  higher  than  necessary);  the  earnings  stream  for  owners  of  independent 
ATMs – about half the ATMs in Australia – are limited to the interchange fees paid by banks, 
which  are  of  course  their  competitors;  and  access  by  new  entrants  is  difficult,  potentially 
limiting competition. 
Under the new arrangements, there will be no interchange fees. An ATM owner will be able 
to charge the customer directly a fee for the use of the machine, but must disclose the fee 
prior to the transaction. Banks will probably continue to allow fee-free withdrawals by their 
customers at their own machines, because they expect to cover those costs with the revenue 
earned across the entire customer relationship. Use of another bank’s ATMs will presumably 
attract a fee by that other bank to cover the costs. But the only cost to a cardholder’s bank 
associated with use of a “foreign” ATM is the cost of processing the transaction electronically 
–  a  matter  of  no  more  than  10  cents.  Given  this,  we  cannot  see  any  strong  case  for  a 
“foreign” fee. Independent ATM owners will charge for the use of their machines, but that will 
maintain an incentive to grow their network. Otherwise, it is likely that the independents as a 
source  of  competition  would  diminish  over  time,  reducing  consumer  choice.  Access  to  the 
system  will  be  governed  by  a  code,  which  caps  the  price  of  connections,  so  that  new 
competitors cannot be unduly hampered by the incumbent players over-charging to connect. 
The  essence  of  the  changes  is  simple.  People  have  always  been  paying,  one  way  or 
another, to use ATMs. ATMs do have a cost of operation and somehow that cost has to be 
covered. Even where no explicit charge is levied, somewhere or other the financial institution 
is making up that cost. They do not provide services for free. 
Now people will know exactly what the price of an ATM transaction is, and they will know it 
before completing the transaction. There should be no “foreign” fees of any significance. And 
BIS Review 21/2009 
 3
competition  will  be  maintained,  by  allowing  the  independent  ATM  owners  to  remain  viable 
and new competitors to enter more easily. That is, in our judgment, an improvement over the 
arrangements of the past and is the best way of keeping costs down in the long run. 
My colleagues and I now look forward to your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2009
