Masaaki Shirakawa: Some thoughts on incentives at micro- and macro-
level for crisis prevention 
Remarks by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Eighth Bank for 
International Settlements, Annual Conference, Basel, 26 June 2009. 
 financial  and  economic  crisis  has  posed  wide-ranging  challenges 
Introduction 
The  current 
to 
policymakers and academics. Already, various proposals have been made for the reform of 
financial  supervision  and  regulation.  The  traditional  approach  in  this  area  is  based  on  a 
microprudential perspective. From that perspective, financial system stability will be achieved 
by assembling sound financial institutions with adequate capital and liquidity positions as well 
as proper risk management.  
That  approach  certainly  plays  an  important  role,  but  I  am  still  uncertain  whether  the 
cumulative efforts in that approach will eventually ensure the financial system being shielded 
from  a  future  crisis.  In  fact,  the  financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  was 
reformulated from the microprudential viewpoints every time a financial crisis occurred.  
In that respect, I will raise two questions. The first question is: “Has legally effective netting 
contributed  to  reducing  the  overall  degree  of  risk  in  the  financial  system?”  It  is  true  that 
netting  is  effective  in  reducing  counterparty  risk.  However,  once  the  risk  is  reduced  to  a 
certain degree, a financial institution tends to take further risk. As a result, it is still not certain 
whether netting contributes to reducing aggregate risk.  
The second question is: “Will a financial institution take a different business strategy not to 
expand  its  leverage  when  facing  again  a  benign  economic  condition,  comprised  of  low 
inflation, high growth, and low interest rates?” Some financial institutions will surely take a 
conservative  strategy,  considering  the  lessons  from  the  current  crisis.  But,  most  financial 
institutions  will  find  it  hard  to  resist  pressures  from  equity  holders  to  raise  the  returns  on 
equity under severe competition. 
Those examples seem to show the need for analyzing the incentives of financial institutions 
from the viewpoints of the macro- as well as micro-level. Incentives for a financial institution 
are underpinned not only by the framework for financial regulation and supervision at a micro 
level but also importantly by the financial and economic environment at a macro level. At a 
micro level, “too big to fail” is the single most important issue. At a macro level, monetary 
policy  is  important.  Today,  I  will  mainly  focus  on  monetary  policy  responses  to  a  bubble. 
Then, I will briefly touch upon some issues on supervision and regulation.  
Importance of risk-taking channel 
Before  the  current  global  financial  crisis,  the  majority  view  about  the  monetary  policy 
responses to a bubble can be summarized into two points. First, before the burst of a bubble, 
monetary  policy  should  respond  to  asset  price  movements,  whether  driven  by  the 
fundamentals or not, only to the degree that those movements have implications for future 
inflation and economic growth. Monetary policy should not go beyond that or should not step 
into  “extra  operations,”  by  which  I  mean  a  policy  decision  to  intentionally  deviate  from  a 
monetary policy rule, like the Taylor rule. Second, in contrast to the bubble period, central 
banks should be proactive after the burst of a bubble. Monetary policy should carry out “mop-
up operations” aggressively responding to the adverse effects stemming from the burst of a 
bubble. This line of argument is generally premised on the assumption that a bubble is very 
difficult to be identified on a real time basis, and that a preemptive action by monetary policy 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 1
alone is likely to require a large hike in interest rates, thus exerting a devastating adverse 
impact on economic activity. 
To  discuss  the  monetary  policy  responses  to  a  bubble,  it  matters  a  great  deal  how  to 
understand  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  The  recent  monetary  policy 
analysis,  based  on  new  Keynesian  macroeconomics,  explores  optimal  monetary  policy  to 
stabilize  inflation  and  output.  The  declines  in  volatility  of  inflation  and  economic  growth 
themselves  certainly  improve  the  economic  welfare,  but  dynamics  in  the  economy  do  not 
stop there. Once macroeconomic stability is achieved, another transmission channel outside 
the standard New Keynesian macroeconomics gets crucial. That is often referred to as the 
“risk-taking channel” of monetary policy. 
More precisely, risk perception and risk tolerance of economic agents change gradually but 
steadily  under  benign  economic  and  financial  conditions,  thereby  affecting  their  risk-taking 
behavior.  That  induces  an  expansion  of  credit  and  leverage  at  financial  institutions,  and 
results  in  the  accumulation  of  financial  imbalances  behind  the  scenes.  Such  imbalances 
abruptly manifest themselves by some shock when the imbalances exceed the critical point. 
As  a  result,  the  financial  system  becomes  unstable,  and  economic  activity  deteriorates 
significantly. 
We see various forms of risk-taking channel. First, it appears as maturity mismatches. When 
the  interest  rates  are  reduced,  financial  institutions  expand  maturity  mismatches  by  short-
term  funding  and  long-term  lending.  That  eases  liquidity  constraints  in  the  non-financial 
private  sector,  thereby  stimulating  economic  activity.  Financial  institutions  also  create 
maturity  mismatches on their off-the-balance-sheet, for example, by investing in structured 
credit  products  through  structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs).  In  addition,  financial 
institutions  generate  maturity  mismatches  beyond  the  national  border,  as  witnessed  in  the 
surge in cross-border lending during the credit boom preceding the current crisis. 
Second, the risk-taking channel appears as an increase in asset prices. The availability of 
funds directly influences asset prices, and, more importantly, it also influences asset prices in 
an indirect way by influencing market liquidity of particular assets. As the availability of funds 
improves and more investors participate into the markets, the market transactions become 
easier  in  both  sale  and  purchase,  thus  expanding  market  liquidity  at  an  accelerated  pace. 
The  increases  in  asset  prices  and  the  expansion  in  market  liquidity  enhance  the  risk 
tolerance  capacity  of  investors,  thereby  pushing  asset  prices  further  upward.  Economic 
activity is consequentially stimulated. 
In addition, the two forms of risk-taking channel just I mentioned interact with each other. The 
expansion  of  maturity  mismatches,  generally  associated  with  the  expansion  of  leverage, 
stimulates asset prices, and higher asset prices, in turn, facilitate the expansion of maturity 
mismatches and leverage.  
Considering  the  risk-taking  channel,  it  is  crucially  important  to  realize  two  points  in 
formulating monetary policy. First, banks play an important role as a mediator of transmitting 
the effects of monetary policy. In this context, the behavior of banks influences the economy 
significantly, regardless of the share of the banking sector in financial intermediation. During 
a  period  of  interest  rate  reduction,  for  example,  expansions  in  maturity  mismatches  and 
increases in asset prices are observed on a bank’s balance sheet. When the cycle is moving 
upward under benign economic and financial conditions, the amplification process between 
maturity  mismatches  and  asset  prices  takes  place  very  gradually  but  steadily,  and,  in  any 
case, the risks in the financial system are unlikely to manifest themselves. Once the cycle is 
reversed, however, the situation deteriorates suddenly. Maturity mismatches exaggerate the 
shortage in funding liquidity. In addition, the sharp declines in asset prices result in losses, 
possibly  inducing  a  shortage  in  capital,  and  the  deterioration  in  market  liquidity,  thereby 
provoking  a  further  shortage  in  funding  liquidity  due  to  margin  calls  and  lowered  collateral 
values. Those developments eventually hit banks’ balance sheets.  
2 
 BIS Review 82/2009
Second,  there  exists  an  asymmetry  between  the  upward  and  downward  phases.  Although 
the upward phase proceeds gradually, the downward phase proceeds in an asymmetrically 
quick  manner,  since  banks  are  forced  to  take  immediate  action  to  counter  the  shortage  in 
funding liquidity. In addition, once confidence is lost, it takes a long time to restore the eroded 
confidence.  As  market  participants  explain,  the  credit  line  can  be  cut  off  at  once,  but  the 
reestablishment of the credit line takes a much longer time. 
Issues related to monetary policy 
Mop-up operations 
Given  the  understanding  on  the  risk-taking  channel  I  have  discussed  so  far,  what 
consequences will follow from the  asymmetric monetary policy responses before and after 
the  burst  of  a  bubble?  Suppose  a  central  bank  is  considered  to  make  a  commitment  to 
refrain  from  taking  any  monetary  policy  responses  until  the  burst  of  a  bubble,  the  private 
agents  will  surely  take  action  based  on  such  unfounded  expectations.  That  will  accelerate 
maturity mismatches and asset price increases, thus further accelerating the bubble and the 
adverse consequences of its burst.  
One  of  the  basic  messages  from  standard  New  Keynesian  macroeconomics  is  that  “the 
policy commitment is effective in stabilizing the economy, given the forward-looking behavior 
in the private sector.” Standard New Keynesian macroeconomics does not incorporate the 
risk-taking  channel,  but  its  basic  message  suggests  the  importance  of  the  symmetric 
monetary policy responses to a bubble. 
Extra operations  
Then, what is an idea about extra operations against a bubble? I agree with the principle that 
monetary  policy  should  respond  to  asset  price  movements,  whether  driven  by  the 
fundamentals or not, only to the degree that those movements have implications for future 
inflation and economic growth. I should also say that the real issue here is how to understand 
the expression of “only to the degree that asset price movements have implications for future 
inflation and economic growth” in implementing monetary policy. 
The  transmission  dynamics  of  the  risk-taking  channel,  I  have  just  mentioned,  differs 
significantly from those of the standard interest rate channel through housing investment and 
capital investment. The risk-taking channel produces asymmetric effects between the initial 
positive  impact  and  the  later  negative  impact.  And,  more  importantly,  it  also  accompanies 
considerable uncertainty about the timing when negative impacts occur. Given such nature of 
the  risk-taking  channel,  conventional  macroeconomic  models  in  a  central  bank’s  toolkit  do 
not sufficiently incorporate the effects stemming from maturity mismatches and asset prices 
in the short term as well as in the longer term.  
Policy challenges for central banks 
In  light  of  the  previous  discussion,  I  will  raise  some  issues  for  discussion  regarding  the 
actions by central banks. 
Monetary policy responses to a bubble  
The  first  is  monetary  policy  responses  to  a  bubble.  That  issue  is  often  debated  simply  as 
whether  monetary  policy  should  lean  against  the  wind  or  excessive  asset  price  increases. 
However, I believe that such a way of addressing the issue just confuses the discussion. No 
central banker believes that a bubble can or should be prevented by monetary policy alone. 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 3
A  more  proper  way  of  addressing  the  issue  would  be  “how  should  monetary  policy  be 
conducted in an environment in which all the symptoms of the economy except for inflation 
signal a need for policy tightening: asset prices are rising, credit and leverage are increasing, 
maturity  mismatch  is  widening,  and  the  economy  is  being  overheated,  while  only  inflation 
remains low and stable?” My answer is that monetary policy responses are needed anyway, 
and it is just semantic whether to call them extra operations. I should hasten to add that the 
build-up of excesses, of course, cannot be contained by monetary policy alone, and needs to 
be addressed by a combination of policy measures. That leads me to the second issue of the 
role of policy measures other than monetary policy. 
Two objectives and two instruments? 
It  is  often  argued  that  achieving  the  two  objectives,  price  stability  and  financial  system 
stability,  requires  two  policy  instruments.  Active  discussions  are  continuing  regarding  the 
need for developing prudential policy measures, including the countercyclical implementation 
of  minimum  capital  adequacy  requirements.  I  completely  agree  with  the  necessity  of 
developing prudential policy measures. Having said that, I am wondering whether it is valid to 
employ the Tinbergen principle in this context.  
The  two  objectives  are  not  independent  but  closely  connected  with  each  other.  It  does 
appear  that  an  intra-temporal  trade-off  exists  between  current  price  stability  and  current 
financial system stability. However, a real trade-off does exist in an inter-temporal direction 
between the current economic stability and the future economic stability. If that is the case, 
financial system stability and price stability are not independent objectives, but just differ in 
the time-horizon. I should say that central banks need one large toolkit to achieve one large 
policy objective, rather than need two policy instruments for the two objectives.  
Versatility of regulation 
The  third  is  regulatory  and  supervisory  issues  at  a  micro  level.  Among  various  issues  for 
discussion,  I  will  focus  on  the  versatility  of  the  regulation  to  fit  a  variety  of  financial 
institutions.  On  the  one  hand,  heterogeneity  in  financial  institutions  is  quite  important  in 
enhancing the robustness of the financial system against shocks. On the other hand, one-
size-fits-all  treatments  of  heterogeneous  financial  institutions  in  designing  prudential 
regulation,  such  as  capital  adequacy  regulation  and  liquidity  regulation,  entail  a  risk  of 
deteriorating the robustness of the financial system.  
If  regulatory  capital  is  set  at  the  level  above  economic  capital,  pressures  on  financial 
institutions  from  equity  holders  to  earn  sufficient  profits  become  all  the  more  intense.  As 
financial  history  tells,  too  much  as  well  as  too  little  capital  has  caused  problems.  That  is, 
excess  capital  is  likely  to  induce  a  pile-up  of  financial  imbalances.  If  a  risk  measurement 
framework  is  inappropriate,  and  minimum  capital  requirements  based  on  such  a  risk 
measurement  framework  are  excessively  high,  that  will  produce  perverse  incentives  for 
individual financial institutions, resulting in a trigger for macroeconomic instability.  
Capital  and  liquidity  positions  for  financial  institutions  depend  crucially  on  the  business 
model.  A  business  model  for  financial  institutions  varies  according  to  countries,  or  times, 
institutions.  The  issue  here  is  the  ability  of  regulatory  authorities  to  assess  the  business 
model. Given differences in business model, redesigning capital adequacy regulations is an 
important challenge, along with the conduct of monetary policy. 
Closing remarks 
In closing, I ask myself what are the determinants of the amount of economy-wide risk-taking 
after  all.  There  is  no  simple  answer.  Yet,  I  believe  both  micro  and  macro  approaches  are 
needed for preventing a future crisis. 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2009
