Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Philippines – navigating through the global 
financial turmoil 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Australian-New  Zealand  Chamber  of  Commerce 
Philippines Annual General Membership Meeting, Makati-City, 14 April 2009. 
 Introduction 
President Richard Barclay, distinguished members of the Australian-New Zealand Chamber 
of Commerce, ladies and gentlemen good evening.  
First,  let  me  thank  ANZCHAM  for  inviting  me  to  your  monthly  members’  meeting.  If  I 
remember correctly, the last time I graced a similar event of ANZCHAM was in July 2005 – 
as I was just beginning my term as central bank governor.  
Much has transpired during the nearly four years since then. As this particular slide shows, 
our economies have experienced ups and downs – riding on record growth rates, and now 
recessionary trends, historic low inflation, and then some episodes of highly unstable prices, 
stock market gyrations, as well as periods of volatility in our exchange rates.  
Our journey in the last four years has taken us through good roads, so to speak. But we also 
went  through  road  blocks  and  speed  bumps  along  the  way.  Now,  the  global  financial  and 
economic turmoil presents our economies with, perhaps, our biggest challenge yet.  
The current crisis has been described as a “crisis unlike any we have seen in our lifetime”. 
We have seen much of the crisis’ adverse effect on our economies, but we know that much 
is still to unfold. For my remarks tonight, I thought I would follow the outline flashed on the 
screen  right  now.  I  will  begin  by  quickly  running  through  three  themes  that  I  have  seen 
surrounding the current crisis:  
First, that “the law of unintended consequences” has been at work in this crisis. Second, that 
a global crisis needs global responses. Finally, that no economy is immune from the effects 
of this crisis, but those which have built up buffers are more likely to fare better than others.  
I shall then conclude my remarks with a description of the policy actions and initiatives that 
the BSP has so far implemented to allow us a less bumpy ride to the not-so-distant period of 
economic recovery. 
Unintended consequences evident in the crisis 
I  am  sure  many  of  you  have  heard  of  the  term  “law  of  unintended  consequences”.  Some 
have  defined  this  as  “the  proposition  that  every  undertaking,  however  well-intentioned,  is 
generally  accompanied  by  unforeseen  repercussions  that  can  overshadow  the  principal 
intention.”  
Let me illustrate, continuing with my road analogy. In road development, one option to deal 
with a traffic-congested road is to build a bypass or an alternate road. Unfortunately, building 
a bypass may decongest the existing road, but as often happens, with new developments in 
the area of the bypass, we would now have, instead of just one congested road, two traffic 
congestions.  
Many  analysts  have  said  that  “the  law  of  unintended  consequences”  was  working 
spectacularly in the run up to this current crisis.  
One evidence of this is the benign macroeconomic environment created by the low interest 
rate  regime  prevalent  during  the  first  half  of  this  decade.  This  should  be  a  good  thing. 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 1
However,  this  environment  led  to  the  search  for  higher  yields,  that  fueled  unprecedented 
asset price increases and at rates faster than the growth in household incomes. This further 
led to a loss of rationality (individuals believing house prices would never fall) and extension 
of credit by financial institutions to sectors of the economy that normally would not qualify to 
borrow (in other words, the so-called “subprime” borrowers).  
Sounds  familiar?  This  was  what  transpired  in  the  United  States  –  low  federal  funds  rate 
fueling a boom in mortgages with borrowers having doubtful credit histories, housing prices 
bubbled and burst, with the negative feedbacks affecting both the U.S. domestic economy 
and financial markets.  
Another example is in line with risk spreading through financial innovations.  
The ability to spread risk should also be a desirable goal. However, the fast-paced evolution 
of  financial  products  and  services,  along  with  the  seemingly  “loose”  financial  regulation  – 
later on gave way to the unfortunate reality that risks were eventually “concealed”. Through 
securitization and deleveraging, those hidden risks were effectively multiplied in the process. 
Thus, while financial innovations have good intentions, they also have some side effects… if 
not prudently monitored or given appropriate form of regulation. 
These developments, together with a host of other factors, fueled the current crisis, which 
from all angles, can be considered our first truly global crisis. From what was first believed to 
be a US-centric subprime mortgage problem, the crisis has since transformed into financial 
turmoil and further into an economic growth crisis. From the US and Europe, it has spread to 
the rest of the world. Economies in the periphery suffered market failures characterized by 
sudden stops as sentiment turned, despite sound policies. Even countries that did not have 
strong  financial  links  with  the  core  nations  are  now  being  affected  through  real  flows  and 
financial losses on trade activities. 
Global crisis requires a global responses 
This brings me to my second theme – “A global crisis requires a global response.” 
When it had become evident that the economic events were not going to remain localized at 
the  epicenter,  advanced  and  emerging  economies  implemented  policies  and  strategic 
actions,  in  concert  and  at  the  national  level.  Some  economies  that  have  more  monetary 
space have eased policy interest rates, reserve requirements and credit facilities. Some that 
have  more  fiscal  space  boosted  spending  via  stimulus  packages  and  prioritization  of 
important  infrastructures.  Many  have  pursued  both  expansionary  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies.  Some  countries  like  Australia  and  New  Zealand  have  implemented  unlimited  but 
temporary deposit guarantees and opened up US dollar swap lines with the Fed.  
Finding  the  right  policy  mix  poses  a  continuous  challenge,  as  economic  managers  and 
policymakers would have to deal with varying conditions, magnitude and depth of the crisis’ 
effects. Thus, the worldwide crusade to mitigate the impact of the current global financial and 
economic  crisis  continues  its  experimentation  but  with  utmost  caution  for  a  wrong  policy 
could eventually take its toll on the economy over the long-term horizon.  
No economy is immune, but buffers and cushions help lessen the impact 
The crisis has shown that no one is immune. This leads me to my third theme. No economy 
is immune but some economies fare better because of buffers built from past reforms and 
behavior. While our countries have been affected, it is noteworthy that the cushions we have 
painstakingly  put  in  place  before  the  current  crisis  unfolded  have  helped  us  weather  the 
blows. Allow me to name a few of these buffers. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2009
In the case of Australia and New Zealand, these economies have grown strongly for the past 
10 years and inflation has been largely within the 1 to 3% target band; this has resulted in 
low  unemployment,  and  a  strong  fiscal  position.  They  also  have  good  institutions.  They 
scored  highly  on  measures  of  ease  of  doing  business,  as  well  as  measures  of 
corruption/transparency.  They  also  have  flexible  labour  markets.  They  both  have  an 
established track record for transparency in regulatory institutions, sound management of the 
public  accounts,  and  a  forward-looking  monetary  policy  are  well-regarded  internationally. 
Finally,  their  banking  system  remained  sound  and  well-capitalised.  The  large  Australian 
banking groups, of which the major New Zealand banks are a part of, are now among the 
largest and highest-credit-quality banks in the world. Australian parents of the big 4 NZ banks 
are some of the best-rated in the world (4 of the remaining 13 AAs and in the top 20 biggest). 
The openness of your economies has indeed left you quite vulnerable during this crisis, but 
your strong institutions have certainly helped to mitigate the crisis’ adverse impact.  
How about in the Philippines? What are the buffers we have built?  
With  the  easing  of  oil  and  other  non-oil  commodity  prices  in  the  world  market  and  the 
moderation in inflation expectations, inflation is now expected to further decelerate – and be 
within the target ranges – in 2009 and 2010. Actual headline inflation has decreased to 6.4 
percent in March from 7.3 percent in February 2009. (Core Inflation in March also declined to 
5.6 percent from 6.4 percent in February 2009) 
These developments opened the opportunity for BSP, during its last three policy meetings, to 
cut its policy rates by a total of 125 basis points. The reduction in rates makes more funds 
available  for  lending  to corporations,  including  small  and  medium  business  enterprises,  as 
well  as  for  consumer  loans.  We  will  continue  to  monitor  developments  to  ensure  that  our 
policy settings remain appropriate.  
In  October  2008,  at  the  height  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  this  crisis,  the  BSP 
implemented  several  measures  to  boost  liquidity.  We  were  witnessing  at  the  time  the 
freezing of credit markets in the major economies. So, even as we were aware there was 
ample liquidity in the system then, the BSP took preemptive steps to avert a similar situation 
developing here.  
These  measures,  which  I  will  discuss  shortly,  have  helped  to  raise  domestic  liquidity  and 
allowed banks to continue to extend loans. The continued liquidity and credit growth is shown 
in this slide.  
Demand for money remained strong in February as domestic liquidity or M3 grew by 14.6 
percent year-on-year, higher than the 6.8 percent expansion during the same month a year 
ago  but  lower  than  the  16.1  percent  growth  in  January  2009.  The  continued  strength  of 
domestic  liquidity  indicates  that  there  are  funds  available  in  the  system  which  could  be 
tapped for investment and other productive activities.  
Outstanding  loans  of  commercial  banks  including  reverse  repurchase  agreements  (RRPs) 
increased in February 2009 by 22.5 percent year-on-year, an acceleration from the previous 
month’s  growth  of  18.8  percent.  Net  of  RRP  placements  with  the  BSP,  lending  also 
increased  by  22.6  percent  year-on-year  in  February,  slightly  slower  compared  to  the  24.5 
percent expansion in the previous month. 
We have allowed liquidity to grow faster than we would normally tolerate since we see that 
these  funds  are  being  used  in  productive  sectors.  Nonetheless,  we  are  mindful  that  while 
liquidity fuels economic growth, excess liquidity could fan inflation. In view of this, we always 
keep in mind that balance is necessary to ensure that we are able to support growth in an 
environment of stable prices.  
BIS Review 47/2009 
 3
One  of  the  lessons  we  learned  from  the  1997  Asian  Financial  Crisis  was  the  value  of 
managing external debt and building up FX reserves for self insurance. This chart shows that 
we have indeed learned this lesson well.  
Based  on  preliminary  data,  as  of  end-March  2009,  our  reserves  have  remained  broadly 
steady and close to record level at US$38.9 billion. This suffices to cover about 6.2 months 
of imports of goods and payments of services and income, or alternatively, it could cover our 
short-term external debt based on residual maturity about 2.9 times. (What's interesting to 
note is this level of reserves is more than fourfold our reserves level in 1997 of $8.8 billion!) 
We  were  able  to  continue  building  reserves  because  our  external  payments  position  has 
remained in surplus in 2008 (in fact for nearly 5 years now). The healthy external balance 
has been supported by remittances of overseas Filipinos as well as higher services receipts 
particularly from business process outsourcing. In February 2009, our balance of payments 
position posted a surplus of US$ 469 million, resulting in a year-to-date surplus of US$2.2 
billion in 2009. 
Thus,  even  as  we  face  a  slowdown  in  external  demand  and  capital  flows,  the  stronger 
external liquidity position that we currently enjoy will make us less vulnerable to the moods 
and swings of international financial markets. 
This  slide  shows  that  (1)  The  banking  system’s  asset  base  has  been  expanding  steadily, 
supported  by  sustained  growth  in  deposits.  Our  banks  have  continued  to  perform  their 
central role of efficiently channeling funds to productive uses and managing and distributing 
risks; (2) Banks have been offloading their non-performing assets and problem loans. As a 
result, the NPL ratio is now at the pre-Asian crisis level of around 4.0 percent.  
Furthermore, the profitability of the banking system has continued to increase, although with 
some moderation as of late. Banks have remained capitalized at levels above both the BSP-
regulatory requirement and the international (BIS) standard. In addition, let me also assure 
you that the rural banking industry remains strong and healthy despite the recent closures of 
some  rural  banks  which  have  been  found  to  have  been  suffering  from  severe  solvency 
problems.  
BSP initiatives and policy thrusts 
Amidst this global crisis, the Philippines has indeed remained resilient and steadfast. How 
have we been able to accomplish this?  
Let  me  quickly  go  over  the  BSP’s  initiatives  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  the  crisis.  And  then 
conclude with our policy thrusts going forward.  
To  ensure  liquidity  in  the  financial  system,  the  BSP  opened  the  US  dollar  repo  facility  to 
augment dollar liquidity in the foreign exchange market and ensure the ready availability of 
credit  for  imports  and  other  legitimate  funding  requirements.  The  BSP  also  increased  the 
budget  for  the  peso  rediscounting  facility  to  P60  billion.  Regular  reserve  requirements  on 
bank  deposits  and  deposit  substitutes  were  reduced  by  two  percentage  points.  To  ensure 
continued access to financing of small businesses, the BSP launched its Credit Surety Fund 
(CSF) Program which provides guarantee to small cooperatives with good track record but 
without credit history. 
The  BSP  was  also  quick  in  bolstering  confidence  in  the  financial  system,  through  timely 
communication with financial institutions and market participants on the minimal exposure of 
the banking system to troubled financial assets, such that the impact of the global financial 
crisis on the Philippines has not been significant.  
Monetary  policy  in  2009  will  continue  to  pursue  prudent  rate  movements  mindful  of  price 
stability as the primary mandate. With the easing in the prices of oil and non-oil commodities 
in the world market, inflation is expected to further decelerate and be within the target range 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2009
of 2.5-4.5 percent in 2009. This will give some flexibility to monetary policy to support growth. 
An accommodative monetary policy stance is expected to help ensure greater availability of 
credit and reinforce market confidence. However, given possible upside risks to inflation, a 
more measured adjustment of policy rates is appropriate.  
Banking sector policies will be geared towards improving the regulatory framework, mindful 
of the need to protect consumers and investors. Key financial and banking sector reforms will 
be sustained in pursuit of greater efficiency, better risk management, stronger capital base, 
improved  disclosure  and  transparency  practices,  and  enhanced  corporate  governance 
standards in the banking system.  
The BSP’s external sector policy will remain focused on ensuring our external vulnerabilities 
are limited. We expect to continue to post a surplus in our BOP, mainly still due to steady OF 
remittances and receipts from the BPO sector. This will give us the opportunity to further beef 
up  reserves  for  self-insurance.  We  will  continue  to  pursue  a  market-determined  exchange 
rate to allow us to maintain external price competitiveness. We will also engage in policies 
that would sustain a manageable external debt profile.  
The current turmoil underscored the importance of comprehensive and globally coordinated 
policy  responses.  Recognizing  this,  the  BSP  has  been  actively  consulting  with  its  regional 
peers to share information and discuss emerging developments and policy alternatives. 
Conclusion 
As I mentioned when I began my remarks, an overarching theme of this crisis is the law of 
unintended consequences. Is it possible to avoid this going forward?  
Frederic  Bastiat,  a  19th  century  French  economic  journalist,  once  said,  “there  is  only  one 
difference  between  a  bad  economist  and  a  good  economist:  the  bad  economist  confines 
himself to the visible effect; the good economist takes into account the effects that can be 
seen and those effects that must be foreseen”. 
It may be difficult to perfectly foresee things but this should not discourage us from trying. 
Thus, I encourage all of us in this venue to remain positive, yet vigilant for any circumstances 
that could come our way. The BSP, for its part, will remain committed and continue to put 
forth monetary policy actions and banking reforms that will allow our economy to withstand 
the road blocks comprising panics, crises and other changes in the horizon. 
Let  us  keep  our  eyes  steady  on  the  road  ahead  and  gear  up.  The  BSP  looks  forward  to 
continued  partnership  with  the  Chamber.  This  will  certainly  help  enable  our  economies 
navigate the global financial crisis towards an economic recovery of renewed confidence and 
regained trust in markets. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 5
