Martín Redrado: What’s wrong with the current framework of global 
financial architecture? 
Speech  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  at  Bank 
Indonesia’s 7th Annual International Seminar “Global financial tsunami: what can we do?”, 
Bali, 13 June 2009. 
 Climate  change  is  not  the  topic  of  this  seminar,  as  it  was  last  year,  but  it  is  appropriately 
embedded in the label for the occasion. This is particularly appealing for the turbulent times 
the global economy is going through. The international environment seems to be emerging 
from  a  unique  combination  of  natural  catastrophes:  extensive  droughts  on  credit  markets, 
earthquake on trade and a flood of distrust. And, as if the former weren’t enough, we are now 
confronting the risks of an A-flu pandemic. 
In a context of several structural changes that the economy is experiencing worldwide, there 
are  also  different  microclimates.  First,  I  will  briefly  provide  my  vision  on  where  the  global 
economy is heading to. For this purposes, I will assess the recent developments on these 
“micro-environments”  as  they  add  several  question  marks  to  the  likelihood  of  achieving  a 
sustainable  and  long-lasting  recovery.  Then,  the  lessons  learned  so  far  from  the  crisis  in 
terms of the changes needed in regulatory and policy frameworks both at the national and 
supra-national levels will be addressed. In the case of how the global financial infrastructure 
is evolving and what path it should follow, I will stress both its lender of last resort role and its 
regulatory function.  
The U.S. economy is still on “de-leveraging” mode. The two-fold hit of financial assets and 
home equity loss led to a significant wealth destruction combined with debt overhang that is 
calling for a stronger correction of savings. This process has already begun with PCE figures. 
They reveal a savings rate that jumped from zero early last year to about five percent today. 
Further  adjustment  is  in  the  pipeline.  The  labor  market  is  still  on  the  downside,  amid 
continuing massive lays-off in manufacturing sector. Although some particular areas seem to 
be  bottoming  out  like  construction and  services  –  there  is  some  evidence  that  the  intense 
declines in output that we have seen are over – spending is still weak. We can describe, so 
far, what we are witnessing recently is as a “jobless recovery”. 
On the monetary and financial side, the string of initiatives launched one after the other have 
not  delivered  as  expected  in  terms  of  kicking  start  the  credit  market.  PPIP,  TALF,  TSLF, 
TARP; it is even hard to track such an extensive list of programs aimed at supplying liquidity, 
fresh capital and re-starting securitization but more with the goal of boosting market activity 
than  crowding  it  out.  On  the  demand  side,  one  drawback  going  forward  is  that  financial 
institutions are not likely to take advantage of excessive leverage as it happened in the past. 
On the supply side, much debate is around exit strategies. Particularly, how the Fed is going 
to deal with the massive liquidity provision, which is seen as an increasing inflationary risk. 
However there is a point to be made on the opposite direction: I mean a deflationary scenario 
as a result of the unwinding of the liquidity provision. If the Fed obtains any profit due to its 
operation (given a revaluation of financial assets bought, which would, of course be, a good 
news) it would end up withdrawing more cash from the market than the formerly issued. This 
could trigger a new dry up on the markets. So, it is not just about returning to the pre-crisis 
balance sheet of Fed. 
In my view, the roadmap for a sustainable recovery of should have several features such as: 
i)  long  term  funding,  which  is  still absent;  ii)  households  balance  sheets  repair  (the  micro-
fundamentals point to additional adjustment still to come); iii) banks balance sheets repair; 
the banking will be redesigned on the basis of simpler criteria, with lower leverage and more 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 1
capital.  Burying  the  old  system  and  enabling  a  new  one  to  emerge  will  take  time;  and  iv) 
long-run fiscal and monetary sustainability. 
On  the  other  edge  of  the  Atlantic,  Europe  is  caught  in  a  delicate  situation.  First,  the 
divergence between policy makers about fiscal and monetary policy measures to prevent a 
deepening of the slump. And, second, the “East menace”, which is the sizable exposure of its 
banking system to Eastern Europe risk. Currency mismatches and their impact on credit risk 
still poses significant challenges for the region. In fact, the whole periphery (both East and 
West) is under scrutiny due to the brutal adjustment in aggregate spending that is yielding 
sky-rocket unemployment.  
In the emerging world, the adjustment is also taking place. And, in some cases, it is showing 
up the hard way. We witness Asian economies suffering from a collapse on trade which is 
mostly region-driven. Figures reveal that U.S. imports did not fall as much as intra-Asia trade. 
On the positive side, inventories data in East Asia suggest that the retrenchment on industrial 
activity might be over. Again, here also the “green shoots” could be the effect of anti-crisis 
packages  rather  than  a  more  lasting  effect  with  domestic  consumption  taking  the  “driver’s 
seat”.  
On our side Latin America has been better prepared to face this crisis both when comparing 
with  history  and  with  the  way  other  emerging  markets  are  being  affected.  And,  of  course, 
these developments have not been achieved by chance. Following the crises of the 1990s 
and  2000s,  our  countries  have  taken  important  steps  to  strengthen  macroeconomic 
management,  prudential  regulation  and  oversight.  Improved  current  account  and  fiscal 
positions,  large  amounts  of  external  liquidity,  better  liability  management  and  robust 
monetary frameworks are several features that place my region not even in the first row of 
the  fire  line  at  this  time.  I  would  like  to  stress,  in  particular,  the  strengthening  of  balance 
sheets,  including  the  built  up  of  liquidity  buffers  to  face  external  shocks  and  the  reduced 
currency  mismatches  –  one  of  the  key  sins  of  the  past.  The  development  of  a  domestic 
currency capital market was a corner-stone that allow the monetary and financial system to 
act as a shock smoother rather than a shock amplifier. 
Several challenges lie ahead to restore a normal path in the world financial system. Let me 
tackle  this  issue  by  sharing  my  views  on  some  of  the  relevant  topics  that  need  to  be 
addressed at the national and supra-national order. 
At the national level, one of the key structural changes is that financial stability is now ranking 
higher on every central bank goals worldwide. Both developed and emerging countries have 
had  to  adjust  monetary  schemes  focused  on  the  interest  rate  as  the  single  instrument  to 
maintain  stability.  In  my  region,  financial  stability  has  always  been  at  the  forefront  of  the 
central  banks´  tool kit  due  to  our  recurrent  crisis.  In  fact,  financial stability  objectives  were 
implicitly  and  explicitly  added,  and  instruments  were  adjusted  to  new  priorities.  Within  this 
framework,  many  central  banks  have  had  to  revisit  their  usual  regulation,  operation  and 
intervention mechanisms.  
In this regard, the economic literature is lagging behind. If the relationship between economic 
theory  and  policy  recommendations  is  reasonably  well  defined  during  “normal”  times,  in 
times of turmoil, this relationship becomes much weaker. We have reached a point in which 
economic theory is having a hard time keeping up with praxis. Literature has shown results 
that  are  ambiguous  or  contrary  to  those  produced  by  the  usual  “technology”,  especially  in 
relation to the approach that relies on the interest rate as the single instrument. The same 
applies to the managed floating exchange rate regimes. Recent empirical papers that refined 
the analysis started by several academics argue against sharp fluctuations in the domestic 
currency.  Instead,  mitigating  excessive  volatility,  especially  in  developing  countries  with 
rather shallow capital markets and limited access to hedging instruments, seems to be an 
appropriate policy. 
This kind of monetary and financial framework that ensures systemic stability has been my 
main task during the last years. This means giving priority to avoiding "the next crisis" and 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2009
building  buffers  to  minimize  the  effects  of  disruptions.  In  my  country,  the  decades  of 
macroeconomic  instability  and  recurrent  crises  were  not  harmless  in  terms  of  welfare. 
Although  Latin  American  countries  have  shown  lower  economic  growth  rates  and  higher 
macroeconomic volatility than other regions, the case of Argentina is on a different scale. If 
we consider the past 30 years, the average growth in Latin America was less than half of 
Asia’s,  with  volatility  that  nearly  doubled  Asian  levels.  In  that  period  of  time,  Argentina’s 
growth was three times lower than in Emerging Asia, while volatility turned out to be eight 
times higher. This process triggered enormous economic and social losses, hindering on our 
chances  to  develop  and  leading  to  changes  in  our  citizens’  behavior.  Indeed,  the 
consequences of this process include portfolio dollarization; fiscal dominance; obstacles to 
develop a long-term credit market; and the marked negative correlation between changes in 
retail deposits and foreign exchange fluctuations. 
These factors, which undermined the power of some traditional monetary policy instruments, 
have  played  a  key  role  in  the  design  of  our  current  monetary  and  financial  system.  In 
particular, our risk management strategy based on four pillars (permanent equilibrium in the 
monetary market, managed floating exchange rate regime, development of external liquidity 
buffers,  appropriate  financial  regulation  and  supervision)  is  compatible  with  these  aims  as 
well  as  with  the  tools  available.  This  scheme, which  was  carefully  developed  along  recent 
years, now allows us to overcome each episode of stress, minimizing the impact on the real 
economy and avoiding inconsistencies that might make it unsustainable over time. Over the 
last  two  years,  we  have  experienced  four  periods  to  significant  financial  stress  in  the 
domestic  market  and  our  monetary  and  financial  framework  has  delivered.  In  each  of  the 
events,  we  first  reacted  firmly  to  normalize  the  money  demand  and  stabilize  the  foreign 
exchange market. Then, with simple instruments, we ensured liquidity provision to guarantee 
systemic  stability.  Finally,  we  implemented  an  array  of  measures  including  reforms  on  the 
markets for Central Bank securities, the development of additional mechanisms for liquidity 
provision, changes to enhance futures market depth and transparency, and instruments to 
facilitate supply of foreign currency. Our system worked as a dam to the rest of the economy, 
providing for the first time in decades monetary and financial stability. So in my view, there is 
a  need  to  rethink  the  paradigm  for  Central  Banks  so  that  we  have  the  tools  to  provide 
monetary and financial stability. 
Now  let  me  move  from  the  national  level  to  the  global  one.  In  this  instance  a  more 
sophisticated supra-national framework is urgently needed to deal with financial stability. Any 
roadmap should have at least the following ingredients:  
i) 
Greater  convergence  in  financial  regulation  and  supervision  standards  among 
countries; 
Rethinking the role of the IMF; 
Reinforcement of macro-prudential supervision and regulation tools; 
Reformulation of asset valuation methods;  
Avoidance regulatory arbitrage and control of shadow banking system;  
Redefinition of the credit rating agencies function. 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
Current  events  show 
that  cross-border  banking  operation  has  both  systemic  and 
macroeconomic  consequences  domestically  and  internationally.  This  calls  for  coordinated 
actions  between  national  authorities  together  with  a  more  aggressive  “stepping  up”  from 
international  financial  institutions.  Let  me  be  very  clear:  the  international  architecture  is  in 
desperate need of a “guardian” for global financial stability. This is, of course, a well-suited 
role for the IMF given its global reach and infrastructure.  
So  far,  the  IMF  has  announced  a  series  of  measures,  which  revisited  its  traditional  credit 
practices  and  created  new  credit  lines,  such  as  the  Flexible  Credit  Line  (FCL)  and  the 
Exogenous Shock Facility (ESF). These are welcomed steps but also “baby” steps. As long 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 3
as a comprehensive set of products for different countries with different particular needs is 
not developed, any attempt to perform this role effectively would fall short. The IMF should 
have the fire power to deal with global events but should also have the proper equipment. 
This  means  making  available  instruments  to  ensure  the  adequate  circulation  of  liquidity 
worldwide.  
This  may  include:  short-term  credit  for  liquidity  purposes  for  central  banks  tailored  to  the 
specific  needs  of  the  country  ,  guarantee  schemes  to  develop  a  particular  domestic  credit 
market  and a  variety  of  products  for  countries  facing  capital  outflows  that  are  unrelated  to 
their economic fundamentals, among others.  
It is not a matter of chance that so many bilateral swaps agreements between Central Banks 
emerged  during  the  crisis.  It  is  a  natural  response  of  the  system  to  the  lacking  of  an 
international provider of liquidity of last resort going forward. In my view, while this is very 
welcomed,  the  arrangements  are  not  enough  it  terms  of  size  and  length  to  provide  an 
alternative to self-insurance via foreign reserve accumulation. In fact, the development of all 
of  the  bilateral  agreements  and  the  regional  initiatives  such  as  Chiang  Mai  just  prove  the 
need for international cooperation in a context of an absence of a multilateral organization in 
a position to perform as a kind of “central bank of the central banks”. This is the next step we 
need to go for. 
And for this to happen, the role of the G-20 is critical. So far, the group has managed to build 
consensus  on  the  relevant  issues  and  has  been  able  to  make  some  progress  both  in  the 
reform  of  the  international  financial  architecture  (expansion  of  the  FSF  and  the  Basel 
Committee,  the  capitalization  of  the  IMF,  revisiting  of  the  IMF  international  lender  of  last 
resort role, and speeding up the governance reform process of the IFIs) and in coordinating 
macroeconomic policy responses to the crisis.  
One of the key challenges the G-20 faces going forward is to consolidate as a formal body. 
That means not only to propose changes to reform of the international financial architecture 
but also, and most importantly, to systematically monitor its degree of implementation. The 
next meeting is going to be essential to assess the degree of progress in the implementation 
of the course of action set forth.  
In my view, the creation of the FSB has been the most significant reform in the international 
financial architecture so far. The FSB will play a key role in the new international financial 
architecture. It will be responsible for coordinating banking regulation, developing regulatory 
and supervisory standards, preparing early warning reports and exchanging information with 
supervisors. Enhanced representation will increase the likelihood of effective implementation 
of standards and will hike the quality of standards.  
For  instance,  in  the  case  of  the  regulatory  treatment  of  currency  mismatches,  we,  I  mean 
those  countries  that  suffered  significant  macroeconomic  crisis,  have  some  experience  to 
share.  The  increased  credit  risk  faced  by  subsidiaries,  when  these  subsidiaries  are 
significant  for  the  banking  group  as  a  whole,  imposes  significant  negative  effects  for  the 
parent  bank  and  home  financial  market.  Central  Banks  could  strengthen  its  regulation  on 
credit risk management by requiring banks that before granting a loan, they should assure 
that  no  currency  mismatches  exist  in  debtors’  balance  sheets.  This  regulation  can  be 
imposed by host authorities to subsidiaries in their jurisdictions, and also, by home regulators 
to the banking group as a whole regarding each of its subsidiaries. This means for example 
that  home  regulators  ask  that  the  parent  bank  and  each  subsidiary  inside  the  group  must 
comply  with  that  requirement.  If  not,  penalties  should  be  imposed,  such  as  increases  in 
capital  requirements.  The  effect  of  that  kind  of  currency  mismatches  could  be  explicitly 
considered in the Pilar II of the Basel II Agreement. If the effect of currency mismatches are 
not  properly  attended  by  banks,  supervisors  at  the  banking  group  level,  should  require 
additional capital to attend the potential effect, at the banking group level, of the worsening of 
debtors´ income in hosts markets, and therefore, in subsidiaries capital position and then, in 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2009
parent bank capital positions. Also, the potential effects of currency mismatches should be 
explicitly addressed in supervisory colleges.  
Credit risk transfer is another key aspect of the agenda. Instead of reducing systemic risks, 
Credit  Default  Swaps  have  contributed  to  raising  them.  Risk  is  not  always  shifted  to  the 
parties  that  are  best  able  to  bear  it,  but  to  those  subject  to  laxer  regulatory  constraints. 
Another  topic  important  to  highlight,  because  of  its  relevance  for  emerging  markets 
economies,  is  the  lack  of  transparency  and  absence  of  reliable  statistics  in  the  OTC 
derivatives  markets  for  non-financial  corporations.  This  opacity  left  policy-makers  without 
information about exposures on OTC transactions done with foreign financial institutions. As 
we  know,  the  consequences  of  these  exposures  in  some  emerging  markets  were 
systemically important and central banks had to provide financial assistance to the market, to 
avoid major financial distress. 
We  must  work  towards  encouraging  the  trading  of  credit  derivatives  using  electronic 
platforms or regulated exchanges and the clearing of standardized credit derivatives through 
a central counterparty. This would help to reduce risk, in part by allowing for the multilateral 
netting  of  outstanding  notional  amounts,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  requirement  of 
posting collateral. However, if central banks promote its usage they should be prepared to 
provide it with access to central bank credit facilities, or to provide liquidity by other means in 
case of need. 
A macro-prudential approach recommends that regulators and supervisors should consider 
potential systemic risk and the vulnerabilities of the environment in which financial institutions 
act.  It  will  be  fundamental  to  understand  the  interaction  that  exists  between  the  financial 
system and the real economy. This approach will demand greater cooperation between local 
and  external  regulators,  requiring  them  to  develop  an  integrated  picture  of  the  financial 
system,  considering  not  just  banks,  but  also  all  financial  institutions.  The  analysis  of 
macroeconomic vulnerabilities that could subsequently impact on financial system liquidity or 
solvency  should  also  be  embedded  in  the  regulatory  framework.  Deviations  should  be 
analyzed in relation to the long-term trends for certain variables, such as credit to GDP ratio, 
assets prices (residential and commercial property, shares and government securities, and 
currencies), the exchange rate equilibrium (real/effective) and the international capital flows, 
among others. 
To sum up, we can expect that financial markets are going to be different going forward. The 
former  market  based  financial  system  should  be  brought  down  the  umbrella  of  prudential 
regulation avoiding regulatory arbitrage. However, this could lead to a time of slower credit 
expansion given that higher leverage in that sector allowed faster credit expansion which is 
alleged  to  underlay  faster  growth  rates.  So  once  again,  preventing  a  credit  market  bubble 
calls for tougher surveillance on this kind of financial agents, but at the same time we should 
be careful not to choke productivity growth. In this financial framework, Central Banks duties 
should be also rethink particularly regarding the ability to be lender of last resort to non-bank 
financial institutions. But something that we can be sure of is that a stable global financial 
market would reduce the “parking” of liquidity leaving the possibility of diverting resources to 
be  more  efficiently  allocated,  helping  our  countries  to  keep  catching  up  with  the  needed 
development of our societies. 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 5
