Masaaki Shirakawa: Provision of subordinated loans 
Excerpt  from  an  address  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
Meeting with Banks’ Top Management, Tokyo, 24 March 2009. 
 lending, 
financial 
the  environment  surrounding 
At the Policy Board meeting held on March 17, the Bank of Japan decided to explore a new 
framework for providing subordinated loans to banks. We have invited today representatives 
of banks which are subject to international capital standards to explain the background and 
the Bank of Japan’s view on the decision. 
The  funding  conditions  for  firms  have  deteriorated  rapidly  since  last  autumn  due  to  the 
increased  strains  in  global  financial  markets  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  While 
financial  institutions  have  retained  the  financial  intermediation  function  accordingly  by 
increasing 
institutions  has  become 
increasingly  severe  due  to  the  stock  price  plunge  and  the  domestic  economic  downturn. 
Fund  raising  in  financial  markets  for  funds  over  the  fiscal  year-end  has  mostly  been 
completed,  but  the  firms  continue  to  face  difficult  funding conditions. While  the  CP  market 
has started to restore its function, funding in the capital market has been limited to the firms 
with high ratings. Looking ahead, while demand for funds to secure liquidity for the year-end 
and the fiscal year-end and demand for working capital due to the rise in raw material prices 
until last summer will decline, demand for funds to continue and to restructure business are 
expected to gain momentum. 
There might be a case in which the financial intermediation function will not be carried out 
smoothly  from  a  macro  perspective,  if  the  strains  in  global  financial  markets  increase  and 
financial institutions become more conscious of possible capital constraints in the future. If 
financial institutions become more conscious of taking credit risk and all financial institutions 
take  the  same  action  simultaneously,  the  adverse  feedback  loop  between  the  finance  and 
the economy may intensify through financial institutions’ restraining from accumulating their 
assets,  leading  to  the  fallacy  of  composition,  although  the  action  is  judged  as  rational  for 
each  individual  institution.  As  a  result,  that  might  weaken  the  capital  strength  of  each 
financial institution. 
From  that  point  of  view,  concern  is  for  the  influence  of  a  possible  decline  in  stock  prices. 
While  the  amount  of  stocks  currently  held  by  financial  institutions  is  significantly  reduced 
compared with the early 2000s, it remains unchanged that they hold substantial market risk 
associated  with  stockholdings.  Although  stock  prices  have  recently  somewhat  rebounded, 
the financial systems in the U.S. and Europe have remained unstable. It should be avoided 
that  each  financial  institution's  consciousness  about  a  possible  decline  in  stock  prices 
triggers the aforementioned fallacy of composition. 
Against such a backdrop, the Bank has decided to begin exploring specifically the provision 
of subordinated loans to the banks that are subject to international capital standards. This 
measure aims at ensuring the smooth functioning of financial intermediation and the stability 
of Japan’s financial system, by enabling Japan’s banks to maintain sufficient capital bases 
even in severe financial and economic environments. 
By the measure taken by the Bank, financial institutions are provided with three channels to 
raise  capital;  (1)  capital  raising  by  financial  institutions  through  markets,  (2)  capital  raising 
based on the Act on Special Measures for Strengthening Financial Functions, (3) borrowing 
subordinated loans from the Bank. Subordinated loans by the Bank will work effectively in 
conjunction with the other two measures to raise capital. In addition, providing such a safety-
net measure would enhance the robustness of Japan’s financial system and the functioning 
of financial intermediation even under the stressed conditions. 
BIS Review 37/2009 
 1
For  a  central  bank,  this  kind  of  direct  provision  of  quasi-capital  funds  is  an  extremely 
extraordinary  measure.  However,  considering  the  future  stress  scenario  of  the  financial 
system, the Bank has judged that, from the standpoint of a central bank, it is necessary to do 
its best to maintain the smooth functioning of financial intermediation and ensure the stability 
of the financial system even by conducting this extraordinary measure. 
The Bank expects financial institutions to grasp the thinking behind the measure and to strive 
to maintain the smooth functioning of financial intermediation with further efforts of boosting 
capital  bases.  Needless  to  say,  risk  management  is  extremely  important  for  financial 
institutions,  which  cannot  be  emphasized 
the  current 
circumstances, as I mentioned above, the surfacing of the risk stemming from the fallacy of 
composition should be avoided. To that end, it is important for the management of financial 
institutions,  while  conducting  sound  business  operations,  to  boost  capital  bases  with 
envisioning the consequences for Japan's economy. 
The  Bank  also  expects 
communication with their client companies to convey business policies and lending stances. 
It is the basic premise that the stability of the financial system should be ensured in order to 
return to a sustainable economic growth path under price stability. From the standpoint of a 
central  bank,  the  Bank  is  determined  to  make  its  best  effort  to  secure  the  stability  of  the 
financial system. We would appreciate your continued support and cooperation. Thank you. 
too  much.  However,  under 
to  pay  due  concern 
the  smooth 
institutions 
financial 
for 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2009
