Elizabeth A Duke: CRA – a framework for the future 
Speech  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Revisiting the CRA Policy Discussion, Washington DC, 24 February 
2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Good  afternoon.  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  to  discuss  the  future  of  the  Community 
Reinvestment Act (CRA). As many of you probably know, I joined the Federal Reserve Board 
last year after having spent many  years as a community  banker. My  experience gives me 
both a practical and theoretical interest in today's discussion of CRA's future.  
When  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  celebrated  the  30th  Anniversary  of  CRA's 
enactment, it did so by hosting a forum in October 2007 that focused not just on the law's 
contributions  to  making  financial  services  more  readily  available  in  low-  and  moderate-
income communities, but also on the challenges of applying the law in a financial landscape 
that  is  vastly  different  from  the  one  that  existed  in  1977.  It  was  at  that  gathering  of 
researchers, regulators, bankers, nonprofit practitioners, and community advocates familiar 
with  the  CRA  that  Congressman  Barney  Frank  challenged  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Boston to collect the best thinking about how the CRA might be improved for the future.  
The Bank took this challenge to heart and, together with the Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco, invited an impressive group of experts to contribute to the creation of a publication 
serving as the center of discussion at today's forum, Revisiting the CRA: Perspectives on the 
Future of the Community Reinvestment Act. This volume presents a variety of perspectives 
from many who have been closely involved in the development and implementation of CRA 
policy over the years. As one might imagine, there is no shortage of good ideas contained in 
these pages including suggestions for statutory as well as regulatory changes. While many 
divergent views are expressed in this publication, its most striking feature is an expression of 
a shared understanding that access to financial services for all, including low- or moderate-
income communities and individuals continues to be an important goal for policymakers. 
In my remarks today, I will highlight what I consider to be the most compelling reasons for 
making changes to the CRA at this time, discuss many of the themes and issues raised in 
this publication, and suggest a framework for how, as policymakers concerned with ensuring 
the full participation of every individual in our economic recovery, we might weigh the various 
policy options before us. 
CRA: a model for g overnment intervention  
Being among experts today, I need not revisit how CRA came into being. Suffice it to say that 
Congress,  concerned  with  the  worsening  condition  of  many  older,  urban  neighborhoods  in 
the  1970s, wanted  to  address  the  lending  practices  of some  financial  institutions that  took 
deposits from households in their local communities but made loans and investments outside 
those  same  communities.  In  addition  to  this  disinvestment,  some  lenders  engaged  in 
redlining, a practice based sometimes on race, at other times on income, and in still others 
on both factors. These practices motivated Congress to enact the CRA and, in so doing, it 
clarified an affirmative obligation for banks and thrifts to serve the credit needs of their entire 
communities, including low- and moderate-income areas. At the time, Congress justified this 
obligation  by  citing  the  special  privileges  conferred  upon  depository  institutions  including 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 1
federal  deposit  insurance.  By  focusing  the  attention  of  regulators  on  this  obligation  and 
requiring that a financial institution's performance under the CRA be considered part of its 
application  to  merge  or  acquire  another  institution,  the  law  provided  a  strong  incentive  to 
meet  community  credit  needs  while  leaving  regulators  with  a  great  deal  of  flexibility  to 
improve upon the implementing regulations as markets evolved. 
The most significant changes to the CRA regulations were in response to an executive order 
issued in 1993 by President Clinton that directed banking agencies to make regulations more 
performance-oriented.  The  regulations  created  several  evaluation  methods  based  on  a 
bank's size and business strategy. In particular, they created separate lending, investment, 
and  service-test  evaluation  criteria  for  large  banks.  The  revisions  helped  to  stimulate 
increased lending and investment activity in low- and moderate-income areas. In fact, some 
studies suggest that these changes to the regulations coincided with an increase in annual 
lending commitments from $ 1.6 billion in 1990 to $103 billion in 1999.1 Research that directly 
tested  for  the  effects  of  CRA,  by  comparing  mortgage  lending  volumes  and  neighborhood 
outcomes in neighborhoods just above and just below CRA's income threshold, shows that 
the law has led to additional lending and has had favorable effects on homeownership rates, 
home values, and vacancy rates.2 
CRA was written in a simpler time for banks. By and large, a local bank's focus, even that of 
a  larger  one,  was  local.  Over  time,  however,  it  has  become  apparent  that  changes  in  the 
structure of the financial industry since CRA's enactment pose a significant challenge to the 
law as it is written. The notion of serving a local community has been challenged not only by 
industry  consolidation  that  has  resulted  in  the  creation  of  very  large  banks  that  operate 
across the nation, but also by advancements in technology that allow banking services to be 
delivered  without  traditional  branch  networks.  The  article  by  Avery,  Courchane,  and  Zorn 
noted that, by 2007, the 25 largest depository institutions operated nearly 40 percent of all 
retail banking offices, up from just 10 percent in 1987. During that same period, their share of 
deposits  more  than  doubled  to  nearly  55  percent,  while  their  share  of  mortgages  soared 
nearly  threefold  to  67  percent.3  Given  merger  activity  in  recent  months,  consolidation 
continues to present challenges to local communities as the largest financial institutions grow 
even  larger.  At  the  same  time,  many  financial  institutions  have  perfected  lending  through 
loan production offices, agents, brokers, and electronic means, making the notion of a local 
lending  area  based  on  deposit-taking  branches  and  automated  teller  machines  seem 
outmoded. 
Perhaps even more striking is the dramatic increase in lending from institutions other than 
the  CRA-regulated  financial  institutions.  As  securitization  grew,  the  share  of  mortgage 
originations  by  non-CRA-regulated  institutions  also  grew:  in  1990,  only  17  percent  of 
mortgage  lending  was  originated  by  institutions  not  covered  by  the  CRA.  This  share 
compares with a peak of 40 percent in 1993 and an average around 30 percent thereafter.4 
Moreover, nonbank financial service providers who offer a range of products, such as payday 
loans,  check  cashing,  remittance  services,  and  other  services,  have  proliferated  in  recent 
years and target lower-income areas in particular. These services are offered at a very high 
cost, and yet serve needs that are not fully met by regulated financial institutions. While the 
trend  in  mortgage  lending  has  abated  very  recently  due  to  the  subprime  crisis,  the 
                                                 
1   National  Community  Reinvestment  Coalition  (September  2007),  CRA  Commitments,  www.community-
wealth.org/_pdfs/articles-publications/cdfis/report-silver-brown.pdf. 
2   See www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2008/200861/200861pap.pdf and 
www.chicagofed.org/cedric/files/2003_conf_paper_session5_canner.pdf. 
3   Robert  B.  Avery,  Marsha  J.  Courchane,  and  Peter  M.  Zorn  (2009).  “The  CRA  within  a  Changing  Financial 
Landscape”, Revisiting the CRA: Perspectives on the Future of the Community Reinvestment Act, pp. 34-50. 
4   Avery, Courchane, and Zorn. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2009
prevalence of alternative financial services has not, and it is clear that CRA's coverage and, 
arguably, its impact, have diminished as a result.  
After having worked with CRA over the years, I am still surprised at the misperceptions that 
persist about it. One widely held misperception is that CRA is only about mortgage lending to 
low-  and  moderate-income  borrowers  in  lower-income  neighborhoods.  As  a  former 
community  banker,  I  know  that  CRA's  impact  is  just  as  important  in  meeting  the  needs  of 
small farms and businesses and, as such, it serves as a valuable catalyst for job creation in 
both urban and rural areas across the country. This point is particularly noteworthy at a time 
when  mounting  job  losses  are  adding  to  the  woes  of  consumers  and  exacerbating  the 
problems in housing and mortgage lending. The most recent misperception promulgated by 
many who either do not know much about the law or don't like it, is that the CRA caused the 
subprime mortgage meltdown.  
Our  recent  analysis  of  CRA-related  lending  found  no  connection  between  CRA  and  the 
subprime mortgage problems. In fact, the Board's analysis found that nearly 60 percent of 
higher-priced loans went to middle- or higher-income borrowers or neighborhoods, which are 
not the focus of CRA activity. Additionally, about 20 percent of the higher-priced loans that 
were extended in low- or moderate-income areas, or to low- or moderate-income borrowers, 
were loans originated by lenders not covered by the CRA. Our analysis found, in fact, that 
only 6 percent of all higher-priced loans were made by CRA-covered lenders to borrowers 
and neighborhoods targeted by the CRA. Further, our review of loan performance found that 
rates of serious mortgage delinquency are high in all neighborhood groups, not just in lower-
income areas.  
These conclusions were supported by research conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
San  Francisco  and  published  in  the  Revisiting  the  CRA  volume  under  discussion  today. 
Moreover, an analysis of foreclosure rates in that study found that loans originated by CRA-
covered  lenders  were  significantly  less  likely  to  be  in  foreclosure  than  those  originated  by 
independent mortgage companies.5 Clearly, claims that CRA caused the subprime crisis are 
not supported by the facts.  
The question of the moment, then, is not whether the current crisis was caused by the CRA, 
but what can be done to make CRA a more effective regulatory incentive going forward as 
we  face  an unprecedented  set  of  community  needs  in  the wake  of  the  current  foreclosure 
crisis  and  the  resulting  economic  slowdown.  Lower-income  neighborhoods  that  were  once 
stable  thanks  to  the  efforts  of  community  development  practitioners  and  their  banking 
partners now suffer from the negative effects of high foreclosure rates, including increased 
numbers of vacant and abandoned property, a loss of equity in their own homes, and higher 
rates  of  crime  and  arson.  Infrastructure  in  these  communities  is  eroding:  retailers,  service 
providers,  and  other  contributors  to  the  economic  health  of  these  neighborhoods  are 
departing.  
Communities with lower levels of personal and neighborhood assets, including many minority 
communities targeted for higher-priced subprime mortgages, have been particularly hard hit.6 
As credit has tightened, less capital is available for these communities. The pool of loan and 
investment capital is shrinking at the same time that philanthropic dollars are challenged by 
                                                 
5   Elizabeth Laderman and Carolina Reid (2009). “CRA Lending During the Subprime Meltdown”, Revisiting the 
CRA: Perspectives on the Future of the Community Reinvestment Act, pp. 115-133. 
6   Lower-income and minority communities were targeted for higher-priced subprime mortgages and, as a result, 
have experienced high rates of foreclosures. An analysis of 2005 lending indicates that 40 percent of lending 
in  minority  communities  (those  where  more  than  half  of  the  population  was  minority)  were  higher-cost 
subprime  loans,  compared  with  23  percent  of  loans  made  elsewhere.  Similar  discrepancies  were  found  in 
areas  where  the  median  income  was  below  80  percent  of  the  average  median  income.  Lei  Ding,  Janneke 
Ratcliffe,  Roberto  Quericia,  and  Michael  Stegman  (Spring  2008),  “Neighborhood  Patterns  of  High  Cost 
Lending: The Case of Atlanta”, Journal of Affordable Housing & Community Development Law, pp. 193-217. 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 3
investment  losses.  To  make  matters  even  more  challenging,  state  and  local  governments 
face extraordinary budget deficits and have fewer resources to offer these communities. 
Given  this  context,  it  is  no  surprise  that  some  members  of  Congress  have  expressed  an 
interest in considering measures to improve the supervision of financial institutions, including 
the role of CRA in providing financial products and services to lower-income communities. 
The Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and San Francisco have offered a valuable place to 
start  the  discussion  of  what  should  come  next.  Revisiting  the  CRA  offers  more  detailed 
background information about CRA's origins and the developments in the banking industry 
that  I  have  alluded  to  here.  Some  of  the  contributing  authors  recommend  revisions  to  the 
current  regulations,  others  advocate  for  the  expansion  of  CRA's  coverage,  and  still  others 
suggest that we start all over again with the creation of a new model for providing financial 
products and services to underserved communities.  
A framework for change 
There is no shortage of good thinking in this volume. And while I am not prepared to pick and 
choose among the many options presented in it today, I would like to discuss several in the 
context of some principles that I think provide a useful framework for thinking about any new 
regulatory initiative. Framing the issue may be particularly helpful in trying to imagine CRA's 
future in a new financial environment.  
First, I believe it is important to be clear about the problem that we are trying to solve. When 
CRA was enacted, the concern was that lower-income communities did not have access to 
capital and financial services. While concern about credit access has begun to resurface in a 
tightening credit environment, I would hesitate to limit the focus of a new CRA in this way. 
Access to credit in lower-income areas has been less of a problem in recent years than has 
been access to loan products that were fairly priced, well-underwritten by lenders, and well-
understood by consumers. The analysis that I cited earlier regarding the targeting of lower-
income and minority communities indicates that we continue to have a problem that warrants 
regulation.  Whether,  as  Stella  Adams  suggests  in  her  article,  race  should  be  explicitly 
considered  in  evaluating  a  financial  institution's  CRA  performance  or,  as  Lawrence  White 
suggests  in  his  piece,  stronger  enforcement  of  the  existing  fair  lending  and  antitrust  laws 
make  CRA  unnecessary,  these  issues  deserve  serious  debate.  Perhaps,  as  Larry  Lindsey 
suggests, we should think of financial products and services as a public good and regulate 
them accordingly.  
In  any  case,  it  is  important  that,  first,  we  clarify  the  problem  that  needs  to  be  addressed. 
Then, we can address whether the solution requires statutory change or whether it can be 
successfully resolved through revisions to the regulations. 
Second,  policymakers  need  to  identify  who  is  in  the  best  position  to  solve  the  problem 
identified.  Bill  Apgar  argues  in  his  paper  that  an  uneven  regulatory  structure  encouraged 
mortgage companies and non-bank subsidiaries to engage in subprime lending that banks 
bypassed because of fair lending and CRA requirements. He argues that all lenders should 
have a CRA obligation. For years, policymakers have hesitated to expand the coverage of 
CRA because of the nexus the law created between a financial institution's obligation to its 
community and its access to deposit insurance and other banking system benefits. Changing 
that nexus, it has been argued, could make CRA look more like a tax, which could be more 
easily attacked politically, than a quid pro quo. While the recent expansion of access to the 
Federal Reserve's discount window might be seen as an opportunity to expand coverage to 
new  entities,  it  is  not clear  to  me  that  this  nexus  alone  should  be  the  basis  for  expanding 
CRA's coverage. The concern Apgar raises over the unintended impact of uneven regulation 
may, in itself, be reason enough to extend CRA coverage to providers of all consumer credit 
and financial services. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2009
This concern leads me to my third principle for developing a new CRA structure. Any new 
regulatory  initiative  should  be  transparent.  As  a  former  banker,  I  fully  appreciate  both  the 
need for regulations that are designed to achieve their goals and the need for those goals to 
be clearly stated. As a former president of the American Bankers Association, I advocated 
reductions  in  the  regulatory  burden.  Regulatory  burden  refers  not  just  to  the  number  of 
regulations that an industry must follow, but also the quality of those regulations. Much of the 
motivation for the CRA regulatory amendments in the 1990s stemmed from the vagueness of 
the  original  12-assessment-factor  approach.  The  revised  regulations  provided  the  clarity 
necessary to spur the increases in lending and investment activity that I referred to earlier. 
They provided clearer standards by which financial institutions could organize their activities. 
From a consumer perspective, the fact that Congress amended the CRA statute in 1989 to 
make  evaluations  public  provided  the  transparency  necessary  to  help  create  a  dialogue 
between banks and community advocates. This dialogue contributed to an increased number 
of public/private partnerships that were uniquely successful in addressing the economic and 
community development needs of lower-income communities. 
A fourth principle, closely related to the need for transparency, is that policymakers should 
balance the benefits and costs of regulation by taking care to tailor laws and regulations to 
meet  their  stated  goals  as  effectively  and  efficiently  as  possible.  The  documentation 
requirements  should  take  into  account  the  size  and  resources  of  the  institution,  and  they 
should not overwhelm the activities themselves. There is still room to improve CRA in this 
respect. A great deal of justification is required to demonstrate that certain activities qualify 
for consideration under the regulations. Much of this is related to the need to demonstrate a 
benefit to an institution's assessment area. In order to simplify the regulation's approach to 
meeting the credit needs of lower-income areas, it may be necessary to consider a different 
way of measuring impact. Moreover, measuring performance for any institution must take a 
broad  view  of  community  needs,  balancing  quantitative  measures  of  performance  with 
consideration  of  the  quality  of  the  credit,  investments,  and  services  extended.  Or,  as  the 
introductory piece in Revisiting the CRA, by Olson, Chakrabarti, and Essene, suggests, the 
story  of  CRA  may  be  one  of  a  regulation  that  began  by  measuring  process,  evolved  to  a 
system  of  measuring  outputs,  but  perhaps,  in  the  future,  needs  to  measure  outcomes  in 
lower-income communities. 
Finally,  any  new  CRA  regulation  should  be  flexible.  One  of  CRA's  strengths  has  been  the 
flexibility  that  the  consideration  of  a  bank's  performance  context  provides.  The  regulatory 
agencies' ability to redesign CRA regulations over the years kept it relevant as the financial 
markets  changed.  For  example,  recent  revisions  recognized  the  difficulty  in  meeting  the 
credit  needs  of  rural  communities  that  do  not  have  clearly  delineated  neighborhoods  with 
differing  income  levels.  It  also  offered  added  incentives  for  financial  institutions  to  provide 
assistance in disaster areas. These provisions may not have been possible if Congress had 
dictated the exact terms of the CRA evaluation that regulators should apply in determining an 
institution's CRA rating, and, as a general matter, I believe that Congress was wise not to be 
overly specific in the CRA.  
Conclusion 
The future health of communities depends on each of us doing our part to focus attention on 
the  needs  of  those  communities  that  have  been  affected  by  the  combined  impact  of 
foreclosures  and  a  weak  economy.  At  the  encouragement  of  Congressman  Frank,  the 
Federal  Reserve  Banks  of  Boston  and  San  Francisco  were  inspired  to  broaden  policy 
discussions by inviting CRA experts to contribute to a very thoughtful volume on the future of 
CRA. In formulating a new approach to CRA, I would recommend keeping the most effective 
feature of the law – its flexibility. Any new regulatory structure should also be clear about the 
problem we are trying to solve, it should determine who is in the best position to solve the 
problem,  and  it  should  be  transparent  and  designed  to  ensure  that  community  benefit  is 
maximized without placing excessive regulatory burden on financial institutions. If we follow 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 5
these  principles,  I  am  sure  that,  together,  we  can  determine  the  most  effective  way  to 
improve upon a regulation that has had demonstrated success in making credit available to 
low-and moderate-income communities, and we can further determine the most effective way 
to strengthen its role as we meet the challenges ahead. 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2009
