Mojmír Hampl: Financial strangulation? 
Article by Mr Mojmír Hampl, Vice Governor of the Czech National Bank and a member of the 
EU's  Economic  and  Financial  Committee,  published  in  The  Wall  Street  Journal,  Prague, 
2 December 2008. 
 Don't rush to change all the fire regulations while the actual fire is still raging. 
The  reaction  to  the  financial  crisis  should  not  be  worse  than  the  crisis  itself.  This  is  the 
mantra  I've  been  repeating  to  myself  –  while  shaking  my  head  in  disbelief  at  many  ideas 
surfacing  in  the  European  and  global  debate  on  the  "postcrisis"  shape  of  the  financial 
universe. 
The list of proposals that have appeared on the table so far is long and ranges from attempts 
to ban short-selling and regulate credit default swap markets to toughening up supervision of 
credit  rating  agencies,  hedge  funds  or  the  whole  sphere  of  structured  financing.  Capping 
executive  pay  –  the  easiest  target  for  anyone  searching  for  cheap  political  capital  –  is  of 
course included. So are state efforts to micromanage banks, such as French attempts to set 
numerical targets for lending by recapitalized banks. For many people, these measures are 
the tolerable or even necessary by-products of fixing the crisis. 
At the top of the list, then, looms a concept of a brand-new, omnipotent, global (or at least 
European) super-regulator that would undoubtedly do everything better next time. 
In general, most of these ideas are heading in the same direction: toward greater regulation 
and centralization of the financial sector, and toward less competition and a greater public-
sector presence in the financial industry from now on. 
These  thoughts  –  often  presented  in  soft  "Eurospeak"  so  as  not  to  sound  too  alarming  – 
seem  as  if  their  proponents  thought  them  up  long  ago  and  were  just  waiting  for  a  good 
opportunity to unveil them as miracle cures for all the financial world's ills and woes. 
It is as if we hadn't all known for years that unfortunately – in the world in general, and the 
financial one in particular – there are no such things as perfect rules, perfect regulation or, 
above  all,  perfect  certainty.  It  is  as  if  we'd  forgotten  that  competition,  rivalry,  profit 
opportunities and staff motivation are not the spawn of the devil but do a lot of good. 
More important, the private part of the financial universe is being presented as a self-evident 
culprit  of  the  crisis,  while  the  role  of  the  state  faces  much  less  scrutiny.  The  question  of 
whether  monetary  authorities,  prior  to  the  crisis,  properly  regulated  interest  rates as  a  key 
price in the economy attracts much less attention in the debate than it should. The same is 
true  for  the question  of whether  the  existing store  of  individual  countries'  supervision  tools 
was used correctly and adequately before the crisis. 
This is interesting, as the crisis poses some new challenges and questions. Should monetary 
policy  try  to  stabilize  a  broader  set  of  indicators  in  the  future,  not  just  prices  of  consumer 
goods, but also real-estate or other asset prices? Does it make sense to have a separate 
currency  but  not  to  have  an  autonomous  monetary  policy,  like  the  Baltic  countries  and 
Bulgaria, or to have a separate currency but not to have an effective lender of last resort, like 
Iceland? Doesn't the system of exchange-rate pegs, quasi-pegs or currency boards increase 
imbalances of those who are pegged, and thus their vulnerability in a crisis? These questions 
are important, but they are not being properly discussed in the current debate. 
Many forget that the state's role in the financial sector is already huge. Central banks, finance 
ministries  and  various  state  agencies  across  the  globe  do  regulate  and  supervise  the 
financial industry more, not less, than many other industries. Yet that is precisely why every 
further  tightening  of  the  screws  should  be  carefully  considered  and  analyzed,  not  adopted 
BIS Review 10/2009 
 1
under  pressure  or  threat,  hastily  or  imprudently.  One  should  bear  in  mind  that  regulation 
never distinguishes the bad banks from the good ones. And even this crisis has revealed that 
many financial institutions are in good shape and coping with its consequences quite well. 
Although many people won't admit it, new rules being drawn up today will radically affect the 
financial  market  tomorrow  and  beyond.  That's  the  way  it  goes:  Times  of  crisis  permit 
dramatic  and  rapid  changes  that  would  not  be  implementable,  or  even  thinkable,  under 
normal circumstances. But when the dust settles, it is very difficult to reverse them. 
All  thinking  people  in  the  financial  sector  should  want  to  ensure  that  the  rash  solutions 
adopted in the present bad times, many of which will do little or no good anyway, do not in 
the long run generate much worse times for the industry, and hence its clients. 
Putting out a fire is one thing. But improving the fire regulations is quite another. Certainly a 
large fire can provide inspiration for future fire prevention. But it is by no means wise to fight 
the fire while simultaneously changing in haste all the fire regulations. 
The risks of such an approach are considerable, especially if the public – as well as part of 
the industry itself – increasingly accepts the dogma that the financial sector provides quasi-
public or even purely public goods and services. 
I'm sure that a thoughtful discussion about the causes of the crisis and ways how to prevent 
them  in  the  future  would  require  much  more  time,  cool-headedness  and,  above  all,  more 
input  from  academics  and  trained  professionals  and  less  from  politicians  and  European 
bureaucrats. 
Maybe I'm a bit skeptical. But I have a very vivid imagination influenced also by the tragic ex-
communist and state interventionist experience of the Czech Republic. And my imagination 
allows me to foresee some extreme scenarios. 
One day, when we are forced to wait in endless queues or pay bribes just to be issued with a 
credit card, when account statements arrive only sporadically and four months late, when we 
have to stand in long lines to be served by bored staff who are only there on Monday from 10 
a.m. till 1 p.m. (with an hour off for lunch), when we witness strikes by nationalized financial-
sector workers and the banks are closed for the duration, when we see credit committees full 
of unmotivated state employees and politicians whose positions are secure thanks to state-
owned golden shares in each bank – perhaps then we will understand what it means to turn 
the financial universe into a public-sector-like industry. Then we will truly have bad times all 
the time, not just now and again. But then it will be too late to think about whether, at the time 
of the crisis, we got a bit carried away with the state's role in the financial industry. 
We  should  think  twice  before  we  create,  in  the  financial  sphere,  a  twin  to  the  infamous 
Common Agricultural Policy. An EU "Common Banking Policy" would be equally disastrous in 
the long run, and equally hard to get rid of. Let's not go there. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2009
