Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The global financial crisis – impact on 
Uganda and the policy response  
Speech  by  Prof.  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
EABC Workshop, Arusha, Tanzania, 4 March 2009. 
 Let me say how pleased I am to be at this EABC regional conference on the global financial 
crisis. By responding to the challenges we are facing today and by acting together regionally 
and  internationally  like  at  this  forum  for  our  economies,  we  policy  makers  can  replace 
uncertainty  by  clear  action,  hope  and  confidence.  Only  this  way  can  we  be  certain  of 
tomorrow's financial stability and robust economic growth. The starting point, however, is to 
ensure that we understand fully the genesis of the problem so that we can prescribe the right 
solutions for our national financial systems and economies. 
The global financial crisis in perspective 
It is impossible either to identify a single cause for the current financial crisis nor to explain it 
in  a  linear  fashion.  Rather  the  crisis  reflects  a  confluence  of  several  developments:  loose 
monetary  and  fiscal  policies  in  the  United  States,  global  macroeconomic  imbalances,  and 
poor financial system supervision and regulation. 
• 
Poor policies: It should be noted that the USA pursued excessively loose monetary 
and  fiscal  policies  in  recent  years,  which  stoked  two  price  bubbles  (the  high 
technology company stocks, 1999-2000; and the massive housing price bubble which 
spread from the USA to Europe and Middle East. The sustained period of low interest 
rates  encouraged  excessive  risk-taking  and  indebtedness  by  individuals  and 
enterprises. 
Inadequate  regulation:  Financial  innovation  under  the  subprime  mortgage  facilities 
fostered the creation of marginal assets under the cover of securitization. Under this 
arrangement, lenders split their loans into numerous small pieces, which they in turn 
sold to unsuspecting individuals throughout the economy. This created the burden of 
nonperforming  assets,  especially  among  the  purchasers  of  the  securitized  loans, 
which went unrecognized by the regulators 
Global 
in  USA,  which  created 
unsustainable  balance  of  payments  deficits.  This  deficit  was  funded  largely  from 
abroad,  especially  with  large  savings  from  China  and  India  which  resulted  from 
increased exports earnings to the USA. 
from  excessive  demand 
imbalance:  resulted 
  After a relatively long period of macro-economic stability, interest rates fell to very low levels 
by recent historical standards in the United States. There was a marked decline in market 
volatility  and  risks  spreads  narrowed  which  encouraged  complacency  about  risks.  Mr. 
Greenspan, the former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board's opposition to the regulator 
of  over-the-counter  derivatives  which  form  the  bulk  of  the  counterparty  risk  "encouraged" 
bankers to remove credit risk from the balance sheets of Banks by packaging the loans into 
new securities and selling them on capital markets. 
Sub-prime  mortgages to high risk borrowers were repackaged and sold on as securities – 
and when the house prices began to fall below the underlying values of properties held as 
collateral the subprime mortgage crisis broke out. Participants in the capital markets could 
not know which of the assets they held were "toxic" assets from sub-prime mortgage lenders. 
According to Ben Bernanke, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve "far too much lending in 
recent years was neither responsible nor prudent ..... In addition, abusive unfair or deceptive 
BIS Review 57/2009 
 1
lending  practices  led  some  borrowers  into  mortgages  that  they  would  not  have  chosen 
knowingly". 
So  there  was  a  lack  of  market  discipline,  poorly  aligned  incentives  and  lack  of  regulatory 
monitoring of attendant risks. 
The  sub  prime  mortgage  crisis  reached  a  critical  stage  during  September  2008, 
characterized  by  severely  contracted  liquidity  in  the  global  credit  markets  and  insolvency 
threats  to  investment  banks  and  other  institutions.  A  broadening  of  credit  quality  concerns 
and unanticipated contagion to other financial assets further exacerbated this crisis. With a 
high leverage and rising uncertainty about the ultimate distribution of risk, low confidence in 
the banking sector ensued leading to a virtual closure of interbank and money markets and a 
sharp retrenchment of credit. 
Beginning with failures of large financial institutions in the United States, it rapidly evolved 
into  a  global  credit  crisis,  fear  of  deflation  and  sharp  reductions  in  shipping  resulting  in  a 
number of European bank failures and declines in various stock indices, and large reductions 
in the market value of equities (stock) and commodities worldwide. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  Uganda's  financial  sector  has  not  been  affected by  these  sub-prime 
mortgages, since the economy was not exposed in any way to these sub-prime mortgages. 
However,  the  credit  crunch  together  with  other  global  imbalances  led  to  real  economic 
effects,  resulting  into  a  global  economic  down  turn  and  a  recession  in  the  developed 
countries of the Western World. It is this global recession which is having a lagged impact on 
the Ugandan economy. 
What have been the observed effects on Uganda's economy so far? 
The global economic meltdown could have an effect on Uganda's economy through several 
channels: 
o 
Global  recession  could  prompt  lower  world  demand  and  lower  prices  for  Uganda's 
exports, resulting in lower fiscal revenues as trade slows down. 
Tight global credit conditions could lower external financing through reduced foreign 
direct investment (FDI) as well as lower borrowing to meet the needs of the economy. 
Uncertainty and genuine needs abroad, could imply capital flight and related pressure 
on the exchange rate and interest rates. 
However,  the  financial  sector  remains  resilient,  and  there  is  no  evidence  of  its 
exposure to the toxic wastes. 
As a result, real GDP growth in Uganda could slowdown to 6-7% in 2008/09, which 
by any standards is still remarkable. 
o 
o 
o 
o 
The ensuing economic recession in the developed world is having knock on effects on the 
Ugandan  economy.  In  particular,  the  following  changes  have  been  observed  in  recent 
months: 
• 
Trade.  Uganda's  exports  for  the  period  up  to  August  2008 were  remarkably  robust 
exceeding 2006 and 2007 values. The high growth was due to, among other things, 
the  peace  dividend  in  the  region  (Sudan  and  Congo).  Imports  too  had  risen  on 
account of rising domestic demand for both consumption and investment goods But 
since around September 2008, both exports and imports have recorded lower growth 
rates  and  in  some  instances,  they  have  stopped  growing.  However,  looking  at  the 
composition  of  informal  cross  border  exports,  demand  for  domestically  produced 
exports (mainly agricultural commodities) has remained robust relative to demand for 
re-exports  (mainly  manufactured  commodities).  This  provides  an  opportunity  for 
harnessing  benefits  from  the  regional  trade  if  the  supply  response  were  to  be 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2009
     improved to compensate for falling international demand for formal exports. Uganda, 
however, will need to keep monitoring the effect of oil price declines that might impact 
revenues of Sudan and subsequently its demand for Uganda goods. 
Private flows. In 2006/07 and 2007/08, there was a sharp increase in other foreign 
inflows comprised of aid (loans and grants), workers remittances and NGO inflows, 
income earnings, foreign direct investment, portfolio flows, and private sector credit. 
But  since  around  October  2008,  inflows  have  dropped-off  with  two  direct  effects: 
depreciation of the Uganda shilling and an increase in domestic interest rates. 
o 
The  Uganda  shilling-U.S.  dollar  exchange  rate  has  depreciated  by  around 
20%  relative  to  its  September  2008  value  reflecting  lower  inflows  and  even 
some  outflows  by  portfolio  investors.  (It  is  estimated  that  foreign  portfolio 
investors held around US$ 400 million in GOU Treasury Bills and Bonds as of 
September 2008 and about US$193mn as at end December 2008.) 
Interest rates on government treasury bills and bonds have consequently also 
increased, with some knock-on effects on bank lending rates. 
o 
Stock market. The Uganda securities Exchange (USE) all share index in the period 
July-October 2008 lost 39 percent. The month of October 2008 alone recorded the 
biggest  loss  of  28  percent.  The  fall  in  the  share  prices  on  the  cross-listed  stocks, 
which  account  for  61  percent  of  total  shares  explains  the  fall  in  the  USE  all  share 
index.  The  high  percentage  of  foreign  investors  exiting,  accounted  for  most  of  the 
decline in the USE index as investors exited to the so-called Safe heaven. The dip in 
the index, however, appears to have been primarily driven by panic and uncertainty 
among foreign investors rather than the change in macroeconomic fundamentals of 
the listed companies. Indeed the fall was temporary and the index recovered mainly 
because the institutions listed on the USE remain fundamentally strong.  
Donor flows. Aid from donors has remained fairly stable though in December 2008, it 
fell short of amounts observed for the same month in 2006 and 2007. However, we 
are  yet  to  establish  whether  this  is  due  to  delayed  disbursements  and  not  a  cut  in 
donor flows. 
Taxes. While the tax collections appear to perform well in nominal terms, adjusting for 
the  impact  of  inflation  shows  that  revenue  appears  to  have  declined  somewhat 
starting from July 2008 to January 2009. The preliminary indications of a decline in 
real  tax  revenues,  if  sustained,  could  have  implications  for  Uganda's  fiscal 
consolidation strategy. 
Inflation, which has for a long time been stabilized at low single digit rates, has since 
mid  2008  crept  to  double-digit  levels.  This  has  been  due  to  exogenous  factors 
associated  with  high  imported  inflation  from  Uganda's  major  trade  partners  (e.g. 
Kenya,  South  Africa,  India  and  China),  high  demand  for  Ugandan  goods  from 
neighboring countries, as well as low supply response in the domestic economy. In 
addition,  the  high  costs  of  fuel  and  food  on  the  world  market  exerted  upward 
pressures on Uganda's inflation. The recently observed slow-down in prices of these 
items on account of slowing global economy, however, could if sustained contribute 
to  reducing  the  inflation  and  the  cost  of  doing  business  in  Uganda.  The  challenge 
however  lies  in  the  apparent  decoupling  of  domestic  pump  prices  from  world  price 
trends, partly attributed to high specific tax on fuel, as well as high costs of logistics.1 
                                                 
1  
It is noted that the direct world cost of fuel contributes only 30% of Uganda's total pump prices, while logistics 
account for 40%. 
BIS Review 57/2009 
 3
 Relationship  of  multinational  enterprises  with  their  subsidiaries.  At  the  micro 
level,  there  are  potential  risks  on  to  the  real  sector  arising  from  the  propagation  of 
shocks  experienced  by  parent  enterprises  on  their  subsidiaries.  Parent  companies 
based in developed economies facing subdued demand and/or financial constraints 
due  to  the  global  financial  crisis  and  recession  that  could  force  them  to  wind  up 
operations  globally  are  a  potential  source  of  risk  for  the  economy.  Closure  of  their 
subsidiaries  operating  in  Uganda  would  have  adverse  effects  on  employment, 
demand for domestically produced inputs, asset quality of banks for those accessing 
domestic credit, taxes etc. At the policy level, monitoring of such large multinationals 
has been increased. 
As a result of these developments, Uganda's overall economic growth this year and next is 
likely to be lower than in recent years. 
Financial sector 
Given  its  centrality  for  economic  activity,  recent  developments  in  Uganda's  banking  sector 
are worth further elaboration. 
Uganda's banking sector remains sound and stable. The banks' capital adequacy ratios are 
well  above  the  regulatory  requirements.  Although  Uganda  is  a  home  to  subsidiaries  of 
International  banks,  the  local  subsidiaries  had  no  exposures  to  the  subprime  products  of 
other toxic debts. Thus, for example, while Citi Bank International and Barclays Bank PLC 
have a lot of such impaired assets, their Uganda subsidiaries, Citi Uganda Ltd, and Barclays 
Bank  (U)  Ltd.  have  their  own  capital  base  and  no  exposure  to  the  toxic  assets.  The  two 
subsidiaries have standalone capital requirements and are decoupled from the parents. 
But while solvency is not an issue, the local banking system has not wholly escaped being 
affected by the global financial crisis. In particular, the abrupt decline in capital inflows has 
contributed to the reduction of liquidity in the banking system in recent weeks.  
There  is  also  some  anecdotal  evidence  that  some  large  local  companies'  access  to  credit 
abroad  has  been  curtailed  causing  an  increase  in  domestic  demand  for  credit.  This 
rebalancing of credit portfolios by large local companies has contributed to higher interbank 
rates  and  higher  than  normal  recourse  to  borrowing  from  the  central  bank.  This  is  also 
indicated in the higher bidding rates for government of Uganda securities particularly in the 
months of October, November and December 2008. The challenge this poses is in finding a 
balance  between  maintaining  sufficient  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  as  well  as  keeping 
inflation  at  bay.  Measures  are  being  taken  to  ensure  that  government  spending  agencies 
effectively and efficiently absorb all budgeted funds on the specific programs to ease liquidity 
conditions. 
What policy measures have been taken so far and what needs to be done going 
forward? 
As the global financial centers seemingly headed towards a meltdown in September/October 
2008  and  this  manifested  through  depreciation  pressures  on  the  Uganda  shilling/dollar 
exchange rate, government of Uganda adopted a number of measures, including: 
• 
The review of the fiscal program to accommodate lower domestic revenue compared 
to the June/July 2008 budget time. The view was that provided the revenue shortfall 
was  moderate,  it  would  be  manageable  albeit  translating  into  a  higher  fiscal  deficit 
and  thus  pressure  on  interest  rates.  But  any  additional  spending  pressures  would 
need matching spending cuts in other areas so that the public finances would not be 
an additional source of strain on the economy at this difficult time. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2009
    Re-calibrating  the  government's  liquidity  management  program  to  assume  lower 
private capital inflows than in recent years. 
Revising  the  inflation  and  balance  of  payment  outlook  consistent  with  the  latest 
developments. 
Adjusting  the  sterilization  mix  to  emphasize  preserving  Uganda's  foreign  exchange 
reserves. Official reserves currently stand at US$2.2 billion a level that is sufficient to 
cover over 5 months of future imports of goods and services. 
Given the uncertainty about the safety of some banks abroad, the Bank of Uganda 
also  took  precautionary  measures  by  investing  in  instruments  issued  by  G7 
governments and multilateral institutions. In addition, the bulk of reserves are being 
held with central banks rather than commercial banks. 
Policies going forward 
The global world recession is a threat to Uganda's strong economic growth performance of 
recent  years  as  well  as  its  plans  to  scale-up  infrastructure  spending.  But  reflecting  the 
prudent policies of recent years, we are in a good position to weather the storm including on 
account of the planned increase in public investment. 
Specifically,  development  expenditures  are  targeted  to  increase  from  U  Sh  1,400  billion 
actual  spending  in  2007/08  to  close  to  U  Sh  2,  900  billion  that  was  provided  for  in  the 
2008/09  budget.  If  effectively  implemented  fully,  this  would  translate  into  a  4  percentage 
points of GDP increase in public investment – a much bigger stimulus to the economy than, 
say,  the  stimulus  package  in  the  United  States  which  amounts  to  less  than  1  percentage 
point of GDP. 
But  the  only  way  that  Uganda's  economy  can  benefit  from  the  planned  increase  in 
investment  is  if  spending  agencies  efficiently  absorb  the  allocated  funds  and  use  them 
effectively. The key sectors of agriculture, transport and energy are now being urged to step 
up their absorption capacity if fiscal policy is to have the intended effect of cushioning the 
expected decline in domestic demand on account of lower private capital inflows. 
With respect to monetary policy, the Bank of Uganda will continue to pursue the objective of 
preserving  foreign  reserves  and  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability.  This  is  important 
because the outlook for capital inflows of all forms (FDI, portfolio, remittances) is declining. 
Specifically, the Balance of Payments (BOP) shocks are partly being allowed to be absorbed 
via  exchange  rate  adjustments,  strengthening  and  broadening  financial  stability  including 
cross  border  cooperation  to  ensure  sound  international  financial  rules  and  systems  to 
minimize financial contagion. 
Other issues 
Lastly, there is need to take a step back and discuss how policies in Uganda may differ from 
the approach adopted in some of the advanced economies. 
Why can't Uganda rely on borrowing much as the U.S. is currently doing? 
We should note that by maintaining the current spending profile in the face of a decline in 
revenues, the government of Uganda is going to end-up with a higher fiscal deficit path over 
the  medium-term.  So  Uganda,  too,  will  be  relying  on  borrowing,  albeit  at  a  much  smaller 
degree than the United States of America. 
Second, unlike the U.S.A, Uganda is financially constrained. To wit, the global financial crisis 
has  led  to  lower  borrowing  rates  for  the  U.  S.  government,  notwithstanding  the  mounting 
fiscal imbalances. In contrast, interest rates on government securities in Uganda have drifted 
BIS Review 57/2009 
 5
upwards. This is partly because some investors sold local Ugandan government securities to 
instead hold U. S. Treasuries. 
Why shouldn't the Bank of Uganda flood the Ugandan financial market with liquidity much as 
the Federal Reserve has done? 
First and foremost, the inflation rate which remains in the double digits in Uganda is a major 
concern, while in the U.S. the risk is of deflation. Second, supplying more shillings will likely 
entail  increases  in  inflation  rate  and  reserve  losses  (unless  the  exchange  rate  is  of  no 
concern). And as discussed above, preserving foreign reserves to the extent possible should 
be one of the anchors of monetary policy in this highly uncertain environment. 
Concluding remarks 
In  conclusion,  Uganda's  macroeconomic  framework  guiding  public  policy  under  the  Policy 
Support  Instrument  (PSI)  framework  for  2008/09  appear  to  be  appropriate  as  it  took  into 
account  the  likely  impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  impact  so  far  is  not  too  big  to 
warrant a major policy shift. 
While  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  appears  to  be  severing  among  industrial 
countries, the limited integration of the Ugandan banking sector and overall economy into the 
global economy provides some safety net for the economy. 
Prudent  and  flexible  macroeconomic  management  together  with  smarter  financial  market 
regulation  and  risk-based  banking  supervision  will  enable  Uganda  to  maintain  sound 
economic fundamentals and to adjust to the current harsh global environment. Finally, there 
is  need  for  an  effective  and  focused  communication  strategy  of  “hope”  on  the  part  of  the 
government that conveys the same message so as not to undermine the performance of the 
economy. 
6 
 BIS Review 57/2009
