Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Economic forecasts, measures to exit the 
crisis, and the Spanish financial system 
Opening address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, of the 
Cinco Días Series of Conferences, Madrid, 31 March 2009. 
 Thank  you  very  much  for  calling  on  me  to  inaugurate  this  series  of  conferences at  a  time 
burdened with challenges for economic analysis and economic policy.  
Given the scope of this conference, I shall address three matters of interest to the media: 
economic forecasts, the measures needed to exit the crisis and the current situation of the 
Spanish financial system.  
Economic  forecasting  has  seen  better  days.  Over  the  past  20  years,  all  institutions  have 
been projecting high growth rates for the world economy in view of the benefits arising from 
increasingly integrated economic systems anchored firmly on free-market principles. Nobody 
could  have  conceived  systemic  market  failings  on  a  global  scale  such  as  those  we  are 
currently  witnessing,  and  which  are  prompting  a  spectacular  collapse  in  output  and  world 
trade. 
And  right  now,  in  the  thick  of  the  crisis,  it  is  still  difficult  to  prepare  macroeconomic 
projections. But it is precisely in these circumstances when we most need such projections 
which, while they may well contain a large margin of error, are of use to us for assessing the 
juncture  at which  economies  stand.  More  than  the  specific  figures  in  the  projections,  what 
matters most is knowing the direction and intensity of the forces driving current dynamics, so 
we may better identify and gauge the pressing measures needed. 
The  forecasts  published  by  international  institutions  in  recent  weeks  show  that  we  face  a 
severe global recession. Earlier this month, on 13 March, the International Monetary Fund 
published for the first time a negative growth rate for the world economy of between 0.5 and 
1 pp for this year. A moderate recovery is estimated for 2010, but one still far below what we 
thought the growth potential trajectory was. 
Unfortunately, for several months now, each new projection has habitually entailed a notable 
downward  correction  on  the  projection  immediately  preceding  it.  It  would  therefore  not  be 
unusual,  once  the  IMF  updates  its  world  macroeconomic  outlook  in  a  few  weeks,  that  the 
resulting forecasts should have worsened on those published this month. 
The outlook for the euro area does not differ substantially from what the IMF anticipates for 
the developed economies. Early in the month the European Central Bank released what are 
still  the  latest  projections  for  the  area  as  a  whole,  placing  growth  at  between  -3.2%  and 
-2.2% for the current year and between -0.7% and 0.7% for 2010. 
As  for  Spain,  next  Friday,  repeating  an  initiative  first  launched  two  years  back,  we  shall 
publish  our  projections  for  2009  and  2010.  I  shall  leave  the  specific  figures  for  Friday’s 
release.  But  the  projections  of  the  Banco  de  España  will  simply  confirm  that  the  Spanish 
economy is immersed in a deep contraction, where the unemployment rate, if no measures 
are taken, will rise to a very worrying level and where practically the only positive features 
are the improvement in inflation and progress in the adjustment of the external sector.  
It is clear today that the various adverse shocks - both real and financial - triggered by the 
international crisis impacted the Spanish economy when it was in the process of reabsorbing 
the  imbalances  it  had  built  up  during  15  years  of  high  growth  that  had  brought  us 
progressively closer to the standards of the core EU countries. 
These  external  and  domestic  contractionary  forces,  having  unfortunately  superimposed 
themselves,  sharply  accelerated  the  adjustment,  turning  it  into  a  deep  recession  similar  to 
BIS Review 43/2009 
 1
incurred  by  Spanish  households  and 
that affecting virtually all the developed economies. This recession, however, displays certain 
specific  features  in  our  country  derived  from  the  imbalances  built  up  during  the  previous 
expansion and from the inadequacy of the measures adopted to strengthen our productive 
and market structures. 
In Spain the contraction is affecting residential and real estate construction more severely. In 
these sectors excessive productive resources were concentrated and prices posted growth 
rates that were too high, taking them beyond levels consistent with their fundamentals. 
firms,  encouraged  by  overly 
The  high  debt 
accommodative financial conditions but also by optimistic expectations about future income, 
is  now  acting  as  a  drag  on  their  consumption  and  investment  decisions.  And  further 
exacerbating  this  is  the  dizzying  deterioration  in  confidence  which,  fuelled  by  the  global 
climate of uncertainty, is pushing households and firms to postpone their spending plans and 
to strengthen their saving.  
Pinpointing which  specific  mechanisms  lie  behind  a  certain  type  of  behaviour  of  economic 
agents'  confidence  is  always  a  complex  task.  But  in  the  current  circumstances,  and 
especially in Spain, it would not be hazardous to link much of the behaviour of confidence to 
that of employment. The intensity with which employment is shrinking is the most distinctive 
feature of the recession in Spain. In this respect, it repeats traditional patterns of behaviour 
and shows the persistent weaknesses in the institutional structure of our labour markets that 
must be corrected. 
The  best  way  to  restore  confidence  in  these  circumstances  involves  a  calm  and  realistic 
analysis  of  the  problems,  reasoned  discussion  of  potential  solutions  and  the  rapid 
implementation  of  measures  deemed  appropriate.  When  faced  with  a  severe  recession, 
neither an alarmist overstatement of the difficulties nor well-meaning calls for confidence in a 
prompt  recovery  that  will  come  about  spontaneously,  with  no  need  for  relevant  measures, 
are  of  any  use.  The  only  effective  means  for  conveying  confidence  to  agents,  who  clearly 
perceive the effects of the crisis, is through the acknowledgement of the actual impact of the 
crisis and of the challenges posed, together with a credible commitment to tackle resolutely 
and forcefully the reforms needed. 
Before  discussing  specific  measures,  and  given  the  difficulty  of  implementing  them,  we 
should  question  whether  the  Spanish  economy  might  emerge  from  this  crisis  without 
undertaking reforms. The speed with which the Spanish economy is adjusting might lead us 
to  think  that  the  undoubtedly  notable  capacity  of  the  Spanish  private  sector  would  alone 
suffice to swiftly reduce the imbalances built up over the past 15 years. Certain indicators, 
such  as  the  spectacular  improvement  in  inflation  and  the  rapid  reduction  of  the  external 
deficit,  might  support  this  “comfortable”  or  “lazy”  view  that  it  would  be  possible  to  exit  the 
crisis  sidestepping  painful  reforms.  Let  me  tell  you  what  I  think.  Structural  reforms  are 
necessary  and  pressing,  firstly  to  cut  the  cost  of  the  adjustment,  and  secondly  so  that 
recovery is not unnecessarily delayed.  
The  real  and  financial  crisis  buffeting  the  world  economy  has  deprived  us  of  some  of  the 
attributes, such as readily available external financing and buoyant external demand, which 
in  other  circumstances  might  have  helped  us  temper  the  intensity  and  speed  of  the 
adjustment  of  our  domestic  demand.  It  is  precisely  in  the  absence  of  such  attributes  that 
certain imbalances are being rapidly reabsorbed. In the last quarter of the year, there was a 
positive contribution of the external sector to annual GDP growth of more than 2 pp. In under 
two  years,  external  financing  requirements  might  have  halved.  Further,  in  December  last 
year, the Spanish inflation rate stood at 1.5%, a substantially lower figure. And since then 
inflation  has  continued  falling  and  the  difference  with  the  euro  area  countries,  now  in  our 
favour, has improved to stand at 0.5 pp last month. 
Nonetheless,  such  a  rapid  adjustment  of  the  external  deficit  and  of  inflation,  centred 
predominantly as it is on the contraction of demand, activity and employment, entails very 
high costs. In social terms, the ranks of the unemployed have swollen to around 3.5 million. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2009
The productive structure is also being affected through the closure of numerous firms, just as 
the  budgetary  position  is  worsening  notably  under  the  pressure  of  more  social  benefit 
disbursements  and  the  contractionary  effects  on  revenue  due  to  the  fall-off  in  activity. 
Uncurbed,  all  these  factors  will  bear  heavily  and  adversely  on  our  ability  to  overcome  the 
crisis.  
Accordingly,  all  tiers  of  government  and  social  agents  -  central,  regional  and  local 
government, Parliament and the regional assemblies, employers' associations, trade unions, 
institutions, etc. - should join forces in identifying the measures and action needed to resume 
as  swiftly  as  possible  a  sustained  growth  path,  and  implement  them  with  the  utmost 
determination and diligence.  
I would like to stress just two ideas which may help us understand the exceptional situation 
we face and justify the urgency of the measures Spain needs.  
The first is that there is a feedback loop between the vicious circles in which the economy is 
caught and the contractionary forces at play. And if prompt action is not taken, these may 
inhibit the operation of the factors that should underpin a turnaround towards recovery. The 
second  is  that,  once  the  worst  of  the  crisis  is  behind  us,  i.e.  when  international  financial 
markets regain stability and the world economy begins to pick up, the Spanish economy will 
not  be  able  to  resume  growth  at  rates  similar  to  those  in  the  recent  past  if  substantial 
structural  changes  are  not  addressed.  This  is  because  we  will  no  longer  be  able,  as 
previously, to resort to growing debt to stimulate domestic demand.  
The fiscal drive to date had been notable. This is evident in the rapid deterioration in public 
finances in recent months. Accordingly, in order to infuse economic agents with confidence, 
a strategy should be designed immediately to allow a return to budgetary stability, which was 
of  such  benefit  to  Spain.  The  current  priority,  therefore,  is  to  focus  on  applying  forthwith 
structural measures to promote a growth pattern with a greater emphasis on productivity, in 
contrast to that followed in the past 15 years.  
Specifically,  among  the  aspects  requiring  the  adoption  of  immediate  measures  are  those 
relating to the workings of the labour market. The figures on falling employment and rising 
unemployment  in  Spain  in  recent  quarters  dramatically  illustrate  how  our  labour  market 
accentuates  the  contraction  in  employment  in  downturns  and  acts  as  the  main  factor 
amplifying recessions. As you all know, this is Spain's most negative distinguishing feature 
relative  to  other  advanced  countries.  Decidedly,  we  cannot  put  off  adopting,  as  soon  as 
possible, reforms to staunch the ongoing rate of dismissals and to promote to the full new 
hires. 
It  is  vital  to  reform  those  labour  market  arrangements  whereby  the  main  means  for  the 
adjustment  of  Spanish  firms  continues  to  be  labour  shedding.  Here,  the  current  collective 
bargaining system  plays  a  key  role.  As  it  stands,  it  prevents  working and  wage  conditions 
from  adjusting  in  a  sufficiently  differentiated  manner  to  the  different  labour  and  productive 
environments that companies and productive sectors face.  
The adverse effects of our particular collective bargaining system are not so visible in periods 
of  strong  growth,  although  then,  too,  they  hamper  increases  in  productivity.  But  in  today's 
circumstances,  where  the  crisis  impacts  companies  and  productive  sectors  very  unevenly, 
such effects mean that the adjustment operates by unnecessarily forcing out a large number 
of workers from the market. 
Therefore,  at  least  during  the  crisis,  collective  bargaining  agreements  should  be  applied 
flexibly  to  allow  employers  and  workers  to  reach  temporary  agreements  within  individual 
companies so that, in these exceptional circumstances, working conditions can be adjusted 
in  exchange  for  maintaining  employment  levels  or  softening  reductions.  Recent  days  have 
seen some agreements along these lines. This option should become widespread, especially 
for those companies that have not participated in the negotiation of industry-wide or national 
agreements. 
BIS Review 43/2009 
 3
In addition to containing dismissals, these reforms should check the ongoing closure of firms. 
We  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  companies  going  to  the  wall  entails  sizeable 
decapitalisation costs. This is because it is companies that build up technological know-how 
and that have far-reaching knowledge of markets and of customer and supplier relationships. 
And this without prejudice to lifting administrative obstacles and thus ensuring that firms can 
be created swiftly and easily, so that when the recovery begins the momentum of demand 
translates  into  increases  in  activity  and  employment,  and  does  not  feed  through  to  price 
rises.  
To improve the labour market situation, there is also a pressing need to promote new hiring 
to the full so that workers who have lost their jobs promptly find a way back into employment, 
avoiding the prolonged periods of unemployment that had such adverse effects in the past. 
True, creating new jobs depends above all on companies' expectations improving in respect 
of  the  demand  for  their  products.  But  current  hiring  arrangements  fall  short  on  a  series  of 
characteristics  which,  at  times  of  uncertainty  such  as  at  present,  have  adverse  effects  on 
recruitment decisions. Exceptionally and at least during the crisis, then, consideration should 
be  given  to  the  possibility  of  introducing  a  simple  and  permanent  employment-promoting 
contract, that can be used for all new hires and under an unemployment protection regime 
that does not discourage recruitment.  
But  the  possible  urgent  measures  I  have  outlined  should  not  sideline  either  far-reaching 
reforms of our labour institutions or other major structural reforms that the Spanish economy 
needs. Indeed, the strength and sustainability of the recovery will largely hinge on the scope 
and  rapid  application  of  such  reforms.  Further,  if  they  are  tackled  in  sufficient  depth,  the 
excesses committed in the past decade will be avoided and the resources available may be 
assigned to more productive uses. Many proposals have been made in this connection, but I 
shall only mention those I consider important.  
One aspect of paramount importance is the development of the rental market. And this is not 
only because it would notably increase the possibility of matching job supply and demand, 
but also because it would contribute to providing an outlet for unsold housing and to reducing 
rental costs in a setting in which housing may not be readily affordable. To do this it would be 
necessary, first, to ensure that the various measures adopted to improve legal security for 
owners  are  actually  effective;  and,  further,  to  liberalise  certain  features  of  the  current 
legislation, such as those relating to contract length.  
Measures  in  the  so-called  network  industries  are  likewise  necessary.  For  Spanish  firms 
producing  final  goods  and  services  to  be  able  to  compete  on  an  equal  footing  with  other 
developed countries, it is crucial that those industries providing a large portion of the inputs 
these branches require should reduce their inefficiencies as far as possible. Among energy 
utilities, for instance, the degree of vertical and horizontal integration remains very high and 
interconnections with other countries are not advancing quickly enough.  
In the telecommunications market, it is vital to step up competition in Internet access in order 
to reduce the related costs and spread its use. Turning to the transport sector, the National 
Competition Board has highlighted the presence of numerous restrictions to competition in 
the area of road haulage licences. In the railway sector a regulator has yet to be created, six 
years after Parliamentary legislation was passed to this end. Moreover, the boost to railway 
freight transport that access to new private operators would provide would also help us meet 
environmental commitments. Also, we must not delay any longer the development of a new 
airport management model.  
And let us not forget to harness the magnificent opportunity the EU Services Directive has 
given  us  to  do  away  with  all  national  and  regional  obstacles  persisting  in  the  services 
industry and which are a drag on our growth. In this respect, the legislation recently approved 
by  the  Council  of  Ministers  initiating  transposition  should  smooth  access  to  services 
activities;  prior  authorisation  will  no  longer  be  needed,  administrative  procedures  will  be 
notably  simplified  and  certain  obstacles  to  free  movement  of  services  will  be  eliminated. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2009
Nonetheless,  the  success  of  the  reform,  in  terms  of  greater  liberalisation  of  services,  will 
depend  on  its  proper  application  to  key  sectors,  such  as  professional  services  and  retail 
trade, and on the strict limitation of legally permitted opt-outs. 
Top  of  the  to-do  list  is  a  matter  concerning  the  main  source  of  wealth  of  any  country:  the 
human capital of its citizens. It is well known that the level of educational attainment of the 
Spanish labour force increased notably during the second half of the past century. But it is 
also a fact that convergence in educational terms with our European partners has slowed in 
recent years, which will bear most adversely on the economy’s productivity. Many facets of 
our education system need changing, but the overriding priority is to extend and improve the 
quality  of  secondary  education,  an  area  where  regional  governments  admittedly  have  an 
essential role to play. 
The  system  for  continuous  training  throughout  employees’  working  lives  must  also  work 
properly.  Here,  the  delay  in  the  labour  market  reform  not  only  has  adverse  effects  on 
employment but also discourages investment in human capital by workers themselves and 
by companies, which negatively impacts productivity. 
Evidently,  the  situation  we  are  in  calls  for  a  whole  set  of  thoroughgoing  reforms  and 
measures, in step with the scale of the challenges facing the economy. And if the adoption of 
structural reforms always requires a particular effort on the part of the industries involved in 
economic,  social  and  political  terms  in  order  to  achieve  the  highest  degree  of  consensus 
possible,  such  effort  is  evidently  all  the  more  necessary  in  the  current  exceptional 
circumstances.  
Now on to the last matter I shall address today: the situation of the Spanish financial system. 
The Spanish financial sector has been affected by the financial crisis since it began, although 
its  effects  have  undoubtedly  heightened  since  last  summer.  The  current  crisis  has  two 
characteristics. Firstly, it is an international crisis on a large and widespread scale, affecting 
different markets, numerous institutions in various countries, a wide variety of assets and the 
real  economy.  In  a  further  manifestation  of  the  process  of  globalisation,  the  problems 
generated  in  very  specific  geographical  markets  have  ultimately  spread  to  most  countries, 
and it is not very realistic to believe that isolation from the crisis may be an option.  
Secondly,  the  crisis  is  going  to  cause  an  across-the-board  reduction  in  the  financial  and 
banking  business  in  particular.  The  excesses  seen  in  financial  innovation  and  in  overly 
expansionary credit policies have caused many of the current problems, whereby there will 
foreseeably be a back-to-basics movement entailing a clear reduction in total turnover in the 
financial sector. 
These characteristics of the crisis shape the two principal challenges that financial systems 
face today: reviving the flow of credit to economic agents, and the orderly restructuring of the 
financial system. Let us analyse these two issues separately.  
The  first  and  most  immediate  aim  is  that  credit  and  liquidity  should  once  again  flow 
unimpeded  towards  companies  and  consumers.  The  resolute  action  of  European  central 
banks  and  governments  since  October  has  meant  that  illiquidity  strains  have  largely  been 
resolved  in  the  financial  sector.  However,  credit  to  companies  and  consumers  has  been 
checked  by  banks'  mistrust,  by  the  increased  risk  profile  of  borrowers  and  by  the  sharp 
decline  in  demand  resulting  from  the  slowdown  in  economic  activity.  The  deceleration  is 
proving particularly acute and credit growth has fallen from a rate twice that of nominal GDP 
before the crisis to around 5%. And the prospect is that this trajectory will continue on the 
immediate horizon, with credit growth dipping to a zero or even negative rate. 
That  generates  a  perverse  effect  which  feeds  back  into  the  difficulties  of  both  those 
demanding  and  supplying  financing,  making  a  global  approach  necessary:  just  as  it  is 
inconceivable  that  the  current  difficulties  of  the  financial  sector  may  be  resolved  if  the 
downward spiral of the Spanish economy is not curtailed, nor may it  be assumed that the 
current situation can be plausibly overcome if the flow of credit were to seize up.  
BIS Review 43/2009 
 5
toxic)  assets  nor  global  and 
Nonetheless, the answer to restoring the flow of credit is neither publicly funded policies to 
purchase  “troubled”  (impaired  or 
indiscriminate  bank 
recapitalisation  plans.  While  these  measures  have  admittedly  been  adopted  in  many 
developed  countries,  they  are  not  the  most  suitable  measures  for  maintaining  the  flow  of 
credit to the private sector, even if they have been of use in those countries that had to bail 
out systemic financial institutions. That does not mean they should be totally ruled out. But I 
am convinced they are of no use for resolving the problem of credit restrictions. 
The  credit-boosting  measures  best  suited  to  the  current  situation  of  the  Spanish  economy 
are those aimed at improving the risk profile of both consumer and corporate transactions. 
This effect may be achieved through different means: e.g. loans subsidised by the Official 
Credit  Institute,  credit  insurance  or  the  deferral  of  social  contributions.  These  measures, 
though  not  immediately  effective  and  needing  complementary  action,  will  help  gradually 
restore lending to companies and consumers. 
A second challenge for the Spanish financial system is its orderly restructuring in the coming 
years. The soundness of our financial system, whose behaviour in terms of both solvency 
and profitability has been patently better since the onset of the crisis than in other developed 
countries, does not preclude the need for restructuring.  
The  changes  in  the  financial  environment  (such  as  the  narrowing  of  margins,  external 
financing  constraints  or  the  increase  in  bad  debts  linked  to  the  real  estate  sector  and  to 
unemployment) highlight certain core business weaknesses in part of the Spanish banking 
system. Some degree of restructuring to ensure the system's long-term resilience is therefore 
not only inevitable but also healthy. 
Spanish systemic banks may ride out the crisis unaided. But clearly, as the case of Caja de 
Castilla la Mancha shows, if the international crisis is prolonged it might well prove necessary 
to restructure some small-and medium-sized institutions. And given the scale and intensity of 
the  current  global  financial  crisis,  we  should  be  ready  to  use  more  public  funds  than  on 
previous occasions.  
Parliament  has  just  approved  a  widely  backed  motion  incorporating  certain  restructuring 
principles that I find most interesting, and which I shall remind you of. First, the cost of bank 
restructuring should be as low as possible for the public coffers, whereby efforts should be 
chiefly  directed  at  seeking  solutions  within  the  private  sector.  Second,  the  reorganisation 
plans chosen should not lead to a widespread recapitalisation of banks as a whole. And in 
relation to this, I would add two points: one, that the assistance - if any - granted to specific 
banks  should  be  tied  to  their  restructuring,  since  this  is  what  the  competition  rules  of  the 
single  European  market  require;  and  two,  that  the  managers  who  pursued  unsuitable 
business  plans  from  the  standpoint  of  prudent  risk  management  should  assume  the 
consequences. 
So  as  to  maintain  confidence  in  the  Spanish  financial  system,  all  restructurings  approved 
should  fully  observe  bank  creditors’  rights.  Finally,  transparency  requires  that  all  reporting 
procedures deemed necessary be approved. 
The  ultimate  aim  of  restructuring  the  Spanish  banking  system  should  be  to  improve  the 
solvency  of  the  resulting  banks,  the  number  of  which  will  most  likely  diminish  as  a 
consequence  of  the  decline  in  business  volume  over  the  coming  years.  This  reduction  in 
capacity  will  free  up  resources  for  other  sectors  with  greater  potential  for  economic 
development.  
During  the  1980s,  Spain  faced  a  most  severe  banking  crisis  that  affected  a  significant 
proportion of the banks operating in that decade. That crisis, in conjunction with subsequent 
action, was a sufficiently valuable lesson on how to manage bank crises at the institution I 
preside over. Such experience should be harnessed for the restructuring still to be done.  
Moreover, economic agents are aware that the decisions the Banco de España takes are, as 
our  tradition  demands,  based  solely  on  expert  criteria  geared  to  safeguarding  banks' 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2009
creditors,  preserving  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  upholding  free-market 
principles.  Using  the  Deposit  Guarantee  Funds,  without  prejudice  to  any  additional 
instruments set in place, will secure the participation of the financial sector in this process.  
Finally, I should not conclude without stressing that the degree of consensus social agents 
and political forces may reach will be the linchpin to ensuring the success of the restructuring 
process. It will be a difficult and complex process, and we should all ideally pull together for 
the benefit of the whole of the Spanish economy.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 43/2009 
 7
