Ardian Fullani: Developments in the Albanian financial system 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the meeting with actors 
from foreign exchange bureaus, Tirana, 6 February 2009. 
 Honourable Managers of Foreign Exchange Bureaus, 
Honourable Cambists, 
The country’s vigorous economic and financial development has promoted the development 
of the financial system. We have all witnessed its constant growth in a number of institutions, 
products  and  quality  of  services,  as  well  as 
its  geographic  expansion.  Financial 
intermediation has been increasing, enabling ever more effective transfer of unused funds for 
financing the economy needs. 
From this viewpoint, the segment you represent has also played its important role. For many 
years on end, we have tried to transfer the foreign exchange business from informal to formal 
channels. This process has had its own ups and downs. However, I feel well to state that 
recently  very  positive  developments  have  taken  place.  Since  2000,  the  number  of  entities 
carrying out foreign exchange business is ten-folded. The Bank of Albania has granted 227 
licences to foreign exchange bureaus, with a comprehensive territorial extension. 
During the period of June 2007 – December 2008, 136 foreign exchange bureaus applied for 
and obtained a licence. Allow me to remind you of the moment when the Bank of Albania 
adopted a set of more liberal rules on the conduct of foreign exchange business, particularly 
in terms of minimum required capital. 
Today’s  meeting  is  the  first  between  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  you,  but  it  is  a  follow-up  of 
meetings  we  have  held  with  market  stakeholders,  with  commercial  banks’  representatives 
and other groups of interest, who are interested in and can impact on the accomplishment of 
these objectives. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  constantly  assessed  the  foreign  exchange  market  as  the  most 
developed  market  in  the  country,  which  is  a  reflection  not  only  of  the  force  of  free  market 
initiative, but also of the existence of a more competitive environment in it. We appreciate 
that  foreign  exchange  bureaus  have  played  and  are  playing  an  irreplaceable  role  in  its 
development  and  performance.  Notwithstanding  the  increased  international  market  share 
and  the  ever  larger  role  the  commercial  banks  are  playing  in  generating  liquidity  and  in 
setting  the  price  in  this  market,  the  Bank  of  Albania  constantly  regards  your  role  as 
necessary for further enhancement of efficiency in foreign exchange market operation. 
Leaving  out  of  focus,  just  for  the  moment,  the  structural  factors  of  the  Albanian  economy, 
which make necessary the existence of foreign exchange market share even in the form of 
cash, the Bank of Albania regards this role in view of your positioning as important mediators 
between  cash  operations  and  operations  carried  out  through  the  banking  system.  In  this 
aspect, I could not help mentioning also the obligation you have in terms of more rigorous 
implementation of money laundering prevention law. 
As you may already know, presently Albania applies the flexible exchange rate regime, which 
means  that  market  forces  are  the  ones  that  determine  its  level.  Your  behaviour  has 
constantly  helped  reflecting  in  this  price  the  demand  and  supply  for  this  commodity, 
preventing the risk of price mismatch to overall market conditions and to the macroeconomic 
climate  of  the  country.  In  this  framework,  I  would  also  like  to  highlight  your  positive 
behaviour, related to positioning future flows of the supply and demand for foreign currency, 
particularly during critical periods of the market, which relate to the seasonal exchange rate 
behaviour, as a rational behaviour that helps reducing exchange rate volatility. 
BIS Review 31/2009 
 1
Given  the  above,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  highly  interested  in  getting  informed  with  your 
opinions  about  market  operation,  positive  or  negative  changes  having  occurred  recently, 
relationships  between  foreign  exchange  bureaus  and  commercial  banks  within  the 
framework of competition and mutual benefit. 
The Bank of Albania expresses its willingness to provide trainings on various products that 
may be traded by the domestic foreign exchange market. As the first step in this regard, we 
plan  to  deal  with  forward  operations,  which  will  better  serve  the  smoothing  of  seasonal 
effects  of  exchange  rate  behaviour  and  the  hedging  against  undesirable  foreign  exchange 
movements. 
Highlighting the general but very important nature of the above issues, we would also like to 
share opinions on current economic situation with you. 
Psychological effects on foreign exchange rate performance are another extremely important 
factor. Taking into consideration the current world crisis, the Bank of Albania, appreciating 
your position in generating information from both, businesses and the broad public, would be 
interested in your opinions; Moreover, it would welcome your suggestions about any possible 
forms of generating these opinions periodically. 
In  conclusion,  intending  to  leave  more  room  for  discussing  and  exchanging  ideas,  we 
welcome your opinions even about other issues, related to reporting to the Bank of Albania 
or implementation of money laundering prevention law. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2009
