Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The world after the crisis – designing the future. A 
monetary order for the XXI century 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  Aspen  Institute  Italia,  World  Economy  Conference,  Villa  Madama,  Rome, 
23 June 2009. 
 I  would  like  first  of  all  to  thank  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  this  panel 
discussion on a new Monetary Order for the XXI Century.1 The title seems to suggest that 
we  had  a  monetary  order  in  the  previous  century,  but  then  we  lost  it  in  the  course  of  this 
decade  and  we  now  need  something  new.  In  fact,  we  have  been  searching  for  a  new 
monetary order since the fall of the Bretton Woods agreement, in the summer of 1971, and 
even that order was not so orderly, after all.  
I will not try to define what a monetary order is.2 What we ultimately need is a framework in 
which  payment  flows  between  residents  of  different  countries  ensure  smooth  trading  in 
goods,  services  and  financial  assets.  It  matters  not  only  because  international  trade  is  an 
engine for growth but also because payments imbalances are a natural result of non-barter 
economies. Actually, the more developed the financial sector is, the easier it is to finance an 
imbalance between inward and outward payments, to the extent that the debt can be repaid 
or the credit can be cashed in. We could thus define a viable monetary order as one in which 
the  credibility  of  the  debtor  and  in  the  worthiness  of  the  creditor  can  be  maintained,  while 
preserving the stability of the underlying real and financial markets. 
We know that a country’s purchases of goods and services from the rest of the world do not 
match at each and every point in time its sales, and therefore that its balance of payments is 
in  fact  unbalanced.  Such  an  imbalance  may  be  a  good  thing,  and  be  fully  consistent  with 
economic  fundamentals,  for  two  reasons.  First,  countries,  just  like  individuals,  want  to 
smooth  consumption  over  time.  Those  that  have  a  large  productive  potential  and  a  young 
population tend to borrow so as to be able to invest in their future; those that are rich and 
have a middle-aged population tend to repay debt and save for when the population is older 
and less active.3 Thus, a functioning international monetary order allows countries to smooth 
consumption over time, just as a bank does for individuals. 
The  second  benefit  of  a  well-functioning  international  monetary  system  is  that  it  enables 
countries to insure against bad times. In particular, a country that is a net lender to the rest of 
the world – by exporting and saving more than it imports and consumes – is able to draw on 
                                                 
1  
I  wish  to  thank  Marcel  Fratscher,  Ettore  Dorrucci  and  Arnaud  Mehl  for  their  contributions.  The  opinions 
expressed reflect only mine. 
2   The  terms  “order”  and  “system”  are  here  used  interchangeably.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that 
Mundell (1972) and McKinnon (1996) made a distinction between international monetary “order” and “system”. 
According to their definitions, the order is the set of rules and the system the modus operandi of the order. 
See Robert Mundell, “The Future of the International Financial System”, in Acheson, J. Chant and Prachowny, 
Bretton Woods Revisited, University  of Toronto Press, 1972. See also Ronald McKinnon, The Rules of the 
Game: International Money and Exchange Rates, MIT Press, Chapter II, 1996. 
3   Referred to as the life-cycle hypothesis of consumption for individuals (F. Modigliani and A. Ando, “The Life 
Cycle Hypothesis of Saving”, American Economic Review, 1963), which was reformulated for the behaviour of 
countries by Modigliani (1970), “The life cycle hypothesis of saving and intercountry differences in the saving 
ratio”,  in:  Eltis,  Scott  and  Wolfe,  eds.,  Induction,  Growth  and  Trade:  Essays  in  honour  of  Sir  Roy  Harrod 
(Clarendon Press, Oxford), 197-226. 
BIS Review79/2009 
 1
those savings invested abroad when it falls on hard times. Such a risk-sharing mechanism4 
has indeed been an important reason for the economic stability we observed for much of the 
1990s and 2000s in advanced economies. In fact, this benefit was for a long time during the 
last  decade  regarded  as  a  major  economic  achievement.  Yet  the  increased  financial 
integration  of  countries,  and  precisely  this  insurance  mechanism,  may  also  have  played  a 
role  in  the  spreading  of  the  current  financial  crisis  to  virtually  every  open  economy  in  the 
world.  
A key point is that there is a limit to the extent to which the rest of the world can finance a 
country’s external imbalance. In a well-functioning monetary order, both policy-makers and 
markets should be able to assess the limits of the external funds available for a country to 
finance its payments deficit, before such a limit is reached and to take corrective action. 
We know that this limit is very difficult to assess, because it depends on the specific domestic 
and international circumstances. The more sophisticated the financial markets are, the more 
easily a country can finance its payments deficit; and the less urgently needed is a policy to 
adjust  the  domestic  economy.  I  can  still  hear  Alan  Greenspan  saying:  “it  is  tempting  to 
conclude that the US current account deficit is essentially a by-product of long-term secular 
forces, and thus is largely benign. After all, we do seem to have been able to finance our 
international current account deficit with relative ease in recent years.”5
A key question, ultimately, is: who should decide what a sustainable payments deficit is? The 
answers to this question, both right and wrong, have marked the evolution of the international 
monetary system since the Second World War. Allow me a brief retrospective.  
Under the Bretton Woods agreement, the availability of international liquidity, ultimately in the 
form  of  gold,  was  the  binding  criterion  for  fostering  a  country  to  adjust  its  external 
imbalances. The system broke up because the US did not have enough gold to finance its 
imbalances, and did not want to live within those constraints, as it had to finance the Vietnam 
war. The move to a flexible exchange regime in the early 1970s was expected to solve the 
problem. The thinking at that time was that a country’s balance of payments is by definition in 
balance in a floating system, because the exchange rate adjusts to ensure such a balance. 
Defining the limits of a sustainable payments deficit, beyond which financing would start to 
become problematic, was considered as a non-problem. The market would decide. That was 
the consensus at the time. Not many disagreed. I still remember my surprise when Robert 
Triffin – who chaired my Bachelor’s dissertation committee in Louvain in 1978 – asked me 
“Should the US adjust or finance their current account deficit?” I gave the textbook answer, 
but he didn’t look so convinced.  
Financial markets are indeed expected to finance external deficits, until they decide not to do 
so  any  more,  at  least  not  at  the  prevailing  price  (i.e.  exchange  rate).  And  when  such  a 
decision is made, the adjustment can be rather violent. We had the experience of markets 
simply  refusing  to  finance  external  imbalances  in  the  1980s  and  1990s,  producing  major 
exchange  rate  adjustments  leading  to  financial  crises.  However,  this  concerned  mainly 
developing  and  emerging  markets.  Furthermore,  the  crises  often  happened  in  countries 
which  refused  to  allow  their  currencies  to  fully  float.  In  most  cases,  the  crisis  erupted 
because countries were trying to peg their exchange rates at overvalued levels. One of the 
lessons of the Asian crisis in the late 1990s, in particular, was that countries should either let 
                                                 
4   For a comprehensive account of the functioning of risk-sharing across countries, see e.g. Lewis, K. (1996), 
“What  Can  Explain  the  Apparent  Lack  of  International  Consumption  Risk  Sharing”,  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, 104(2), pp. 267-297. 
5   Alan Greenspan: “International imbalances”, Remarks Before the Advancing Enterprise Conference, London, 
England, December 2, 2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2009
their exchange rates float in order to avoid accumulating excessive external imbalances, or 
adjust their macroeconomic policies to ensure consistency with their peg.6
We entered this century with a new consensus, in which policy-makers took a back seat and 
relied heavily on markets to allocate capital across countries, while the IMF was mandated to 
exert a strong surveillance role with a view to ensuring transparency and encouraging early 
adjustment. This was the consensus reached at the G7 Summit in Cologne, in 1999, which 
was later adopted by the G20.  
The  expectations  have  not  been  fully  met,  for  several  reasons.  First,  several  emerging 
market economies have not let their currencies float freely, and have continued to peg their 
exchange rates, although at undervalued rates (instead of overvalued). The reason has not 
only been a fear of floating but also a desire to promote exports as well as to accumulate 
reserves  as  a  self-insurance  policy  in  case  of  a  crisis.  In  turn,  the  accumulation  of  large 
surpluses, especially in emerging Asia and in oil-exporting countries, has made possible the 
financing of the US current account deficit. It has also influenced monetary conditions in the 
US,  lowering  long  term  interest  rates  and  making  monetary  conditions  more  expansionary 
than would otherwise have been the case.  
The  second  reason  is  that  the  IMF  has  not  succeeded  in  convincing  countries  to  pursue 
macroeconomic  policies  consistent  with  sustainable  current  account  positions.  Advanced 
economies, in particular the US, have not taken IMF advice fully into consideration in their 
decision-making. Emerging economies, partly following the example given by the advanced 
countries,  have  also  attached  less  importance  to  IMF  surveillance.  The  accumulation  of 
external assets has made them less dependent on IMF funding and advice. For example, the 
IMF has not succeeded in completing an Art. IV surveillance programme with China since 
2006. Furthermore, the IMF has been reproached by emerging market economies of lacking 
legitimacy, in view of their relatively low quota and representation.  
What  is  the  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  experience  of  the  last  ten  years  and  from  the 
crisis?  Either  the  recommendations  contained  in  the  consensus  prevailing  after  the  Asian 
crisis  were  wrong  or  they  were  not  appropriately  implemented.  I  tend  to  side  with  the  last 
view. The lesson that I would thus draw from the crisis is that those recommendations which 
were not implemented over the last decade should now be strengthened. 
The  fact  that  the  crisis  has  restored  the  IMF  to  its  place  at  the  heart  of  the  international 
financial system should provide some hope in this respect. However, over recent months the 
Fund has concentrated mainly on crisis resolution. On the other hand, if we are striving for an 
international  monetary  order  in  which  crises  are  the  exception,  the  Fund  has  to  have  a 
greater  role  in  prevention.  In  this  respect,  the  discussions  that  have  taken  place  in  most 
international  fora  after  the  burst  of  the  crisis  have  focussed  mainly  on  strengthened 
regulatory and prudential measures, not on macroeconomic surveilance. One could even see 
a  risk  that  the  way  in  which  this  crisis  is  being  addressed  could  weaken  the  Fund’s 
preventive tools, at least with respect to macroeconomic policies. Let me elaborate. 
One element of concern is that, even after the crisis, the IMF has not been able to convince 
its members that large external imbalances constitute a serious threat to global financial and 
economic stability. The crisis is seen by several key players as unrelated to the accumulation 
of  external  imbalances,  and  thus  unrelated  to  the  way  in  which  the  international  financial 
system works. The IMF itself seems to favour the view that the origins of this crisis are not to 
be found in the members’ policies, nor in external imbalances, but in insufficient regulation 
and supervision and in the improper behaviour of market participants.7 There is a wide range 
                                                 
6   “Exchange rate regimes for emerging market economies”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, February 2003. 
7   See IMF (2009): “Lessons of the Global Crisis for Macroeconomic Policy”, 19 February 2009; Blanchard, O. 
(2008): “The Crisis: Basic Mechanisms, and Appropriate Policies”, MIT Working Paper 09-01. 
BIS Review79/2009 
 3
of  literature,  including  that  published  by  the  IMF  until  2007,  showing  how  global  savings–
investment imbalances have played a fundamental role that must not be neglected.8 These 
imbalances were ultimately the symptom of the creation of excessive international liquidity by 
countries like the United States and of excessive savings by countries like China, and were 
associated with a reduction in the cost of capital and interest rates, in particular in the United 
States. This spurred an unsustainable boom in consumption as well as excessive risk-taking, 
both among consumers and financial institutions. These imbalances contributed to the large 
financial distortions and bubbles in global financial markets, which created the preconditions 
for today’s crisis. Neglecting imbalances as a source of risk is not the best way to improve 
the crisis prevention arm of the IMF. 
How can we expect the international monetary order to develop? And how can we strike a 
better balance between financing and adjustment? 
There is a risk that the forces favouring earlier and more effective adjustment of imbalances, 
and thus helping to avoid financing crises, have been weakened. In the current discussion on 
the reform of the international financial system, not many are suggesting that the IMF should 
play a stronger role in preventing the accumulation of excessive external imbalances and in 
fostering  more  disciplined  domestic  policies.  Just  to  give  an  example,  the  Decision  on 
Bilateral  Surveillance  over  Members’  Policies,  aimed  at  identifying  fundamental  exchange 
rate misalignments, has been modified to allow greater discretion in surveillance, especially 
exchange  rates.  This  might  look  like  a  tactical  choice,  but  I  doubt  that  it  will  result  in  a 
tougher hand for the IMF. 
While emerging and developing countries are requesting a stronger voice in the IMF, they 
also seem to be suggesting that they would like this institution to be less intrusive, imposing 
less conditionality while at the same time providing more and cheaper financing. Advanced 
economies seem to be supporting this view, having inundated the IMF with funds, most of 
them available with very little conditionality or none at all. This might be appropriate in times 
of systemic crisis but cannot be sustainable in normal times. Some thought should perhaps 
also be given to the need for a strategy to exit from cheap and unconditional IMF financing.  
Overall,  most  of  the  IMF’s  shareholders  seem  to  favour  making  IMF  financing  easier.  The 
idea  of  enhancing  the  role  of  the  SDR,  or  another  world  reserve  currency,  goes  towards 
facilitating the financing needs of both deficit and surplus countries. For deficit countries, this 
idea  aims  to  make  it  easier  to  borrow  outside  the  markets,  from  international  institutions, 
giving  the  issuer  of  such  currency  some  form  of  international  lender-of-last-resort function. 
For surplus countries, it aims to reduce the devaluation risk of those countries that want to 
accumulate reserves. It is not clear, under these circumstances, how the risk of excessive 
imbalances  would  be  perceived  by  both  creditors  and  debtors.  The  real  risk  is  that  the 
adjustment  takes  place  even  later,  while  imbalances  are  left  to  accumulate  for  a  longer 
period of time. But under these circumstances the crisis could be even greater, and the ex 
                                                 
8   See, among others: Trichet, J-C. (2009): “Macroeconomic policies, imbalances and the need to avoid going 
back to the status quo ante”, address at the Annual Joint Parliamentary Meeting of the European Parliament 
(Brussels, 16 February); Bracke, T., Bussière, M., Fidora, M., Straub, R.: (2008): “A Framework for Assessing 
Global  Imbalances”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper  No  78  (January);  Bracke,  T.  and  Fidora,  M.:  (2008):  “Global 
Liquidity  Glut  or  Global  Savings  Glut?  A  Structural  VAR  Approach”,  ECB  Working  Paper  No 911  (June); 
Dorrucci, E., Meyer-Cirkel, A., and Santabárbara, D. (2009): “Domestic Financial Development in Emerging 
Economies:  Evidence  and  Implications”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper  No  102  (April);  Portes,  R.  (2009):  “Global 
Imbalances”,  in  Dewatripont,  Freixas  and  Portes  (eds.),  Macroeconomic  Stability  and  Financial  Regulation: 
Key Issues for the G20, CEPR. Visco, I. (2009): “The Global Crisis: The Role of Policies and the International 
Monetary  System”,  paper  prepared  for  the  G20  Workshop  on  the  Macroeconomic  Causes  of  the  Crisis 
(Mumbai, 24-26 May). Moreover, among the many papers that had identified global imbalances as creating 
systemic  risks  for  the  global  economy,  see:  IMF  (2007):  “Staff  Report  on  the  Multilateral  Consultation  on 
Global Imbalances with China, the Euro Area, Japan, Saudi Arabia, and the United States” – prepared by a 
Staff Team from PDR, RES and WHD, approved by Mark Allen and Michael Deppler (29 June). 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2009
post  adjustment  even  harsher.  That  is  the  experience  of  the  gold  standard,  the  last  world 
currency. 
In sum, a new world monetary order – that is, a framework for payments between residents 
of different countries which ensures smooth trading in goods, services and financial assets – 
requires  a  mechanism  to  keep  imbalances  in  check.  Key  elements  of  such  a  mechanism 
include a prominent role for the IMF in two essential areas: strong and effective surveillance 
in  crisis  prevention,  and  responsible  lending,  with  appropriate  limits  and  conditionality,  to 
countries in need. This was the consensus prevailing until just before this crisis. There is a 
risk  that  the  short-term  objectives  pursued  to  resolve  the  current  crisis  will  change  this 
consensus.  A  new  monetary  order  must  first  and  foremost  aim  to  prevent  crises,  not  to 
postpone them. 
BIS Review79/2009 
 5
