Zdeněk Tůma: Statistics – investment in the future 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Zdeněk  Tůma,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the 
International  Conference  “Statistics:  Investment  in  the  Future”,  organized  by  the  Czech 
National  Bank  together  with  the  Czech  Statistical  Office  and  the  Prague  University  of 
Economics, Prague, 14 September 2009.  
 Dear Prime Minister, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
I am very pleased that the Czech National Bank can host this conference in its premises. It is 
also  our  great  pleasure  to  co-organize  the  conference  together  with  the  Czech  Statistical 
Office and the Prague University of Economics – it is the evidence of good, I even would say, 
above-average relationships between these three institutions. 
The  international  conference  “Statistics:  Investment  in  the  Future”  we  are  opening  by  this 
plenary session is the second conference of this kind, organized five years after the first one. 
But  this  year’s  venue  is  held  in  a  rather  different  economic  and  financial  environment 
compared  to  the  previous  conference.  The  whole  world  has  been  affected  by  the  global 
financial  crisis.  Let  me  say  a  few  words  about  the  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  on  our 
economy. In autumn last year the first signs of the global financial crisis were detected in the 
inter-bank market. The main cause was a lack of confidence among banks spreading from 
abroad, resulting in their preference to keep more liquidity than usual. In spite of the fact that 
there has long been a significant surplus of liquidity in the Czech money market, this lack of 
confidence  caused  a  deterioration  of  the  proper  functioning  of  the  market.  The  Czech 
National  Bank  launched  the  liquidity-supplying  facility  in  October  2008.  Czech  government 
bonds  were  made  eligible  as  collateral  in  these  operations.  This  technical  measure  was 
aimed  at  limiting  the  potential  spreading  of  problems  from  foreign  financial  markets  to  the 
Czech financial sector. The situation calmed down at the end of 2008. 
Overall, the financial crisis itself has had only a limited primary impact on the Czech financial 
market  due  to  its  low  exposure  to  toxic  assets  and  focus  on  domestic  business  in  local 
currency. Nevertheless, the country was affected by an increase in risk aversion to the whole 
of Central and Eastern Europe, due mainly to the problems of some countries which needed 
financing  from  abroad.  The  Czech  Republic  is  among  the  countries  that  provide  loans  to 
some of them or participate in lending schemes organised by international institutions. 
The financial crisis has led to a significant decrease in global economic activity. As the Czech 
economy is very open and export-oriented, the loss of demand from major trading partners 
was  reflected  in  weaker  domestic  economic  activity  and  therefore  banks  became  more 
cautious  in providing  credit  to  the  business sector  and  subsequently  to  households.  Weak 
foreign demand is thus probably the most severe factor stemming from the global financial 
crisis that is affecting the Czech economy. 
From the statistical point of view, the financial crisis which turned into a global recession has 
provided  a  good  opportunity  to  carry  out  a  stock-taking  exercise  in  the  areas  of  data 
availability  and  timeliness.  In  the  case  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  it  was  quite  a 
comprehensive  exercise  since  the  central  bank  acts  as  a  monetary  authority,  integrated 
supervisor  and  statistical  institution,  which  brings  a  lot  of  synergies.  During  the  period  of 
turbulence  banks  were  required  to  provide  us  with  additional  information  regarding,  for 
example, their liquidity positions, exposures vis-à-vis the group of their foreign parent bank 
and  information  indicating  how  active  the  banks  were  in  their  lending  activities.  This 
information was even provided on a daily basis for some time. Some data, both standard and 
those provided as a result of the global financial crisis, are collected mainly for supervisory 
reasons  and  other  data  for  monetary  purposes,  but  put  together  they  provide  the  policy 
makers  with  a  comprehensive  set  of  information.  In  addition,  the  statistical  and  regulatory 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 1
concepts have interacted more closely since data collection for both purposes started to be 
carried out in a coordinated way. Integration of supervision in the central bank, which took 
place more than three years ago, thus also proved successful during this turbulent period. 
The Czech National Bank is both a user and producer of statistics. Macroeconomic statistics 
produced  by  the  Czech  Statistical  Office  are  very  important  for  the  central  bank.  Price 
statistics,  particularly  consumer  price  statistics,  are  a  key  set  of  indicators  reflecting  the 
ability  of  the  central  bank  to  fulfil  its  main  task  –  price  stability.  Nevertheless,  not  only 
consumer price statistics are in the sphere of our interest. As it is known, we operate in the 
inflation  targeting  regime.  Since  this  is  a  forward-looking  framework,  we  undergo  a 
forecasting  exercise  which  results  in  a  comprehensive  macroeconomic  forecast  every 
quarter of the year. This forecast is based on a number of economic variables and national 
accounts figures are at the centre of our interest. I do not want to list all the other statistics 
necessary for analytical and forecasting activities at our bank, but let me mention at least one 
more area: residential property prices. Property prices played an important role in the global 
financial crisis. From this point of view, our discussions with the Czech Statistical Office in 
this field held in recent years should not be considered a waste of time. We have touched 
upon many methodological issues not only in residential property prices as such, but also in 
related statistics like owner-occupied housing within the consumer price index. 
The  central  bank  also  acts  as  a  producer  of  statistics.  It  is  not  necessary  to  mention  all 
standard  statistics  compiled  by  central  banks  such  as  monetary  aggregates  and  their 
counterparts, interest rates statistics, statistics on other financial intermediaries, balance of 
payments or financial accounts statistics. I would like to stress the fact that after integration 
of  supervisory  institutions  in  the  central  bank  we  also  integrated  data  collection  and  data 
storage  systems  for  both  supervisory  and  statistical  purposes.  These  systems  enable 
collecting data only once, which saves the costs of all respondents, allowing the CNB to use 
a  single  set  of  data  for  different  purposes.  As  I  have  already  mentioned,  these 
comprehensive data sets also served us well during the period of turbulence, allowing us to 
monitor the developments in the banking sector. 
The  name  of  the  conference  “Statistics:  Investment  in  the  Future”  means  that  the  papers 
which will be presented in the next two days will be forward-looking ones. In recent years, we 
have witnessed a number of initiatives at the international and European level dealing with 
capturing  new  phenomena  of  economic  developments  in  statistics  such  as  wider  use  of 
mortgages, lending provided by non-bank financial institutions to households or securitisation 
of  loans  and  other  loan  transfers.  Recently,  the  European  Central  Bank  Regulation  on 
statistical  reporting  requirements  as  regards  securitisation  has  entered 
force. 
Securitisation of loans and their transfer to specialised institutions had been identified as an 
important  phenomenon  at  least  two  years  ago  when  the  work  on  the  Regulation  started. 
There are also additional initiatives in the pipeline that attempt to capture new phenomena, 
such as more detailed statistics on insurance companies and pension funds. This financial 
sub-sector has become the second largest one at the European level. 
Let me also touch upon a very important area of our statistical work – co-operation between 
statistical  authorities,  namely  between  the  Czech  Statistical  Office  and  the  Czech  National 
Bank, not only in the preparation of this conference but on a regular basis. This co-operation 
is aimed at an effective arrangement of statistical processes in our country and minimizing 
the burden on respondents. Coordinated data collection and sharing of information are the 
key points in this respect. 
As  we  know,  a  formal  arrangement  is  always  a  necessary  but  not  sufficient  condition  for 
good results. It has become a standard between these two institutions to meet once a year at 
an annual summit devoted not only to the assessment of the past twelve months’ work and 
designing  the  tasks  for  the  period  ahead,  but  also  to  informal  discussions  in  a  friendly 
atmosphere. This is also an important feature of statistical work since statistics do not involve 
only figures, but also people who create and compile them. 
into 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2009
Having  finished  the  description  of  our  co-operation  in  this  way,  I  would  like  to  wish  all 
participants  of  the  conference  the  same  friendly  atmosphere  at  the  conference  and  at  the 
same  time  interesting  presentations  and  fruitful  discussions  in  addressing  the  above 
mentioned or other statistical issues. 
Thank you for your attention 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 3
