Elizabeth A Duke: Federal Reserve's initiatives to support minority-
owned institutions  
Speech  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Minority Depository Institutions National Conference 2009, Chicago, 
Illinois, 9 July 2009. 
 I am pleased to be with you today. These annual conferences are very important, offering 
essential  opportunities  for  the  banking  agencies  to  meet  with  minority  bankers  to  discuss 
emerging industry developments, to learn from your accomplishments and challenges, and to 
share  our  views  on  sound  practices.  They  also  highlight  the  importance  that  we  place  on 
promoting and ensuring the growth of minority-owned depositories.  
I spent 30 years of my career as a banker, primarily as a community banker. I was, in fact, 
involved in two start-up banks. So for those of you who have had that experience – I have 
shared  your  pain,  as  well  as  the  sense  of  accomplishment  that  comes  from  building  an 
organization from scratch. I first became a community bank CEO in August 1991 when my 
boss and mentor died suddenly. As many of you remember, that was also a time of financial 
crisis. I spent my days as you may now be spending yours, struggling to maintain adequate 
capital and liquidity in the face of declining profitability and growing loan losses. I agonized 
over new-loan and loan-workout decisions affecting the small businesses that had been my 
customers for more than a decade. It wasn't easy to return the bank to a solid footing, and 
the process took years, but we made it through, as you will. The bank and its customers not 
only survived, they thrived.  
Our survival was due in no small part to a strong working relationship, one based on mutual 
trust  and  respect,  with  our  primary  federal  supervisor,  the  Federal  Reserve.  In  fact,  Gene 
Johnson, a Vice President at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond who is in the audience 
today, was a young examiner back when I was a young banker. Indeed, he was often the 
examiner-in-charge during those difficult years. We didn't always agree, but we always had 
the same objective – a safe and sound institution. Seventeen years later, in August 2008, my 
career in banking took a new direction when I joined the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve  System.  And  in  this  crisis  I  continue  to  believe  in  the  importance  of  the  working 
relationship between bankers and bank supervisors. You can count on me to be an advocate 
for the programs established by the Federal Reserve to support minority institutions.  
The Federal Reserve, of course, is mainly known for its efforts in formulating the country's 
monetary policy. But as this group well knows, the Fed also plays an important part in the 
supervision  of  financial  institutions.  It  has  the  primary  rule-writing  authority  for  many 
consumer protection regulations that govern a wide range of financial activities. It provides 
liquidity  to  the  financial  system.  And,  as  has  been  seen  in  the  current  crisis,  in  times  of 
financial  stress  the  Federal  Reserve  joins  with  other  government  agencies  to  support 
financial  stability.  As  community  bankers,  you  understand  how  intertwined  the  strength  of 
your institution is with the performance of your community's economy. The financial crisis has 
shown how true that is whether the economies and institutions are local, national, or even 
global.  
I consider it my role to bring a banking perspective to the deliberations and decisions of the 
Board,  with  a  hands-on  understanding  of  the  impact  of  public  policy  on  banking  and  the 
impact of banking on the economy. In order to keep up with the latest issues and concerns in 
the banking community, I work hard to stay in close touch with bankers representing a wide 
range  of  banking  markets,  charters,  and  geographic  locations.  While  I  understand  the 
community banking part of your business, I likely do not have a full appreciation of all the 
BIS Review 86/2009 
 1
challenges you face as minority bankers. So I am eager to hear your thoughts today and to 
continue the conversation in the months and years ahead. 
I thought I would begin today with some of the topics that I hear about most from bankers. 
Then I will talk a bit about some of the efforts that have been taken to repair the financial 
system,  with  particular  emphasis  on  the  ways  in  which  these  actions  might  impact  your 
banks  and  the  broader  economy.  I  plan  to  conclude  by  briefly  discussing  the  current 
condition of minority banks and highlighting the importance of your lending activities to our 
economy. And then I would like to hear from you. 
Community banker concerns 
Overwhelmingly, the biggest concern I am hearing about these days is the public perception 
of  banks  and  bankers.  Clearly,  the  public  is  angry.  They  are  angry  at  banks  and,  just  as 
much, at bank regulators. They are angry about bailouts. They are angry about bad loans. 
They are angry about big salaries. They are angry because banks are not lending. And they 
are angry about high rates and fees.  
Community bankers are angry, too. They are angry because they did not ask for or receive 
any bailouts. They did not make the subprime loans. They did not get the big bonuses. And 
they are still making every good loan they can find. But regardless of their innocence, they 
are paying the price for public anger at banks and are being vilified and stigmatized. 
Much of the stigma has fallen especially on banks that received capital investments through 
the  Treasury  Department's  Capital  Purchase  Program,  a  program  established  under  the 
Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program,  or  TARP,  to  make  preferred  stock  investments  in  viable 
banks.  
I  can  certainly  understand  your  frustration  with  the  time  it  took  to  get  the  details  of  the 
program  finalized.  Frankly,  I  think  that  everyone  underestimated  the  complexity  of  offering 
the program to 8,000 institutions operating under many different charters and having different 
legal and capital structures. And I understand your discomfort with receiving capital from the 
government, an unusual source of equity in our banking market. I can also understand your 
feeling of frustration when the capital that was supposed to be a mark of strength and good 
health morphed into a perceived government bailout, a bailout from problems that most of 
you  never  had  to  begin  with.  And  I  absolutely  understand  your  concern  about  losing  key 
employees due to restrictions covering compensation policies.  
And now, when some institutions are just applying for or receiving capital investments, others 
are  applying  to  repay,  or  are  actually  repaying,  their  investments.  As  you  make  your  own 
capital decision – whether that decision is to take the capital in the first place or to repay it – I 
would  ask  that  you  set  aside  any  emotions  about  the  process  and  evaluate  your  ability  to 
access capital and liquidity to continue lending in your community.  
Much of the financial weakness that led to establishment of the Capital Purchase Program 
still exists. Economic conditions are stabilizing or, where they are still deteriorating, appear to 
be doing so more slowly. But economic activity is still at a low level. Real estate prices are 
still  declining.  Confidence  in  the  financial  system  has  still  not  returned  to  pre-crisis  levels. 
And you still may be faced with unusual opportunities for growth or unexpected challenges 
that  may  require  more  capital.  Once  you  repay  the  TARP  investment,  it  likely  will  not  be 
available again. So, please, before you make your decision, take one more unemotional run 
through  your  projections,  your  assumptions,  and  your  "what-ifs,"  and  make  sure  you  are 
comfortable  with  your  decision.  And  if  you  have  already  received  TARP  capital,  consider 
holding it in reserve for a little longer, at least until conditions are more favorable.  
Another area of concern to some community bankers has been examination practices. While 
many  report  business  as  usual,  others  have  raised  concerns  about  overly  strict  asset 
classifications, particularly in regions experiencing substantial drops in real estate values. I 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2009
would  imagine  that  this  is  a  particular  concern  for  minority  banks,  many  of  which  serve 
economically disadvantaged neighborhoods that are being particularly hard hit in this crisis. 
Indeed,  as  the  banking  agencies  pointed  out  in  their  November  2008  Interagency  Policy 
Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers, bankers and examiners need to 
respond  realistically  to  recent  deterioration  in  asset  quality,  but  avoid  overcorrecting  to 
ensure that lending continues to flow to creditworthy borrowers.  
Looking forward into the next cycle of examinations, I expect many of the priorities of Federal 
Reserve examiners to remain the same. But there may be some slight changes in focus. For 
example, examiners have for several years been paying significant attention to commercial 
real  estate  concentrations,  encouraging  banks  to  improve  their  management-reporting, 
stress-testing,  and  other  credit-administration  practices  as  their  concentrations  have 
increased in magnitude. Now, as examiners are seeing more and more loans secured by real 
estate  projects  that  are  not  performing  as  expected,  they  are  looking  for  bankers  to  have 
realistic views and to have considered the effect a change in a project's performance has on 
the value of its collateral. In some cases, an examiner may encourage a banker to obtain an 
updated valuation or appraisal of a project's supporting collateral. 
In  view  of  the  strains  on  bank  deposits  in  the  wake  of  last  year's  bank  failures  and  the 
difficulty that many banks are having in raising capital, examiners will also be redoubling their 
efforts at assessing liquidity and capital planning. Some liquidity and capital plans that banks 
had  been  relying  on  proved  inadequate  last  year;  others  clearly  were  not  sufficiently 
developed  to  address  the  range  of  contingencies  that  banks  can  face  in  a  volatile  market 
environment.  
Compensation  management  systems  also  are  under  heightened  scrutiny  from  regulators. 
Banks  that  have  received  TARP  capital  can  expect  to  see  some  efforts  by  examiners  to 
confirm  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  the  Treasury  Department's  investment 
agreements. However, compensation plans for other banks will not escape attention. Banks 
should expect to see a growing focus on the incentives embedded in compensation plans, 
with examiners discouraging incentive structures that foster excessive risk-taking. 
Finally, while I have talked about issues with the loans already on your books, it is especially 
important  in  this  environment  to  be  sure  that  you  have  the  capacity  to  make  –  and  are 
making  –  all  possible  loans  to  creditworthy  borrowers.  Making  new  loans  and  working  out 
existing  loans  is  hard  work.  It  is  even  harder  in  stressed  situations.  But  your  deep 
understanding  of  the  customers  and  communities  you  serve  makes  your  work  vitally 
important to this recovery.  
Efforts to repair the financial system 
While I will admit that many of the government initiatives aimed at easing the financial crisis 
have been focused on the largest institutions, I would still argue that many of these programs 
have recognized the importance of institutions of all sizes to a degree that I have never seen 
before. For example, when money market funds began experiencing runs after the Lehman 
bankruptcy, the Treasury immediately came out with a money market fund guarantee. After 
hearing  from  banks,  especially  community  banks,  about  the  risk  the  guarantee  posed  of 
draining uninsured deposits from the banking system, the Treasury modified the guarantee to 
cover only balances in place as of the date the guarantee was first announced.  
Similarly,  the  capital  available  under  the  TARP  Capital  Purchase  Program  was  made 
available  to  all  institutions,  regardless  of  size.  In  fact,  about  two-thirds  of  all  recipients  of 
TARP capital are community banks, demonstrating the degree to which these programs were 
made available to community banks.  
The  FDIC  also  initiated  a  number  of  changes  to  support  the  financial  infrastructure,  and 
community banks in particular. Deposit insurance was increased to $250,000, something that 
had long been sought by community bankers. And the guarantee was recently extended to 
BIS Review 86/2009 
 3
the end of 2013. In addition, unlimited insurance was made available for demand deposits, 
and was modified to include IOLTA and low-interest NOW accounts. These changes have 
been of huge assistance to community banks and their small business customers. Moreover, 
the  FDIC  made  its  debt-guarantee  program  available  to  banks  of  all  sizes.  The  debt-
guarantee  and  demand-deposit-guarantee  programs  required  joint  action  by  the  FDIC, 
Federal Reserve, and Treasury to invoke the systemic risk exception in the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Act. 
In the past, systemic risk had been thought of as involving a single large institution. In the 
recent cases, we invoked the systemic risk exception with respect to the system as a whole, 
thereby allowing assistance to flow to institutions of all sizes.  
For  its  part,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  also  taken  steps  to  assist  smaller  institutions.  For 
example, all banks can borrow funds under the Federal Reserve Term Auction Facility, which 
operates much the same as the discount window, but offers longer terms. And Regulation D 
was recently modified to allow community banks to earn interest on excess reserves held in 
bankers' banks on a pass-through basis.  
So  I  hope  that  from  these  examples  you  see  that  the  interests  of  community  banks  have 
been considered in many aspects of the government's effort to return financial stability.  
Federal Reserve initiatives to promote the strength of minority depository institutions  
Recently,  the  markets  have  shown  signs  of  modest  improvement,  suggesting  that 
government support of the financial system is having a positive effect. But the effects of the 
current recession continue to be seen in the financial performance of banks of all sizes and 
types. Indeed, some banks have not yet made their way across the "bridge to stabilization" 
that serves as a theme for this conference.  
Like  their  competitors,  minority  depository  institutions  have  weakened  in  the  current 
environment. For example, for the full year 2008, 43 percent of the 217 minority depository 
institutions  reported  a  loss,  resulting  in  an  aggregate  return  on  assets  of  negative  0.16 
percent.  As  with  other  banks,  much  of  this  deterioration  stemmed  from  higher  loan  loss 
provisions,  expanded  noninterest  expenses,  and  tighter  net  interest  margins.  Loan 
delinquencies also rose for these institutions, producing an average ratio of noncurrent loans 
to total loans of more than 3 percent. However, despite these pressures, minority depository 
institutions generally maintained sound capital positions at the end of the first quarter, with a 
10.5 percent average tier 1 leverage ratio, tier 1 risk-based capital of 14.2 percent, and total 
risk-based  capital  ratio  of  15.4  percent.  The  average  reserve  for  loan  losses  reached  1.7 
percent of total loans. Additional peer group statistics are available on the Federal Reserve's 
Partnership for Progress website at www.fedpartnership.gov. 
Partnership for Progress is a Federal Reserve initiative launched last year in recognition of 
the  importance  of  healthy  minority  depository  institutions  to  the  overall  strength  of 
communities in this country. The program seeks to promote the soundness and success of 
your institutions by increasing the level of technical assistance and support that we provide to 
minority  depository  institutions  and  de  novo  banks.  Since  the  program  was  started, 
management of several state member banks and bank holding companies have contacted 
the Reserve Banks directly to provide helpful feedback and suggestions. 
As  part  of  the  Partnership  for  Progress  program,  we  have  assigned  dedicated  contacts  in 
each  Federal  Reserve  District  to  work  with  minority-owned  and  de  novo  institutions.  Mike 
Collins, the Executive Vice President in charge of Supervision at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Philadelphia, who spoke with you yesterday, chairs the program on behalf of the Federal 
Reserve System. He works closely with a national coordinator on the Board's staff to ensure 
that the program is successful and provides effective and useful responses to your questions 
and concerns. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2009
In December, we held the first annual meeting for the District contacts and invited several 
bankers to help us learn more about the challenges faced by your institutions. Drawing on 
the insights shared by the bankers at the meeting, we have refined our outreach efforts so 
that  they  better  match  the  needs  of  your  institutions.  A  key  effort  that  we  have  completed 
since that meeting is the development of Federal Reserve training materials designed to help 
examiners understand the unique challenges faced by minority depository institutions. The 
training materials were recently shared with supervisory staff at a senior examiners' forum in 
Dallas and will soon be used in other training for examiners. 
On the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) front, the banking regulatory agencies approved 
Q&As  in  January  that  allow  non-minority-owned  banks  and  non-women-owned  banks  to 
receive  positive  CRA  consideration  for  capital  investments,  loan  participations,  and  other 
ventures  made  in  cooperation  with  minority-owned  banks,  women-owned  banks,  or  low-
income  credit  unions.  While  these  activities  must  help  meet  the  credit  needs  of  the  local 
communities in which the minority-owned banks, women-owned banks, or low-income credit 
unions are chartered, the Q&As clarify that the activities do not also have to benefit the non-
minority bank's assessment area. The Q&As apply to all types and sizes of banks, regardless 
of  the  performance  test  under  which  they  are  being  evaluated.  On  June  24,  the  agencies 
announced  proposed  rulemaking  for  CRA  that  would  codify  the  guidance  provided  in  the 
January interagency Q&As. 
In concluding, I would like to commend you for the important work that you do to support your 
communities.  As  a  former  banker  and  now  as  a  regulator,  I  recognize  the  importance  of 
fostering  the  soundness  of  minority-owned  institutions  to  ensure  that  they  can  continue  to 
provide access to credit, especially in our current economic environment.  
I wish you success and would be happy to take questions at this time. 
BIS Review 86/2009 
 5
