Jürgen Stark: The economic crisis and the response of fiscal and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Austrian Industrial Organisation, Linz, 8 June 2009. 
 Introduction 
Following the default of Lehman Brothers in mid-September last year, the turmoil in financial 
markets which had started in August 2007 turned into a major financial crisis. Liquidity dried 
up, and credit flows to the economy slowed down. Problems in the financial system quickly 
spilled over to the real economy, and an adverse feedback loop between the real economy 
and the financial sector emerged. This has led to the most severe and synchronised global 
economic downturn for 80 years. The euro area has not been spared. Economic activity has 
declined sharply, and inflation is at its lowest level since the launch of the euro.  
Monetary and fiscal authorities across the globe have responded quickly and decisively to 
these extraordinary developments. In particular, against the background of rapidly receding 
inflationary  pressures  and  risks,  the  Eurosystem  has  taken  monetary  policy  and  liquidity 
management measures that were unprecedented in nature, scope and timing. Since October 
last year we have reduced the interest rate on the main refinancing operations by 325 basis 
points. We have also provided unlimited liquidity support to the banking system in the euro 
area  to  maintain  the  flow  of  credit.  Likewise,  governments  in  the  euro  area  have  reacted 
swiftly to stabilise the financial system and to counteract the adverse impact of the financial 
crisis on the real economy.  
Looking  ahead,  both  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  will  need  to  remain  credible  and 
effective,  and  to  fulfil  their  respective  responsibilities.  In  so  doing,  they  will  lay  solid 
foundations for future economic recovery and long-term economic growth and job creation. 
The  crisis  has  shown  how  important  it  is  to  have  an  independent  central  bank  firmly 
committed  to  the  objective  of  price  stability.  At  the  same  time,  governments  must  make  a 
strong and credible commitment to a path of fiscal consolidation and thus comply with the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  But  they  must  also  resist  the  temptation  to  further  increase  the 
size of the stimulus measures, as this could erode trust in the sustainability of public finances 
and undermine the effectiveness of the measures already adopted.  
In my presentation today, I would like first to analyse the economic outlook and then discuss 
in more detail the policy measures taken in response to the crisis. I will then consider their 
implications  and  the  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  the  crisis  for  central  banks  and  monetary 
policy.  
Economic outlook 
Global economic situation 
a.  
Let me begin with the assessment of the global economic situation. The turmoil in financial 
markets, which was triggered by a systematic under-pricing of risk, particularly in the US sub-
prime mortgage market, has now developed into a fully-fledged financial and economic crisis 
at global level.  
While  the  world  economy  continues  to  face  a  severe  and  synchronised  downturn,  recent 
international business confidence indicators suggest that the pace of the decline in economic 
activity is slowing down somewhat. Most forecasters expect that the global economy is likely 
to  recover 
in  2010,  albeit  at  a  gradual  pace.  The  June  2009  Eurosystem  staff 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 1
macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area,  which  have  just  been  published,  are  in  line 
with  this  overall  assessment.  They  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  global  economy 
outside the euro area will contract by 1.6% this year grow and by 2.1% in 2010. 
Nonetheless, the economic prospects remain fraught with uncertainty. Compared with a few 
months  ago,  overall  risks  to  global  economic  growth  have  become  more  balanced.  A 
stronger positive confidence effect than expected triggered by the monetary and fiscal policy 
measures could lead to a more sustained recovery in global demand and in global trade, and 
a quicker normalisation of financial market and credit conditions. Of course, if global policy 
actions  fail  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance  between  economic  stimulus  and  longer-term 
sustainability, financial market conditions could turn unfavourable again. 
Global  inflation  rates  have  continued  to  diminish  rapidly.  This  is  mainly  due  to  lower 
commodity prices, weaker labour market conditions and greater global economic slack. Risks 
to  global  inflation  seem  to  be  broadly  balanced  in  the  short  to  medium  term.  Beyond  that 
horizon, however, inflation risks depend on how efficiently the authorities withdraw the policy 
stimulus. 
Euro area activity  
b.  
In  line  with  global  developments,  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  has  also  contracted 
sharply since the second half of 2008. The euro area economy has shrunk by about 4% over 
the past two quarters, the worst decline since the start of Economic and Monetary Union.  
For the current quarter, there is evidence that the economy has shrunk further, though at a 
slower  pace.  The  economy  is  no  longer  in  free  fall;  we  are  seeing  the  first  signs  of 
stabilisation. Indicators of consumer confidence and business sentiment have continued to 
improve somewhat. We are also seeing some encouraging signs of normalisation in financial 
markets.  
Looking  ahead,  the  euro  area  economy  is  likely  to  be  very  weak  for  the  remainder  of  this 
year, before gradually recovering in the course of 2010. The Eurosystem staff projections for 
real  GDP  growth  are  broadly  in  line  with  the  most  recent  forecasts  from  the  IMF  and  the 
European Commission. Both institutions expect the euro area economy to contract by 4% or 
more in 2009, followed by a gradual recovery in 2010. Quarterly growth rates are expected to 
return to positive levels by mid-2010. The projected gradual recovery reflects the significant 
macroeconomic stimulus under way and the measures taken to make the financial system 
function normally both inside and outside the euro area.  
Euro area price developments 
c.  
Inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  declined  rapidly  since  it  reached  its  highest  level,  4%,  last 
summer. In May, euro area HICP inflation was down to 0.0%, according to the preliminary 
estimate from Eurostat. This is the lowest number registered since the launch of the euro. 
The  rapid  decline  over  this  period  is  primarily  due  to  the  marked  fall  in  global  commodity 
prices,  and  particularly  oil  prices.  If  we  exclude  food  and  energy,  however,  HICP  inflation 
over the past year has moderated only marginally. In April, the most recent month for which 
we have data, HICP inflation excluding food and energy was 1.8%. 
Inflation rates are likely to enter negative territory during the summer, but we expect them to 
turn positive by the end of 2009. This can largely be explained by base effects from energy 
prices. These effects are of no concern to the ECB, which aims to maintain price stability in 
the medium term. In other words, its monetary policy strategy aims to ensure that short-term 
volatility in inflation rates does not lead to volatility in long-term inflation expectations. 
It  is  important  not  to  confuse  the  temporarily  negative  inflation  rates  we  are  likely  to 
experience  this  summer  with  outright  deflation.  Let  me  remind  you  of  the  difference:  a 
deflationary process is a persistent, broad-based and self-sustaining fall in the overall price 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2009
level.  It  is  reinforced  by  the  anticipation  that  prices  will  decline  further  in  the  future.  As  a 
consequence,  inflation  expectations  become  disanchored  and  negative,  and  firms  and 
households may decide to postpone investments and major purchases. 
In  fact,  what  we  are  experiencing  at  the  moment  can  be  described  as  a  period  of  rapid 
disinflation.  This  is  linked  to  transitory  movements  in  relative  prices  and  is  in  principle  a 
welcome  development.  Provided  that  medium-term  inflation  expectations  remain  well 
anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability,  low  or  negative  inflation  rates  for  a  short 
period of time may help to sustain real income and may therefore stimulate spending. 
But even if we expect inflation rates to turn positive again by the end of this year, the weak 
economic outlook for the euro area is expected to keep domestic price pressures contained 
for some time. According to the Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, HICP inflation 
in the euro area is likely to be very moderate, but above zero, on average this year. Inflation 
is expected to pick up, but remain at a moderate level in 2010. Forecasts produced by the 
European Commission and other international organisations paint a similar picture. The risks 
to this outlook are viewed as broadly balanced. However, in the longer term, it is important 
that the current policy stimulus is withdrawn in due course. 
Monetary and financing conditions 
d.  
Let me now turn to the monetary analysis, which is particularly useful for assessing risks to 
price  stability  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  The  latest  money  and  credit  data  support  the 
assessment  of  diminishing  inflationary  pressures  in  the  medium  term.  The  deceleration  of 
broad money growth observed in 2008 increased towards the turn of the year and continues 
at a rapid pace. Developments in money and credit aggregates have been volatile over the 
past few months. This may be explained partly by the sharp reduction in the key ECB interest 
rates,  which  may  have  encouraged  shifts  in  the  allocation  of  funds.  If  we  disregard  this 
volatility,  the  continued  deceleration  in  the  pace  of  underlying  monetary  expansion  and  in 
credit growth seems to reflect the sharp deterioration in economic activity.  
As  regards  financing  conditions  in  the  euro  area,  external  financing  costs  have  been 
declining  since  October  last  year,  and  particularly  sharply  since  the  start  of  this  year. 
Following policy interest rate cuts, bank lending rates have fallen significantly. This indicates 
that  the  pass-through  mechanism  from  policy  rates  to  the  real  economy  has  continued  to 
function in recent months, even though there is evidence that banks’ margins have widened. 
With  credit  spreads  across  all  rating  classes  decreasing  from  their  record  highs  and  with 
stock  prices  rising,  the  overall  cost  of  financing  for  euro  area  non-financial  corporations  is 
diminishing.  In  general,  the  recent  positive  signs  from  financial  markets  point  to  a  gradual 
improvement in confidence among investors. 
Policy measures 
I will now turn to the policy measures taken in response to the current crisis. Both monetary 
and  fiscal  policy-makers  have  reacted  in  a  forceful  and  timely  manner,  aiming  to  restore 
confidence.  And  indeed,  as  regards  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  and  liquidity 
management  measures,  it  seems  that  our  responses  are  bearing  fruit.  Confidence  has 
returned  to  financial  markets,  and  business  surveys  are  picking  up.  I  expect  global  and 
domestic  demand  to  increasingly  benefit  from  the  significant  economic  stimulus  and  the 
measures taken so far to bring the financial system back to normal functioning. 
Monetary policy 
The  ECB  has  acted  in  a  timely,  decisive  and  appropriate  manner  since  the  start  of  the 
financial  market  turmoil.  We  have  cut  our  key  policy  rate  by  325  basis  points  since  last 
October, when the escalating financial crisis led to a rapid decline of inflationary pressures. 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 3
The  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  now  stands  at  1.0%,  its  lowest  level 
since the launch of the euro. This level is appropriate taking into account all information and 
analyses. Money market rates have fallen even further to record lows, and the loan interest 
rates  charged  by  banks  have  declined.  Our  substantive  monetary  policy  easing  is  already 
being felt in the real economy.  
In addition to lowering the policy interest rate quickly and sharply, we have resorted to highly 
non-standard liquidity operations in order to provide the financial system with the liquidity that 
was so urgently needed. Last October, we adopted a “fixed-rate full allotment” procedure in 
all our open market operations. This gives banks as much central bank liquidity as they want 
at our key policy interest rate, against an expanded list of eligible collateral. Coupled with the 
fact  that  essentially  all  financially  sound  euro  area  credit  institutions  can  participate  in  the 
Eurosystem's  refinancing  operations,  these  measures  have  significantly  eased  the  banks’ 
balance  sheet  constraints,  thereby  avoiding  a  sudden  stop  in  the  supply  of  credit  and  the 
emergence of a systemic crisis.  
At the Governing Council meeting in early May, we decided to extend the maturity range of 
these liquidity-providing operations from six to 12 months. Furthermore, we decided that the 
Eurosystem  will  purchase  euro-denominated  covered  bonds  issued  in  the  euro  area.  Last 
week we announced the details of this purchase programme. These decisions were taken to 
enhance credit support to the economy through banks. More specifically, all these measures 
aim  to  promote  the  ongoing  decline  in  money  market  term  rates,  to  encourage  banks  to 
maintain  and  expand  their  lending  to  clients,  to  improve  market  liquidity  in  important 
segments of the private debt security market, and to ease funding conditions for banks and 
enterprises.  These  measures  take  into  account  the  central  role  played  by  the  euro  area 
banking system in financing the economy. This contrasts with the financial structure of other 
economic regions.  
The  above-mentioned  measures  led  to  a  significant  increase  in  the  Eurosystem’s  balance 
sheet: it reached a peak of 19% of GDP in December 2008 from 10% of GDP in mid-2007, 
up by €850 billion. This increase in the size of the balance sheet corresponds to a higher 
level of outstanding refinancing operations, and has consequently increased the amount of 
risk  borne  by  the  Eurosystem.  Since  its  peak  in  December,  the  size  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
balance sheet has declined by around €300 billion to 15% of GDP in May 2009. This decline 
suggests a gradual increase in money market activity, at least for very short maturities. The 
fact  that  we  have  taken  on  additional  risk  is  no  coincidence.  Whenever  liquidity  dries  up 
because market participants are reluctant to lend to each other, the central bank has to step 
in, but at the same time not put its reputation at risk.  
To  summarise,  we  have  employed  a  wide  range  of  measures  to  counter  the  effect  of  the 
financial and economic crisis. The approach we have followed has been tailored to the needs 
of the euro area, where the banking system plays a more important role in financing than in 
other  major  economies.  These  differences  are  important  for  the  implementation  and 
transmission  of  monetary  policy,  and  therefore  the  Eurosystem’s  reactions  to  the  crisis 
cannot be compared directly with those of other leading central banks. 
Fiscal policy measures  
Let me now turn to the fiscal policy reaction to the economic crisis. Fiscal authorities in the 
euro  area  have  demonstrated  their  willingness  and  capacity  to  act  rapidly  and  in  a 
coordinated  manner  in  exceptional  circumstances.  It  is  important  to  distinguish  between 
measures  intended  to  support  the  banking  sector  and  fiscal  policy  measures  aimed  at 
stimulating demand.  
4 
 BIS Review 72/2009
Support for the banking sector 
Government support for the banking sector was necessary; it has safeguarded the stability of 
the financial system. The price of this success, however, is that governments have incurred 
substantial fiscal costs and credit risks that are ultimately borne by taxpayers. Following the 
adoption of a concerted European action plan on 12 October 2008, euro area governments 
announced  national  measures  to  support  the  banking  sector.  These  measures  consist  of 
government  guarantees  for  interbank  lending,  recapitalisation  of  financial  institutions  in 
difficulty, increase the coverage of retail deposit insurance and asset relief schemes. Overall, 
euro area governments committed about 23% of euro area GDP to financial sector support 
measures.  
For the euro area, the various support measures adopted so far are expected to have only a 
small  direct  impact  on  government  deficits,  whereas  the  impact  on  debt  is  expected  to  be 
about 3% of GDP. Finally, contingent liabilities related to the financial rescue measures are 
expected  to  be  about  8%  of  GDP,  excluding  government  guarantees  on  retail  deposits. 
These figures, however, do not reflect the very different developments taking place across 
euro area countries.  
Between  end-September  and  end-October  2008,  concurrent  to  the  announcement  of  the 
broad-based bank rescue packages, an adverse shift in market sentiment towards sovereign 
borrowers  occurred.  It  became  more  expensive  to  insure  against  the  default  of  euro  area 
countries,  and  this  change  of  mood  was  reflected  in  significantly  higher  sovereign  CDS 
premia for euro area countries. This would suggest that the bank rescue packages brought 
about an increase in public sector credit risk.  
At  the  same  time,  long-term  government  bond  yield  spreads  vis-à-vis  Germany  have 
widened substantially for most euro area countries. These spreads mainly reflect perceptions 
of  differing  liquidity  and  credit  risk  among  countries.  The  fact  that  developments  in 
government bond yield spreads have mirrored higher sovereign CDS premia suggests that 
concerns  about  fiscal  sustainability  have  become  an  important  factor,  affecting  investors’ 
perceptions.  In  particular,  government  bond  yield  spreads  seem  to  be  higher  in  those 
Member  States  regarded  as  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  current  environment.  Among  the 
relevant factors are current fiscal imbalances, but also external imbalances, and they could 
ultimately have repercussions on the general government budget. Past fiscal behaviour may 
also play a role.  
Rising  long-term  government  bond  yields  may  only  have  a  gradual  impact  on  government 
borrowing costs, as changes in interest rates only affect the cost of newly issued debt and 
debt at variable interest rates. However, they may signal both a reduced willingness on the 
part of investors to provide long-term funding as well as difficulty in accessing capital market 
funds.  So  far,  most  euro  area  countries  have  enjoyed  relatively  low  interest  rates  on  new 
government  debt  issuance,  despite  facing  considerably  more  difficult  market  conditions. 
Looking  ahead,  as  the  economy  recovers  and  competition  for  financing  increases, 
governments may face higher bond yields again.  
Discretionary use of fiscal policy  
In  addition  to  providing  financial  support  to  the  banking  sector,  euro  area  governments 
reacted forcefully to counter the negative impact of the financial turmoil on the real economy. 
Besides the operation of automatic stabilisers, which provide a significant cushion to the euro 
area economy by way of lower tax revenues and higher spending on unemployment benefits, 
the  discretionary  use  of  fiscal  policy  helped  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  the  global  economic 
downturn.  However,  fiscal  stimulus measures  need  to  remain  temporary  and  be  combined 
with measures that ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium run. This will preserve trust 
in the sustainability of public finances and support both the recovery and long-term economic 
growth. 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 5
For  2009  and  2010,  the  European  Commission  estimates  the  overall  fiscal  impulse  to  the 
euro  area  economy,  as  measured  by  the  change  in  the  general  government  deficit,  to  be 
about 4.6% of GDP, 60% of which is due to the automatic stabilisers. 
While the recent coordinated fiscal loosening has been broadly accepted as a legitimate and 
necessary step in the short run, given the exceptional economic circumstances, it also entails 
a  significant  fiscal  burden.  The  latest  available  economic  forecasts  (EC  Spring  2009 
Economic  Forecasts)  point  to  dramatic  developments  in  euro  area  public  finances.  In 
addition to a rapidly deteriorating general government deficit, which is expected to be above 
6% of euro area GDP in 2010, the euro area debt ratio will increase by about 15 percentage 
points  to  above  80%  of  GDP  by  2010.  In  both  2009  and  2010  13  out  of  16  euro  area 
countries are expected to have a budget deficit above the 3% of GDP reference value.  
These  figures  are  very  high,  though  they  compare  favourably  with  other  major  economic 
regions  that  have  also  provided  a  substantial  fiscal  impulse  to  their  economy.  The  budget 
deficit  in  both  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States  is  projected  to  be  about  14%  of 
GDP in 2010, whereas in Japan it is projected to be about 9% of GDP.  
Against this backdrop, euro area countries must reject calls for additional fiscal loosening. In 
the  current  environment,  any  further  fiscal  stimulus  is  likely  to  be  counterproductive  as  it 
could hamper the economic recovery in two ways. First of all, even higher fiscal deficits could 
fuel market concerns about a country’s ability to meet its future debt obligations, thus putting 
upward  pressure  on  interest  rates.  Second,  increasing  budget  deficits  would  also  raise 
concerns  about  a  higher  tax  burden  in  the  future,  thus  inducing  consumers  to  save  rather 
than spend any additional income.  
Let me now turn to two important questions regarding the fiscal authorities’ response to the 
economic crisis.  First, do the measures have the potential to restore  confidence?  Second, 
are those measures effective?  
The  financial  sector  support  measures,  combined  with  the  Eurosystem’s  enhanced  credit 
support  measures,  were  successful  in  safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  financial  system. 
Together, these initiatives have the potential to tackle the crisis of confidence at its root also 
by taking into account the fundamental role of the banking sector in the functioning of the 
economy. The restructuring of the banking sector is the top policy priority, and progress in 
this domain is the key to economic recovery. Given the challenges which lie ahead, banks 
should  take  appropriate  measures  to  strengthen  their  capital  base  and,  where  necessary, 
take full advantage of government support and in particular recapitalisation measures. 
As regards fiscal policy response, let me first say that the merits of discretionary measures 
are less obvious than those safeguarding the functioning of the financial system. In principle, 
automatic stabilisers should represent the first line of defence during an economic downturn. 
However, under exceptional circumstances and if a country has room for manoeuvre, fiscal 
policy  can  contribute  to  macroeconomic  stability  also  through  discretionary  actions.  When 
assessing  the  merits  of  the  different  measures  taken,  we  should  differentiate  between 
measures  such  as  (1)  expenditure  increases  and  (2)  tax  cuts,  and  (3)  measures  like 
guarantees and loan subsidies to specific sectors of the economy. In fact, although support 
for  credit-constrained  firms  could  ease  their  access  to  credit  and  the  restructuring  of  their 
balance sheets, it may also lead to an inefficient allocation of capital and the propping up of 
companies  that  would  otherwise  fail.  Moreover,  this  type  of  support  would  be  difficult  to 
reverse and might act as a brake on long-term growth. 
Turning to the effectiveness of fiscal measures to stimulate demand (i.e. spending increases 
and tax cuts), it crucially depends on the behaviour of economic agents, and that in turn also 
affects the size of the fiscal multipliers (i.e. the GDP effect of fiscal stimulus measures). The 
expectation that higher government spending today may lead to higher taxation in the future 
would induce both households and firms to save rather spend any additional income, thus 
reducing  the  size  of  the  fiscal  multiplier.  Therefore,  the  public  perception  of  overall  fiscal 
sustainability  plays  an  important  role  in  the  impact  of  the  respective  national  fiscal  stimuli. 
6 
 BIS Review 72/2009
The effectiveness of fiscal stimulus measures also depends on the extent to which private 
investors respond positively to tax policy, with their investments likely to be more responsive 
in the case of “temporary” tax breaks, as they provide an incentive to bring forward future 
investment plans. At the same time, there is a risk that fiscal stimulus measures may crowd 
out private investment by putting upward pressure on interest rates.  
As regards the size of the fiscal multiplier, empirical studies (e.g. Perotti (2002), Blanchard 
and  Perotti  (2002),  IMF  WEO  (2008))  show  that  in  the  short  term  (i.e.  after  one  quarter) 
public  spending  multipliers  are  larger  than  tax  multipliers.  By  contrast,  in  the  long  term, 
revenue  measures  are  associated  with  higher  growth  and  faster  recoveries.  These  results 
reflect the theoretical Keynesian prediction that some of the higher disposable income from a 
tax  cut  is  saved,  while  government  purchases  of  goods  and  services  directly  affect  the 
aggregate  demand.  However,  the  evidence  on  the  relative  effectiveness  of  the  different 
measures is mixed. For the euro area, the measures adopted by governments are estimated 
to  have  a  short-lived  impact  on  real  GDP  growth,  limited  to  the  year  in  which  they  are 
introduced.  
Besides  these  factors,  the  effectiveness  of  any  stimulus  package  will  depend  to  a  large 
extent  on  its  design  and  implementation.  Fiscal  stimulus  measures  should  be  “timely, 
temporary  and  targeted”.  “Timely”  means  that  the  measures  take  effect  when  they  are 
needed; any delays in assessing the cyclical situation, in taking decisions and implementing 
the measures may fail to prevent a drop in output. “Temporary” implies that the fiscal impulse 
should only last as long as the recession in question. “Targeted” relates to the expected size 
of the multiplier effect. In addition to these “TTT” criteria, the measures should be consistent 
with other policy objectives such as fiscal sustainability, long-term economic growth and the 
functioning of the market mechanism. 
Implications of policy measures 
The  current  crisis  has  increased  the  role  of  the  government  in  the  economy.  Some  bank 
rescue  operations  have  involved  outright  nationalisations,  so  governments  now  have 
significant  exposure  to  the  financial  sector.  Similarly,  the  large  fiscal  stimuli  packages 
adopted by many countries have led to a large increase in the size of the public sector in the 
economy.  
At the same time, the turmoil is being interpreted by some as a crisis of the market economy. 
It has encouraged critics of the market economy to speak out and demand a much larger role 
in the economy for governments. 
The  financial  system  clearly  needs  a  fundamental  overhaul.  Financial  institutions  have  to 
take a different approach and adopt appropriate incentives. Risk-takers should be liable and 
not only reap the rewards of their actions but also bear responsibility for their consequences. 
We  need  to  strengthen  the  regulation  of  the  financial  system,  and  in  particular,  we  must 
improve  the  international  cooperation  between  national  supervisors  of  the  financial  sector. 
But let me hasten to add that policy-makers must not get carried away by recent events; they 
should  act  in  a  measured  way,  and  not  throw  the  baby  out  with  the  bathwater.  While 
governments  have  had  no  alternative  but  to  support  systemically  relevant  financial 
institutions,  they  should,  as  a  rule,  keep  their  assistance  to  specific  sectors  or  firms  to  a 
minimum.  And  when  they  do  intervene,  they  should  prepare  clear  and  credible  exit 
strategies. No matter how serious the current crisis is, the market economy remains the best 
way  to  organise  our  economic  affairs.  It  is  only  20  years  ago  since  the  breakdown  of  the 
socialist system in eastern Europe, which demonstrated the failures of central planning and 
heavy government involvement. Therefore, once we emerge from the current crisis, the role 
of government in the economy needs to be scaled back. Its presence in the banking sector 
must  be  gradually  reduced  as  the  restructuring  of  the  sector  starts  to  take  effect.  The 
stimulus measures must be reversed in due course. We have seen in the past how so-called 
temporary measures ended up being permanent. 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 7
An exit strategy is a comprehensive programme to withdraw and neutralise measures taken 
during the financial crisis, without causing any harm to the economy. If they have no well-
defined  exit  strategy,  governments  may  get  bogged  down  and  the  positive  impact  of  the 
measures taken may be undermined. A well thought-out exit strategy is needed to reassure 
economic agents that a timely restoration of the level playing field in the different sectors of 
the economy is the ultimate objective. As such, an exit strategy needs to contain clear criteria 
about  the  timing  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  financial  support  and  the  reversal  of  the  fiscal 
stimuli. 
In principle, the extra government debt incurred by asset acquisition should be covered by 
future  sales  of  these  assets.  The  state  guarantees  should  serve  to  stabilise  the  banking 
system and would then not need to be called on.  
As to the fiscal stimuli, euro area governments did not lay out clear exit strategies when they 
announced  the  stimuli.  Some  of  their  measures  do  not  expire  automatically  or  are  not 
explicitly designed to be temporary. The possible difficulties of reversing the fiscal stimulus 
packages  may  hinder  the  return  to  sound  fiscal  positions  in  the  short  run.  Under  these 
circumstances, the peer pressure mechanism, on which the EU fiscal framework is based, 
may be weakened thus making more difficult a return to sound fiscal policies. As a matter of 
fact, countries with high fiscal deficits may be tempted not to put political pressure on their 
peers.  Protracted  excessive  deficits  may  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  EU  fiscal 
framework,  thus  casting  doubts  on  fiscal  sustainability  and  jeopardising  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact.  
In this respect, let me say that the current crisis has taught us an important lesson about the 
importance of preserving the public’s trust in the soundness of public finances. At the current 
juncture, euro area governments must make credible commitments to return to sound fiscal 
policies. Doing so in full compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact is the most credible 
exit strategy. This requires, first, a full reversal of the fiscal stimulus measures taken so far. 
This is necessary to ensure an efficient allocation of resources by minimising distortions in 
the incentives of economic agents and by avoiding a permanent increase in the size of the 
public  sector.  Second,  governments  must  live  up  to  their  commitment  to  maintain  fiscal 
discipline.  This  means  that  credible  fiscal  consolidation  plans  have  to  be  implemented  as 
early as possible, including a consolidation effort of at least 1% of GDP per annum where 
necessary. If euro area countries do not practise fiscal restraint seriously, the debt dynamics 
will be in danger of spiralling out of control. 
The  current  crisis  has  shown  how  important  it  is  for  countries  to  consolidate  during  good 
economic  times  and  to  build  a  “fiscal  reservoir”  from  which  they  can  draw  in  periods  of 
“drought”. Many euro area countries failed to do so. They suddenly found themselves in this 
turbulent environment burdened by high fiscal deficits and debt ratios. Their room for fiscal 
manoeuvre  was  very  limited,  as  was  their  capacity  to  adopt  effective  counter-cyclical 
measures when they were most needed. In addition, the developments in government bond 
yield  spreads  since  last  autumn  have  shown  that,  in  uncertain  times,  financial  markets 
increasingly discriminate between countries on the basis of their creditworthiness, including 
fiscal fundamentals.  
We  are  seeing  the  first,  timid  signs  of  an  economic  recovery;  investors  are  regaining  their 
appetite for risk. It is critical that euro area governments boost confidence in the soundness 
of  public  finances  as  an  element  to  support  both  the  recovery  and  long-term  economic 
growth. 
As regards monetary policy, it is equally important to draw up a strategy for withdrawing in 
due  course  the  extraordinary  measures  that  have  been  implemented  or  announced.  The 
ECB obviously cannot maintain the current degree of support indefinitely. We are providing 
substantial  short-term  support  to  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy,  and  thereby 
ultimately  maintaining  price  stability.  But  what  if  macroeconomic  conditions  warrant  a 
removal of monetary stimulus? 
8 
 BIS Review 72/2009
In fact, we are prepared to take appropriate actions once the macroeconomic environment 
improves. We will ensure that the measures taken can be quickly unwound and the liquidity 
provided  absorbed.  This  includes,  for  instance,  unwinding  the  increase  in  the  average 
maturity  of  our  refinancing  operations.  Being  prepared  to  exit  from  our  non-standard 
measures  –  as  soon  as  the  macroeconomic  conditions  justify  such  a  move  –  helps  to 
maintain price stability over the medium term and to ensure a firm anchoring of longer-term 
inflation expectations.  
Any changes in the operational framework will of course be communicated in good time. The 
ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  remain  committed  to  pursuing  a  timely  and  transparent 
communication policy.  
Likewise,  the  financial  sector  needs  to  live  up  to  its  responsibilities  and  not  to  become 
dependent on long-term funding through the ECB’s refinancing operations. It is important that 
the  financial  sector  also  helps  to  restore  confidence  among  banks.  Japan,  since  the  early 
1990s, has exemplified the economic damage that can result from not promptly restructuring 
an ailing financial system.  
Some  earlier  attempts  by  policy-makers  to  stimulate  the  economy  during  downturns  were 
ineffective and only led to higher inflation. The 1970s come to mind, when the surge in oil 
prices  led  to  persistently  high  inflation  and  lower  economic  growth.  Unsurprisingly,  some 
people have been wondering if the exceptional measures taken by central banks and fiscal 
authorities  during  the  current  crisis  will  result  in  another  period  of  high  inflation.  But  the 
situation  today  is  very  different  from  the  1970s.  The  Eurosystem’s  objective  is  to  maintain 
price stability in the medium term, and nothing else. All our monetary policy decisions since 
the  financial  crisis  erupted  have  been  taken  in  order  to  safeguard  price  stability  in  a 
symmetric  way.  Maintaining  price  stability  will  remain  the  only  objective  that  guides  our 
decisions. This implies that the very accommodative monetary policy stance we are pursuing 
now will be reversed once the economy starts to recover and upside risks to price stability 
emerge again. The people of the euro area can trust our commitment to deliver price stability 
because they know we are independent and not subject to outside influence.  
Lessons for monetary policy from the crisis 
Let me now turn to the most important lessons I think we can draw from the current crisis 
with respect to monetary policy. I would like to raise three points.  
First of all, the current crisis demonstrates, once again, how important it is for central banks 
to remain independent of political influence. Even if we are experiencing the worst economic 
downturn  since  the  1930s,  long-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  remain  solidly 
anchored in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability. This represents the strongest and 
most reassuring protection against a deflationary spiral, and it is the result of market agents 
trusting  our  commitment  and  ability  to  deliver  price  stability.  Our  independence,  our  clear 
mandate and our precise definition of price stability have been crucial factors in maintaining 
inflation expectations firmly anchored during these challenging times. 
Secondly, although central banks may be charged with additional tasks in the aftermath of 
the crisis, their primary objective must remain the maintenance of price stability. We cannot 
allow  any  conflicts  of interest  to arise.  The  high-level  expert  group  headed  by  Jacques  de 
Larosière,  former  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Managing  Director  of  the  IMF,  has 
identified  a  number  of  weaknesses  in  the  supervisory  framework  both  inside  and  outside 
Europe that contributed to the build-up of the current crisis. One of the group’s proposals is 
to give the ECB more responsibility for so-called macro-prudential supervision. This means 
supervision that aims to limit the risk of distress in the financial system as a whole, but does 
not extend to supervision of individual financial institutions.  
Building  on  the  de  Larosière  report,  the  European  Commission  has  recently  proposed  to 
establish a European Systemic Risk Council (ESRC), chaired by the ECB President. 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 9
The  ECB  welcomes  the  Commission’s  proposal.  Establishing  the  ESRC  will  substantially 
improve the present institutional arrangements for risk assessment at EU level. Much of the 
work that will be done by the ESRC also be useful for assessing risks to price stability. But I 
would also like to stress that maintaining price stability must remain the primary objective of 
the Eurosystem. With only one tool at our disposal – the interest rate – we cannot achieve 
more than one objective. Therefore, it is particularly important for any risk warnings from the 
new Council to be translated into policy action by the responsible authorities as effectively as 
possible.  The  ECB  cannot  use  its  policy  interest  rate  to  mitigate  risks  that  are  not  directly 
related to price stability. At the same time, price stability is the best contribution we can make 
to financial stability.  
My third point concerns the important role played by monetary analysis – and in particular the 
role of asset prices – when assessing the risks to price stability over the medium term. Price 
stability  is  our  primary  objective,  but  this  does  not  imply  that  we  only  focus  on  short  to 
medium-term movements in inflation. Any build-up of financial imbalances which could pose 
risks to price stability in the longer term could be overlooked under a restrictive short-term 
approach. The ECB’s assessment of risks to price stability is well equipped to detect these 
types of risk as it is based on a comprehensive economic and monetary analysis – its well-
known two-pillar strategy. The first pillar, the economic analysis, is common to most central 
banks.  This  analysis  basically  consists  of  identifying  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  short  to 
medium term by analysing the interplay between aggregate supply and aggregate demand in 
the economy. 
The second pillar, the monetary analysis, plays a more prominent role at the ECB than at 
other  central  banks.  The  ECB  pays  special  attention  to  monetary  developments  in 
recognition of the fact that monetary growth and inflation are closely related in the medium to 
long term. Analysing developments in credit, and in particular loans to the private sector, is 
helpful in extracting the relevant signals from the monetary developments. This analysis also 
implies a regular monitoring of asset price developments and their implications. This analysis 
will become even more prominent in the future. The ECB has been a pioneer when it comes 
to  monetary  analysis,  and  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  we  can  say  that  the  monetary 
analysis  served  us  well  in  recent  years.  Back  in  2005,  the  monetary  analysis  was  already 
indicating  upward  risks  to  price  stability  coming  from  strong  growth  in  money  and  credit, 
driven  by  a  rapid  increase  in  asset  prices,  and  house  prices  in  particular.  This  led  us  to 
increase interest rates in a series of steps starting in December 2005, at a time when the 
economic  analysis  was  providing  more  mixed  signals.  The  decision  to  tighten  monetary 
policy at an early stage may be one reason why financial imbalances in the euro area did not 
develop as far as in some other countries.  
Conclusion  
To conclude, let me summarise my main points. The world economy is in its worst recession 
since  the  1930s,  and  the  euro  area  economy  is  no  exception.  The  fiscal  and  monetary 
authorities have  responded  forcefully  and  their  efforts  are  slowly  starting  to  bear  fruit.  The 
pace  of  the  economic  contraction  appears  to  be  slowing  down,  and  confidence  indicators 
have improved somewhat. 
The  crisis  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  sound  public  finances.  Governments  need  to 
consolidate during good economic times in order to have room for manoeuvre during not-so-
good times.  
With  respect  to  monetary  policy,  the  crisis  has  demonstrated  the  importance  of  having  an 
independent  central  bank  credibly  committed  to  price  stability.  The  pre-crisis  years  also 
showed  the  usefulness  of  the  monetary  analysis,  the  second  pillar  in  the  Eurosystem’s 
assessment  of  risks  to  price  stability.  In  particular,  it  helped  to  maintain  a  medium-term 
perspective. 
10 
 BIS Review 72/2009
Looking ahead, the fiscal and monetary authorities have an important role in sustaining the 
economic recovery. Governments must devise and enact credible strategies to exit from the 
banking sector and to ensure that the discretionary policy measures adopted during the crisis 
will be reversed. Their full compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact is the best tool to 
solidly anchor market expectations. Furthermore, the ECB’s commitment to maintaining price 
stability is the best contribution monetary policy can make to sustaining economic recovery 
and long-term economic growth.  
The ECB is well prepared to take appropriate action and also to exit from its non-standard 
monetary  policy  and  liquidity  management  measures  in  a  credible  manner  once  the 
macroeconomic environment improves.  
Most importantly, we will continue to deliver on what we are expected to deliver, which is to 
maintain price stability, and to provide an anchor of confidence in difficult times. 
References 
Blanchard, O. and R. Perotti (2002). "An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of 
Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output." Quarterly Journal of Economics 
117(4): 1329-1368. 
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook (2008). Chapter 5 "Fiscal Policy as a 
countercyclical tool." October 
Perotti, R. (2002). "Estimating the effects of fiscal policy in OECD countries." ECB Working 
Paper no. 168. 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 11
