European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
15 January 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our first 
press conference of 2009. Let me therefore wish you all a very Happy New Year. I would 
also like to take this opportunity to welcome Slovakia as the 16th country to adopt the euro 
as  its  currency.  Accordingly,  Mr  Šramko,  the  Governor  of  Národná  banka  Slovenska, 
became a member of the Governing Council on 1 January 2009. Following the adoption of 
the euro by Slovakia there are now 329 million citizens using the euro as their currency. 
We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council, which was 
also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
to reduce the interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by a 
further 50 basis points, bringing the total reduction since 8 October 2008 to 225 basis points. 
Today’s decision takes into account that inflationary pressures have continued to diminish, 
owing  in  particular  to  the  further  weakening  in  the  economic  outlook.  Looking  forward,  we 
continue to expect inflation rates in the euro area to be in line with price stability over the 
policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  incomes 
and savings. After today’s decision we consider risks to price stability over the medium term 
to  be  broadly  balanced.  This  takes  into  account  the  latest  economic  data  releases  and 
survey information, which add clear further evidence to the assessment that the euro area is 
experiencing a significant slowdown, largely related to the effects of the intensification and 
broadening of the financial turmoil. Both global demand and euro area demand are likely to 
be dampened for a protracted period. Monetary expansion is moderating further, supporting 
the assessment that inflationary pressures and risks are diminishing. All in all, the level of 
uncertainty remains exceptionally high. The Governing Council will continue to keep inflation 
expectations firmly anchored in line with its medium-term objective of inflation rates below, 
but  close  to,  2%.  This  supports  sustainable  growth  and  employment  and  contributes  to 
financial stability. Accordingly, we will continue to monitor very closely all developments over 
the period ahead. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Since September 2008 the financial market turmoil has intensified and broadened. Tensions 
have  increasingly  spilled  over  from  the  financial  sector  into  the  real  economy.  As  a  result, 
economic activity throughout the world, including in the euro area, has weakened further. In 
particular,  foreign  demand  for  euro  area  exports  has  declined,  and  euro  area  domestic 
activity  has  contracted  in  the  face  of  weaker  demand  prospects  and  tighter  financing 
conditions. The survey data and monthly indicators for November and December that have 
become  available  since  our  last  meeting  clearly  point  to  a  further  weakening  of  economic 
activity  around  the  turn  of  the  year,  indicating  the  materialisation  of  previously  identified 
downside risks to activity.  
Looking further ahead, on the basis of our current analysis and assessment, we continue to 
see global economic weakness and very sluggish domestic demand persisting in the coming 
quarters as the impact of the financial tensions on activity continues. At the same time, we 
expect the fall in commodity prices to support real disposable income in the period ahead. 
Furthermore, the euro area should over time reap the full benefit from the effects of policy 
measures announced over recent weeks. 
BIS Review 5/2009 
 1
In the view of the Governing Council, this outlook for the economy remains surrounded by an 
exceptionally high degree of uncertainty. Overall, risks to economic growth remain clearly on 
the downside. They relate mainly to the potential for a stronger impact on the real economy 
of  the  turmoil  in  financial  markets,  as  well  as  to  concerns  about  the  emergence  and 
intensification of protectionist pressures and to possible adverse developments in the world 
economy stemming from a disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
It is crucial that all parties concerned make their contribution to lay sound foundations for a 
sustainable  recovery.  For  this  to  materialise  as  early  as  possible,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance to maintain discipline and a medium-term perspective in macroeconomic policy-
making,  pursuing  a  stability-oriented  and  sustainable  approach.  This  is  the  best  way  to 
preserve  and  enhance  confidence.  The  significant  measures  being  implemented  by 
governments  to  deal  with  the  financial  turmoil  should  help  to  ensure  trust  in  the  financial 
system and to ease constraints on credit supply to companies and households.  
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation has declined substantially since the 
middle of 2008, when it peaked at 4.0%. HICP inflation was 1.6% in December, after 2.1% in 
November.  As  we  have  emphasised  on  previous  occasions,  the  significant  decline  in 
headline  inflation  in  the  second  half  of  2008  reflects  mainly  the  sharp  falls  in  global 
commodity prices over the past few months.  
Looking  forward,  lower  commodity  prices  and  weakening  demand  confirm  that  inflationary 
pressures in the euro area are diminishing. Owing mainly to base effects stemming from the 
past  behaviour  of  energy  prices,  headline  annual  inflation  rates  are  projected  to  decline 
further in the coming months, possibly reaching very low levels at mid-year. However, also 
owing  to  base  effects  stemming  from  past  energy  price  developments,  inflation  rates  are 
expected to increase again in the second half of the year. Hence it is likely that HICP inflation 
rates will fluctuate sharply during 2009. Such short-term  volatility is, however, not relevant 
from a monetary policy perspective. Looking over the policy-relevant, medium-term horizon, 
annual  HICP  inflation  is  expected  to  be  in  line  with  price  stability.  This  assessment  is 
supported by available indicators of inflation expectations for the medium term.  
Risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  are  broadly  balanced.  Unexpected  further 
declines in commodity prices or a stronger than expected slowdown in the economy could 
put  downward  pressure  on  inflation,  while  upside  risks  to  price  stability  could  materialise 
particularly  if  the  recent  fall  in  commodity  prices  were  to  reverse  or  if  domestic  price 
pressures turn out to be stronger than assumed. It is therefore crucial that price and wage-
setters fully live up to their responsibilities.  
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  latest  evidence  confirms  a  moderating  rate  of 
monetary  expansion  in  the  euro  area.  Monetary  trends  therefore  support  the  view  that 
inflationary pressures and risks are diminishing. 
In  analysing  monetary  developments  it  should be  recognised  that  the  intensification  of  the 
financial  market  turmoil  since  mid-September  has  the  potential  to  affect  the  evolution  of 
monetary  aggregates  significantly.  Recent  money  and  credit  data  indicate  that  this  has 
already  had  a  substantial  impact  on  the  behaviour  of  market  participants.  Both  the  broad 
aggregate M3 and, in particular, the components of M3 that are most closely related to the 
ongoing  financial  tensions  –  such  as  holdings  of  money  market  funds  –  have  shown  high 
month-to-month volatility of late. Overall, however, looking to the extent possible through this 
volatility,  the  rate  of  broad  money  growth  continues  to  moderate  in  line  with  the  trend 
established  over  the  past  18  months,  with  the  intensification  of  financial  tensions  since 
September leading to significant substitution among the components of M3, rather than, at 
least so far, sharp changes in the trend of M3 itself.  
Turning to the evolution of bank loans, the tightening of financing conditions resulting from 
the  intensification  of  the  financial  tensions  has  contributed  to  a  slowdown  in  the  flow  of 
monetary financial institution (MFI) loans to the non-financial private sector in recent months. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2009
More data and further analysis are necessary to form a robust judgement about the severity 
and scope of credit constraints and their possible implications for economic activity.  
To sum up, we decided to reduce the interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the 
Eurosystem by a further 50 basis points, bringing the total reduction since 8 October 2008 to 
225  basis  points.  Today’s  decision  takes  into  account  that  inflationary  pressures  have 
continued to diminish, owing in particular to the further weakening in the economic outlook. 
The  Governing  Council  recalls  its  operational  decision,  taken  on  18  December  2008,  to 
widen again the corridor formed by the rates on the Eurosystem’s standing facilities as of 21 
January 2009. Looking forward, we continue to expect inflation rates in the euro area to be in 
line with price stability over the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, thereby supporting the 
purchasing power of incomes and savings. After today’s decision we consider risks to price 
stability  over  the  medium-term  to  be  broadly  balanced.  This  takes  into  account  the  latest 
economic  data  releases  and  survey  information,  which  add  clear  further  evidence  to  the 
assessment that the euro area is experiencing a significant slowdown, largely related to the 
effects of the intensification and broadening of the financial turmoil. Both global demand and 
euro area demand are likely to be dampened for a protracted period. A cross-check of the 
outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  this  view. 
Monetary  expansion  is  moderating  further,  supporting  the  assessment  that  inflationary 
pressures and risks are diminishing. All in all, the level of uncertainty remains exceptionally 
high. The Governing Council will continue to keep inflation expectations firmly anchored in 
line with its medium-term objective of inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. This supports 
sustainable growth and employment and contributes to financial stability. Accordingly, we will 
continue to monitor very closely all developments over the period ahead. 
Regarding  fiscal  policies,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  European  Council’s 
reconfirmation  of  its  full  commitment  to  sustainable  public  finances.  In  this  respect,  the 
current  economic  situation  calls  for  particular  prudence  with  regard  to  the  adoption  of 
extensive fiscal stimulus measures, taking into account the particular fiscal situation in each 
country.  The  operation  of  automatic  stabilisers  will  provide  a  relatively  large  and  powerful 
fiscal  impulse  to  the  weakening  economy,  in  addition  to  already  announced  expansionary 
fiscal policy measures and the government support for the banking sector. Taken together, 
the  additional  measures  decided  so  far  put  a  considerable  burden  on  public  finances  in  a 
large number of euro area countries. If not reversed in due time, this will negatively affect in 
particular the younger and future generations. It is therefore essential to return to a credible 
commitment to medium-term budgetary objectives as soon as possible. The significant fiscal 
loosening  and  the  implied  increase  in  government  debt  should  in  any  case  not  risk 
undermining public confidence in the sustainability of public finances, thereby detracting from 
the effectiveness of a fiscal stimulus.  
Turning  to  structural  policies,  the  ongoing  period  of  weak  economic  activity  and  high 
uncertainty  about  the  economic  outlook  imply  the  need  to  strengthen  the  resilience  and 
flexibility of the euro area economy. Product market reforms should foster competition and 
speed up effective restructuring. Labour market reforms should help to facilitate appropriate 
wage-setting,  as  well  as  labour  mobility  across  sectors  and  regions.  The  current  situation 
should therefore be seen as a catalyst to foster the implementation of necessary domestic 
reforms in line with the principle of an open market economy with free competition. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 5/2009 
 3
