Stanley Fischer: Preparing for future crises  
Revised version of the paper by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, 
presented as the lunchtime speech at the 33rd Annual Symposium of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City, on "Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Stability", at Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming, 21 August 2009.  
The  main changes, which relate to the role of the Financial Stability Board, are  based on comments made  by 
Mario  Draghi.  I  am  grateful  to  Mervyn  King  for  extremely  helpful  comments  and  suggestions,  and  to  Joshua 
Shnek and Philip Yhelzon of the Bank of Israel for their assistance. 
 At last year's Symposium, "Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System", I had the 
privilege of delivering the concluding remarks of the conference, and ended with the forecast: 
"But if the authorities in the U.S. and abroad move rapidly and well to stabilize the financial 
situation, growth could be beginning to resume by the time we meet here again next year."  
Well,  here  we  are,  one  year  later,  and  growth  does  appear  to  be  beginning  to  resume.1 
Following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, the authorities, especially the central banks, in 
the U.S. and abroad did by and large move rapidly and well to stabilize the financial situation. 
But  the  route  the  world  economy  traveled  between  2008  and  August  2009  was  extremely 
bumpy,  uncertain,  and  at  times  frightening.  Further,  despite  the  encouraging  signs  of 
recovery, it is too early to declare the economic crisis over. Much remains to be done, not 
least in bringing banking systems back to health, and there are good – though not conclusive 
– reasons to fear a sub-standard recovery. Nonetheless, it is reasonable to declare that the 
worst of the crisis is behind us, and that the first signs of global growth have appeared earlier 
than was generally expected nine months ago.  
This, the worst recession in the advanced countries since the Great Depression, is bound to 
leave  major  marks  on  economies  –  on  financial  systems,  on  the  public  finances,  on 
economic policy, on economics, and more broadly. At its height, in the fourth quarter of 2008 
and  the  first  quarter  of  2009,  the  crisis  sparked  apocalyptic  articles  about  the  length  and 
depth  of  the  recession  and  the  possibility  that  we  were  facing  a  rerun  of  the  Great 
Depression, about the future of capitalism, about the decline of the west and the transfer of 
the  center  of  gravity  of  the  global  economy  and  its  leadership  to  the  emerging  countries, 
particularly China, about the decline of the role of the dollar, about reforming the international 
financial system, about reforming economics, and more. 
Fascinating and important as these issues are, I will focus on narrower economic structure 
and  policy  topics  relating  to  the  question  of  how  to  reduce  the  frequency  and  mitigate  the 
extent of future crises. Prior to the crisis, two main, interrelated, reasons had been given for 
fearing a major recession: global imbalances, which had been at the core of dire forecasts for 
several  years,  and  which  had  become  part  of  the  explanation  for  low  real  interest  rates 
during the first half of this decade; and financial fragility, based in part on the bubble in house 
prices, and in part on the complexities and vulnerabilities of the financial superstructure that 
had  been  built  up  around  mortgage  financing  and  associated  sophisticated  derivative 
instruments. Concerns about financial fragility had been mounting in the years leading up to 
the  crisis,  but  not  to  the  point  of  leading  to  major  changes  in  the  behavior  of  either  the 
authorities or most of the private financial sector.  
Both financial fragility and global imbalances contributed to the crisis, and in discussing the 
measures that need to be taken to reduce the frequency and mitigate the extent of crises, I 
                                                 
1   Among other indicators, IMF forecasts of growth for 2009 have stabilized, and their forecasts for all regions for 
growth in 2010 have begun to increase.  
BIS Review 107/2009 
 1
will deal with both – with financial issues and their implications for financial supervision, for 
corporate  governance,  and  for  central  banking,  and  with  global  imbalances  and  the 
international system.  
Financial sector reforms – regulatory and corporate governance 
I. 
In contrast to most of the financial crises of the previous decade, which started in emerging 
market countries, this crisis started in the center of the global financial system – in the United 
States – and spread outwards. In the words of Guillermo Ortiz, Governor of the Banco de 
Mexico, in August 2007: "This time it wasn't us". So the reforms that need to be implemented 
to reduce the frequency and depth of financial crises have to start at the center.  
The crisis has generated an explosion of reports recommending wide-ranging reforms of the 
financial  system.2  For  a  non-random  example,  the  G30  report,  Financial  Reform:  A 
Framework  for  Financial  Stability,  (January  2009)  presents  18  recommendations,  grouped 
under four headings: (i) "Gaps and weaknesses in the coverage of prudential regulation and 
supervision must be eliminated"; (ii) "The quality and effectiveness of prudential regulation 
and  supervision  must  be  improved";3  (iii)  "Institutional  policies  and  standards  must  be 
strengthened,  with  particular  emphasis  on  standards  for  governance,  risk  management, 
capital,  and  liquidity";  and  (iv)  "Financial  markets  and  products  must  be  made  more 
transparent, with better-aligned risk and prudential incentives. The infrastructure supporting 
such  markets  must  be  made  much  more  robust  and  resistant  to  potential  failures  of  even 
large financial institutions".  
Regulation and supervision of the financial system 
Systemic or macroprudential regulation. Almost all the reports on the reform of the financial 
system  see  a  need  for  macroprudential  or  systemic  regulation,  and  many  place  this 
responsibility with the central bank.  
The  U.S.  Treasury  report  of  June  2009  (p.11)  defines  macroprudential  supervision  as 
supervision that considers risks to the financial system as a whole, and recommends placing 
the responsibility for such regulation with the Fed. To give the Fed the capacity to meet this 
responsibility, the report (p.10) specifies that it should have the authority to regulate "[a]ny 
financial  firm  whose  combination  of  size,  leverage,  and  interconnectedness  could  pose  a 
threat to financial stability if it failed (Tier 1 FHC) …. regardless of whether the firm owns an 
insured  depository  institution".  Further,  the  prudential  standards  for  these  firms  should  be 
                                                 
2   The UK and US governments, and the EU Presidency, have all issued reports on financial sector reforms. See 
HM Treasury, Reforming financial markets, July 2009; US Department of the Treasury, Financial Regulatory 
Reform, June, 2009; and the Presidency Conclusions of the Council of the European Union, June 19, 2009, 
which essentially adopt the recommendations of the Report of the High-Level Group on Financial Supervision 
in the EU, chaired by Jacques de Larosiere, Brussels, February 25, 2009, with regard to the establishment of 
a European Systemic Risk Board, whose chair is to be elected by the members of the General Council of the 
ECB.  See  also:  the  G-30  report,  Financial  Reform:  A  Framework  for  Financial  Stability,  January  2009; 
Financial  Services  Authority,  UK,  The  Turner  Review:  A  regulatory  response  to  the  global  banking  crisis, 
March  2009;  Committee  on  Capital  Markets  Regulation,  The  Global  Financial  Crisis:  A  Plan  for  Regulatory 
Reform, May 2009, which includes a table comparing its 57 recommendations with those of other reports, pp 
221-225; a series of reports on regulatory issues by the Financial Stability Forum, starting with its early and 
important  paper  on  Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional  Resilience,  April  2008;  G-20,  Declaration  on 
Strengthening  the  Financial  System,  April  2009,  based  in  part  on  the  recommendations  by  the  Issing 
Committee, New Financial Order, February, 2009; IMF, Lessons of the Financial Crisis for Future Regulation 
of Financial Institutions and Markets and for Liquidity Management, February 2009.  
3   One of the recommendations under this heading relates to improved international regulatory and supervisory 
coordination, an important topic on which I touch only lightly in this speech. 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2009
stricter and more conservative than those applied to other financial firms; and the supervision 
of these firms should extend to the parent company and all its subsidiaries.4
By contrast, the report of the UK Treasury of July this year (Chapter 6) is more hesitant about 
assigning this responsibility, though it gives the impression that in the end it would give it to 
the Financial Services Authority (FSA), the unified financial system regulator.5 In developing 
its argument, the UK Treasury report takes note (p.91) of the "broad international consensus 
that  central  banks  should  be  independent  and  should  pursue  stable  inflation,  and  that 
regulators  should  pursue  risk-based  micro-prudential  regulation.  But  because  of  the  links 
between financial and macroeconomic stability, they need to work closely together to ensure 
macroeconomic stability." It further emphasizes that macroprudential tools "would need to be 
developed  and  agreed  at  an  international  level  and  implemented  in  a  standardised  way  in 
order to avoid jurisdictional and regulatory arbitrage." (p.92)  
What are these tools likely to be? Among the candidates are the central bank interest rate, 
and  tools  that  aim  directly  at  the  rate  of  credit  creation  and  the  overall  riskiness  of  the 
financial system, including capital and leverage ratios. In addition, it is possible to use and/or 
revive more specific regulatory tools that affect the financial system, for instance maximum 
loan to value ratios and other mortgage terms, margin requirements, and other regulations 
that  were  in  place  during  the  post-Great  Depression  and  post-World  War  II  period,  which 
have fallen out of use or been repealed. 
The  argument  about  macroprudential  regulation is  closely  related  to  a  topic  that  has  been 
discussed repeatedly at these conferences – how the central bank should respond to asset 
prices, and particularly to perceived asset price bubbles. This discussion has suffered from 
three distortions. First, if the issue is posed as that of how to burst a bubble when the only 
tool at the central bank's disposal is its interest rate, it is all too easy to argue that nothing 
should be done until the bubble bursts. The more general issue is whether the interest rate 
should  respond  to  asset  prices  and  the  financial  situation  more  generally,  and  there  is  a 
strong argument that the answer is yes. Second, there is no reason to confine the central 
bank's policy tools to the interest rate. Macroprudential tools can be added to its quiver. And 
third, the right question is not what the central bank should do, but rather what actions need 
to be taken by the authorities to maintain economic stability and support growth. There is a 
need for macroprudential regulation, and the question that should be discussed is that of the 
optimal institutional arrangements to this end.  
Historically supervision has been structured along sectoral lines – a supervisor of the banks, 
a  supervisor  of  the  insurance  companies,  and  so  forth.6  More  recently  the  approach  has 
been functional, in particular distinguishing between prudential (control of risk) and conduct-
of-business (with respect to both investor and consumer protection) supervision. In the twin-
peaks  Dutch  model,  prudential  supervision  of  the  entire  financial  system  is  located  in  the 
central  bank,  and  conduct  of  business  supervision  in  a  separate  organization,  outside  the 
central bank. In the Irish model, both functions are located in the central bank.7 In Australia, 
prudential and conduct-of-business supervision are located in separate organizations, both 
separate from the central bank. As already noted, in the UK the FSA – the Financial Services 
Authority – is responsible for supervision of the entire financial system, and is located outside 
                                                 
4  However the report complicates the message by adding that "[f]unctionally regulated and depository institution 
subsidiaries of a Tier 1 FHC should continue to be supervised and regulated primarily by their functional or 
bank regulator as the case may be." (p.11).  
5   By contrast, the report of the Conservative Party, "From Crisis to Confidence: Plan for Sound Banking" (July, 
2009) would abolish the FSA and assign the responsibility for bank and for macroprudential supervision to the 
Bank of England. 
I quote here from my concluding remarks last year. 
6 
7   More accurately, the organization is known as the "Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland". 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 3
the central bank. In the United States, supervisory responsibilities are widely dispersed, there 
are gaps in the system, and coordination has been difficult; the US Treasury plan seeks to 
deal with all these problems. 
I doubt that there is one best model. In Israel bank supervision is under the aegis of the Bank 
of Israel, and I found the presence of the bank supervisor and the information flows from his 
department  essential  in  enabling  us  to  deal  with  the  current  crisis.  Information  flows  are 
critical, and the plain fact is that information flows more readily within an organization than 
between organizations – which is one of the reasons to have prudential supervision within 
the central bank. Those who have not lived in bureaucracies might suggest that surely it is 
possible  to  ensure  rapid  and  accurate  information  flows  between  institutions.  It  may  be 
possible, but it is not the rule – and the importance of timely and accurate information flows 
to the making of policy decisions in a crisis cannot be exaggerated.  
In addition there is the crucial question of how to coordinate decisions on monetary policy 
and  macroprudential  policy.  There  may  be  occasions  –  as  in  recent  years  –  when 
considerations of inflation stabilization and those of systemic stability need to be balanced. If 
the responsibility for systemic stability is in the central bank, then it decides how to strike the 
balance. If not, someone else has to do so. Who? It could be the organization responsible for 
macroprudential  policy,  but  in  the  words  of  the  UK  Treasury,  financial  regulators  usually 
"pursue risk-based micro-prudential regulation"; that is to say, their concern is with the safety 
of individual institutions. If the decision is not made the responsibility of the central bank, it 
will  likely  end  up  with  an  inter-agency  committee  or  with  the  Treasury.  Inter-agency 
committees have difficulties reaching rapid decisions, and there would be great difficulty in 
coordinating decisions on monetary and macroprudential policy if one were under the control 
of the central bank and the other under the control of the Treasury.  
I conclude that the central bank should be given the responsibility, and the tools to do the 
macroprudential job. In the case of the United States, the US Treasury proposal gives the 
Fed the authority to regulate systemically important institutions, which is part of what it would 
need to fulfill its macroprudential responsibilities, but it is not clear what additional policy tools 
– such as regulation of financial institution capital ratios – it would be given.  
The size and complexity of the financial system is bound to be a consideration in determining 
the  structure  of  the  regulatory  system,  for  there  are  diseconomies  of  scale  in  running  any 
large  organization.  That  is  to  say,  the  case  for  a  single  financial-system  wide  regulator  is 
typically  stronger  in  a  smaller  economy.  In  addition,  the  political  system  is  likely  to  be 
cautious  about  making  any  individual  independent  institution  too  powerful.  Hence  financial 
supervision  in  a  large  economy,  such  as  that  of  the  United  States  is  likely  to  remain 
dispersed  among  several  institutions,  even  though  it  needs  to  be  coordinated,  and  even 
though that coordination is difficult.  
In a small economy, such as that of Israel, it would be possible to place the responsibility for 
the  prudential  supervision  of  the  entire  financial  system  in  the  central  bank,  and  to  make 
another institution or institutions responsible for conduct of business supervision.8 The new 
law of the Bank of Israel, which we hope will be passed soon, specifies supporting financial 
stability as one of the Bank's three main missions, and we believe that our ability to do so 
would be strengthened by implementing the Dutch model of financial sector supervision, with 
all prudential supervision in the central bank. 
As to whether macroprudential tools "need to be developed and agreed at an international 
level and implemented in a standardised way in order to avoid jurisdictional and regulatory 
arbitrage", as argued by the UK Treasury report, that would be desirable, but only if it can be 
                                                 
8   Conduct of business supervision could be in one organization or divided between consumer relations and 
investor relations aspects of behavior. 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2009
done quickly. If not, there is no time to wait and countries need to begin putting in place their 
national  approaches  to  macroprudential  supervision,  while  seeking  simultaneously  to 
coordinate internationally.9  
Capital and liquidity ratios. It is both likely and desirable that required capital ratios around 
the world will rise in the wake of the crisis, and that there will be a greater emphasis on Tier I 
capital. The Spanish model of countercyclical capital ratios has gained widespread support 
and is likely to be implemented in more countries, and this should contribute to stabilizing the 
business cycle.10 In effect the Spanish model treats the countercyclical element in a bank's 
capital as a reserve for use during a downturn, to enable banks to continue lending as the 
economic situation deteriorates.  
Given  the  constant  pressures  from  financial  institutions  to  find  ways  to  reduce  capital 
requirements,  including  through  off-balance  sheet  activities,  regulators  will  have  to  be  on 
their  toes  in  the  cat-and-mouse  game  between  regulator  and  regulatee,  to  ensure  that 
effective capital ratios do not get whittled away as a result of financial innovation and political 
pressures. 
In  addition  to  increasing  capital  ratios,  regulators  are  likely  to  introduce  required  liquidity 
ratios. Experience, including that of the last year, suggests that there should be a liquidity 
ratio, and that the range of assets defined as being liquid should be small. Here too is an 
area where international agreement and coordination would be desirable, but where national 
regulators should not wait for international agreement before introducing liquidity ratios.  
Financial institutions are likely to complain that higher capital ratios and the introduction of 
formal liquidity ratios increase their costs of doing business and are in effect tax increases. 
Given the vivid demonstration during the last year of the fragility of financial systems faced 
with  a  loss  of  confidence,  and  the  fact  that  their  survival  depends  on  government  backing 
and action – in the last year on a massive scale – it is fully appropriate that financial firms be 
required to self-insure against future crises by holding more capital and more liquidity. The 
tax  treatment  of  the  counter-cyclical  elements  in  the  additional  capital  may  need  to  be 
considered. 
Too big to fail, resolution  mechanisms, and  moral hazard. The experience of the last year 
has brought much-needed clarity to the "too big to fail" issue. Some of the great names of 
financial  history  have  disappeared  (e.g.  Lehman  Brothers),  some  companies  are  in  the 
process of working their way out of existence (e.g. AIG), many would not have survived but 
for government assistance (e.g. Citigroup), and many holders of their shares have suffered 
very large losses.  
It  is  likely  that  the  need  to  show  that  the  authorities  would  not  save  every  big  financial 
institution – in other words to counter the effect on financial behavior of the "too big to fail" 
doctrine – was a factor in the decision not to save Lehman. The worldwide panic brought on 
by the Lehman failure led directly to the decision two days later to provide massive aid to 
AIG, making it seem that "too big to fail" was alive and well. But the truth is that if some part 
of AIG survives, it will not recognizably be the same institution, and that the shareholders of 
the  original  AIG  will  not  recoup  their  investments  –  in  other  words,  it  has  failed.  Similarly, 
much of Citigroup is now state-owned, and its private sector shareholders have suffered very 
large losses.  
                                                 
9   For  a  concise  summary  of  the  issues  with  regard  to  international  coordination  and  possible  solutions,  see 
"Lessons of the Financial Crisis for Future Regulation of Financial Institutions and Markets and for Liquidity 
Management", IMF, February 2009, pp.19-21. 
10   See the joint Financial Stability Forum-Basel Committee on Bank Supervision Working Group on Bank Capital 
Issues  report,  Reducing  Procyclicality  Arising  from  the  Bank  Capital  Framework,  March  2009;  and  FSF, 
Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Addressing Procyclicality in the Financial System, April 2009.  
BIS Review 107/2009 
 5
So in what sense were these institutions too big to fail? In at least three senses. First, deposit 
holders  in  the  relevant  institutions  were  not  significantly  penalized:  as  the  financial  crisis 
deepened,  governments  either  gave  very  broad  guarantees  of  bank  deposits  or  at  a 
minimum, greatly augmented formal deposit insurance schemes. This was unavoidable and 
appropriate, given the need to prevent runs on banks. Second, bondholders in most financial 
institutions that received state aid and survived in some form were not penalized. The issue 
here was to prevent "runs" on bank debt, which would have taken the form of even larger 
system-wide  declines in  the  value  of  bank  debt,  and  enhanced  difficulties  for  the  banks  in 
mobilizing resources through debt issuance. The issue of the standing of bank debt in future 
crises is not yet resolved, but needs to be; indeed in some countries where bank debts have 
received government guarantees, a way out of those guarantees needs to be devised. And 
third, many firms that did survive needed the state's aid to do so: they have been given an 
opportunity to restore their fortunes and some of them are already apparently well into the 
process of doing that. This does not sit well with the general public, which seems to feel that 
a greater price should have been paid by both the owners of companies and their highest-
paid employees – even though many of the managers and high-paid employees lost large 
parts of their wealth as a result of the decline in the value of the stock and options they held 
in their institutions.  
Lehman  was  not  an  especially  big  firm.  Nonetheless,  because  its  operations  involved 
counterparties all over the U.S. and global financial systems, its failure created widespread 
damage. In its wake, the category of "too interconnected to fail" was added to "too big to fail". 
That is a nice category, but the real lesson is not about "big" versus "interconnected"; rather 
it is about trying to form a realistic estimate of the costs and benefits of alternative courses of 
action when faced with an institution in trouble.  
As a result of the crisis, it is now more widely understood that the key to dealing with financial 
institutions  in  trouble  is  that  of  resolution  mechanisms  –  that  is,  mechanisms  for  winding 
down a firm in trouble in an orderly way, as the FDIC typically does with a failing bank. In the 
words of Sheila Bair,11 "… resolution would concentrate on maintaining the liquidity and key 
activities of the organization so that the entity can be resolved in an orderly fashion without 
disrupting the functioning of the financial system. Losses would be borne by the stockholders 
and  bondholders  of  the  holding  company,  and  senior  management  would  be  replaced. 
Without a new comprehensive resolution regime, we will be forced to repeat the costly, ad 
hoc responses of the last year."  
 If there had been a usable resolution mechanism for Lehman, the company could have been 
taken over by the resolution agency – which would have had to have access to the funds 
needed to do this – and its liabilities run off over the course of time. Such an approach would 
have been much less costly than was the Lehman failure. Mervyn King has described the 
need for efficient resolution mechanisms by saying that every financial firm should be asked 
to write a will – a document that specifies how its assets are to be allocated in the event of its 
death. 
There  has  also  been  considerable  discussion  about  how  to  deal  with  very  large  financial 
firms,  including  those  that  are  very  large  relative  to  the  size  of  their  economies,  as  in  the 
case of the Icelandic banks, or two of the Swiss banks. It seems clear that countries should 
seek to limit the size of individual financial institutions relative to the size of the economy, 
both  to  reduce  the  costs  to  the  economy  of  the  firm's  failing,  and  to  reduce  the  overall 
vulnerability  of  the  financial  system  to  individual  failures.  One  way  to  do  this  is  to  require 
larger banks, or those of systemic importance, to have higher capital and prudential ratios. 
The  Swiss  authorities  are  strongly  encouraging  their  largest  banks  to  add  to  their  capital. 
                                                 
11   In testimony before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, July 23 2009. 
6 
 BIS Review 107/2009
Whether the authorities should use other regulatory mechanisms to this end is another issue 
that is on the table. 
Even  for  the  largest  economies,  there  is  a  case  for  discouraging  financial  institutions  from 
growing  excessively.  While  it  is  clear  that  there  are  economies  of  scale  in  commercial 
banking up to a certain point, it is less clear that those economies of scale continue at the 
very largest banks – and the costs of dealing with the failure of an individual bank rise as the 
size of the bank rises. It is even less clear that there are serious economies of scope in the 
financial sector – that is, there is little evidence that the financial supermarket view by which 
the  end  of  Glass-Steagall  was  justified  in  the  United  States  leads  to  more  efficient  and 
cheaper provision of financial services. And although investment banks became commercial 
banks during the last year, to obtain access to the Fed's facilities, there do not appear to be 
major economic benefits – and there are certainly potential economic disadvantages – from 
combining trading activities on a serious scale with normal commercial banking.12  
This  issue  –  that  of  the  most  efficient  structure  of  financial  institutions  and  of  the  financial 
system – is central to the question of how best to regulate the financial system in the years 
ahead, taking into account the fact that financial institutions are liable to failure as a result of 
a loss of confidence in them, and that the costs of those failures may be macroeconomic in 
scale. At this stage we seem to taking it for granted that we should go back to the structure of 
the  financial  system  as  it  was  on  the  eve  of  the  crisis.  But  we  need  to  be  thinking  more 
broadly,  including  the  possibility  that  some  radical  restructuring  is  needed,  for  instance  by 
sharply  restricting  proprietary  trading  by  banking  institutions,  or  by  some  other  forms  of 
narrower banking.  
There  has  been  very  little  progress  so  far  on  how  to  deal  with  the  failure  of  a  major 
international  bank.  The  main  issue  is  which  country  or  countries  take  responsibility  for 
dealing  with  the  aftermath  of  a  failure.  One  possibility  is  to  require  internationally  active 
financial  institutions  to  have  legally  separate  subsidiaries  in  each  country,  so  that  each 
subsidiary is wound up in its country of operation.13
Finally, on moral hazard: this must be a prime issue in the design and supervision of financial 
systems.  No  policymaker  wants  to  be  in  a  position  in  which  concern  over  moral  hazard 
creates  the  dilemma  of  either  taking  an  action  that  is  extremely  costly  to  the  economy  to 
teach some people a lesson, or else doing something that may well encourage undesirable 
behavior in the future. Both in the design of the system, and in its operation, we need to do 
whatever we can to avoid placing decision-makers in such a situation. If we do find ourselves 
in such a situation, it is too late – for it is a mistake to inflict serious and unwarranted damage 
on many people in order to teach a lesson to a few.  
Corporate governance 
Although it is natural for policymakers to focus on improving supervision and regulation, the 
larger  failures  responsible  for  the  crisis  were  those  of  the  management  of  financial 
institutions. Management, particularly corporate risk management, failed in a big way in this 
crisis, and that failure is more worrisome than the failure of the regulators, for we should not 
expect regulators, with their limited resources and inherent limits on how much information 
they receive and can master, to do better than corporate risk management in understanding 
and controlling the risks facing a financial institution.  
                                                 
12 The G-30 report recommends (p.59) that "Large, systemically important banking institutions should be restricted 
in  undertaking  proprietary  activities  that  present  particularly  high  risks  …Sponsorship  and  management  of 
commingled private pools of capital (….) should ordinarily be prohibited and large proprietary trading should 
be limited by strict capital and liquidity requirements." 
13 See Michael Pomerleano, "Ring-fence cross-border financial institutions", Financial Times, ….,August 10, 2009 
http://blogs.ft/com/economistsforum/  
BIS Review 107/2009 
 7
John  Kay  has  recently  expressed  the  view  that  modern  banks  are  too  complicated  to  be 
managed  by  mere  mortals.14  Accepting  that  view  as  a  challenge  rather  than  a  counsel  of 
despair,  I  will  briefly  discuss  potential  reforms  in  the  areas  of  risk  management  and 
compensation, drawing mainly on the recent report prepared for the British government by 
Sir David Walker, and a June 2009 OECD report on corporate governance.15
Corporate risk management. The Walker Report focuses on the board as the key vehicle for 
improved  corporate  governance.  It  recommends  (p.81)  the  establishment  of  a  board  risk 
committee, separate from the audit committee, "with responsibility for oversight and advice to 
the board on the current risk exposures of the entity and future risk strategy". The executive 
risk  committee  would  be  required  to  operate  within  the  parameters  and  limits  set  by  the 
board risk committee.  
The  report  recommends  the  appointment  of  a  Chief  Risk  Officer,  who  should  be  totally 
independent from individual business units, reporting directly to the CEO16 and to the board 
risk committee, and who "should be accorded both status and remuneration reflective of the 
key importance of the role" (p.84).  
Beyond  strengthening  the  board's  capacity  to  supervise  risk,  it  is  necessary  also  to 
strengthen  risk  management  within 
Internal  risk  managers  need 
independence from other business units and the full backing of management and the board 
to  carry  out  their  function,  for  the  pressures  that  the  competitive  environment  of  a  large 
financial firm place on a risk manager are intense. "Just say no" is easy enough to say, but 
harder to do when it means cutting colleagues off from a potentially highly profitable fee, or 
trade, or investment. 
The internal risk managers I met during my short life in the private sector were technically 
proficient. They may have been under pressure to agree to risky trades. But what was most 
lacking, in the case I’m aware of, was somebody taking a system-wide view of the risks that 
were being faced, someone with the capacity to ask tough questions about the possibility of 
radical changes in the market environment – and then getting management to do something 
about it.  
There is a delicate point here. If risk managers are required to assign high probabilities to 
extreme scenarios, such as those of the last year, the volume of lending and risk-taking more 
generally  will  be  seriously  and  dangerously  reduced.  It  is  neither  wise  nor  efficient  for  the 
management of financial firms or their regulators to require financial institutions to become 
excessively risk averse in their lending and market activities. But if these institutions pay too 
little  attention  to  adverse  events  that  have  a  reasonable  probability  of  occurring,  they 
contribute to excesses of volatility and crises.17  
Compensation  and  risk  taking.  18  In  its  "Principles  for  Sound  Compensation  Policies",  the 
FSF  specifies  (pp.  2-3)  that:  compensation  must  be  adjusted  for  all  types  of  risk; 
the  corporation. 
                                                 
14   "Our banks are beyond the control of mere mortals", Financial Times, July 8, 2009.  
15   A review of corporate governance in UK banks and other financial industry entities, prepared for the UK Prime 
Minister and the Treasury, July 2009. See also OECD, Corporate Governance and the Financial Crisis: Key 
Findings and Main Messages, June 2009 ; and FSF, FSF Principles for Sound Compensation Practices, April 
2009. 
16   The report specifies "CEO or FD", where FD is the finance director.  
17   This  paragraph  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  there  is  a  rational  expectations  equilibrium  in  which 
companies take reasonable risks and make profits commensurate with those risks. 
18   See the report by the FSF, FSF Principles for Sound Compensation Practices, April 2009. The OECD report 
on  corporate  governance,  op  cit,  contains  an  excellent  summary  of  the  issues  relating  to  remuneration 
practices, actual and desired from the viewpoint of financial stability and efficiency. For the modern theory see 
for example Lucian Bebchuk and Jesse Fried, Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive 
8 
 BIS Review 107/2009
compensation  outcomes  must  be  symmetric  with  risk  outcomes;  compensation  payout 
schedules  must  be  sensitive  to  the  time  horizon  of  risks;  and  the  mix  of  cash,  equity  and 
other forms of compensation must be consistent with risk alignment.  
Just  three  comments:  First,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  line  up  pay  with  incentives  and 
performance, but it is critical that companies try to do better. Second, the fact that individuals 
in  effect  have  limited  liability  creates  an  asymmetry  that  encourages  excessive  risk-taking 
whatever the form in which conditional compensation might be paid. Third, after the disasters 
of the last year, and the large costs of government intervention, the financial sector needs to 
regain  the  confidence  of  the  public,  and  returning  to  previous  modes  and  levels  of 
compensation as if nothing has happened is not the way to achieve that goal.19
The  current  discussion  of  corporate  governance  places  much  of  the  responsibility  for 
achieving better performance on corporate boards. But we should not exaggerate what they 
and  the  regulators  can  do,  for  both  lack  the  full-time  immersion  in  the  problems  of  the 
company  that  company  management  has.  With  regard  to  risk  management  and  to 
compensation,  and  to  corporate  governance  more  generally,  we  need  to  look  to  firm 
management at least as much as to corporate boards and regulation to get it right.  
The role of the central bank 
II. 
This was not a normal recession, and nor were the central banking policies used to combat 
it. The Fed and other leading central banks played an extremely activist role in responding to 
the crisis, particularly in their interventions in asset markets. The question is whether central 
bank actions in this crisis were appropriate for crisis response, and whether the innovative 
policies  we  have  seen  in  the  last  year  will  lead  to  longer-term  changes  in  central  banking 
doctrine and behavior. 
Liquidity trap and quantitative and credit easing. The zero interest rate policy of the Bank of 
Japan in the 1990s was accompanied by a policy of quantitative easing (QE). The simplest 
notion of quantitative easing is that the central bank purchases assets in order to increase 
the monetary base, or a broader aggregate.  
In  the  present  crisis,  as  the  interest  rate  came  close  to  its  zero  lower  bound20  in  the  US, 
Japan,  the  Euro  area,  the  UK,  Canada,  Israel  and  other  countries,  central  banks  began 
policies  of  quantitative  easing,  via  asset  purchases.  Growth  rates  of  various  definitions  of 
money  have  been  impressive  in  many  countries,  with  the  growth  rates  of  the  monetary 
aggregates closest to the money base being highest – for instance, in the Israeli case the 
growth  rate  of  M1  over  the  past  12  months  has  been  56 percent,  while  that  of  M2  (which 
includes  term  deposits,  which  in  light  of  the  ultra-low  interest  rates  on  term  deposits  have 
migrated into the current accounts that are included in M1) has been 18 percent. 
Central banks had to contend with the question of how much QE to do. One approach was to 
use a Taylor rule to calculate what the (negative) interest rate would have been according to 
the Taylor rule, and then to calculate how much a relevant quantity (say the monetary base) 
would have had to be increased to attain that interest rate. Another was to use some form of 
the quantity theory. As an aside, if monetary policy was defined in terms of the growth of the 
                                                                                                                                                         
Compensation (Harvard University Press 2004). See also Bebchuk and Fried, "Equity Compensation for Long-
Term Results", WSJ.com, June 16, 2009. 
 For a comment on this point, see Lucian Bebchuk and Alma Cohen, "Back to the Good Times on Wall Street", 
WSJ.com, July 31, 2009. 
19 
20   In the General Theory, Keynes discusses Gesell's scheme for creating a negative rate of return on money by 
stamping it. There are no doubt other schemes to achieve the same end, but as of now there seems to be no 
practical way of reducing the central bank nominal interest rate below zero. 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 9
quantity  of  some  asset,  such  as  the  monetary  base,  the  central  bank  could  not  also 
announce  a  given  interest  rate  as  its  policy  rate.  This  is  probably  why  the  Fed  has 
announced the policy rate as a range.  
In our case, and that of most other central banks that are close to the zero lower bound, the 
central  bank  nevertheless  announces  and  fixes  a  policy  rate  close  to  zero.  These  rates 
currently vary between 25 and 100 basis points. We stopped cutting the policy rate when it 
reached 50 basis points, on the basis of an analysis that further cuts would have had only a 
minimal impact on credit conditions.  
Several  central  banks,  including  the  Fed  and  the  Bank  of  England,  have  undertaken 
programs  of  purchasing  longer  term  government  bonds.  In  the  case  of  the  Bank  of  Israel, 
where  the  term  structure  was  very  steep  when  the  program  was  initiated,  the  goal  was  to 
reduce  medium  term  indexed  interest  rates  on  government  bonds,  on  which  indexed 
mortgage  rates  are  based.  Our  estimate  is  that  our  program,  which  lasted  for  about  four 
months21  and  amounted  to  a  bit  less  than  3  percent  of  GDP  (less  than  10  percent  of  the 
stock  of  relevant  bonds)  reduced  interest  rates  by  about  30-40  basis  points.  The  program 
also appears to have had an effect on corporate bond rates.  
Purchases of government bonds led to the concern or accusation that the central bank was 
financing the government deficit and "printing money" to that end. The Bank of Israel also 
intervened for over a year in the foreign exchange market, in a program that ended earlier 
this  month.  We  bought  $100  million  a  day  (about  4-5  percent  of  the  daily  turnover), 
increasing our foreign exchange reserves from $27 billion to $52 billion, an increase of about 
13 percent of GDP, with the reserves to GDP ratio currently at about 27 percent.22 These 
purchases too led to the concern that we were printing money and thereby contributing to 
inflation.  
Our  foreign  exchange  interventions  were  undertaken  both  because  we  had  for  long  been 
concerned that our foreign exchange reserves were too low, and because we did not want to 
enter a recession in an economy whose exports amount to over 40 percent of GDP, with a 
sharply  appreciated  exchange  rate.  We  also anticipated that  a  depreciating  exchange  rate 
would contribute to preventing deflation, as indeed happened.23
Do these non-standard asset purchase programs "print money"? They  may do so, but not 
necessarily. It depends whether at the margin they are sterilized, in the sense that actions 
are  taken  to  offset  their  effects  on  the  short-term  interest  rate,  or  on  a  given  monetary  or 
financial quantitative target of monetary policy. Do they contribute to inflation? That was part 
of  the  intention  –  they  were  intended  to  ease  financial  conditions,  and  to  help  prevent 
deflation. In our case, and that of other countries too, the goal of QE programs was to raise 
the  inflation  rate  from  the  negative  rate  that  we  feared.  Here  the  inflation  target  was 
important: we were able to explain that even at a zero interest rate, inflation was expected to 
                                                 
21   The program was terminated at the end of July. 
22   We intervened in the foreign exchange market for the first time in nearly ten years when the exchange rate 
appreciated very rapidly in March 2008, at a time when it was already clear that we were likely to go into a 
recession. The program started with daily purchases of $25 million, but when the exchange rate of the shekel 
against  the  dollar  plunged  in  July  2008,  we  increased  our  daily  purchases  to  $100  million.  After  that  the 
exchange rate against the dollar depreciated over the course of the next six months by about 20-25 percent, 
taking the nominal and real exchange rates back towards but below the average of the years 2003-2007. 
23  Lars Svensson had made this argument in suggesting a way out of Japan's deflation of the 1990s. Such a 
policy is much easier to implement for a small open economy than for a large economy that already has a 
significant current account surplus.  
10 
 BIS Review 107/2009
 be  negative.24  Thus  our  inflation  target  required  us  to  conduct  a  monetary  policy  – 
quantitative easing – aimed at raising the inflation rate.  
Lender  of  last  resort.  While  other  central  banks  were  emphasizing  their  QE  policies, 
Chairman  Bernanke  for  a  while  described  some  of  the  Fed's  operations  as  credit  easing, 
interventions in specific markets that are not functioning normally, such as the commercial 
paper market following the collapse of Lehman, and the markets for mortgage-based assets 
following the collapse of the housing price bubble.  
These  innovative  interventions  are  closer  to  the  lender  of  last  resort  function  than  to  pure 
quantitative  easing,  in  the  sense  that  the  central  bank  is  lending  in  markets  that  have 
become  dysfunctional  or  that  are  operating  poorly,  in  significant  part  due  to  a  loss  of 
confidence  in  counterparties.  But  unless  sterilized,  the  operations  also  involve  quantitative 
easing in its more general sense of expanding the central bank's balance sheet. 
The Fed's credit-easing policies and the scale on which they were carried out represent an 
innovation in central bank crisis operations, one that has been described as making the Fed 
the market-maker of last resort. It is unlikely that such operations will be needed in future in 
normal  cyclical  downturns,  but  they  are  a  valuable  tool  that  could  be  used  in  dealing  with 
future financial panics, and that should be used if important markets seize up, as happened 
in this crisis. 
In addition, central banks are likely to continue to undertake the classic function of a lender of 
last resort, of providing liquidity either to institutions in trouble due to a loss of liquidity, or to 
the market (a form of QE). As is well-known, the distinction between liquidity and solvency 
difficulties for a financial institution should determine how the central bank behaves. In the 
case of a liquidity problem, the central bank can solve the problem of the institution in trouble 
by  providing  a  temporary  loan;  in  solvency  cases  the  firm  should  be  taken  over  and 
reorganized, possibly by closing it. Dealing with an insolvent institution is typically a quasi-
fiscal  operation,  a  fact  that  led  to  considerable  unease  about  some  Fed  operations  in  this 
crisis. In the Israeli case, the law gives the central bank a free hand in injecting liquidity, but 
the central bank needs government approval  to resolve an insolvent institution.25 It is also 
well known that it is typically difficult in the midst of a crisis to distinguish between an illiquid 
institution  and  one  that  is  insolvent,  an  issue  that  surfaces  in  arguments  about  mark-to-
market accounting.  
Responsibility for financial stability. I have so far been discussing the response to the crisis, 
implicitly focusing on the period after the collapse of Lehman Brothers. During that period the 
central  banks  did  extremely  well.  Some  of  them  did  less  well  in  the  lead-up  to  the  crisis, 
when  financial  vulnerabilities  were  either  not  identified  or  not  responded  to.  It  is  uncertain 
whether those central banks would have behaved differently had they already been assigned 
formal  responsibility  for  macroprudential  stability;  if  they  had,  they  would  have  had  more 
reason to have acted and at least mitigated the effects of the financial excesses that were 
already visible in 2006. 
Inflation targeting. What are the implications of this crisis for central bank policies in future 
crises? In particular, has the activism of central banks in intervening in financial markets and 
in  rapidly  reducing  interest  rates  essentially  to  zero,  along  with  their  possible  role  in 
macroprudential stability, invalidated the inflation targeting approach to monetary policy?  
                                                 
24   In the event, the inflation rate was negative for only four months at the turn of the year, and for most of this 
year, including currently, the 12-month inflation rate has been above the 3 percent upper bound of the target 
inflation range. 
25  However the law does not specify that the government will necessarily pay the costs of resolving an insolvent 
bank. 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 11
The simplest answer is that there could on occasion be a conflict between the inflation goal 
of  monetary  policy  and  that  of  financial  stability,  implying  that  recent  practice  may  well  be 
inconsistent with a strict inflation targeting approach. For instance, it is often asserted that 
the  Fed's  low  interest  rate  policies  coming  out  of  the  2001  recession  contributed  to  the 
housing bubble of later years. Without wishing to take a stand on that issue, it is plausible to 
argue that if the Fed had been charged with responsibility not only for inflation and growth, 
but also macroprudential stability, it might have raised its interest rate more rapidly. 
However  there  is  no  necessary  inconsistency  between  flexible  inflation  targeting  and  the 
actions required of central banks in this crisis. The goals of the central bank as set out in 
recent  legislation  around  the  world  are  typically  three-fold.  For  example,  let  me  quote  the 
new Bank of Israel law, which we hope will be passed by the Knesset in its winter session: 
• 
• 
To maintain price stability, as specified by the government  
To support the other goals of government economic policy, particularly the promotion 
of employment and growth, so long as this does not conflict with price stability over 
the course of time 
To contribute to the stability of the financial system.26 
• 
The behavior of inflation targeting central banks in this crisis was consistent with the flexible 
inflation targeting approach as set out above. As soon as it became clear after the failure of 
Lehman that economies were heading for negative inflation, the inflation targeting approach 
dictated  that  monetary  policy  should  be  expansionary,  thus  being  consistent  with  both  the 
first and second goals of policy. In addition, many central banks were involved in attempts to 
bolster financial stability, both through their ultra-low interest rates and in their decisions to 
undertake both quantitative and credit easing. 
The answers to the questions posed at the beginning of this section are (i) yes, central bank 
actions  in  this  crisis  were  by  and  large  not  only  appropriate,  but  also  innovatively  so,  in 
responding to the economic crisis of 2007-2009, though less so in the earlier years in which 
financial  excesses  developed;  (ii)  for  those  banks  practicing  flexible  inflation  targeting  and 
with a financial stability responsibility and tools to do the job (e.g. because bank supervision 
is within the central bank) neither doctrine nor policy is likely to change much; (iii) for those 
banks that hitherto did not have a financial stability responsibility, and that will be given tools 
for the job, policies and doctrines are likely to change to reflect their new responsibilities; and 
(iv) flexible inflation targeting will continue to be a good approach to monetary policy making.  
International coordination – the FSB27
III. 
The  G-20's  Declaration  on  Strengthening  the  Financial  System,28  issued  at  the  London 
Summit  on  April  2,  2009  expands  the  FSF,  giving  it  a  broad  and  ambitious  mandate29  to 
                                                 
26  Two explanatory notes: (i) the government's definition of price stability is that the inflation rate should be in the 
range  of  one  to  three  percent;  and  (ii)  the  draft  law  contains  a  definition  of  "over  the  course  of  time"  as 
meaning  that  the  inflation  rate  is  expected  by  the  monetary  policy  committee  to  return  to  within  the  target 
range within two years. In practice the Bank of Israel has used a one-year horizon to define the flexibility of the 
inflation target.  
27   I am grateful for comments at Jackson Hole by Mario Draghi that clarified the role and achievements of the 
FSF/FSB.  
28   At www.number10.gov.uk/Page18929. The G-20 summit was preceded by a November 13, 2008 joint letter by 
the heads of the IMF and the FSF to the G-20 Ministers and Governors, laying out principles for coordination 
between the two institutions. The G-20 communique appears to go further in the direction of the FSF/FSB than 
the joint letter. Specifically, the first point in the joint letter states "Surveillance of the global financially system 
is the responsibility of the IMF". That appears to be inconsistent with the first bullet point immediately below, 
drawn from the April 2009 G20 communique. 
12 
 BIS Review 107/2009
promote financial stability and "a stronger institutional basis and enhanced capacity as the 
financial stability board (FSB)." Among the main tasks with which the FSB is charged are 
• 
assessing vulnerabilities affecting the financial system and identifying and overseeing 
action needed to address them (italics added) 
monitoring and advising on market developments and their implications for regulatory 
policy 
undertaking joint strategic reviews of the policy development work of the international 
Standard Setting Bodies 
setting guidelines for the functioning of supervisory colleges (the group of regulators 
from  the  main  countries  in  which  a  given  international  financial  company  is  active, 
charged with coordinating the international supervision of that company) 
supporting contingency planning for cross-border crisis management; and 
collaborating with the IMF to conduct Early Warning Exercises … on the build up of 
macroeconomic and financial risks and the actions needed to address them.  
    This  is  an  extraordinarily  ambitious  program  for  an  organization  consisting  of  the  various 
supervisors of the G-20 and a few other countries, and supported by a small secretariat at 
the  BIS.  Note  that  national  supervisors  frequently  have  difficulty  coordinating  among 
themselves  domestically.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  they  can  coordinate  better  in  the 
international forum offered by the FSB in pointing fingers and assessing what needs to be 
done.  By  making  an  organization  of  typically  collegial  national  supervisors  responsible  for 
international  surveillance  of  financial  systems,  the  G-20  injected  a  potential  weakness  into 
the proposed system of global financial surveillance. It also remains to be seen in what way 
the FSF will be "re-established with a stronger institutional basis and enhanced capacity" as 
the FSB. 
The  FSF  has  done  an  excellent  job  in  producing  high-quality  reports  on  regulation  and 
supervision.  It  has  also  been  exceptionally  rapid  in  reaching  agreement  on  a  number  of 
important  regulatory  reforms.  But  the  tasks  of  surveillance  –  of  assessing  vulnerabilities 
affecting the financial system and of identifying the actions needed to address them – are far 
more demanding. Even more demanding is the task of overseeing the actions that countries 
should be implementing to deal with those vulnerabilities. It is puzzling that in defining the 
tasks  of  the  FSB,  the  G-20  mentions  the  IMF  only  in  the  context  of  joint  Early  Warning 
Exercises,  and  not  in  the  context  of  surveillance  and  oversight  of  policies  to  strengthen 
national and international financial systems. It is important for the stability of the international 
financial system that this issue be clarified. 
The role of the IMF 
IV.  
As part of their response to the crisis, the G-20 leaders decided at their April 2 2009 meeting 
significantly  to  increase  the  IMF's  financial  resources,  to  enable  the  Fund  to  play  a  more 
vigorous role in helping countries badly hit by the global financial crisis, and to equip it to deal 
with  potential  future  crises.  They  also  welcomed  the  Fund's  new  lending  facility,  the  FCL, 
(Flexible Credit Line) designed to provide liquidity to countries with strong policies and policy 
frameworks. Both these changes are significant and will help deal with future crises. 
                                                                                                                                                         
29   See Masahiro Kawai and Michael Pomerleano, International financial stability architecture for the 21st century, 
http://blogs.ft.com/economistsforum/2009/08/..., 02/08/2009 for a critique of the current structure of the FSB in 
relation to its mandate. 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 13
Major  reforms  in  Fund  governance  are  also  getting  under  way,  with  the  goal  of  enabling 
emerging market countries, particularly the BRICs, to take a larger share in Fund quotas and 
in Fund decisions. This is part of the process of recognizing the shifting center of gravity of 
the global economy. But the process will not be easy, mainly because countries whose quota 
shares need to decline are less than enthusiastic about the changes. 
However, I do not want to concentrate here on Fund governance, important as that is to the 
future  of  international  cooperation  and  coordination.  Rather  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the 
surveillance issue and on global imbalances. After every crisis there is a call to strengthen 
IMF surveillance of the global economy. For instance, in the IMFC communiqué of October 
11,  2008,  "[t]he  Committee  underscores  the  central  role  of  Fund  surveillance  in  providing 
clear, advance warning of risks, helping members understand the interdependence of their 
economies, and promoting globally consistent policy responses." 
There is no question that Fund surveillance should be important, possibly central, in warning 
member  countries  of  the  risks  they  face.  Those  warnings  are  likely  to  be  taken  more 
seriously  the  better  the  surveillance  record  of the  Fund,  which  is  the  reason  to strengthen 
Fund surveillance. But it is less clear that clear warnings of risks generally lead to action. The 
impression created by the statement quoted in the previous paragraph is that what countries 
require to get them to take action in time to prevent a crisis is adequate warning of the risks 
of a crisis, or an adequate understanding of international interdependencies. 
That  is  not  likely.  Fund  warnings  of  risks  that  an  OECD  economy  may  be  courting  do  not 
generally  come  as  a  surprise  to  policymakers  in  those  countries.  For  instance,  it  cannot 
conceivably  be  the  case  that  the  experts  have  only  now  recognized  the  need  for  all  the 
financial sector reforms that are being proposed in the flood of recent reports. The question 
is what countries do about the warnings. In my experience in the Fund, which I'm sure is still 
relevant, policymakers typically do nothing except claim that Fund staff are too conservative, 
too unimaginative, and overstate the risks. And since we are talking about probabilities, it is 
hard to refute that claim.  
We  are  often  asked,  "Why  weren't  we  warned  about  this  crisis?"  We  were  warned,  in  the 
sense that we knew there was a risk of a major crisis, even if that was not the majority view. 
Policy makers generally deal with risks, not with certainties. There are no iron-clad warnings 
in  this  business,  except  those  about  processes  that  cannot  go  on  forever.  A  rational  cost-
benefit analysis would probably have suggested that some mitigating steps to deal with the 
housing  price  bubble  and  with  a  possible  financial  crisis  should  have  been  taken  before 
2007. But that did not happen.  
Why?  In  part  because  there  is  always  someone  out  there  warning  of  some  impending 
disaster,  and  it  is  very  difficult  to  judge  how  accurate  the  warnings  are,  particularly  if  they 
have been repeated year after year. In part because taking away the punch bowl is difficult 
when everyone is having a good time. Or to say virtually the same thing in different words, in 
part  because  unpopular  measures  to  deal  with  what  seems  like  a  low  probability  risk  are 
difficult to justify. In part because policymakers may be willing to take greater risks than those 
doing the surveillance regard as wise. And in part because those giving the warnings and/or 
the  policymakers  may  simply  have  misread  the  situation30  –  for  there  will  always  be 
surprises,  and  that  is  a  key  factor  we  need  to  take  into  account  in  reforming  the  financial 
system, by focusing on its robustness in dealing with unexpected events.  
Now, finally, to global imbalances: Why was nothing done about global imbalances before 
the crisis happened? The IMF was set up in part, and its rules were designed, to deal with 
the asymmetry between the ability  of the international system to discipline those countries 
                                                 
30   In  thinking  about  this  issue,  I  have  read  some  of  the  literature  on  major  intelligence  failures  of  the  past, 
including  Pearl  Harbor  and  the  Yom  Kippur  war.  Some  of  the  lessons  of  that  literature  may  be  helpful  in 
thinking about making policy decisions about uncertain events or threats.  
14 
 BIS Review 107/2009
that run deficits in their balance of payments and those that run surpluses31 – an issue with 
which Keynes was very familiar from interwar experience. If you run deficits in your balance 
of payments, at some point you get into trouble, so you are going to be disciplined. If you run 
surpluses all you do32 is to continue to build up your reserves. If you are willing to keep doing 
that, you can keep going with that strategy forever, or at least for a very long time. But that 
surplus is reflected in deficits somewhere else in the system.  
The  IMF  experimented  with  multilateral  surveillance  to  deal  with  the  China-US  current 
account imbalances. That attempt failed. What else can you do about this phenomenon? You 
can try to make the system more resilient, which is what the move to floating exchange rates 
did  as  the  original  Bretton  Woods  system  collapsed.  Or  you  can  try  to  give  the  relevant 
countries a greater sense of responsibility for the international economic system, by giving 
them a greater role in running the system. In doing this, though, we have also to recognize 
that no country, including the United States, is going to put all the focus in its mutual relations 
with  a  major  country  on  the  issue  of  the  management  of  their  exchange  rate.  Nobody, 
including the United States, is going to base all its relations with a country as important as 
China on the exchange rate issue, however important it may be economically.  
That is to say, we don’t really have a good way of dealing with the problem of the asymmetry 
of  the  adjustment  pressures  on  deficit  and  surplus  countries,  the  problem  that  underlies 
global  imbalances.  That  is  a  source  of  weakness  in  the  international  system's  ability  to 
reduce the frequency and severity of future crises.  
Concluding comments 
VI.  
How will all the proposed reforms affect the frequency and seriousness of future financial and 
economic crises? That question can be divided into two parts. The first is whether the advice 
now being offered would make a serious difference if implemented. The second is how much 
of the advice will be implemented. 
My tentative answer to the first question is that the advice on macroprudential supervision 
and  its  location  in  central  banks  would  improve  our  ability  to  deal  with  crises;  that  other 
suggestions for improving supervision and regulation of financial corporations – most of them 
not discussed in this speech, but included for example in the G30 report – would also make 
an  important  difference;  that  improvements  in  corporate  governance,  particularly  in  risk 
control, would be helpful; that the tasks suggested for the new FSB would be very useful if 
they  can  be  implemented;  and  that  we  still  do  not  have  an  answer  for  dealing  with  global 
imbalances arising from a pegged undervalued exchange rate. 
And the tentative answer to the second question: that we may be relaxing too soon, thinking 
the crisis is past when that is far from sure; that in dealing with financial fragility, we need to 
think  about  reforming  the  structure  of  the  financial  system  as  well  as  dealing  with  the 
weaknesses that led to  the current crisis; that inter-agency rivalries may prevent  desirable 
reforms of financial sector supervision; that proposed reforms in corporate governance may 
be putting too large a weight on the ability of corporate boards to control management, and 
too  small  a  weight  on  the  need  for  improvements  in  management  performance;  that  the 
current FSB structure is not adequate to the ambitious goals it has been set, and that the 
system would work better if the FSB were more closely tied to the IMF, particularly in doing 
surveillance; that the central role for the IMF that was proposed by the G-20 at the height of 
the crisis may be slipping away as the urgency of acting appears to be diminishing; that we 
do not have a solution for global imbalances; and that we need to focus more on what it will 
                                                 
31  I draw here on material presented in a speech to the European meeting of the Trilateral Commission, in Paris, 
on November 8, 2008. 
32   This assumes the foreign exchange purchases can be sterilized.  
BIS Review 107/2009 
 15
take  to  get  governments  to  act  in  accordance  with  warnings  of  future  risks  than  to  focus 
purely on improving the quality of the warnings.  
We need also to remember that every financial crisis is different, each in its own way, and 
that in seeking to prevent future crises we need to seek out and deal not only with the factors 
that caused the present crisis, but also with those that could cause the crises of the future. 
And finally, the final word: despite all these concerns, on the whole we are making progress. 
16 
 BIS Review 107/2009
