Tom Alweendo: Announcement of the commencement date of the 
Financial Intelligence Act 2007  
Speech  by  Mr  Tom  Alweendo,  Governor  of  Bank  of  Namibia,  at  launching  the  awareness 
campaign on provisions of the Financial Intelligence Act 2007, Windhoek, 29 April 2009. 
 Distinguished Invited Guests; 
Members of the media; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
I would like to welcome all of you to the Bank of Namibia this morning. The occasion today is 
to officially launch the commencement of the Financial Intelligence Act and to also launch our 
public awareness campaign. 
As you are all by now aware, the Financial Intelligence Act was enacted in 2007. The Act 
empowers  the  Bank  of  Namibia,  amongst  others  to  receive  suspicious  transaction  reports 
from reporting entities, to analyze such reports, and to disseminate the intelligence gathered 
to law enforcement agencies for further investigation and possible prosecution. The Bank is 
further  required  to  conduct  compliance  audits  with  all  reporting  entities  to  ensure  effective 
adherence to this Act. The key in combating money laundering through the reporting entities 
is to know who their customers are. If they know their customers well, they will be able to 
detect attempts at money laundering. 
In fulfilling this mandate, since 2007 we have been preparing ourselves to be ready with the 
implementation of the Act. In this respect, I am happy to say that we have managed to build 
the necessary capacity and that we are more than ready to implement the Act. 
Due to some legislative delays, the Bank was not able to commence with the implementation 
of  the  Act  as  early  as  we  would  have  wished.  However,  I  am  happy  to  report  that  the 
commencement date for the Act is now set to be the 1st May 2009. In order to educate the 
public  on  money  laundering,  we  are  also  starting  with  a  comprehensive  awareness 
campaign.  This  is  necessary  because  we  are  only  likely  to  successfully  combat  money 
laundering when the public in general understand as to what is at stake. 
Financial  crime,  of  which  money  laundering  is  part,  is  increasingly  becoming  a  global 
phenomenon. This is despite the enactment of laws designed to curb financial crime. This is 
not only a threat to the global financial sector, but if allowed to flourish money laundering has 
the  potential  to  become  a  threat  to  society.  It  can  lead  to  the  accumulation  of  economic 
power  to  organized  crime.  This  development  has  the  potential  of  eroding  our  political  and 
social systems based on elected representation as we know them today. In other words, the 
social  consequences  for  allowing  money  launderers  to  operate  unchecked  could  spell 
disaster for stability and the rule of law. 
Law  enforcement  agencies  are  overwhelmed  by  the  sheer  size  and  sophistication  that 
criminals are now employing to perpetrate their illegal deeds. The efforts on crime prevention 
are  now  compounded  by  globalization  that  has  created  what  one  may  say  is  a  global 
economy in which organized crime groups and individuals can and do generate huge sums 
of money. Money laundering is therefore a global problem which requires a concerted global 
response. In order to protect our respective financial systems from the destabilizing effects of 
crime and money laundering, it is imperative that we act and respond to this scourge with 
unmatched  resolve  and  commitment  to  combating  it.  Everybody  has,  therefore,  a 
responsibility to combat money laundering, because its negative impact has a unique way of 
creating far ranging negative consequences. 
The  financial  sector,  in  particular  the  banking  sector,  more  than  any  sectors,  needs  to 
operate in a crime and money laundering free environments. We all know that banks deal 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 1
with other people’s money and therefore rely heavily on reputation for integrity. Without the 
public confidence from the law abiding citizenry it would be difficult for financial institutions to 
conduct business in the form they do now. It is also conceivable that money laundering, if 
perpetrated on a high scale, would complicate the ability of financial institutions to manage 
their operations and risks. 
Another  consequence  of  money  laundering  on  a  grand  scale  is  that  it  may  erode  the 
effectiveness and management of monetary policy, because of its potential of changing the 
demand  for  cash  in  the  economy.  Money  laundering  is  also  bad  for  the  economy  and 
development  in  that  it  undermines  legitimate  business,  competition  and  reduces  the  tax 
revenue to national authorities as launderers would be operating underground outside the tax 
net. 
The combating of money laundering presupposes the existence of capacity and resources at 
national  level.  In  many  of  developing  countries,  this  is  a  real  challenge  in  that  there  are 
competing  demands  with  regards  to  the  utilization  of  scarce  resources.  The  scarcity  of 
resources is more critical in the law enforcement spheres, since most national jurisdictions 
have less than efficient law enforcement agencies which are in most cases overwhelmed by 
the demands to enforce other national laws. 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  urge  members  of  the  public  to  look  out  for  information  on 
combating money laundering, starting next week. I look forward to everyone’s participation in 
effectively combating money laundering. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2009
