Thomas Jordan: Low interest rates – blessing or curse? 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the Delegiertenversammlung des HEV Schweiz, Säntis, 19 June 2009. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Monetary policy uses low interest rates to try and stimulate demand as a way of combating 
the economic crisis. The property market is an important transmission channel in this regard, 
as low mortgage rates provide direct relief to home owners and tenants in the form of lower 
interest payments and rents. This provides households with greater room for manoeuvre in 
consumption  and  investment.  This  in  turn  boosts  overall  economic  demand  and  economic 
growth. 
However,  despite  these  direct  positive  effects,  a  low  level  of  interest  rates  can  also  pose 
medium-term  risks  for  the  stability  of  the  Swiss  property  market,  and  hence  the  financial 
system. The past has repeatedly shown that prolonged periods of low interest rates can lead 
to speculation on property markets, and to declining standards in mortgage lending. 
The  challenge  in  today’s  difficult  environment  is  how  to  boost  the  economy  through  low 
interest rates without creating medium-term risks for the stability of the financial system and 
the  property  market.  Responsible  behaviour  on  the  part  of  home  owners,  combined  with 
bank  discipline  when  granting  loans,  can  contain  these  risks.  Households  should  buy 
property only if they would also be able to afford it if interest rates increased. Moreover, they 
should finance their house purchase with a sufficient proportion of equity. Equity acts as a 
cushion, absorbing movements in property prices. In addition, banks should use discipline in 
lending  practices,  even  in  an  environment  of  low  interest  rates.  The  prime  considerations 
when  granting  loans  should  be  the  observance  of  maximum  loan-to-value  ratios  and  a 
conservative valuation of property. 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 1
