John Hurley: Economic assessment and the role of the Central Bank  
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services 
Authority  of  Ireland,  to  the  Joint  Oireachtas  Committee  on  Economic  Regulatory  Affairs, 
Dublin, 10 March 2009.  
 Good morning Chairman and members of the Joint Committee. Thank you for the invitation 
to  speak  with  you  today.  I  am  accompanied  by  Tony  Grimes,  the  Director  General  of  the 
Central Bank, and Tom O’Connell, Assistant Director General, Economics.  
I am aware that the Chairman and senior officers of the Financial Regulator were before this 
committee recently dealing with their own area of responsibility. In my own opening remarks 
today,  I  would  like  to  update  the  Committee  on  our  current  economic  assessment,  and  to 
outline briefly the on-going role of the Central Bank in dealing with the various issues that 
confront our financial system. I will refer to the international debate concerning how central 
banks  and  financial supervisors  can  work  better  together  to  reduce  the  chances  of  events 
like  these  happening  again.  In  this  context,  the  Taoiseach  announced  recently  the 
Government’s  intention  to  incorporate  both  central  banking  functions  and  prudential 
supervision in a unitary organisation.  
Economic assessment  
The disruption to global financial markets, which was triggered in August 2007, has evolved 
into the most severe systemic crisis in almost a century. The extent of the turmoil has been 
far worse than was envisaged and it is still very unclear when the crisis will end and what the 
ultimate effects will be. The financial crisis has fed directly into developments in the global 
economy. Prior to the collapse of Lehmann Brothers in mid-September it remained unclear 
how  big  an  impact  the  financial  turmoil  would  have  on  real  economic  activity.  The 
subsequent  broadening  and  intensification  of  the  financial  crisis  has  led  to  a  rapid 
deterioration  in  confidence,  a  development  encapsulated  in  the  substantial  and  persistent 
downward revisions to global growth forecasts that have taken place.  
For example, in July last year, the IMF was expecting global growth of 3.9 per cent in 2009, a 
development  that  they  described  as  “a  pronounced  slowdown”.  Since  then  the  Fund  has 
issued three new forecasts as it became increasingly obvious that the financial turmoil would 
have a significant effect on real economic activity, and its impact would not be limited to the 
advanced economies. This included taking the unprecedented step of issuing two forecasts 
in the final quarter of 2008. In October, the global growth projection was revised down to 3 
per cent, in November to 2.2 per cent and most recently, in January, to 0.5 per cent. This 
latter revision was particularly sharp, and if correct would represent the slowest global growth 
rate  since  World  War  II.  The  situation  in  advanced  economies  is  actually  worse  as,  within 
these  global  growth  projections,  the  significant  downward  revisions  to  growth  in  the 
advanced economies, which are expected to contract this year by 2 per cent, are balanced 
by relatively better performance in emerging markets.  
These exceptionally unfavourable global economic and financial conditions are making our 
own already very difficult domestic economic situation worse. Ireland is now experiencing an 
unprecedented  contraction  in  output,  which  is  set  to  persist  this  year  and  next.  While  the 
initial  downturn  in  activity  was  driven  by  the  sharp  decline  in  the  Irish  property  and 
construction  sectors,  this  has  now  broadened  out  into  a  marked  weakening  of  domestic 
demand,  which  is  being  significantly  amplified  by  the  contraction  in  export  demand  as  a 
result of the movement into recession of all our main trading partners. Reflecting the scale 
and  speed  of  developments,  Irish  economic  performance  has  deteriorated  markedly  –  the 
contraction  in  activity  has  deepened  significantly,  there  has  been  a  sharp  rise  in 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 1
unemployment  and  a  rapid  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  position.  With  the  global  recession 
deepening  and  domestic  demand  exceptionally  weak,  the  overall  outlook  for  growth  has 
continued  to  deteriorate  in  recent  months.  Based  on  what  is  currently  known,  our  latest 
unpublished estimates suggest that GDP will fall by over 6 per cent this year, with a broadly 
similar fall likely in the level of employment. This is likely to result in an unemployment rate 
averaging  over  11  per  cent  for  the  year.  However,  risks  to  this  outlook  remain  to  the 
downside.  
No one should be in any doubt about the seriousness of the global situation, which is not 
easing, and the seriousness of our own difficulties. We face significant challenges and it is 
critical for present and future generations that we work together now to confront them. If we 
do so, our economy will recover and has the potential to grow solidly again in the medium 
term.  Our  economy’s  strengths  are  important  in  this  respect.  We  still  have  favourable 
demographic  trends,  there  is  the  capacity  for  a  rebound  in  productivity  growth,  the  Irish 
labour market continues to be more flexible than most and at the start of the crisis public debt 
as a percentage of GDP was low. However, the achievement of this potential is not inevitable 
and  is  contingent  on  sound  economic  management.  This  calls  for  timely  and  what  are 
inevitably  unpalatable measures  in  the  short-run  to  ensure  that  the  public  finances  remain 
sustainable,  as  well  as  pursuing  policies  that  help  restore  competitiveness  and,  over  the 
medium-term,  provide  the  platform  for  realising  growth  potential.  The  significant  measures 
already announced in relation to the public finances, in addition to those to be adopted over 
the coming weeks, signal our determination to make this difficult adjustment.  
Against this general background, the pressures on the Irish financial system have intensified 
significantly.  Irish  banks  continue  to  face  very  difficult  conditions.  Their  share  prices  have 
declined dramatically over the past year. The impact of the marked deterioration in the wider 
economy on the banking sector is a key concern. However, recent Government actions with 
respect to the banking system demonstrate a commitment to take whatever measures are 
necessary  to  stand  behind  the  financial  system.  Most  recently  in  this  context,  the 
Government, in a similar fashion to those in many other countries, announced details of its 
recapitalisation scheme for the two major domestic banks. This increases the main banks’ 
core Tier 1 capital ratios, which are regarded as a key indicator of financial soundness. In 
addition,  under  the  terms  of  the  recapitalisation  package,  there  is  provision  for  a  greater 
supply of credit to the real economy. The two main banks have confirmed their commitment 
to increase lending capacity to small- and medium-sized enterprises by 10 per cent and to 
provide an additional 30 per cent capacity for lending to first-time home-buyers in 2009.  
As part of the recapitalisation package the Government announced that it is looking at other 
possible measures to enhance the stability of the overall financial system. Discussions are 
underway with the other domestic financial institutions covered by the guarantee concerning 
their  respective  capital  positions.  In  the  context  of  the  six-month  review  of  the  Guarantee 
Scheme, consideration is being given to adapting the scheme to facilitate longer-term bond 
issuance. In addition, the Government has announced its intention to examine proposals to 
mitigate the impact of risks related to specific exposures on the assets side of banks’ balance 
sheets, in line with ongoing work on this issue at European level.  
The role of the Central Bank  
The Central Bank has responded to the unfolding crisis in a number of ways.  
Provision of liquidity  
The Irish central bank, on behalf of the Eurosystem, and along with central banks globally, 
has been providing significant volumes of liquidity to the banking sector, since major financial 
stress began to become evident in autumn 2007. The Eurosystem entered this crisis with a 
relatively broad collateral framework for supplying liquidity to banks. It has made its liquidity 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2009
more easily accessible for banks by widening its list of eligible collateral, providing the funds 
on  a  full  allotment  basis  and  extending  the  maturity  of  its  operations.  This  has  been  of 
significant benefit to our own banks and, indeed, other banks throughout the system.  
Euro area monetary policy  
In response to the turmoil, and the associated impact on the real economy, central banks in 
all  the  major  economies,  including  the  Eurosystem,  have  eased  monetary  policy,  in  many 
cases to levels not previously seen. In this regard, the Governing Council of the ECB has cut 
its policy interest rate by 2 ¾ per cent since the beginning of last October. Despite tensions 
in financial markets, this has had a significant impact on interest rates at the retail level. Of 
course, uncertainty concerning the economic outlook remains very high and, as always, the 
Governing Council will continue to monitor closely all developments. You will also be aware 
that some central banks have also started to engage in more non-standard monetary policy 
operations, such as the outright purchases of private and public assets. I should mention that 
the ECB is currently studying possible non-standard monetary policy measures.  
Contributing to financial stability  
Through the formulation and publication of financial stability assessments, central banks in 
the  major  industrial countries  draw attention  to risks  to  the financial  system.  In  our annual 
Financial Stability Reports, Quarterly Bulletins and other public statements, the Central Bank 
has highlighted risks to financial stability. The major risk was identified as the interaction of a 
significant  international  shock  and  certain  vulnerabilities  in  the  domestic  economy  relating, 
for instance, to property prices, credit growth and the extent of the banking sector’s reliance 
on  wholesale  funding.  However,  our  financial  stability  reports  and  the  warnings  they 
contained, no less than those in similar reports issued by other central banks, were not as 
effective  as  they  might  have  been  as  they  did  not  lead  to  a  sufficient  or  timely  change  in 
behaviour. But for the massive deterioration in the external environment, these risks would 
have been more manageable, albeit with difficulty.  
Financial regulatory architecture  
In the light of the crisis over the past two years, there is recognition that the architecture of 
financial  regulation  and  supervision,  both  here  and  internationally,  needs  broad-ranging 
review and reform  
Within  the  European  Union(EU),  the  European  Commission’s  High-Level  Group  on  Cross-
Border  Financial  Supervision,  chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière,  has  completed  an  urgent 
review  of  financial  supervision  in  the  European  Union  and  reported  its  findings  two  weeks 
ago.  This  Group  was  mandated  to  consider  the  future  of  European  supervision  and 
regulation in light of the financial crisis. Their Report summarises the serious situation that 
we are all facing and I quote “[s]ince July 2007, the world has faced, and continues to face, 
the most serious and disruptive financial crisis since 1929. Originating primarily in the United 
States, the crisis is now global, deep, even worsening. It has proved to be highly contagious 
and complex, rippling rapidly through different market segments and countries. Many parts of 
the financial system remain under severe strain. Some markets and institutions have stopped 
functioning.  This,  in  turn,  has  negatively  affected  the  real  economy.  Financial  markets 
depend on trust. But much of this trust has evaporated.” The Group concluded in its review 
that there have been real and important supervisory and regulatory failures. They  suggest 
two initiatives to repair the supervisory and regulatory system within the EU.  
First, there is a recognition that, while financial stability reports produced by central banks 
make a significant contribution to the analysis of risks and seek to influence financial market 
participants  through  “moral  suasion”,  there  is  a  need  to  add  operational  effectiveness  to 
these reports, to ensure that the risks identified therein can be acted upon in more specific 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 3
and timely ways. This is the weakness in existing arrangements that has been highlighted by 
the  current  crisis.  At  the  European  level,  the  de  Larosière  group  recommends  that  a 
European  Systemic  Risk  Council  should  be  set  up  under  the  auspices  of  the  European 
Central  Bank(ECB)  and  chaired  by  the  President  of  the  ECB.  Its  role  will  be  to  gather 
information on risks to the wider financial system, commonly labelled macro-prudential risks. 
However, of crucial importance, is the Group’s proposal for a mechanism to ensure follow-up 
action on these issues by supervisors across the EU.  
Second,  they  propose  a  new  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  –  essentially  an 
integrated network of European Financial Supervisors. Existing national supervisors, who are 
closest to the markets and institutions they supervise, would continue to carry out day-to-day 
supervision  but  a  European  centre  would  coordinate  the  application  of  common  high  level 
supervisory  standards  and  guarantee  strong  cooperation  with  other  supervisors.  Further, 
supervisors  will  operate  in  a  changed  international  regulatory  environment.  The  Group 
pointed to weaknesses in many international regulations, such as capital requirements and 
accounting standards, which they recommend should be reflected upon and revised.  
The  Government’s  recently  announced  plans  to  reform  the  regulatory  structure  here 
dovetails  with  these  international  developments.  The  proposed  arrangements  envisage  a 
much  more  explicit  link  to  be  put  in  place  between  financial  stability  and  prudential 
supervision. While the specific details have yet to be announced, we look forward to working 
closely  with  Government  and  other  relevant  parties  on  the  full  implementation  of  those 
reforms, to ensure that our arrangements evolve in line with best international standards and 
that the new approach is implemented rigorously.  
Both myself and my colleagues are available to take your questions now. 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2009
