Kiyohiko G Nishimura: “The past does not repeat itself, but it rhymes” – 
four lessons learned from the financial crises 
Remarks by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Panel 
Session  "Responding  to  the  Financial  Crises:  Lessons  Learned"  at  the  45th  Annual 
Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, Chicago, 8 May 2009. 
 Thank you, Chairman. It is always pleasant to come to Chicago, even when the topic of the 
discussion  is  challenging,  and  I  am  grateful  to  the  Chicago  Fed  for  inviting  me  to  this 
esteemed conference. 
Needless to say, we have already learned many hard lessons from the current crisis. For the 
sake of better financial regulation, I would like to focus on four lessons in particular. 
Lesson One 
1.  
The  first  lesson  is  encapsulated  in  Mark  Twain’s  famous  line,  “The  past  does  not  repeat 
itself, but it rhymes”. It is now fair to say that many thought Japan’s so-called “lost decade” 
was  a  problem  peculiar  to  Japan, and  also,  by  learning well  from  that  problem,  it  was  not 
going to be repeated elsewhere. Unfortunately, this has turned out not to be the case. 
In fact, we can see a remarkable resemblance in the development of the financial crises and 
subsequent  policy  responses  between  the  current  US  situation  and  Japan’s  lost  decade. 
Chart 1 shows a rough mapping of events in the time line between the current US crisis and 
Japan’s lost decade. 
In  both  countries,  the  problem  had  its  root  cause  in  the  property  markets.  In  the  US,  the 
legacy or toxic assets were sub-prime RMBS and their related securitized products; in Japan, 
they  were  commercial  properties  in  central  business  districts,  particularly  in  Tokyo.  It  was 
these toxic assets that gradually began to hurt banks’ balance sheets. 
We  then  saw  an  adverse  feedback  loop  develop  between  financial  distress  and  economic 
activity.  The  subsequent  policy  responses  by  both  Japan  and  the  US  also  bear  a  marked 
resemblance. 
However,  the  past  does  not  repeat  itself  exactly,  as  the  “time  scale”  and  the  degree  of 
“acceleration”  in  the  two  crises  were  different.  In  the  early  stages,  one  month  in  the 
development of the US crisis seemed to be equivalent to three months in the development of 
Japan’s, but the pace later accelerated, and it now appears that one US month is equal to 
five or six months in Japan of the 1990s. 
What  made  the  difference  to  the  time  scale  and  acceleration?  Innovations  and  structural 
changes  over  the  last  two  decades  have  no  doubt  played  an  important  role,  namely 
globalization, advances in information communication technology, and financial innovations 
and sophistication. Indeed, compared with Japan in the 1990s, the current crisis is far more 
complex, interconnected and global. 
Accordingly, the velocity of market dysfunction has been much faster and its contagion much 
more  widespread  than  in  Japan’s  case,  and  the  damage  inflicted  on  the  global  financial 
system  and  economy  has  been  far  more  devastating  than  Japan’s  non-performing  loan 
problem. 
BIS Review 58/2009 
 1
Lesson Two 
2.  
The second lesson we have learned from the crises is that once an adverse feedback loop 
has been started, it is extremely difficult and costly to stop it and to restore confidence. 
This  was  the  essence  of  Japan’s  experience;  a  series  of  fiscal  stimulus  packages  and  an 
accommodative  monetary  policy  could  not  generate  sustained  economic  growth,  as  the 
financial  system  was  severely  impaired  and  market  confidence  continued  to  be  eroded. 
Injections  of  public  capital  in  1998  and  1999  were  also,  in  retrospect,  not  sufficient  to 
convince the market to jump-start the economy. 
This is evident in Chart 2. At the same time, it was clear that the Japanese economy was 
suffering from a significant productivity slowdown from its peak in the 1980s. 
So  when  and  how  did  Japan’s  adverse  feedback  loop  stop?  With  hindsight,  perhaps  the 
turning point was October 2002, when the Financial Services Agency urged major banks to 
halve  their  NPL  ratios  by  the  end  of  March  2005,  and  pledged  to  monitor  their  efforts 
continuously and rigorously. The Bank of Japan also urged banks to carry out more rigorous 
evaluations of NPLs, and to dispose of them promptly based on those evaluations. 
In  retrospect,  the  timing  coincided  with  the  reflection  point  at  which  the  economy  had  just 
passed  the  trough  of  the  2001  recession,  and  began  to  recover,  thanks  to  strong  export 
demand due to the vigorous world economy. 
This was also the time when substantial progress was being made in corporate restructuring 
with  respect  to  the  so-called  “three  excesses”:  debt,  employment  and  production  capacity. 
This  restructuring  helped  the  final  pick  up.  In  this  way,  the  Japanese  economy  was,  in 
general, out of the woods around 2005, although some regional economies lagged behind, 
having benefited less from the global growth. 
Lesson Three 
3.  
I  will  move  on  to  the  third  lesson  and  ask  the  following  question:  “Is  it  possible  to  solve 
problems with troubled assets at an early stage?” I find the answer is unfortunately negative: 
“It is very difficult”. 
This is because when the valuation of troubled assets becomes highly uncertain, in the way 
Frank  Knight  described here  in  Chicago  eighty-some  years  ago,  a  “wait  and  see”  strategy 
may be the natural reaction for both sellers and buyers1. So, private initiatives alone may not 
be sufficient to solve the problem. We have a list of such private attempts, with the fate of the 
M-LEC  among  them,  as  well  as  the  Cooperative  Credit  Purchase  Corporation  in  Japan  in 
1993.  
At  the  same  time,  it  becomes  increasingly  difficult  and  costly  for  financial  institutions  with 
troubled assets to raise capital once the market becomes suspicious. 
However, governments usually face severe difficulty gaining public support for intervention in 
the  early  stages  of  a  crisis,  as  we  have  seen  recently,  while  the  financial  institutions 
themselves seek to avoid stigma and government interference. 
Lesson Four 
4.  
What is the core of the problem? Lesson Four of the crises is that it is the difficulty in getting 
“reasonable estimates” of losses and a “reasonable pricing” of troubled assets, on which both 
                                                 
1   See Nishimura, K. G., and H. Ozaki, “Irreversible investment and Knightian uncertainty” Journal of Economic 
Theory 136 (2007), pp668-694. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2009
troubled  assets  have  had  macro-systemic  effects, 
sellers  and  buyers  can  agree,  that  leads  to  erosion  in  confidence.  It  is  this  erosion  in 
confidence which then leads to an “excessive” aversion to uncertainty. 
There  are  a  number  of  related  factors  which  have  contributed  to  the  current  erosion  in 
confidence.  Firstly, 
including 
unprecedented levels of downside-correlation. 
Secondly,  these  troubled  assets’  losses  were  dynamic  and  evolved  over  time.  The 
“estimated losses” increased continuously as the economy slid into stagnation. Valuation of 
these assets, based on pre-crisis norms, grossly and consistently underestimated the losses, 
leading to an erosion of confidence in valuation methods and ultimately in the solvency of the 
institutions with these assets. 
Moreover,  troubled  assets  were  very  heterogeneous,  and  the  erosion  of  confidence  in 
existing  valuation  methods  set  an  adverse  selection  mechanism  in  motion,  leading  to  a 
marked deterioration in market liquidity. 
Let  me  briefly  summarize  the  implications  of  erosion  (or  contamination)  of  investors’ 
confidence  in  financial  institutions.  Once  they  lose  confidence,  these  investors  face 
“unknown  unknowns”  that  they  never  dreamed  of  before.  They  then  become  “excessively” 
averse to uncertainty surrounding the future prospects of financial institutions. That is, they 
make decisions based on the “worst possible case scenario” and try to minimize the losses 
they  would  incur  in  this worst  possible  case2.  Their  valuation  of  these  financial  institutions 
thereby  turns  out  to  be  “excessively”  pessimistic,  and  they  become  very  sensitive  to  any 
news that supposedly has some bearing on the worst possible case scenario. Moreover, they 
tend to “wait and see,” until they feel more confident about the valuation of troubled assets. 
The result of these factors and their erosion of confidence is a significant undervaluation of 
financial institutions at the trough of an economic downturn. 
Concluding remarks: so what should we do? 
5.  
Having seen the devastating effects of the adverse feedback loop and erosion of confidence, 
the natural reaction or desire would be to make every effort to avoid macro-systemic financial 
distress, and thus to regulate macro-systemically important financial institutions more closely 
and comprehensively, as was agreed at the G20 London summit, in order to prevent another 
crisis from developing. 
However, at the same time, it is also important to bear in mind the following three points:  
Firstly,  we  should  avoid  any  “pro-cyclicality”  of  reforming  zeal,  such  as  strengthening 
regulations in the downturn when it may further exacerbate the slump, or deregulating the 
industry in the upturn when vigilance is called for. Past experience, as exemplified in Lesson 
One, suggests we are very much prone to this tendency. 
Secondly, we should also bear in mind that no regulation is perfect. The origins of financial 
crises  often  lie  in  financial  institutions’  regulatory  arbitrages  and  investors’  complacent 
behavior based on “plausible deniability”. Also, we live in a dynamic world and are always 
subject to innovations and structural changes so that, as we have just learned, it is virtually 
impossible to identify and eliminate in advance all possible causes of financial distress. 
Thus,  thirdly,  we  should  prepare  for  the  conceivably  worst  case  in  “normal”  times,  when 
confidence is still maintained. Lessons Three and Four show the fundamental problem of the 
financial  crises  is  the  difficulty  in  raising  capital  when  it  is  most  needed,  because  of  the 
adverse  feedback  loop  and  erosion  of  confidence.  It  is  worth  exploring  the  feasibility  of 
                                                 
2   See Nishimura, K. G., and H. Ozaki, “An axiomatic approach to ε-contamination” Economic Theory 27 (2006), 
pp333-340. 
BIS Review 58/2009 
 3
macroeconomic  pre-committed  or  pre-paid  “safety-net”  schemes  to  complement  ex-ante 
regulations.  In  this  regard,  contingent  capital  schemes  and  their  variants  are  particularly 
worth exploring when designing regulatory reforms for macro-systemically important financial 
institutions.  
Several such schemes have been proposed within the framework of private initiatives: capital 
insurance by Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein; reverse convertible debenture by the Squam Lake 
Working Group; and “margin calls” on shareholders by Hart and Zingales. For example, in 
the  capital  insurance  scheme,  participating  institutions  pay  “systemic-risk  insurance” 
premiums to insurers in good times, and get capital from them in bad times when a systemic 
risk materializes. Since what we are preparing for is macro-systemic risk, the trigger should 
be  a  macroeconomic  event.  Other  proposed  schemes  also  rely  on  private  incentives  to 
supply capital to financial institutions when they need it. 
However,  private  initiatives  are  not  likely  to  be  sufficient  to  cope  with  financial  institutions’ 
capital shortages in macro-systemic events, since insurers may find themselves in distress 
and unable to provide the necessary capital3. Moreover, a large-scale systemic risk is very 
rare, and its probability is very hard to measure, if not impossible. Insurers would demand 
much higher premiums than usual to take on such almost totally unknown risk (“uncertainty” 
in the spirit of Frank Knight, as mentioned before). In that case, it may be reasonable to have 
a public-private partnership capital insurance scheme in which private insurers insure the risk 
up to a certain point and a government takes the rest (up to a pre-specified limit). This is in 
fact quite similar to earthquake insurance in Japan.  
These schemes, however, have their own problems. When insured, an institution may find it 
attractive to take further risk. We need appropriate supervision to prevent this moral hazard 
behavior. A non-participating institution may benefit from financial stability without paying its 
fair share of the costs. To avoid this free-rider problem, all systemically important institutions 
are  required  to  participate.  And  so  on.  Although  contingent  capital  schemes  need  further 
elaboration,  they  deserve  discussion  as  a  complement  to  the  regulatory  reforms  currently 
under consideration. 
Let me stop here for the time being. Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
3   This is not a remote possibility. In fact, a similar event happened in the current financial crisis. See Augstums, 
Ieva  M.,  “Berkshire  Hathaway  subsidiary  in  Kansas  to  stop  insuring  bank  deposits  above  FDIC  limit”, 
Associated Press, September 10, 2008. 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2009
U.S.
Japan
1: 
of 
US 
package
and 
Jun. 1996
Oct. 2007
Act of 2008
events 
First Policy Rate Cut
First Policy Rate Cut
between 
Feb. 2007 
Sept. 2007 
Oct. 2007 
26% decline in ABX-HE (BBB) in one month
Commercial land price started to decline sharply
Rough  mapping 
Cooperative Credit Purchase Corporation
Feb. 2008 President Bush signs the Economic Stimulus
18% decline in ABX-HE (AAA) in four months
Citigroup, BoA and JPMC announce plans for $80
billion Master Liquidity Enhancement
Conduit (to be abandoned in Dec. 07)
Jan. 1993 Financial institutions collectively establish
'93, '94, '95 fiscal stimulus packages
Jun. 1995 Govt. announces full protection for deposits for
4Q 1990
July 1991
2Q 1992 20% decline in commercial land price in one quarter
Aug. 1992 Govt. announces first significant fiscal stimulus
Japan 
Chart 
red  bracket:  major  events,  blue:  monetary  policy,  yellow:  fiscal  policy,  pink:  bank 
rescues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 2: Japan’s Real GDP Growth and Fiscal and Monetary Policy 
five years (to be extended further)
Government establishes Resolution and Collection
Bank (later to be reorganized as Resolution and Collection
Corporation)
Failure of Sanyo Securities, Hokkaido
Takushoku Bank, Tokuyo City Bank and
Yamaicihi Securities
Treasury Dept. purchases a total of $125
billion in preferred stock in 9 U.S. banks (more
to follow)
Treasury, FRB and FDIC jointly announce an
agreement with Citigroup to provide a package of
guarantees, liquidity access and capital
banks (1.8 trillion yen)
Introduction of temporary nationalization scheme,
new scheme for public capital fund injection and
etc. Temporary nationalization of Long Term
Credit Bank of Japan.
fiscal stimulus packages
'98, '99
Feb. 1999 BoJ introduces zero interest rate policy
Mar. 1999 Public capital fund injection to 15 major
Sep. 2008 FHFA places Fannie Mae and Fredie Mac in
Sep. 2008 Lehman Brothers Holdings files for Chapter 11
Dec. 2008 FOMC votes to establish a target range for the
Sep. 2008 FRB authorizes FRB NY to lend up to $85 billion to
Mar. 1998 Public capital fund injection to 21 major
effective federal fund rate of 0 to 0.25 percent
Oct. 2008 Establishment of $700 billion TARP
government conservatorship.
banks (7.5 trillion yen)
bankruptcy protection
Nov. 2008
Nov. 1997
Oct. 2008
Oct. 1998
AIG
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
FY
   %, y/y changes and contributions
% at end of FY
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
91
92
97
95
94
96
93
NetExports
Public Demand
Monetary policy rate (right scale)
98
99
00
01
05
06
07
03
02
04
Private Demand
RGDP Growth
BIS Review 58/2009 
 5
