Nout Wellink: A new structure for European and global financial 
supervision 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  37th  Economics  Conference,  Vienna,  14  May 
2009. 
 Introduction 
Reporters repeatedly ask me about my thoughts on the economic downturn. How protracted 
will the economic recession be? Will there be prolonged deflation? These are valid questions 
– questions we have all been asking ourselves over the past months. Fundamental questions 
about  what  we  learn  from  this  crisis  are  less  frequently  asked,  yet  these  are  exactly  the 
questions  we  should  be  asking  ourselves  now.  The  organisers  of  this  long-standing, 
excellent economics conference understand that all too well. Today and tomorrow, we will go 
beyond  the  crisis  and  look  at  the  economic  policy  agenda  for  the  years  to  come.  This 
morning, I present my views on the appropriate structure of European and global financial 
supervision.  I  restrict  myself  to  the  institutional  lessons  to  be  learned  and  the  institutional 
challenges to be tackled. 
European perspective 
Starting  from  a  European  perspective,  for  some  time  now  there  has  been  widespread 
agreement that the existing institutional set-up in Europe is unsustainable. The ongoing crisis 
has  strengthened  this  view  considerably.  While  large  European  financial  institutions  are 
cross-border in nature, the supervisory system in Europe clearly is not. Financial supervision 
remains  the  remit  of  national  member  states.  Differences  in  financial  supervisors’  national 
mandates  threaten  the  level  playing  field  in  Europe.  And  because  financial  supervisors 
operate under strictly national incentives, information-sharing and cooperation between them 
has not been sufficient. Up to now, macro-prudential supervision, which is aimed at limiting 
the frequency and severity of financial distress, has not only been too weak in Europe, but 
also too decentralised. This stands in contrast with other policy areas, in particular monetary 
policy, where decision-making is centralised and based on a much stricter analytical footing. 
Finally, most European central banks have published macro-prudential risk warnings. These 
have  been  ineffective,  however,  as  has  been  painfully  revealed  by  the  crisis.  We  have 
learned that such warnings are not effective unless they are translated into action and that 
we need to pay more attention to system-wide risks. 
In  light  of  these  and  other  lessons,  a  high-level  group  chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière 
recently  made  specific  proposals  on  the  structure  for  financial  supervision  in  Europe. 
According to the De Larosière group, a European Systemic Risk Council should be set up to 
strengthen  macro-prudential  supervision.  Likewise,  the  group  recommends  establishing  a 
European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors  to  strengthen  micro-prudential  supervision.  I 
would like to express my support for a quantum leap with respect to financial supervision in 
Europe, taking the De Larosière report as the starting point. 
Recommendation ESRC 
Let me begin with their proposal for a European Systemic Risk Council, a body that would be 
in  charge  of  performing  macro-prudential  supervision,  issuing  risk  warnings  and  giving 
recommendations  on  policy  measures.  While  the  idea  of  such  a  Risk  Council  is  broadly 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 1
welcomed, it also has encountered criticism. There have been comments on the Council’s 
suggested mandate as well as on its institutional design. 
Regarding the suggested mandate, there is the notion that the Council should refrain from 
giving  binding  macro-prudential  policy  recommendations.  While  the  key  pillars  of  macro-
prudential supervision are regulation, financial supervision, and monetary and fiscal policy, 
the Risk Council itself has no responsibility for these tasks, nor any decision-making powers. 
However, what the Risk Council can and actually should realise is better macro-prudential 
analysis at the European Level. It should communicate its findings to the competent bodies 
and monitor the follow up by the relevant authorities. Let me now be a bit more specific.  
First, we have to come up with a clear definition of macro-prudential analysis. Only when we 
have agreed on the definition of macro-prudential analysis can we determine the scope of 
the  Risk  Council’s  mandate.  Ideally,  the  Council’s  mandate  would  be  broad.  After  all,  the 
areas  determining  system-wide  risk  are  widespread.  To  be  effective,  macro-prudential 
analysis  should  not  be  limited  to  current  risks  but  also  examine  the  systemic  impact  of 
general developments in financial innovation, financial regulation and market design. 
Moreover, the Risk Council should be able to identify how risks are distributed in the financial 
system, evolve over time and can be amplified within the financial system and by interactions 
between the financial system and the real economy. The Risk Council should therefore have 
access to the necessary information, although there are constraints to information-sharing. 
For instance, sharing firm-specific data could prove problematic. Unfortunately, exactly this 
type of information is essential to macro-prudential supervisors. Firm-specific data allows for 
better analysis of the magnitude and distribution of key risks and also provides insight into 
the  inter-linkages  between  different  financial  institutions.  So,  in  the  interest  of  macro-
prudential analysis, we have to find a workable solution to firm-specific data sharing at the 
European level. 
Crucial in the whole process is the translation of the macro-prudential risk analysis into Risk 
Council conclusions. Contrary to what the De Larosière group proposes, these conclusions 
cannot – for reasons of governance – be binding. For the Council conclusions to be effective, 
it is important that these are clear, concise and directed to the relevant authorities, such as 
individual  supervisors  and  Member  States  but  also  European  bodies  like  the  Council  of 
Ministers and the future European System of Financial Supervision. Needless to say that the 
Risk  Council  should  monitor  and  evaluate  the  follow  up  given  to  the  Risk  Council’s 
conclusions. The Risk Council should be entitled to give its opinion on the measures taken, if 
necessary on a confidential basis. 
The  second  criticism  of  the  Risk  Council  is  of  a  more  institutional  nature.  Regarding  the 
composition,  a  complaint  is  that  EU  central  banks  will  be  overrepresented  and  EU 
supervisors  will  be  underrepresented  in  the  Risk  Council.  Frankly,  I  agree.  Inviting  ECB 
General  Council  members  to  sit  on  the  Risk  Council,  while  national  supervisors  are  only 
represented  by  the  three  presidents  of  the  Supervisory  Authorities  makes  the  balance 
uneven.  Equally  important  is  that  this  proposal  does  not  do  justice  to  the  importance  of 
supervisory information for macro-prudential analysis and underestimates the importance of 
a real dialogue between central banks and active supervisors. However, with more than 50 
national  supervisors  in  the  EU,  it  is  important  to  strike  a  balance  between  participation  of 
supervisors and the effectiveness of the Risk Council. If membership is extended to national 
supervisors we can perhaps involve them on a rotation basis. It goes without saying that the 
chairs of the European level three committees (the future Authorities) should become full and 
permanent  members  of  the  Risk  Council.  An  issue  to  address  is  whether  the  national 
supervisors should have voting rights. Here I hesitate; after all, macro-prudential supervision 
is the primary responsibility of central banks. 
This brings me to the choice for the ECB president as chairman of the Risk Council. Non-
euro area EU countries have opposed this, as it would exclude the possibility that one of their 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2009
representatives would chair the Risk Council. However, I am still of the opinion that the ECB 
president is best positioned in the EU to chair the Risk Council. 
Third, there is also still lack of clarity on the working procedures of the Risk Council, including 
the preparation of its meetings. Here, I see a role for the Banking Supervision Committee, at 
present  an  ESCB  body,  composed  of  EU  central  banks  and  financial  supervisors.  The 
Banking Supervision Committee can only play this role if its mandate and composition are 
changed.  The  mandate  of  the  BSC  would  be  to  present  clear  risk  analyses  to  the  Risk 
Council,  even  if  controversial.  The  cross-sectional  dimension  of  the  financial  system  also 
pleads for expansion of BSC membership to include supervisors of insurance, securities and 
pension firms. This could be achieved through participation of one representative of CEIOPS 
and CESR, similar to the current participation of CEBS. 
Recommendation ESFS 
The De Larosière group has also given advice on how to address shortcomings in the micro-
prudential supervisory structure. In this respect they propose to set up a European System of 
Financial  Supervision,  being  a  network  of  national  supervisors  and  so-called  European 
Authorities.  These  European  Authorities  would  be  the  successors  of  the  current  Level  3 
Committees CEBS, CEIOPS and CESR. The Authorities would continue to perform all the 
functions of the Level 3 Committees but, in addition, would carry out  a number of specific 
new tasks. As there are many, I will not go over them one by one. The crucial point is that 
these new tasks would bring about a transfer of decision-making powers from the national to 
the  European  level.  Notably,  the  group  advises  the  European  Authorities  to  have  binding 
mediation powers in case of cross-border disputes between national supervisors. 
I  fully  agree  with  the  group  that  stronger  cross-border  supervision  in  Europe  is  highly 
desirable.  In  fact,  I  would  be  in  favour  of  even  more  far-reaching  proposals  towards 
supranational  supervision  in  Europe.  But  only  if  the  necessary  requirements  for  such  a 
historical move are fulfilled. The most important requirement concerns the issue of burden-
sharing. Indeed, the Achilles' heel of this part of the De Larosière report is that too little is 
said  about  this  central  issue.  Before  we  can  transfer  decision-making  powers  to  the 
international  level,  we  really  should  first  agree  on  burden-sharing  arrangements.  So  the 
advice on the European System of Financial Supervision is not sufficiently balanced. I see 
two  solutions  to  this.  One  is  to  decide  on  EU  burden-sharing  arrangements,  which  is  of 
course easier said than done. The other, second-best solution would be to strive for the time 
being for less decision-making powers at the European level than has been suggested by the 
group, and working hard on solutions for the burden sharing issue. 
I am in favour of burden-sharing arrangements at the European level, though fully aware of 
all  the  difficulties  involved.  But  if  the  end  goal  is  European  supervision  for  pan-European 
financial institutions, there is no alternative. For burden sharing arrangements to be credible, 
they should be legally binding and preferably enshrined in the Treaty. It is a misconception 
that effective burden-sharing arrangements can be made in Memoranda of Understanding. 
Burden-sharing  arrangements  should  also  be  incentive-compatible.  To  this  end,  a  mix  of 
general and specific burden-sharing is preferable. Under an arrangement of general burden-
sharing,  all  member  states  contribute  proportionally,  e.g.  to  the  size  of  their  economy, 
implying  a  partial  transfer  of  budgetary  responsibility  to  the  EU  level.  This  makes  sense, 
since the stability of the European financial system is a public good and of benefit to Europe 
as a whole. The proportion of general burden-sharing should be kept relatively low however, 
as  it  involves  cross-border  fiscal  transfers.  This  explains  why  specific  burden-sharing 
arrangements are also needed. Under such arrangements, only the countries confronted with 
a financial institution in difficulty contribute. Firm-specific arrangements give member states 
the right incentives to perform their supervisory duties well. 
Although  a  decision  on  burden-sharing  is  a  necessary  condition  for  a  fundamentally  new 
European  supervisory  structure,  we  can  still  make  progress  without  it.  In  this  respect  I 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 3
envisage grey and white areas. White areas refer to tasks that should be performed at the 
EU level. These tasks include the licensing and supervision of EU-wide institutions, such as 
credit  rating  agencies and  platforms  for  over-the-counter derivatives.  It  is  also  conceivable 
that  the  Lamfalussy  process  can  be  further  streamlined  by  transferring  certain  decision-
making  powers  to  the  Authorities.  Close  to  the  white  areas,  there  are  grey  areas,  which 
relate to tasks that can be transferred to the European level, but only if certain requirements 
are fulfilled. For instance, under the strict requirement that the confidentiality of supervisory 
information  is  guaranteed,  the  supervisory  Authorities  could  be  given  the  competence  to 
send binding information requests to national supervisors. 
One  last  point  I  would  like  to  make  about  the  new  micro-prudential  supervisory  structure 
relates  to  its  sectoral  design.  The  group’s  advice  to  start  with  sector-specific  Authorities 
should  be  reconsidered.  The  distinctions  between  financial  sectors  and  products  have 
become blurred, which makes a sector-based supervisory approach less effective. Indeed, 
the trend in national supervisory structures is towards cross-sectoral supervision. The new 
European  supervisory  structure  should  follow  this  trend  and  therewith  reduce  the  risk  for 
supervisory underlap and overlap.  
Turning to global perspective 
So  far  I  have  discussed  the  challenges  and  trade-offs  involved  in  transforming  the 
supervisory  structure  in  Europe.  While  necessary,  this  is  not  a  sufficient  step  and  more 
needs  to  be  done.  The  global  nature  of  the  crisis  underlines  that  the  financial  stability  of 
Europe also depends on the quality of financial supervision outside Europe. Let me briefly 
raise  just  two  key  issues  regarding  international  supervision  that  warrant  further  attention, 
without going into detail. 
Scope of supervision 
The first issue is the scope of financial supervision, which should be broadened. Key players 
in  the  international  financial  arena, such  as credit  rating  agencies,  hedge  funds  and  credit 
counterparties, are not or only very lightly supervised. Yet, the crisis has demonstrated that 
their  activities  could  pose  system-wide  risks, either  directly  or  by  triggering  excessive  risk-
taking  behaviour  by  financial  institutions.  Some  form  of  supervision  of  these  institutions  is 
therefore legitimate. But this task won’t be easy as some hurdles are hard to overcome. 
The European Commission has taken steps to supervise credit rating agencies in Europe. As 
I mentioned, it appears logical to license and supervise such agencies at the European level. 
However,  given  that  credit  rating  agencies  are  globally  active,  a  global  approach  may  be 
even  more  effective.  The  proposals  of  the  European  Commission  constitute  a  first  and 
necessary  step  towards  global  supervision  of  credit  rating  agencies  in  the  years  to  come. 
With regard to hedge funds, it is beyond dispute that they may under certain circumstances 
have  a  destabilizing  influence,  although  they  did  not  trigger  the  present  crisis.  As  indirect 
supervision of hedge funds, via their regulated counterparties, has proven less effective in 
limiting the risks these entities pose, direct and tighter supervision of hedge funds is needed. 
In this respect, the Commission’s recent proposal on a regulatory and supervisory framework 
for hedge funds and other alternative investment managers can be welcomed. Note however 
that supervision on hedge funds is complicated by the lack of an encompassing definition of 
hedge  funds  and  the  risk  that  these  entities  will  move  to  places  with  a  more  hedge  fund 
friendly regime. The first logical step is to register hedge funds, to force them to report on 
developments in core financial indictors and open positions in excess of certain thresholds 
and to subject hedge fund managers to a fit and proper test.  
The second issue concerns the need to improve the cooperation among supervisors. Under 
the auspices of the G20 quite a few global colleges of supervisors have been established to 
foster international cooperation between supervisors. It is expected that more global colleges 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2009
for significant cross-border firms will become active in the near future. While colleges are a 
sensible approach to dealing with the global nature of the financial industry, they have their 
limitations, especially in a global context. In contrast to EU colleges, global colleges have no 
legal  basis,  and  this  hampers  supervisory  cooperation  and  information-sharing.  DNB 
currently  chairs  two  global  colleges.  In  these  colleges  we  provide  for  several  IT  tools  to 
encourage  as  much  information-sharing  and  cooperation  as  possible,  provided  that  the 
confidentiality of supervisory information is assured. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. The crisis has reminded us all too well that a new 
structure for financial supervision in Europe is urgently needed. In a European context, the 
proposals of De Larosière group are a good point of departure, though specific amendments 
are required. At the end of May, the European Commission will present its reaction to the De 
Larosière  group  proposals.  I  will  give  our  present  position.  To  improve  macro-prudential 
supervision,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Council  should  be  set  up  as  soon  as  possible. 
Open issues about its mandate and institutional design should be resolved. Regarding micro-
prudential  supervision,  I  am  in  favour  of  more  centralised  European  decision-making,  but 
only if the necessary requirements for such a leap forward are fulfilled. The central issue we 
need to settle on is burden-sharing at the European level. In a global context, the scope of 
supervision should be broadened and include all financial systemically-relevant institutions. 
In  line  with  the  G20  declaration,  the  functioning  of  colleges  of  supervisors  should  be 
supported. 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 5
