Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Antecedents of the global financial crisis – a 
multi-factorial phenomenon 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Sixth  Sec.  Alfonso  Yuchengco  Policy  Conference, 
Makati City, 2 February 2009. 
 Secretary  Alfonso  Yuchengco,  distinguished  guests  and  fellow  stakeholders  from  the 
business sector, the government and the academe, ladies and gentlemen good morning.  
First, let me thank the Board of Trustees and Secretary Yuchengco for inviting me to your 
sixth policy conference. It is my pleasure to be able to share with you today some thoughts 
on  a  subject  which  has  occupied  global  attention,  especially  since  the  last  four  months  of 
2008 – when marquee  financial institutions in Wall Street started to crumble, and “bailout” 
became a buzzword in global financial markets.  
Let me put in a nutshell the Philippines’ economic situation in 2008. What we had seen as an 
ideal convergence of low inflation and high growth in 2007 was clearly disrupted by the highly 
volatile  oil  and  food  prices,  the  spread  of  the  subprime  mortgage  woes  of  the  US  to 
international  financial  markets,  and  the  recession  in  some  key  advanced  economies  and 
economic  slowdown  elsewhere.  Forecasts  for  this  year  and  2010  continue  to  be  revised 
downward, as more concrete data become available. A bleaker outlook is in the offing, with 
the  impact  of  the  crisis  trickling  down  to  the  real  and  external  sectors,  affecting  trade, 
investment and consumer demand.  
But before we get into the details of the extent and implications of the crisis on our country’s 
development momentum, I suppose it is important to ask the question: 
How did the current global financial crisis occur in the first place? What led to the creation of 
“bubbles”?  
I believe that there are two layers to the reasons for the crisis. The first layer I will refer to as 
the “superstructure” or the physical – what is happening and visible to the naked eye. The 
second layer is the “microstructure” or the psychology – what is underlying those that can be 
seen. 
Let me talk about the “superstructure” first. 
The roots of the US financial crisis can be traced back to the early years of this decade when 
the  United  States  aggressively  eased  its  monetary  policy  to  facilitate  recovery  from  the 
dotcom bubble and the September 11 terrorist attacks.  
If you will recall, the US Federal Reserve began a cycle of cuts in the Fed funds target rate 
from 6.5 percent in May 2000 to as low as one percent by June 2003. On the fiscal front, 
large public deficit spending beginning in 2001 was pursued to prop up the economy which 
was then on the brink of recession. 
The low interest rate regime fueled a boom in mortgages, including among borrowers with 
doubtful credit histories or those fancifully called NINJA loans – that is, loans to No Income, 
No Job or Assets loans. Thus, house prices in the US began rising in 2000, surpassing the 
growth of disposable income. 
The excessive lending itself would not have brought in such great financial distress because 
if the borrowers turned out to be poor borrowers, then foreclosures would just have followed. 
However,  what  made  this  risky  behavior  turn  into  a  crisis  event  was  the  bundling  of 
mortgages by various financial institutions into complex securities such as collateralized debt 
obligations (CDOs) which were largely unregulated.  
BIS Review 13/2009 
 1
These  complex  transactions  were  designed  in  search  for  yield  and  new  markets.  The 
securitized  products  were  sold  to  banks,  Wall  Street  firms  and  overseas  investors.  The 
continued appreciation of house prices ensured attractive returns for these mortgage-related 
securities.  
With  too  much  liquidity  in  the  US  economy  and  with  the  price  level  creeping  up,  the  US 
Federal Reserve started to rein inflation in.  
In June 2004, the Fed began a cycle of hikes in the Federal funds target rate, lifting the Fed 
funds target rate from one percent to as high as 5.25 percent just two years later (or by June 
2006).  
When  interest  rates  were  raised,  an  asset  bubble  burst  became  imminent.  The  elevated 
interest rates discouraged availments of mortgage loans, which led to a build up in unsold 
homes. This precipitated the steep descent in house prices from their peak in 2006. As of 
end-November  2008,  the  S&P/Case-Shiller  index  of  20  major  metropolitan  areas  showed 
that home prices in the US had fallen by around 25 percent below their July 2006 peak.  
The  immediate  damage  was  felt  in  sub-prime  mortgages  –  not  only  the  most  highly 
leveraged  sector  in  the  economy  but  also  that  with  the  weakest  capital  support,  least 
transparency,  and  on  which  the  poorest  due  diligence  had  been  done.  Initially,  market 
participants  and  policymakers  felt  the  damage  was  an  isolated  case  that  could  be  “fixed”. 
This  belief  partly  mirrored  the  (over)  reliance  on  the  most  modern  risk  management 
techniques related to derivatives and structured products. It also partly reflected inadequate 
information on the extent to which sub-prime exposures had infected the balance sheets of 
financial institutions. 
With  the  glut  in  supply  and  as  housing  prices  fell,  the  value  of  the  collaterals  supporting 
mortgage loans eroded. Higher delinquency rates on sub-prime mortgage loans triggered a 
wave  of  bankruptcies  of  sub-prime  mortgage  lenders.  As  bankruptcy  filings  by  mortgage 
lenders mounted, unnerved investors began draining liquidity from financial markets.  
With banks holding on to their cash to cover losses, credit markets started to seize up. Even 
creditworthy  borrowers  began  experiencing  difficulty  in  borrowing.  Firms/  households  cut 
back on investment and consumption, causing a slump in economic activity, precipitating a 
recessionary cycle. 
Moreover, since the loans were securitized and sold to other investors as credit derivatives, 
the  defaults  in  the  mortgage  lending  market  spread  to  the  wider  credit  markets,  multiplied 
several-fold  by  leverage.  Eventually,  losses  in  subprime  mortgage  lending  and  credit 
derivatives  would  spill  over  to  the  broader  financial  markets  and  to  financial  institutions 
elsewhere that invested in US mortgage bonds and structured products.  
There were other factors that could have contributed to the credit crisis.  
Mark-to-market  accounting  standards  exacerbated  selling  pressures  during  the  period  of 
deflating house prices as banks were forced to recognize valuation losses in their balance 
sheets.  
The fragmented supervision in the United States led to lack of regulation over segments of 
the financial system.  
Even credit rating agencies have gone under scrutiny for giving investment-grade ratings to 
securitization transactions that were backed by sub-prime mortgage loans. These high credit 
ratings encouraged the flow of investor funds to these securitized instruments. Critics claim 
that  conflicts  of  interest  were  involved,  as  rating  agencies  were  paid  by  firms,  such  as 
investment banks, that originated and sold the debt to investors.  
However,  beneath  what  can  be  seen  by  the  naked  eye  is  the  "micro  structure"  or  the 
underpinning of the crisis.  
2 
 BIS Review 13/2009
There is a quote from Robert Shiller. He said "too little attention has been paid to the most 
fundamental cause (for the housing crisis): the contagious optimism, seemingly impervious to 
facts, that often takes hold when prices are rising. Bubbles are primarily social phenomena; 
until  we  understand  and  address  the  psychology  that  fuels  them,  they're  going  to  keep 
forming".  
I  am  a  believer  that  all  these  over-structures  could  be  explained  by  underlying  market 
psychology  –  Greed.  Ignorance.  Herd  mentality.  Disregard  for  or  misuse  of  information. 
Exuberance. Irrationality. 
If we look back at the 1997 Asian financial crisis, and the other crises during the last three 
decades,  the  pattern  seems  to  be  quite  similar:  crisis  was  preceded  by  rapid  credit 
expansion,  which  manifested  itself  in  asset  prices.  These  gains,  of  course,  provided  the 
collateral to justify even more lending. The euphoria generated by such gains also seemed to 
affect both the perception of risk and the appetite for risk-taking, on the side of both lenders 
and  borrowers.  As  a  result,  leveraging  increased  even  as  the  general  quality  of  credits 
deteriorated – unfortunately, this was commonly “not perceived” at the time.  
And, as we realize now, the so-called “Minsky moment” invariably comes. At a certain point, 
usually  when  earlier  expectations  about  profits  or  future  income  growth  begin  to  look 
unrealistic, the whole endogenous process goes into reverse. In effect, boom turns to bust, 
with  the  stress  in  the  financial  system  commonly,  but  not  universally,  aggravating  the 
economic damage on the downside.  
Together,  the  superstructure  and  the  microstructure  of  the  crisis  would  explain  the  bubble 
that just burst.  
In  hindsight,  it  is  clear  that  global  financial  activities  had  outpaced  the  financial  systems’ 
ability  to  manage  these  activities  in  an  orderly  manner.  Thus,  the  air  of  uncertainty  and 
vulnerability as well as a general sense of eroded confidence now looms in both industrial 
and emerging market economies.  
One could even call this a Black Swan Event – a large-impact, hard-to-predict and rare event 
beyond the realm of normal expectations.  
While the epicenter of the financial turmoil is in the US, tremors have been felt worldwide. 
The slowdown in growth spread to Europe, amid weak business and consumer sentiment, 
terms of trade losses, and tightening credit conditions.  
The  impact  on  Asia  has  come  through  risk  aversion  as  evidenced  by:  1)  the  reversal  of 
equity capital inflows; 2) widening of sovereign credit spreads; and 3) heightened volatility in 
exchange rates.  
Apprehension  has  also  risen  in  the  Asian  economies,  particularly  in  terms  of  reduced 
production, and weaker consumer demand. 
These  developments  necessitated  coordinated  policy  actions  among  major  advanced 
economies to support the global financial system on a scale not seen for decades.  
Many  central  banks  have  taken  strong  actions  to  cut  interest  rates  and  expand  liquidity 
provision  both  in  local  and  foreign  currencies.  Other  measures  taken  include  capital 
injections  into  financial  institutions,  expansion  of  deposit  insurance  and  purchase  of 
distressed assets.  
On  fiscal  policy,  many  countries  have  announced  and  are  already  implementing  sizeable 
stimulus packages.  
Evidently,  there  is  no  “one-size-fits-all”  policy  mix.  Some  countries  have  more  fiscal  and 
monetary space than others.  
This brings me to the next – and to most of us here – the central question – how will the 
Philippine economy fare amid this highly challenging global economic turmoil? 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 3
Admittedly,  we  are  not  immune  to  what  is  happening  around  the  world,  but  there  are 
insulations,  cushions,  buffers  that  can  serve  the  Philippine  economy  in  good  stead  in  this 
challenging period. 
Let me provide some details on these buffers. 
Output growth has continued at a respectable pace and it continues to be demand-driven. 
The 4.6 percent GDP growth for 2008 was a respectable growth performance vis-à-vis those 
of our Asian neighbors. It is noteworthy that the country’s GDP growth for 2008 is within the 
country’s long-term growth trend.  
Domestic  demand  continues  to  be  the  main  driver  of  growth  in  the  economy,  specifically 
personal consumption. Demographics – particularly in the form of the Philippines’ young and 
economically active population – underpins the view that consumption will continue to propel 
economic growth even in these difficult times. Moreover, income levels are such that majority 
of the population has a greater propensity to consume. 
Weakening  global  demand  is  causing  commodity  prices  to  retreat.  Reflecting  the  global 
economic downturn, oil prices began to ease starting July 2008. 
Partly  because  of  this,  headline  inflation  dropped  sharply  lower  in  December  2008  to  8.0 
percent year-on-year. This brought the average inflation in 2008 to 9.3 percent. Lower fuel 
prices  and  slower  price  increases  of  food  and  light,  as  well  as  of  transportation  and 
communication services accounted for the retreat of inflation. 
With the easing in the prices of oil and other non-oil commodities in the world market and 
given  moderating  inflation  expectations,  inflation  in  the  Philippines  is  expected  to  further 
decelerate – and be within the target range – in 2009 (2.5-4.5%) and 2010 (3.5-5.5%).  
This  gives  some  flexibility  to  monetary  policy  to  support  growth  and  stabilize  financial 
conditions, while being highly attentive to price pressures. 
Fiscal reforms, particularly the VAT reform, have strengthened the Philippines’ ability to cope 
with externally-induced challenges, as fiscal consolidation has improved our debt profile and 
markets’  view  about  the  commitment  of  our  authorities  to  difficult  but  much-needed  fiscal 
rectitude. 
Recent adjustments in fiscal targets could also provide policy space to support growth. The 
postponement of the balanced-budget objective due to the expected slowdown in the global 
economy will provide countercyclical fiscal space for the government to boost infrastructure 
spending  and  enhance  social  safety  nets  to  support  the  most  vulnerable  segments  of  the 
population.  
The fiscal stimulus – provided that it adheres to best principles of what some would call the 4 
T’s  (spending  that  is  timely,  targeted,  transparent  and  temporary)  or  as  some  would  say 
“spending that gives the most bang for the buck” – should be supportive of durable, robust 
growth.  
On  the  external  front,  we  have  continued  to  build  up  our  international  reserves  for  self-
insurance  to  reduce  our  vulnerabilities  to  the  inevitable  moods  and  swings  of  international 
financial markets. 
At  year-end  2008,  our  reserves  rose  to  US$37.6  billion.  This  suffices  to  cover  about  6 
months of imports of goods and payments of services and income, or alternatively, it could 
cover our short-term external debt based on residual maturity about three times over.  
We  were  able  to  do  this  because  our  external  position  remained  in  surplus  in  2008, 
supported by remittances of overseas Filipinos as well as higher services receipts (including 
from tourism & business process outsourcing). 
Meanwhile,  the  Philippine  financial  system  remains  stable  notwithstanding  the  challenges 
brought about by the global financial crisis.  
4 
 BIS Review 13/2009
The Asian financial crisis of 1997 had imprinted valuable lessons which provided the needed 
cushion for our banking system to weather the current turmoil. For instance, we regulated the 
real  estate  sector  in  relation  to  housing  and  mortgage  markets;  we  implemented  stronger 
bank supervision anchored on managing risk exposures; we reduced non-performing loans 
via  asset  vehicles;  we  implemented  macro-prudential  surveillance  with  due  diligence  in 
implementing internationally accepted standards via the Basel II accord; and we participated 
actively in implementing collaboration among Asian neighbors for coordinated responses and 
information-sharing to mitigate contagion effects and spillovers. 
Importantly too, the Philippines is relatively well-insulated from key transmission channels of 
the global financial strains that are affecting other emerging market economies (EMEs). This 
is so for the following reasons: 
Reasons: 
• 
Philippine  financial  institutions  have  relatively  limited  exposure  to  structured  credit 
and  related  derivative  products  which  were  the  main  cause  of  the  large  losses  of 
crisis-affected international banks. It is helpful to point out that derivatives licenses in 
the Philippines have been given out prudently.  
Philippine  banks  are  more  domestically  oriented,  and  rely  more  on  traditional 
banking  services  such  as  deposits  than  on  complex  products  like  derivatives  as 
sources of funds. Corporate sector bond financing is also minimal and private sector 
reliance on external loans is limited.  
Lastly,  while  credit  growth  has  been  steady  and  significant,  it  has  not  fueled 
concerns of overheating or asset price booms.  
  What should we expect in 2009? 
Even though we could lay claim to the “island of calm” status mentioned by economists in 
evaluating  the  Philippine  economic  situation  amidst  the  crisis,  and  even  though  we  have 
buffers that we could rely upon as we brave the current financial storm, we should not rest on 
our laurels for the effects of the crisis are just beginning to show their fangs and just starting 
to bite into our pockets.  
The real and external sectors are yet to experience tougher challenges so let me share the 
policy thrusts of the BSP this year: 
Monetary policy in 2009 will continue to focus on our primary mandate of price stability. As 
inflation  risks  moderate,  the  BSP  will  carefully  consider  opportunities  for  monetary  policy 
easing amidst a possible tightening in financial conditions. We will also continue to ensure 
appropriate  levels  of  market  liquidity  to  maintain  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  financial 
markets.  Through  these,  we  hope  to  provide  the  necessary  conditions  that  will  allow 
economic  growth  to  continue.  We  will  at  the  same  time  endeavor  to  keep  inflation  at 
manageable levels as this creates the environment for sustainable long-term growth. 
The BSP’s external sector policy will remain focused on ensuring our external vulnerabilities 
are reduced. We expect to continue to post a surplus in our BOP, mainly due to steady OF 
remittances and receipts from the BPO sector, coupled with a reduced level of imports. This 
will give us the opportunity to further beef up reserves for self-insurance. We will continue to 
pursue a market-determined exchange rate to allow us to maintain external competitiveness. 
We will also engage in policies that would sustain a manageable external debt profile. 
Banking sector policies will remain geared towards the financial system’s soundness in terms 
of greater risk management, stronger capital base, bolder disclosure mechanisms, and better 
corporate governance standards. Since most of the experts point to the lack of regulation as 
one of the root causes of the US subprime market crisis, it is therefore tempting to swing to 
the  other  extreme  of  over  regulation.  I  don’t  believe  that  we  should  move  towards  that 
direction.  Instead,  what  I  believe  should  occur  is  a  move  towards  greater  accountability. 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 5
Thus, the BSP will sustain its reforms that would lead to improved disclosure practices, better 
risk  management  and  higher  standards  of  governance  in  the  banking  system.  We  will 
continue  to  pursue  regulation  that  would  make  the  markets  work  more  efficiently  and 
advance consumer protection. 
Realizing  that  the  current  crisis  has  taken  on  a  global  nature,  we  will  further  strengthen 
engagements with our regional peers to share information, discuss emerging developments, 
and  pool  resources,  if  necessary  even  foreign  exchange  reserves.  It’s  interesting  that  the 
current financial turmoil took on a turn for the better once the major economies began to act 
in concert. Confidence had been quickly eroding until then. The coordinated and cooperative 
policies that were put in place by the US and European central banks and finance ministries 
beginning  October  last  year,  have  helped  restore  some  traction  in  the  markets  and 
subsequently  improved  market  confidence  not  only  in  the  major  economies,  but  also  in 
emerging markets. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 2009 will be a critical year for our economy. But we should look at 
this crisis as like the gift of fire of old. Fire is important in all facets of our lives including the 
need  for  light,  power  and  heat.  Yet  fire  is  not  without  risks  to  life  and  property.  What  is 
important is to be able to master it and harness it to serve human needs. Thus, this crisis 
should pose a challenge to us to put together and implement policies this year and beyond 
that would enhance the resilience and the flexibility of our economy. 
Without  a  doubt,  this  crisis  shall  test  our  resiliency  and  character,  and  it  shall  determine 
whether  our  buffers  would  keep  us  afloat  amidst  troubled  waters.  The  Philippines  is  not  a 
newbie in terms of facing crises, for we have hurdled quite a number of these in the past. 
Each crisis we encountered was unique in its roots and causes. But we have learned from 
each, every time. It’s too early to make prescriptions and judgments, given that much is still 
to  unfold.  I  trust  that  the  audience  could  share  my  vision  in  seeing  a  glass  half-filled  with 
water as “half-full” rather than “half-empty”. Let us also remain vigilant and prepared for any 
circumstances that could come our way. 
Let me end my remarks this morning with a quote from John D. Rockefeller. He said "These 
are days when many are discouraged. In the years of my life, depressions have come and 
gone. Prosperity has always returned and will again."  
Thank you very much. Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
6 
 BIS Review 13/2009
