Lucas Papademos: The role of the ECB in financial crisis management 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference on “The cost of the financial crisis: Planning an exit strategy”, organised by the 
Bank  of  Greece  and  the  Hellenic  Observatory  at  the  London  School  of  Economics  and 
Political Science, Athens, 27 May 2009. 
 Introduction  
I.  
“Τα πάντα ρεῖ” (all is in flux) Heraclitus asserted about 2500 years ago. His aphorism is truly 
relevant to our understanding and assessment of the financial and economic developments 
over the past two years. The financial crisis has evolved over time, and so have the policies 
employed  to  counteract  its  impact  as  well  as  the  public  debate  about  its  causes  and 
consequences.  A  year  ago,  gatherings  such  as  this  one  would  have  been  dedicated  to 
identifying the underlying sources and the other contributing factors of the turmoil in financial 
markets.  Six  months  ago,  as  the  crisis  deepened  and  broadened  after  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers, public policies and discussions concentrated on how to restore confidence 
in  the  banking  system  and  deal  with  the  significant  weakening  of  economic  activity 
worldwide. More recently, the attention has progressively focused on the new economic and 
financial landscape that is likely to emerge after the crisis, and on devising “exit strategies” 
from  the  extraordinary  policies  currently  pursued.  This  conference  is  at  the  heart  of  the 
present phase of the evolving debate and I would like to thank the Bank of Greece and the 
Hellenic Observatory at the London School of  Economics and Political Science for inviting 
me to contribute to this discussion. 
The general theme of this conference highlights the cost of the financial crisis, the policies 
being  implemented  to  manage  and  resolve  it,  and  the  plans  for  an  exit  strategy.  The 
financial, economic and social costs are indeed staggering, and they are likely to rise. A few 
figures will underscore the magnitude of the costs incurred so far. With regard to financial 
costs, the total writedowns on the assets of global banks over the period 2007-2010 have 
been  estimated  by  the  IMF  at  USD  2.8  trillion  of  which  about  one-third,  just  under  USD  1 
trillion, have already occurred.1 In the euro area, the writedowns of banks reported so far, 
until  early  May,  had  reached  USD  179  billion,  roughly  18%  of  the  total  losses  incurred  by 
banks  globally  to  date.  The  value  of  net  wealth  has  also  declined  substantially  since  the 
turmoil erupted. For example, the market value of equity in Europe had fallen by EUR 3.65 
trillion, or 45%, from its previous peak in July 2007 until late May 2009.2 Finally, with regard 
to the economic cost of the crisis, one simple but encompassing measure is the aggregate 
output lost due to the recession that was triggered by the financial turmoil. In the euro area, 
the cumulated output loss from the second quarter of 2008 (when growth turned negative) 
                                                 
1   The  total  potential  writedowns  on  the  assets  of  global  financial  institutions  (including  banks  pension  funds, 
insurance companies and hedge funds) over the period 2007-2010 have been estimated at USD 4.1 trillion, of 
which about two thirds (USD 2.8 trillion) are expected to be borne by banks (see International Monetary Fund 
(2009)).  These  estimates,  which  include  future  potential  writedowns  until  the  end  of  2010,  are  based  on  a 
number  of  projections  of  future  economic  activity  and  assumptions  about  asset  market  developments,  and 
estimates of the likely impairment charges on loans. They are, therefore, subject to a substantial margin of 
error. 
2   Figures  based  on  S&P  European  350  Index.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  this  index  has  recovered 
significantly since March 2009; market capitalisation rose from €3.39 trillion on 9 March to €4.55 trillion by 26 
May 2009. 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 1
until the first quarter of this year, amounts to 5% of GDP, which is equivalent to about EUR 
400 billion.3  
In  order  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  the  crisis  on  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy, 
governments  and  central  banks  have  taken  strong  and  decisive  action.  Indeed,  in  many 
cases  they  have  implemented  measures  that  are  extraordinary  in  size  and  scope.  As  a 
central banker, I will concentrate in my remarks on the role of central banks – and of the ECB 
in  particular  –  in  dealing  with  the  current  financial  crisis  and  establishing  conditions  that 
support the economy’s recovery and return to a path of sustainable growth and price stability. 
In particular, I will address the following issues: 
• 
first, the available central bank policy instruments in managing a financial crisis and 
the rationale for the measures actually taken; 
second, the effectiveness of the ECB’s policies in promoting the orderly functioning 
of money markets, in fostering the provision of credit to firms and households, and, 
more generally, in countering the effects of the crisis on the financial system and the 
broader economy; 
third,  the  role  and  effectiveness  of  other  policies  –  notably  the  government 
measures  to  support  the  banking  system  and  the  fiscal  stimulus  packages  –  in 
mitigating the impact of the crisis and in complementing the actions of central banks; 
and 
fourth, and looking forward, the prospects for sustainable growth in an environment 
of  price  stability  and  financial  stability;  that  is,  the  prospects  of  escaping  from  the 
current  state  of  economic  underperformance  and  financial  system  stress,  and  the 
associated  need  for  an  appropriate  exit  strategy  from  the  extraordinary  measures 
taken by central banks and governments. 
   Financial crisis management: the role and instruments of central bank policy 
II.  
Let  me  start  by  making  two  general  points  concerning  the  role  of  central  banks  in 
safeguarding  financial  stability  and  the  instruments  that  can  be  employed  to  this  end.  The 
first point is that the role and actions of central banks, in promoting financial stability must be 
compatible  with  the  policy  framework  guiding  the  achievement  of  the  primary  objective  of 
price stability. Financial stability and price stability are, in general, complementary goals and 
conditions that are mutually reinforcing. But there can be occasions when the constellation of 
shocks affecting the economy and the dynamics of market processes may pose challenges 
or policy trade-offs for central banks aiming at the preservation of price and the safeguarding 
of financial stability. 
The second point concerns the available policy instruments and the actual measures taken 
by central banks when dealing with the financial crisis: The tools include (i) liquidity provision 
and management; (ii) the key monetary policy interest rates; and (iii) credit support measures 
aimed at enhancing the functioning of credit markets. The use of these policy instruments, 
and the timing of their use, depend on the potential relationship between (i) the prospects for 
price stability and (ii) the size of financial market stresses and associated systemic risks. It 
also depends upon the economy’s financial structure. For example, the extent to which the 
financing  of  the  economy  relies  on  the  banking  system  and  on  the  capital  market  has 
implications for the relative reliance on different policy tools. 
                                                 
3   This  figure  measures  the  estimated  foregone  aggregate  output  compared  to  a  counterfactual  non-crisis 
scenario under which euro area GDP would have expanded at an average rate equal to its long term growth 
potential. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2009
the 
financial 
in  summer  2007, 
turbulence  erupted 
These propositions are useful in order to better understand the rationale and the nature of 
the policies that have been pursued by the ECB in managing the current crisis. In particular, 
when  assessing  the  role  of  the  ECB  in  supporting  financial  stability,  it  is  important  to 
distinguish between actions that involve a change in the monetary policy stance – that is, a 
change in the policy rate and/or an expansion of central bank money – and the management 
of liquidity that aims to mitigate the impact of shocks on the interbank money market so as to 
ensure its orderly functioning and the efficient transmission of monetary policy impulses to 
the economy. 
Since 
financial  and  economic 
developments  as  well  as  central  bank  policy  responses  can  be  usefully  examined  and 
assessed over two time periods. During the first period, from early August 2007 until early 
October 2008, the ECB did not ease the stance of monetary policy – as defined by its key 
policy rates – to address financial market tensions. On the contrary, in July 2008, it raised its 
key policy rates by 25 basis points to counter increasing inflationary pressures and medium-
term inflation risks. But from the onset of the crisis in August 2007, the ECB took swift and 
decisive  action  to  provide  liquidity  in  the  interbank  money  market  in  order  to  alleviate  the 
stresses and ensure, to the maximum extent possible, that liquidity problems would not turn 
into solvency problems, and that systemic risk would be effectively contained.  
During this first phase of the crisis, the Eurosystem engaged in active liquidity management 
adjusting the intertemporal distribution of liquidity provision within the reserve maintenance 
period, but without changing the total supply of bank reserves over the entire maintenance 
period. At the same time, the maturity profile of the refinancing operations was altered, but 
the overall supply of central bank money was kept broadly unchanged. As a result, between 
the end of June 2007 and the end of September 2008, the balance sheet of the Eurosystem 
increased only moderately by about 100 billion euro.4  
Therefore,  for  more  than  a  year  since  the  eruption  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  the 
unfavourable combination of, on the one hand, persisting and increasing inflation risks and, 
on the other, substantial stresses in the financial systems and risks to its stability required a 
“separation” of the monetary policy stance from the management of liquidity. The former was 
defined so as to achieve the primary objective of preserving medium-term price stability. The 
latter aimed at, and was effective in, mitigating pressures in the money market and tensions 
in other financial markets, as measured, for example, by CDS spreads and corporate bond 
risk premia, which gradually eased. 
With  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  last  year,  the  crisis  entered  a  new 
phase: it intensified greatly and abruptly, spread across economic sectors, and broadened 
globally. Risk aversion rose dramatically and confidence plummeted, stresses in the banking 
system  increased,  the  money  market  became  dysfunctional,  and  world  economic  activity 
weakened substantially accompanied by a sharp drop in world trade and a marked decline in 
commodity prices.  
The  sudden  and  substantial  deterioration 
the 
macroeconomic  environment  changed  the  outlook  for  price  stability  and  inflation  risks 
diminished significantly in the euro area and globally. At the same time, the risks to financial 
stability  increased.  In  response,  the  ECB  and  other  major  central  banks  eased  monetary 
policy and injected large amounts of liquidity, also employing non-standard policy measures. 
Over the past seven months, since the financial crisis deepened and broadened, the ECB 
has reduced its key policy interest rate by 325 basis point, to now 1%. The magnitude of the 
monetary policy easing over such a short period of time is unprecedented.  
financial  market  conditions  and 
in 
                                                 
4   At the end of September 2008, the size of the balance sheet of  the Eurosystem  was EUR 1013 billion, an 
increase of 11% compared to its size at the end of June 2007, before the turmoil erupted. 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 3
Indeed,  the  provision  of  liquidity  by  the  ECB  to  the  euro  area  banking  system  has  been 
extraordinary in size and scope, and has involved implementation of non-standard measures. 
Following  the  Lehman  Brothers  bankruptcy  last  September,  banks  became  ever  more 
reluctant  to  lend  to  each  other  as  a  result  of  a  sharp  increase  in  the  perceived  risks  of 
counterparty default and a continued lack of transparency about the health of banks’ balance 
sheets.5 Since last October, the ECB has provided unlimited funding in euro at fixed interest 
rates  over  periods  up  to  six  months  against  an  expanded  list  of  eligible  assets  for  use  as 
collateral  in  Eurosystem  refinancing  operations.  This  extraordinary  expansion  of  liquidity 
provided to euro area banks is reflected in the growth of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. 
Between  the  end  of  June  2007  and  the  end  of  April  2009,  the  balance  sheet  of  the 
Eurosystem increased by about EUR 600 billion, and had reached EUR 1.51 trillion which is 
equivalent  to  16%  of  the  nominal  GDP  of  the  euro  area.  By  comparison,  the  size  of  the 
Federal Reserve System balance sheet had reached 14% of the US nominal GDP at the end 
of April 2009.  
The effectiveness of central bank policies  
III.  
How  effective  have  the  ECB  policies  been  in  mitigating  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on  the 
financial system and the economy? We can assess this by first examining the effects of the 
measures  taken  on  the  money  and  credit  markets.  The  provision  of  unlimited  amounts  of 
liquidity (against adequate collateral) in the interbank money market and the sharp reduction 
in  the  ECB’s  key  policy  rates  to  exceptionally  low  levels  have  resulted  in  a  significant 
improvement  in  money  market  conditions.  This  has  contributed  to  the  financing  of  the 
economy and has helped to contain the impact of the crisis on economic activity and price 
developments. The spread between the three-month unsecured money market rate, Euribor, 
and the three-month overnight index swap rate (Eonia swap rate), a widely-used measure of 
interbank market tensions, declined by almost 130 basis points over the past seven months, 
from the highs of above 180 basis points recorded in October 2008 to just below 60 basis 
points  in  mid-May  2009.6  Moreover,  the  levels of  money  market  rates have  declined  even 
more from the peaks reached last October. For example, the three-month Euribor rate was 
1.26% at the beginning of this week (26 May), more than 400 basis points lower that its peak 
value (5.39%) last October. Moreover, the increasing transaction volumes in the unsecured 
interbank market and the lower utilisation of the ECB’s deposit facility indicate that market 
liquidity has improved significantly.  
It  is  sometimes  claimed  that  money  market  conditions  in  the  euro  area  are  considerably 
tighter than in other major money markets. The facts disprove such assertions. The current 
levels of interest rates in the euro money market compare very favourably with the levels of 
the  corresponding  interest  rates  in  the  dollar  and  pound  sterling  money  markets,  where 
interest rate spreads and levels have also declined sharply over the past few months. For 
example, the level of the six-month Euribor rate at the beginning of this week (1.46%) was 
only  somewhat  higher  than  the  corresponding  Libor  rate  (1.22%)  in  the  US  dollar  money 
                                                 
5   The effects of asymmetric information and counterparty credit risk on the structure of the interbank market and 
various policy responses are analysed in Heider et al. (2009). 
6   Over the past few days, the EONIA rate has temporarily risen above the rate of the ECB’s main refinancing 
operations. This is due to changed behaviour on the part of banks showing reduced demand for ECB liquidity. 
This  has  temporarily  diminished  the  levels  of  excess  liquidity,  thus  driving  up  the  EONIA  rate.  During  the 
ECB’s most recent refinancing operation, banks have reacted by increasing their demand again, and EONIA 
can be expected to drop below the main refinancing rate. Overall, however, the gradual reduction of the level 
of excess liquidity demanded by banks is an encouraging sign pointing towards the progressive normalisation 
in the functioning of the money market. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2009
market.7  Therefore,  effectively,  over  the  past  seven  months,  conditions  in  the  euro  area 
money  market  have  improved  substantially  and  they  are  broadly  comparable  to  those  in 
other major money markets, despite the higher level of the key policy rate of the ECB (the 
interest rate on the main refinancing operations (MRO) of the ECB). This outcome reflects 
the  extremely  low  level (0.25%)  of  the  ECB’s  deposit  rate and  the  Bank’s  management  of 
liquidity in the interbank money market.  
The very low level of interest rates in the euro money market and the generous provision of 
funding by the ECB to the banking system have gradually resulted in a marked decline in 
bank lending rates, especially on short-term credit to the private sector.8 More generally, the 
real  average  cost  of  financing  for  euro  area  non-financial  corporations  has  declined  by  43 
basis points over the past five months to 4.47%, from its peak level reached last October. 
However, the cost of financing for speculative-grade-rated firms (i.e. the high-yield segment 
of the corporate bond market), although it has also declined somewhat, remains at unusually 
high  levels  (at  about  19%  in  nominal  terms),  reflecting  the  continuing  high  degree  of  risk 
aversion of investors that has prevailed since the intensification of the crisis last fall. 
Despite the improved conditions in the euro money market and in the average cost of bank 
lending to the private sector, bank credit standards have remained tight and the annual rate 
of credit growth to the private sector has decelerated steadily. Indeed, in recent months the 
flow  of  credit  to  both  firms  and  households  became  negative.  These  developments  partly 
reflect the reduced demand for banks loans by both households and firms. But they are also 
partly a consequence of the deleveraging of banks’ balance sheets and persisting stresses in 
the bank wholesale bank funding markets. It is not easy, however, to disentangle the relative 
contribution to bank credit developments of demand and supply-side factors on the basis of 
the available evidence. 
Having said that, it is evident that the effects of the financial crisis on banks’ profitability and 
capital position have been sizeable. Banks’ efforts to deleverage their balance sheets and 
build capital and liquidity buffers are constraining, other things being equal, their lending to 
the  private  sector.  So  far,  by  early  May  2009,  write-downs  on  the  securities  and  loans  of 
large euro area banks amounted to USD 179 billion, which corresponds to just over 18% of 
the  total  write-downs  of  major  banks  globally  (USD  986  billion).9  Euro  area  banks  have 
successfully  raised  capital  from  both  private  and  public  sources,  amounting  to  USD  192 
billion, which exceeds the recorded write-downs.10 Of course, a key issue is the amount of 
potential further write-downs that could be faced by global and euro area financial institutions 
and the additional capital that should be raised by them to safeguard their solvency. Recently 
the  IMF  has  estimated  that  the  total  amount  of  potential  future  write-downs  of  euro  area 
banks  could  be  around  USD  750  billion,  largely  on  their  loan  exposures.11  This  estimate, 
however, is based on assumptions and methodology that can be challenged and it is subject 
to  a  high  margin  of  error.  Estimates  based  on  alternative  methodologies  and  assumptions 
yield a much lower, yet sizeable, figure.  
                                                 
7   The 3-month Euribor rate is very close to the 3-month GBP Libor rate (1.28%) but considerably higher than 
the 3-month USD Libor rate (0.66%) while the 6-month Euribor rate virtually the same with the six-month GBP 
Libor rate (1.49%). 
8   For  example,  the  short-term  (i.e.  below  one  year)  bank  lending  rate  was  3.52%  in  March  2009,  some  2.5 
percentage points below its peak value (6.03%) reached last October. This is still somewhat higher than the 
corresponding US bank lending rate at 2.04% in March 2009. 
9   Of  this  overall  figure  of  EUR  790  billion,  USD  130  billion  refer  to  the  writedowns  of  euro  area  large  and 
complex banking groups (LCGBs); while USD 49 billion relate to other euro area banks. 
10   Of this total amount of  USD 192 billion  in  capital raised,  almost USD 155 billion refer to euro area  LCBGs 
while over USD 37 billion have been raised by other euro area banks. 
11   See International Monetary Fund (2009). 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 5
Independently of the total potential impact of the financial turbulence and the weak economic 
activity on euro area banks’ net income and capital position, it is evident that they will need to 
strengthen  their  balance  sheets.  In  order  to  restore  an  adequate  flow  of  credit  to  the 
economy,  banks  should  take  advantage  of  governments’  commitments  to  support  banks’ 
balance  sheets  through  capital  injections,  the  provision  of  government  guarantees  on  new 
bank debt, as well as through asset relief schemes aiming at removing troubled assets from 
banks’  balance  sheets.  The  common  goals  of  these  government  measures  in  Europe  and 
elsewhere  are  to  safeguard  financial  stability,  help  restore  the  provision  of  credit  to  the 
economy  and  bolster  confidence  in  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system  and  in  the 
prospects of the economy. Needless to say, the ongoing structural adjustment in the banking 
sector and the low confidence of investors in the soundness of some institutions cannot be 
counteracted by monetary policy and the provision of central bank liquidity. 
Bank support measures and fiscal stimulus 
IV.  
At  present,  the  European  economy  is  experiencing  a  mutually  reinforcing  interaction 
between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  weakening  of  economic  activity  and  rising  unemployment, 
and, on the other hand, the deleveraging of banks’ balance sheets and the persisting bank 
stresses in some bank funding markets. The deleveraging process and the emergence of an 
adverse  feedback  loop  between  the  real  economy  and  the  financial  sector  will  affect  the 
favourable  impact  of  monetary  policy  and  liquidity  provision  on  the  economy.  These 
developments  underscore  the  importance  of  effective  implementation  of  the  government 
measures  to  strengthen  bank  balance  sheets  and  improve  banks’  medium-term  market 
funding. These measures are complementary to the actions of the ECB and play a crucial 
role in improving the financing of the economy and fostering its recovery. 
To give an idea of the scale of the governments’ banks support measures, let me mention a 
few figures: until early May, banks in the euro area had received just over EUR 113 billion of 
capital injections from governments and around EUR 300 billion of government guarantees. 
However, only one third of the commitments for capital injections had been used until the end 
of April and a smaller fraction, less than 18%, of the commitments to guarantee new bank 
debt  have  been  called  for.  The  use  of  government  credit  guarantees  varies  considerably 
across  countries  for  several  reasons.  For  example,  banks’  needs  for  such  guarantees 
depend  on  the  time  profile  of  the  maturity  of  their  debt,  but  they  also  reflect  the  relatively 
retrained demand for loans by the private sector. Moreover, the unlimited financing provided 
by the ECB also explains the subdued demand in most countries for guarantees on short-
term debt with maturity less than one year. Finally, certain factors might have discouraged 
the use of government guarantees, such as the associated “stigma effect” and the pricing, 
which may appear high in current market conditions. 
Overall, the use of government guarantees on bank debt is considered satisfactory in most 
countries. At the same time, it is still too early to comprehensively assess the effectiveness of 
all  bank  support  schemes  in  improving  the  longer-term  funding  of  banks  and  in  fostering 
bank  lending  to  the  private  sector.  The  implementation  of  the  bank  support  schemes  has 
been  gradual  over  the  past  few  months  and  the  evidence  is  relatively  limited.  But  on  one 
aspect, the facts already speak a clear language: namely that the use of guaranteed debt 
has been indispensable in providing banks with access to medium and longer-term financing: 
most –and in some countries even the totality – of the new bank debt issued since October 
last year has been government guaranteed. Banks should take advantage of the available 
government support and strengthen their capital buffers, not least with a view to the prospect 
that  the  current  extraordinary  liquidity  provision  by  the  ECB  will  not  remain  in  place 
indefinitely. This issue relates to the exit strategy to which I will return shortly. 
The  governments’  actions  aimed  at  dealing  with  the  crisis  have  not  been  limited  to  the 
support  of  the  financial  sector.  Fiscal  stimulus  packages  across  the  euro  area  amount  to 
€100 billion (1.1% of euro area GDP) this year and a further €75 billion (0.8%) is planned for 
6 
 BIS Review 65/2009
next  year.  Their  financing  as  well  the  deterioration  of  budgetary  balances  due  to  the 
operation  of  the  automatic  stabilisers  in  the  wake  of  the  economic  downturn,  and  the 
aforementioned  bank  support  measures  imply  that  the  fiscal  deficit  for  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole will surge, from 1.9% of GDP in 2008, to 5.3% in 2009 and further to 6.5% in 2010.12 
The dynamics of public debt are equally striking. Compared to last year, the debt burden of 
euro  area  countries  will  grow  by  almost  9%  of  GDP  this  year,  from  69%  (2008)  to  almost 
78%  (2009).  These  are  worrying  developments,  especially  when  bearing  in  mind  that  this 
deterioration  of  public  finances  in  the  span  of  only  one  year  wipes  out  the  consolidation 
efforts of euro area governments of an entire decade.13 By mentioning these figures I do not 
wish to deny that the current focus of fiscal policy on supporting the economy’s recovery is 
not  justified.  At  the  same  time,  due  attention  should  be  paid  that  current  actions  do  not 
undermine the public’s trust in the long-term sustainability of public finances and the integrity 
of  the  EU  fiscal  framework.  Governments  have  to  have  a  credible  commitment  to  achieve 
sound  fiscal  positions  as  soon  as  possible  and  should  fully  apply  the  provisions  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. Otherwise, we may face a serious risk that the current economic 
and financial crisis will evolve in the years to come into a fiscal crisis of major proportions. It 
is vital for the sustainability of our economies’ growth performance that this risk should be 
prevented from materialising. 
Prospects and exit strategies 
V.  
What  are  the  prospects  for  the  euro  area  economy?  The  latest  data  show  that  economic 
activity contracted sharply by 2.5% in the first quarter of 2009, following a 1.6% decline in the 
fourth quarter of 2008, and confirm that the pace of economic activity in the first half of 2009 
will be much weaker than projected by the ECB staff in March. For the second quarter of this 
year, however, we expect that the contraction in GDP growth will be less pronounced than in 
the first quarter. Over the past few weeks, survey data, including indicators of consumer and 
business confidence, in the euro area and other parts of the world suggest that the pace of 
decline  in  economic  activity  is  moderating  and  that  the  euro  area  economy  is  stabilising. 
Although economic activity is likely to remain very weak for the remainder of this year – and 
this  is  consistent  with  the  level  of  survey  indicators  –  overall  the  available  information 
confirms our expectation that the euro area economy will gradually recover in the course of 
2010. Needless to say, the emerging encouraging signs leave no room for complacency in 
view  of  several  risks  that  lie  ahead  and  the  continued  high  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
economic outlook. 
As  central  bankers,  our  core  concern  is,  of  course,  inflation.  The  euro  area  is  currently 
witnessing  a  process  of  rapid  disinflation,  mainly  driven  by  the  marked  decline  in  global 
commodity  prices  since  last  July  and  associated  base  effects.  This  is  likely  to  cause  a 
U-shaped  profile  for  headline  annual  inflation  in  the  course  of  2009.  We  expect  headline 
annual inflation to fall further in the coming months, temporarily reaching negative levels in 
some  months  around mid-year.  Thereafter,  annual  inflation  rates  are  expected  to  increase 
again in the latter part of 2009. 
Against  the  background  of  these  price  developments,  is  there  a  reason  to  be  concerned 
about  deflation?  In  my  opinion,  the  risk  of  deflation  in  the  euro  area  remains  very  limited. 
What  we  are  experiencing  in  the  euro  area  is  a  disinflation  process  reflecting  reduced 
inflationary  pressure  in  the  supply  chain  due  to  lower  input  costs,  a  moderation  of  wage 
increases and stronger competition in a context of falling demand and excess capacity. This 
temporary  disinflation  does  not  constitute  a  persistent,  broad-based  and  self-sustaining 
                                                 
12   See European Commission (2009) 
13   General government debt of euro area governments was 77.4% of GDP in 1997, and had reached 69.1% in 
2007. 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 7
decline in the overall price level, which may be reinforced by the anticipation that prices will 
decline  further  in  the  future.  On  the  contrary,  expectations  of  inflation  over  the  medium  to 
long-term are solidly anchored at levels consistent with price stability. This firm anchoring of 
expectations  and  various  measures  of  underlying  inflation  trends  confirm  that  price 
developments over the medium and longer term will be in line with price stability. In 2010, 
HICP  inflation  is  likely  to  remain  positive  and  below  2%,  in  an  environment  of  sluggish 
demand in the euro area and elsewhere.  
Since  last  October,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  eased  monetary  policy 
significantly  and  rapidly,  but  also  provided  unlimited  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  and 
implemented “non-standard” enhanced credit support measures, which aim at ensuring that 
the  monetary  policy  impulse  deriving  from  the  decrease  in  central  bank  rates  is  efficiently 
transmitted  to  the  real  economy.  It  is  encouraging  to  observe  that  these  policy  actions, 
together  with  the  substantial  fiscal  stimulus  being  implemented  by  governments  and  their 
measures  aimed  at  supporting  the  banking  system,  are  progressively  having  a  visible 
positive impact on the growth performance of the euro area. In time, they should lead to a 
normalisation of conditions in financial markets and the recovery of the economy to a path of 
sustainable growth.  
And  this  leads  me  to  some  final  remarks  on  the  conference  theme  –  “planning  an  exit 
strategy” – which is crucial. An exit strategy will need to have three elements: an exit from 
the environment of exceptionally low interest rates and unlimited liquidity provision; an exit 
from the extensive government support measures to the banking system, and an exit from 
the substantial fiscal stimulus. Let me focus on the first, as this is in the hands of the central 
bank. For us in the ECB and the Eurosystem, when devising an exit strategy from the current 
extraordinary  low  level  of  interest  rates  and  the  liquidity  support  to  the  banking  system, 
through  standard  and  non-standard  measures,  it  will  be  essential  to  strike  a  balance 
between, on the one hand, responding in a timely and effective manner to incipient risks to 
price stability as the economy recovers and market conditions normalise, and, on the other 
hand,  winding  down  in  a  proportionate  manner  the  support  schemes  and  non-standard 
measures  that  have  been  implemented  to  mitigate  the  adverse  effects  of  the  crisis  on  the 
banking system and certain financial market segments. With regard to the latter, gradualism 
and clear communication by the central bank of any changes to the operational framework 
with  sufficient  lead  time  to  allow  market  participants  to  prepare  and  adjust  their  liquidity 
management will be essential. The ECB and the Eurosystem are committed to pursuing such 
a gradualist approach as well as a timely and transparent communication policy. 
Conclusion 
VI.  
I started my remarks by pointing to the relevance of Heraclitus’ insight for the last two years, 
namely  that  “all  is  in  flux”.  He  developed  further  his  theory  of  continuous  change  and 
reasoned  that  all  that  exists,  in  fact,  “simultaneously  forms  and  dissolves”.  This  line  of 
philosphical reasoning led him to argue that “the way up and the way down are one and the 
same”.14 I doubt, however, that bankers and investors would share this particular view of the 
philosopher,  especially  in  the  light  of  developments  over  the  past  few  years.  Let  me 
conclude,  however,  on  a  reassuring  note  and  a  wish  concerning  the  exit  from  the  current 
crisis on the basis of the logic of Heraclitus that led him to the conclusion that “out of discord 
comes the fairest harmony” (έκ τῶν διαφερόντων καλλίστην άρμονίαν) – which, in the context 
of the discussions in this conference and in relation to our policy aims, would be translated 
into achieving sustainable growth in an environment of price stability and financial stability.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                 
14   See Kahn (1979). 
8 
 BIS Review 65/2009
References 
European Commission (2009), Spring Economic Forecast, May.  
Heider, F., M. Hoerova and C. Holthausen (2008), “Liquidity Hoarding and Interbank Market 
Spreads: The Role of Counterparty Risk,” available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1362113. 
International Monetary Fund (2009) “Global Financial Stability Report”, April. 
Kahn,  C.  (1979)  “The  Art  and  Thought  of  Heraclitus:  Fragments  with  Translation  and 
Commentary”, London: Cambridge University Press. 
Papademos,  L  (2009a).  “The  dual  crisis:  economic  impact,  policy  response  and  exit 
strategy”, speech at the High-Level Panel Debate on “Europe in the Economic and Financial 
Crisis: How to bring back prosperity for everyone?”, Brussels, 4 May. 
Papademos,  L  (2009b).  “Monetary  policy  and  the  ‘Great  Crisis’:  Lessons  and  challenges”, 
speech  at  the  37th  Economics  Conference  “Beyond  the  Crisis:  Economic  Policy  in  a  New 
Macroeconomic  Environment”  organised  by  the  Österreichische  Nationalbank,  Vienna,  14 
May 2009. 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 9
