Ewart S Williams: The international financial crisis – impact on the region 
and Trinidad and Tobago  
Feature  address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Couva/Point Lisas Chamber of Commerce, Port-of-Spain, 15 January 2009. 
 Thanks for inviting me to address you today.  
In my remarks I will try to put the current economic difficulties facing Trinidad and Tobago in 
the broader context of the still unfolding global financial crisis.  
The world economy was going along reasonably fine until the third quarter of 2008 when we 
were suddenly blind-sided with an international financial crisis the likes of which we have not 
experienced in almost a century. And just when we were beginning to see some stabilization 
in international financial markets, the world finds itself catapulting into a global recession 
of an intensity that’s still not fully appreciated.  
There are many theories surrounding the roots of the crisis: I would not go into the polemics, 
except to say that we are where we are now as a result of several “sins” in the world’s major 
economies, including for example, a prolonged build-up of structural imbalances; inadequate 
financial sector regulation, excessive risk taking and a fair amount of greed.  
The whole world is facing a crisis that is primarily the making of the richer more developed 
countries and while it was once felt that the damage would have been limited to the culpable, 
it has now engulfed the entire world, putting a lie to a widely held view that emerging market 
countries had “de-coupled”.  
The irony is, since the fourth quarter of 2008 equity markets in the emerging economies have 
declined  by  much  more  than  in  the  developed  countries.  Moreover,  the  major  emerging 
market countries, for example Mexico, Brazil, Russia as well as the Asian economies, have 
also  been  hit  by  significant  capital  outflows  and  exchange  rate  depreciation.  The  poorer 
developing countries are not being spared as they face the adverse market realities as well 
as major reductions in foreign aid.  
The  global  recession  is  undoubtedly  turning  out  to  be  much  worse  than  was  initially 
expected.  There  is  now  a  consensus  that  growth  in  some  of  the  major  economies  will  be 
negative in 2009, with recovery not expected until 2010. Emerging markets and developing 
countries are expected to fare slightly better with real GDP growth projected at about 3 per 
cent,  much  of  which  will  come  from  China  and  India.  Note,  however,  that  in  the  case  of 
China,  real  growth  is  coming  down  from  an  average  of  11-12  per  cent  over  the  past  few 
years to 8 per cent in 2009.  
It is widely felt that what we are witnessing now is not so much a crisis in the financial system 
but  a  crisis  of  confidence  on  the  part  of  household  and  businesses,  and  it  is  global  in 
nature.  
The data coming out for the developed countries are shocking indeed. The U.S., for example 
reported job losses of over half a million in December, pushing the unemployment rate to 7.2 
per  cent,  the  highest  in  16  years.  It  is  projected  that  unemployment  in  the  US  could  soon 
reach double-digits.  
In  Germany,  the  unemployment  rate  now  stands  at  close  to  9  per  cent:  in  the  U.K., 
unemployment has reached (6.0 per cent) and in the E.U. it is 8.4 per cent.  
To  address  the  deepening  recession  and  mounting  job  losses,  most  of  the  advanced 
economies are adopting enormous stimulus programs.  
BIS Review 6/2009 
 1
   President-elect Barack Obama’s economic recovery and investment plan includes 
a  fiscal  stimulus  of  around  US$775  billion,  in  addition  to  bank  support 
programmes of another US$1.5-2 billion.  
Germany has unveiled a major fiscal stimulus package which includes cuts in taxes 
and a programme of public investment infrastructure.  
Japan also unveiled a massive economic recovery package.  
Even China recently announced a new fiscal stimulus plan, of around US$586 billion 
aimed at boosting the rapidly slowing economy.  
Our Caribbean neighbours have also been seriously impacted by the financial crisis and the 
global recession. In Jamaica emigrants’ remittances (the second largest foreign exchange 
earner) fell by an estimated 17 per cent last year. An even larger fall is expected in 2009, 
along  with  a  sharp  reduction  in  tourist  arrivals.  There  have  been  hotel  closures  and  the 
postponement  of  hotel  investment  projects  in  the  Bahamas,  the  OECS,  Barbados  and 
elsewhere in the region.  
Late last year, the Barbadian Government unveiled an economic stimulus package aimed 
at  protecting  jobs  and  supporting  the  tourism  industry.  Jamaica  has  also  announced  a 
stimulus package involving tax cuts, loan facilities for vulnerable sectors and infrastructural 
spending.  
Here  in  Trinidad  and Tobago,  we  have  seen  an  interesting  change  in  our  circumstances 
over the past few months.  
Our  once  thriving  energy  sector  is  facing  sharply  reduced  external  demand  and  anemic 
prices.  Oil  prices  have  plummeted  from  over  US$140  per  barrel  in  June  2008  to  around 
US$40 per barrel currently, while gas prices (Henry Hub) have declined from over of US$12 
per mmbtu in June to an average of US$6 per mmbtu in December 2008. Several planned 
investments  in  the  sector  have  been  postponed  because  of  financing  problems  or  market 
uncertainties.  
We have also seen an otherwise struggling stock market take a sharp drop – by 27 per cent 
– between June and December 2008.  
Our  households,  like  those  elsewhere  have  observed  financial  turmoil  abroad  and  have 
become more cautious – much to the disappointment of the merchants who were depending 
on Christmas sales for a large part of their income.  
There  are  indications  of  a  marked  slowdown  in  housing  activity,  in  part  due  to  high 
interest rates but perhaps more so as a consequence of the unwinding of the construction 
and real estate boom of the last years.  
In addition, our manufacturing sector has begun to face the impact of the declining external 
and domestic demand.  
It’s amazing how it takes difficult times like these to appreciate the inter-connectedness of 
our economy.  
A fall in demand and energy prices affects not only the large energy companies but a whole 
host of smaller companies and entrepreneurs who provide services to these companies. The 
energy sector also accounts for an important part of construction and thus the downturn in 
the sector exerts a downward pull on construction activity.  
The manufacturing sector is being affected by a fall in demand from regional markets and the 
slowdown in tourism and construction. Since the non-energy sector is the major generator of 
incomes,  its  fortunes  have  a  ripple  effect  on  private  demand  and  on  the  overall  level  of 
investment and employment.  
And this brings us to the role of Government in the present scenario. As you know, over the 
past  few  years,  the  Government  has  taken  an  active  role  in  promoting  economic 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2009
increase 
including 
through  a  significant 
in  expenditure  on 
transformation, 
infrastructure  and  social  services.  In  addition  to  serving  as  a  catalyst  to  growth  and 
capacity expansion, government expenditure has also contributed to an unacceptable surge 
in  domestic  inflation  (aided  no  doubt  by  an  unprecedented  increase  in  international  food 
prices).  
Conscious  of  the  need  to  reduce  inflation  the  Government  initially  sought  to  match  a 
projected  reduction  in  energy  sector  revenues  by  a  compensating  cut  in  expenditures. 
Thus, on November 30, 2008 in response to an expected shortfall in energy sector revenues 
of TT$5.3 billion, the Government announced expenditure cuts of TT$5.0 billion.  
Yesterday the Government announced that as a result of the continuing fall in energy prices 
the revenue shortfall is likely to be some $2.3 billion greater than originally envisaged. It 
was announced however, that in order to maintain employment and avoid a recession in the 
local economy, this shortfall will not be met by further expenditure cuts but rather by 
borrowing – in the jargon, through deficit financing.  
We are now facing the reality that the intensity of the global recession is such that countries 
need to take steps less they be drawn into the quagmire; that is the reality of globalization 
being a part of an integrated world. You need to react to international developments and take 
defensive  steps,  as  needed,  to  protect  your  employment  levels  and  preserve  a  minimum 
level of economic activity.  
The  need  for  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policies  is  now  recognized  by  both  developed  and 
developing countries. Most countries are now prepared to accept budget deficits to defend 
their economies. It’s happening all through Latin America, it’s happening throughout Asia; it’s 
happening even in the oil rich Gulf States. (A few days ago Saudi Arabia, whose oil revenues 
have been cut by 50 per cent, unveiled its 2009 budget which carried a record deficit. Dubai 
announced  a  fiscal  package  that  converted  a  fiscal  surplus  to  a  deficit  of  1.3  per  cent  of 
GDP).  
Fortunately  we  are  in  a  better  position  than  most  developing  countries  to  withstand  the 
recession and to accommodate a moderate level of deficit financing. Unlike in the 1980’s, we 
have a low and manageable level of debt, our banking system is robust, well-capitalized with 
a  low  level  of  non-performing  loans,  and  we  have  a  more  than  adequate  level  of  official 
reserves – about US$ 9 billion.  
Our  Achilles  heel  is  the  high  level  of  inflation  which  can  reduce  fiscal  space,  since  in 
principle,  too  much  deficit  financing  can  easily  add  to  inflationary  pressures.  Fortunately, 
there are compensating forces that are supporting a reduction in inflation. These include the 
sharp decline in international food prices; an expected increase in domestic food production 
and the impact of reduced private demand on the general level of prices. It is also envisaged 
that  the  weaker  demand  and  employment  environment  will  reduce  wage  pressures  and 
reverse inflationary expectations.  
In terms of our outlook for 2009 we anticipate that energy sector growth will probably remain 
flat in 2009 while non-energy sector growth could be about 3 per cent less than one-half that 
of  2008.  We  expect  the  main  drivers  in  the  non-energy  sector  will  be  agriculture, 
manufacturing  and  tourism  services,  boosted  by  the  upcoming  two  large  international 
conferences.  
On this basis, the Bank is projecting real GDP growth of 1-2 per cent; some increase in 
unemployment,  perhaps  to  6-7  per  cent;  an  inflation  rate  of  7-8  per  cent  and  little,  if  any, 
increase in official reserves. The non-energy fiscal deficit is projected at around 12 per cent 
of GDP while the overall deficit is projected to widen to around 1-1.5 per cent of GDP.  
I  would  admit  that  these  forecasts  are  subject  to  wide  margins  of  error  since  the  global 
environment is still extremely unstable and thus some of the basic parameters are subject to 
considerable volatility.  
BIS Review 6/2009 
 3
The current economic environment is a nightmare for policymakers. In the U.S. for instance, 
some  commentators  are  complaining  that  Obama’s  massive  rescue  package  is  too  small, 
while the traditionalists think that it is far too large.  
Here at home, there is a view in some quarters that the Bank should move immediately to 
lower interest rates. While a reduction in interest rates may contribute to boosting domestic 
demand and containing the economic slowdown, it’s our view that, with inflation currently 
at 14.3 per cent, lowering interest rates without some reasonable indication that inflation is 
on  a  downward  path,  would  carry  serious  risks  of  further  entrenching  inflation  and  an 
inflationary psychology.  
Some people see a depreciation of the currency as being inevitable. I disagree, pointing to 
our  significant  foreign  reserve  cushion  which  gives  us  the  ability  to  stabilize  our  foreign 
exchange market, if needed.  
Let  me  end  with  a  few  words  about  the  opportunities  that  the  current  economic  setting 
presents.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  economic  situation  will  be  difficult  in  2009,  but  I  am 
confident that we will weather the storm and do just fine.  
Calling to mind the old adage that “behind every dark cloud there is a silver lining” we 
should keep reminding ourselves that, even if the crisis is prolonged it would eventually come 
to  an  end.  What  is  perhaps  most  important  in  all  of  this  is  that  we  should  be  preparing 
ourselves for the new opportunities that must arise once the situation stabilizes.  
This is the time for the business sector to be introducing productivity enhancing measures 
which would help tide you through the down-turn and serve you in good stead in the recovery 
phase.  
This is the time to engender a culture of increased productivity among your workers and set 
the stage for linking wage increases to productivity, when the recovery comes.  
If the current economic slowdown brings an end to the unsustainable real estate bubble and 
the  splurge  in  motor  car  imports,  it  would  have  had  a  positive  impact.  If  it  leads  to  better 
project  selection,  a  drive  for  greater  public  sector  efficiency  and  a  platform  for  greater 
public/private sector collaboration, we would have learnt much from the crisis.  
Some people argue that we learnt nothing from the crisis of the 1980’s. I disagree and I point 
to the fact that the crisis of the 1980’s led to the stronger fundamentals of the 1990’s.  
Let  us  use  the  current  crisis  to  set  the  basis  for  an  even  stronger  economy  that  would 
improve our resilience and set the stage for sustainable growth and development.  
4 
 BIS Review 6/2009
