Paul Tucker: The repertoire of official sector interventions in the financial 
system – last resort lending, market-making, and capital 
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor, Financial Stability, of the Bank of England, at 
the  Bank  of  Japan  2009  International  Conference  “Financial  System  and  Monetary  Policy: 
Implementation”, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, 27-28 May 2009.  
 Everything – and I mean everything – about central banking stems from our liabilities being 
the base money of the economy. From this flow our roles in monetary policy and financial 
stability.  And,  in  consequence,  the  manner  in  which  central  banks  supply  our  money  – 
overnight, intra-day, and for term maturities; in routine and in various stressed circumstances 
– just could not matter more, even if much of the time it seems like an obscure corner of the 
financial system’s plumbing. 
About  half  a  decade  ago,  I  set  out  the  thinking  that  underpins  the  Bank  of  England’s 
management of our balance sheet, focusing principally on the implementation of monetary 
policy.1 Today I want to explain how, over the past eighteen months, we have developed our 
system  for  providing  liquidity  insurance  to  banks  in  the  interests  of  preserving  financial 
stability;  and  how  that  bears  on  the  prudential  regulation  of  banks’  liquidity.  From  that 
discussion  of  LOLR  as  Bagehot  would  have  recognised  it2,  I  shall  go  on  to  air  some 
developing  thinking  about  two  other  instruments  available  to  the  authorities  to  address 
financial system distress: Market Maker of Last Resort, and Capital of Last Resort.  
The implementation of monetary policy in stressed conditions 
Most  of  the  time,  central  bank  operations  revolve  around  the  implementation  of  monetary 
policy. For the Bank of England, in routine circumstances that means, of course, establishing 
overnight  money  market  interest  rates  in  line  with  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  policy 
rate  (Bank  Rate).  It  is  vital  that  we  should  be  able  to  achieve  that  primary  rate-setting 
Objective in stressed conditions, as well as in peacetime. 
Since  mid-decade,  the  reserves  part  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  operational  framework  has, 
accordingly, made explicit provision for three broad types of contingency: a bank finding itself 
temporarily  short  of  reserves  at  the  end  of  the  banking  day  due  to  technical  problems  or 
frictions in the money markets; a widespread shock to the sector’s demand for reserves; and, 
thirdly, a pronounced shift in the degree to which banks collectively find themselves needing 
to manage their reserves directly with the Bank rather than via the money markets. To cater 
for  those  eventualities,  banks  can,  first,  borrow  unlimited  amounts  overnight  against  the 
highest-quality collateral, for a modest premium of 25 basis points, designed to leave intact 
incentives  to  manage  liquidity  in  the  markets  rather  than  with  us.  Second,  banks  can 
increase the size of the precautionary balances or buffer they hold with the Bank by altering 
their  reserves  targets  in  our  voluntary  reserves  system.3  And,  third,  in  the  face  of,  say,  a 
                                                 
1   “Managing the central bank’s balance sheet: where monetary policy meets financial stability”, Lecture to mark 
the fifteenth anniversary of Lombard Street Research, London, July 2004, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 
Autumn 2004, pp359-382. 
2   So I am using the expression in its older, broader sense, not narrowly to mean bespoke support operations. 
3   Under the Bank of England’s Sterling Monetary Framework, individual reserves banks choose each month a 
level  of  reserves  they  wish  to  target  on  average  over  a  month-long  maintenance  period  running  between 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  meetings.  The  Bank  supplies,  via  OMOs,  the  resulting  aggregate  level  of 
reserves.  In  stressed  circumstances,  the  Bank  can  permit  a  revision  to  the  target  during  the  monthly 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 1
9/11-type  event  that  disrupted  the financial  infrastructure  and  effectively  closed  the  money 
markets,  the  Bank  could  temporarily  substitute  itself  for  the  markets  by  allowing  banks  to 
borrow from, and deposit with, us at no charge relative to Bank Rate.4
Beyond monetary policy 
All  of  those  contingencies  involve  events  affecting  either  the  demand  for  reserves  or  their 
distribution around the system. And the measures designed to cope with them are therefore 
part  and  parcel  of  the  Bank’s  management  of  the  banking  system’s  day-to-day  sterling 
liquidity in the course of implementing monetary policy. Of course, that is helpful to – indeed, 
is a necessary condition for – the maintenance of financial stability. Most obviously, during 
the current crisis banks chose to more than double their targets for reserves balances with 
the  Bank  in  the  months  following  August  2007,  and  we  injected  the  required  increase  in 
money into the system. That was necessary to keep overnight rates broadly in line with Bank 
Rate;  and  it  was  also  necessary,  although  not sufficient,  to  stabilise  the  short-term  money 
markets  and  the  banking  system.  But,  as  the  past  18  months  or  so  have  demonstrated, 
contingency plans centred on managing reserves by no means exhaust the range of market 
operations and facilities available to central banks to reduce the economic costs of severe 
disruptions to the financial system. 
While  not  explicitly  directed  to  managing  day-to-day  monetary  conditions,  those  wider 
measures  absolutely  must,  nevertheless,  be  constructed  to  be  consistent  with,  and 
supportive of, monetary policy. 
Financial stability and commercial banks 
How best to construct those facilities turns in part on how we think about financial stability, 
and  so  I  should  probably  be  clear  about  the  definition  of  financial  stability  I  employ.  It  is 
largely  to  do  with  money  and  the  role  of  the  banking  system  in  a  monetary  economy. 
Monetary policy is, of course, directed to ensuring stability in the value of central bank money 
relative to goods and services. Analogously, in significant degree financial stability is about 
safeguarding the stability of private money (deposits held by households and firms with the 
banking system) relative to central bank money. Depositors with banks have to be confident 
that they can exchange their deposits at face value for our money – our notes; or that they 
can  smoothly  transfer  their  deposits  to  other  banks  where  they  could  be  confident  of  that. 
Those  two  formulations  amount  to  much  the  same  thing,  as  transfers  between  banks  are 
settled across our books in central bank money, the economy’s ultimate settlement asset.5 At 
the  level  of  the  system,  we  need  an  “exchange  rate”  of  unity  between  private  money  and 
central bank money. And we need wholesale funders of banks to be confident of that too. 
Absent  that  stability  and  confidence,  the  payments  system  and  credit  creation  become 
severely disrupted, with big social costs.  
Of course, banks are not the only lenders in our economies. The current crisis owes a lot to 
the non-bank financial sector – funds, conduits, SIVs, securities dealers, and so on. But the 
excessive  leverage  and  maturity  transformation  in  the  shadow  banking  system  was  in 
general  predicated  on  the  plentiful  availability  of  credit  on  too-easy  terms  from  the 
                                                                                                                                                         
maintenance  period.  For  more  details  see  paragraphs  74-81  of  “The  Framework  for  the  Bank  of  England’s 
Operations in the Sterling Money Markets (the ‘Red Book’)”, Bank of England. 
Ibid., paragraph 166. 
4  
5   Transfers in the main sterling payment systems are settled gross in real time across the Bank’s balance sheet. 
For members  of the real-time system, no  credit exposures amongst them arise. Transfers between  smaller 
banks are settled across the balance sheets of big commercial banks. The banking sector would probably be 
more resilient if all banks joined the RTGS system. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2009
commercial banking system. Up to a point, the same goes for the abundant liquidity in asset 
markets that preceded the crisis. Of course, persistently strong demand for financial assets – 
crudely, rising prices – created liquidity. But, beyond that, the willingness and terms on which 
“market-makers” and traders underpinned liquidity depended on generous access to credit 
for financing inventory and positions. And the ultimate private sector providers of such credit 
are always the commercial banks.6
So  commercial  banks  are  special.  They  are  special  because  their  deposit  liabilities  are 
money.  But  they  are  also  inherently  fragile.  First,  as  monetary  institutions,  the  liquidity 
insurance  they  provide,  via  demand  deposits  and  committed  on-demand  lines  of  credit, 
entails  large  mismatches  between  the  maturities  of  their  liabilities  and  assets  (actual  and 
contingent). The accompanying conversion of liquid savings into illiquid loans to households 
and firms benefits society. But it also exposes the banks to big liquidity risks. Given a first 
come-first  served  system  of  redemption  for  retail  and  wholesale  deposits,  that  creates  the 
risk of runs. Secondly, a deposit-taking institution is leveraged, even if it does not fund itself 
in  wholesale  markets:  retail  deposits  are  debt.  So  banks’  capital  adequacy  can  quickly  be 
imperilled by a fall in asset prices. In that sense, the “liquidity” and “solvency” explanations of 
the current crisis are inseparable. Especially in a world in which banks’ trading portfolios are 
marked to market, a drying up of liquidity in markets brings about a fall in asset prices, and 
so a depletion of banks’ net worth. All that underlines just why our predecessors placed such 
great  weight  on  official  interventions  to  maintain  the  safety  and  soundness  of  banks.7  If 
anyone  doubted  it,  this  crisis  underlines  how  problems  of  funding  liquidity,  asset-market 
liquidity and solvency are intertwined. And those dimensions of a systemic crisis map into the 
authorities’  capability,  in  principle,  to  be  a  Lender  of  Last  Resort;  a  Market  Maker  of  Last 
Resort; and a provider of Capital of Last Resort.  
Central bank provision of liquidity insurance, and LOLR 
Bagehot’s famous dictum, in Lombard Street, was that, to avert panic, central banks should 
lend early and freely (ie without limit), to solvent firms, against good collateral, and at “high 
rates”. One of his great themes was that the Bank of England should acknowledge its role in 
stemming panics, and set out its principles for doing so: “The Bank has never laid down any 
clear or sound policy on the subject.”8
Over the past fifteen years or so, including during the current crisis, the Bank of England has 
taken steps to make the Bank’s principles clearer.9 Most recently, we have also addressed 
                                                 
6   For example, see Brunnermeier M K and Pedersen L H (2008), “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity”, The 
Society for Financial Studies, Oxford University Press. 
7   Bank  supervision  has  its  origins  not  in  consumer  protection  but  in  preserving  stability  (and  protecting  the 
central bank against risks incurred through its open market operations and discount window lending). This was 
evident in the remarks, just over twenty years ago, of George Blunden, the Bank’s then Deputy Governor and, 
a decade earlier, the founding Chairman of the Basel Committee: “Supervisory standards are set not only with 
an eye to what is required to protect depositors with individual institutions, looked at in the narrow context of 
their own operations, but also with an eye to protecting them from problems which could be created by wider, 
systemic, developments. A bank may consider a course of action it wishes to take to be acceptable – as it 
may well be in a limited context. But the same course might, if widely copied by other banks, have unfortunate 
effects on the banking system as a whole. It is part of the supervisors’ job to take that wider, systemic view 
and sometimes to curb practices which even prudent banks might, if left to themselves, regard as safe.” See, 
Blunden G, “Supervision and Central Banking”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, August 1987. 
8 Page 206 of the 1999 paperback reprint of Bagehot (1873), “Lombard Street” in the Wiley Investment Classics 
series. 
9   For example, see Eddie George’s 1993 lecture “The pursuit of financial stability”; Mervyn King’s September 
2007 letter to the Treasury Select Committee, “Turmoil in financial markets: what can central banks do?”; and, 
most  recently,  the  document  on  the  Bank’s  liquidity  insurance  facilities,  “The  Development  of  the  Bank  of 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 3
some  difficult  issues  around  the  transparency  of  collateral  policy,  and  about  how  to  avoid 
incentivising imprudent liquidity management.  
The time-consistency problem and collateral policy 
Like so much in central banking, time-consistency is at the centre of it. 
That a time-consistency problem can bedevil monetary policy is well known10, and motivates 
an  institutional  framework  in  which  independent  central  banks  have  clear  mandates  for 
fighting  inflation.  Much  less  is  said  about  what  might  be  equally  serious  time-consistency 
problems  in  the  sphere  of  financial  stability.  They  can  be  especially  apparent  in  central 
banks’ collateral policy.  
Given  banks’  incomplete  cover  against  their  maturity  mismatch,  central  banks  have  long 
stood  ready  to  “discount”  –  or  lend  against  the  collateral  of  –  certain  assets  in  unlimited 
amounts. But central banks have also long been worried that, left to themselves, banks will 
try to avoid holding the best-quality, most liquid assets, because they yield less.  
If, in an attempt to induce banks to hold truly liquid assets, the central bank were to declare 
that it would lend against only the highest-quality collateral, the banking system would know 
that  those  assets  could  be  converted  into  money  in  all  circumstances.  But  if  an  otherwise 
solvent bank gets into trouble and still faces a liquidity problem after taking all of its eligible 
high-quality  assets  to  the  central  bank,  the  authorities  face  a  choice  between  letting  it  fail 
through a lack of liquidity or lending against a wider class of assets. Their choice will turn on 
an  assessment  of  the  trade  off  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  risk  of  financial  instability 
today  that  could  flow  from  immediate  bank  failures  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  risk  of 
financial  instability  in  the  future  that  may  flow  from  the  central  bank  being  seen  to  protect 
banks from their mistakes. 11 If during peacetime a bank judges that its failure would be likely 
to  cause  widespread  systemic  distress,  it  will  probably  conclude  that  the  central  bank’s 
collateral  policy  will,  during  wartime,  be  relaxed,  leading  it  to  choose  to  hold  less  of  the 
highest-quality eligible assets than otherwise. Crucially, the central bank may then, after all, 
not  be  able  to  stick  to  its  declared  collateral  policy,  just  as  the  bank  suspected.  In  other 
words, a central bank policy of lending against only the best assets is likely to prove time 
inconsistent when it comes to the crunch. 
This is not an ivory tower problem. It is a real problem. 
It  is  why  the  Bank  of  England  confirmed  last  year  that  we  do  stand  ready,  via  our  public 
facilities, to lend against a wide range of collateral, subject crucially to appropriate haircuts 
and other terms. To do otherwise would be futile; it would lack credibility. And to do so is 
consistent with Bagehot’s dictum that central banks should lend against “everything which in 
common times is good ‘banking security’ ”.12
The Bank has already published an initial list of collateral eligible in its dedicated liquidity-
insurance  facilities.  Looking  ahead,  the  Bank  plans  to  expand  the  list,  and  to  promulgate 
detailed eligibility criteria reflecting its risk tolerance and experience gained from managing 
                                                                                                                                                         
England’s  Market  Operations:  A  consultative  paper  by  the  Bank  of  England”,  October  2008.  Mark  Carney, 
Governor of the Bank of Canada, has also set out his principles for the Bank of Canada’s liquidity provision. 
10   Broadly, if the monetary authority thinks it can achieve above “trend” output growth or employment for a while 
by reducing interest rates, it may be tempted to let inflation temporarily rise above the rate it has promised to 
deliver. But people get used to this – or, in models, anticipate it – and so the extra inflation is simply built into 
their  wage  and  price  setting,  without  any  benefit  to  output  or  jobs,  but  at  the  cost  of  a  higher  steady-state 
inflation rate.  
11   This is discussed in Mervyn King’s 2007 letter to the Treasury Select Committee. 
12   Page  205  of  the  1999  paperback  reprint  of  Bagehot  (1873),  “Lombard  Street”  in  the  Wiley  Investment 
Classics series. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2009
assets and collateral. In doing so, the Bank recognises that its decisions will have a bearing 
on the development of markets. For example, for securitised assets, the Bank plans in due 
course to establish criteria for both the structure of the securitisations and the composition of 
the underlying portfolios that it will lend against.  
The Bank’s Discount Window Facility and wider-collateral OMOs: adverse incentives 
and the terms of liquidity insurance 
These  expansions  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  facilities  have  required  us  to  be  much clearer 
than, perhaps, ever before about the terms on which we insure against liquidity risk.  
As  with  other  types  of  insurance,  without  care  central  banks’  provision  of  insurance  could 
inadvertently  have  the  perverse  effect  of  reducing  banks’  incentives  to  contain  their 
exposures to liquidity risk in the first place – no doubt bringing the banks temporarily higher 
profits,  but  increasing  the  potential  costs  to  the  wider  economy  of  those  liquidity  risks 
crystallising. For broadly similar reasons, we have had to think hard about how to protect the 
Bank against excessive risk (via eligibility criteria, haircuts, price etc). 
The  principles  that  underpin  the  design  of  the  Bank’s  facilities,  set  out  last  October,  are 
basically as follows: 
• 
• 
They should absolutely not cut across, and should ideally support, monetary policy. 
Crucially, the terms of such liquidity insurance should balance its benefits against the 
costs of creating incentives for banks to take more liquidity risk than otherwise. 
The  Bank  should  be,  and  is,  prepared  to  lend  against  a  wide  class  of  collateral 
subject to applying appropriate haircuts, and provided that we are capable of valuing 
it  and  of  managing  it  in  the  event  of  a  counterparty  default.  (One  of  the  great 
problems  in  our  capital  markets  is  that  too  many  firms  forgot  that  collateral  and 
haircuts matter only when a counterparty defaults.)  
Such  lending  against  wider  collateral  should  be  for  term  maturities,  as  lending  in 
stressed circumstances for only very short maturities creates rollover risk and so may 
be ineffective in forestalling panic. 
Liquidity-insurance  facilities  that  are  permanently  available  should  be  delivered  via 
secured loans (repo or collateral swaps) rather than outright purchases, as during the 
life of a loan we can update the collateral margins and other terms that control the 
risk to the Bank. 
Permanent  facilities  providing  bilateral  liquidity  insurance  should  be  made  available 
only to commercial banks, as they unavoidably need such insurance given that their 
liabilities  are  money  and  the  vital  role  they  play,  as  monetary  institutions,  in  the 
economy  and  the  financial  system.  (Private-sector  institutions  seeking  to  offer 
monetary (deposit) services should be regulated as banks.13) 
Such public facilities should not be available to banks where in the judgment of the 
Bank there are serious question-marks over their viability or solvency. (That need not 
exhaust our menu for providing liquidity to individual firms. It is of course open to us 
to offer that via bespoke support operations.14) 
                                                      
13   This  suggests,  for  example,  that  constant-NAV  money  market  mutual  funds  should  convert  into  banks  or 
switch to being variable-NAV funds. Arguably, similar principles should apply to other non-bank banks. See 
Tucker PMWT (2009), “Remarks at the Turner Review Conference by Paul Tucker”, Bank of England. Paul 
Volker’s recent Group of Thirty report also argues for this. 
14   This  can  be  effected  under  the  Tripartite  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  UK’s  Tripartite 
authorities (HMT, FSA and Bank). 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 5
Consistent with those Design Principles, during the current crisis we added to the Bank of 
England’s Sterling Monetary Framework two instruments that are explicitly designed to help 
contain  financial  system  stress,  by  providing  financing  against  securities  that  may  become 
illiquid in stressed conditions: 
• 
A Discount Window Facility (DWF) making available to commercial banks collateral 
swaps in which the Bank can lend UK government securities in exchange for a wide 
range of eligible collateral. 
Long-term repos (LTRs) via which the Bank lends cash against collateral comprising 
a  range  of  high-quality  securities  going  beyond  the  sovereign  securities  routinely 
eligible in the Bank’s short-term repo operations.  
 For  the  Bank’s  short-term  repos,  eligible  collateral  has  not  been  widened:  it  remains 
essentially high-quality government bonds. That is because the purpose of the weekly short-
term OMOs is to manage the Bank’s net supply of reserves rather than to provide broader 
liquidity insurance.  
Liquidity insurance and monetary policy 
The two new facilities differ from each other in so far as the long-term repos (LTRs) are for a 
total size determined by the Bank, whereas drawings from the Discount Window Facility are 
for amounts determined by individual counterparties; and in that the Bank lends cash via the 
LTRs, whereas we would usually lend securities via the DWF. That affects their interaction 
with monetary policy. In the case of the DWF, we lend securities (gilts) that are eligible in our 
OMOs, so they can be turned into cash either in the market or via our repo operations. But, 
in its usual mode of operation, the DWF does not directly affect the Bank’s aggregate supply 
of  reserves.15  Indirectly,  it  may  even  reduce  the  demand  for  reserves,  as  it  gives  sound 
banks a source of liquidity insurance separate from holding precautionary balances with the 
Bank.  
By contrast, the wider-collateral LTR OMOs do inject reserves. For a given monthly reserves 
target,  that  means  that,  other  things  being  equal,  the  Bank  has  to  reduce  the  size  of  its 
weekly short-term OMOs, in order to ensure that its net supply of reserves is equal to the 
target;  otherwise  overnight  rates  would  sink  below  the  MPC’s  policy  rate.  But  when,  as 
during the current crisis, the scale of wider-collateral repos is massively increased, reducing 
short-term repos to zero is not always enough to achieve our monetary objective. The Bank 
of England has therefore introduced the sale, via auction, of very short-term Bank of England 
bills to drain excess (ie above target) reserves from the market. That has enabled us to make 
a very significant (order of magnitude) discretionary increase in our cash-liquidity insurance 
without  cutting  across  monetary  policy.  (In  my  view  that  is  preferable,  on  technical  and 
presentational  grounds,  to  draining  the  market  by  HMG  depositing  with  the  Bank  the 
proceeds  of  increased  Treasury  issuance,  which  could  be  confused  with  deficit-financing 
operations.)  In  economic  terms,  the  net  effect  for  the  system  in  aggregate  is  to  inject 
reserves against wider-collateral up to some targeted level consistent with monetary policy, 
together with a further collateral swap of Bank bills against wider-collateral. But the structure 
employed has distributional benefits too.  
Haircuts 
Consistency  with  monetary  policy  is  one  constraint  on  our  provision  of  liquidity  insurance. 
Controlling  our  risk  is  another.  For  its  loan  (repo  and  swap)  operations,  the  Bank  uses 
                                                 
15   The Bank has retained discretion to lend cash via the DWF in various circumstances, including where the gilt 
repo market was not functioning. 
6 
 BIS Review 67/2009
valuations,16  haircuts  and  daily  remargining  to  leave  financial  risk  with  its  counterparties. 
Haircuts  can  be  based  on  past  volatility  and  on  scenario  or  stress  analysis.  We  increase 
haircuts  for  own-name  securities,  where  a  market  price  can  no  longer  be  observed,  or 
sometimes in the light of the particular circumstances of individual counterparties. Consistent 
with its role as central bank, the Bank aims thereby to unbundle liquidity risk from credit and 
valuation risk. And that means we do not, and could not, lend 100% of our valuation of the 
collateral, which is a constraint on the scale of the liquidity insurance we provide.  
Haircuts are kept under review, and the Bank reserves the right to alter them, including on 
outstanding transactions. Looking ahead, the Bank aims to take into account structural and 
cyclical changes in financial conditions. In the future, the Bank might, for example, increase 
haircuts  during  “peacetime”  if  liquidity  in  the  secondary  market  from  a  particular  type  of 
collateral became impaired; or if the Bank concluded that, as the upswing of a credit cycle 
developed, risk was plausibly becoming underpriced and so was not properly reflected in the 
valuations of instruments it was accepting as collateral. Whether or not that would be enough 
of itself quell a cycle is obviously uncertain; but it would help to protect us against risk and 
would give a signal. 
In short, haircut policy matters.  
Pricing 
But the Bank does not believe that haircuts can be relied upon on their own to produce the 
appropriate incentives for banks’ liquidity management. Price matters too. Bagehot said that 
the  rate  should  be  “high”.  But  since  he  wrote  in  the  context  of  the  Gold  Standard  and  of 
domestic  financial  crises  that  were  typically  accompanied  by  external  (or  capital  account) 
crises, his notion of a “high rate” was bound up with the central bank tightening monetary 
conditions to stem the outflows (of gold). But it is clear enough that, although he did not in 
fact talk of “penalty” rates, the relevant measure for him was the rate charged by the central 
bank relative to that prevailing in the market in normal conditions, ie before a crisis breaks.  
The Bank has adopted, and promulgated, a fee structure for its liquidity-insurance facilities 
that  increases  as  banks’  borrowing  increases  and/or  is  made  against  riskier,  less  liquid 
collateral.  That  is  designed  to  underpin  incentives  for  banks  to  manage  liquidity  risk 
prudently, in the long-run interests not only of the banking system but of the wider economy. 
We have published a schedule for DWF pricing with those properties, structured around four 
broad classes of collateral, grouped according to their liquidity/risk characteristics.17 We plan, 
after  consultation,  to  introduce  an  auction  structure  for  the  wider-collateral  long-term  repo 
OMOs  that  delivers  the  same  broad  result  of  counterparties  having  to  pay  up  to  borrow 
against less liquid collateral.18  
                                                 
16   The Bank published its general approach to collateral valuations when it disclosed use of the Special Liquidity 
Scheme. It stated: “Securities are valued by the Bank using observed market prices that are independent and 
routinely available publicly. The Bank reserves the right to use its own calculated prices, including where such 
independent market prices are unavailable. Those calculated prices are designed to deliver valuations taking 
account of securities’ contracted cash flows and yields of comparable securities, but not individual loan-by-
loan analysis of portfolios. To account for the risk that a calculated price is an over-estimate of what a market 
price would have been had it existed, an additional haircut is added. The Bank’s valuation of all securities is 
binding.” For more details, see the Market Notice for the Special Liquidity Scheme released on 21 April 2008. 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/sls/index.htm. 
17   More information on the Discount Window Facility (DWF) can be found in the Bank’s Market Notice, released 
on 19 March 2009. www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/money/discount/index.htm
18   In the auctions there would be separate stop-out rates for lending against liquid and less liquid collateral and 
the proportion of the Bank's long-term lending allocated to the different types of collateral would be related to 
the  spread  between  the  stop-out  rates.  A  high  proportion  would be  allocated  to  lending  against  less  liquid 
collateral only if, given the bids received, there was an appropriately large spread between the stop-out rates. 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 7
Knowledge  of  the  framework’s  pricing  structure  can  be  factored  into  banks’  liquidity 
management and contingency planning. 
Mitigants for the “stigma problem” 
But during the turmoil of the past eighteen or so months, around the world banks have at 
times been reluctant to pay such “penalty” rates of interest for fear of signalling, if somehow 
their use leaks or is revealed by a “witch hunt”, that they have an idiosyncratic problem even 
when they don’t. During 2007 this became known as the “stigma problem”,19 and it caused 
standing  lending  facilities,  a  key  piece  of  central  bank  machinery  for  providing  overnight 
liquidity  to  the  payments  system,  to  more  or  less  atrophy  in  some  centres  during  the  first 
phase of the crisis. 
That  state  of  affairs  was  not  sustainable,  and  it  prompted  a  number  of  central  banks  to 
innovate. Auctions of funds against wider collateral of the kind introduced by the Fed and the 
Bank of England side-step the stigma problem by having a number of banks borrow at the 
same time. They have definitely helped to underpin the system. But, compared with a facility, 
those auctions are available only periodically – fortnightly in the UK at present – rather than 
every day. The DWF is available on a continuous basis, and is designed to avoid the stigma 
problem. In particular, in its usual mode of operation, it involves a collateral swap, so there is 
no give away of its being used in the size of either the banking system’s reserves balances 
or our open market operations. And we publish data on its use on an aggregate, averaged 
basis  and  with  a  lag.  This  puts  onto  a  permanent  footing  some  of  the  technology  of  the 
Bank’s Special Liquidity Scheme, which was used in 2008 to provide 3-year financing, via a 
collateral swap, for assets that had become illiquid as a result of the crisis.20
How the facilities can work in extremely stressed conditions 
Monthly,  wide-collateral  repos  for  a  3-month  maturity  and  typically  of  fairly  modest  size, 
together  with  a  continuously  available  Window  for  30-day  collateral  swaps,  are  now 
permanent features of the Bank of England’s regime. Various parameters can be adapted in 
the face of extremely stressed conditions of the kind we have been facing. Thus, the wide-
collateral repos have been held fortnightly rather than monthly, and for very large sizes. And 
the DWF currently offers a 12-month swap option, as well as the standard 30-day facility.  
In  summary,  by  providing  liquidity  insurance  the  Bank  aims  effectively  to  give  essentially 
sound  banks  and  others  time  to  address  the  problems  created  by  stress,  and  for  the 
authorities to develop remedial plans, without creating perverse incentives or exposing itself 
to  risk.  Given  those  aims,  banks  must  avail  themselves  of  these  facilities.  We  believe,  for 
example,  that  all  qualifying  banks  and  building  societies  should  sign  up  for  the  Discount 
Window Facility; that they should pre-position with us a range of eligible collateral, so that 
they avoid operational stumbles when they seek to use the Window; that they should use it 
regularly in meaningful size as part of testing and making a reality of their contingency plans; 
and that they should share those plans with the Bank, which, amongst other things, would 
help  us  assess  applications  to  draw.  In  that  way,  the  DWF  can  truly  help  to  underpin  the 
system’s liquidity in the future.  
                                                 
19   See Tucker PMWT (2008), “The Structure of Regulation: Lessons from the Crisis of 2007”, a speech to the 
LSE’s Financial Markets Group Conference; and the Committee on the Global Financial System, Paper No. 31 
(July  2008),  “Central  bank  operations  in  response  to  the  financial  turmoil”,  CGFS  Papers,  Bank  for 
International Settlements. 
20 The SLS was introduced in April 2008 and was open until end-January 2009. It enabled banks to swap legacy 
illiquid securities (principally RMBS and covered bonds) for UK Treasury Bills for a period of three years. The 
Bank announced in early February that it lent £185bn of TBills, against £287bn (nominal) of collateral. 
8 
 BIS Review 67/2009
Prudential regulation of banks’ liquidity: how it relates to central bank liquidity 
insurance  
But  such  insurance  is  not  and  cannot  be  a  source  of  longer-term  funding  to  the  banking 
system.  Prudent  valuations  and  haircuts  mean  that  our  insurance  cannot  finance  anything 
like the whole of a bank’s balance sheet even in the short run, and also that banks need a 
clear buffer of surplus capital. Nor is central bank liquidity insurance always going to work.  
That  underlines  why  prudent  liquidity  management  must  be  a  major  responsibility  of  the 
banks  themselves.  In  the  normal  course  of  their  business,  they  should  insure  themselves 
against liquidity risk in private markets. They can do so by, for example, holding a stock of 
assets  that  can  unquestionably  be  exchanged  readily  in  the  financial  markets  for  cash  in 
anything  other  than  the  gravest  market  distress;  by  maintaining  funding  with  a  prudent 
maturity structure relative to that of their assets and contingent commitments; and in the case 
of smaller banks, up to a point by buying insurance in the form of completely committed lines 
of credit from larger banks, but also crucially by holding unquestionably liquid assets in case 
their bank-provider is ailing when they call on the line.21 Banks earn a return from providing 
liquidity  services,  and  so  make  a  trade-off  in  deciding  how  much  liquidity  risk  to  run.  But, 
because of the spillover effects from bank failures, the overall social cost of banks’ liquidity 
risks  crystallising  can  be  considerably  greater  than  the  costs  for  the  individual  banks 
themselves.  Regulation  by  the  micro-prudential  authorities  has  been  the  primary  tool  for 
dealing with that issue.  
There  is  currently  a  very  important,  and  long  overdue,  international  debate  about  how  to 
improve the regulation of liquidity.  
I want to dwell today on just one important element of this debate.  
This concerns whether or not the assets counted by prudential regulators as part of a bank’s 
liquidity buffer should be defined to include all of the assets held by the bank that are eligible 
in the operations/facilities of the central banks to which the bank has access. Some argue 
that they should. The Bank of England would regard that as a big mistake.  
For  the  reasons  I  have  described,  the  collateral  eligible  at  most  central  banks  goes  way 
beyond  securities  that  can  be  relied  upon  in  stressed  conditions  to  be  liquid  in  private 
markets  (whether  outright  or  repo).  So  if  they  all  counted  as  core-liquidity  for  regulatory 
purposes,  banks  would  in  effect  be  liberated  from  having  to  hold  a  buffer  of  low-yielding 
assets that they could confidently use in the market before they turned to us. That would be a 
regime  in  which  central  banks  would,  in  effect,  be  lender  of  second  resort  (ie  as  soon  as 
some  markets  closed  up)  rather  than  LOLR  (broadly  understood).  The  equilibrium  would 
surely  be  one  in  which  less  of  banks’  balance  sheets  were  liquid  in  the  markets  than  is 
desirable; and in which the banking system in aggregate could run excess liquidity risk from 
a  systemic  perspective.  Haven’t  we  seen  the  results  of  that  already?  Isn’t  the  purpose  of 
regulatory standards to avoid that?  
Our  own  favored  approach  is  that  the  regulators  should  define  the  “liquidity  buffer”  to 
comprise high-quality securities that can reliably be traded or exchanged in liquid markets, 
including  in stressed circumstances.  In  practice,  that  would  mean  focusing  on  government 
bonds in many economies.22
                                                 
21   See  Chapman  G,  Emblow,  A  and  Michael  I  (2000),  “Banking  System  Liquidity:  Developments  and  Issues”, 
Financial Stability Review, Issue 9, December 2000. 
22   Such an approach would be consistent with the 2008 CGFS report on Central Bank Operations on this issue: 
“Insofar as central bank actions might lead to degradation of market participants’ management of liquidity and 
other risks, a possible offset would be to implement tighter supervisory and prudential policies concerning the 
management of liquidity and related risks.” It would also seem to comply with the 2008 BCBS Principles on 
Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision, which say that: “With respect to the composition of its liquidity 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 9
That  is  the  approach  that  the  UK’s  Financial  Services  Authority  will  be  adopting  in  due 
course, after a number of years’ discussion. We greatly welcome that outcome. Of course, in 
the midst of the crisis, any such requirement has to be carefully transitioned, but the eventual 
destination should be clear enough.  
For  such  a  policy  to  deliver  its  potential,  it  would  be  good  if  regulators,  internationally, 
required  all  banks  regularly  to  turn  over  a  meaningful  share  of  their  “stock  liquidity”  in  the 
market on a reasonably regular basis. That would also help to put banks in a position to reap 
the  benefits  of  the  Bank’s  Discount  Window  Facility,  through  which,  as  I  have  described, 
sound  banks  can  borrow  gilts.  Frankly,  it  has  been  shocking  over  the  past  year  or  so  to 
discover  how  many  medium-sized  banks  and  building  societies  did  not  hold  government 
bonds  or  other  very  high  quality  assets;  or,  if  they  did,  how  many  did  not  have  a  regular 
presence in the gilt repo market or even had no capacity to repo at all. Turning up in the core 
secured-funding markets for the first time for years is an absolute give away of distress. All 
that has to change.  
Market-maker of Last Resort 
What I have said so far could be mistaken to imply that only banking markets matter. That 
would be misleading. The capital markets obviously matter too.  
Indeed, the current crisis has illustrated just what a mess can result from liquidity draining out 
of those markets. Market liquidity is endogenous: participants thinking that it might dry up can 
contribute to its doing so. In the early phases of this crisis, by virtue of holding large “trading” 
books  that  were  marked  to  market,  banks  and  other  traders  found  themselves  having  to 
make very large portfolio write downs in the face of sharp rises in liquidity premia in asset 
markets.  As  highly-levered  institutions,  those  mark-downs  depleted  their  net  worth  to  the 
point of imperilling solvency. That caused a retrenchment in the availability of credit, helping 
to plunge the world economy into recession, and so impairing the value of more traditional 
loan books, in a vicious spiral.  
So  it  would  have  been  better  if,  somehow,  we  could  have  preserved  the  liquidity  of  the 
markets. 
Liquidity insurance facilities that underpin banks' funding are obviously helpful to that, as they 
increase the probability of bank-dealers being able to finance unwanted inventory. But some 
voices have argued that the authorities should act more directly to preserve market liquidity; 
or, in other words, that central banks should stand ready to act as a Market Maker of Last 
Resort.23
Certainly, the profound changes in the structure of the financial system over recent decades 
should not leave us blindly attached to mid-19 century precepts. 
But nor can we be blind to the challenges in embarking on acting as MMLR. In the first place, 
whereas  lending  to  a  bank  does  with  certainty  give  that  bank  more  liquidity,  entering  a 
market  as  a  buyer  does  not  automatically  enhance  the  liquidity  of  that  market.  Secondly, 
whereas central banks can protect themselves against the risk in secured loans by requiring 
more collateral if conditions deteriorate, an outright purchase is a one-off transaction; if we 
pay too much given the true risk, that’s that. 
                                                                                                                                                         
cushion,  a  bank  should  hold  a  core  of  the  most  reliably  liquid  assets,  such  as  cash  and  high  quality 
government bonds or similar instruments, to guard against the most sever stress scenarios”. 
23   For  example  see,  Buiter  W  and  Sibert  A  (2007),  “The  Central  Bank  as  Market  Maker  of  Last  Resort”, 
Maverecon – Willem Buiter’s Blog (http://maverecon.blogspot.com/2007/08/central-bank-as-market-maker-of-
last.html). This section has benefited from internal discussions with Kalin Nikolov and Roger Clews. 
10 
 BIS Review 67/2009
So this is new territory. Whereas a trawl of the web reveals over 200,000 articles referring to 
LOLR, there are around 1,500 mentions of MMLR, most of them published over the past year 
or so.24 And like all new territory, it needs to be thought through. One recent contribution25 
suggested that if the purpose of LOLR in a bank-based system is “to stabilise the balance 
sheets of banks”, in a market-based system it should be “to stabilise the limit-order book, by 
placing orders to buy”.  
By  analogy  with  the  more  familiar  “LOLR”  function,  the  following  thoughts  suggest 
themselves for debate in our community. 
First,  as  with  LOLR,  central  banks  cannot  engage  in  MMLR  operations  if  to  do  so  would 
interfere with monetary policy. Securities are purchased in exchange for cash, entailing an 
injection of reserves into the banking system. That has to be consistent with the target for the 
central bank’s net supply of reserves. 
Second, a MMLR should aim to charge a penalty (eg buy at a discount) to the fundamental 
value  of  an  asset.  Put  another  way,  any  bid-ask  spread  should  be  unattractive  relative  to 
peacetime conditions in private markets. 
Third, any purchase (auction) mechanism should be designed to reveal information about the 
state of the market and the fairness of prices paid.  
Fourth,  while  the  MMLR  cannot  avoid  the  risk  inherent  in  outright  purchases,  it  absolutely 
must not over reach its capital resources. 
Fifth, the MMLR should aim to be catalytic, helping ideally to kick-start the market rather than 
replace it. 
Sixth, the MMLR should avoid propping up markets that would not be fundamentally viable 
once peacetime returns.  
I must stress that those are just starters for debate.  
But, unfortunately, we cannot always wait for consensus around fully articulated principles. 
Recently, in the context of its Asset-Purchase Facility programme, the Bank of England has 
embarked  on  what  could,  perhaps,  be  viewed  as  two  variants  of  MMLR  in  the  sterling 
corporate  financing  markets.  Both  have  been  focused  on  our  being  a  buyer,  rather  than 
operating  on  both  sides  of  the  market,  but  arguably  that  is  what  the  various  MMLR  ideas 
really amount to in crisis conditions.  
In the first, we offer to buy Commercial Paper at announced spreads, which are designed to 
be  above  those  warranted  by  credit-fundamentals,  and  above  market  spreads  during 
peacetime, but below those prevailing in the market before we stepped in. In other words, we 
are  ready  to  lend  without  charging  a  hefty  liquidity  premium,  since  we  are  not  liquidity 
constrained.  We  offer  to  buy  paper in  both  the primary  market  and  the  secondary market. 
The latter is in effect a temporary liquidity facility to money market funds and others, at an 
extra cost of 25bp over the fixed spread, and with the aim of increasing their willingness to 
buy new paper. The goal has been to stimulate the market to bring market prices to at least 
our  spreads,  with  market  transactions  occurring  there  or  more  cheaply.  A  measure  of 
success  is  not  how  much  paper  we  buy,  but  whether  providing  a  backstop  assists  the 
functioning of the market.  
The  Bank’s  second  facility  is  in  some  ways  more  interesting  in  the  context  of  the  debate 
about MMLR. We are acting as a back-stop buyer of sterling corporate bonds, by regularly 
holding auctions in individual securities. To protect against risk, the Bank sets (and updates) 
                                                 
24   Many of them by Willem Buiter. 
25   Cecchetti  S  G  (2009),  “Central  Bank  Tools  and  Liquidity  Shortages”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York 
Conference, 19-20 February 2009. The quote is from the slides used at the conference. 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 11
reserve  prices,  which  draw  on  CDS  spreads,  models  of  risk  etc  as  well  as  qualitative 
information. The amounts we offer to buy in each auction are small. The objective is explicitly 
catalytic. It is to reduce the inventory risk run by bank market-makers in the securities, and to 
reduce  liquidity  risk  for  market  participants  more  generally.  Perhaps  the  best  way  to  think 
about it in the abstract is that it is akin to our stepping into the market with a narrower bid-
offer  spread  than  private  sector  intermediaries  would  otherwise  offer,  with  a  view  to  those 
very same dealers bringing their bid-offer spreads inside ours and to investors reducing the 
liquidity  premium  they  require.  To  the  extent  that  such  measures  work,  liquidity  risk  for 
intermediaries,  and  so  for  traders  and  investors,  is  reduced;  and  thus,  the  spread  in 
corporate  bond  yields  should  decline  too.  There  is  some  evidence  that  that  has  occurred 
since  we  introduced  the  facility  in  March,  although  it  is  impossible  to  control  for  the  more 
general improvement in global corporate bond markets.  
Providing a MMLR facility requires know-how and capital resources. In the UK, the Bank is 
equipped  to  offer  MMLR  when  needed  in  so  far  as  we  have  the  wherewithal  to  pay  for 
whatever  we  buy  using  our  money  (where,  as  I  described  earlier,  we  can  sterilise  any 
monetary  effects  if  we  need  to).  But  given  the  Bank  of  England’s  very  small  accounting 
capital, we have acted on the back of an indemnity from the government. The presence of 
tax payer protection is not enough, however, for central banks to ignore risk. Not only does 
exposure  to  reputational  risk  matter.  Central  banks  should  not  be  involved  in  providing 
facilities  which  it  is  clear  would  be  likely  to  result  in  a  transfer  of  resources  to  the  private 
sector. That is the realm of fiscal policy. Central banks should stick to central banking. In the 
Bank of England’s current asset-purchase operations, that is reflected in our remit from the 
government  focusing  on  high-quality  securities,  and  in  the  maximum  prices  (minimum 
spreads) we set.  
These  considerations  need  to  be  weighed  very  carefully  in  deciding  whether,  or  how,  to 
operationalise  any  MMLR  policy.  We  absolutely  must  keep  a  clear  line  around  central 
banking.26
Which brings me to the third “instrument” I want to say something about today. 
Capital of Last Resort 
However much the authorities do to forestall or alleviate a crisis by providing liquidity, I fear 
that  we  cannot  rule  out  that  very  rarely  the  banking  system  will  end  up  needing  to  be 
supported by some ultimate source of capital. We absolutely must be prepared to let banks 
fail when, in systemic terms, it is safe to do so. Such decisions call for technocratic judgment. 
But,  as  we  have  seen,  sometimes  disorderly  bank  insolvencies  would  bring  systemic 
distress.  
For that reason, at least three things follow. First, each country needs a Special Resolution 
Regime  for  distressed  banks,  and  probably  more  widely;  we  cannot  rely  on  general 
insolvency law to help control threats to system stability. Thank goodness, the UK now has 
such a regime for banks, and the Bank will draw lessons about whether it needs refinement 
over  time.  Second,  given  the  prevalence  of  internationally  active  banks  in  a  globalised 
economy, national authorities just must be able to work together – in reality; when it matters 
– to control the resolution of banks whose activities cross borders.27 And third, as by now 
                                                 
26   This  was  re-affimed  recently  in  a  joint  statement  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Department  of  the 
Treasury (www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20090323b.htm). 
27   Work is underway under the auspices of the Financial Stability Board, which published Principles endorsed by 
G20 heads of government in April; and in the Basel Committee of Banking Supervisors. These issues were 
also discussed recently by Eric Rosengren, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in a speech at 
the Institute of Regulation and Risk, Hong Kong, 5 May 2009 “Challenges in Resolving Systemically Important 
Financial Institutions”. 
12 
 BIS Review 67/2009
many  others  have  said,28  we  need  to  find  a  solution  to  Too-Big-To-Fail,  or  too 
interconnected,  too  complex  –  however  one  wants  to  think  about  it.  That  might  involve 
requiring  banks  to  have  credible  resolution  plans  for  themselves,  with  higher  regulatory 
capital and liquidity charges entailed if they do not.  
As  we  have  seen  across  many  countries  during  the  current  crisis,  governments  can 
otherwise end up having to provide capital support in order to prevent the financial system 
unravelling, with unfathomable costs for the real economy and so for households. The long 
lesson  of  history  is  that  we  must  build  a  resilient  system;  but  that  we  and  our  successors 
would be foolhardy to imagine that governments will never again need to provide capital to 
save the day.  
If that is right, then society needs principles and policies for what might be called “Capital of 
Last Resort”, to sit alongside the Lender of Last Resort (LOLR) principles developed by and 
for  central  banks  since  the  19th  century.  Clear  and  timeless  principles  in  this  area  barely 
exist. There are just 30 or so mentions of COLR on the web. 
One possible starting point is how we have learned to think about bespoke liquidity-support 
operations. After explicitly recognising that occasionally liquidity support operations can end 
up providing de facto risk capital if the recipient deteriorates, the late Eddie George offered 
some thoughts on this in 1993;29 “central banks are not in the business of providing public 
subsidy to private shareholders. If we do provide support, we will try to structure it so that any 
losses fall first on the shareholders and any benefits come first to us. And any support we 
provide will be on terms that are as penal as we can make them, without precipitating the 
collapse  we  are  trying  to  avoid  ………  We  look  for  a  clean  exit.  The  company  may  be 
required to run down or restructure its operations, under our surveillance, to the point where 
it can do without our support. We aim to protect the system, not to keep in being unviable 
banking capacity …...” And, paraphrasing Mervyn King in 2007: “if the [authorities] underwrite 
any [risk] that threatens to damage the economy as a whole, it encourages the view that as 
long as a bank takes the same sort of risks that other banks are taking then it is more likely 
that their problems will be insured ex post.” 
Extrapolating, common principles for LOLR, MMLR and COLR might include that the terms 
must  help  prevent  and  contain  crises;  not  incentivise  imprudent  behaviour;  be  time-
consistent, which is to say that they must be credible; and lead to an exit strategy. 
Elsewhere in the repertoire, we are clear, for example, that the costs of LOLR should fall to 
shareholders; and that the costs of deposit insurance should be recovered by levies on the 
banking sector as a whole. Building on that, one possible way through the COLR maze might 
conceivably be to establish, over the medium term, a regime where the eventual cost of any 
COLR would in some way be allocated back to the banking system itself rather than to the 
general  taxpayer.  If  it  is  unavoidable  that,  instead  of  allowing  banks  to  fail,  the  banking 
system occasionally needs to be rescued through injections of equity capital, “insurance” is in 
effect  being  extended  to  ordinary  creditors  generally  and  not  just  to  retail  depositors.  The 
funding of that insurance would, perhaps, be extended in a similar fashion. If the authorities 
determined  that  a  public  equity  injection  was  necessary  in  order  to  preserve  stability, 
government  could  be  authorised  to  provide  the  support,  but  with  a  right  to  claim  back  the 
eventual cost, if any, from an increased “insurance” levy on the banking system over a period 
of years beginning after the crisis had clearly passed. Under that kind of regime, more of the 
cost of banking system failures could fall on the shareholders of banks generally rather than 
                                                 
28   For  example,  Philipp  Hildebrand  (Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank)  on 
5 May 2009, in an interview with Handelsblatt, a German daily newspaper. 
29   “The pursuit of financial stability”, LSE lecture by Governor George, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin; and 
Mervyn King’s September 2007 letter to the Treasury Select Committee, “Turmoil in financial markets: what 
can central banks do?”. 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 13
on the public pursue. Banking sector shareholders collectively would benefit ex ante from the 
provision of the insurance to the system as a whole; and ex post from support given to any 
particular firms. The authorities would, in effect, loan their capacity to fund and absorb risk to 
the  banking  system  for  a  temporary  period  during  the  height  of  the  crisis,  but  would 
eventually  be  repaid  by  the  system.  Banks  could  take  that  into  account  in  planning  their 
businesses; and might, arguably, have an incentive during peacetime to monitor the threats 
which their peers posed to stability.  
Unlike regular deposit insurance, where the Bank has favoured the UK moving to a degree of 
pre-funding of the system, it is less clear that such a regime could or should be pre-funded. 
But, as with regular deposit insurance, the question of whether or not any ex post allocation 
of  costs  should  somehow  be  risk  based  would  need  to  be  considered.  Indeed,  more 
generally,  including  perhaps  even  for  liquidity  insurance,  we  need  over  time  to  be  clearer 
about the principles that drive whether insurance premiums are risk based and collected up 
front.  
This  is  obviously  difficult  territory.  There  are  arguments  against  any  approach  along  those 
lines. I air it not so much a proposal but in the hope of stimulating serious thinking about what 
a COLR regime might look like.  
If  a  COLR  regime  could  be  devised,  it  would  be  very  important  that  it  was  not  overused. 
Private sector backstops should be used first; and they could be better designed. One such 
approach would be to require banks to take out private capital insurance. This could take a 
variety  of  forms.  One  idea  would  be  straight  capital  insurance:  ie  a  commitment  from 
investment institutions to subscribe when called upon to do so by a bank. As with possible 
public sector capital-insurance schemes to be activated only during a systemic crisis, such 
private insurance could be linked to maintaining a required minimum capital ratio. A private 
scheme  of  that  kind  would  not  work,  however,  if  the  insurer  could  not  afford  to  subscribe 
when  the  call  came;  or  if  investment  institutions  were  unwilling  to  enter  into  such 
commitments  on  a  sufficient  scale  for  the  insurance  to  make  a  difference  to  the  system’s 
resilience.  Another  idea  circulating  currently30  is  that  banks  would  be  required  by  the 
authorities to issue hybrid-debt-capital instruments that could be converted when needed into 
loss-absorbing equity. In one variant, the option to require conversion would lie in the hands 
of regulators provided a systemic-severity test were passed.  
Summary and conclusions 
During  the  current  crisis,  the  normal  functioning  of  the  financial  system  broke  down,  with 
profound  effects  on  credit  conditions  and  on  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  response. 
Although I have ranged widely today, I have in fact deliberately not covered the operations 
employed  in  some  countries  to  lend  directly  to  firms,  effectively  by-passing  the  financial 
system; or the actions by some central banks, including the Bank of England, to expand the 
money  supply  in  an  environment  of near-zero  policy  rates. Instead,  I  have  focused  on  the 
repertoire  of  instruments  directed  to  supporting,  and  ideally  reviving,  the  financial  system 
itself: funding liquidity, market liquidity, and solvency. 
In  terms  of  funding  liquidity,  following  innovations  over  the  past  year  the  Bank  of  England 
now  offers  six  permanent  facilities  through  which  liquidity  can  pass  between  us  and  the 
banking system – intra-day repos to oil the wholesale payments system; variations in banks’ 
reserves balances, which comprise a prime liquid asset for banks; Open Market Operation 
(OMOs)  against  government  securities;  use  of  overnight  Operational  Standing  Facilities  to 
absorb  day-to-day  frictional  payments  shocks;  longer-term  repos  through  which  the  Bank 
                                                 
30   For  example,  “An  Expedited  Resolution  Mechanism  for  Distressed  Financial  Firms:  Regulatory  Hybrid 
Securities”, Squam Lake Working Group on Financial Regulation, April 2009, Council on Foreign Relations. 
14 
 BIS Review 67/2009
lends  cash  against  wider  collateral;  and  a  Discount  Window  Facility,  through  which  banks 
without  fundamental  problems  of  solvency  or  viability  can  exchange  a  very  wide  range  of 
collateral for UK government bonds.  
In designing those facilities the Bank has been clear about its goals. On the financial stability 
front, we frame them as follows: 
“To  reduce  the  cost  of  disruptions  to  the  liquidity  and  payments  services  supplied  by 
commercial  banks.  The  Bank  does  this  by  balancing  the  provision  of  liquidity  insurance 
against  the  costs  of  creating  incentives  for  banks  to  take  greater  risks,  and  subject  to  the 
need to avoid taking risk onto its balance sheet.” 
In  that  area,  central  banks  are  able  to  draw  on  more  than  a  century  of  experience  and 
analysis. But this crisis has exposed a gap in thinking about what principles should guide any 
Market Maker of Last Resort or Capital of Last Resort interventions by the authorities. I will 
not remotely have solved that problem today, but I hope I can prompt others to help clarify 
thinking  and  practice  in  those  areas  in  the  years  to  come.  Doing  so  will  be  important  to 
developing  new  “rules  of  the  game”  for  what  must  in  the  future  be  a  more  resilient  global 
financial system.  
BIS Review 67/2009 
 15
