Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Macro-prudential supervision 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the CEPR/ESI 13th Annual Conference on “Financial Supervision in an Uncertain 
World”,  European  Banking  Center  at  Venice 
International  University,  Venice, 
25-26 September 2009. 
 Introduction1
The recent financial crisis has produced a broad consensus on analysis and policy action in 
at least three areas, namely the need: i) to gain a better understanding of systemic risk; ii) to 
strengthen the macro-prudential aspects of financial supervision; and iii) to deepen central 
banks’  involvement  in  it.  The  establishment  of  a  new  body  to  conduct  macro-prudential 
supervision at EU level – the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) – is one element in a 
comprehensive set of initiatives and responses in this field.  
My  remarks  today  focus  on  the  future  work  of  this  body  and  consist  of  four  parts.  I’ll  first 
consider  the  origins,  purpose  and  structure  of  the  ESRB.  In  second  place,  I’ll  discuss  the 
concept of systemic risk, and how it can be monitored and assessed effectively. I’ll examine 
some analytical tools for systemic risk analysis in the EU and look at how these tasks could 
be organised in the context of the ESRB. In the third part, I’ll cover the ECB’s experience in 
conducting  financial  stability  surveillance  in  the  euro  area  and  reflect  on  the  vulnerabilities 
that  we  (and  other  authorities)  identified  before  the  crisis.  I’ll  ask  why  the  communications 
about the risks that built up were insufficient to prevent the crisis. The fourth part is a what if? 
What if the Risk Board had existed in the early 2000s – could the factors that led to the crisis 
have been identified and averted? The answer should point to some of the key advantages 
of (and reasons for) the EU’s new macro-prudential function. 
The setting-up of the European Systemic Risk Board  
1.  
The idea of establishing a body to monitor and assess systemic risk at European level was 
first mooted in the late 1990s.2 It took over a decade and a financial crisis to implement it. Let 
me recall the milestones of the setting-up of the ESRB institutional framework. Following the 
recommendations of the de Larosière Report, in February this year, the main features of the 
institutional framework for macro-prudential supervision were defined by the Communication 
published by the European Commission on 27 May as well as the Conclusions approved by 
the ECOFIN Council on 9 June and by the European Council on 18 and 19 June.  
The European Systemic Risk Board will be responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of 
the financial system within the European Union. It will seek to prevent or mitigate systemic 
risks  within  the  financial  system,  so  as  to  avoid  widespread  financial  distress,  and  it  will 
contribute  to  a  smooth  functioning  of  the  Internal  Market  and  ensure  a  sustainable 
contribution of the financial sector to economic growth. Its tasks will be to identify and assess 
risks to systemic stability in the EU, issue risk warnings where risks appear to be significant 
                                                 
1  
I would like to thank L. Cappiello, I. Cabral, P. Hartmann, and F. Recine for their contributions, and D. Clarke 
for reviewing the document. I bear responsibility for the views expressed and for any errors. 
2   See, for example, European Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee (1998), “EMU, the ECB and Financial 
Supervision”, Statement No. 2, 19 October, which proposes a “European Observatory of Systemic Risk” as an 
initial  step  towards  a  European-wide  supervisory  structure.  Aglietta  and  Scialom  (2003),  “The  Challenge  of 
European  Integration  for  Prudential  Policy”,  FMG  Special  Paper,  No.  152,  October,  provide  an  elaborate 
discussion of such a body. 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 1
and, where necessary, give recommendations on measures to be taken to contain such risks 
and follow up on their implementation.  
The  Risk  Board  will  have  33  full  members:  the  27  EU  central  bank  Governors,  the  ECB 
President  and  Vice-President,  a  Commission  member  and  the  three  Chairs  of  the  new 
European  Supervisory  Authorities.  To  ensure  close  cooperation  with  supervisors,  a 
representative from one national supervisory authority for each EU country may attend the 
meetings  of  the  ESRB,  but  will  have  no  voting  rights.  In  addition,  the  President  of  the 
Economic  and  Financial  Committee  (EFC)  will  participate,  but  likewise  will  have  no  voting 
rights.  
The  ECB  was  requested  by  ECOFIN  to  provide  the  necessary  analytical,  statistical, 
administrative  and  logistical  support,  and  to  draw  on  technical  advice  from  the  national 
central banks and supervisors. This is a clear recognition of the important role that central 
banks have gained over time in monitoring financial stability.  
The Commission proposals specify in detail the new institutional arrangements concerning 
the establishment of the ESRB and the involvement of the ECB. The ECB/Eurosystem will 
provide its views when formally consulted according to the Treaty provisions. Indeed, further 
work is needed to clarify and optimise the details of the institutional framework for the ESRB 
as  well  as  for  the  new  European  Supervisory  Authorities  for  micro-prudential  supervision. 
Sound  institutional  arrangements  are  a  crucial  pre-condition  for  the  effectiveness  of  these 
supervisory reforms in general and the establishment of the Risk Board in particular. In this 
context, let me mention two key elements to be defined by the forthcoming legislation. 
One  is  the  arrangements  for  the  exchange  of  micro-prudential  information  among  national 
supervisors,  the  new  European  Supervisory  Authorities  and  the  ESRB  (subject  to  specific 
confidentiality agreements). In order for the ESRB to perform its functions, it should have the 
power to request any information it deems necessary (for example, exposures of large and 
complex financial institutions to structured products).3  
The  other  key  element  is  that  a  risk  warning  needs  to  be  translated  into  appropriate 
supervisory  action.  An 
the 
recommendations adopted by the ESRB as regards the actions to address the systemic risks 
identified  by  the  macro-prudential  assessment  would  be  followed  up  by  the  competent 
national authorities. However, as the recommendations will not be binding, there should be 
institutional  mechanisms  to  ensure  that  they  are  implemented.  And  if  they  are  not 
implemented, an explanation has to be provided. 
The ESRB may decide to make the recommendations public. As the recommendations aim 
to  address  systemic  risks,  their  publication  will  increase  pressure  on  the  Member  State  to 
implement such recommendations.  
A  peer  review  mechanism  should  be  set  up.  In  particular,  the  ECB,  on  behalf  of  the  Risk 
Board, would closely monitor the implementation of the recommendations by Member States 
and  national  authorities.  Cases  of  non-compliance  could  be  reported  to  the  Council  and, 
where relevant, to the European Supervisory Authorities for appropriate follow-up. 
institutional  mechanism  should  exist 
to  ensure 
that 
The concept of systemic risk and its analysis by the ESRB 
2.  
How well this institutional framework will enable the ESRB to perform its tasks will depend on 
its  understanding  of  systemic  risk,  the  amount  of  relevant  information  at  its  disposal,  the 
analytical tools that are available to assess the risks, and the framework used to distil the 
                                                 
3   This was, for example, a clear conclusion of the de Larosière Report (2009), “High-level Group on Financial 
Supervision in Europe”, Brussels. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2009
most  important  results  from  all  these  elements.  Let  me  comment  on  some  of  these  four 
aspects and touch on how we intend to fulfil our mandate to support the ESRB. 
Conceptual issues of systemic risk 
Systemic risk analysis is nothing new to the central banking community, including the ECB. 
One reflection of this fact is the series of triennial central bank conferences held under the 
G10  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  between  the  mid-1990s  and  early  2000s. 
Even the European Monetary Institute, which was the forerunner of the ECB, contributed to 
systemic risk work in this context, alongside the US Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, 
the Bank of Japan and many other central banks.4 For instance, from the outset, the ECB 
drew up a research agenda on financial stability and systemic risk.5 In addition, in 2004 we 
started to publish a Financial Stability Report (FSR) twice a year. The main objective of this 
Report is to help identify, at an early stage, potential vulnerabilities and to raise awareness 
among market participants with a view to promoting preventive and remedial policies. Each 
issue also contains several special features offering a wealth of further insight into financial 
stability and systemic risk. 
This background suggests that the ECB is a logical choice as a provider of analytical support 
to  the  ESRB,  but  it  should  not  obscure  two  major  challenges  we  are  facing.  First,  the 
phenomenon of systemic risk is extraordinarily complex. Second, despite the steps reported 
above and some lively academic literature on financial contagion over the last two decades, 
systemic  risk  analysis  and  research  is  far  less  advanced  than  that  of  monetary  policy,  for 
example. There are no established frameworks that can be taken “straight off the shelf”. 
Having  said  that,  let  me  describe  briefly  the  concept  of  systemic  risk.  Systemic  risk  was 
defined by the G10 in 2001 as “… the risk that an event will trigger a loss of economic value 
or confidence in, and attendant increases in uncertainty about, a substantial portion of the 
financial system that is serious enough to quite probably have significant adverse effects on 
the real economy.”6 In simpler terms, it is the risk that the failure and distress of a significant 
part  of  the  financial  sector  reduces  the  availability  of  credit,  which  in  turn  may  adversely 
affect  the  real  economy.  Interestingly,  this  notion  of  systemic  risk  is  quite  similar  to  the 
definition of financial stability that the ECB uses in its Financial Stability Report, underlining 
the fact that our financial stability work has always had a macro-prudential orientation. Our 
working definition describes financial stability as a “condition in which the financial system – 
comprising  of  financial  intermediaries,  markets  and  market  infrastructures  –  is  capable  of 
withstanding shocks and the unravelling of imbalances, thereby mitigating the likelihood of 
disruptions in the financial intermediation process which are severe enough to significantly 
impair the allocation of savings to profitable investment opportunities”.  
5  
                                                 
4   See, for example, de Bandt and Hartmann (1998), “What is systemic risk today?”, in Risk Measurement and 
Systemic Risk, Proceedings of the Second Joint Central Bank Research Conference, hosted by the Bank of 
Japan, Tokyo, 1997. 
In this regard  some of the ECB outputs (partly in collaboration  with  academics  and researchers from other 
central  banks  and  international  organisations)  include:  Fell  and  Schinasi,  (2005),  “Assessing  Financial 
Stability: Exploring the Boundaries of Analysis”, National Institute Economic Review, Vol. 192, No. 1; de Bandt 
and  Hartmann  (2000),  “Systemic  risk:  A  survey”,  ECB  Working  Paper,  No  35,  November;  Hartmann, 
Straetmans  and  de  Vries  (2004),  “Asset  market  linkages  in  crisis  periods”,  Review  of  Economics  and 
Statistics,  86(1);  Hartmann,  Straetmans  and  de  Vries  (2005),  “Banking  system  risk:  A  cross-Atlantic 
perspective”, NBER Working Paper, No. 11698, October; Cappiello, Engle and Sheppard (2006), “Asymmetric 
dynamics in the correlation of global equity and bond returns”, Journal of Financial Econometrics, 4(4); Gropp, 
Lo  Duca  and  Vesala  (2009),  “Cross-border  bank  contagion  in  Europe”,  in  Shin  and  Gropp  (eds.),  Banking 
Integration,  Bank  Stability,  and  Regulation,  special  issue  of  the  International  Journal  Central  Banking,  5(1); 
Iyer  and  Peydró-Alcalde  (forthcoming),  “Interbank  contagion  at  work:  Evidence  from  a  natural  experiment”, 
Review of Financial Studies. 
6   Group of Ten, (2001), “Report on Consolidation in the Financial Sector”, Basel. 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 3
Following de Bandt, Hartmann and Peydró-Alcalde (forthcoming), we  can distinguish three 
broad  and  interrelated  ways  in  which  systemic  risk  can  materialise.7  The  first  one  is 
commonly called contagion and is closely studied in the research literature. For example, a 
supposedly  idiosyncratic  failure  of  a  financial  intermediary  leads  to  the  failure  of  other 
intermediaries. The second one emerges from imbalances that build up over time, such as 
credit booms or concentrations of lending in certain regions or sectors. These “bubbles” can 
go on profitably for most participants who “ride” them for quite a while. Then relatively small 
events  or  changes  in  expectations  can  lead  to  their  breakdown,  simultaneously  bringing 
down a wide range of intermediaries and markets.8 The third way in which systemic risk can 
materialise relates to economic downturns or other aggregate shocks that cause the collapse 
of a wide range of intermediaries and markets simultaneously.9  
Other important elements in systemic risk include the strong information intensity of financial 
contracts  and  transactions,  and  a  high  degree  of  connectedness  between  financial 
intermediaries and markets as well as a strong reliance on debt financing (leverage) and on 
maturity  mismatches  between  assets  and 
feedback 
mechanisms that amplify shocks and can lead to non-linearities in the financial system that 
then are easily transmitted to the real economy.  
Systemic stability, or the absence of systemic risk, can be seen as a public good, thereby 
legitimising the  role  of governments  and  other  authorities in  addressing  it.10  Like  pollution, 
systemic risk involves externalities, in the sense that each financial intermediary manages its 
own risks but does not consider its impact on the risk of the system as a whole. The financial 
crisis contributed considerably to a better understanding of the phenomenon of systemic risk, 
which  is  also  reflected  in  aspects  of  regulatory  reforms.  In  particular,  the  possibility  of 
aligning  capital  requirements  to  a  measure  of  firms’  systemic  risk  contribution  is  being 
contemplated by regulators, e.g. the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.11
How could the ESRB then structure its supervisory work on systemic risk? In broad terms, 
systemic risk analysis can be broken down into two core components: i) surveillance, or risk 
detection, and ii) risk assessment, each of which I will address in turn.  
liabilities.  These 
factors 
imply 
Risk detection 
Financial  stability  surveillance  concerns  risk  identification.  This  kind  of  surveillance  mainly 
aims  to  detect  potential  sources  of  risk,  especially  financial  vulnerabilities  –  that  is 
weaknesses which, if unearthed, could lead to a disruption or failure in part of the financial 
                                                 
7   De  Bandt,  Hartmann  and  Peydró-Alcalde  (2009),  “Systemic  risk  in  banking:  An  update”,  forthcoming  in  the 
ECB Working Paper series, and Berger, Molyneux and Wilson (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Banking, Oxford 
University Press. This paper surveys all the relevant academic research with respect to the three categories 
and relates them to the present crisis where applicable. 
8   This tendency of financial systems towards boom-bust cycles goes back, for example, to the work by Minsky 
(1977), “A theory of systemic fragility”, in Altman and Sametz, Financial Crises, Wiley. Notably, observers from 
the Bank for International Settlements, such as Bill White and Claudio Borio, warned before 2007 that such 
imbalances were building up. 
9   For example, Gorton (1988), “Banking panics and business cycles”, Oxford Economic Papers, 40, observes 
that most US banking crises during the national banking era could have been predicted with a simple business 
cycle model. 
10   See,  for  example,  Acharya,  Pedersen,  Philippon  and  Richardson  (2009),  “Regulating  Systemic  Risk”,  in 
Acharya  and  Richardson  (eds.),  Restoring  Financial  Stability:  How  to  Repair  a  Failed  System,  Wiley;  Lo 
(2008), “Hedge Funds, Systemic Risk, and the Financial Crisis of 2007-2008”, Written Testimony prepared for 
the  US  House  of  Representatives,  Committee  on  Oversight  and  Government  Reforms,  Hearing  on  Hedge 
Funds, November. 
11   Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  “Comprehensive  response  to  the  global  banking  crisis”,  press 
release, 7 September 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2009
system and potentially to a financial crisis. It would have to pay attention to the sources of 
the  three  forms  of  systemic  risk  discussed  earlier  –  contagion,  imbalances  and  macro 
shocks. 
Risk  monitoring  should  identify  sources  of  risks  and  vulnerability  coming  from  within  the 
financial system – i.e. stemming from financial institutions, markets or market infrastructure – 
and also those present in the macroeconomic environment and non-financial related events. 
These  would  include  vulnerabilities  resulting  from  global  imbalances,  growth  prospects, 
developments in housing markets, creditworthiness of borrowers, to name a few.  
The  monitoring  involves  processing  large  amounts  of  (often  disparate)  information  of  a 
statistical nature and is based on market sources. In addition, continuous market intelligence 
efforts  are  essential  for  effective  risk  monitoring  and  the  early  detection  of  new  financial 
instruments, practices or business strategies which could create vulnerabilities and risks in 
financial markets.  
In the case of the Risk Board, market intelligence will be complemented by what could be 
called “institutional intelligence” and “policy intelligence”, given the qualitative information and 
expert knowledge available to central banks and supervisory authorities represented in the 
ESRB.  The  Board’s  independent,  impartial  status  could  prove  to  be  invaluable  in  the 
surveillance and identification of risks viewed as material. 
Risk  monitoring  is  facilitated  by  a  large  set  of  tools,  including  contemporaneous  financial 
stability  indicators  and  forward-looking  early  warning  indicators  and  models.  These  tools 
need to be regularly revised and updated in order to capture innovation in financial markets, 
fuelled by new products and business models. 
Macro-prudential  indicators  comprise  a  vast  set  of  indicators  –  on  the  macroeconomic 
environment,  financial  markets,  financial  institutions  and  financial  system  infrastructures. 
More  specifically,  they  include  macroeconomic  aspects,  financing  conditions,  monetary 
conditions,  asset  valuations,  risk  appetite,  market  liquidity,  funding  liquidity,  credit  risk, 
financial  strength  of  institutions,  and  others.  Some  of  these  indicators  may  contain 
information  relevant  to  early  warnings  as  they  may  draw  attention  to  rapidly  increasing 
exposures  to  specific  asset  classes,  broad-based  increases  in  financial  leverage  and 
dynamics  in  the  maturity  profile  of  financial  institutions’  debt  which  could  indicate  roll-over 
problems.12
In the ESRB context, early warning indicators and early warning signal (EWS) models should 
play  an  important  role  in  both  the  risk  surveillance  phase  and  in  the  lead-up  to  the  risk 
warning  phase.  EWS  models  are  designed  to  indicate  when  a  financial  system,  market  or 
intermediary reaches a “danger zone”, which usually points to a crisis ahead. In the past, a 
number  of  forward-looking  stability  indicators  were  used  by  most  central  banks,  but  these 
were not necessarily comprehensive frameworks of developed EWS models covering most 
financial  systems.  One  reason  for  this  may  have  been  that  the  older  generation  of  these 
models performed well in the sample but they typically failed to predict future crises. Recent 
research suggests that their out-of-sample performance can be improved, in particular with 
respect  to  credit  cycles  and  asset  price  bubbles.13  A  caveat  that  remains  is  that  it  seems 
difficult for them to improve their predictions on the timing of credit booms and asset-bubble 
bursting.  
                                                 
12   See, for example, ECB Financial Stability Review, December 2007, Box 16 “A market-based indicator of the 
probability of adverse systemic events involving large and complex banking groups”; ECB Financial Stability 
Review, June 2006, Special Feature B “Assessing banking systemic risk with extreme value analysis”. 
13   See,  for  example,  Alessi  and  Detken  (2009),  “‘Real-time’  early  warning  indicators  for  costly  asset  price 
boom/bust cycles: a role for global liquidity”, ECB WP Series No 1039, March; Borio and Drehmann (2009), 
“Assessing  the  risk  of  banking  crises  –  revisited“,  BIS  Quarterly  Review,  March;  ECB  Financial  Stability 
Review, June 2009, Special Feature D “Estimating probabilities of hedge fund liquidation”. 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 5
Risk assessment  
Risk assessment relates to the evaluation of the relevance and potential severity of each risk 
identified  as  material  in  the  surveillance  phase.  It  should  therefore  include  a  quantitative 
evaluation of the likelihood that the potential risk scenarios could actually materialise, as well 
as  an  evaluation  of  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to  absorb  the  shocks  (for  example, 
through  existing  capital  buffers  or  through  the  potential  to  increase  buffers  in  the  future 
through  profit  retention).  It  should  also  include  cost  estimates  in  terms  of  the  failure  of 
institutions, costs deriving from the malfunctioning of financial markets or impairment of the 
real  economy.  The  product  of  these  factors  forms  the  basis  for  the  ranking  of  risks. 
Quantitative methods and analytical tools (for example, macro-stress testing models) should 
support, together with expert judgement, the prioritising or ranking of these risks. The models 
will help in the conduct of quantitative impact assessments on the financial sector as well as 
in the assessment of the potential costs for the real economy, and thereby offer information 
about the relevance and severity of the risks detected in the surveillance phase.  
Macro-stress  testing  models  have  become  the  workhorse  of  macro-prudential  stability 
analysis  in  the  last  decade,  notably  including  quantitative  impact  studies  for  specific 
scenarios.  Their  main  purpose  is  to  assess  the  resilience  of  the  banking  and  financial 
systems  against  extreme  but  still  plausible  events.  One  problem  with  these  models  in  the 
past  was  that  even  for  large  shocks  they  generated  hardly  any  bank  failures.  This  can 
probably  be  improved  by  using  appropriate  data,  more  granular  than  previously  available, 
and by capturing better and a larger number of adverse feedback loops that can play a role 
in  amplifying  the  transmission  of  instability  in  the  financial  system.  These  feedback  loops 
could  include  contagion  effects  across  banks,  market  liquidity  and  funding  liquidity 
problems.14 Another difficulty for these models is whether they should be extended to also 
capture feedbacks from real economy outcomes to financial stability variables.  
The assessment task is currently much less developed than the surveillance one. This is not 
only because it involves considerable analytical sophistication, but also and mainly because 
there are significant gaps in the information on the financial intermediaries themselves and 
on inter-linkages between the various parts of the financial system.  
Viewing the financial system as a network, more information is needed on the key network 
nodes, and well as on the links between those nodes.15 The degree of interconnectedness in 
the  system  may  be  determined  by  common  exposures  to  specific  asset  classes,  such  as 
specific  sectors  in  the  economy,  for  example,  commercial  property,  or  to  specific  regions 
such as emerging Europe, via granted loans or securities holdings. Inter-linkages may also 
derive from intra-bank and intra-group exposure, as well as from trading and other correlated 
positions in the financial markets, such as in the credit derivatives market, which may lead to 
crowded  trades,  should  they  need  to  be  unwound  simultaneously.  They  may  derive  from 
cross-ownerships and capital participations among institutions, from similarities in business 
models, or from reliance on the same external sources for funding, for example.  
While  it  is  unrealistic  to  think  that  it  would  be  possible  to  characterise  the  degree  of 
interconnectedness of the financial system by taking into account all possible channels for 
contagion, a great deal of invaluable information exists in a scattered form (at the disposal of 
supervisors, trading platforms or the institutions themselves). 
At present, these information gaps imply that most modelling techniques for risk assessment, 
including  macro  stress-testing  and  contagion  models,  are  highly  dependent  on  market-
                                                 
14   See,  for  instance,  Aikman,  Alessandri,  Eklund,  Gai,  Kapadia,  Martin,  Mora,  Sterne  and  Willison  (2009), 
“Funding liquidity risk in a quantitative model of systemic stability”, Bank of England WP No. 372, June. 
15   See, for instance, ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2009, Special Feature C, “Balance sheet contagion 
and  the  transmission  of  risk  in  the  euro  area  financial  system”;  Haldane  (2009)  “Rethinking  the  financial 
system network”, speech delivered at the Financial Student Association, Amsterdam, April. 
6 
 BIS Review 115/2009
inferred data based on stock prices or credit default swap spreads that, in particular, might 
not behave reliably at times of turmoil or stress in financial markets.  
It is important to note that the complexities of systemic risk and macro-prudential supervision 
and the state of current research do not allow the analytical tool kit to be limited to just one or 
two  major  models.  Given  that  the  framework  for  macro-prudential  analysis  is  at  an  early 
stage of development compared with other areas of economics, there is a need to look at a 
wider  range  of  models  and  thereby  include  relevant  risks,  imbalances  and  transmission 
channels.  
Systemic risk analysis needs to be supported by a suite of state-of-the-art analytical models 
and  tools,  and  a  conceptual  framework  for  using  them.  The  complex  and  intertwined 
economic  and  financial  linkages  call  for  a  constant  cross-checking  of  several  indicators  or 
measures. In addition, the evolving nature of finance and the pace of innovation also require 
that the set of tools for systemic risk detection and assessment are constantly adjusted or 
revised.  Many  central  banks,  including  the  ECB,  have  in  the  past  developed  such  models 
and  tools  in  order  to  support  their  regular  financial  stability  analyses  and  reports.  The 
experiences with the crisis and the decision to establish a macro-prudential stability function 
in  Europe  suggest  that,  even  when  building  on  existing  structures,  significant  efforts  are 
called  for  in  order  to  extend  and  further  improve  models  and  tools.  While  it  would  be 
desirable  for  the  risk  assessment  exercise  to  be  increasingly  quantitative,  it  should  never 
become  mechanistic  or  fully  model-based.  Expert  judgement  and  qualitative  assessments 
will always be crucial to understand the messages coming from various analytical tools, also 
taking into account overall intelligence efforts.  
Comprehensive information base 
Irrespective of their level of sophistication, models need to be fed with the appropriate data in 
order  to  produce  results  that,  in  addition  to  their  analytical  interest,  can  support  policy 
messages. A comprehensive information base is also key in the risk surveillance phase that 
precedes  the  actual  risk  assessment.  This  is  because  the  establishment  of  a  wide  radar 
screen supporting rigorous monitoring is only possible if the critical information is available.  
The current crisis has convincingly shown that a significant part of credit intermediation was 
channelled outside the banking sector and the regulated financial sector. The non-regulated 
or “shadow” banking system was almost totally off any surveillance radar screen. Not enough 
was  known  about  special  investment  vehicles,  conduits,  securitisation  markets  and 
instruments, or about all the financial intermediation that takes place outside the traditional 
banking system. Moreover, little was known about the direct and indirect exposures between 
this shadow banking system and the regulated one, which turned out to be substantial. 
Information  on  non-banking  institutions,  potentially  of  systemic  importance,  such  as  hedge 
funds,  was  scattered,  not  quality-checked  and  typically  provided  on  a  voluntary  basis.  A 
tendency to create a bias towards the best performers was the result. Even for the banking 
sector,  for  which  data  is  abundant  –  and,  what’s  more,  there  is  substantial  expertise  in 
conducting  risk  assessments  –  the  information  available  to  bodies  entrusted  with  financial 
stability functions but without a supervisory mandate is far from satisfactory. The information 
on  the  degree  of  interconnectedness  that  I  previously  mentioned  is  critical,  even  if  only  to 
identify  the  key  nodes  of  the  financial  system  network  which  would  need  to  be  closely 
monitored. So far, for the case of the ECB, systemic risk analysis is conducted solely on the 
basis of publicly available information, mostly gathered from individual financial reporting.  
The  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  just  over  a  year  ago  illustrates  well  the  relevance  of  such 
inter-linkages  between  financial  institutions.  They  may  matter  more  than  the  size  of  their 
balance  sheets.  And  if  those  linkages  are  impaired,  they  can  affect  the  functioning  of  the 
entire financial system. In fact, before the crisis an increasing amount of overall risk in the 
economy was perceived to exist, but there was little certainty as to where the risks lay. Few 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 7
suspected that the vast majority of them would be held directly or indirectly at key nodes of 
the financial system network. 
The spectacular growth in the securitisation and credit risk transfer market in the years up to 
the crisis increased discussion of the potential vulnerabilities, in particular about who were 
the  ultimate  holders  of  the  risks  originating  in  the  banking  system,  and  their  capacity  to 
withstand  shocks.  These  risks  were  transferred  from  the  originators  to  various  investors 
outside  the  banking  sector,  from  institutional  investors  to  hedge  funds,  but  also  within  the 
banking  sector  itself.  In  fact,  weaknesses  in  the  so-called  originate-to-distribute  model 
followed by most large banks, and fragilities in the funding of special investment vehicles and 
conduits resulted in some of those risks backfiring and ending up consolidated on the banks’ 
balance  sheets.  The  eruption  of  the  turmoil  left  banks  sitting  on  unwanted  risks,  such  as 
leveraged loans related to leveraged-buy-out transactions, (often referred to as warehousing 
risk in the financial jargon), which were intended to be sold on to the market. Likewise, in the 
structuring  of  collateralised  debt  obligations  (CDOs),  which  were  an  extremely  profitable 
business  for  banks  in  the  years  before  summer  2007,  the  banking  system  ended  up 
accumulating a considerable proportion of CDO tranches. As the crisis broke, these tranches 
rapidly became a significant fraction of banks’ impaired or so-called toxic assets. 
Risk warnings 
Let’s get back to the European Systemic Risk Board. In addition to risk surveillance and risk 
assessment, the ESRB will be entrusted with a third task – issuing risk warnings and policy 
recommendations. This is somewhat new to the central banking community. The issuance of 
risk warnings, in the context of safeguarding financial stability – where the analysis is centred 
on the downside risks and thus on highly improbable events – differs substantially from other 
types of analysis focused on a central, most probable, baseline scenario (such as the one 
supporting monetary policy). The translation of systemic risk assessments into proposals for 
concrete policy actions – of a prudential or supervisory nature – is also, to a large extent, 
new to the central banking community. 
What went wrong? 
3.  
Confronted with the question of whether central banks and international bodies with financial 
stability  competencies  saw  the  financial  crisis  coming,  it  would  be  fair  to  answer  “Yes,  to 
some extent”. Prior to the summer of 2007, in a number of official publications16, attention 
was drawn to a number of growing vulnerabilities and potential risks such as:  
• 
the  (then  incipient)  crisis  in  the  US  sub-prime  mortgage  market  and  its  potential  to 
deepen and spread to other markets; 
the fact that financial market liquidity could vanish abruptly when investor uncertainty 
and risk aversion rose;  
the role of hedge funds as key players, over the years, in fuelling liquidity in financial 
markets, implying that a shock to the hedge fund industry would severely affect the 
smooth functioning of some markets; 
the  excessive  reliance  of  investors  on  the  risk  assessment  of  structured  products 
made by rating agencies; 
                                                    
16   See ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2007; BIS Quarterly Review, June 2007; Bank of England Financial 
Stability Report, April 2007; IMF Global Financial Stability Report, April 2007. 
8 
 BIS Review 115/2009
 the concentration of risks in the financial system, which was becoming increasingly 
difficult to identify due to the proliferation of structured finance products and credit risk 
transfer instruments; 
the risk-bearing ability of the ultimate risk-holders in these chains. 
• 
However, it would be fair to say that few, if any – including market participants and public 
authorities – were able to foresee the magnitude and severity of the crisis. In retrospect, it 
became clear that the crisis was greatly intensified by a myriad of unknown connections and 
interdependencies between financial intermediaries, within and outside the banking system, 
including  some  non-regulated  financial  sectors.  Sophisticated  market  participants  and 
investors were also apparently unaware of the degree of interconnectedness in the financial 
system. Otherwise, their behaviour in the months leading up to the summer of 2007 might 
have  shown  some  anticipation  of  the  developments  (e.g.  they  might  have  seized  some 
contrarian investment opportunities). 
In particular,  
• 
the  magnitude  of  the  large  off-balance-sheet  exposures  of  banks  to  the  US  sub-
prime-related structured finance products was widely unknown; 
little  information  existed  about  the  extent  and  implications  of  the  activities  of  new 
financial  entities  –  conduits  and  other  structured  investment  vehicles  –  which  are 
linked through management and liquidity arrangements to banks; 
the  probability 
intertwined  vulnerabilities  could  materialise 
simultaneously and combine in the way they eventually did was perceived as being 
very close to zero; 
the extent of inter-linkages between financial intermediaries and across markets was 
not  fully  appreciated,  and  the  possibility  of  tensions  in  one  specific  segment  of  the 
credit market spreading rapidly to other markets and continents was not foreseen. 
the  various 
   that 
For more than two years now, we have been discussing the need for major improvements in 
supervisory and regulatory frameworks to respond to the weaknesses that came to light as 
the crisis unfolded. I will not address these issues again today. I will approach the question 
from the point of view of central banks and ask: what influenced their ability to raise market 
awareness  with  respect  to  building  vulnerabilities  within  the  financial  system?  And  can  we 
rely on the ESRB to repair this problem in the future? 
The  information  at  the  disposal  of  central  banks  and  other  bodies  with  financial  stability 
competencies enabled them to point to growing risks and vulnerabilities, but it did not allow a 
deeper  understanding  of  the  interconnections  in  the  financial  system  and  of  the  potential 
magnitude  of  the  detected  risks.  As  a  result,  the  discussion  of  the  risks  in  their  public 
communications or publications tended to be mostly of a qualitative nature, and generally did 
not involve a clear risk prioritisation exercise, and therefore had a potentially smaller impact 
on market behaviour.  
Another  important  element  was  that  risk  assessments  were  generally  not  made  with  the 
specific aim of suggesting appropriate remedial policy actions in terms of prudential policies 
or regulation. Recommendations, mostly formulated in broad terms, tended to target market 
participants’  behaviour  (e.g.  proposing  mitigating  actions),  but  they  were  more  muted 
regarding  policy  measures  that  could  be  taken  in  the  prudential  and  regulatory  area.  One 
reason  for  this  is,  again,  the  information  base.  The  formulation  of  concrete  policy 
recommendations (e.g. with respect to capital buffers or funding-related issues) would need 
to be backed by rigorous quantitative assessments, for which publicly available information is 
generally  not  sufficient.  Along  the  same  lines,  and  perhaps  as  a  result  of  the  deficient 
information base, very limited research and analytical efforts have been pooled in the central 
banking  community  with  a  view  to  supporting  policy  suggestions  in  the  prudential  and 
regulatory area.  
BIS Review 115/2009 
 9
Turning the clock back 
4.  
But let me turn the question around and ask: what if the Risk Board had existed in 2006-07? 
Would this have prevented the financial crisis? 
This is a difficult question because the modus operandi of the ESRB is still to be defined. It is 
also difficult to know whether the agreed framework and operational processes will prove to 
be effective. However, if the ESRB is given the appropriate information base, if it combines 
central banking and supervisory expertise and is supported by a sound analytical framework 
and can produce solid risk assessments and policy recommendations, the answer should be 
positive. 
Policy-makers,  regulators,  academics  and  market  participants  have  learnt  an  enormous 
amount  from  the  crisis.  As  the  turmoil  spread,  they  learnt  about  the  functioning  of  the 
financial system and the links between the financial system and the real sector. In particular, 
the crisis highlighted the importance of the shadow banking system in fuelling credit into the 
economy, of indirect links between the banking and insurance sectors, as well as of fragilities 
in the securitisation market, just to name a few. However, it seems appropriate to ask: would 
a  pre-crisis  ESRB  have  closely  monitored  the  Asset  Backed  Commercial  Paper  (ABCP) 
markets? Would it have been fully aware of conduits and special investment vehicles (SIVs)? 
Against this background, the financial crisis has triggered a number of initiatives to improve 
the monitoring of the shadow banking system. These include calls for mandatory reporting by 
financial institutions (e.g. hedge funds with significant volumes of assets under management) 
as well as the reporting of amendments to the accounting treatment of conduits and SIVs to 
ensure greater transparency with respect to links to sponsors, for example. 
These  initiatives  are  expected  to  contribute  to  a  better  coverage  of  the  non-regulated 
financial sector,  coupled  with  a  greater  awareness  of  the  business  models  and  topics  that 
were overlooked in the past. This information would not have been available to a pre-crisis 
ESRB. 
The crisis has also stressed the importance of developing ways to measure systemic risk, as 
it  clearly  showed  that  –  both  for  market  participants  and  regulators  –  without  proper 
measurement there can be no proper management. A comprehensive strand of work relating 
to complementary measures of risk, capturing elements of leverage, liquidity, correlation of 
positions,  concentration  of  exposures,  has  been  initiated  both  by  the  private  and  public 
sectors. Prior to the summer of 2007, there was less emphasis on the need for targeted and 
adequate  measurement  of  variables,  including  a  critical  stance  on  systemic  risk,  for 
supervisory and financial stability purposes. 
The  crisis  has  also  shown  that  firm-level  data  on  financial  intermediaries,  including  of  a 
supervisory nature, might be critical to identify institutions of potential systemic relevance that 
warrant closer monitoring and to understand interdependencies among firms and markets – 
interdependencies which, if impaired, could have a strong impact on the overall stability of 
the financial system.  
The key data requirements relate to: i) the possibility of joint failures of institutions resulting 
from their common exposures at a single point in time (these exposures could derive from 
shocks that come from outside the financial system or inter-linkages among intermediaries), 
and ii) the fact that, over time, the dynamics of the financial system and of the real economy 
reinforce each other, increasing the amplitude of booms and busts, and undermining stability 
in  both  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy.  The  financial  crisis  has  shown  that 
monitoring aggregate data is insufficient and may not accurately indicate the vulnerabilities 
hidden in the financial system and that there is the need to link micro data to macroeconomic 
risks. 
As such, firm-level data (as opposed to, for example, estimates based on country or sector 
aggregates)  have  been  recognised  as  essential  for  more  accurate  assessments  of  the 
potential impact of risks materialising, e.g. estimating the amount of losses for the financial 
10 
 BIS Review 115/2009
tools 
research 
to  support 
sector,  as  well  as  for  conducting  system-wide  stress  testing,  contagion  analysis,  or  the 
assessment of feedback loops between the real and financial sectors.  
In the pre-turmoil period, supervisory authorities were more concerned about overburdening 
institutions with reporting requirements than with enforcing adequate disclosure. As such, an 
ESRB established before the summer of 2007, but with access to the same information base 
as the one available to central banks at the time, might not have made substantially different 
systemic risk assessments. 
In addition to the importance of having a more comprehensive information base, the crisis 
has led to a significant revamping of research into systemic risk and to greater input into the 
formulation  of  related  policy  recommendations.  As  I  just  mentioned,  in  addition  to 
improvements  in  macro  stress-testing  techniques  and  the  early  warning  signal  literature, 
more attention is being paid to contagion and spill-over models, especially for the banking 
sector,  to  macro-financial  risk-based  flow-of-funds  approach  using  contingent  claims 
analysis,  and 
to 
regulatory  and  supervisory  policy 
recommendations.  
One  area  in  which  a  pre-crisis  ESRB  could  have  made  a  difference  is  in  the  conduct  of 
country-specific analysis. Generally, ECB financial stability assessments focus on the euro 
area  as  a  whole  and  rarely  make  distinctions  between  euro  area  countries.  They  mainly 
consider  the  risks  and  vulnerabilities  common  to  most  euro  area  countries;  there  is  little 
analysis, let alone formulation, of policy recommendations, at country level. While this helps 
to distil the elements of the analysis relevant to the euro zone, country-specific vulnerabilities 
might end up receiving insufficient attention.  
The  ESRB  will  have  a  clear  mandate  to  pursue  country  analysis  and  to  provide  country-
specific policy recommendations if deemed necessary. If a task of this kind had been carried 
out by an independent and impartial body before the crisis, it could have signalled growing 
vulnerabilities  in  EU  countries.  Risk  warnings  about  fragilities  related  to  foreign  currency 
lending, about particularly highly leveraged sectors in some countries, or overvaluation in a 
number of EU housing markets could have been louder. I would add, though, that none of 
these elements triggered the financial crisis – rather, they intensified it as the crisis spread to 
the EU financial system. 
The  crisis  also  calls  for  improved  coordination  and  cooperation  between  the  international 
bodies  responsible  for  safeguarding  financial  stability  at  all  levels  of  the  analysis. 
Cooperation between the ESRB, the Financial Stability Board and the IMF, for example, will 
probably  be  fruitful  in  the  future,  helping  to  raise  awareness  of  growing  vulnerabilities  at 
global  level  that  could  not  surface  as  prominently  in  an  EU-focused  financial  stability 
surveillance  exercise.  Cooperation  in  the  risk  detection  and  risk  assessment  tasks  would 
involve, for example, sharing of technical expertise and of findings from market and policy 
intelligence efforts. In addition, the ESRB may use these international bodies as a sounding 
board for its risk assessments, risk warnings and policy recommendations. An ESRB with an 
EU-wide focus established prior to the summer of 2007 would not have had access to the 
stepped-up co-operation at global level or to the wealth of information and analysis on the 
global environment that should be at its disposal as soon as it starts functioning in 2010.  
Final remarks 
While the ESRB has a better chance of achieving its mandate now than it would have had 
earlier this decade, its tasks will be difficult and its challenges considerable.  
In particular regarding the issuance of risk warnings, the credibility of the ESRB will rest upon 
the  minimisation  and  balancing  of  so-called  type  I  errors  and  type  II  errors.  Type  I  errors 
entail the possibility of identifying those risks that subsequently do not materialise, while type 
II errors relate to the possibility of failing to identify risks that subsequently do materialise. 
Identifying  a  long  list  of  potential  systemic  risks  to  financial  stability  could  minimise  the 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 11
probability of making type II errors but may lead to accusations of “crying wolf”. The opposite 
could  lead  to  an  important  risk  to  the  EU  financial  system  being  overlooked,  which  if  it 
materialised, could harm the ESRB’s reputation. 
Both the rigour of the checks for potential sources of risk and vulnerability, and the quality of 
the risk assessments (based on the information made available to the ESRB) should have a 
substantive influence on the credibility and effectiveness of the Board’s work. 
Addressing the type I-type II error trade-off by selecting which risks merit risk warnings can 
only be done by combining a comprehensive and strict monitoring of all potential sources of 
risk with a well-informed and detailed risk assessment. Expertise in the analysis of financial 
sector issues, market and public intelligence provided by the EU authorities represented in 
the  ESRB  will  be  considered  invaluable.  However,  assessments  of  a  qualitative  nature 
should, to the extent possible, be complemented by quantitative impact assessments, which 
will also facilitate the task of prioritising the risks and the decision to issue risk warnings.  
In  short,  if  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  is  to  really  strengthen  macro-prudential 
supervision in Europe, four conditions need to be fulfilled. First, a clear legislative framework 
must be created to underpin the work of the ESRB and the supporting role of the ECB. It 
should be noted that last June the European Council clearly indicated that the ECB should 
provide the secretarial, logistical, administrative and analytical support to the ESRB. Second, 
all parties involved in the preparation of ESRB risk assessments and potential risk warnings 
need to do the necessary analysis and research to bring our understanding of systemic risk 
and  macro-prudential  regulation  to  a  new  level,  and  to  find  common  languages  and 
frameworks.  Third,  in  addition  to  improving  the  analytical  tools  supporting  risk  surveillance 
and  risk  assessment,  more  detailed  and  accurate  information  –  to  back  up  ESRB  risk 
warnings  –  is  essential.  It  should  include  better  data  coverage  of  non-regulated  financial 
sectors, as well as more granular information on key node-institutions in the financial system 
and  on  potential  inter-linkages  between  them.  The  ability  to  formulate  concrete  policy 
recommendations, as opposed to general recommendations, depends greatly on access to 
critical information. Finally, risk warnings and recommendations made by the ESRB have to 
be translated into concrete action, in particular by the national supervisory authorities. 
To conclude, the European Systemic Risk Board can be compared to a doctor who examines 
a patient, asking him about his ailment and suggesting that some tests be done. The doctor 
then makes a diagnosis and eventually recommends some medicines. It’s up to the patient to 
abide by the doctor’s recommendation. The doctor is not in a position to take direct action. 
He is not allowed to intervene, even when things get really bad, as in the case of a risk of 
contagion  and  the  patient  has  to  be  put  in  quarantine.  He  might  be  the  best  doctor  in  the 
world, but his treatment will only be as good as the quality and completeness of the patient’s 
replies – and the patient’s willingness to take the medicines prescribed. 
This is the way in which the ESRB has been constructed in Europe. Its success will largely 
depend on the compliance of its “patients”, who hopefully have learned the lessons of this 
crisis. 
Thank you for your attention. 
12 
 BIS Review 115/2009
