Masaaki Shirakawa: Coping with financial crisis – Japan’s experiences 
and current global financial crisis 
Address by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Fourth Deposit 
Insurance Corporation of Japan Round Table, Tokyo, 25 February 2009. 
 Introduction 
I am much honored to be invited to address the 4th Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan 
Round Table in Tokyo. 
As you are well aware, the global financial system is unstable due to the burst of the global 
credit bubble. In particular, global financial markets have been under severe strain since the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers last autumn. Both the central bank and the deposit insurance 
corporation  do  not  draw  much  attention  under  normal  circumstances,  and  their  presence 
stands out only when depositors and financial market participants do not have full confidence 
in the soundness of financial institutions and financial system stability. Today, the activities of 
the deposit insurance corporation and the central bank draw much attention from the public, 
and that is a testament that we are facing difficult challenges. 
From a longer-term perspective, it was in the early 1990s when the activities of the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation of Japan, hereafter DICJ, started to draw attention from the public and 
the media, and the financial assistance by the DICJ was carried out in 1991 for the first time 
in  its  history.  At  the  time,  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  was  an  ex-officio 
Governor of the DICJ, and I, as a staffer at the Financial System Department of the Bank of 
Japan,  had  an  opportunity  to  be  deeply  involved  in  the  process  in  which  the  financial 
assistance  was  actually  utilized.  As  events  unfolded,  Japan  had  to  handle  more  severe 
financial crisis since the latter half of the 1990s. Through those experiences, it was shown 
how  critical  various  functions  of  the  deposit  insurance  system  were  in  achieving  financial 
system stability. In my address today, I will express my views on how to cope with a financial 
crisis by comparing Japan’s experience and the current global financial crisis. 
Financial crisis in Japan after the burst of the bubble 
1.  
During Japan’s financial crisis, while real estate prices varied according to the region and the 
usage,  the  representative  index  plunged  to  almost  a  quarter  of  its  peak.  Banks  played  a 
predominant role in financial intermediation, and Japanese banks incurred cumulative losses 
of  some  110  trillion  yen,  equivalent  to  20  percent  of  Japan's  GDP.  It  was  after  2003  that 
Japanese  banks’  capital  strength  and  profitability  bottomed  out  and  the  stability  and 
functioning of the financial system started to improve, when Japan’s economy returned to a 
full-fledged  recovery  path  supported  by  the  global  economic  growth.  In  the  meantime,  the 
average  growth  of  Japan’s  economy  had  been  stagnant,  compared  with  the  previous 
decades. While the economy of this period is often called as “Japan’s lost decade”, in my 
view, such a categorization might not be perfectly capturing the nature of the problem and 
challenges of policy measures taken to cope with a financial crisis. I will touch on this issue 
later, but it is true that it took a prolonged period of time for Japan to return to a full-fledged 
recovery path after the burst of the bubble. Today, I will emphasize three points focusing on 
policy  responses  on  the  financial  system  front,  although  we  also  have  to  examine  the 
macroeconomic policy responses in order to make a comprehensive analysis of how to cope 
with a financial crisis. 
First, there was a delay in recognizing the severity of the impact of massive nonperforming 
assets on the economy. It was a few years after the burst of the bubble when we recognized 
how  seriously  the  decline  in  real  estate  prices  affected  financial  institutions.  However,  we 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 1
lagged behind in recognizing how powerful the macroeconomic significance of the impact – 
or to borrow the recently much talked-about expression, “an adverse feedback loop between 
the financial system and the real economy” – could be. 
Second,  there  were  imperfections  in  accounting  and  disclosure  standards.  At  present, 
vigorous discussions are going on about how to cover the expected losses over the credit 
cycle in terms of accounting. At the time, there was a lag in showing the incurred losses of 
financial institutions on the accounting and disclosure front. Partly because of that, there was 
only  an  insufficient  incentive  mechanism  at  play  to  urge  banks  to  promptly  address  the 
nonperforming asset problem. 
Third, partly as a result of the aforementioned two points, the authorities could not resolve 
troubled  financial  institutions  in  a  timely  manner,  because  of  the  delayed  progress  in 
establishing  a  framework  of  resolution  to  cope  with  troubled  and  failed  large  financial 
institutions. Arguably, the legal framework of resolution, operational procedure, and, above 
all,  public  funds  to  cover  a  capital  shortage  are  vital  in  ensuring  the  smooth  resolution  of 
troubled  and  failed  financial  institutions.  And  it  was  in  early  1998  after  we  experienced  a 
series of failures of large financial institutions that the full-fledged safety net framework was 
put in place. It is clear in my memory that, the DICJ in the meantime had been tackling the 
resolution of failed financial institutions by making full use of what it had in its arsenal. Until 
the safety net framework was established, there were some cases that the Bank of Japan 
also  played  an  unconventional  role  as  a  central  bank  in  dealing  with  failed  financial 
institutions by injecting its money as capital. 
Current global financial crisis 
2.  
In light of our experiences during the financial crisis in Japan, the development of the current 
global financial crisis gives me a surprising sense of déjà vu. Until recently, Japan’s financial 
crisis  has  been  considered  as  an  isolated  event  unique  to  Japan.  It  appears  that  people 
around the globe are gradually coming to understand the implications of the massive credit 
bubble and its burst through the bitter experience during the current crisis. 
First, in terms of “the recognition of the problem”, for example, the estimate by the IMF on the 
total  losses  on  U.S.  credit-related  debts  has  been  increasing  as  time  went.  That  typically 
suggests that the impact of an adverse feedback loop between the financial system and the 
real economy has also been underestimated in the current crisis. 
Second, there have been the issues related to accounting and disclosure standards. While 
the standards have improved compared with those of Japan in the 1990s, there are some 
new issues. Those include how to evaluate complicated structured products whose market 
liquidity is extremely low, and how to incorporate off-balance sheet vehicles. In addition, the 
traditional  issues  also  persist.  The  nonperforming  asset  problem  of  U.S.  and  European 
financial institutions appears to have been gradually shifting to a traditional problem of loans 
on  the  banking  book.  The  difficulty  of  evaluating  the  loan  asset  value,  when  the  adverse 
feedback loop between the financial system and the real economy is at play, seems to be an 
unflagging issue at any time. 
Third, the framework to deal with troubled financial institutions was not well-equipped. It can 
hardly be said that the process of the disposal of the Northern Rock and Lehman Brothers 
was carried out within the sufficiently robust institutional framework. Even if such framework 
was in place, public capital injection into financial institutions is unpopular among the public 
in any country. In addition, there is a stigma on the part of financial institution to apply for 
injection  of  public  capital.  Furthermore,  it  is  also  a  daunting  task  to  identify  the  amount  of 
losses incurred by financial institutions, which is the precondition for public capital injection. 
Those were all the difficulties that Japan actually confronted. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2009
Measures addressing the liquidity problem 
3.  
I  will  now  turn  to  the  policy  responses  when  a  financial  crisis  takes  place.  As  I  have  just 
mentioned, there are many similarities between Japan’s financial crisis and the current global 
financial crisis. Nevertheless, we are not likely to find a “one-size-fits-all” solution. Therefore, 
let  me  point  out  that  what  I  describe  from  now  will  be  an attempt  to  present  a  conceptual 
underpinning. 
Both in the cases of Japan after the burst of the bubble and the current global financial crisis, 
the  crisis  always  surfaced  in  the form  of  liquidity  shortage.  In  Japan,  the  default  of  a  mid-
sized  securities  firm  in  the  interbank  money  market,  despite  the  small  amount  of  default, 
triggered  a  steep  liquidity  contraction  in  the  money  market  and  led  to  turmoil  in  Japan’s 
financial  system  as  a  whole.  In  the  current  financial  crisis,  after  the  severity  of  the  credit-
related debt problem surfaced in August 2007, U.S. and European financial institutions faced 
a liquidity shortage, and the collapse of Lehman Brothers further exacerbated the conditions 
in the funding markets. 
As such, while a lack of liquidity was the starting point of the problem, the root cause of the 
problem was an issue of the solvency of financial institutions. 
In the early phase of a crisis, it is difficult to recognize how serious the liquidity problem is 
and how serious the solvency problem is. In case it is purely a liquidity problem, which is a 
relatively  idyllic  case,  the  central  bank  plays  a  role  as  “the  lender  of  last  resort”  based  on 
classical Bagehot’s principle. If it is likely that the problem is not a pure liquidity problem but a 
solvency  problem  from  a  system-wide  perspective,  there  would  be  various  challenges  in 
carrying  out  policy  responses  in  a  timely  manner.  In  such  a  case,  while  the  central  bank 
prevents the financial system from further destabilizing through aggressive liquidity provision, 
the  financial  institutions  should  identify  their  incurred  losses  and  need  to  cover  the  capital 
shortages in the market, and the government ought to carry out public capital injection when 
the capital raising turns out to be insufficient. 
Put that in the context of the current global financial crisis, concern over counterparty risks 
intensified to an extraordinary level after the collapse of Lehman Brothers. And not only the 
confidence of  depositors  declined but  also  interbank  money  markets  faced  malfunctioning, 
where  a  high  degree  of  mutual  trust  between  the  participants  is  a  prerequisite.  Once 
confidence  collapses,  the  restoration  of  confidence  becomes  a  top  priority.  In  that  regard, 
several countries expanded the coverage of deposit insurance and provided a government 
guarantee  for  financial  institutions’  funding  in  the  markets.  Those  measures  were  indeed 
effective. The deposit insurance system is intended to ensure bank depositors’ confidence 
through  protecting  deposits  up  to  a  predetermined  amount.  In  the  current  crisis,  the 
expansion of the coverage of deposit insurance indeed had effects of stabilizing depositors’ 
behaviors  to  some  extent.  Moreover,  central  banks  have  been  trying  to  stabilize  global 
financial markets by making extraordinary arrangements to provide liquidity to the markets in 
the U.S. dollar together with their own currencies. 
Through those measures, the funding conditions of U.S. and European financial institutions 
have been eased to some extent, compared with the situation immediately after the collapse 
of  Lehman  Brothers.  However,  as  each  government  decided  to  introduce  a  guarantee 
scheme  and  the  expansion  of  deposit  insurance  coverage,  it  created  some  unintended 
problems. The international flow of funds has changed, and some sound financial institutions 
that  were  in  no  need  of  receiving  government  guarantees  have  faced  unfavorable  funding 
conditions. While Japan has not introduced a government guarantee scheme, fund-raising by 
international financial institutions that received government guarantees, in off-shore markets 
or in the Samurai bond market in Tokyo, has adversely affected the corporate bond issuance 
of  Japanese  firms  in  the  yen-denominated  bond  markets.  In  addition,  in  Japan’s interbank 
money market, it took some time for international financial institutions to raise funds easily, 
because  the  coverage  and  the  procedure  of  a  government  guarantee  were  not  clearly 
recognized  by  market  participants.  In  that  regard,  during  the  financial  crisis  since  the  late 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 3
1990s, Japan adopted a blanket guarantee of all liabilities of financial institutions. While that 
was an extraordinary measure, it was quite effective in averting the collapse of the financial 
system. 
Restoration of solvency 
4.  
Together with policy measures on the liquidity front, measures to restore solvency are of vital 
importance in a financial crisis. In the current global financial crisis, several measures have 
been already taken since last autumn to restore the solvency of financial institutions by using 
public capital. Those measures have proved to be effective. Nevertheless, there have been 
some cases in which financial institutions that received public funds continued to face weak 
stock  prices  and  widening  CDS  premiums,  and  thus  needed  to  have  the  second  round  of 
public capital injections. 
In  those  cases,  it  could  be  pointed  out  that  pricing  of  structured  products  has  become 
difficult, due to the decline in market liquidity, and the quality of loans continues to deteriorate 
because of the adverse feedback loop between the financial system and the real economy. A 
“mirage”  phenomenon  is  taking  place  in  that,  despite  public  capital  injection,  concern  over 
additional  losses  on  the  assets  mounts  over  time  and  such  concern  in  turn  will  heighten 
concern for a capital shortage of financial institutions. 
Under  those  circumstances,  it  is  of  vital  importance  to  remove  uncertainty.  There  are  two 
options to remove uncertainty stemming from financial institutions’ nonperforming assets; the 
government  purchases  those  assets  or  provides  a  loss  guarantee  to  those  assets. 
Nevertheless,  even  in  both  cases,  uncertainty  might  not  be  removed  for  the  assets  not 
covered by the purchases or the guarantees, and investors thus would continue to ask the 
institutions for high risk premiums. Consequently, the institutions might not be able to fully 
restore confidence in the market. In addition, there are also other difficulties; how to set the 
selling price of the nonperforming assets in the case of asset purchase scheme and how to 
set the fee in the case of guarantee scheme. What Japan faced in the past and what the U.S. 
is  facing  now  is  arguably  those  difficulties.  However,  even  with  such  difficulties,  it  is  an 
indispensable  process  to  promptly  identify  the  amount  of  losses  and  to  carry  out 
recapitalization to secure financial system stability, if necessary. 
It  should  be  noted  that  new  issues  have  emerged  in  the  global  financial  system  as  public 
capital injection prevails. One of them is a gap between the level of capital recorded on the 
balance sheet and market participants’ perception of franchise value of financial institutions. 
The  level  of  capital  presumably  should  reflect  market  expectations  about  earning  growth 
potential of a firm. On one hand, recapitalization by the government serves as a buffer for 
future losses, in the same way with privately raised capital. On the other hand, it comes from 
different  incentives  from  private  capital,  in  which  investors  shoulder  the  risk  with  an 
expectation to recoup their investments by the future growth of the firm. 
In addition, if people increasingly tend to judge the soundness of a financial institution simply 
by  looking  at  the  level  of  capital  on  the  balance  sheet  –  in  other  words,  looking  at  the 
capacity  to  absorb  future  losses  rather  than  the  earning  growth  potential  –,  a  financial 
institution  could  face  a  paradoxical  situation.  A  financial  institution  which  does  not  accept 
public  capital  because  of  its  financial  soundness  might  suffer  a  competitive  disadvantage 
against another institution which accepts public capital, because the sound institution has a 
lower capital adequacy ratio as a result. Furthermore, if many financial institutions intend to 
raise regulatory capital adequacy ratios at this juncture in order to avoid such disadvantage, 
the  real  economy  will  be  adversely  affected.  When  reviewing  financial  regulation  and 
supervision in the future, the role of capital regulation will definitely be an important issue on 
the agenda. Aside from such a general point, it is also necessary to take into account that, 
during a financial crisis, the regulatory framework of capital adequacy ratio should not amplify 
pro-cyclicality. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2009
Closing remarks 
I have so far expressed my views on the steps to cope with a financial crisis. In closing, I will 
offer two thoughts with respect to financial crisis responses. 
First,  it  is  necessary  to  make  an  objective  assessment  of  what  can  be  solved  and  what 
cannot be solved by policy responses to a financial crisis. Both in terms of macroeconomic 
policy  and  financial  system  measures,  to  take  prompt  and  bold  measures  to  address  a 
financial crisis is not easy for any country, but is quite important. Without those measures, 
the economies will be forced to experience heavy adjustments and might end up in a perfect 
storm.  At  the  same  time,  however,  crisis  responses  do  not  eliminate  the  excesses 
accumulated in the periods preceding the crisis. When those excesses are really massive, it 
will take long for the economy to return to a sustainable growth path. Japan’s “lost decade” 
was partly attributable to such an element. If protectionism spreads triggered by intensified 
frustrations under such dire economic conditions, the economy’s potential growth rate itself 
might decline. In that regard, we also need to make a realistic assessment of the nature of 
the current crisis and limits of the crisis responses. 
Second, in a financial crisis, it is critical to ensure cooperation between the authorities – the 
deposit insurance corporation, the central bank, and financial supervisory authorities – which 
are responsible for financial system stability. Cooperation between each country’s authorities 
has also become increasingly important, reflecting the globalization of financial markets and 
hence the globalization of a financial crisis. Cooperative ties in terms of the nuts and bolts 
seem  to  have  been  furthered  during  the  current  crisis.  At  present,  the  cooperative 
relationship between jurisdictions appears to be strengthening at various levels. One element 
of the cooperative relationship is to share each country’s experience and lessons. In closing, 
I sincerely hope that the 4th Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan Round Table in Tokyo 
would  offer  such  a  valuable  opportunity  to  share  each  other’s  recognition  and  exchange 
views between participants. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 5
