Stanley Fischer: Israel’s banking system and economy 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Annual 
Conference of the Association of Banks, Tel Aviv, 23 December 2008.  
 The Annual Conference of the Association of Banks is taking place this year while we are 
experiencing one of the worst financial crises in modern times. The global banking system is 
at the center of the crisis, and it is reflected in the advanced economies not only in sharp falls 
in prices of shares and private bonds, but also in shocks to the banking system, to the extent 
that more than few commercial banks and investment banks have actually collapsed. 
Our situation is different. Israel's banking system is strong, and depositors can continue to 
have confidence in Israel's banks. 
The global financial crisis is not leaving Israel's banking system entirely unscathed, however, 
and  its  effects  are  being  felt,  among  other  things,  in  the  area  of  risks  confronting  the 
economy and the banks. One of the salient risks is that of a possible increase in problem 
loans,  a  characteristic  feature  in  periods  of  slowdown  in  economic  growth.  That  said,  the 
stability of the banking system is being maintained, and so far its exposure to the financial 
storm has been relatively limited. That may be attributed to the high level of professionalism 
of the Supervisor of Banks and his staff, and the welcomely high degree of conservatism of 
Israeli banks, relative to that in many other countries. It is due to that conservatism that the 
dangerous  developments  that  occurred  in  the  area  of  mortgages  in  the  US  and  other 
countries have hardly been seen here. 
In light of the crisis the Bank Supervision Department is making every effort to intensify and 
extend  its  regular  monitoring  of  developments  in  each  and  every  bank  and  in  the  banking 
system as a whole. You, the banks, are certainly conscious of the Supervisor's hand on your 
pulse all the time, and certainly appreciate the expediency of that intensive activity vis-à-vis 
the banking system and the whole economy. 
In addition, the Bank announced that it is ready to help the banks with all the means at its 
disposal,  as  necessary,  in  order  to  support  depositors.  At  the  same  time  the  government 
announced that out of concern for the public's deposits and to ensure the public's confidence 
in the financial system, it will stand behind the stability of the financial system. It went on to 
emphasize that for sixty years depositor holders have not been harmed, and the government 
will continue to follow that path in the future too. 
The challenge confronting us at this time is to preserve the relatively good situation in the 
banking system and to take the steps necessary to enable the economy to emerge from the 
current period in the best way possible. This is our main objective, and by "our" I mean the 
government,  the  Bank  of  Israel,  and  mainly  the  Bank  Supervision,  but  it  is  surely  also  an 
important objective for you, the banks. 
There is another goal, in the main for the policymakers, and that is to make the period of the 
slowdown in growth as short as possible, to keep any damage to a minimum, and to return 
quickly to the path of rapid, sustainable growth – essential not just to the economy, but to 
Israel's overall strength. 
One  of  the  most  important  aspects  of  this  is  the  accessibility  of  the  private  sector  – 
particularly the business sector, including medium sized and small businesses – to sources 
of credit, to enable it to continue producing and developing. At this time, in the shadow of the 
crisis, accessibility to nonbank credit and to credit from abroad is very restricted. Bank credit, 
on the other hand, continues to expand. 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 1
The steps formulated by the Ministry of Finance with the Securities Authority, and with 
the  cooperation  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  give  a  partial  but  significant  answer  to  the 
question of credit sources. 
1. 
With regard to nonbank credit measures have been formulated to arrange debts to 
holders of corporate bonds via credit officers, the establishment of funds to deal with 
nonbank  credit  jointly  with  the  financial  institutions,  and  making  credit  funds 
available to exporters and medium sized and small businesses. 
With regard to bank credit, steps have been designed to give state guarantees for 
the issue of subordinated notes by the banks, which means increasing their sources 
for advancing credit. 
2. 
This program is an important means of strengthening the economy's ability to deal with the 
shocks  emanating  from  the  global  economy.  Israel's  banking  system  has  an  important 
function  to  fulfill  with  regard  to  the  second  point  I  mentioned  above,  i.e.,  increasing  the 
sources of bank credit, and generally in all matters related to making credit available to the 
economy.  The  banking  system  cannot  allow  itself  to  ignore  this  important  role.  This  is 
especially  the  case  bearing  in  mind  that  unlike  other  sections  of  the  business  sector  the 
banks enjoy the benefit of the safety net spread by the government and the Bank of Israel in 
the form of their commitment to maintain the strength and stability of the financial system, of 
which the banks are a central component. 
It is natural that in a time of crisis and uncertainty, such as the present, the banks should 
exercise  special  caution  in  their  credit  policy.  Moreover,  the  Supervisor  of  Banks  and  I 
encourage  the  banks  to  be  more  careful  and  not  to  take  unnecessary  risks––but  this  too 
must be to the right degree. 
Hence  it  is  essential  that  the  banks,  which  are  one  of  the  most  crucial  elements  in  the 
economy's ability to continue to grow, strike the correct balance between their credit policies, 
which at this time must be cautious, and the needs of the economy, particularly the business 
sector, for finance. 
I am not speaking only about the supply of bank credit, but also about its cost. Recently the 
Bank of Israel reduced the interest rate sharply, with the purpose of helping to lower the cost 
of credit to the business sector and households. In practice the banks hardly reflected these 
cuts in the cost of credit they offered. And here again, although in this special period spreads 
are  expected  to  increase,  it  is  important  to  maintain  a  sense  of  proportion  and  not  act 
excessively.  To  put  it  another  way,  I  repeat  what  I  said  to  you  in  previous  years,  "Good 
bankers can make good loans in bad times," and I have every confidence that in this hall we 
have good bankers. 
As an economist, I would like to explain this issue by noting that this relates to externalities. 
Thus, if all banks significantly tighten their credit policy the economy will grow more slowly, 
thereby retrospectively justifying the step they took. On the other hand, if every bank takes 
into account that even slight easing of its credit policy in its marginal decisions will make the 
economy grow faster, this will retrospectively justify their decision. 
One of the Bank of Israel's roles is to help to achieve the right balance. To do this we will, 
monitor  the  amount  of  credit  each  bank  gives,  among  other  things.  We  see  no  conflict 
between our responsibility to support the return of the economy to rapid, sustainable growth, 
and our responsibility to support the stability and strength of the whole financial system, and 
specifically of the banking system. 
The financial crisis is still with us, and is too soon to predict when it will end. We do know, 
however, that it will end, and the economy will return to growth rates similar to those of the 
last  few  years.  Hence  the  importance  of  not  wasting  valuable  time.  And  I  am  saying  this 
when the steps formulated and approved by the government have not yet been implemented. 
It is thus important and urgent that all of us, including the banks, join in the efforts to achieve 
the important objectives before us. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2008
I  therefore  expect  the  banks  to  play  their  part  by  finding  the  correct  balance  between  the 
need to operate a cautious and prudent policy, essential in itself, and their responsibility as 
one  of  the  main  tollgates  along  the  road  towards  the  economy's  medium-  and  long-term 
growth. Failure to strike the right balance will cost the economy very dearly. 
The  Bank  of  Israel  will  do  everything  within  its  authority,  in  its  role  as  interest  rate 
policymaker and as Supervisor of Banks, to help steer the economy back onto the path of 
healthy and rapid growth. I am sure that the government will also play its part. It is vital that 
the  banks,  on  their  part,  continue  to  manage  their  business  while  maintaining  their 
robustness, and take full account of the implications of their decisions on economic growth. 
Israel's economy has what it needs to grow. 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 3
