European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
3 September 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
to  leave  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  current  rates  remain  appropriate, 
taking  into account  all  the  information  and  analyses  that  have  become  available  since  our 
last meeting on 6 August 2009. In this respect, at today’s meeting we also decided that the 
rate for the twelve-month longer-term refinancing operation to be allotted on 30 September 
2009  will  be  the  prevailing  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations.  This  decision,  which 
continues  to  guarantee  liquidity  support  to  the  banking  system  of  the  euro  area  for  an 
extended period of time at very favourable conditions, should promote the extension of credit 
to the euro area economy and, therefore, further underpin its recovery. Price developments 
are expected to remain subdued over the policy-relevant horizon. Annual HICP inflation was 
slightly  negative  in August  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate.  This  reflects  mainly  the 
base effects of the strong rise in commodity prices in 2008. The return of HICP inflation to 
moderate positive rates is expected within the coming months. At the same time, the latest 
information  supports  our  view  that  there  are  increasing  signs  of  stabilisation  in  economic 
activity  in  the  euro  area  and  elsewhere.  This  is  consistent  with  the  expectation  that  the 
significant  contraction  in  economic  activity  has  come  to  an  end  and  is  now  followed  by  a 
period of stabilisation and very gradual recovery. Available indicators of inflation expectations 
over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s 
aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The outcome of 
the monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low inflationary pressure over the medium 
term, as money and credit expansion continues to decelerate. Against this background, we 
expect price stability to be maintained over the medium term, thereby continuing to support 
the purchasing power of euro area households. 
Let me now explain our assessment in further detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Following the strong negative growth rates observed around the turn of the year, according to 
Eurostat’s  first  estimate,  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  declined  only  slightly  in  the 
second  quarter  of  2009,  contracting  by  0.1%  compared  with  the  previous  quarter.  Survey 
indicators  for  the  third  quarter  of  2009  support  the  view  that  the  euro  area  economy  is 
stabilising further. In the near term, the euro area should continue to benefit from a recovery 
in exports, the significant macroeconomic stimulus under way and the measures taken so far 
to restore the functioning of the financial system. In addition, the inventory cycle is expected 
to  contribute  positively.  However,  uncertainty  remains  high  and  the  persistent  volatility  in 
incoming  data  warrants  a  cautious  interpretation  of  available  information.  Overall,  the 
recovery  is  expected  to  be  rather  uneven,  given  the  temporary  nature  of  some  of  the 
supporting factors and the ongoing balance sheet correction in the financial and non-financial 
sectors of the economy, both inside and outside the euro area. 
This  assessment  is  broadly  in  line  with  the  September  2009  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections  for  the  euro  area.  According  to  these  projections,  average  annual  real  GDP 
growth will range between -4.4% and -3.8% in 2009 and between -0.5% and +0.9% in 2010. 
Compared with the June 2009 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, this implies an 
upward  revision  of  the  ranges  for  both  2009  and  2010,  reflecting  mainly  the  recent,  more 
BIS Review 102/2009 
 1
positive developments and information. Forecasts by international organisations are broadly 
in line with the September 2009 ECB staff projections. 
In the view of the Governing Council, the risks to this outlook remain broadly balanced. On 
the  upside,  there  may  be  stronger  than  anticipated  effects  stemming  from  the  extensive 
macroeconomic stimulus being provided and from other policy measures taken. Confidence 
may  also  improve  more  quickly,  labour  market  deterioration  may  be  less  marked  than 
currently  expected  and  foreign  demand  may  prove  to  be  stronger  than  projected.  On  the 
downside, concerns remain relating to a stronger or more protracted negative feedback loop 
between the real economy and the still strained financial markets, renewed increases in oil 
and  other  commodity  prices,  the  intensification  of  protectionist  pressures  and  a  disorderly 
correction of global imbalances. At the same time, the uncertainty surrounding this outlook 
remains higher than usual.  
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation was, according to Eurostat’s flash 
estimate,  -0.2%  in August  ,  compared  with  -0.7%  in  July.  This  development  is  in  line  with 
previous  expectations  and  reflects  largely  base  effects  resulting  from  the  movements  in 
global commodity prices a year ago. Owing to these base effects, annual inflation rates are 
projected to turn positive again within the coming months. Looking further ahead, inflation is 
expected  to  remain  in  positive  territory,  with  overall  price  and  cost  developments  staying 
subdued in the wake of ongoing sluggish demand in the euro area and elsewhere. In this 
context, it is important to re-emphasise that the indicators of inflation expectations over the 
medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of 
keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
This  outlook  is  consistent  with  the  September  2009  ECB  staff  projections  for  euro  area 
inflation. In these projections, annual HICP inflation is projected to range between 0.2% and 
0.6% in 2009 and between 0.8% and 1.6% in 2010, revised slightly upwards from the June 
2009  Eurosystem  staff  projections,  reflecting  mainly  upward  revisions  to  energy  prices. 
Available forecasts from international organisations provide a broadly similar picture.  
Risks  to  the  outlook  for  price  developments  remain  broadly  balanced.  They  relate,  in 
particular, to the outlook for economic activity and to higher than expected commodity prices. 
Furthermore,  increases  in  indirect  taxation  and  administered  prices  may  be  stronger  than 
currently expected owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming years. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the latest data confirm a continued deceleration in both 
broad  money  and  credit  growth.  In  July,  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3  and  loans  to  the 
private sector declined further to 3.0% and 0.6% respectively, reaching new lows since 1999. 
These  developments  support  the  assessment  of  a  slower  underlying  pace  of  monetary 
expansion and low inflationary pressures over the medium term.  
The short-term developments of M3 and its components have remained volatile. The recent 
changes in interest rates paid on the different instruments included in M3 have continued to 
underlie the strong shifts in the allocation of funds from, in particular, short-term time deposits 
to overnight deposits. The deceleration in annual M3 growth has thus continued to combine 
with a substantial further strengthening of annual M1 growth, which in July rose to 12.1%. In 
addition,  the  relatively  steep  yield  curve  and  the  re-emergence  of  risk  appetite,  reflected 
particularly in the increase in stock prices over the past few months, may have dampened M3 
growth to some extent.  
The overall flow of bank loans to the non-financial private sector remained subdued in July, 
with the differences across borrowing sectors becoming more marked. The flow of loans to 
households remained slightly positive, whereas in the case of non-financial corporations the 
flow of loans was negative again. The decline in loans to non-financial corporations continues 
to reflect mainly a strong net redemption of loans with a shorter maturity, while lending and 
borrowing  at  longer  maturities  remained  positive.  The  fall  in  production  and  trade  and  the 
ongoing uncertainty in the business outlook are likely to have dampened firms’ demand for 
financing.  Given  the  normal  lag  between  a  recovery  in  economic  activity  and  a  pick-up  in 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2009
loans to enterprises, further weak developments in loans to non-financial corporations in the 
coming  months  appear  likely.  At  the  same  time,  a  gradual  improvement  in  financing 
conditions,  as  lower  market  interest  rates  continue  to  be  passed  on  in  lower  bank  lending 
rates, should support the demand for credit in the period ahead. Against the background of 
highly demanding challenges, banks should take appropriate measures to strengthen further 
their  capital  bases  and,  where  necessary,  take  full  advantage  of  government  measures  to 
support the financial sector, particularly as regards recapitalisation.  
To sum up, the information and analyses that have become available since our meeting on 
6 August 2009 confirms the view of the Governing Council that the current key ECB interest 
rates remain appropriate. In this respect, at today’s meeting we also decided that the rate for 
the twelve-month longer-term refinancing operation to be allotted on 30 September 2009 will 
be the prevailing rate on the main refinancing operations. Price developments are expected 
to  remain  subdued  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  Annual  HICP  inflation  was  slightly 
negative  in  August.  This  reflects  mainly  the  base  effects  of  the  strong  rise  in  commodity 
prices in 2008. The return of HICP inflation to moderate positive rates is expected within the 
coming  months. At  the  same  time,  the  latest  information  supports  our  view  that  there  are 
increasing signs of stabilisation in economic activity in the euro area and elsewhere. This is 
consistent with the expectation that the significant contraction in economic activity has come 
to  an  end  and  is  now  followed  by  a  period  of  stabilisation  and  very  gradual  recovery  . 
Available  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly 
anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close 
to, 2% over the medium term. A cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with 
that of the monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low inflationary pressure over the 
medium  term,  as  money  and  credit  expansion  continues  to  decelerate.  Against  this 
background,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
continuing to support the purchasing power of euro area households. 
As the transmission of monetary policy works with lags, we expect that our policy action will 
progressively  feed  through  to  the  economy  in  full.  Hence,  with  all  the  measures  taken, 
monetary  policy  is  providing  ongoing  support  for  households  and  corporations.  Once  the 
macroeconomic  environment  improves,  the  Governing  Council  will  make  sure  that  the 
measures taken are unwound in a timely fashion and that the liquidity provided is absorbed in 
order to counter effectively any threat to price stability over the medium to longer term. By so 
doing,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  ensure  a  firm  anchoring  of  medium-term 
inflation expectations. Such anchoring is indispensable to supporting sustainable growth and 
employment  and  contributing  to  financial  stability. Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to  monitor 
very closely all developments over the period ahead. 
As regards fiscal policies, the latest quarterly euro area data and developments in individual 
countries confirm a substantial deterioration of fiscal positions in 2009, which is projected to 
continue in 2010. In finalising their 2010 budgets and medium-term fiscal plans, governments 
must now substantiate their commitment to ensuring a swift return to sound and sustainable 
public  finances  in  line  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  In  particular,  it  is  crucial  that 
ambitious  and  realistic  fiscal  exit  and  consolidation  strategies,  underpinned  by  concrete 
structural measures, are put in place. The structural adjustment process should start, in any 
case, not later than the economic recovery and the consolidation efforts should be stepped 
up in 2011. Structural consolidation efforts will need to exceed significantly the benchmark of 
0.5% of GDP per annum set in the Stability and Growth Pact. In countries with high deficits 
and/or debt ratios, the annual structural adjustment should reach at least 1% of GDP. The 
focus  of  the  structural  measures  should  lie  on  the  expenditure  side,  as  in  most  euro  area 
countries tax and social contribution rates are already high.  
Turning  to  structural  policies,  it  is  likely  that  the  financial  crisis  will  affect  the  growth 
potential  in  the  euro  area. This  outlook  reinforces  the  need  to  strengthen  reform  efforts  to 
support  sustainable  growth  and  employment  in  the  euro  area.  It  requires,  in  particular, 
appropriate wage-setting, sufficient labour market flexibility and effective incentives to work. 
BIS Review 102/2009 
 3
At the same time, policies that enhance competition and innovation are urgently needed to 
speed  up  restructuring  and  investment  and  to  create  the  business  opportunities  and 
productivity  gains  needed  to  ensure  a  sustained  recovery.  In  this  respect,  an  appropriate 
restructuring and consolidation of the banking sector plays an important role. Sound balance 
sheets,  solid  risk  management,  and  transparent  and  robust  business  models  are  key  to 
strengthening the financial soundness of banks and their resilience to shocks, thereby laying 
the foundations for sustainable economic growth and financial stability. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2009
