Caleb M Fundanga: Repatriation of bank notes between Zambia and 
Mozambique 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the signing ceremony 
of the Agreement on Repatriation of Bank Notes between the Bank of Mozambique and the 
Bank of Zambia, Lusaka, 4 February 2009. 
 •  Your Excellency, the High Commissioner; 
•  Governor Ernesto Gouveia Gove, Governor of the Bank of Mozambique; 
•  Members of the Mozambican delegation; 
•  Bank of Zambia staff present; 
•  Distinguished Invited Guests; 
•  Ladies and gentlemen: 
May  I  begin  by  extending  a  warm  welcome  to  Governor  Gove  and  members  of  the 
Mozambique delegation to Zambia in general and to this signing ceremony of the Agreement 
on  the  Repatriation  of  Bank  Notes  between  the  Bank  of  Mozambique  and  the  Bank  of 
Zambia, in particular. 
Governor,  the  existence  of  an  extensive  border  between  Mozambique  and  Zambia  has 
resulted  in significant  cross-border  trade  as  evidenced  by  the  movement  of  people,  goods 
and currencies across the border thereby strengthening our shared identity and background 
as Africans. I must however, hasten to mention that, the cross border trade has hitherto been 
hindered by the need for traders from both sides of the border to convert funds into United 
States Dollars and then convert funds back into the other currency when purchasing goods 
or services. By so doing, cross-border traders incur foreign exchange losses as well as other 
conversion costs in the process. 
Further,  the  issue  of  a  parallel  currency  market  existing  among  the  cross  border  traders 
between  the  two  countries  point  to  the  need  to  strengthen  bilateral  trade  between  our 
countries  and  put  in  place  payment  systems  that  should  promote  this  trade  based  on  the 
exchange  of  the  two  local  currencies.  In  this  regard,  this  agreement  is  critical  to  facilitate 
better trade between our sister countries. 
Your  Excellency,  there  are,  however,  challenges  associated  with  the  currency  of  one 
country circulating in another country and these need careful scrutiny and handling. These 
include vices such as counterfeiting and facilitating illegal trade as well as enhancing cross 
border  money  laundering  activities.  Moreover,  to  us  as  monetary  authorities,  cross-border 
local  currency  circulation  creates  the  potential  of  complicating  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy,  especially  if  a  significant  amount  of  the  country’s  domestic  currency  is  being  used 
outside  the  jurisdiction.  For  us  who  target  monetary  aggregates,  this  may  lead  to 
implementation  of  inappropriate  monetary  policy  decisions  which  may  adversely  affect  the 
real economy. 
Currency  repatriation  is  critical  as  it  will  allow  us  adjust  the  currency  in  circulation,  a  key 
component  of  reserve  money,  which  is  the  intermediate  target  in  our  monetary  policy 
operations. We are therefore looking forward to the implementation of the agreement we are 
signing today to facilitate currency repatriation between our two Central Banks. 
I  am  therefore,  very  pleased  that  the  long  months  of  discussions  between  the  Banco  de 
Mozambique and the Bank of Zambia have resulted in the mutual agreement to repatriate 
both  the  Meticais  and  Kwacha.  This  achievement  should  be  saluted  as  citizens  of  both 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 1
countries  will  now  be  able  to  pay  for  goods  originating  from  the  other  country  with  the 
currency of that country, hence eliminating the need for currency conversions by citizens. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  agreement  is  also  a  step  towards  further 
strengthening trade and financial cooperation between the two countries. It provides the legal 
basis  for  commercial  banks,  bureaux  de  change  and  other  financial  institutions  to  freely 
accept  each  country’s  currency  and  repatriate  it  through  the  banking  system  with  full 
accountability. The agreement will not only enhance trade cooperation but will also increase 
cooperation between our two central banks. Furthermore, the agreement provides a platform 
for sharing information on the bank notes in use by the two central banks. This information 
exchange  initiative  should  not  only  end  at  central  banks,  but  be  extended  to  all  economic 
entities that will use and benefit from this development, especially our hard working farmers 
who should be paid genuine currencies when they sell their produce. 
Once again, Governor, let me thank you most sincerely for initiating this agreement. Indeed, 
the  signing  of  this  agreement  is  a  testament  of  the  cordial  relationship  that  has  existed 
between Mozambique and Zambia since the days of the liberation struggle. I must add here 
that,  for  us,  it  marks  a  key  milestone  towards  enhancing  regional  integration  and 
macroeconomic convergence. As you are aware, Governor, this is our main goal as member 
countries of the Southern Africa Development Community. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2009
