Miranda S Goeltom: Opportunities for Indonesian investment through 
sharia financing – experiences and challenges 
Keynote speech by Prof Dr Miranda S Goeltom, Acting Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the 
International  Seminar  on  Islamic  Finance  and  Banking  “Opportunities  for  Indonesian 
Investment  through  Sharia  Financing  –  Experiences  and  Challenges”,  New  York,  17  July 
2009. 
 Distinguished speakers and participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
May  I  ask  you  to  join  me  in  thanking  God  the  Beneficent  and  Merciful  for  His  unbounded 
grace  that  has  enabled  us  to  gather  here  today  on  such  an  important  occasion,  the 
International Seminar on Islamic Finance and Banking, entitled “Opportunities for Indonesian 
Investment through Sharia Financing: Experiences and Challenges”. I am thrilled to see so 
many distinguished speakers and participants, all prepared to contribute with their insightful 
experience and expertise. 
In my opinion, this seminar is of paramount importance in the midst of our efforts to discuss 
alternative solutions to avoid a repeat of the current economic and global financial crises. In 
such  a  deep  global  crisis  we  must  seek  ways  to  survive  and,  subsequently,  return  to  our 
previously hard-earned growth and stability. This is precisely the time when collective action 
is required most, in order for us all to survive this global financial tsunami and emerge the 
other side stronger and wiser. Given the depth and systemic nature of the crisis, a wait-and-
see  approach  or  simply  hoping  that  recovery  will  take  place  on  its  own  is  utterly 
unacceptable. 
The crisis and the current global financial system 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
A number of analyses argue that the ongoing global financial crisis is inseparable from the 
effects  of  the  global  financial  system.  In  the  past  decade,  financial  products  have  become 
more  diverse,  advanced  and  complex.  This  is  attributable  to  the  effect  of  innovative 
development  in  terms  of  information  and  technology,  deregulation  of  supporting  financial 
systems  and  a  favorable  global  macroeconomic  environment,  including  a  low  real  interest 
rate. 
BIS  data  shows  that  global  financial  assets  stock  increased  sharply  from  about  100%  of 
global GDP in 1980 to over 300% in 2005. This development was further accompanied by 
expansive  growth  in  the  amount  and  scope  of  derivatives  and  financial  instruments.  The 
position  of  interest  rate  swap  and  other  derivatives  reached  USD600  trillion  at  the  end  of 
2007  (11  times  annual  global  GDP)  compared  to  USD75  trillion  in  1997  (2.5  times  global 
GDP).  The  position  of  Credit  Default  Swap  (CDS)  also  reached  five  times  that  of  global 
corporate bonds in 2007, which is a very different picture when compared to conditions in 
2004, where the share of CDS was just 85% of corporate bonds. 
On  the  other  hand,  however,  such  developments  also  carried  fatal  side  effects.  Financial 
instruments have become more independent from their underlying transactions that should 
serve  as  the  foundation.  Risk  assessment  on  the  types  of  asset  owned  has  also  become 
more difficult and complex. We have further witnessed that the phenomenon of escalating 
activity in the global financial market turned out not to be permanent. 
BIS Review 109/2009 
 1
As we have noticed, bubbles have burst and brought terrible impacts on the global economy 
since mid 2007. The most commonly used adjective to describe the current financial crisis is 
“unprecedented”.  It  is  unprecedented  in  terms  of  the  speed  at  which  events  unfolded  and 
triggered a series of domino effects; the scale of the impact that has become global; and it is 
truly unprecedented in terms of the panoply of unconventional measures taken by authorities 
around the world. This is clear for all to see in the policy responses taken to overcome the 
crisis,  which  is  incredibly  complex  and  certainly  costly.  The  IMF  projected  that  global 
economic  growth  would  contract  from  3.2%  in  2008  to  -1.3%  in  2009,  whereas  economic 
growth in developed countries is expected to be even worse, shrinking by -3.8%. IMF also 
predicted that total losses due to the current global financial crisis will top US$4 trillion, two-
thirds of which stem from the banking sector. 
The crisis and the sharia financial system 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The lesson we can glean from this crisis is that a sound and resilient economy is not based 
on  speculative  activity.  Furthermore,  financial  sector  activity  must  be  founded  on  business 
activities that produce real benefits to the public. This condition, in my opinion, implies that 
the behavior of the current financial system needs to be reset; going back to basics (khittah) 
as intermediary institutions that distribute funds from surplus units to deficit units. 
One alternative that has the potential to bolster back-to-basics principles would be to expand 
the role of the sharia financial system. This relates to the structural advantage of the sharia 
economic system, which does not permit speculative transactions or products without a real 
underlying  transactions.  A  traditional  sharia  financial  system  focuses  on  conservative 
products  and  avoids  exposure  to  high-risk  financial  instruments.  Consequently,  the 
dependence  on  financial  instruments  is  comparatively  low  because  investment  in  each 
financial instrument must be identified clearly and accurately. 
The  key  characteristics  of  the  sharia  financing  system  also  aligns  the  role  of  banks  to  be 
consistent with their primary function, namely to collect funds from their owners and distribute 
it to borrowers. To be more precise, the main function of banks is to facilitate and finance 
activities associated with the supply of goods and services to the people; more specifically 
“real”  activities.  Therefore,  financing  activities  through  sharia  banking  are  closely  linked  to 
real sector development. Moreover, speculation and gambling, the main culprits behind the 
on-going  crisis,  are  not  tolerated.  Thus,  by  design,  the  Islamic  financial  system  can  instill 
greater stability in an economy. And, if implemented correctly, the Islamic financial system 
can provide an optimal risk management system. 
Sharia financial system performance 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  potential  role  of  sharia  financial  institutions  in  the  economy  has  been  discussed  on 
numerous occasions. According to The Banker magazine in 2007, sharia-compliant assets 
worldwide  have  grown  by  almost  30%  per  annum  in  recent  years.  Such  growth  outstrips 
most  other  business  segments  in  financial  services.  In  2008,  sharia  financial  assets 
worldwide reached $643 billion and are expected to exceed $1 trillion by 2010. In fact, there 
are currently more than 400 financial institutions offering sharia compliant products globally, 
including Sukuk, which has created significant demand in the market over the last five years. 
Countries like United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Malaysia are competing to become 
centers of Islamic finance. 
In such a competitive environment, Indonesia also has a great opportunity to advance itself 
as the center of Islamic finance. As the most populace Muslim country on the planet, with a 
population of more than 237 million, Indonesia is undoubtedly a promising market. 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2009
Since the establishment of its first Islamic bank in 1992, the sharia industry in Indonesia has 
exhibited relatively robust growth. Sharia banking is in its infancy since the establishment of 
the  first  Islamic  bank  in  1992,  however,  has  demonstrated  strong  and  steady  growth. 
Business volume has grown expansively, exceeding the growth rate of the banking industry 
as  a  whole.  Currently  in  Indonesia  there  are  three  full  Islamic  banks  (FIBs),  19  Islamic 
Banking Units at Conventional Banks (IBUs), and 92 Islamic Rural Banks. As a whole, the 
industry  is  supported  by  531  Islamic  bank  offices  currently  operating  throughout  Indonesia 
(288 FIBs, 121 IBUs and 92 rural banks). 
The sharia banking industry has amassed total assets amounting to Rp50 trillion (USD 4.2 
billion),  or  2.1%  of  all  bank  assets  in  Indonesia.  This  share  has  increased  steadily  from 
previous years: 1.4% in 2005, 1.6% in 2006, 1.8% in 2007 and 2.14% in 2008. With 1,470 
branch offices spread over the country, the amount of financing provided by the industry has 
grown from a mere Rp 5.5 trillion (USD 458 million) in 2003 to Rp 28 trillion (USD 2.3 billion) 
in  2007  and  Rp  38  trillion  (USD  3.2  billion)  in  2008.  The  industry  has  also  shown  its 
commitment to support micro and small-scale businesses with microcredit financing (KUR). 
By the end of 2008, total microcredit extended by sharia banks reached Rp 326 billion (USD 
27  million).  As  a  whole,  the  Islamic  banking  sector  has  grown  at  a  compounded  annual 
growth  rate  (CAGR)  of  over  46%  in  the  last  five  years.  Notwithstanding,  the  Industry  is 
expected to acquire a 15% market share of the total national banking system by 2015. 
With  reference  to  the  capital  market,  the  first  corporate  sukuk  was  issued  in  early  2002, 
followed by tens of corporate sukuk issued over the subsequent years. Islamic capital market 
development  was  marked  by  its  inclusion  in  the  National  Master  Plan  in  2005.  As  of 
December  2008,  there  were  22  corporate  Islamic  bonds  issued  under  mudharabah  and 
ijarah contracts totaling Rp 4.78 trillion (equivalent to USD 434.5 million), or approximately 
2.7%  of  total  bonds  issued.  Furthermore,  there  are  currently  36  issuers  of  Islamic  Mutual 
Funds, consisting of equity funds, fixed income funds and balanced funds. Net Asset Value 
(NAV) totals Rp1.8 trillion (USD163.64 million), approximately 3.5% of total NAV for mutual 
funds. 
Those promising sharia financial institutions are inextricably tied to strong political will from 
the  stakeholders.  In  June  2008,  the  Islamic  banking  industry  in  Indonesia  gained  new 
momentum  as  Parliament  passed  a  new  Islamic  Banking  Act.  In  April  of  the  same  year, 
Parliament also enacted a new bill concerning Islamic Bonds. The promulgation of these two 
laws has provided a firm legal foundation for Islamic banking in the country, thus promoting 
the  advancement  of  Islamic  banking  and  finance.  In  August  last  year  the  Government 
successfully  issued  state  sukuk  and  then  in  February  of  this  year  retail  state  sukuk  were 
issued.  Surely,  this  has  contributed  significantly  to  further  catalyze  the  development  of  a 
wide-based  retail  secondary  market  for  investment  products  that  adhere  to  Islamic  rules. 
Meanwhile, a bill to tax sharia transactions is being drafted, which we expect will be passed 
shortly.  We  hope  that  it  will  provide  fairer  tax  treatment  for  sharia  financial  activities,  thus 
making sharia products more competitive. 
Concerning  the  current  global  financial  crisis,  Indonesia’s  sharia  banking  industry  has 
remained relatively stable and insignificant affected. This fact is positively contribured by low 
exposure to international investment and foreign exchange transactions in Indonesia’s sharia 
banks.  It  is  approximately  just  5%  of  total  assets  and  liabilities.  Annual  growth  in  assets, 
deposits  and  sharia  banking  financing  remains  high,  at  29.5%,  27.1%  and  26.08% 
respectively in May 2009. Stable sharia bank performance is also clearly evidenced by low 
industry-wide Non-Performing Financing (NPF) at just 6.19% in May 2009, despite a slight 
increase in March and April 2009. NPF has remained relatively steady compared to NPF in 
2007  and  2008  at  6.62%  and  5.75%  respectively.  With  regards  to  capital,  Tier-1  capital 
position also increased to Rp2.48 trillion, compared to its 2008 position of Rp2.19 trillion. 
However,  we  are  aware  that  a  lot  of  homework  and  groundwork  still  remains  to  be  done. 
There are issues regarding the basic structure of sharia products, both for asset finance and 
BIS Review 109/2009 
 3
fund  raising  or  liability  products.  These  products  require  further  clarification  and  clearer 
guidance not only from the banks but also from the authorities. Another set of challenges that 
lie ahead in terms of further nurturing sharia finance is how to effectively introduce and sell 
related products to this potentially huge market. 
Sharia financing and Indonesia’s economic outlook 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We  believe  that  the  potential  of  sharia  financing  in  Indonesia  will  continue  to  grow  in  the 
future.  In  a  country  with  such  a  large  Muslim  population  the  potential  for  sharia  product 
expansion is great. Currently, the number of sharia users is relatively still limited, namely 3.3 
million fund account holders and 525 thousand financing account holders. 
The outlook for sharia financing in Indonesia is keep promising thanks to robust economic 
outlook. Indonesia’s economy, in fact, has outperformed many other countries in the region 
and  peer  group.  Economic  activities  have  been  sustained  by  relatively  strong  domestic 
demand,  capable  of  absorbing  domestic  production  and preventing  the  market  from  falling 
deeper off the precipice of recession. In the first quarter, the economy recorded 4.4% growth, 
which far exceeds international economic growth. Whereas, economic growth in Quarter II-
2009 is projected at between 3.7% and 4.0%, buoyed by consumption, which is projected to 
exceed  5%.  Holistically,  Bank  Indonesia  expects  the  economy  to  grow  between  3.5%  and 
4.0% in 2009. 
Inflation in 2009 is projected to be lower than our initial forecast, possibly below 5%. This is 
affected by, among others, improving inflation expectations and sustainable food supply and 
distribution.  However,  Bank  Indonesia  continues  to  monitor  potential  inflationary  pressures 
expected in 2010, including rising global commodity prices. In this context, future monetary 
policy is designed to strike an optimal balance between stimulating the domestic economy 
and maintaining macroeconomic and financial system stability in the mid term. 
We  also  believe  that  Indonesia’s  growth  prospects  are  supported  by  sustainable  financial 
system stability. In the financial sector, CAR remains high at 17.3% and NPL is still in the 
safe  zone;  below  5%.  Meanwhile,  bank  liquidity,  including  liquidity  in  the  interbank  money 
market,  is  improving  and  deposits  have  increased.  Despite  the  limited  response  by  bank 
interest  rates  and  credit  disbursements  that  are  far  slower  than  expected,  the  bank  credit 
extension plan has shown indications of quicker expansion in the near future. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me conclude my brief remarks by expressing that, from the point of view of a central bank 
in an emerging economy, the winds of change are indeed blowing. Dealing with the global 
financial  crisis  is  paramount.  Many  of  our  working  assumptions  are  constantly  being 
challenged  by  this  new  reality,  which  requires  creative  and  sound  policy  on  our  part  and, 
more  importantly,  courage  to  implement  bold,  often  unprecedented,  measures.  In  this 
respect, we at Bank Indonesia believe that sharia financial institutions show great promise as 
one of cornerstone of future sustainable economic activity. 
Finally, I am sure that this Seminar will generate valuable insight and new ideas in terms of 
dealing  with  the  global  financial  crisis.  Bank  Indonesia,  as  the  monetary  and  banking 
authority in Indonesia, is ready to fully support the continued development of sharia finance 
in the country. We invite and warmly welcome all of you who wish to join with us and develop 
sharia finance. 
May God bless all of us with His mercy. 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2009
