Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The financial crisis – looking back and the 
way forward 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  conference  “Rien  ne  va  plus?  Ways  to  rebuild  the  European  Social 
Market  Economy”,  organised  by  the  European  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and 
European Trade Union Confederation, Brussels, 22 January 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,1 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak here in Brussels at the European Economic and Social 
Committee  conference.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  their  invitation  and  the 
opportunity to share with you some remarks on the current developments in financial markets 
and the response of the public authorities. 
We  are  facing  a  severe  financial  crisis.  While  the  full  economic  consequences  are  still 
unknown, the declining pace of economic activity in the second half of 2008 and data from 
the labour market show that the real economy in the euro area as well as abroad is deeply 
affected.  
In the middle of this stormy and challenging situation there is still reason to be confident. The 
euro is now 10 years old. And it has shown to be a great success! Since its introduction on 1 
January 1999, the common currency has succeeded in maintaining price stability in the euro 
area. And most recently, it also had the chance to prove itself as a strong anchor, able to 
weather  even  the  severe  financial  turbulence  that  we  are  experiencing.  For  example,  by 
joining  the  euro  area,  its  member  countries  eliminated  the  risk  of  exchange  rate  volatility 
between each other. And the stability of the euro area in this crisis seems to have attracted 
more  support  for  euro  area  membership  in  European  countries  that  have  not  adopted  the 
euro yet. Even if the current situation is far from benign, I believe it would have been more 
difficult without the euro. 
But  let  me  now  take  a  closer  look  at  the  developments  in  financial  markets  over  the  last 
months.  I  will  then  turn  to  the  various  ways  in  which  we  have  addressed  the  challenges 
arising from the crisis. Before I conclude, I will also explain to you what I think needs to be 
done in the coming months.  
Developments in financial markets 
1.  
The combined strength of the various shocks which have affected the global financial system 
since  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  turmoil  in  the  summer  of  2007  has  been  broadly 
unexpected. However, the crisis as such cannot be regarded as a complete surprise. It did 
not build up overnight but instead has developed gradually over several years.  
But  what  factors  lie  behind  the  current  turmoil?  The  pre-crisis  global  macroeconomic 
environment was characterised by low interest rates, low inflation and sustained economic 
growth. This strengthened investors’ risk appetite and contributed to the underestimation and 
under-pricing of risk. The intensified search for yield fostered the proliferation of innovative 
financial  instruments  such  as  structured  finance  products.  Rising  leverage  and  excessive 
credit growth increased the vulnerability of the financial system. 
                                                 
1  
I am very grateful to Kevin Koerner and Stephan Sauer for their valuable input. 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 1
This  fragility  set  the  stage  for  the  turbulence  in  financial  markets  which  started in  summer 
2007. With the end of the boom in the US housing market and increasing interest rates on 
sub-prime  mortgages,  delinquency  rates  on  mortgage  loans  rose.  The  value  of  mortgage-
backed  securities  dropped  heavily.  From  the  sub-prime  market  segment,  the  tensions 
gradually  spilled  over  to  most  other  asset  markets,  in  particular  the  credit  derivatives 
markets, corporate bond and equity markets, and also to the money markets, not only in the 
US but also in the euro area and elsewhere. With the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers on 15 
September 2008, the crisis sharply intensified. 
Let  me  now  illustrate  the  developments  in  financial  markets  since  the  beginning  of  the 
turbulence with the help of some charts. 
  
Chart  1  shows  the  recent  movements  in  euro  area  stock  prices,  represented  by  the  Dow 
Jones Euro Stoxx index. From 15 September 2008 until mid-January 2009, this broad index 
declined dramatically, losing about 30% of its value. Since July 2008, the index has declined 
even  more,  by  about  50%.  As  you  can  see  from  the  chart,  the  most  severe  stock  market 
losses  occurred  in  the  banking  sector,  with  a  decline  of  about  50%  since  mid-September 
2008 and about 70% since summer 2007. 
 2 
 BIS Review 8/2009
   
Chart  2  illustrates  the  exceptionally  high  level  of  uncertainty  in  stock  markets,  here 
measured  by  implied  volatility  taken  from  stock  options  on  the  Dow  Jones  Euro  Stoxx  50 
index. In autumn 2008, implied volatility skyrocketed to new historical highs not only in the 
euro area but across the globe. 
At the heart of the crisis has been a general deterioration of confidence in the health of the 
banking sector and worries about a weakening economic outlook. This has led to a gradual 
and global repricing of credit risk.  
As shown in Chart 3, the yield spread between corporate bonds and government bonds has 
widened  markedly.  In  particular,  lower-grade  financial  firms  have  been  affected  mainly  on 
account of increased credit risk perceptions and a much lower general risk appetite. 
Perhaps the most striking indicator of the various stages in the current crisis is the spread 
between the three-month Euribor, an indicative rate for unsecured lending among banks, and 
the three-month euro overnight index average (Eonia) swap rate (Chart 4). A strong increase 
of  the  spread  in  summer  2007  and  in  September  2008  reflects  the  reluctance  of banks  to 
lend to each other, closely related to a general lack of transparency about the risks individual 
banks have been carrying on their books. 
In  aggregate  terms,  credit  market-related  writedowns  of  financial  institutions  amounted 
worldwide  to  USD  780  billion  in  mid-January  2009.  For  the  euro  area,  losses of USD  134 
billion  have  been  realised.  These  writedowns  and  declining  bank  profits  have  likely 
contributed  to  a  slowdown  in  banks’  loan  supply  to  the  non-financial  sector.  And  the 
profitability  of  financial  institutions  might  face  further  downside  risks  in  the  months  and 
quarters  ahead.  The  risks  arise  from  excessive  investments  in  particular  in  the  credit 
derivatives markets and, most recently, from a dramatic weakening in economic activity, as 
indicated by the latest survey data for November and December 2008. All this is part of our 
recent assessment of the outlook for economic growth in the euro area. 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 3
 4 
   BIS Review 8/2009
Response of the public authorities 
2.  
How  have  the  public  authorities  and  in  particular  the  Eurosystem  reacted  to  these 
developments?  The  Eurosystem  has  shown  a  remarkable  flexibility  in  terms  of  liquidity 
provision since the start of the crisis in summer 2007. This flexibility was necessary in order 
to compensate for the shortage of liquidity in the interbank market,, which is very important 
for  the  transmission  channel  of  monetary  policy.  Thereby,  our  liquidity  operations  have 
contributed to avoiding further increases in the funding costs of banks and their customers.  
In  October  2008,  markets  entered  a  downward  spiral  in  which  even  sound  banks  were 
threatened  by  the  possibility  of  illiquidity  which  could  quickly  turn  into  insolvency.  The 
common  European  action  plan  agreed  to  by  the  EU  and  national  authorities  in  October 
showed the ability of European and national authorities to live up to their responsibilities and 
to act in a swift and concerted manner. The ECB contributed to the European action plan 
through a further widening of its liquidity operations as well as by issuing recommendations 
on recapitalisations and on the pricing of government guarantees. The ECB has swiftly and 
substantially cut the main refinancing rate – four times since October – by a total of 225 basis 
points against diminishing inflationary pressures and downward risks to the real economy.  
I think the liquidity policy, government measures and interest rate decisions that have been 
taken were decisive in breaking the downward spiral in the financial sector in October. The 
first signs of positive effects are visible: spreads in the interbank market have come down 
from their peaks in October and November last year, although they still stand at historically 
high levels.  
  
In particular, as Chart 5 shows, banks have begun to pass on the ECB’s interest rate cuts to 
bank  lending  rates  to  non-financial  corporations  and  households.  At  the  same  time,  the 
growth rate in the volume of loans to the private sector has fallen. We are aware that the 
 BIS Review 8/2009 
 5
crisis is far from over, we are aware that the effects on the real economy have only started to 
be  felt  and  we  also  are  aware  that  there  are  substantial  differences  between  euro  area 
countries.  
Let  me  also  explain  why  the  public  authorities  have  acted  the  way  they  did.  First  of  all, 
rescuing the banking sector is no end in itself. The banking sector is of systemic importance 
for the whole economy. A breakdown of financial intermediation would severely damage all 
other  sectors  in  the  economy.  Historical  evidence  shows  that  banking  crises  can  have 
seriously negative effects on GDP. In Europe, we experienced such effects in Finland and 
Sweden in the early 1990s.2  
Hence,  we  need  a  financial  system  that  can  finance  investment,  innovation  and  ideas.  All 
measures taken aim at supporting trust in the financial system and preventing constraints on 
credit supply. 
Nevertheless,  I  think  it  is  also  important  to  emphasise  that  there  are  limits  to  what  policy-
makers  can  achieve.  As  unsustainable  developments  in  certain  market  segments  and 
geographical  regions  have  partly  caused  the  crisis,  adjustments  have  been  necessary. 
Monetary  and  fiscal  policies  are  needed  to  smoothen  out  the  adjustment  process  and  to 
prevent negative overshooting. At the same time it is important to maintain the confidence of 
the public in the long-run sustainability of public finances. 
The way forward 
3.  
At the same time, the private sector and public authorities are not helplessly exposed to the 
forces that caused the crisis. Various initiatives at national, European and international level 
aim to improve the financial system. 
Of these initiatives, I would like to highlight three areas where I think change is particularly 
needed  because  they  were  primary  causes  of  the  current  financial  crisis:  first,  the  internal 
risk management systems of financial institutions and compensation frameworks in general 
need to be aligned with requirements for sustainable development. Private sector entities can 
shape  the  rules  mainly  within  their  own  organisations  to  avoid  short-termism.  Second, 
transparency  in  all  respects  is  necessary  in  order  to  make  informed  investment  decisions. 
For  example,  the  ECB  welcomes  the  initiatives  to  create  central  counterparties  for  credit 
default  swaps  and  expects  to  see  concrete  results.  Third,  although  business  cycles  are  a 
common characteristic of market economies, public authorities should shape the economic 
order in ways that limit the probability and extent of future crises.  
In this context, regulatory and supervisory bodies have to ensure that their regulations and 
actions  do  not  amplify  business  cycles.  The  current  review  of  capital  requirements  in  the 
financial sector is an important device for making risk measurement and management more 
effective  and  comprehensive.  Guidance  concerning  liquidity  risk  management  has  already 
been published. Moreover, a debate on improvements in accounting rules is ongoing. In this 
respect,  fair-value  accounting  rules  should  be  changed  to  reduce  a  tendency  to  magnify 
boom-and-bust cycles. Marking-to-market practices provide timely and relevant information 
on  the  state  of  financial  firms  under  normal  market  conditions.  Yet,  they  may  also  trigger 
negative  feedback  effects  when  markets  are  disrupted,  as  financial  institutions  may  be 
required to sell assets into falling markets, exacerbating the asset price decline. Furthermore, 
accounting rules should support banks in building buffers during good times against future 
losses.  
                                                 
2   See Reinhart and Rogoff (2008, 2009) for a comprehensive overview of financial crises and their impact on 
real GDP. 
6 
 BIS Review 8/2009
Responding to the financial crisis by supporting trust in the financial system, by preventing 
constraints on credit supply and by addressing the shortcomings in the financial system that I 
have just mentioned – these are our most immediate concerns. At the same time, we must 
not forget that the long-term prosperity of the European Union does not only depend on a 
sound financial system. In order to increase Europe’s long-term growth potential, to promote 
the  creation  of  jobs  and  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  economy  to  shocks,  the 
implementation  of  the  Lisbon  strategy  for  growth  and  jobs  remains  of  key  importance.  In 
particular,  investments  in  innovation,  education,  qualification  of  the  labor  force,  and 
competive markets should become the focus of policies again.  
Conclusion 
4.  
Let  me  summarise  the  main  points:  we  are  experiencing  a  severe  financial  crisis  that  has 
started to show substantial spillover effects to the real economy in the euro area. We have 
seen that European policy-makers have lived up to their responsibilities and acted in a swift 
and concerted manner. At the same time, we have to acknowledge that we are going through 
a  phase  of  necessary  adjustment  after  a  period  of  excessive  risk-taking  in  the  global 
economy. We have developed a number of initiatives at European and international level to 
improve upon the existing framework. Once again, history has proven Jean Monnet’s wisdom 
when  he  said:  “People  only  accept  change  when  they  are  faced  with  necessity,  and  only 
recognise  necessity  when  a  crisis  is  upon  them.”  It  is  now  time  to  accept  change  and 
implement 
the 
the  proposals.  The  Eurosystem 
implementation of reforms wherever necessary. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
to  actively  contribute 
is  ready 
to 
References 
C.  Reinhart  and  K.  Rogoff  (2008),  Banking  Crises:  An  Equal  Opportunity  Menace,  NBER 
Working Paper No. 14587. 
C. Reinhart and K. Rogoff (2009), The Aftermath of Financial Crises, paper presented at the 
American Economic Association Meeting in San Francisco, 3 January 2009. 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 7
