William C Dudley: A preliminary assessment of the TALF  
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association and 
Pension  Real  Estate  Association's  Public-Private  Investment  Program  Summit,  New  York, 
4 June 2009.  
 I thank you for this opportunity to speak to you today about what we at the Federal Reserve 
have been doing to improve market function and credit market access. Since August of 2007, 
the  Fed  has  introduced  a  wide  range  of  special  facilities  designed  to  improve  market 
functioning, increase the availability of credit and bring down borrowing costs for households 
and businesses.  
Today, I am going to focus my comments on the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility 
(TALF),  which  in  my  view  is  one  of  our  most  innovative  programs.  This  facility  is  a 
complement  to  the  Public-Private  Investment  Program  efforts  being  undertaken  by  the 
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  and  the  Treasury,  which  are  the  primary  focus  of 
today’s conference.  
In what follows, I would remind you that my comments reflect my own views and opinions 
and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the  Federal  Reserve 
System. I will discuss how the securitization markets broke down last fall creating the need 
for  TALF,  how  the  TALF  works  and  what  it  already  has  accomplished,  where  we  see  it 
evolving going forward, and finally, some preliminary thoughts on the future of securitization 
markets. 
As  you  know,  one  of  the  origins  of this  crisis  was  the  poor  lending  standards  and lax  risk 
controls  that  led  to  significant  losses  among  many  of  the  firms  that  dominate  the  financial 
industry. As the magnitude and widespread nature of these problems became evident in the 
early  part  of  2007,  there  was  an  abrupt  loss  of  confidence  and  a  sharp  and  sustained 
increase in risk aversion among investors. Liquidity in short-term funding markets seized up 
as  concerns  over  the  viability  of  many  bank  and  non-bank  financial  institutions  increased. 
Many  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  early  efforts  –  including  the  Term  Auction  Facility,  Term 
Securities  Lending  Facility  and  the  Primary  Dealer  Credit  Facility  –  were  directly  aimed  at 
restoring the ability of financial firms to obtain access to liquidity. And while it is still too soon 
to  declare  victory  on  this  front,  there  have  been  significant  improvements  in  interbank 
financing markets.  
The next leg of policy intervention focused more directly on shoring up the strength of our 
financial institutions with programs such as the Treasury’s Capital Purchase Program and the 
FDIC’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program, and here too there has been progress in a 
number of dimensions. Most notably, perhaps, is that in the wake of the release of the results 
of the recent stress test, the largest U.S. bank holding companies have shown an increased 
ability to raise capital and issue debt without government support. The major securities firms 
have deleveraged and have built up significant liquidity buffers. 
Although  conditions  in  interbank  funding  markets  and  capital  markets  more  broadly  have 
shown  signs  of  improvement,  securitization  markets  are  still  significantly  impaired.  This  is 
particularly  true  of  the  asset-backed  securities  markets,  in  which  much  of  household  and 
business credit is intermediated between borrowers and investors.  
What has transpired in the asset-backed securities market over the past two years has been 
dramatic. Prior to August 2007, as much as 60% of private credit creation in the U.S. was not 
held on the books of depository institutions but was instead distributed onwards through the 
ABS markets into the so-called “shadow banking system.” Through the use of ABS, banks 
were able to package consumer loans, credit card receivables, student loans, residential and 
BIS Review 69/2009 
 1
commercial mortgages, as well as other types of loans into securities that were then sold to 
investors.  
However, since August 2007, the ABS market collapsed in a series of stages – first subprime 
mortgages, then alt-A mortgages and non-agency Residential Mortgage Backed Securities, 
and  finally  consumer  ABS  and  Commercial  Mortgage  Backed  Securities  or  CMBS.  The 
collapse  spanned  every  area  outside  of  the  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  market, 
which is supported by the government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.  
The  final  stage  of  collapse  of  the  ABS  markets  occurred  following  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers last fall, when the yields on outstanding ABS issues soared and new originations 
virtually disappeared. This increase in yields did not solely reflect an increase in credit risk; it 
also reflected a genuine loss of confidence and an accompanying increase in risk aversion. 
Yield spreads on even the very safest ABS obligations soared hundreds of basis points. This 
can  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  AAA-rated  student  loan  tranches,  with  underlying  loans  97% 
guaranteed by the federal government, climbed to yield levels as much as 400 basis points 
over LIBOR.  
With the spike in yields, the economic incentives to issue evaporated – issuance was just too 
costly and there was no active market. After averaging around $50 billion per quarter of new 
originations in 2007 and the first three quarters of 2008, consumer ABS issuance plunged to 
only $4 billion during the fourth quarter of 2008. Issuance of commercial mortgage backed 
securities ground to a complete halt and this market currently remains closed. 
So why did the ABS market collapse? There are many reasons.  
One  factor  was  that  in  some  areas,  the  risk  management  incentives  of  banks  and  other 
issuers  of  ABS  were  misaligned  with  those  of  the  end  investors  in  these  securities.  This 
misalignment manifested itself in the overall deterioration in lending standards that took place 
across the economy beginning during the middle part of this decade. Some originators did 
not do an adequate job of due diligence because the underlying loans were swiftly moved off 
their  balance  sheets  through  the  securitization  process.  This  dynamic  should  have  been 
mitigated  to  some  extent  by  the  rating  agencies  as  they  assigned  ratings  to  these  new 
securities,  but  that  process  too  proved  inadequate,  especially  for  residential  real  estate-
related securities. The problems associated with these misaligned incentives for issuers and 
inadequate rigor on the part of the rating agencies became apparent as the housing sector 
turned down and the economy weakened. The result was a dramatic spike in credit losses 
and  an  almost  complete  loss  of  investor  appetite  for  non-agency,  residential  mortgage-
backed product. 
A  second  factor  contributing  to  the  collapse  of  the  ABS  market  was  that  the  benefits  of 
pooling  and  distributing  risk  more  widely  proved  to  be  somewhat  illusory.  In  practice,  the 
performance across different loans that collateralized the securities was much more highly 
correlated  than  was  anticipated,  and  the  risks  associated  with  these  securities  was 
significantly more concentrated than had been assumed. Some banks that were unable to 
sell  the  highest-rated  tranches  kept  them  on  their  books.  In  other  cases,  the  sales  were 
made to off-balance sheet vehicles, in which the banks retained residual risk. This correlation 
contributed to the aversion of investors to the asset class as a whole.  
A  third  contributing  factor  was  the  fact  that  these  securities  were  often  complex  and 
heterogeneous and, thus, hard to value. In a stressed economic environment, this complexity 
exacerbated the erosion in market liquidity conditions, which in turn led to a vicious circle of 
falling prices and even further diminished liquidity. The result was that some bank conduits 
and buyers of securitized products such as SIVs became distressed and failed as mark-to-
market  losses  increased.  In  the  post-Lehman  bankruptcy  world  –  when  liquidity  was 
paramount – securitized products were very difficult to trade, in part, because they were very 
difficult to value. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2009
The  cessation  of  new  asset-backed  securitizations  has  been  problematic  because  banks 
have not had the capacity to keep credit flowing freely. This is especially true given that bank 
balance sheets were already under strain – bank capital has been depleted by credit losses 
and bank balance sheet capacity has been strained by an inability of banks to securitize new 
loan originations and by the need for banks to honor their off-balance sheet obligations.  
For all these reasons, the Federal Reserve determined that it was important to augment the 
balance sheet capacity of the financial system by supporting the ABS market. This was the 
purpose  of  the  TALF.  By  providing  non-recourse,  term  financing  for  new  AAA-rated 
consumer  asset-backed  securities  to  investors,  the  TALF  essentially  provides  the  balance 
sheet  capacity  necessary  to  facilitate  the  continued  flow  of  credit  to  households  and 
businesses.  
The TALF offers three attributes that the private sector has had difficulty providing during this 
time of financial and economic distress: 1) leverage to purchase highly-rated, low-risk assets, 
2)  term  financing  and  3)  protection  against  very  adverse  economic  outcomes.  TALF  loans 
are leveraged – haircuts against the AAA-rated collateral average about 10%; the loan terms 
are three or five years; and the loans are non-recourse, which means that if the economy 
performs very badly and the securities fall sharply in value, an investor can put the collateral 
that secures its TALF loan back to the Fed, only losing the collateral haircut. The loan is then 
extinguished.  
Because  term,  non-recourse  financing  is  not  readily  available  from  the  private  sector 
currently  and  the  spreads  on  asset-backed  securities  remain  elevated,  TALF  provides  an 
opportunity for investors to purchase AAA-rated consumer asset-backed securities and earn 
relatively  high  returns.  Although  some  observers  are  concerned  by  the  prospect  of  TALF 
investors  achieving  relatively  high  returns,  I  think  that  concern  is  misplaced.  Investor 
participation is absolutely essential in order for the TALF to improve the availability of credit 
and to bring down the cost of credit for households and business. The prospect of relatively 
high  expected  risk-adjusted  returns  is  precisely  what  gives  investors  an  incentive  to 
participate in the program. As investors begin to take advantage of the attractive TALF terms, 
spreads on ABS securities contracts, and rates of return go down, and most importantly, the 
costs  of  funds  for  the  issuers  of  the  underlying  securities  falls.  Investors’  actions  to  seek 
attractive returns lead to lower borrowing costs for households and businesses.  
Does the possibility of attractive returns for TALF investors mean that the Federal Reserve is 
taking on large credit risks? I think the answer is a clear “no,” principally because the returns 
earned  by  investors  primarily  are  due  to  the  absence  of  sufficient  private  balance  sheet 
capacity rather than underlying credit risk. In fact, from the Federal Reserve’s perspective, 
the risk of loss is very low. Indeed, there are three layers of protection that stand between the 
Federal Reserve and losses.  
First,  the  underlying  securities  are  AAA-rated,  which  means  that  losses  on  the  underlying 
loans have to be unusually large to move that high up in the capital structure. And although 
some  of  the  rating  agency  models  have  not  held  up  well  in  the  crisis,  the  consumer  ABS 
models have proven to be reasonably robust. In other words, a AAA-rating still means quite a 
bit  in  this  market.  This  is  in  contrast  to  the  collateralized  debt  obligation  or  CDO  market, 
where  AAA-rated  securities  often  used  subprime  and  Alt-A  mortgage  loans  as  their  raw 
ingredient.  
Second,  as  noted  earlier,  the  Fed  has  taken  additional  haircuts  against  the  underlying 
securities averaging about 10%. These haircuts provide additional protection to the Fed.  
Third,  if  the  underlying  collateral  is  put  back  to  the  Fed,  the  Fed  puts  the  collateral  into  a 
special  purpose  vehicle.  In  such  a  situation,  the  Fed  would  be  protected  by  the  excess 
spread earned on the TALF loans and Treasury-provided TARP capital. Only if those buffers 
were wiped out, would the Fed suffer losses.  
BIS Review 69/2009 
 3
We  have  done  stress  simulations  on  the  underlying  loans.  We  think  it  is  unlikely  that  the 
Treasury will lose money on this program, and it sits ahead of the Fed in terms of its loss 
exposure. The risk posed to the Federal Reserve therefore seems quite remote. Instead, we 
expect that the program will be profitable for the taxpayers and will be successful in pushing 
down yields and increasing credit availability.  
Turning  from  the  issues  of  design  and  risk  to  issues  concerning  implementation  and 
effectiveness, we have been rolling the TALF out in stages – first the consumer ABS market, 
with the first subscriptions for TALF loans in March; second, new CMBS securitizations that 
will  start  in  early  summer;  and  third,  legacy  CMBS  and,  possibly  legacy  RMBS,  later  this 
summer.  
By  legacy  assets,  we  mean  highly-rated  existing  securitized  assets  that  are  already 
outstanding. The legacy TALF program will help support asset-backed-securities prices. This 
should  help  aid  market  liquidity  and  make  financial  firms  that  hold  such  assets  less 
vulnerable to the risk of further losses.  
So far, the evidence indicates that the program is working as designed.  
First, the issuance of consumer ABS securities has been gradually reviving. In March, four 
deals  came  to  market  worth  $8.3  billion.  In  April,  there  were  another  4  deals  worth  $2.9 
billion.  In  May,  there  were  8  deals  worth  $13.6  billion  and  this  week,  there  were  13  deals 
worth $16.4 billion. We’re not back yet to the $200 billion annual rate of issuance before the 
crisis and we don’t expect to get there, but we are making a good start. Moreover the type of 
deals has broadened out to include a wide range of asset classes. For example, this month’s 
deals included credit card, auto loan and lease, equipment leasing, insurance premium and 
mortgage servicer securitizations.  
Second, the market for such deals is not wholly reliant on TALF financing. TALF loans have 
accounted  for  a  bit  more  than  half  of  total  issuance  volume  of  ABS,  with  considerable 
variability from subscription to subscription period. We view this as a good thing. This means 
that the TALF is helping to restart the market, rather than the TALF being the market.  
Third,  and  most  importantly,  spreads  on  consumer  ABS  have  been  coming  down  sharply 
from their peak levels reached late last year. For example, the spreads on AAA-rated credit 
card ABS have narrowed from a peak of about 600 basis points over LIBOR to slightly above 
200 basis points currently. Encouragingly, spreads of even lower-rated ABS – securities that 
are not TALF eligible – have also narrowed quite significantly. Although it is still too early to 
say the TALF has been a resounding success, we at the Fed are encouraged by the results 
so far. 
While  we  are  generally  pleased  with  how  the  TALF  program  has  been  evolving,  many 
challenges  remain.  One  challenge  is  in  striking  the  appropriate  balance  between  sufficient 
protections against abuse of the program, on the one hand, and a degree of red tape and 
restrictions that could make the program unattractive to issuers and investors, on the other. 
To the extent that issuers and investors are unwilling to participate in TALF because of fears 
that their involvement might lead to unforeseen complications at a later date, this would lead 
to the unattractive outcome of underutilization and the achievement of only a portion of the 
potential benefits.  
Of  course  it  is  of  critical  importance  in  this  facility  and  in  all  the  programs  instituted  in 
response to this crisis that the interests of the taxpayer be protected, and the safeguards and 
restrictions on the use of TARP funds are designed to achieve this. However, I think it is fair 
to say that TALF got off to a relatively slow start because investors were worried that the use 
of  TARP  funds  in  TALF  could  restrict  their  ability  to  conduct  their  business  activities  more 
broadly, perhaps in unanticipated ways and potentially retroactively. Put simply, to the extent 
that the use of TARP monies creates stigma, this may limit the effectiveness of TALF and 
other  programs  that  use  TARP  funds.  Although  we  think  these  fears  among  market 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2009
participants  that  use  TALF  are  misplaced,  such  anxieties  have  had  an  impact  on  the 
program.  
Another challenge faced by the TALF is to increase the participation of real money investors 
(such  as  mutual  funds,  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies),  many  of  whom  are  not 
permitted to use leverage. We at the Fed are working through a number of highly complex 
issues  to  enable  the  creation  of  vehicles  that  will  make  it  easier  for  a  broader  range  of 
investors to have access to financing for ABS securities. The broader the investor base, the 
greater  the  demand  for  the  securities,  the  lower  the  yield  levels  and  the  greater  the 
improvement in credit availability.  
The rollout of TALF to the Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities market this summer will 
be  important  in  determining  the  overall  success  of  the  program.  The  revival  of  the  CMBS 
market  is  essential  to  stabilizing  the  commercial  real  estate  market.  As  you  know, 
commercial real estate values are under pressure for several reasons. Capitalization rates 
have  climbed  significantly,  reducing  commercial  real  estate  valuations.  In  addition,  the 
income generated from commercial property has diminished due to the contraction in overall 
economic activity. If the availability of funding for this market is not restored, the downturn in 
commercial  real  estate  valuations  and  the  losses  for  the  holders  of  these  assets  will  be 
greater. This will, in turn, likely further constrain credit availability.  
A  revival  of  the  CMBS  market  is  also  important  to  accommodate  the  demand  for  funds  to 
refinance commercial mortgage loans that will be coming due over the next few years. If the 
CMBS market remains shut down, it is unclear where these funds will come from. After all, in 
recent  years,  the  CMBS  market  has  satisfied  about  40%  of  the  credit  needs  of  the 
commercial  mortgage  sector.  If  this  market  is  closed,  then  the  refinancing  of  maturing 
mortgages will be exceedingly difficult and this will exacerbate the drop in commercial real 
estate prices, loan defaults and the pressure on bank capital.  
Finally,  I  want  to  consider  briefly  whether  TALF  will  turn  out  to  be  a  band-aid  –  providing 
temporary support to otherwise defunct securitization markets – or a bridge to an ultimately 
revived and vital securitization market. I think it is too soon to reach a firm conclusion one 
way or the other. I suspect that we will discover that some parts of the securitization market 
will  return  and  prove  viable  even  without  government  support.  But  other  parts  of  these 
markets were fundamentally flawed, and they will not survive, nor should they.  
On a positive note, the fact that there has been an increase in investor demand for consumer 
ABS  that  does  not  use  TALF  financing  is  an  encouraging  sign.  This  indicates  that  more 
traditional  investor  classes,  such  as  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies  that  don’t 
usually use leverage, are starting to stick a toe in the water. However, it is hard to believe 
that there will not be significant changes to the structure of this asset class in the wake of the 
recent crisis.  
So what are some of the changes that I foresee or otherwise feel are required?  
First, there needs to be a better alignment of incentives between the lenders and securities 
dealers  that  originate  and  securitize  the  loans  and  the  investors  that  purchase  these 
securities.  One  suggestion  that  has  received  significant  attention  is  for  banks  to  retain  a 
portion of the securitization on their balance sheets. The notion is that with “some skin in the 
game,” those making the loans will show greater due diligence in terms of the underwriting 
standards  applied  to  the  underlying  loan  originations.  In some  ways,  the  TALF  program  is 
already facilitating this outcome, with the highly-rated AAA-rated securities sold to investors 
and the lower-rated tranches generally retained by the issuers.  
Second, I suspect that investors will become less reliant on the rating agencies – conducting 
more due diligence themselves.  
Third, 
investors  on  standardized, 
homogeneous,  easy-to-evaluate  products.  This  will  improve  the  underlying  liquidity  of 
there  will  be  a  greater 
focus  among 
I  believe 
BIS Review 69/2009 
 5
securitizations, which should result in lower lending costs and should make the assessment 
of the risk of the assets easier.  
Fourth,  I  think  the  overall  securitization  market  will  be  smaller.  The  demise  of  parts  of  the 
shadow  banking  system  such  as  the  SIVs  and  the  fact  that  banks  are  likely  to  have  to 
consolidate some off-balance activities back onto their books at the end of this year should 
reduce the overall demand for and supply of securitized product.  
Developing and implementing the TALF has been challenging. As the program enters into a 
new phase with the financing of CMBS and legacy CMBS, we will encounter further hurdles 
that we will have to overcome, adjusting and modifying the program as needed in order to 
make  it  more  effective.  Nevertheless,  I  am  confident  that  we  will  continue  to  build  on  our 
initial success, reopening credit channels to consumers and businesses. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 69/2009
