Zamani Abdul Ghani: Riding out of the global financial crisis – banking 
reforms and revival 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, at the 13th Malaysian Banking Summit 2009 "Riding Out of the Global Financial 
Crisis – Banking Reforms & Revival", Kuala Lumpur, 12 May 2009. 
 On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia , I would like to thank ASLI for the opportunity to make 
the closing address for the 13 th Malaysian Banking Summit. Indeed the theme chosen is 
highly appropriate and timely as we are currently facing a period that is most challenging.  
The  current  global  economic  slowdown,  as  many  are  aware,  has  been  compared  to  the 
Great Depression of the late 1920s. It began with the stock market crash in October 1929, 
otherwise known as “Black Tuesday”. As to whether the current global slowdown reach such 
proportions, it remains anyone's guess. But as events unfold and with lessons of hindsight 
gaining clarity, we have seen how institutions failed to fully understand or underestimated the 
complexity of products, and were unable to adequately measure tail risks as well, the pro-
cyclical impact of fair value accounting. While these may have merits in sharing the blame, 
others  like  the  high  levels  of  risk  concentration  and  gearing  together  with  the  failure  to 
manage maturity mismatches, are also equally apparent, if not fundamental, in contributing 
to  the  financial  crisis.  Comforting,  however,  is  that  none  of  our  Malaysian  institutions 
undertook complex derivative transactions. This underscored how important it is for Boards 
of Directors to understand products and carefully weigh the risk-versus-return paradigm.  
Here in Malaysia, parallels have also been drawn with the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, but 
interestingly the similarities are arguably few in nature. Correspondingly, the regulatory and 
policy response at the time was also suitably crafted towards addressing relevant issues and 
to  achieve  specific  objectives.  Today,  the  consolidation  of  the  banking  sector  and  the 
significant advances in risk management infrastructure and practices are also firmly in place 
and institutionalized. Payoffs from these efforts are evident as Malaysian financial institutions 
are now on a stronger foundation to venture into new businesses and countries, undertake 
more complex risks and withstand shocks. Their enhanced capabilities are now backed by 
stronger balance sheets, with the risk-weighted capital ratio of the banking sector at 13.4% 
and net non-performing loans ratio of 2.2% as at 31 March 2009. Our financial institutions 
have  also  continued  their  lending  activities  despite  the  global  slowdown.  Total  aggregate 
outstanding loans have grown by 12.0% to RM727.0 billion during 2008 and by 11% yoy as 
at end-March 2009.  
Dealing with financial risks – from regulatory perspective  
On the regulatory front, Bank Negara Malaysia has and is now in the process of conducting 
another series of stress tests to gauge, from a capital standpoint, the collective soundness of 
the banking sector in absorbing potential losses. Complementing this is the liquidity stress 
tests  conducted  to  assess  specifically  the  capability  to  withstand  market  wide  liquidity 
shocks.  This  reflects  the  heightened  state  of  vigilance  in  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  as  we 
continue to direct significant effort and resources towards strengthening our surveillance. In 
addition  to  macro  surveillance,  the  supervision  framework  is  also  more  forward  looking 
including  increased  engagements  and  dialogue  with  senior  management  of  financial 
institution, industry leaders, trade bodies and various chambers of commerce for the early 
detection of emerging issues and developments.  
BIS Review 58/2009 
 1
Facilitating access to credit and easing monetary policy  
Another area of importance is the continuing availability of credit from the banking sector. We 
have earlier highlighted the rate of growth in outstanding loans. In addition, the government 
has  introduced  specific  guarantee  schemes  while  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  also,  on  its  part, 
maintained a monetary policy easing stance that is conducive to achieve the same goal of 
facilitating access to credit at reasonable cost.  
At the same time, to assist the household sector, the Agensi Kaunselling dan Pengurusan 
kredit  (AKPK)  is  also  an  avenue  for  individual  borrowers  and  potential  borrowers  to  seek 
advice and assistance in managing their finances and debts. Clients of the banking industry 
may also contact Bank Negara Malaysia hotlines and its LINK and TeleLINK for assistance 
for  info.  LINK  refers  to  Laman  Informasi  Nasihat  dan  Khidmat.  Association  of  Banks  in 
Malaysia (ABM) has also introduced toll free lines for the benefit of its stakeholders. These 
combined efforts seek to lower borrowing costs and ease cash flows while at the same time 
promote financial discipline. More importantly, it is to avert a sharp slowdown in economic 
activities.  
Financial liberalisation  
Bank Negara Malaysia has also remained committed to the objectives of the Financial Sector 
Master  Plan  (FSMP)  issued  in  2001.  The  recently  announced  liberalization  measures,  for 
example, forms part of the concluding phase of the FSMP which is to liberalise the banking 
sector  by  allowing  for  the  increase  in  operational  flexibilities,  product  offering  and,  the 
issuance of new licenses by 2011. But, as capacity and institutional building efforts continue 
to  be  pursued,  it  must  be  complemented  by  enhancements  in  regulatory,  supervisory  and 
surveillance  framework  to  preserve  the  integrity  and  resilience  of  the  financial  system. 
Clearly this is the distinction which must be made with de-regularisation per se.  
Islamic banking  
Islamic  banking  also  remains  as  one  of  the  key  agendas  under  the  FSMP.  Also  in  the 
recently announced liberalisation measures, we will issue up to two new licenses given the 
growing demand and the need to give further boost to the MIFC initiative. As we have more 
than two decades of experience in this area, Bank Negara Malaysia will continue to build on 
this  competitive  advantage  to  ensure  Malaysia  remains  at  the  forefront  of  global  Islamic 
banking.  It  is  therefore  encouraging  to  note  that  Islamic  finance  has  continued  to 
demonstrate  its  evolution  and  strong  growth  as  assets  have  expanded  by  22%  to  RM192 
billion  in  2008  alone  and  now  accounts  for  15.0%  of  the  total  assets  in  the  industry.  This 
reflects the growing relevance of Islamic banking and is testimony to its acceptance as the 
embodiment of ethical banking and finance.  
Other threats to the financial system  
Financial  institutions  also  face  increasing  challenges  from  other  non-financial  risks 
associated  with  the  extensive  use  of  technology  and  the  potential  outbreak  of  epidemics. 
Therefore it is vital then that the state of preparedness of BCP/BCM contingency measures is 
constantly ready to address any possibilities and not be blind sided by financial risks alone.  
Closing  
It is neither by accident nor coincidence that the Malaysian financial system is currently at a 
position  of  considerable  strength,  depth  and  resilience.  Rather  it  is  through  the  combined 
efforts  of  both  industry  players  and  the  regulator  as  well  as  the  support  of  all  our 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2009
stakeholders. I believe that this spirit of cooperation and mutual respect is entrenched and 
will serve us once again as we look forward to safely ride out the impact of the current global 
financial crisis. 
BIS Review 58/2009 
 3
