Ardian Fullani: Albania’s economy against the background of global 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  meeting  with 
representatives  of  exporting  companies  and  Albanian  Association  of  Banks,  Tirana, 
23 February 2009. 
 Dear participants, 
It is a my great pleasure to welcome at the Bank of Albania premises, so many honourable 
guests, whose contribution to ensuring stable growth rates of the country’s economic activity 
has been significant in the recent years. Your role has been vital in involving Albania to the 
globalization process and in attracting foreign investments. 
Export industry is of great importance to the Albanian economy. During the transition period, 
our economy has recorded a negative trade balance, which, in turn, has caused a constant 
current deficit. Long-run macroeconomic stability requires  that in the course of time, these 
balances are paid from future trade surpluses. You realise that it has to do with a challenge 
you have to cope with at present and in the near and distant future. Naturally, I can not avoid 
mentioning  that  a  great  role  also  belongs  to  decision-making  institutions,  which  should 
create, by means of economic development policies, relevant incentives, the background and 
infrastructure on which your business will be based and promoted. 
Macroeconomic developments in recent years and overall trends reflected in the standard of 
living indicators, show that the Albanian economy has succeeded in completing the transition 
stage  and  entering  the  group  of  the  developing  countries.  Nevertheless,  currently  the 
Albanian  economy  is  being  influenced  by  second  round  effects  that  have  affected  the 
advanced economies of the world. 
In  general,  first  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  outburst  in  American,  Asian  and  European 
markets  were:  tightening  of  lending  terms,  reduced  liquidity  and  decreased  value  of  the 
national  wealth  of  those  economies.  These  phenomena  triggered  less  consumption  and 
investments, and eventually led to overall economic slowdown of all those regions. 
Such  developments  have  also  affected  the  developing  economies,  since  globalization 
process  has  turned  them  into  factories  of  large  economies.  In  consequence,  this 
phenomenon has triggered the spread of crisis effects even in the developing economies. 
Naturally,  reduced  demand  has  caused  overall  decreased  investments  of  developed 
economies in traditional exporting markets. Currently, capital flows that have financed high 
current deficits, particularly into transition economies of the Central and Eastern Europe, are 
interrupted.  Furthermore,  financial  and  manufacturing  companies,  as  well  as  households 
from advanced economies, being faced with financial difficulties, are exercising pressures to 
withdraw their funds from the developing economies. All these developments have shaken 
the macroeconomic equilibrium of the developing economies, which are experiencing current 
deficit deepening and strong pressures on their currencies. 
This contagion mechanism, through which the crisis ignited in most advanced economies of 
the world is spreading worldwide, has made Albanian economy feel the effects. Even though 
the financial system was not influenced by the world financial crisis, second-round effects are 
being reflected and will be reflected even in the future. The Bank of Albania has assessed 
that,  driven  also  by  a  large  global  market  “drought”,  2008  has  recorded  reduced  foreign 
currency inflows and increased current deficit. 
During two last months a moderate foreign exchange rate depreciation was noted. However, 
we  should  take  into  account  that  Albania  is  in  a  more  favourable  position  than  other 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 1
economies of the Central and Eastern Europe. Our advantage stands on the fact that unlike 
other countries of the region, we have not financed our current and trade deficits with short-
term foreign capital inflows, otherwise referred to as “hot money”. The Bank of Albania has 
prohibited lending to the economy with the so-called “exotic currency”, which once upon a 
time represented funds of a very low cost, ready to penetrate even to our economy. Let me 
remind  you  that  many  developing  economies  have  fallen  into  the  trap  of  those  funds, 
suffering  now  gravely  from  their  flight.  Furthermore,  we  have  adopted  a  flexible  exchange 
rate, unlike fixed or managed exchange rates. 
The Bank of Albania has assessed that current developments, particularly those of our main 
partners, will bring about tendencies which are generally different from those with which we 
have been working over last ten years. 
Actually, the euro area is in crisis. Economic growth is negative; the euro is loosing terrain 
versus  the  dollar;  unemployment  is  increasing;  and  prices  are  going  down.  Important 
industries,  such  as  the  financial  industry  or  that  of  machineries  are  undergoing  the  worst 
situation over 50 recent years and governments of these countries are obliged to approve aid 
packages,  to  guarantee  their  survival.  According  to  the  most  optimistic  assessment,  this 
situation will not be improved, at least until the end of this year. Therefore, I emphasise that 
exporters should adopt new philosophies. They should be innovators, increase products and 
discover new markets, beyond the traditional ones, which have currently been hit from the 
economic and financial crisis. 
Global  developments  impose  adoption  of  new  approaches.  The  country’s  economic  and 
financial  development  stage  and  passing  into  the  group  of  the  developing  countries  have 
created conditions for businesses in general and export industries in particular to adopt new 
standards in business management. Businesses should understand that the optimal regime 
of their activity  requires new elements. Current developments of the world economy  make 
necessary  the  increase  of  prudence  for  managing  the  financial  asset  portfolio,  overall  risk 
and exchange rate risk in particular, as well as for identifying alternative financial methods 
and  instruments.  Businesses  should  invest  in  increasing  analysing  and  forecasting 
capacities.  They  should  build  their  development  scenarios,  including  even  the  envisage  of 
their possible financial losses from non-operation. They should also employ capable human 
resources,  specialised,  educated,  that  is  professional  ones,  in  order  to  ensure  an  efficient 
activity.  To  this  end,  I  invite  you  to  cooperate  more  with  the  banking  system,  to  stand  by 
banks,  but  also  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  be  open  with  them.  Make  use  of  this 
communication  for  constructing  preferential  cooperation.  This  path  will  create  to  you  the 
opportunity  to  find  and  promote  appropriate  financing  instruments  and  possibilities  to 
overcome  difficulties  of  the  moment  and  guarantee  the  future  of  this  important  branch  of 
business. 
Foreign  currency  income  growth  from  all  possible  sources  is  translated  into  increase  of 
macroeconomic  stability  in  general  and  of  financial  stability  in  particular  for  the  Albanian 
economy. At present, the geographic, demographic, economic and social characteristics of 
the Albanian economy present advantages, which if wisely utilized, may be materialised into 
economic benefits. Therefore, export sector constitutes an important source of profit and of 
foreign  currency  flows  for  financial  intermediation  in  foreign  currency.  From  this  viewpoint, 
the  support  of  exporters  by  the  financial  sector,  not  only  with  products  and  financial 
resources but also with financial consultancy, is an activity of mutual benefit. For this reason, 
I  deem  that  the  role  of  the  banking  system  may  be  one  of  the  main  promoters  to  absorb 
some of advantages generated by the current international situation. 
Availing myself of the presence of banking system participants, I would like to address an 
institutional appeal to them: Assess more prudentially the role and potentials of this industry, 
stand  by  it  with  advice  and  financial  consultancy,  review  your  policies  on  commissions 
applied to it and in this process, give priority to a larger funding for it. Recent crisis indicated 
that we all sail in the same waters and we may resist the waves, only if we confront these 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2009
challenges together. Export is a generator of foreign currency flows needed so much for the 
currency  stability,  which  is  related  to  all  other  balances,  financial  system’s  stability  also 
included. 
Under  these  conditions,  we  should  be  aware  that  a  joint  action,  of  national  importance, 
deeply patriotic for the values and future of the country is needed. Make the market more 
lively,  more  competitive  and  more  innovative.  Now  the  financial  infrastructure  is  complete 
and it is up to you to use it more efficiently. 
It  is  the  time  to  try  to  seek  other  balances  in  terms  of  foreign  currency  flows  into  the 
economy. Remittances have been important for a long time. They were the largest foreign 
currency serum in the economy. However, we should be aware that other indicators, such as 
exports and foreign direct investments will be prior items in the total foreign currency flows in 
the  future.  This  should  be  realised  by  everyone  and  based  on  this  ground,  let  us  work 
together for the future. 
Dear participants, 
International initiatives are in the process. The Berlin meeting was extremely important in this 
regard. There was broadly discussed and converged into the idea that there is room for more 
coordinated actions, and protectionism is not the answer to the crisis. 
The  London  meeting  will  make  new  steps  in  this  regard.  Promoting  investments  for  a 
cleverer  future,  setting  new  models  for  a  new  world,  more  structured  and  with  renovated 
industry, will be in its focus. The crisis will have its own winners. Winners will be those that 
will develop new policies, products, services and markets of a non-cyclic nature. 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 3
