Masaaki Shirakawa: Unconventional monetary policy – central banks: 
facing the challenges and learning the lessons  
Remarks by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Conference co-
hosted by the People's Bank of China and the Bank for International Settlements, Shanghai, 
8 August 2009. 
 Introduction 
Currently, major central banks have introduced "unconventional monetary policy measures" 
to deal with the economic and financial crisis that materialized in the aftermath of the bursting 
of the global credit bubble. In this regard, the Bank of Japan has clearly been a forerunner 
since  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s.  Today,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  some  of  the  issues 
surrounding  unconventional  monetary  policy,  while  reflecting  upon  the  experiences  of  the 
Bank of Japan during the latter half of the 1990s and the earlier part of this decade. 
Bank of Japan's monetary policy since the latter half of the 1990s 
In  order  to  refresh  the  memories  of  conference  participants,  I  will  begin  by  listing  the 
innovative  elements  of  Bank  of  Japan's  monetary  policy  since  the  latter  half  of  the 1990s, 
including those which were not necessarily considered to be innovative by outside observers 
at that time.  
First,  the  overnight  interbank  rate  was  brought  down  to  truly  zero,  to  be  precise  0.001%. 
Second, we introduced "quantitative easing" by setting the outstanding amount of reserves at 
the central bank as an operational target and by raising it to levels well beyond the required 
amount. At its peak, the excess reserves were 29 trillion yen or 5.8% of nominal GDP. This 
compares with 6.2% for the Federal Reserve and 3.5% for the European Central Bank during 
the  current  global  crisis.  Third,  we  extended  the  maturity  of  funds-supplying  operations.  In 
2005, during the final phase of quantitative easing, the average maturity of funds-supplying 
operations was over six months and the  longest operation extended up to eleven months. 
Fourth, we made commitments on the duration of zero interest rates and quantitative easing. 
Fifth,  we  commenced  what  is  now  called  "credit  easing"  by  purchasing  ABCP  and  ABS. 
Sixth, although not necessarily part of monetary policy, the Bank of Japan purchased stocks 
from  banks'  equity  portfolios  in  order  to  help  reduce  the  market  risk  associated  with  their 
shareholdings, which was a significant destabilizing factor for the Japanese financial system.  
In  a  nutshell,  the  Bank  of  Japan  had,  in  previous  years,  adopted  many  of  the  innovative 
measures which are now being introduced on a global scale. 
Challenges for the Japanese economy and the Bank of Japan 
Though  needless  to  say,  such  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  were  initiated  to 
deal with the difficulties that the Japanese economy confronted at that time. Each crisis is 
different.  But  overall,  there  are  many  common  elements  with  the  challenges  that  the 
economies  and  central  banks  in  Europe  and  North  America  are  now  facing.  Specifically,  I 
can raise five points.  
First, the risk taking capacity of various economic entities was severely damaged, and, as a 
result, the effectiveness of conventional monetary policy was seriously hampered.  
Second, in such an environment, the overnight interest rate dropped down to zero, limiting 
the room for additional easing through conventional monetary policy  measures. In Japan's 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 1
case, the overnight rate fell to 0.5% five years after real estate prices peaked in 1990. In the 
US,  policy  actions  were  faster,  but  still  three  years  had  passed  after  the  residential  real 
estate prices peaked in 2006, before overnight rates came down to levels seen in Japan.  
Third, it took time to recapitalize the banking system, which was most effective and vital in 
revitalizing the economy. The injection of public capital into weakened financial institutions 
was  indispensable  in  stabilizing  the  financial  system,  but  was  politically  unpopular.  In  the 
current crisis, European and US authorities have deployed such measures much faster than 
the Japanese case. But more than a year passed after the initial shock which occurred in the 
summer of 2007, before such measures were initiated.  
Fourth, reflecting the situation I have just mentioned, uncertainty regarding the transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy is much larger than in normal times. Therefore, regardless of 
whether experimental types of monetary policy measures were introduced or not, explaining 
the intentions of monetary policy decisions to markets and to the public at large, or in other 
words, fulfilling their accountability obligations became a key challenge for central banks.  
Fifth,  when  central  banks  try  to  create  "productive"  policy  measures,  in  an  environment 
where  the  effectiveness  of  traditional  monetary  policy  is  constrained,  they  naturally  come 
close to the area of fiscal policy. As a result, the policymakers need to face up to the issue of 
who should be responsible for such policy actions in a democratic society. 
The challenges for central banks  
How should central banks deal with such issues? The answer depends on multiple factors. 
They  include,  among  others,  the  economic  and  financial  environment  which  each  central 
bank  faces,  and  the  laws  which  set  out  the  responsibilities  of  each  central  bank  and  the 
policy  tools  at  its  disposal.  There  is  no  single  universal  answer  which  transcends  both 
borders and the passage of time. I would like to explain my perspectives on unconventional 
monetary policy, building upon the experiences from both the last Japanese crisis and the 
current global crisis.  
First, the most essential point in dealing with a financial crisis is to maintain the stability of 
financial markets and the financial system. Central banks need to exert maximum effort in 
this area. After all, in times of crisis, that is what central banking is all about. In this regard, 
the Bank of Japan introduced quantitative easing, credit easing, and stock purchases. With 
respect to Japan's quantitative easing, although the stimulative effects on economic activity 
through  monetarist  channels  seemed  to  be  self-evident  in  the  eyes  of  quite  a  number  of 
economists,  the  financial  system  perspective  was  not  fully  appreciated.  However,  looking 
back, the most important benefit of quantitative easing was its contribution to financial market 
and financial system stability through the provision of abundant liquidity.1 In the current crisis, 
major central banks have expanded their balance sheets, but excluding the Bank of England, 
they have not characterized their measures to loosen monetary policy as quantitative easing. 
This certainly is understandable when we look back on the Japanese experience, where the 
effectiveness of quantitative easing on real economic activities has not been confirmed.  
Second, as I mentioned, in order to stabilize the financial system, the injection of capital into 
the  banking  system  together  with  the  provision  of  liquidity  is  indispensable.  This  alleviates 
pressure  on  the  financial  intermediation  process,  but  it  is  not  sufficient  to  resolve  the 
fundamental problem which had lead to the crisis.  
This raises the third point. The unwinding of various excesses which have built up in the non-
banking private sector is just as critical. We must not forget that the injection of public funds 
as capital into the banking sector as well as the provision of abundant liquidity through, for 
                                                 
1   As for the effect of quantitative easing, see Bank of Japan (2005), Shirakawa (2004, 2005), Ugai (2007). 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2009
example, quantitative easing do not alleviate the need for the unwinding process in the non-
banking  sector.  It  must  be  recognized  that  some  time  is  necessary  before  excesses  are 
unwound  and  the  economy  can  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path.  The  length  of  time 
necessary will depend on the size of the imbalances which build up during the bubble period, 
and the severity of the negative feedback effect magnified by the loss of confidence during 
the crisis that follows. In any case, it will not be brief.2  
The fourth issue is the fine line between monetary policy and fiscal policy. Measures to take 
on  individual  credit  risk  such  as  corporate  debt  are  extraordinary  steps  for  a  central  bank 
since they come close to the area of fiscal policy which deals with resource allocation at the 
micro level. I believe such measures are only justified when we are facing a situation where, 
if left untouched, there is a substantial risk that credit market functions will deteriorate and 
the  resulting  weakening  of  the  financial  conditions  can  seriously  damage  the  economy.  It 
must also be compatible with the legal framework provided in each country's central banking 
law. When such measures are introduced, in order to avoid constraining market functioning 
where  market  participants  become  reliant  on  such  extraordinary  measures,  it  would  be 
important to have an appropriate built-in exit mechanism which reduces the incentive to use 
the  facility  as  market  functioning  recovers.  Additionally,  since  it  is  in  essence  close  to  the 
realm  of  fiscal  policy,  a  clear  understanding  of  which  authorities  are  taking  on  the  risks 
involved is indispensable. This is also important from the perspective of maintaining public 
confidence in the financial strength of the central bank. If the central bank's financial strength 
is  perceived  to  be  weakened,  concerns  may  arise,  subtly  through  various  channels,  with 
regard to its ability to effectively fulfill its monetary policy mandate.  
Fifth  is  communication  with  the  markets.  Without  public  trust  in  the  organization,  a  central 
bank cannot effectively conduct monetary policy. Words and deeds have to match. There is 
much  uncertainty  with  regard  to  the  effectiveness  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  and 
extraordinary measures may be pushing the boundary of monetary policy. Because of these 
two  aspects,  thorough  communication  with  markets  and  the  public  becomes  all  the  more 
important. Careful explanations while continuously evaluating both the positive and adverse 
effects of the steps taken become critical. Even during times of a crisis, if central banks take 
time-inconsistent policy measures, this could rather have negative effects on confidence in 
the central bank, and as a result reduce the effectiveness of monetary policy. At the end of 
the day, the central bank needs to communicate its aims and strategies in response to the 
characteristics of the problem the economy faces, and also needs to take policy measures 
which  are  consistent  with  the  communication.  I  would  like  to  emphasize  once  again  that, 
especially  in  a  crisis  situation,  the central  banks  must  make  clear  their  commitment  to  the 
stability  of  financial  markets  and  the  financial  system,  and  take  decisive  policy  actions  to 
achieve such goals.  
Concluding remarks  
The five issues I raised today were those which the Bank of Japan struggled to solve when it 
last embarked on unconventional monetary policy. The difference between now and then is 
that the practical difficulties in dealing with such issues were not fully appreciated by many 
economists  at 
the  various  policy 
recommendations  that  were  made  toward  Japan's  policymakers  by  economists,  both 
domestically and from abroad, as well as from international organizations since the latter half 
I  am  sure  many  of  you  can  recall 
time. 
that 
                                                 
2   Ahearne et al. (2002) analyzed the Bank of Japan's monetary policy conducted during the 1990s, and showed 
the simulation result that deflation could have been avoided if the Bank of Japan had cut its policy rate to a 
great  extent  immediately  after  the  bursting  of  the  asset  price  bubble.  There  have  been  cases  where  an 
optimistic view has been expressed, partly based on such analysis, that a recession after the bursting of a 
bubble could be dealt with by aggressive monetary easing. For instance, Mishkin (2007) noted that, as long as 
a central bank timely responds to the bursting bubble, its harmful effect can be kept to a manageable level. 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 3
of the 1990s. Recommendations, some of which were quite bold, were made to the Bank of 
Japan. Typical recommendations were: "all that the Bank of Japan needs to do is to set a 
high inflation rate target and purchase all types of assets including physical assets to achieve 
that target", and "the Bank of Japan should monetize the government's budget deficit". One 
of  the  most  famous  was,  "the  central  bank  should  credibly  promise  to  be  irresponsible".3 
Interestingly, in the current crisis, in spite of the sharp contraction of the economy, very few 
similar  bold  recommendations  are  being  made  by  economists,  and  such  radical  measures 
are  not  being  implemented.  As  we  experience  first  time  challenges,  the  discussion 
surrounding  policy  measures  tends  to  swing  between  the  extremes.  Such  discussions 
become  truly  practical  once  people  actually  face  the  challenge  of  dealing  with  a  crisis. 
Viewing  such  changes,  I  believe  that  the  learning  process,  the  process  of  moving  forward 
while learning the lessons from past experiences, is working effectively. What is important is 
to fulfill our basic responsibilities as a central bank. In this regard, an important challenge for 
us central bankers is to continue to humbly work to increase our understanding of changes in 
the economy and financial system and enriching our knowledge regarding the workings of 
the economy and the art of central banking.  
Thank you.  
Reference 
Ahearne, Alan, Gagnon, Joseph, Haltmaier, Carter, Kole, Linda, Roush, Jennifer, and John 
Rogers, "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International 
Finance  Discussion  Papers  Number  729,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, 2002.  
Bank of Japan, "Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, October 2005," 2005.  
Krugman, Paul, "It's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap", Brookings 
Paper on Economic Activity 2, pp.137-205, 1998.  
Mishkin,  Frederic,  S.,  "Housing  and  the  Monetary  Transmission  Mechanism,"  Finance  and 
Economics Discussion Series 2007-40, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
2007.  
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  "Comment  to  "Securing  the  Peace  after  a  Truce  in  the  War  on 
Inflation," by Vincent R. Reinhart" in the 11th International Conference sponsored, Monetary 
and Economic Studies, Vol.22, No.S-1, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of 
Japan, pp.208-215, 2004.  
------------------,  "Speech  in  the  Concluding  Panel  Discussion,"  in  the  12th  international 
conference,  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Vol.23,  No.S-1,  Institute  for  Monetary  and 
Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, pp.243-248, 2005.  
Ugai,  Hiroshi,  "Effects  of  the  Quantitative  Easing  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Empirical  Analyses," 
Monetary and Economic Studies, Vol.25, No.1, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, 
Bank of Japan, pp.1-47, 2007, 
                                                 
3   See Krugman (1998). 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2009
