William C Dudley: The economic outlook and the Fed's balance sheet – 
the issue of "how" versus "when"   
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Association for a Better New York Breakfast Meeting, New 
York, 29 July 2009. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here at the Association for a Better New 
York. This group has obviously been very successful. New York today is a far different and 
vastly  superior  place  from  what  I  found  when  I  first  arrived  as  a  freshman  at  Columbia 
University in 1970. 
Today, I’d like to accomplish two tasks. First, I’ll comment briefly on the economy and the 
economic outlook – where we have been and where we may be going. I’m going to suggest 
that the balance of risks is still tilted toward weakness in growth and employment and not 
toward higher inflation. I will also argue that it is premature to talk about “when” we are going 
to exit from this period of unusual policy accommodation. 
Second, I will talk about the impact of the Federal Reserve’s lending facilities and purchase 
programs on the size of the Fed’s balance sheet. I’ll explain why an expanded balance sheet 
does  not  constrain  our  ability  to  exit  from  the  current  degree  of  policy  accommodation.  In 
other  words,  contrary  to  what  is  sometimes  argued,  it  is  not  the  case  that  our  expanded 
balance sheet will inevitably prove inflationary. It is important that this critical issue be well 
understood.  The  public  must  be  absolutely  confident  that  the  Fed  can  meet  its  monetary 
policy objectives of low and stable inflation and sustainable economic growth. Before I begin 
to get into these issues in earnest, let me note that, as always, the views I put forward today 
are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  position  of  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
Turning  first  to  the  outlook,  the  economic  contraction  appears  to  be  waning  and  it  seems 
likely that we will see moderate growth in the second half of the year. The economy should 
be  boosted  by  three  factors:  1)  a  modest  recovery  in  housing  activity  and  motor  vehicle 
sales; 2) the impact of the fiscal stimulus on domestic demand; and 3) a sharp swing in the 
pace of inventory investment. In fact, if the inventory swing were concentrated in a particular 
quarter, we could see fairly rapid growth for a brief period. 
Regardless of the precise timing, there are a number of factors which suggest that the pace 
of recovery will be considerably slower than usual. In particular, I expect that consumption – 
which accounts for about 70 percent of gross domestic product – is likely to grow slowly for 
three reasons. First, real income growth will probably be weak by historical standards. There 
were a number of special factors that boosted real income in the first half of the year, helping 
to offset a sharp drop in hours worked and very sluggish hourly wage gains. These factors 
included the sharp drop in gasoline and natural gas prices; the large cost-of-living-allowance 
increase for Social Security recipients reflecting last year’s high headline inflation; a sharp 
drop in final tax settlements; a reduction in withholding tax rates; and a one-time payment to 
Social Security recipients. These factors provided a transitory boost to real incomes, which 
will be absent during the second half of the year. As a result, real disposable income is likely 
to decline modestly over this period.  
Second, households are still adjusting to the sharp drop in net worth caused by the persistent 
decline  in  home  prices  and  last  year’s  fall  in  equity  prices.  This  suggests  that  the  desired 
saving rate will not decline sharply. That means consumer spending is unlikely to rise much 
faster than income. In other words, weak income growth will be an effective constraint on the 
pace of consumer spending. 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 1
Moreover,  some  sectors  such  as  business  fixed  investment  in  structures  are  likely  to 
continue to weaken as existing projects are completed. In an environment in which vacancy 
rates  are  high  and  climbing,  prices  are  falling,  and  credit  for  new  projects  is  virtually 
nonexistent, this sector is likely to be a significant drag on the economy over the next year.  
Perhaps  most  important,  the  normal  cyclical  dynamic  in  which  housing,  consumer  durable 
goods  purchases  and  investment  spending  rebound  in  response  to  monetary  easing  is 
unlikely to be as powerful in this episode as during a typical economic recovery. The financial 
system  is  still  in  the  middle  of  a  prolonged  adjustment  process.  Banks  and  other  financial 
institutions are working their way through large credit losses and the securitization markets 
are  recovering  only  slowly.  This  means  that  credit  availability  will  be  constrained  for  some 
time to come and this will serve to limit the pace of recovery. 
If  the  recovery  does,  in  fact,  turn  out  to  be  lackluster,  the  unemployment  rate  is  likely  to 
remain  elevated  and  capacity  utilization  rates  unusually  low  for  some  time  to  come.  This 
suggests that inflation will be quiescent. For all these reasons, concern about “when” the Fed 
will  exit  from  its  current  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  is,  in  my  view,  very 
premature. 
In contrast, I think it is important to address today the issue of “how” the Fed can exit from 
the current stance of policy when the time comes, even if its numerous special facilities and 
purchase programs continue to keep the size of its balance sheet at an expanded level. 
Why  do  I  believe  it  is  so  important  to  explain  the  issue  of  “how”  having  just  argued  that 
“when”  is  not  yet  a  pressing  issue?  The  reason  is  that  if  people  believe  –  correctly  or 
incorrectly – that the Federal Reserve could have a problem managing a smooth exit from its 
accommodative  policy  stance,  this  belief  alone  could  have  the  adverse  effect  of  causing 
inflation  expectations  to  become  less  well  anchored  and  risk  premia  on  long-dated  debt 
securities  and  loans  to  rise.  These  effects  could  conceivably  make  it  more  difficult  to 
generate a sustainable economic recovery. 
This risk seems significant. For example, just last week a major bank published a survey of a 
broad  array  of  1800  investors.  Of  those  surveyed,  20  percent  thought  that  inflation  might 
average more than 2.5 percentage points per year above their assessment of the Federal 
Reserve’s  target.  This  outcome  presumably  reflects  two  factors  –  the  balance-sheet 
expansion of the Fed and the large fiscal deficit. 
With this in mind, let me spend the remainder of my time discussing the sources of growth in 
the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the past year and a half or so, and explain why I 
am confident that the exit from our accommodative policy stance, as well as from our various 
lending facilities and purchase programs, can be handled smoothly. 
As you are aware, the Federal Reserve has been engaged in a wide array of unprecedented 
activities over the past two years in response to the financial crisis. These include: 
• 
Liquidity  facilities  designed  to  improve  market  function.  These  include  facilities 
oriented  to  banks  and  dealers  such  as  the  Term  Auction  Facility  (TAF),  Primary 
Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) and the foreign exchange swap programs; and facilities 
designed  to  improve  market  function  in  impaired  parts  of  the  money  and  capital 
markets such as the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) and the Term Asset-
Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF).  
Purchase programs oriented to easing financial conditions. These include the agency 
debt, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and Treasury purchase programs.  
Several firm-specific interventions in which the Federal Reserve has taken on illiquid 
asset portfolios from Bear Stearns and AIG, with the goal of managing and liquidating 
these asset portfolios over time in a manner that is in the best interests of the federal 
government and the U.S. taxpayer.  
BIS Review 94/2009
  2 
 These  programs  have  led  to  significant  changes  in  both  the  composition  and  size  of  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet.  For  example,  in  August  2007,  prior  to  the  onset  of  the 
crisis, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet was about $870 billion. Currently, the size of the 
balance sheet is about $2 trillion. To gain a better understanding of how we got to where we 
are now, I think it is useful to divide the past two years into three distinct phases. 
The first stage I’ll define as the period running roughly from the start of the crisis in August 
2007  to  September  2008.  During  this  stage,  the  Fed’s  monetary  policy  implementation 
regime  worked  in  such  a  way  that  control  over  the  size  of  its  balance  sheet,  and  more 
specifically over the level of excess reserves, was essential to ensure that the Open Market 
Desk  could  control  the  fed  funds  rate  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  FOMC’s  monetary 
policy objectives. Had the Fed’s special liquidity facilities grown sufficiently large during that 
period,  raising  the  level  of  the  excess  reserves  in  the  banking  system,  the  fed  funds  rate 
would likely have fallen far below the FOMC’s target rate. To keep the fed funds rate around 
the target, the only sure-fire option was to avoid a significant expansion in the balance sheet 
by funding the expansion of nontraditional assets, such as TAF loans, FX swaps, and PDCF 
loans  with  similarly  sized  liquidations  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  portfolio  of  Treasury 
securities.  Thus,  over  the  period  from  August  2007  up  through  the  time  of  the  Lehman 
Brothers failure in September 2008, the total size of the Fed’s balance sheet and the level of 
excess reserves in the banking system changed very little. 
The second stage began in October 2008 when the Federal Reserve gained the authority to 
pay interest on reserves, including excess reserves. The addition of interest on reserves to 
the Fed’s toolkit effectively broke the link between the size of the Fed’s balance sheet and 
the stance of monetary policy. Policymakers now had the capacity to expand the size of the 
Fed’s liquidity facilities and other programs without the threat of compromising the control of 
monetary policy. This new tool immediately proved enormously helpful. The Fed was able to 
respond to the deterioration of conditions in the fall of 2008 by sharply increasing the size of 
its Term Auction Facility program and removing the limits on the size of many of the foreign 
exchange  swap  programs.  These  programs,  along  with  the  increased  use  of  the  Fed’s 
standing liquidity facilities and the start-up of the Commercial Paper Funding Facility in late 
October,  led  to  a  sharp  growth  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  beginning  in  late 
September. 
The third phase is marked by the launch of the Fed’s purchase programs, starting with the 
agency  debt  program  that  began  in  December  2008  and  extends  through  to  the  present. 
During  this  phase,  the  Fed’s  overall  balance  sheet  has  actually  declined  slightly.  The 
demand  for  the  Fed’s  special  liquidity  programs  has  diminished  more  quickly  than  the 
purchase  programs  have  been  ramped  up.  Although  this  shrinkage  was  not  anticipated  or 
targeted, it is a welcome indication that there has been improvement in the functioning of the 
short-term  funding  markets.1  As  market  function  has  improved  and  credit  spreads  have 
narrowed,  many  of  the  Fed’s  liquidity  facilities  have  become  less  attractive  and  there  has 
been a corresponding decline in usage. For example, outstanding foreign exchange swaps 
have declined from a peak of $586 billion last December to about $110 billion currently, and 
outstanding commercial paper held by the CPFF has fallen from a peak of about $350 billion 
last fall to around $110 billion currently. 
Despite the recent dip in the size of the balance sheet, the size of the purchase programs 
underway  makes  it  likely  that  balance-sheet  growth  will  resume  as  assets  acquired  in 
conjunction with these programs overwhelm any further declines in the funds advanced via 
the shorter-term liquidity facilities. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet seems 
likely to grow to roughly $2.5 trillion, somewhat above the peak reached last December. 
                                                 
1   However, it was anticipated that the attractiveness of the Fed’s facilities would decline as market conditions 
improved. In fact, it was a key element of the exit strategy that was deliberately built into the design of most of 
the facilities. 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 3
It is no coincidence that the growth of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet since last fall has 
been  accompanied  by  a  sharp  rise  in  the  amount  of  excess  reserves.  When  the  Federal 
Reserve  extends  a  loan  or  purchases  a  security,  this  automatically  adds  reserves  to  the 
banking system unless the Fed undertakes an offsetting reserve draining operation. Although 
some  of  the  excess  reserves  that  have  been  generated  by  the  balance-sheet  expansion 
were  initially  sopped  up  by  the  Treasury’s  Supplemental  Financing  Program,  total  excess 
reserves  have  climbed  to  more  than  $700  billion  from  nearly  zero  at  the  beginning  of  the 
crisis. 
The sharp rise in excess reserves has caused the monetary base, which is simply the sum of 
currency plus total reserves, to expand significantly. The increases in excess reserves and in 
the monetary base generated by the Fed’s balance-sheet growth have led some observers to 
worry that this expansion will ultimately prove inflationary. Proponents of this view say that 
the  monetary  base,  the  broad  monetary  aggregates,  total  credit  outstanding  and  inflation 
have  historically  tended  to  move  together,  at  least  over  longer  time  periods.  Thus,  if  the 
monetary  base  is  growing  rapidly,  as  it  has  been  over  the  past  year,  the  view  is  that  this 
growth will ultimately lead to inflation. 
Is this concern well founded? The answer is that in a world where banks could not be paid 
interest on excess reserves, these persistent high reserve balances would indeed have the 
potential to prove inflationary.2 In that world, the excess reserves are likely to lead ultimately 
to an overly accommodative monetary policy. The story goes like this: If banks are earning 
no interest on their excess reserve holdings, they will be willing to lend those reserves out to 
any creditworthy borrowers as long as the interest rate is positive after adjusting for risk. The 
borrowers  would  then  spend  these  monies,  thereby  boosting  economic  activity.  The  funds 
would  not  disappear,  but  instead  would  flow  back  into  the  banking  system  as  they  were 
deposited  by  those  who  had  received  the  income  generated  by  the  increase  in  spending, 
thus replenishing the reserves that had been lent out in the first round of lending. This would 
result in a new stock of excess reserves that would then lead to a second round of credit 
creation  and  a  further  increase  in  economic  activity.  This  cycling  of  excess  reserves  into 
credit creation, and the corresponding increase in economic activity, would continue until the 
excess  reserves  were  fully  absorbed  by  an  increase  in  currency  outstanding  and/or  an 
increase  in  required  reserves  associated  with  the  rise  in  the  amount  of  banking  deposits. 
Inflation would rise as the excessive credit creation generated by the excess reserves led to 
an overheated economy and a rise in inflation expectations. 
But that is not the world in which we now live. Because the Federal Reserve now has the 
ability to pay interest on excess reserves (IOER), it also now has the ability to prevent excess 
reserves  from  leading  to  excessive  credit  creation.  Because  the  Federal  Reserve  is  the 
safest of counterparties, the IOER rate effectively becomes the risk-free rate.3 By raising that 
rate,  the  Federal  Reserve  raises  the  cost  of  credit  more  generally  because  banks  will  not 
lend  at  rates  below  the  IOER  rate  when  they  can  instead  hold  their  excess  reserves  on 
deposit with the Fed. Because banks no longer seek to lend out their excess reserves, there 
is no increase in the amount of credit outstanding, no redeposit of the excess reserves, no 
increase in economic activity and no risk that excessive credit creation will fuel an inflationary 
spiral. 
                                                 
2   That rate is unlikely to spur too much lending right now given the constraints on credit availability, but at some 
future date it undoubtedly would be too low once the recovery is sufficiently advanced and credit conditions 
improved. 
3   For a more detailed discussion of monetary policy implementation under a regime in which the central bank 
pays  interest  on  reserves,  see:  Todd  Keister,  Antoine  Martin,  and  James  J.  McAndrews  (2008),  "Divorcing 
Money from Monetary Policy," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, Vol. 14 (2), 41-
56; and Todd Keister and James J. McAndrews (2009), "Why Are Banks Holding So Many Excess Reserves?" 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 380. 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2009
For this dynamic to work correctly, the Federal Reserve needs to set an IOER rate consistent 
with the amount of required reserves, money supply and credit outstanding consistent with its 
dual  mandate  of  full  employment  and  price  stability.  If  demand  for  credit  exceeds  what  is 
appropriate, the Federal Reserve raises the IOER rate to reduce demand. If the demand for 
credit  is  insufficient  to  push  the  economy  to  full  employment,  then  the  Federal  Reserve 
reduces the IOER rate, recognizing that the IOER rate cannot fall below zero. This does not 
differ much from how the Federal Reserve has behaved historically – set the fed funds rate 
at a level consistent with the desired level of economic activity and inflation over time.  
So  how  does  the  IOER  rate  relate  to  the  fed  funds  rate?  The  two  rates  are  likely to  track 
each other closely in most circumstances.4 First, banks generally do not have any incentive 
to sell fed funds at rates below the IOER rate. Only nondepository institutions – such as the 
government sponsored enterprises (GSEs) – that can buy and sell fed funds but are not able 
to hold excess reserves with the Fed, might have an incentive to sell fed funds at rates below 
the IOER rate. But even in this case, the fed funds rate would not likely fall far below the 
IOER rate. After all, if the fed funds rate were to fall significantly below the IOER rate, banks 
could purchase the fed funds and hold them as reserves with the Fed, earning the difference. 
The ability of banks to engage in arbitrage should limit the size of the deviations between the 
IOER  rate  and  the  fed  funds  rate.  Thus,  through  the  IOER  rate,  the  Federal  Reserve  can 
effectively retain control of monetary policy. 
In addition to paying interest on excess reserves, the Federal Reserve also has the ability to 
drain the excess reserves from the banking system. This can be done in a variety of ways: 
reverse  repo  transactions  with  dealers  and  other  counterparties,  securities  sales  from  the 
Fed’s  portfolio  or  bill  issuance  by  the  Treasury,  with  the  funds  deposited  at  the  Federal 
Reserve. Although our ability to pay interest on excess reserves is sufficient to retain control 
of monetary policy, it is not bad policy to have both a “belt and suspenders” in place. As a 
result, we are working out ways to drain reserves to provide reassurance that we will not – 
under any circumstance – lose control of monetary policy. 
A related concern is the question of whether the Federal Reserve will be able to act quickly 
enough once it determines that it is time to raise rates. This concern reflects the view that the 
excess  reserves  sitting  on  banks’  balance  sheets  are  essentially  “dry  tinder”  that  could 
quickly  fuel  excessive  credit  creation  and  put  the  Fed  behind  the  curve  in  tightening 
monetary policy. 
In terms of imagery, this concern seems compelling – the banks sitting on piles of money that 
could be used to extend credit on a moment’s notice. However, this reasoning ignores a very 
important  point.  Based  on  how  monetary  policy  has  been  conducted  for  several  decades, 
banks have always had the ability to expand credit whenever they like. They don’t need a 
pile  of  “dry  tinder”  in  the  form  of  excess  reserves  to  do  so.  That  is  because  the  Federal 
Reserve has committed itself to supply sufficient reserves to keep the fed funds rate at its 
target. If banks want to expand credit and that drives up the demand for reserves, the Fed 
automatically meets that demand in its conduct of monetary policy. In terms of the ability to 
expand credit rapidly, it makes no difference whether the banks have lots of excess reserves 
or not. 
Another source of concern among some market participants has been the Federal Reserve’s 
purchase of Treasury securities. The worry here is that the Federal Reserve’s purchases are 
“monetizing the debt” and that therefore these purchases will ultimately prove inflationary. 
                                                 
4  
In a world of excess reserves and a positive IOER, either the IOER or the fed funds rate could conceivably be 
used as the primary instrument of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve would have precise control over the 
IOER  and  this  would  lead  to  some  variability  in  the  actual  fed  funds  rate.  This  would  not  be  much  of  a 
departure from the recent past in which the actual fed funds rate has tended to fluctuate closely around the fed 
funds target. 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 5
Regarding the Fed’s Treasury purchase program, I want to make two points. First, with the 
fed funds rate constrained at zero lower bound, policymakers needed to find other ways to 
stimulate economic activity. The agency debt and agency MBS purchase programs proved 
effective in narrowing credit spreads in the debt and MBS market, but the Federal Reserve 
would  have  encountered  diminishing  returns  in  terms  of  impaired  market  function  if  it  had 
raised the sizes of these two programs further. This suggested that the best course to hold 
down mortgage rates and other private borrowing rates would be to engage in a Treasury 
purchase program that would put downward pressure on Treasury rates. In this regard, the 
Fed’s purchases have not been motivated by accommodating an expansive fiscal policy and 
the large fiscal deficits that are its consequence. I can assure you that the Federal Reserve 
will never engage in a program to accommodate or facilitate an unsustainable fiscal policy 
program. Instead, these programs were designed to help ease financial conditions at a time 
that the Federal Reserve could not push the fed funds rate below zero. 
Second, the program is small. So even if one were to take a darker view of what the Federal 
Reserve  has  done,  it  is  important  to  put  the  purchase  program  in  context.  Even  after 
completion of a purchase program of up to $300 billion of Treasuries, the Federal Reserve’s 
holdings of Treasuries will be smaller than they had been in August 2007 on the eve of the 
crisis.  Moreover,  as  a  share  of  Treasuries  outstanding,  the  Fed’s  share  will  be  the  lowest 
since the early 1990s. 
Overall, the Federal Reserve’s balance-sheet expansion has had notable benefits. The asset 
purchase programs have helped to keep longer-term private interest rates relatively low, and 
the  expansion  of  liquidity  facilities  has  helped  to  restore  more  normal  market  function. 
However,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  Federal  Reserve  balance-sheet  expansion  and 
Treasury  purchase  program  are  cost  free,  only  that  the  benefits  of  these  programs, 
individually and collectively, are seen as exceeding the potential costs. 
Nevertheless, there are three issues on the cost side that deserve note. First, policymakers 
need  to  take  seriously  any  concerns  that  the  Fed’s  actions  might  conceivably  lead  to  an 
inflation problem. After all, inflation is driven mainly by two variables – inflation expectations 
and the degree of pressure on resources. It would be potentially very damaging if any of the 
Fed’s  programs  were  to  unhinge  inflation  expectations.  One  risk  with  embarking  on  the 
Treasury purchase program was that it had the potential to create the misperception that the 
Fed  was  providing  the  fiscal  authorities  with  the  means  to  fund  a  more  stimulative  fiscal 
policy than they would otherwise have been able to finance. This misperception around the 
intent and purpose of the program could have undermined the Fed’s credibility and triggered 
a damaging rise in inflation expectations. Indeed, one of my primary goals for this speech is 
to make it clear that we have not compromised our ability or our commitment to keep inflation 
in  check.  Keeping  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  well  anchored  around  a  low  level  is 
essential. 
Second, the Federal Reserve’s balance-sheet expansion does have a consequence for the 
balance sheet of the banking system. The increase in the amount of excess reserves has to 
be held by banks. Excess reserves are a risk-free asset that they may not wish to hold. More 
important, to the extent that the banks worry about their overall leverage ratios, it is possible 
that a large increase in excess reserves could conceivably diminish the willingness of banks 
to  lend.  At  present,  these  balance-sheet  issues  do  not  appear  to  be  having  a  meaningful 
effect  on  bank  behavior.  In  fact,  the  excess  reserves  serve  as  a  liquidity  buffer  that  many 
banks find attractive in the current environment. But that does not mean we can ignore this 
issue.  We  need  to  keep  this  issue  in  mind  as  we  contemplate  how  much  balance-sheet 
expansion might be appropriate. 
Third, the Federal Reserve is taking on some interest-rate risk in terms of its balance sheet. 
The excess reserves have an overnight maturity. These liabilities are being used to purchase 
longer-term assets. In principle, if short-term interest rates were to move up very sharply, the 
6 
 BIS Review 94/2009
cost  of  funding  could  eventually  exceed  the  return  on  the  Fed’s  assets.  The  bigger  our 
balance sheet, the greater the amount of interest-rate risk we are assuming. 
We  have  examined  this  issue  in  detail.  Suffice  it  to  say,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  Federal 
Reserve’s net-interest margin could be pinched in certain environments – say if the economic 
recovery turned out to be very robust. But our analysis shows that it is extremely unlikely that 
the  Fed’s  net-interest  margin  will  turn  negative.  In  part,  that  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
balance-sheet risk associated with the interest-rate mismatch is offset to a large degree by 
the fact that the cost of much of the Fed’s liabilities – the amount of currency outstanding – is 
zero. So when short-term rates rise, the cost of a significant portion of the Fed’s liabilities is 
unaffected. 
Making policy during a crisis involves making tough choices. Perfect solutions are not always 
achievable  or  even  legally  feasible.  I  can  assure  you  that  our  decisions  have  been  made 
carefully, always with an eye toward finding the right balance between the risks and rewards 
of  alternative  options.  Most  critical  is  our  commitment  never  to  take  actions  that  might 
compromise our ability to retain our control of monetary policy and that might undermine our 
ability to achieve our dual mandate of full employment and price stability. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be very happy to take a few questions.  
BIS Review 94/2009 
 7
