Radovan Jelašić: Strengthening integration and cooperation in 
Southeast Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the  Press 
Conference of the European Fund for Southeast Europe (EFSE), Belgrade, 26 May 2009. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here today with Dr. Klaus Glaubitt and Ms. Sylvia Wisniwski from the 
European Fund for Southeast Europe – EFSE. Before they start their presentation on EFSE, 
I would like to depict the current economic situation and describe EFSE’s role in stabilising 
the  economies  in  Serbia  and  Southeast  Europe  as  well  as  in  promoting  economic  and 
financial sector development in the region. 
The  financial  crisis  has  been  a  huge  liquidity  shock.  This  means  that  investors,  financial 
institutions as well as businesses and households around the world have been scrambling 
for liquidity. As we are all facing the effects of this “sudden stop”, we have to undertake bold 
measures, almost as bold as those which were taken at the fall of the iron curtain, however, 
with  one  difference  –  this  time  it  would  be  purely  for  the  maintenance  of  stability  and 
standards of living, and not for their substantial increase. 
The National Bank of Serbia – NBS – was relatively well prepared for the initial effects of the 
crisis. As of today, the NBS has undertaken several measures in order to limit the impact of 
the  crisis  on  the  banking  sector,  which  include  securing  additional  support  from  the 
international finance institutions such as KfW, the European Investment Bank – EIB and the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development – EBRD. 
Time  is  critical  for  all  parties  and  help  from  international  finance  institutions  including  from 
vehicles such as EFSE is needed more than ever to: mitigate the impact of the crisis in the 
region, resolve the prevailing credit crunch and, more importantly, to secure the stability of 
the financial sector. 
The stability of the financial sector remains the key pillar of a functioning market economy a 
precondition of general stability. The services it provides like payments, deposits and loans 
are  fundamental  for  the  entire  economy,  especially  for  micro  and  small  enterprises.  The 
microfinance sector has been hit hard by the financial crisis, not only due to higher interest 
rates but even more significantly due to the lack of availability of funds for such purposes. 
In this respect, EFSE plays a key role in providing a stable funding source for development 
finance  and  the  micro  and  small  enterprise  sector.  In  times  of  economic  crisis,  continued 
access to finance for small businesses is essential. They are at the heart of the economy. 
Development finance must operate counter cyclically, which means fighting the credit crunch 
around the globe, in particular in emerging Europe including Southeast Europe, and that is 
exactly what EFSE does. 
But apart from this financial dimension, EFSE is still taking on other roles in contributing to 
financial sector development in Southeast Europe: 
We appreciate EFSE’s role as a responsible investor. As such, EFSE promotes responsible 
lending  practices  in  the  region,  refraining  from  promoting  consumer  lending  or  speculative 
activities. Why is this crucial for financial sector development? The financial crisis was in part 
caused  by  irresponsible  lending  practices,  in  particular  by  credit  technologies  employed  in 
the subprime market, the very origin of the current crisis. Against this background, there is 
indeed the valuable lesson to be learnt that responsible finance is a must to ensure a sound 
financial system.  
BIS Review 66/2009 
 1
Last but not least, I am proud to say that I, as well as my other colleagues from the Central 
Banks of the EFSE partner countries, are all members of the EFSE Advisory Group. As such, 
we are involved in EFSE’s work. But it is more than a sole advisory board, serving EFSE as 
an information source to stay abreast of financial sector developments in the region from a 
policy maker’s perspective. It provides a platform for regional exchange on financial sector 
issues.  Thus,  it  is  a  crucial  vehicle  to  strengthen  integration  and  cooperation  in  Southeast 
Europe, which in these current times of turmoil has never been so important. No Southeast 
European country has the resources or the means to make it out for the current crisis alone. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2009
