Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with the Börsen-Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  the 
Börsen-Zeitung  conducted  by  Dr  Jürgen  Schaaf  on  16  December  2008,  published  on  31 
December 2008. 
 Question:  Do  you  believe  that  the  citizens  of  the  euro  area  will  one  day  have  a  similarly 
strong relationship to the euro as the Germans used to have to the Deutsche Mark? 
Answer:  Confidence  in  the  currency,  in  the  central  bank  as  an  institution  and  in  the 
independence of the central bank to deliver price stability is crucially important. When asked 
whether they considered the ECB’s independence from politics to be an important condition 
for price stability, 78% of the 320 million fellow citizens of the euro area said “yes”. And that 
was before the recent intensification of the financial crisis. 
Question: And now?  
Answer: All evidence suggests that, since then, the sentiment of our fellow citizens on the 
importance of the euro and of the ECB as an independent institution has even increased.  
Question: Studies have shown from time to time that the support of the population for the 
stability  of  the  currency  is  even  more  important  than  the  institutional  independence  of  the 
central bank. Has the euro already achieved this status? 
Answer: As a symbol of European unity, the euro is already extremely successful. Since the 
outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  euro  and  the  ECB  have  become,  even  more  visibly,  a 
central anchor for confidence. In this sense, I believe the emotional relationship of citizens to 
the euro has become stronger. 
Question: What, in your view, is the greatest achievement of the first ten years of the euro? 
Answer: For me, the greatest success is the fact that, after having promised the citizens that 
the euro would be equal, in terms of stability and the maintenance of value, to the previously 
most solid currencies, including the Deutsche Mark, we have fulfilled this promise effectively.  
Question: And what is the greatest challenge for the next ten years? 
Answer: There are a number of challenges that face us. The first is to maintain the level of 
credibility and confidence that the euro has gained during the first ten years. And in addition 
to all the other challenges that an important central bank in the industrialised world has to 
deal with, I would stress two challenges that are entirely specific to the ECB. First, the fact 
that  we  are  ourselves  actively  contributing  to  achieving  the  single  market  with  a  single 
currency  and,  second,  that  we  must  prepare  in  the  best  possible  fashion  for  a  successful 
enlargement of the euro area.  
Question: In addition to price stability, the stability of the financial markets has become the 
focus of attention in the context of the current crisis. Would it be sensible for the ECB to have 
an explicit mandate to safeguard the stability of the financial markets? 
Answer: Our primary mandate, to ensure price stability, is a very important prerequisite for 
financial stability. Furthermore, our two-pillar strategy allows us to identify long-term risks to 
price  stability  and  to  financial  stability  at  an  early  stage  through  our  monetary  analysis.  In 
addition to our economic analysis, our monetary analysis examines not only the evolution of 
monetary aggregates, but also, in close detail, the dynamics of their components and of their 
counterparts,  including  the  evolution  of  credit  outstanding  to  categories  of  borrowers.  This 
also brings potential risks to the stability of the euro area financial system to our attention. 
Question: But is that enough? 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 1
Answer:  All  central  banks  make  a  contribution  to  financial  stability  in  their  respective 
economic areas. And I would say that in our case macro-prudential matters are certainly part 
of our responsibility.  
Question: Is the same also true of banking supervision? 
Answer: The position of the ECB’s Governing Council has always been that a very close link 
between  central  banks  and  banking  supervisory  authorities  is  indispensable.  One  of  the 
lessons of the first ten years of the euro, and of the recent financial market turbulence, is that 
if we can make an even greater contribution to the smooth functioning of banking supervision 
in general and in the euro area in particular – with regard to banking institutions with cross-
border activities – this could be a sensible option. It has to be studied very carefully, and we 
will see afterwards what the position of the Governing Council will be. 
Question: The spreads on government bonds have widened considerably in the euro area. 
Unsound  fiscal  policies  are  thus  punished,  but  some  countries  face  potential  refinancing 
problems on the capital market. Is this a curse or a blessing?  
Answer:  The  capital  market  is  sending  signals  that  need  to  be  looked  at  attentively. 
Following a phase in which the pricing of risks was, in general, too low, the markets may now 
be showing a tendency to overvalue risks. In any event, developments need to be watched 
closely. 
Question:  But  who  will  stand  by  the  side  of  the  countries with  worse ratings  if  the  capital 
market is practically blocked for these countries because of a continued flight to quality? 
Answer: I am sure that these countries will take the appropriate steps to face up to these 
challenges themselves. 
Question: That means that they shouldn’t hope for external help?  
Answer:  The  very  fact  of  belonging  to  the  single  currency  area  is,  in  itself,  a  significant 
contribution to facing up to this situation.  
Question: The financial crisis worsened considerably in the autumn. Would the world look 
different now if the US investment bank had been rescued? 
Answer: I don’t want to go into the major difficulties of individual institutions in September. It 
is clear to me that the financial crisis has worsened significantly since mid-September and 
has  moved  into  a  new  phase.  But  even  if  all  organisations  that  were  in  trouble  had  been 
rescued, it would have remained necessary for central banks and governments on both sides 
of the Atlantic to take extremely bold measures in order to be prepared for systemic liquidity 
and insolvency risks. 
Question: How do you explain the fact that, despite the ongoing banking crisis, the ECB’s 
statistics do not yet indicate the existence of a credit crunch in the euro area?  
Answer:  What  is  true  is  that  we  see  a  certain  weakening  in  the  dynamics  of  loans  to 
enterprises.  But  the  rate  of  growth  of  outstanding  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  has 
remained robust in double-digit figures. However, since bank lending standards have been 
tightening  significantly  for  some  time  and  the  financial  crisis  entered  a  new  phase  only  in 
mid-September, we must observe all developments very closely and remain attentive to new 
facts and figures. 
Question: The major investor Warren Buffett once described credit derivatives as “financial 
weapons of mass destruction”. Do you share this view? 
Answer: I wouldn’t necessarily use that formulation myself. But the level of complexity and 
lack  of  transparency  reached  in  the  production,  marketing  and  selling  of  these  financial 
market  instruments  indeed  proved  to  be  destructive  and  contributed  substantially  to  the 
fragility of financial markets.  
2 
 BIS Review 1/2009
Question:  The  reputation  of  the  ECB  has  been  strengthened  by  the  crisis.  Has  it  also 
profited financially from the brisk demand for the greater amount of liquidity made available?  
Answer: I will wait for all our accounts to be finalised. 
Question:  In  October  you  considerably  expanded  the  collateral  framework  for  credit 
operations. Since then you have accepted more risky securities as collateral. How high is the 
ECB’s exposure as a result?  
Answer:  Like  all  other  central  banks,  we  have  been  more  forthcoming  as  regards  our 
collateral  framework  in  order  to  provide  the  banking  sector  with  appropriate  liquidity.  Our 
balance sheet has grown by approximately 55% over the last 12 months. At the same time, 
we have to permanently ensure that our risk management is improved to take into account 
the increased volume of risks. 
Question: The financial sector has been largely safeguarded through guarantees and equity 
capital aid. Now the car industry is asking for state support. Is this not understandable? 
Answer:  The  decision  on  this  falls  first  of  all  under  the  responsibility  of  the  national 
governments  and  parliaments.  As  a  central  bank,  we  have  emphasised  the  fact  that  the 
financial sector is of systemic importance because it affects all other sectors, all enterprises 
and their employees.  
Question:  Knowing  what  we  do  now,  was  the  interest  rate  increase  in  July  this  year  a 
mistake? And why is it generally so difficult for central bankers to admit to mistakes?  
Answer:  The  modest  interest  rate  increase  in  July  was  important  taking  into  account  the 
inflationary threats that were visible at the time. 
Question: What were those threats? 
Answer:  Long-term  inflation  expectations  threatened  to  become  unanchored.  In  addition, 
wage and salary demands in some euro area countries caused us serious concern that there 
could be broad-based second-round effects. The interest rate decision enabled us to bring 
medium  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  back  under  control  in  line  with  our  definition  of 
price  stability.  And  this  regained  control  of  expectations  was,  by  the  way,  the  precondition 
which allowed us to cut rates strongly from October when the crisis worsened. Do not forget: 
our definition of price stability in the medium term is “less than, but close to, 2%”. The interest 
rate increase in July must be related to the “less than 2%” part. Our recent decrease of rates 
after the intensification of the crisis in September must be related to “close to 2%”. 
Question: Since then rates have been cut drastically around the world. The US central bank, 
the Federal Reserve (Fed), has now de facto cut rates to zero. The conventional weapons of 
monetary policy are fast being exhausted. What unorthodox options does the ECB have at its 
disposal? 
Answer: First, let me remind you that we have, in all circumstances, to deliver price stability 
in line with our definition “less than, but close to, 2%”. 
Question: And second? 
Answer: Second, the present unlimited provision of liquidity at a fixed rate and with a one-
week,  one-month,  three-month  and  six-month  duration  can  certainly  be  described  as  an 
unusual  measure.  The  extension  of  eligibility  in  our  collateral  framework  is  also  an 
exceptional  measure,  particularly  as  it  was  already  very  broad  and  flexible.  We  have  also 
expanded our balance sheet on a scale that would have been unthinkable before the crisis: 
around 55% in the last 12 months.  
Question : The ECB expects that the economy will gradually start to recover again in 2010. 
Where are the impulses for growth likely to come from?  
Answer:  The  growth  and  inflation  projections  you  mention  come  from  the  staff  of  the 
Eurosystem central banks. They are not the forecasts of the Governing Council of the ECB. 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 3
We  look  closely  at  these  projections,  but  we  also  consider  other  forecasts,  such  as  those 
from the private sector. 
Question: And what conclusion do you arrive at? 
Answer: Taking into account the staff projections, we believe that the risks to growth in the 
euro  area  are  on  the  downside.  That  being  said,  we  are  in  an  environment  of  great 
uncertainty and we must treat new data and figures with the greatest humility. But we also 
have to take into account the fact that some developments, such as the drastic reduction in 
the price of oil and other commodities, are simultaneously disinflationary and expansionary.  
Question:  Why  is  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  so  reluctant  to  give  indications 
regarding the interest rate decision in January? 
Answer:  As  I  said  at  the  last  press  conference  when  reporting  on  the  position  of  the 
Governing Council, we are concentrating at present on the impact of our previous decisions. 
We have already cut rates by 175 basis points within a very short span of time. This impulse 
is, at the moment, far from having been fully transmitted to the economy. That being said, as 
I always stress, we are never pre-committed and we always do what is necessary to solidly 
anchor inflationary expectations in the medium term. 
4 
 BIS Review 1/2009
