Duvvuri Subbarao: Global financial crisis – questioning the questions 
Text of the JRD Tata Memorial Lecture by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve 
Bank  of  India,  at  the  meeting  of  The  Associated  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry  of 
India, New Delhi, 31 July 2009. 
 JRD Tata 
Thank you for inviting me to deliver this year’s JRD Tata Memorial Lecture. It is an honour to 
which I attach a lot of value. The man whose life this series of lectures commemorates, JRD 
Tata – or JRD, as he was known – left a great legacy as a visionary, as an industry leader, 
as a philanthropist, and above all as a humanist. 
Two  words  capture  JRD’s  lasting  contribution,  nation  builder.  His  commitment  to  India’s 
development was deep and abiding, and he was passionate about improving the lot of the 
less privileged. S.A. Sabavala, one of JRD’s long-time associates, tells a story that illustrates 
this  passion.  After  picking  up  Mother  Teresa  in  Jamshedpur  once,  JRD  spoke  generally 
about poverty in India, how it upset him, when it would end and so on. Her reply, “Mr. Tata, 
your job is to open more industries, give more employment to people, and leave the rest to 
God.” 
JRD evidently took the Mother’s advice to heart. Starting with 14 enterprises at the start of 
his business career, JRD retired in 1988 with a conglomerate of 95 enterprises that provided 
steady  employment  to  hundreds  of  thousands.  Tata  businesses  ranged  from  airlines  to 
hotels, trucks to locomotives, heavy chemicals to pharmaceuticals and financial services, tea 
and air conditioning, becoming a household name. 
We in the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) are proud of a special connection with JRD. He was a 
Director on the RBI’s Central Board for three terms – from 1952 to 1964. There are countless 
stories about JRD’s humanism, determination, old world charm and everyday courtesies. The 
Reserve Bank has its own share. I will share one quick anecdote that sums up the measure 
of this remarkable man. RBI board meetings at that time were held on the first floor in the old 
building.  When  meetings  would  break  around  lunch  time,  JRD  would  join  the  line  of  RBI 
staffers  waiting  to  take  the  elevator.  JRD  always  insisted  that  the  staff  go  ahead  of  him, 
telling  the  lift  man:  “These  boys  are  hungry,  and  they  have  to  eat  and  then  come  back  to 
work.  Please  drop  them  off  first.”  Old  timers  of  RBI,  almost  all  of  them  now  retired,  recall 
several occasions when JRD showed unaffected empathy. 
There is a similar fount of stories about JRD’s visionary leadership in tough times, and his 
astute understanding of what could drive the future, and how to always keep ahead of the 
curve.  He  was  a  good  listener,  but  he  always  asked  penetrating  and  insightful  questions, 
questioning even the questions that others asked.  
Today we pay tribute to that amazing individual, a Bharat Ratna, and his rare capability to 
question  the  questions.  Very  often,  asking  the  right  question  is  even  more  important  even 
than having the right answer. JRD’s insights underpin my speech today: I will question the 
questions  that  people  are  asking  about  the  financial crisis, its  impact  and  our  approach  to 
recovery. 
The global crisis 
We  are  going  through  what  is  by  all  accounts  the  deepest  economic  crisis  of  our  time. 
Economic  historians  are  comparing  this  crisis  to  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.  Both 
were  global  in  scope,  both  were  centred  in  the  United  States,  and  importantly  both  were 
preceded by mounting global imbalances, loose monetary policy and high levels of leverage.  
BIS Review 95/2009 
 1
Still,  there  are  important  differences  between  the  Great  Recession  of  today  and  the  Great 
Depression and all the crises in between. A number of regions of the world – Latin America 
and Asia – and a number of individual countries such as Argentina, Mexico, Russia, Turkey – 
had all gone through crises, and these crises were essentially traditional retail banking and 
currency crises. During these crises richer countries buffered the fall bailing out the troubled 
regions. In contrast, the current crisis hit at the very heart of global finance with no buffer to 
fall back on. Some studies suggest that the net worth impact of this crisis, when measured by 
variables such as declines in output, trade volumes and stock markets, has arguably been 
more severe than that of the Great Depression.  
Every  country  in  every  part  of  the  world  has  been  affected  by  the  crisis,  although  through 
different  channels  and  to  different  degrees.  The  United  States  and  Europe,  which  had 
become  dependent  on  the  financial  sector  as  their  engine  of  growth,  were  at  the  very 
epicentre of the crisis. Export growth led Asia, which managed its external sector cautiously 
after the Asian Crisis of a decade ago, saw its growth plummet through a sharp decline in the 
demand for exports. Over the years, Eastern Europe had become dependent on large-scale 
capital  imports  through  banking  channels  and  was  therefore  hit  by  the  reversal  of  capital 
flows. African and South American economies suffered through the huge drop in commodity 
prices and deterioration in their terms of trade. In India, our financial markets continued to 
function  normally,  and  our  financial  sector  remained  healthy.  Even  so,  we  too  were  hit  by 
sudden  capital  flow  reversals  as  part  of  the  global  deleveraging  process  and  the  liquidity 
hiccups transmitted mainly through the confidence channel. 
The  point  here  is  that  almost  every  country  around  the  world  has  been  impacted  by  this 
crisis. 
Text  book  economics  tells  us  that  stresses  in  non-tradable  sectors  remain  confined  to 
economic boundaries. Many text books also cite housing as a quintessential example of a 
non-tradable good. It is paradoxical therefore that a problem that, at some level, traces its 
origins to pressures in the US sub-prime housing market should snowball into a crisis of such 
global  dimensions.  This  only  demonstrates  the  power  of  globalization,  which  is  now 
increasingly  encompassing  sectors 
through  growing 
communication linkages, capital flows and the depth of financial engineering – three aspects 
that lie at the heart of this crisis. 
A lot is being written about how this crisis is too important to waste, how we should learn the 
lessons of this crisis and go forward with Schumpeterian creative destruction. Some people 
have, however, questioned the wisdom of drawing lessons when the immediate challenge is 
to pull the world economy out of its tailspin. When Chairman Mao was asked what he thought 
of the French Revolution, he said it was too early to say. People who take a long view of 
history as did Chairman Mao would say that it is too premature to talk about the lessons of 
the crisis. Of course, this crisis is by no means over. There may yet be surprises. So, is it too 
early to raise questions?  
I believe it is not. The world is changing too rapidly to allow us the luxury of sitting back until 
after  the  crisis  has  passed  to  investigate  its  causes  and  draw  key  lessons.  Indeed  the 
situation is so complex, compelling and urgent that we cannot effectively resolve it unless we 
start looking at everything de novo. 
This crisis has also been an intellectual challenge. It has thrown up a number of issues that 
we believed were behind us, reopened questions that we thought were answered, renewed 
debates  that  we  had  assumed  were  settled  and  attacked  stereotype  views  that  we  had 
accepted without questioning. Out of all this churning, lessons are being drawn and applied 
to policy and institutional reform. While this earnestness is welcome, there is a risk that we 
may  be  learning  the  wrong  lessons  because  we  are  asking  the  wrong  questions. That  we 
need to ask the right question to get the right answers is self evident, even tautological. What 
I propose to do therefore in my lecture today is to question the questions in four crisis related 
areas addressing them in the global context and the Indian context. 
long  considered  non-tradable 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2009
Global imbalances 
The first issue relates to global imbalances. No crisis as complex as this has a simple or a 
single cause. In popular perception, the collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September 2008 
will remain marked as the trigger of the crisis. At one level that may well be true. Indeed, I 
can visualize future text books in finance dividing the world into “before Lehman” and “after 
Lehman”. But if we probe deeper, we will learn that at the heart of the crisis were two root 
causes – the build up of global imbalances and developments in the financial markets over 
the  last  two  decades.  And  received  wisdom  today  is  that  these  two  root  causes  are 
interconnected, and that financial market developments were in a sense driven by the global 
imbalances.  
Global  macro  imbalances  got  built  up  because  of  the  large  savings  and  current  account 
surpluses in China and much of Asia in wake of the East Asian Crisis a decade ago. These 
were mirrored by large increases in leveraged consumption and current account deficits in 
the US. In short, Asia produced and America consumed. There is a raging debate on what 
was the cause, and what the effect – the US consumption boom and the Asian savings glut? 
Regardless, the bottom line is that one was simply the mirror of the other and the two share a 
symbiotic relationship. 
And how did these imbalances build up? The answer lies in globalization – globalization of 
trade, of labour and of finance. The world witnessed a phenomenal expansion in global trade 
over the last 50 years; global trade as a proportion of global GDP more than doubled from 24 
per cent in 1960 to 57 per cent in 2006, just before the crisis hit us. Globalization of finance 
was  even  more  prolific,  especially  over  the  last  decade.  For  the  world  taken  together,  the 
ratio of foreign assets and foreign liabilities to GDP rose from 45 per cent in 1970 to over 300 
per cent in 2004.1 The impact of globalization of labour was by far more striking. Emerging 
Asia added nearly three billion to the world’s pool of labour as it integrated with the rest of the 
world over the last two decades thus hugely improving its comparative advantage. Together 
the  three  dimensions  of  globalization  –  trade,  finance  and  labour  –  helped  emerging  Asia 
multiply  by  a  factor  its  exports  to  the  advanced  economies.  The  result  was  large  and 
persistent  current  account  surpluses  in  the  Asian  economies  and  corresponding  current 
account deficits in the importing advanced economies. 
The chain of causation from these imbalances to the financial crisis is interesting although 
not  obvious.  As  Asia  accumulated  savings  and  simultaneously  maintained  competitive 
exchange  rates,  the  savings  turned  into  central  bank  reserves.  Central  banks,  in  turn, 
invested these savings not in any large, diversified portfolio but in government bonds of the 
advanced economies. This in turn drove down risk free real interest rates to historically low 
levels triggering phenomenal credit expansion and dropping of the guard on credit standards, 
erosion of credit quality and search for yield, all of which combined to brew the crisis to its 
explosive dimensions.  
Where did India stand in all this? India did not contribute to global imbalances. Indeed we ran 
current account deficits for the last two decades except for a brief period during 2001-04. In 
other words, we imported savings, did not export them. However, India’s integration with the 
rest of the world over the last decade has been remarkably rapid. First, let us look at trade 
integration. The two way trade (merchandize exports plus imports) as a proportion of GDP 
doubled from 20 per cent in 1998/99, just after the Asian crisis, to 41 per cent in 2008/09. 
Our  financial  integration  was  even  deeper  as  measured  by  the  proportion  of  total  external 
transactions (gross current flows plus gross capital flows) to GDP. This ratio much more than 
doubled from 44 per cent in 1998/99 to 112 per cent in 2008/09. While the crisis transmitted 
                                                 
1   Philip R. Lane and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2006), “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and 
Extended  Estimates  of  Foreign  Assets  and  Liabilities,  1970-2004”,  Working  Paper  WP/06/69,  International 
Monetary Fund. 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 3
to India through both the trade and finance channels, the latter was by far more significant in 
terms of the intensity of impact. 
Notwithstanding  reams  being  written  about  resolving  the  present  crisis  and  preventing 
another like this, global imbalances are not on the radar screen of policy debate. This is both 
perplexing and disturbing. Indeed, once the immediacy of the crisis is behind us, it will not be 
surprising if we head for another round of destabilizing global imbalances.  
How do we manage global imbalances? It is argued that if the US Fed had refused to supply 
the  incipient  demand  for  liquidity  in  the  late  1990s  and  early  2000s,  higher  interest  rates 
could  have  prevented  the  borrowing  boom  and  the  follow  on  widespread  deterioration  of 
financial  standards  and  the  subsequent  melt  down.  But  this  also  would  have  meant  lower 
growth in the US and the rest of the world. The short point is that even as macroeconomic 
imbalances should not be allowed to proliferate, it is necessary to balance the need for global 
economic growth against the disruptions which follow the unwinding of such imbalances. 
Resolving  the  problem  of  global  imbalances  does  not  mean  eliminating  them.  As  long  as 
there is world trade, certain countries will have surpluses and certain others will run deficits. 
Global imbalances have been, are, and will continue to be inevitable.  
So, to ask how we can eliminate global imbalances is clearly the wrong question. The right 
question is this: given that global imbalances are inevitable, how do we ensure that they do 
not build up to destabilizing levels? 
Monetary & fiscal policy 
The  second  issue  on  questioning  the  questions  relates  to  monetary  and  fiscal  policy. 
Unnerved by the scale and sweep of the crisis, governments and central banks around the 
world responded with an unprecedented show of policy force. The size and pace of monetary 
and fiscal expansion raised a paradoxical situation – even as governments and central banks 
coordinated and cooperated, many of their familiar conflicts got played out once again. 
Central  banks  reduced policy  rates  ferociously,  and  in  many  advanced  countries the  rates 
are  at  or  near  zero.  This  is  the  standard  tool  of  monetary  policy  whereby  central  banks 
expect to influence interest rates at the long end, and steer financial conditions and hence 
the entire economy by adjusting the short term rates. Even in normal times, monetary policy 
transmission  is  lagged.  In  the  crisis  situation,  because  of  the  fear  and  uncertainty  in  the 
financial  markets,  it  almost  totally  lost  traction.  Central  banks  responded  to  this  alarming 
impasse through a slew of measures variously described as quantitative and credit easing. 
It  soon  became  clear  that  even  as  monetary  policy  became  the  first  line  of  defence  and 
central banks turned lenders of first resort, credit markets were in no mood to revive soon. 
So, governments had to step in with huge fiscal packages to stimulate domestic demand and 
to recapitalize banks.  
Fiscal deficits have ballooned around the world to levels never seen in peace time. In the US, 
the fiscal deficit (general government balance) is projected to rise from 2.2 per cent in 2006 
to 13.6 per cent in 2009; in the UK, from 2.6 per cent (2006) to 10.9 per cent (2010); and, in 
the euro area, from 1.2 per cent (2006) to 6.1 per cent (2010). Public debt of the ten leading 
rich  countries  is  projected  to  jump  from  78  per  cent  in  2007  to  106  per  cent  in  2010  and 
further  to  114  per  cent  in  2014.  “We  are  all  Keynesians  now”,  as  President  Nixon  once 
remarked. 
Financing these fiscal deficits has not been a problem so far. The extreme risk aversion in 
the wake of the crisis triggered “flight to safety” and “flight to liquidity” which, in turn, ensured 
that  there  was  enough  appetite  for  treasuries.  Even  so,  yields  on  treasuries  have  started 
firming  up  in  recent  weeks  suggesting  the  return  of  some  risk  appetite.  Central  banks  are 
showing extraordinary monetary accommodation by pumping in huge amounts of liquidity to 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2009
support  banks  and  financial  institutions.  This  has  willy-nilly  helped  governments  raise 
borrowings.  
Governments  are  likely  to  be  forced  to  pay  back  for  this  support.  Central  banks’  balance 
sheets have expanded at a furious pace. The US Fed balance sheet, for example, expanded 
from $919 billion at end June 2008 to $2 trillion by end June 2009. The reserves of banks 
with the Fed jumped twenty times from less than $33 billion as at end June 2008 to $661 
billion by end June 2009. Should the central bank’s interest income fall short of its interest 
payment obligations, it will have to fall back on fiscal support for interest payments, reversing 
the dependency equation between the government and the central bank.  
Many believe that these tensions between fiscal and monetary policy are temporary, and will 
melt away once the crisis has passed. That is unlikely to be the case. On the contrary, fiscal 
deficits in advanced economies are likely to persist, and in fact, increase on the way forward 
for at least two reasons. First, since it will take some years for households to rebuild their 
balance  sheets  which  got  ruptured  by  the  crisis,  economic  growth  will  likely  be  weak  for 
some  years  necessitating  big  fiscal  deficits.  Even  so,  since  this  deficit  will  be  of  a  cyclical 
nature, it can possibly be managed. However, the second and a bigger fiscal concern stems 
from the demographic profile of the advanced economies. As more people age, dependency 
ratios increase and social security payments mount, governments will have to resort to big 
deficits  on  a  long  term  basis  to  meet  these  obligations.  Moreover  if  the  surplus  Asian 
economies  make  the  necessary  adjustment,  they  will  move  away  from  funding  the  fiscal 
deficits of advanced economies. In other words, monetary policy will have to be conducted in 
a regime of large and continuing structural fiscal deficits.  
How are the tensions between fiscal and monetary policies playing out in India? Here, even 
as the Government and the Reserve Bank coordinated their crisis management efforts, there 
are dilemmas. Last year (2008/09), the government launched three fiscal stimulus packages 
which came on top of an already announced expanded safety-net programme for the rural 
poor,  the  farm  loan  waiver  package  and  pay  out  following  the  implementation  of  the  Sixth 
Pay Commission. Together all these commitments raised the fiscal deficit from 2.5 per cent 
estimated in the budget to 6.2 per cent (as per pre-actual figures) by the close of the year. 
The budget for 2009/10 projects a fiscal deficit of 6.8 per cent of GDP.  
For its part, the Reserve Bank sharply reversed its monetary stance from tightening to easing 
following  the  full  outbreak  of  the  crisis  in  September  2008.  The  monetary  stimulus  came 
through  a  sharp  reduction  in  the  policy  interest  rates  and  the  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR), 
reduced  pre-emption  of  bank  resources  through  the  statutory  liquidity  ratio  (SLR)  and 
expansion of refinance facilities for banks some of which were sector specific. The potential 
liquidity  made  available  by  the  Reserve  Bank  as  a  result  of  these  measures  amounted  to 
Rs.560,000 crores, nearly 9 per cent of GDP. 
The countercyclical spending by the government and the accommodative monetary policy of 
the Reserve Bank were both necessary in order to cushion the economy from the onslaught 
of  the  crisis.  Nevertheless,  the  sudden  and  rapid  expansion  of  government  borrowing 
programme  has  impeded  monetary  transmission.  Last  year,  the  final  net  government 
borrowing  was  two  and  a  half  times  the  original  budget  estimate.  This  year’s  budgeted 
borrowing is going to be at least a third higher than that. The intent behind Reserve Bank’s 
monetary easing was to encourage banks to reduce lending rates and maintain the flow of 
credit  to  the  productive  sectors.  But  government  borrowing  had  resulted  in  firming  up  of 
yields, notwithstanding the substantial excess liquidity, militating against the low interest rate 
regime that we want.  
The huge government borrowing programme demanded active liquidity management by the 
Reserve  Bank,  and  we  responded  by  way  of  open  market  operations  (OMO).  For  the  first 
time we put out the programme for the OMO along with the programme for borrowing so as 
to  reduce  uncertainty  and  infuse  confidence  in  the  market.  This  year  again,  the  Reserve 
Bank  will  have  to  manage  the  delicate  balance  between  government  borrowing  and 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 5
maintaining ample liquidity to meet the demand for private credit as it picks up in the months 
ahead. We will follow the same open, transparent and consultative process as we did last 
year.  
Going forward, we need to tread the balance between short term compulsions and medium 
term sustainability with care and good judgement. In the short term, the countercyclical public 
spending was necessary; the important point here is to spend that money quickly, effectively 
and to create durable assets. On the monetary side, the increased fiscal deficit is going to 
pose more than a proportionate challenge. Creation of high power money in the face of large 
fiscal deficits, even if there is no direct primary financing, is not costless; it can sow the seeds 
of  the  next  inflationary  cycle.  The  challenge  for  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to  maintain  a 
comfortable liquidity situation while at the same time anchoring inflation expectations.  
The current monetary and fiscal stance is, however, not the steady state. The Reserve Bank 
needs to roll back the special monetary accommodation. For this to happen, there are two 
necessary  conditions.  First,  the  government  will  have  to  show  a  firm  and  credible 
commitment  to  fiscal  responsibility  by  fleshing  out  the  road  map  for  fiscal  consolidation. 
Second,  there  will  have  to  be  more  definite  signs  of  recovery.  The  Reserve  Bank  will 
maintain  an  accommodative  stance  until  demand  conditions  improve  and  credit  flow  takes 
hold, but reversing the expansionary policies is definitely on the agenda on the way forward. 
Having explained the Indian context in some detail, let me now return to the global scene. 
The seventy odd years since the Great Depression saw a famous rivalry between fiscal and 
monetary policies for influence. The crisis has shown that both are required, and that indeed 
both are critical for macroeconomic stabilization. It is unlikely that we will revert to status quo 
ante  once  the  crisis  has  passed.  On  the  contrary,  there  will  need  to  be  increasing 
coordination  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  Central  banks  will  have  to  take  into 
account fiscal compulsions in their monetary stance while governments will need to commit 
to strict fiscal responsibility. To ask therefore how monetary and fiscal policies can go their 
separate ways is the wrong question. What is the right question? I submit the right question 
is: how can we coordinate fiscal and monetary policies to achieve the planned outcomes?  
Inflation targetting 
I  will  now  move  to  the  third  issue  –  inflation  targetting.  In  the  years  leading  to  the  crisis, 
central bankers had nearly declared victory. They had found the holy grail of stable growth, 
low  inflation  and  low  unemployment  through  a  rule  based  monetary  policy  that  targeted 
inflation  rather  than  monetary  aggregates.  The  much  celebrated  Great  Moderation  had 
delivered.  
The crisis at once hurt the central bankers’ pride and shattered their confidence as the Great 
Moderation  unravelled.  Monetary  policy  was  found  wanting  in  delivering  financial  stability. 
The undoing was the reluctance or failure of central banks to acknowledge increasing asset 
prices.  
The monetary stance of studied indifference to asset price inflation stemmed from the now 
notoriously famous Greenspan orthodoxy which can be summarized as follows. First, asset 
price bubbles are hard to identify on a real time basis, and the fundamental factors that drive 
asset prices are not directly observable. Second, monetary policy is too blunt an instrument 
to  counteract  asset  price  booms.  And  third,  a  central  bank  cannot  presume  to  know  more 
than the market. The surmise therefore was that the cost-benefit calculus of a more activist 
monetary stance of “leaning against the wind” was clearly negative. It is more cost effective 
for monetary policy to wait for the bubble to burst and clean up afterwards rather than prick 
the bubble in advance.  
The  Great  Unravelling  has,  however,  shattered  the  intellectual  consensus  around  both 
inflation targeting and the Greenspan orthodoxy on asset price build up. The crisis has made 
6 
 BIS Review 95/2009
two things clear. First, the policy of benign neglect of asset price build up has failed. Second, 
price stability does not necessarily deliver financial stability.  
Where do we in India stand on inflation targetting? Over the last few years, there has been 
an animated debate in India on inflation targeting fuelled by two influential studies, one by 
Percy  Mistry  and  the  other  by  Raghuram  Rajan.  While  Mistry  strongly  urged  that  the  gold 
standard  for  stabilizing  monetary  policy  is  a  transparent,  independent,  inflation-targetting 
central bank, Rajan held that reorienting RBI towards inflation targetting will have to dovetail 
with the government’s commitment to maintain fiscal discipline and not hold the central bank 
accountable for either the level or the volatility of the nominal exchange rate. 
The  debate  on  inflation  targetting  in  India  has  to  some  extent  been  overtaken  by  the 
learnings  from  the  crisis.  Nevertheless,  it  is  worthwhile  noting  that  inflation  targetting  is 
neither  desirable  nor  practical  in  India  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  I  will  defer  a  detailed 
exposition on this issue to another forum; I will allude here only to the important reasons.  
• 
First, it is inconceivable that in an emerging economy like India, the central bank can 
drive  a  single  goal  oblivious  of  the  larger  development  context.  The  Reserve  Bank 
must  be  guided  simultaneously  by  the  objectives  of  price stability,  financial  stability 
and growth.  
Second,  food  items  which  have  a  large  weight  (46-70  per  cent)  in  the  various 
consumer prices indices are vulnerable to large supply shocks, especially because of 
the vagaries of the monsoon, and are therefore beyond the pale of monetary policy. 
An inflation targeting RBI cannot do much to tame a supply driven inflation except as 
a line of defence in an extreme situation.  
Third, which inflation index do we target? In India, we have one wholesale price index 
and  four  consumer  price  indices.  There  are  ongoing  efforts  at  a  technical  level  to 
reduce the number of consumer price indices, and I believe the technical issues are 
not insurmountable. But that still will not give us a single representative inflation rate 
for an emerging market economy with market imperfections, diverse geography and 
1.1 billion people.  
Fourth,  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  in  India  is  impeded  because  of  the 
large fiscal deficits, persistence of administered interest rates and illiquid private bond 
markets.  Inflation  targetting  can  be  efficient  and  effective  only  after  monetary 
transmission becomes streamlined.  
Finally, we need to manage the monetary fall-out of volatile capital flows that queer 
the pitch for a single focus monetary policy. A boom-bust pattern of capital flows can 
lead  to  large  disorderly  movements  in  exchange  rates  rendering  both  inflation 
targeting and financial stability vulnerable. Like other emerging economies, India too 
will have to navigate the impossible trinity as best as it can.  
    In a more global context, given the fall out from the crisis, to ask how central banks should 
revert  to  their  sole  inflation  targeting  mandate  is the  wrong  question. The  right  question is 
this:  what  are  the  specific  roles  and  responsibilities  of  governments  and  central  banks  in 
ensuring price stability, financial stability and macroeconomic stability?  
Real sector and financial sector  
Finally,  I  want  to  address  questions  around  the  interplay  between  the  real  sector  and  the 
financial sector. One of the silent, albeit influential, developments leading to the crisis was 
the  hubris  that  came  to  surround  the  financial  sector.  There  were  two  factors  behind  the 
financial  sector's  growth  in  size,  importance,  and  influence.  The  first  was  the  ferocious 
search for yield, engendered by the easy liquidity in the global system that triggered a wave 
of  financial  innovation.  Complex  financial  products  were  created  by  slicing  and  dicing, 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 7
structuring and hedging, originating and distributing, all under the belief that real value could 
be  created  by  sheer  financial  engineering.  The  second  factor  was  the  razzle  dazzle  of 
sophisticated  maths  applied  to  financial  modelling.  The  premium  was  not  on  models  that 
captured the structural properties of the market but rather on models that best fitted market 
prices, never mind if those prices were way out of line on any fundamental analysis.  
In  the  world  that  existed  before  the  crisis  –  a  benign  global  environment  of  easy  liquidity, 
stable  growth  and  low  inflation  –  profits  kept  coming,  and  everyone  got  lulled  into  a  false 
sense  of  security  in  the  firm  belief  that  profits  will  keep  rolling  in  forever.  Herb  Stein,  an 
economist, pointed out the truism that, "if something cannot go on for ever, it will eventually 
stop." But no one paid attention. Indeed, as Chuck Prince, the former Chief of Citigroup said, 
it was necessary to keep dancing as along as the music was on. The magic of the financial 
sector gave it such a larger than life profile that we began to believe that for every real life 
problem,  no  matter  how  complex,  there  is  a  financial  sector  solution.  Now,  of  course,  we 
know better – for every real life problem, no matter how complex, there is a financial sector 
solution, which is wrong. 
Take the case of the United States. Over the last 50 years, the share of value added from 
manufacturing in GDP shrank by more than half from 25.3 per cent to 11.5 per cent while the 
share of financial sector more than doubled from 3.6 per cent to 7.5 per cent. The job share 
of the manufacturing sector declined by more than half from 28.5 per cent to 10.5 per cent 
while the job share of the financial sector increased by over a third from 3.5 per cent to 4.6 
per  cent.  The  same  trend  is  reflected  in  profits  too.  Over  the  last  50  years,  the  share  of 
manufacturing sector profits in total profits declined by more than half from 49.3 per cent to 
20.6 per cent while the share of profits of the financial sector increased by more than half 
from  17.4  per  cent  to  26.6  per  cent.  Clearly,  the  excessive  risk-taking  behaviour  of  the 
financial sector raised the value-added of the sector beyond a sustainable level making the 
melt down, in retrospect, inevitable.  
Forgotten in the euphoria of financial alchemy is the basic tenet that the financial sector has 
no standing of its own; it derives its strength and resilience from the real economy. It is the 
real sector that should drive the financial sector, not the other way round.  
This  thought  is  also  a  convenient  place  to introduce  my  last  point,  namely  financial  sector 
regulations. In the coming months and years, how the world regulates the financial sector will 
change  dramatically.  The  US,  for  example,  has  already  put  out  a  framework  that  charts 
significant changes from the existing model of financial regulation.  
In India, we too will have to address this issue sooner or later. However, our problem is a 
little different since we must regulate markets in a way that does not hamper development. 
But  whose  development  do  we  focus  on?  As  I  have  argued,  what  is  important  is  the 
development of the real sectors not of the financial sector. To the extent that the financial 
sector  helps  deliver  stronger  and  more  secure  long-term  growth,  its  development  is 
important. And our regulatory framework should be premised on this underlying argument. 
So, as we change or review our regulatory framework, the question we need to answer is 
whether  an  existing  practice  or  a  change  in  rule  delivers  higher  and  more  secure  real 
economy growth; not whether it develops the financial sector or accelerates its expansion. 
All in all, this crisis has dealt a harsh blow to our confidence in the financial sector. But are 
we asking the right question? The question we are asking is how to put the financial sector 
back on the high growth trajectory. I believe we must be asking a different question, so that 
we can come up with effective and lasting solutions. That question is: how can we keep real 
sector  growth  on  a  high  trajectory?  And  only  in  this  connection,  should  we  ask  what  the 
financial sector can do to help.  
8 
 BIS Review 95/2009
Conclusion 
That brings me to the conclusion of my lecture. To summarize, I have argued that in order to 
learn  and  apply  the  right  lessons  from  the  crisis  we  must,  in  the  spirit  of  the  man  whose 
legacy we honour today, question the questions. I am conscious that the list of issues I have 
chosen  is  by  no  means  comprehensive.  Expanding  that  list  and  extending  our  collective 
understanding of the right questions to ask is a shared task for all of us. Finally, I want to 
thank the ASSOCHAM once again for inviting me to deliver the JRD Tata Memorial Lecture. 
It has meant a lot to me. 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 9
