Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Corriere della Sera 
Interview by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted on 
23 September 2009 by Ms Marika de Feo, Corriere della Sera. 
 Is the improvement in the financial markets in line with the new data coming out of the 
economy?  
“There is a significant improvement in the functioning of the financial markets in comparison 
with a year ago. This was what we were aiming at, when we had to take very bold decisions 
after mid-September 08 (when Lehman collapsed), in order to permit the markets to function 
again. Back then, there was a systemic solvency issue, not only a systemic liquidity issue. 
And it is not surprising, taking into account what has been done by the central banks as well 
as by the Governments, that now we observe this improvement in the markets. There are 
other  factors  as  well  that  are  playing  a  positive  role.  In  any  case  we  monitor  with  great 
attention at this stage the interaction between the financial sphere and the real economy.”  
Will growth be positive again earlier than in mid of 2010? 
“Our staff told us this month that the real economy could be a little bit better, in average, in 
2009 and 2010 than what had been projected three months ago – 0.5% higher for each year. 
But  is  means  that  2009  will  remain  very  negative  and  2010  perhaps  only  very  slightly 
positive,  as an  average.  I  don’t  exclude  that  we  could  observe  positive  growth,  quarter  on 
quarter, at the level of the euro area as a whole, before mid 2010. But this doesn’t change 
our  main  message.  Namely,  that  we  have  a  bumpy  road  ahead  and  that  the  level  of 
uncertainty  remains  exceptionally  high  and  therefore  that  prudence  and  caution  are  of 
essence. Now much depend on us, on our capacity to reintroduce confidence in the financial 
and real economy decision making processes, in the households as well as in the corporate 
sector.  It  is  what  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  want  to  do:  preserve  confidence,  inspire 
confidence, remain a solid anchor of confidence. ”  
Can we conclude that you still fear a double-dip? 
“I said that we have to be prepared for a bumpy road ahead. We are in a situation where 
uncertainty  remains:  we  could  have,  quarter  on  quarter,  at  times,  positive  figures,  without 
excluding at times negative figures”. 
Now the G20 will replace the G8. Which is your opinion? 
“I think it is important that we have a progressive improvement in the global governance. The 
G20 should be given credit for being the place where global governance could be effective. 
The G20 is called to be essential, appropriately enlightened by the IMF, because we need to 
have both as good analytical presentations and diagnosis and the peer pressure of the G20. 
The G20 has to address the issues of the domestic large imbalances between savings and 
investments,  and  of  the  set  of  unsustainable  external  imbalances.  We  know  that  these 
imbalances have been at the roots of the present difficulties. If we don’t correct them, we’ll 
have the recipe for the next major crisis. And this of course would be totally unacceptable.” 
Could it be dangerous for the recovery, if governments would withdraw their support 
to the economy?  
“One thing is sure. When time comes, systemic economies are not credible in going back to 
sustainable fiscal  policy  in  the  mid to  long  run.  We  won’t have  the  recovery  which  we  are 
hoping for. Because Governments would not inspire confidence to households and corporate 
business. It is the evaporation of confidence that created this dramatic turmoil. Now we have 
to do everything to rebuild confidence.” 
When is the timing for a fiscal exit strategy? 
BIS Review 116/2009 
 1
“The  position  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  is  that  the  fiscal  adjustment  process 
should  start,  in  any  case,  not  later  than  the  economic  recovery  and  that  the  consolidated 
effort  should  be  stepped  up  in  2011.  This  is  the  position  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole. 
Naturally some countries have more problems than others and they have to take into account 
their particular situation.”  
In Germany and Italy there is a debate for cutting taxes – would it be a right way to 
support growth?  
“The rule which is the best in terms of running a fiscal policy is: first, to be careful that the 
level  of  deficits  in  the  mid-long  term  is  in  line  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact;  that  the 
fiscal strategy is sustainable and inspire confidence. Second: to go to this position you need 
to reduce public expenditure. And third, if it is not enough, you have to increase taxes. Only 
in the case your reduction of spending is  big enough to give you additional room you can 
embark on tax reductions. There is no other way to proceed. I’m not responding for Italy, or 
for a particular country, it is simple arithmetic.”  
How can a high ratio of debt be reduced, especially in countries with low growth, like 
Italy? 
“Italy  is  not  the  only  country  with  a  high  ratio.  The  reduction  of  the  debt  is  a  matter  of 
appropriate decisions. It is true that, when global growth is relatively low, it make things more 
complicated. But a high level of national debt is hampering growth. So, regaining control of 
the  debt  dynamics  and  reducing  the  debt  outstanding  as  a  proportion  of  GDP  is  good  for 
growth and foster medium- and long-term prosperity.”  
The Governing Council will be in Venice in ten days. Can you suggest how Italy can 
regain its diminished competitiveness? 
“My  responsibility  –  the  responsibility  of  the  Executive  Board  together  with  Lorenzo  Bini 
Smaghi and Governing Council together with Mario Draghi - is for the euro area as a whole, 
for our 330 million fellow citizens. For the Italian diagnosis I rely very much on the analysis of 
Banca d’Italia and of Mario Draghi. I will say that for all countries permanent monitoring of the 
competitiveness  indicators  is  absolutely  of  the  essence.  And  that  includes  in  particular  a 
close monitoring of the unit labour costs and all appropriate efforts to develop and reinforce 
creativity, innovation and entrepreneurial spirit in the economy as a whole.” 
Which assets does Italy have?  
“I  think  that  the  potential  of  Italy  is  considerable,  because  it  possesses  a  human  resource 
which  is  of  exceptional  quality.  The  country  has  an  entrepreneurial  spirit  which  is  quasi 
unique in the euro area, together with a capacity – including at very small enterprise level - to 
innovate which you don’t see in all countries. I trust that Italy as an economy has  a lot of 
assets,  which  suggest,  that  its  growth  potential  should  be  higher  than  what  has  been 
observed in the past years.” 
And which are the priorities? 
“Amongst  many  others  an  attentive  monitoring  of  the  unit  labour  costs  is  essential  which 
suggests  taking  into  account  the  productivity  progress  when  you  are  augmenting  salaries. 
Italy has in particular to regain competitiveness in comparison with the average of the euro 
area. This is very important.”  
Why was the banking system in some European countries, like Italy and France, more 
resilient than in others? 
“Several countries had resilient banking systems, it is not necessary to single out Italy and 
France. There are a number of combinations of factors, which might have played a role. The 
structure  of  the  banking  sector,  the  importance  of  retail  banking  are  probably  important 
factors  in  this  resilience  together  with  the  quality  of  banking  surveillance  by  the  central 
banks.”  
2 
 BIS Review 116/2009
Some experts say that structural reforms cannot be introduced in this moment of the 
crisis. What do you think about that? 
“I  do  not  think  it  is  true.  Structural  reforms  are  more  important  than  ever.  Part  of  the 
insufficient  resilience  of  the  various  economies  in  the  world  as  well  as  in  the  euro  area  is 
probably due to the insufficient structural reforms made in the past. It is also clear that the big 
challenges  that  we  have  for  the  future  in  term  of  fiscal  policies  will  be  solved  only  if  we 
embark in structural reforms, because in a large number of domains it would be the only way 
to reduce public spending.”  
Is  the  window  of  opportunity  for  introducing  reforms  of  the  financial  system 
shrinking? 
“With  the  improvement  observed  in  the  financial  markets  some  institutions  and  market 
participants might think that there is no need for the reforms designed at global level. It would 
be plain wrong to think that. The improvements observed are observed in particular because 
there have been bold decisions taken by central banks and by governments. They could not 
be repeated several times! We have to be fully aware of that. More than ever it is extremely 
important to introduce the necessary reforms in the financial system, in order to strengthen 
its resilience and avoid excessive booms and busts.” 
Is there a possibility, that increasing capital ratios of banks after the recovery could 
induce financial institutions to reduce lending in advance, slowing down growth? 
“We have to find out at a global level the appropriate balance between two considerations: in 
the  long  run  we  need  capital  requirements  that  are  fully  taking  into  account  the  long-term 
risks  that  exist  in  the  financial  sphere.  At  the  same  time,  today  we  have  to  cope  with  an 
exceptional  crisis  situation  and  we  have  to  be  careful  not  to  aggravate  this  situation  by 
encouraging a deleveraging process which is adverse from the stand point of the recovery.” 
Did the Basel Committee and the FSB terms of reference found a balance between the 
long-term and the short-term consideration? 
“Yes.  I  think  we  captured  this  correct  balance  when  we  said,  after  the  meeting  of  the 
governance body of the Basel Committee, on September 7th that we were requiring banks to 
move expeditiously to raise the level and quality of their capital to the new standards (which 
will be calibrated by end 2010) but in a manner that promotes the stability of national banking 
systems  and  the  broader  economy.  That  being  said  there  are  today  ways  for  banks  in 
Europe that need more capital to get it. For instance the recapitalisation option that has been 
set up by Governments is only utilised at the level of 55 %. The Governing Council calls on 
banks  to  take  appropriate  measures,  where  necessary,  to  strengthen  further  their  capital 
bases and take full advantage of Government measures to support the financial sector.” 
Are you satisfied with the improvement going on? 
“It is a process which goes on, but that we strongly encourage.” 
“The  ECB  has  financed  the  banks  with  around  600  billion  euro.  But  they  are  not 
forwarding the funds to the real economy. What can be done to encourage lending?  
“We are practising, in particular, moral suasion with banks, telling them that what the ECB is 
doing  is  not  for  the  sake  of  being  kind,  but  because  we  need  them  to  finance  the  real 
economy.  It  is  also  true,  that  the  demand  for  new  credit  is  more  modest  than  before  the 
crisis, because of the recession. So when we are asking the mid-sized enterprises whether 
they had a positive response from banks to their request for new finance, a large majority, 
77%, are responding yes whilst a minority of 12 % said no.” 
In which measure the present monetary policy, very expansionary on both sides of the 
Atlantic, is supporting the creation of a new bubble in the financial markets? 
“You  know  to  which  extent  we  are,  in  the  ECB,  in  the  Eurosystem  attentive  to  do  what  is 
necessary at any time to ensure price stability in the medium- and long-term, in line with our 
BIS Review 116/2009 
 3
definition - below 2 %, but close to 2% -. I trust that we are credible in this promise to be 
faithful  to  our  mandate  and  that  is  the  reason  why  we  are  solidly  anchoring  inflation 
expectations. And I take it that we are united in purpose – in delivering credibly price stability 
– on both sides of the Atlantic as well as on both sides of the Channel.” 
Which  risks  do  you  see  for  the  exit  strategy,  especially  if  it  is  not  going  to  be 
coordinated between both sides of the Atlantic? Is there a risk that the dollar could 
suffer of this? 
“As I just said we are united within the community of central banks: we want to deliver price 
stability. We don’t take the same decisions, because we are in different situations, dealing 
with  different  economies,  facing  different  shocks,  different  levels  of  flexibility,  different 
structures. As regards the floating currencies, I consider very important for the stability of the 
exchange  rates  and  the  prosperity  of  the  global  economy  that  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke, 
Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner and President Obama underline “that a strong dollar is in 
the interest of the US”. I trust that it is not only true but that it is also very important for the 
global economic stability.”  
Which limitation to boni do you favour? 
“I’m  in  agreement  with  the  FSB  terms  of  reference  which  seems  to  me  very  appropriate. 
Seen  from  a  central  bank  perspective,  what  is  decisive  is  that  the  boni  should  not  create 
incentives for taking absurdly high levels of risks that would materialise in a crisis of the type 
we  are  experiencing.  The  main  problem,  seen  from  our  perspective  is  to  be  sure  that  the 
structure of remunerations is conducting to sound and wise decisions justified in the medium 
and long-term.” 
Are  you  satisfied  with  the  Commission’s  proposal  for  the  European  surveillance 
system?  
“The  Commission  has  now  presented  its  proposals  to  the  Council,  which  is  under  the 
Swedish Presidency. As regards the ECB and its General Council we stand ready to do all 
what  we  can  for  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  to  fulfil  its  very  important  systemic 
responsibilities in the best fashion possible to the service of the European financial stability.”  
Are you satisfied with the outcome of the G20 meeting in Pittsburgh?  
“As this stage I would only make three short observations:  
First, we central banks appreciated that it is said that “a sense of normalcy should not lead to 
complacency.” 
Second, I noted that it is also in the preamble that “we will prepare our exit strategies and, 
when  the  time  is  right,  withdraw  our  extraordinary  policy  support  (....),  maintaining  a 
commitment to fiscal responsibility.” 
Third,  it  is  particularly  important  that  the  G20  is  designed  to  be  the  premier  forum  for 
international economic cooperation; that the IMF is asked to play a key role in the multilateral 
surveillance, that the Financial Stability Board includes major systemic economies, and that 
the  communiqué  welcomes  the  key  measures  agreed  by  the  oversight  body  of  the  Basel 
Committee.”  
4 
 BIS Review 116/2009
