Petar Goshev: Macedonia’s prudent monetary and fiscal policy 
Speech by Mr Petar Goshev, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, at 
the press conference, Skopje, 26 March 2009. 
 I. 
II. 
For  longer  than  one  decade  now,  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia 
has  been  successfully  implementing  the  strategy  of  retaining  the  stable  foreign 
exchange rate of the denar, through a successful mix of prudent monetary and fiscal 
policy. The choice for this strategy is not incidental. Macedonia is a small, fully open 
economy  and  extremely  import-export  dependant  and  unfortunately  highly  euroized 
country.  Historically,  it  had  suffered  high  inflationary  as  well  as  hiperinflationary 
schocks, which are deeply curved in people’s memory. For such characteristics of the 
economy and with such negative experiences, the stable foreign exchange rate of the 
denar  has  a  tremendous  importance  for  the  price  stability  and  for  the  positive 
expectations of the economic agents related to macroeconomic environment. Since 
none of the stated characteristics of our economy has not been changed, we in the 
National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia deeply believe that following up with the 
existing monetary strategy – keeping the stable exchange rate of the denar, as the 
main anchor in the economy – should continue. This means, i.e. let me repeat once 
again,  that we  continue  to  defend  the  stability of  the  foreign  exchange  rate  with  all 
instruments and measures available as of the monetary institution.  
In accordance with this strategy, during the past period, i.e. starting at end-2007 and 
during the whole of 2008, being concerned first of all because of the growing inflation 
but also of the growing deficit of our economy to the rest of the world, we undertook a 
number of measures for tightening the monetary policy. However, in the meantime, 
the world crisis has deepened. In the fourth quarter of 2008 it started delivering to us 
high „paying invoices”. The demand as well as the prices for our main export products 
dropped  dramatically  .  This  continues  even  stronger  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  this 
year.  At  the  same  time  domestic  aggregate  demand  (stimulated  by  the  wage  and 
pension  growth,  higher  budget  consumption  and  the  high  credit  growth)  was  not 
appropriately  and  timely  accommodated  in  accordance  with  the  foundations  of  the 
economy.  The  trade  as  well  as  the  current  account  deficit  were  growing,  without 
being followed by the appropriate inflows in both, the capital and the financial account 
in  the  balance  of  payment.  Practically,  imbalances  and  pressures  on  the  foreign 
exchange market were growing and so continue to grow thus being increased by the 
not that seldom carelessness or by, I even don’t exactly know what, other reasons, in 
creating  numerous  well  founded  negative  expectations  related  to  the  foreign 
exchange rate stability. Because of all that, in order to maintain the equilibrium in the 
foreign  exchange  market  in  the  last  quarter  of  2008  the  foreign  exchange 
interventions of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, through net sales of 
foreign  exchange,  amounted 
the  period 
January 01-March  20,  2009,  they  amounted  to  Euro  181.0  mill.  also  on  net  basis. 
This is what actually enabled maintaining the existing foreign exchange rate level. As 
unfavorable  developments  in  foreign  trade  continue  and  happen  within  high 
uncertainties  for  future  capital  inflows  and  net  private  transfers,  as  well  as  under 
psychological pressures over the citizens that direct them towards swapping national 
into foreign currency, we are of an opinion that further change in the monetary policy 
of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia is needed. Namely, although the 
registered inflationary drop, when observing just this indicator, indicates lower risks, 
still the pressures over the foreign exchange rate (as an intermediate objective of the 
monetary  policy)  and  the  growing  risks  of  further  widening  of  external  imbalances, 
clearly seek from us to increase the restrictiveness of the monetary policy. For these 
to  Euro  162.3  million  while 
for 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 1
reasons,  we  decided  to  raise  the  interest  rate  on  the  Central  Bank  bills  by  2 
percentage points that is becoming effective from the next auction, i.e. instead of 7 
percent into rate of 9 percent.  
Broader explanation of the reasons for passing this decision is the following: 
1)  
Negative effects of the world crisis over the world economy continue to grow. 
The latest IMF projections point out that the world growth will switch towards 
the negative zone thus in 2009 world’s GDP will drop between -0.5 and -1.0 
percent. This will represent the first negative GDP growth rate within last 60 
years. The reduction of the world’s GDP below the potential, together with the 
downward trends of food and energy prices, by themselves not only eliminate 
the inflationary pressures, but also create deflationary risks, especially in the 
developed  economies. Unfortunately,  continuous  revisions of  the  projections 
of the world‘s growth are further towards deeper recession. 
In  the  less  developed  economies,  including  ours,  the  external  sector  risks 
appear as most essential, where the large reduction of the external demand as 
well  as  the  lower  inflows  and/or  larger  net  foreign  capital  outflows  create 
serious pressures over the value of national currencies. 
2)  
Macedonian economy, as we stated, is under a strong influence by the global 
macroeconomic developments. As almost everywhere in the world in our case 
as well the inflationary pressures fade and the economic growth decelerates 
because  of  the  reduced  external  demand,  contracted  and  more  expensive 
financing  sources  and  increased  negative  expectations  of  economic  agents. 
The external sector imposes itself as a main problem of our macroeconomic 
policy.  It  is  way  too  vulnerable,  due  to  high  presence  of  exports  in  sectors 
exposed  to  changes  in  world  prices  and  world  demand  as  well  as  due  to 
significant  reliance  on  private  transfers  as  source  for  financing  the  trade 
deficit.  Additional  problem  is  the  approach  to  external  financing.  It  is  less 
available. Expenses increased. Investors have either lost their capital or they 
are waiting for better and less risky period. Under such developments in the 
current  and  capital  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  as  well  as  due  to 
generated unfavorable expectations of the economic agents the pressures in 
the foreign exchange markets become bigger.  
The fall in the external demand caused reduced activity among export-oriented 
industrial sector in the Macedonian economy. The volume of the industrial output 
in the last quarter of 2008 registered an annual drop of 7.6 percent, which intensified 
during January 2009, thus reaching 16.7 percent. Tightened conditions for credit 
as well as pesimistic expectations for the length of the recession reflect over 
domestic demand. Initial signs of a deceleration of household consumption growth 
are registered in trade, in which during q4, 2008 the amount of turnover registered 
dropped  by  5.1  percent.  In  circumstances  of  private  sector  refraining  from 
investments,  the  expectations  are  looking  towards  deceleration  of  the  investment 
activity.  In  any  case,  the  risks  for  the  current  projection  of  the  economic  growth 
definitely are in direction of the realization of growth significantly lower then projected, 
and maybe even that is a high optimism. In conditions of reduced import prices, 
the inflation continues to slow down, so that the average as well as the annual 
inflation rate for February equaled 1.2 and 0.7 percent, respectively. Inflationary 
developments  within  the  first  two  months  of  this  year  show  that  inflationary 
path for this period is under the projected one. Such deviations, to a large extent 
may be explained with the fast decline of oil prices on world markets and with even 
faster  deceleration  of  food  prices.  In  conditions  of  risks  for  a  possible  bigger  then 
expected  deceleration  of  domestic  demand,  as  well  as  due  to  higher  reduction  of 
BIS Review 60/2009
III. 
  2 
 import  prices,  risks  about  the  projected  inflation  are  towards  realizing  lower  then 
projected level of inflation.  
Figure 1 Inflation (in %) 
 3)  
  In  the  external  sector  during  2008  the  highest  ever  current  account 
deficit of 12.7 percent of GDP was realized, which is a significatn increase 
(by  5.5  percentage  points)  compared  to  the  previous  year,  and  to  a  large 
extent it is explained by the trade deficit worsening and reduced net inflows 
from private transfers. Yet, such a gap, during the most of the year has not 
created  strong  pressures 
foreign  exchange  market 
interventions, having in mind that in a significant part it was financed by direct 
investments, as well as through foreign assets of domestic banks. Hence, for 
the whole of 2008 the reduction of foreign reserves was moderate and mostly 
a  reflection  of  developments  in  q4,  (at  worsened  export  performance, 
increased  psychological  influence  due  to  world  crisis  and  more  significant 
outflow of dividend payout abroad). However, the projections for the reduced 
external  demand  and  the  uncertainties  about  the  volume  of  2009  capital 
inflows, announce widenning of the gap between the demand and supply of 
foreign exchange in the foreign exchange market. 
towards  NBRM 
Figure 2 Foreign Reserves (change compared to previous quarter, in millions of 
euros)* 
 
BIS Review 60/2009 
  3
*The change in q4, 2008 includes the dividend payout of one large company to its foreign shareholder.  
Figure 3 
 
 4)  
 Developments in q1, 2009 show higher then expected worsening of the 
trends  in  the  external  sector.  This  corresponds  to  the  continuous 
revisions of the projections of global developments, and is showing up 
through the further reduction of the gross foreign reserves. What exactly 
do  the  available  data  for  the  external  sector  show?  First,  in  the  domain  of 
foreign  trade,  during  the  first  two  months  of  the  current  year  exports  and 
imports  registered  significant  annual  reduction  of  36.8  percent  and  16.6 
percent, respectively. The reduction of the pressure on the trade deficit with 
the reduction of oil prices was offset through the drop in external demand, so 
although the deficit is within the expected range, so far still there is a risk of a 
higher then estimated trade deficit. Second, latest data show that net private 
transfers are lower then projected in conditions of growing demand for foreign 
exchange on the currency exchange market and of changes in the currency 
structure  of  the  deposit  potential.  Third,  certain  indicative  categories  (stock 
exchange data on foreign investors' activities, developments of the net foreign 
assets  of  banks)  indicate  high  probability  of  obtaining  lower  then  expected 
capital inflows, which is consistent with more of global limitations on external 
financing.  
Figure 4 Dynamics of exports and imports of goods (annual changes) 
 
 4 
  BIS Review 60/2009
IV. 
V. 
  Presented  trends  from  our  economy  undoubtfully  confirm  and  justify  the  additional 
reaction of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia. As I stated, the reaction 
is  towards  the  further  tightening  of  the  monetary  policy.  The  characteristics  of  our 
economy  and  of  the  monetary  strategy  deriving  from  it,  whose  central  objective  is 
maintaining  the  foreign  exchange  stability,  make  the  requests  for  undertaking  anti-
crisis measures similar to those of the developed countries, inappropriate and with no 
foundation.  Therefore,  we  constantly  repeat.  The  devaluation  of  the  denar  would 
cause additional distortions in our economy, because of the following:  
- 
the  structure  of  trade  of  the  Macedonian  economy  characterises  with  high 
reliance  of  the  export  on  the  import  of  raw  materials  and  manufacturing 
supplies,  low  representation  of  import  goods  that  could  be  substituted  with 
domestic products (machines and other equipment), weak price ellasticity of 
certain type of import demand (especially energy products), due to which the 
devaluation  of  the  domestic  currency  will  not  reduce  the  problem  of  the 
structural trade deficit; 
On  the  other  hand,  the  negative  implications,  that  can  be  seen  through  the 
transmission effects of the devaluation of domestic currency on prices, further 
psychological pressures and the opening up of a new cycle of expectations for 
an  additional  depreciation  of  the  value  of  the  currency,  will  certainly  appear 
and they will represent a potential threat for the price stability; 
Additional  unfavorable  element  is  the  currency  mismatch,  i.e.  the  net 
indebtedness of domestic economy abroad, which clearly implies substantial 
negative effects from any possible depreciation of the domestic currency. 
 
Therefore, the reaction of the monetary policy, by increasing the interest rate, is 
directed  towards  stabilization  of  the  foreign  exchange  market,  further 
maintenance of the foreign reserves at adequate level and continuation of the 
policy of stable foreign exchange rate.  Obviously, the succesfull maintenance of 
the  external  balance  imposes  the  necessity  of  appropriate  and  well  coordinated 
measures by all the carriers of the macroeconomic policies. In this regard, the fiscal 
policy  adjustments  are  important,  also  to  obtain  external  financing  to  support  the 
balance  of  payments.  The  NBRM,  with  the  decision  made  today,  for  interest  rate 
increase on the CB bills, is making an additional step towards reducing the external 
imbalance,  and  for  achieving  the  interim  and  final  objective  of  the  monetary  policy, 
remaining prepared to futher undertake additional measures, if necessary. 
In  the  end,  one  more  information.  Today,  the  Council  of  the  National  Bank  of  the 
Republic  of  Macedonia  held  its  3rd  session  this  year.  Among  other  issues,  on  this 
session, the Council has adopted the 2008 Annual Report of the National Bank of the 
Republic of Macedonia; the 2008 Annual Report on Managing Foreign Reserves; the 
2008 Internal Audit Report. All these documents shall be available on our web site in 
the following days. 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 5
