John Murray: When the unconventional becomes conventional – 
monetary policy in extraordinary times 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Global 
Interdependence Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19 May 2009.  
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s website.  
 Good afternoon. The financial turbulence that began in the U.S. subprime-mortgage market 
in  August  2007  reached  maximum  intensity  towards  the  end  of  2008,  and  enveloped  the 
entire global economy. Strains that had previously been concentrated in a few major financial 
centers  turned  into  a  full-blown  crisis,  affecting  both  industrial  and  emerging-market 
economies through trade, financial, and confidence channels. 
Policy-makers reacted quickly, applying unprecedented monetary and fiscal stimulus as the 
gravity of the situation became clear. For central banks, this involved pushing target interest 
rates to historic lows and providing emergency liquidity on an extraordinary scale. Although a 
number  of  "green  shoots"  have  recently  appeared  and  the  global  economy  is  no  longer 
deteriorating  at  an  accelerating  rate,  we  remain  in  the  midst  of  the  deepest  and  most 
synchronous contraction of the postwar period.  
Many central banks have tested the limits of their traditional monetary policy instruments and 
have  turned  to  so-called  "unconventional"  measures.  Others  are  giving  unconventional 
measures serious consideration. These instruments are unfamiliar and there is a great deal 
of  confusion  over  exactly  what  they  are  and  how  they  work.  Some  observers  believe  that 
they will be largely ineffective, making a deflationary spiral inevitable. Others worry that they 
will be too effective, or will be left in place too long, leading to an inflationary spiral. Either 
way, unconventional monetary policy instruments are regarded by many as a decidedly risky 
option. 
The  main  purpose  of  my  presentation  today  is  to  address  these  misconceptions  and  to 
alleviate  some  of 
the  use  of 
unconventional  monetary  policies.  First,  I  will  explain  what  central  banks  mean  when  they 
refer  to  unconventional  measures,  and  how  these  measures  differ  from  conventional 
monetary policy measures. Second, I will review the principles that have been developed to 
help guide the use of such instruments, if it is deemed necessary. Finally, I will examine their 
potential effectiveness in the light of recent experience.  
While it's too early to draw strong conclusions, the experience to date with unconventional 
measures  has  been  largely  positive.  I'll  give  some  examples  to  support  my  upbeat 
assessment later in these remarks. But I'll begin with a few comments about recent economic 
developments, and the remedial policy actions that have been undertaken.  
the  unnecessary  concerns 
that  have  arisen  about 
Recent economic developments 
A G-7 colleague has cleverly summarized the experience many of us are living these days as 
"redesigning an airplane while flying it." Sometimes it may feel this way; however, this does 
not do justice to the coherent policy frameworks and careful planning that help guide many of 
the policy measures that we are implementing. The unprecedented economic times in which 
we live and work have forced us to be increasingly creative. Every major industrial country is 
now  in  recession,  as  are  many  emerging-market  economies.  Those  EMEs  that  are  still 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 1
growing have witnessed a marked deceleration in real economic activity, and any hopes of 
"decoupling"  have  long  since  disappeared.  Concerns  about  stagflation,  which  dominated 
policy  debates  as  recently  as  eight  months  ago,  have  largely  dissipated,  replaced  by 
concerns  of  deflation.  Headline  inflation  in  advanced  economies  has  fallen  dramatically, 
reflecting the collapse in commodity prices and widening output gaps, and is expected to dip 
briefly below zero in many countries. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  despite  the  dire  news,  a  recovery  is  still  in  prospect,  aided  by 
aggressive policy actions. The Bank of Canada recently published its spring Monetary Policy 
Report,  where  we  outlined  our  views  on  current  economic  conditions  and  the  near-term 
outlook. In a special annex to the Report, we also presented a framework for unconventional 
monetary policy and how this could be applied, if necessary.  
These are exceptional and unsettling times; anything that can be done to reduce uncertainty 
and  instill  confidence  is  particularly  welcome.  It  was  with  this  in  mind  that  the  Bank  of 
Canada decided to add the special annex to its last Report. Our framework for conventional 
monetary  policy,  based  on  a  flexible  exchange  rate,  an  explicit  inflation  target,  and  clear 
accountability has served us well, and will continue to guide our future actions. The annex 
builds  on  this  foundation,  providing  a  clear  contingency  plan  for  unconventional  measures 
and for dealing with some extraordinary challenges.  
Monetary and fiscal policy responses 
Policy-makers  in  Canada,  the  United  States,  and  elsewhere  have  moved  with  exceptional 
speed and determination to support financial markets, restore growth, and re-equilibrate the 
real  economy.  Authorities  have  provided  extraordinary  assistance  to  the  financial  sector in 
the  form  of  emergency  liquidity,  balance  sheet  guarantees,  asset  purchases,  and 
recapitalization as appropriate. Ambitious and concerted discretionary fiscal measures have 
also  been  initiated  and,  together  with  automatic  fiscal  stabilizers,  will  help  lift  aggregate 
demand. 
Equally impressive and timely action has been undertaken by monetary authorities through 
aggressive cuts to policy interest rates (see Chart 1) These short-term rates are now close to 
zero – the lowest level that nominal interest rates can go. Attempts to push nominal rates 
persistently  below  zero  are  bound  to  be  ineffective,  since  investors  always  have  the 
alternative of converting their securities into cash. Indeed, the effective lower bound (ELB) for 
policy interest rates, as I shall explain in a minute, is likely to lie somewhat above zero. This 
suggests that most major central banks have already reached the maximum dosage of their 
conventional monetary policy medicine. This doesn't mean, however, that central banks are 
out of ammunition. 
Conventional monetary policy and the effective lower bound 
In more conventional times – that is, when banks and financial markets are fully operational – 
the process of monetary policy transmission follows a reasonably direct and well-understood 
path.  The  first  step  involves  a  careful  monitoring  and  forecasting  of  economic  activity  and 
inflation.  Second,  the  central  bank  must  decide  whether  more  or  less  macroeconomic 
stimulus is needed. For many central banks, this is guided by an explicit (or implicit) inflation 
target, since keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable is generally accepted as the best 
contribution that a central bank can make to the economic well-being of its nation's citizens.1 
The value of having such a clear and credible target will be explored in more detail a little 
later in these remarks.  
                                                 
1   The Bank of Canada was one of the first to adopt explicit targets and aims to keep inflation at 2 per cent. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2009
Third, if action is necessary, the central bank will either lower or raise its target interest rate, 
depending on the circumstances. From there, the monetary impulse is transmitted to other 
financial instruments with longer maturities, including the interest rates charged by banks on 
loans. While few transactions are actually conducted at the target rate, the interest rates that 
they  influence  further  out  the  yield  curve  do  have  a  material  effect  on  the  borrowing  and 
lending decisions of households and businesses. 
Once the target interest rate approaches zero, conventional monetary policy has gone just 
about as far as it can go. Nominal interest rates, as noted earlier, cannot fall below zero, and 
most central banks would aim to stop slightly above this level, leaving a small positive margin 
or buffer. Pushing policy rates too low can lead to problems in financial markets and restrict 
the flow of credit at the very time central banks are trying to restore it.  
For these and other reasons, policy-makers are often reluctant to drop their target rate much 
below 25 or 50 basis points, the effective lower bound or ELB for many central banks. 
Unconventional monetary policy instruments 
Once  the  ELB  has  been  reached, monetary  policy  can  continue  to  ease,  but  other  means 
must  be  found  to  increase  the  flow  of  credit  and  to  lower  interest  rates  out  the  maturity 
spectrum. Three basic mechanisms have been identified for this purpose. 
1.   Conditional statements about the future path of policy rates 
The  first  mechanism  is  a  conditional  commitment  regarding  the  future  path  of  the  policy 
interest rate. In normal times, this type of interest rate guidance is usually kept to a minimum 
or expressed in very general terms. In extraordinary times – such as we now face – it may be 
necessary to be more explicit and make a clear conditional commitment to keep the target 
overnight rate low for an extended period. Using this approach, central banks can influence 
interest  rates  well  out  the  yield  curve,  because  long-term  rates  are  largely  a  reflection  of 
expected  future  short  rates.  While  it  may  not  be  possible  to  lower  the  overnight  rate  any 
further, expectations at longer maturities can still be shaped by conditionally committing to 
keep the overnight rate low.  
For  this  mechanism  to  work,  the  conditional  commitment  must  be  credible,  and  inflation 
expectations  must  remain  well  anchored.  Canada's  positive  experience  over  the  past  18 
years  with  an  inflation  targeting  framework  is  especially  helpful  in  this  regard.  Inflation 
targeting  has  reduced  the  risk  of  deflationary  expectations,  permitted  aggressive  policy 
action  in  response  to  the  current  crisis,  and  will  no  doubt  make  it  easier  to  exit  from  any 
unconventional policies that are introduced. 
Quantitative easing 
2.  
The  second  unconventional  mechanism  is  quantitative  easing.  It  is  sometimes  referred  to 
pejoratively,  and  mistakenly,  as  "printing  money."  Quantitative  easing  occurs  whenever  a 
central  bank  purchases  private  or  public  sector  securities  by  expanding  its  reserve  base. 
These purchases directly affect the yields of the securities that are bought, putting downward 
pressure  on  their  interest  rates  and  upward  pressure  on  their  prices.  They  also  inject 
additional  central  bank  reserves  into  the  financial  system,  which  deposit-taking  institutions 
can use to generate additional loans.  
All  quantitative  easing  is,  by  definition,  "unsterilized."  Although  this  is  correctly  viewed  as 
unconventional,  it  closely  resembles  the  way  monetary  policy  is  described  in  most 
undergraduate  textbooks,  and  is  broadly  similar  to  how  it  was  conducted  in  the  heyday  of 
monetarism. 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 3
Credit easing 
3. 
Credit  easing  is  the  third  mechanism,  and  is  a  term  reserved  exclusively  for  central  bank 
purchases of private sector assets in segments of the market where dislocations and credit 
constraints appear to be most severe. It is designed to ease credit conditions by stimulating 
more active trade in certain assets and through a process of portfolio substitution.  
Sterilized purchases of private sector assets can be effected either by selling existing assets 
on the central bank's balance sheet – essentially swapping "good" assets for "bad" – or by 
creating  additional  central  bank  reserves  and  then  sterilizing,  or  mopping  up,  the  extra 
reserves  by  selling  new  government  securities.2  Credit  easing  can  also  be  combined  with 
quantitative easing, in which case the purchase of private assets will remain unsterilized and 
the reserve base will expand. 
Four guiding principles 
Although the three unconventional monetary policy instruments I have just described have 
been  studied  extensively,  real-world  experience  with  them  in  recent  times  is  limited.  Any 
decision  to  use  them  necessarily  involves  some  risk  and  uncertainty.  To  deal  with  these 
challenges, the Bank of Canada has identified four key principles that would guide its actions 
whenever 
these  unconventional  measures  are  employed.  These  principles  can  be 
summarized in four words: focus, impact, neutrality, and prudence. 
Focus 
1.  
Any  unconventional  action  initiated  by  the  Bank  must  have  as  its  primary  objective  the 
achievement and maintenance of the Bank's 2 per cent inflation target. Restoring the normal 
functioning of financial markets and the flow of credit would be important considerations, but 
only to the extent that they help to achieve the ultimate objective.  
Impact 
2.  
Decisions regarding which unconventional instruments to use, and when, would depend on 
current and prospective economic conditions, as opposed to a mechanical game plan. In the 
case of credit easing, consideration would be given to the severity of the market failure, the 
ability of the Bank to correct it, and its importance for the functioning of the real economy. 
Financial markets that were under the most extreme pressure would not necessarily be given 
priority. The impact on output and inflation would be the determining factor. 
Neutrality 
3.  
Unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  would  also  be  implemented  in  a  manner  that 
minimized  the  chances  of  distorting  other  markets  or  producing  unintended  consequences 
elsewhere.  This  would  imply  operating  in  as  broad  a  market  segment  as  possible  and 
avoiding targeted assistance to specific industries or firms.3  
                                                 
2  
It is important to note that the latter would involve a net expansion of the central bank's balance sheet, but 
without  any  increase  in  reserves.  In  contrast,  quantitative  easing  involves  expanding  the  reserve  base 
available  to  the  private  sector.  Unfortunately,  many  observers  mistakenly  assume  that  any  increase  in  a 
central bank's balance sheet represents quantitative easing. 
3   Targeted assistance might be appropriate for achieving other social and economic objectives but is properly 
viewed as the purview of elected governments as opposed to central banks. 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2009
Prudence 
4.  
The fourth principle – prudence – can be exercised in several ways. One is to minimize the 
risks that unconventional policies might pose for the central bank's balance sheet and hence, 
taxpayers' pockets. Credit and quantitative easing can subject a central bank to market risk, 
especially  if  it  is  holding  long-term  instruments  and  interest  rates  begin  to  rise  more  than 
expected. Ironically, this rise could be a sign that the unconventional policies were working.4 
Credit easing could also subject a central bank to credit risk, since it involves the purchase of 
less-creditworthy  instruments.  Some  of  these  risks  can  be  mitigated  through  careful 
screening, the imposition of a minimum credit rating, and dealing in shorter-term instruments. 
But this will not always be possible if the central bank wants to achieve a particular effect. 
Prudence of a slightly different sort is also needed to ensure the unconventional measures 
that have been put in place can be reversed or undone without undue market disruption or 
threat to the central bank's macro objectives. Some short-term and short-dated assets can 
easily  roll  off  the  central  bank's  balance  sheet  as  they  mature.  Longer-term  assets,  in 
contrast, might have to be sold off slowly or held to maturity.5  
Some useful indicators 
Central banks monitor a number of economic and financial indicators in the normal course of 
events;  but  in  uncertain  times,  the  need  for  a  diversified  and  vigilant  approach  is  even 
greater.  Changes  in  interest  rate  levels  and  spreads  before  and  after  any  unconventional 
measure has been introduced can serve as a rough barometer of its impact – a sort of crude 
event  analysis.  Anecdotal  information  drawn  from  surveys  of  businesses,  households,  and 
financial institutions can also help central banks monitor changes in the pricing, terms and 
conditions of debt financing and borrowing. The surveys of senior loan officers conducted in 
most advanced economies are examples of this. 
The growth of various credit and money aggregates can also be used as a rough guide. Of 
course,  since  movements  in  credit  and  money  can  be  driven  by  either  demand  or  supply 
factors, it won't always be clear which way the real financial linkages are running. Moreover, 
relationships  between  money,  credit,  and  the  real  economy  are  seldom  stable,  even  in 
tranquil times. In periods of high volatility and very low interest rates, the instability becomes 
even more extreme. As a result, price and interest rate measures are likely to prove more 
reliable. 
Many central banks have constructed summary measures to judge the ease or tightness of 
financial conditions in their markets. These financial conditions indices (FCIs) are empirically 
based and include a number of different indicators, each weighted by its estimated impact on 
GDP  growth.  Some  representative  indices  for  Canada  and  other  countries  are  shown  in 
Charts 2 and 3. Although one shouldn't assign too much importance to a particular FCI level, 
large changes in an FCI probably indicate a significant easing or tightening. 
At the Bank of Canada, we have brought all of our credit measures together on a single web 
page.  This  collection,  which  we  have  dubbed  our  Credit  Dashboard,  can  be  viewed  at: 
http://credit.bank-banque-canada.ca/index.php/about.  
                                                 
4   As financial markets stabilize, interest rates out the yield curve (particularly on government instruments) would 
be expected to return to more normal levels. 
5   Although  it  isn't  a  guiding  principle,  close  coordination  between  the  central  bank  and  the  treasury  is  also 
necessary. This will avoid confusion and help maximize the effectiveness of any measures that are taken to 
ease  credit  conditions  and  stimulate  the  economy.  Just  as  the  boundary  between  monetary  stability  and 
financial  stability  becomes  increasingly  blurred  in  the  midst  of  a  financial  crisis,  so  too  does  the  boundary 
between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  actions.  It  isn't  uncommon  for  both  central  banks  and  governments  to 
initiate credit-easing measures, and it is important that the two work together. 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 5
   Are unconventional monetary policies working? 
The basic question remains: Does unconventional monetary policy actually work? There is 
good reason to believe that if these measures are implemented vigorously and with the clear 
support of authorities, they will be successful. Initial results for the unconventional policies 
recently employed by Canada, Japan, the euro zone, the United Kingdom, and the United 
States  are  certainly  promising.  However,  any  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  these 
measures must necessarily be treated with considerable caution. 
• 
• 
First, these are early days, and we don't have a great deal of evidence to draw on.  
Second, several policies are often initiated simultaneously, so it is difficult to gauge 
the impact of any particular one.  
Third, spillover effects from one market to another could be significant but difficult to 
detect.  
Fourth,  short-run  and  long-run  effects  could  differ  enormously  and  will  depend 
importantly on the initial conditions in the economy and how the policy is applied.  
Fifth, lower spreads and interest rates may reflect weaker demand as opposed to an 
easing in credit conditions. Attempting to draw definite conclusions is therefore risky.  
It is also important to remember that each country's economic and institutional circumstances 
are different and may require a different approach to unconventional monetary policy easing. 
No  single  formula  will  suit  all  cases.  This  is  reflected  in  the  different  strategies  recently 
adopted  by  a  number  of  countries.  Switzerland,  for  example,  lacks  deep  markets  in 
government and private-sector securities, and has decided to conduct quantitative easing via 
unsterilized intervention in the foreign exchange market. Japan's financial markets have not 
been as seriously affected as those in many other advanced countries, but its banks have 
needed significant support, so most of Japan's unconventional efforts in the past year have 
been focused on banks.6 
The  United  Kingdom  has  concentrated  most  of  its  quantitative  easing  in  the  market  for 
government bonds or gilts, since commercial paper and corporate bond issuance are not as 
significant.  The  focus  in  the  United  States  is  quite  different  again.  Greater  emphasis  has 
been put on quantitative easing using private sector assets. 
Canada  has  not  been  subject  to  many  of  the  imbalances  and  vulnerabilities  that  have 
affected other countries, and has had less need for unconventional measures. The Bank of 
Canada  has  not  engaged  in  credit  or  quantitative  easing,  but  has  made  a  conditional 
commitment regarding the future path of the target interest rate. At the Bank of Canada's last 
fixed announcement date we lowered the target overnight rate to 25 basis points – consistent 
with our estimate of the effective lower bound – and committed to keep the rate there until 
the end of the second quarter of 2010, conditional on the inflation outlook. This conditional 
commitment was buttressed by a decision to offer term purchase and resale agreements out 
to a one-year maturity, with set maximum and minimum bid rates.7  
So, how have all of these diverse actions fared? Here is a brief and tentative summary of 
how  the  unconventional  measures adopted  by  Canada  and  other  industrial countries  have 
performed so far. 
                                                 
6   Although  Japan's  financial  system  was  relatively  unaffected  by  the  global  turmoil,  last  fall  conditions  in  its 
commercial paper and corporate bond markets tightened sharply. In that context, the Bank of Japan began to 
buy commercial paper and corporate bonds to support corporate financing. 
7   We  also  announced  that,  in  our  best  judgment,  these  actions  and  the  easing  that  they  implied  would  be 
sufficient  to  return  the  real  economy  to  equilibrium  and  inflation  to  its  2  per  cent  target  by  mid-2011.  No 
quantitative  easing  would,  therefore,  be  necessary  unless  conditions  deteriorated  relative  to  the  Bank's 
projection. 
6 
 BIS Review 61/2009
•  Conditional  commitments  –  Several  countries  have  made  conditional  commitments 
indicating that they are prepared leave their target interest rates at or near the ELB 
for an extended period. All of them appear to have had some effect on market yields, 
at  least  at  the  time  of  the  announcement.  Canada  has  made  the  most  explicit 
commitment of the major industrial countries and has backed its words with actions. 
The  result  has  been  significant  and  lasting,  in  the  form  of  a  10-  to-20-basis-point 
decline in implied yields on government bonds out to one year (see Chart 4). 
•  Quantitative  easing  –  Experience  here  is  more  limited,  but  targeted  unsterilized 
purchases of corporate debt and commercial paper in Japan and the United Kingdom 
appear to have reduced spreads and increased issuance. Unsterilized purchases of 
government securities in the United Kingdom and in the United States led to sharp 
declines for a short time when these programs were first announced, but yields have 
since reversed. Authorities believe that this does not reflect the waning influence of 
the  programs,  but  rather  the  arrival  of  more  positive  economic  news  and  other 
developments  that  would  have  triggered  even  larger  upward  movements  had  the 
programs not been in place.  
•  Credit easing – Borrowing costs and interest rate spreads in almost all markets have 
improved for a variety of reasons, but significant changes in specific markets can be 
linked  directly  to  the  introduction  of  certain  central  bank  (and  government)  credit-
easing programs. These include, among others, the Government of Canada's Insured 
Mortgage  Purchase  Plan  (IMPP);  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve's  purchases  of  GSE 
direct obligations and mortgage-backed securities (MBS); and the U.S. Commercial 
Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) (See Chart 5). 
The early results, along all three unconventional policy channels, are generally encouraging. 
Conclusion 
I  would  like  to  leave  you  with  four  main  messages:  First,  central  banks  are  not  out  of 
ammunition; unconventional monetary policy measures can be effective. Second, while their 
use  is  subject  to  somewhat  greater  uncertainty  than  traditional  tools,  unconventional 
measures are more fresh than frightening. In many cases, they are direct extensions of what 
we do in the normal course of business. Third, prudent strategies are available to minimize 
the credit and interest rate risks borne by the public sector and hence, the taxpayer. Fourth, 
extra  care  will  be  taken  to  achieve  an  orderly  exit,  guided  by  the  clear  monetary  policy 
frameworks  that  most  central  banks  now  have  in  place.  This  will  help  to  minimize  the 
chances  of  a  premature  and  destabilizing  "exit,"  and  also  guard  against  a  sharp  rise  in 
inflation.  
Stated more simply, the risks of either a deflationary collapse or an inflationary spiral have 
been  greatly  exaggerated.  Central  banks  will  not  forget  to  shut  off  the  liquidity  taps  when 
additional stimulus is no longer required. But we shouldn't get ahead of ourselves. We must 
first  reach  a  point  where  growth  is  self-sustaining  and  we  are  confident  that  our  inflation 
objective can be reached.  
BIS Review 61/2009 
 7
  BIS Review 61/2009
 8 
   9
 BIS Review 61/2009 
  10 
 BIS Review 61/2009
