Hirohide Yamaguchi: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a Meeting with 
Business Leaders, Otaru, 25 March 2009. 
 Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  financial  and  business  communities  in  Otaru  for  giving  me  the 
opportunity to speak here today. I would also like to thank you for your close cooperation with 
our Sapporo Branch in providing information on the economic and financial situation of the 
region. The information is very valuable in enabling us to accurately grasp current economic 
and financial conditions in Japan and formulate the conduct of monetary policy. 
I  visited  Otaru  previously  a  number  of  times  in  connection  with  the  closing  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan's  Otaru  Branch  in  2002  and  its  remodeling  as  the  Bank  of  Japan  Otaru  Museum. 
Closure of the branch was not easy for the local community to accept, but I am very glad to 
hear that the museum has become well known and welcomed its 500 thousandth visitor in 
May 2008, five years after its opening. This successful transition owes a great deal to the 
understanding and cooperation of the local community. 
Before we exchange views, I will speak about recent economic and financial developments in 
Japan  and  abroad  and  also  about  policy  responses  in  major  countries.  In  particular,  I  will 
describe my view of the current substantial economic downturn and the economic outlook, 
and how the authorities worldwide, including the Bank, have acted, as well as the thinking 
behind their actions. 
I.  
A.  
Global financial markets and economic developments 
The background of the turmoil in global financial markets and economic 
downturn 
I will start with developments in global financial markets and the world economy. 
The  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets  began  in  the  summer  of  2007,  but  the  situation 
worsened suddenly when the markets were hit by the failure of Lehman Brothers Holdings 
Inc.  in  September  of  last  year.  Market  participants'  and  investors'  concerns  about  the 
creditworthiness of their trading partners, or counterparty risk, intensified, and as a result the 
volume  of  market  transactions  dropped  sharply  and  market  liquidity  dried  up.  These 
developments subsequently caused a widening of credit spreads on corporate bonds and a 
chain  reaction  of  financial  institutions'  failures  and  deteriorating  performance  in  many 
countries, with prices of financial products – especially securitized ones – dropping and these 
products eventually becoming nonperforming assets of the financial institutions holding them. 
As  you  know,  the  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets  and  the  subsequent  global  economic 
downturn  was  triggered  by  the  U.S.  subprime  mortgage  problem,  which  surfaced  in  the 
summer of 2007. This problem, however, was merely a prominent example of corrections to 
various financial and economic imbalances that had accumulated. 
Looking back, the world economy enjoyed favorable conditions until a couple of years ago, 
and  unprecedentedly  high  growth  rates  of  around  5  percent  continued  from  2004  through 
2007.  Notwithstanding  the  high  growth,  prices  were  generally  stable  due  mainly  to  an 
expansion of global supply capacity resulting from the entry of emerging economies into the 
market economy. Amid the high economic growth and low inflation, interest rates worldwide 
remained low for a prolonged period. 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 1
In this continued benign environment of high growth, low inflation, and low interest rates with 
growing  optimism  about  prospects,  financial  and  economic  activity  overheated  and 
imbalances  accumulated.  This  overheating  caused  a  number  of  things  to  happen.  For 
example,  the  rapid  growth  of  emerging  economies  significantly  increased  the  demand  for 
resources such as crude oil, and led to a surge in commodity prices. Investors and financial 
institutions eased their credit standards, and a global credit bubble emerged, as seen in the 
U.S.  subprime  mortgage  problem.  Looking  at  developments  in  final  demand  on  a  global 
basis, not only industrialized economies in North America and Europe but also emerging and 
commodity-exporting  economies  experienced  robust  private  consumption,  particularly  of 
durable  consumer  goods,  and  also  very  strong  business  fixed  investment.  These  were  all 
indications of the overheating of financial and economic activity. The current global financial 
crisis and the large economic downturn can therefore be viewed as part of the process of 
correcting imbalances that had accumulated. 
These developments suggest that the current financial crisis and economic downturn were 
essentially caused by the cycle of the generation and bursting of a global credit bubble, or 
the  cycle  of  the  overheating  and  corrections  of  financial  and  economic  activity,  similar  to 
cycles that occurred repeatedly in the past. Looking back over the previous two decades, we 
can see many boom-and-bust cycles: Japan's asset price bubble in the late 1980s, the Asian 
currency crisis in the late 1990s, and the global IT bubble in the early 2000s. But the most 
recent  cycle  has  brought  a  worldwide  economic  downturn  that  is  much  larger  than  any  in 
recent history, with distinctive features of "simultaneity" and "rapidity." 
I  will  now  describe  the  background  of  this  simultaneous  and  rapid  downturn  of  the  world 
economy  in  terms  of  three  features:  the  progress  of  globalization  in  financial  activity;  the 
progress of globalization in economic activity; and IT innovations. 
Taking  the  progress  of  globalization  in  financial  activity  first,  financial  institutions  and 
investors  around  the  world  now  carry  out  a  large  volume  of  cross-border  financial 
transactions and invest in a variety of financial assets. The U.S. subprime mortgage problem 
had immediate repercussions also on Western European financial institutions because they 
made  large  investments  in  securitized  products  backed  by  U.S.  subprime  mortgages. 
Financial  institutions  and  investors  in  the  United  States  and  Western  Europe  had  an 
important  role  channeling  funds  to  emerging  economies  in  regions  such  as  Central  and 
Eastern Europe and in Latin America. Since these financial institutions suddenly scaled back 
their  exposures  to  emerging  economies,  the  financial  crises  of  the  United  States  and 
Western Europe have spread to the rest of the world. 
The second feature of the background is the progress of globalization in economic activity. 
Since the 1990s, emerging economies – the NIEs, the BRICs, the ASEAN countries, and the 
former  centrally  planned  economies  –  have  become  full-fledged  members  of  the  market 
economy.  Although  these  economies  continued  to  enjoy  a  level  of  growth  higher  than  the 
industrialized  economies  until  recently,  they  have  now  decelerated  significantly  due  to  the 
outbreak of turmoil in global financial markets and the drop in their exports caused by the 
downturn  in  the  U.S.  and  European  economies.  Emerging  economies  increased  their 
presence in the global marketplace not only as production bases of durable consumer goods 
and  parts  for  industrialized  economies  but  also as  a  huge market  for  the  latter's  products. 
Consequently, the decrease in the industrialized economies' exports to emerging economies 
has aggravated the economic deterioration in the industrialized economies. It is clear that an 
interregional  adverse  feedback  loop  between  trading  partners  –  a  process  in  which  both 
imports and exports of individual countries decline, resulting in a further economic stagnation 
of  all  countries  involved  –  is  now  operating  around  the  globe,  irrespective  of  the  level  of 
economic development. 
The third feature of the background is IT innovations, which have supported the progress of 
globalization in financial and economic activity. The widespread use and popularization of IT 
systems has supported globalization through the increased speed of transactions, reductions 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2009
in the interregional information gap, and a global network of transactions. The breakthrough 
in  information  processing  capacity  has  enabled  the  formation  of  massive  financial  trading 
systems as well as payment and settlement systems, both of which process an enormous 
amount  of  trading  information  in  a  second.  Ironically,  these  sophisticated  systems  perform 
equally  well  in  times  of  contraction  in  financial  transactions  and  economic  activity.  In  the 
current  environment,  they  accelerated  the  speed  of  contraction  and  may  have  caused  a 
sudden unwinding of imbalances, leading to the rapid economic downturn. 
The current state of and outlook for the world economy 
B.  
With  the  abrupt  contraction  of  credit  and  the  drop  in  commercial  trade  around  the  globe, 
many  economies  are  inevitably  facing  either  recession  or  a  slowdown.  U.S.  economic 
conditions  have  deteriorated  significantly.  The  housing  market  has  been  undergoing 
adjustments, and business and consumer spending behavior has become cautious reflecting 
tight  funding  conditions  and  greater  uncertainty  about  economic  prospects.  In  European 
economies, in addition to a decrease in exports, domestic demand has also been declining 
partly due to financial institutions' tightening of lending standards. Emerging economies and 
commodity-exporting  economies,  as  I  described  earlier,  have  been  slowing  because  their 
exports have decreased reflecting the U.S. and European economic deterioration and also 
because  financial  conditions  have  worsened  reflecting  increased  capital  outflow.  Thus,  in 
many  economies  an  adverse  feedback  loop  is  operating  –  a  process  in  which  production, 
income,  and  expenditure  spiral  downward  with  a  decrease  in,  for  example,  exports  as  a 
starting  point.  Simultaneously  operating  worldwide  is  yet  another  adverse  feedback  loop, 
between financial and economic activity – a process in which worsening economic conditions 
due to financial institutions' tightening of lending standards squeeze the institutions' profits, 
and this in turn further tightens their lending standards. 
We are often asked whether the current global economic downturn might evolve to become 
as  serious  as  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.  The  difference  between  the  Great 
Depression and the current economic downturn is relatively clear if one looks at the policy 
responses  by  the  relevant  authorities  worldwide.  Unlike  the  time  of  the  Great  Depression, 
when  the  authorities  could  not  take  effective  measures  in  response  to  failures  of  financial 
institutions,  the  authorities  in  many  countries  today  have  already  formed  a  framework  to 
protect  depositors  and  are  expeditiously  injecting  public  funds  into  financial  institutions  in 
distress.  Other  differences  are  that  currently  governments  and  central  banks  in  major 
countries are promptly taking fiscal and monetary policy actions and the system of free trade 
between  nations  is  being  basically  maintained.  However,  the  following  questions  should 
continue to be kept in mind: (1) whether the actions that have been taken to date to secure 
financial  system  stability  are  sufficient  when  the  adverse  feedback  loop  between  financial 
and  economic  activity  is  still  operating;  (2)  what  specific  means  should  be  employed  to 
compensate for the weakness in effective demand; (3) whether current financial conditions 
are  sufficiently  accommodative  relative  to  the  severity  of  the  deterioration  in  economic 
conditions; and (4) whether protectionism will reemerge, with too much support being given 
to domestic industry. I think it is important to continue analyzing the current difficult situation 
coolly from a contemporary perspective, neither overstating nor understating developments, 
and  referring  to  the  lessons  learned  from  the  past  rather  than  trying  to  make  imperfect 
comparisons with the past. 
Looking  ahead,  since  the  current  financial  crisis  and  economic  downturn  are  a  process  of 
correction  of  various  imbalances  that  had  accumulated  over  the  past  several  years,  the 
present severe situation will likely continue for some time. For the world economy to return to 
a  recovery  path,  the  following  conditions  need  to  be  fulfilled:  (1)  the  U.S.  and  European 
financial  systems  will  have  to  regain  stability,  reducing  downward  pressures  on  the  world 
economy  from  the  financial  side;  and  (2)  at  the  same  time,  adjustments  in  asset  prices, 
production,  and  excessive  capital  stock  will  have  to  make  progress,  paving  the  way  for  a 
recovery in  aggregate demand. However, there are lingering concerns about the  U.S. and 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 3
European financial systems, and the drastic disposal of nonperforming assets has only just 
begun. There is no clear sign of improvement in indicators for major economies at this point, 
and it will be some time before fiscal and monetary policy actions in these economies fully 
take effect. The Bank expects that, from the latter half of fiscal 2009, global financial markets 
will  regain  stability  and  overseas  economies  will  move  out  of  their  deceleration  phase. 
However,  given  the  current  state  of  the  global  economy,  it  is  inevitable  that  uncertainties 
about the outlook are great. 
II.  
Economic and financial developments in Japan 
The current state of and outlook for Japan's economy 
A.  
Now I will discuss economic and financial developments in Japan. 
Japan's economy started to decelerate from the spring of last year, and since the autumn 
exports and production have been experiencing one of the sharpest drops ever. In January 
this year, exports and industrial production fell by 15.8 percent and 10.2 percent respectively, 
on  a  month-on-month  basis,  both  showing  a  decline  comparable  to  the  sharpest  falls  in 
history.  In  addition,  domestic  demand  has  become  weaker  against  the  background  of 
declining  corporate  profits  and  the  worsening  employment  and  income  situation  in  the 
household sector. Against this background, the Bank's assessment is that Japan's economic 
conditions have deteriorated significantly and are likely to continue deteriorating for the time 
being. Real GDP contracted in the October-December quarter last year by 12.1 percent on 
an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  the  sharpest  decline  since  the  period  immediately 
after the first oil crisis, and this figure supports the Bank's assessment. The rates of real GDP 
growth for the United States and the euro area in the same quarter were minus 6.2 percent 
and  minus  5.7  percent,  respectively,  and  the  fact  that  Japan's  economy  contracted  more 
sharply underscores the severity of the country's current economic conditions. 
The fact that the downturn is more severe in Japan than in the U.S. and Western European 
economies, from which the global economic turbulence stemmed, seems to be due mainly to 
the growth mechanism of Japan's economy that has operated for some years. 
Japan's economy continued to grow from early 2002 until recently, moderately perhaps, but 
uninterruptedly. The background to this long period of growth was provided by – in addition 
to  Japanese  firms'  efforts  to  reduce  excessive  debt  and  capital  stock  –  the  favorable 
environment  of  a  rapidly  growing  world  economy.  In  this  situation,  Japan  established  an 
economic  growth  mechanism  that  is  primarily  based  on  production  for  export  of  durable 
consumer  goods  and  capital  goods,  especially  automobiles,  electrical  machinery,  and 
general machinery. I believe that this may be due partly to the following facts: (1) due to the 
declining birthrate and the aging population, rapid growth of domestic demand could not be 
expected; and (2) the yen was on a depreciating trend until the middle of 2007. In fact, the 
industries manufacturing the three types of products I just mentioned account for about half 
of industrial production in Japan, while the share of their counterparts in the United States is 
only  about  20  percent.  About  65  percent  of  all  domestically  produced  automobiles  were 
exported in  2008, a great increase from about  55 percent in 2002. With regard to  general 
machinery, external orders, led by strong demand from member countries of the European 
Union  (EU)  and  commodity-exporting  and  emerging  economies,  grew  steadily  from  2002 
until 2007, increasing by slightly over 50 percent during the period. 
The ongoing global economic downturn has delivered a blow to this growth mechanism of 
Japan's  economy.  A  large  drop  in  real  GDP  in  the  October-December  quarter  was  also 
observed in South Korea, Taiwan, and Germany – all of which have economies with a high 
share of manufacturing industries sensitive to changes in exports, such as those producing 
durable consumer goods, capital goods, and parts for both. In addition, in the case of Japan, 
it seems that the rapid appreciation of the yen from the summer of last year has amplified 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2009
downward pressure on exports that already existed due to a drop in final demand overseas. 
Furthermore, in Japan the share of domestically produced parts and materials is higher than 
in other countries such as the United States, and therefore a decrease in exports tends to 
adversely affect even industries that are not export-oriented. 
These  industries  are  cutting  production  sharply  to  reduce  excessive  inventories,  and 
therefore  production  is  likely  to  continue  decreasing  for  the  time  being.  Business  fixed 
investment, particularly for expanding production capacity, is also likely to decrease for the 
time  being,  as  firms  have  increasingly  regarded  their  capital  stock  as  excessive.  Labor 
market  conditions  are  slackening,  and  developments  warrant  careful  monitoring  as 
adjustments in the labor market, in terms of both wages and the number of employees, might 
spread from manufacturers to nonmanufacturing firms. 
Japanese households, whose savings ratio is high, own large amounts of financial assets, 
but they are not under pressure to make large-scale balance sheet adjustments, unlike their 
U.S.  counterparts,  which  are  suffering  from  falling  land  and  home  prices.  However,  the 
worsening employment and income situation has been gradually taking its toll, and this may 
exert additional downward pressure on private consumption. Furthermore, attention should 
be paid to the possibility that recent unstable stock prices and the deteriorating employment 
situation may weaken consumer confidence further. 
Prices are on a downward trend. In the summer of last year, CPI inflation, in terms of the 
year-on-year rate of change, rose to 2.4 percent, its highest level since the first half of the 
1990s.  Thereafter,  however,  it  moderated  reflecting  declines  in  the  prices  of  petroleum 
products, falling to 0 percent in January this year. It is projected to become negative soon 
with  the  increasing  slackness  evident  in  supply  and  demand  conditions  due  to  the  severe 
economic situation. 
As  for  the  outlook  for  the  economy,  the  Bank's  baseline  scenario  projects  that  it  will  start 
recovering from the latter half of fiscal 2009, with price declines abating as global financial 
markets  regain  stability  and  overseas  economies  move  out  of  their  deceleration  phase. 
However, a high level of uncertainty surrounds this scenario, involving some risks. 
Japan's production is likely to continue decreasing for the time being, but it is also likely that 
the pace of the decrease will slow gradually as inventory adjustment pressures diminish. In 
this  situation,  whether  final  demand  will  start  to  recover  rapidly  when  the  adjustment  is 
completed is the key to the recovery of Japan's production and the economy as a whole. As I 
just mentioned, it is highly uncertain when and how the world economy will begin recovering, 
and  therefore  it  is  also  unclear  to  what  extent  recovery  in  exports  will  bring  economic 
recovery in Japan. If recovery in final demand – including exports – is long delayed, or if the 
degree  of  the  recovery  is  small,  this  may  cause  a  decline  in  firms'  medium  to  long-term 
growth expectations and a consequent increase in adjustment pressures on capital stock and 
employment, eventually depressing domestic private demand further. With regard to prices, if 
downside risks to the economy materialize and the rate of change in prices continues to be 
negative  for  a  long  period  of  time,  firms'  and  households'  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations may decline. The Bank will continue to carefully examine developments as well 
as various downside risks. 
The financial environment in Japan 
B.  
Next, I would like to talk about the current financial environment. 
Financial  conditions  in  Japan  have  remained  tight  since  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers.  I 
would like to focus on recent developments in corporate financing, which is most relevant to 
today's audience. 
The first issue is the levels of interest rates applied to borrowing by firms. They are declining 
due mainly to the effects of the reductions in the policy interest rate since the autumn of last 
year and improvements in the CP market. CP issuance rates, which surged through the end 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 5
of  last  year,  have  declined  since  the  turn  of  the  year,  and  banks'  lending  rates  have  also 
declined slightly, partly reflecting reductions in short-term prime lending rates. On the other 
hand,  credit  spreads  are  increasing  or  remain  elevated,  counteracting  the  effects  of  the 
policy interest rate reductions. 
The second issue is the amount of borrowing by firms. Firms are inclined to compensate for 
a  decline  in  cash  flows  by  borrowing  and  also  to  increase  cash  in  hand  in  view  of  the 
uncertainty of the future. In this situation, there have been some improvements in the issuing 
environment  for  CP  and  bonds,  but  issuance  of  these  instruments  as  a  whole  has  been 
below  the  previous  year's  level.  By  contrast,  bank  lending,  especially  to  large  firms,  has 
continued to increase rapidly. 
On the lender banks' side, however, they are becoming increasingly conscious of their capital 
constraints against the background of expanded securities-related losses and higher credit 
cost  caused  by  a  deterioration  in  the  business  performance  of  borrower  firms.  In  this 
situation, an increasing number of firms have reported that their financial positions are weak 
and lending attitudes of financial institutions are severe. Various research results show that 
small firms, lending to which has remained below the previous year's level, see their financial 
positions  as  having  deteriorated  and  financial  institutions'  lending  attitudes  as  having 
tightened  as  much  as  in  1998  and  2002,  and  the  Bank  needs  to  pay  due  attention  to 
developments. 
The financial condition of Japanese financial institutions has been relatively stable even after 
the emergence of the U.S. subprime mortgage problem, because they have generally made 
progress in the disposal of nonperforming assets since the bursting of the economic bubble 
and also because their investments in overseas securitized products have been limited. In 
fact, unlike in the United States and Europe, failures of financial institutions and their rescues 
by injection of public funds have not occurred in Japan. Notwithstanding this, given that the 
economic downturn is likely to continue for the time being, attention needs to be paid to the 
possibility  that  the  financial  health  of  Japanese  financial  institutions  may  worsen  and  their 
risk-taking ability may decline gradually, in turn reducing their lending capacity. The Bank will 
continue  to  carefully  examine  whether  the  financial  intermediation  function  of  Japanese 
financial institutions and the financial system in Japan will be maintained so that the adverse 
feedback loop between financial and economic activity will not intensify. 
Policy responses 
III.  
Having explained economic and financial developments at home and abroad, I would now 
like to move on to recent policy responses in major countries to those developments. 
Major  countries  have  been  taking policy  measures  to  cope  with  problems  in  their  financial 
systems. Increased strains in global financial markets and heightened concerns about their 
financial  systems  have  prompted  them  to  take  various  measures  since  the  autumn  of  last 
year. The U.S. and European authorities, the governments in particular, have taken a wide 
range of measures: injection of public funds into financial institutions in distress; expansion of 
deposit  insurance  coverage;  and  purchases  of  nonperforming  assets  from  financial 
institutions.  The 
I  mentioned  earlier  have  made 
strengthening financial institutions' capital bases all the more important also in Japan, even 
though  its  financial  system  remains  stable  compared  with  those  of  the  United  States  and 
Europe.  Against  this  background,  the  revised  Act  on  Special  Measures  for  Strengthening 
Financial  Functions  was  passed  by  the  Diet  in  December  to  improve  the  framework  for 
utilizing public funds. 
Many  of  the  measures  being  taken  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  at  present  are  very 
similar to those adopted in Japan to fight the financial crisis in and after the second half of 
the  1990s.  In  that  sense,  I  believe  that  Japan's  experience  has  been  reflected  in  the 
measures being taken in foreign countries today. Lessons learned from Japan's experience 
increased  capital  constraints 
that 
6 
 BIS Review 38/2009
include  the  fact  that,  when  an  adverse  feedback  loop  is  at  work  between  financial  and 
economic activity, policy responses to ensure the stability of the financial system might not 
by themselves resolve the problem completely. The key is to launch a comprehensive policy 
package to prevent intensification of the loop. In such a policy package, measures in different 
areas will need to be implemented simultaneously: not only measures to strengthen financial 
institutions' capital bases, but also measures to resolve excesses in the corporate sector as 
well  as  support  its  revitalization,  and  others  to  underpin  overall  economic  activity.  In  this 
regard, the Bank will continue to find opportunities to explain to other countries the lessons 
Japan has learned. 
Major  countries  have  been  taking  decisive  measures  as  well  in  fiscal  policy.  In  the  United 
States,  the  new  Obama  Administration  has  launched  large-scale  fiscal  stimulus  packages 
equivalent  to  about  75  trillion  yen.  The  Chinese  government  has  announced  measures 
equivalent  to  about  60  trillion  yen  to  boost  the  economy.  The  Japanese  government  also 
intends  to  implement  12  trillion  yen  in  fiscal  measures  and  63  trillion  yen  in  financial 
measures. In the conduct of fiscal policy, generally speaking, it is important to examine ways 
not  only  to  create  demand  in  the  short  run  but  also,  for  example,  to  improve  the 
infrastructure, which will enhance productivity, eventually increasing the growth potential of 
the economy in the long run. Moreover, as indicated in the statements of the latest G-7 and 
G-20 meetings of finance ministers and central bank governors, it is also important that the 
measures be consistent with medium- to long-term fiscal sustainability. 
As  for  monetary  policy,  major  central  banks  have  been  taking  appropriate  measures  in  a 
timely  manner,  varying  in  accordance  with  the  economic  and  financial  situation  in  each 
country. The Bank has been conducting monetary policy in three main areas: reductions in 
interest  rates;  provision  of  ample  liquidity  to  stabilize  financial  markets;  and  facilitation  of 
corporate  financing  by  influencing  individual  financial  markets.  Taking  each  area  in  turn,  I 
would now like to explain the measures the Bank has implemented since the autumn of last 
year. 
With regard to reductions in interest rates, the first area, the Bank reduced the target for the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate – its policy interest rate – to 0.1 percent, from 0.5 percent. 
It  also  worked  on  the  interest  rates  on  term  instruments  by  devising  methods  for  liquidity 
provision, and as a result they have been slightly lower than at the beginning of this year, 
even though demand for funds tends to increase as the fiscal year-end approaches. 
The second area is ensuring stability in financial markets by providing ample liquidity. The 
Bank  has  been  conducting  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  in  a  coordinated  action 
with other central banks, and has also been providing ample funds in yen by, for example, 
purchasing Japanese government bonds (JGBs) outright. Following December's decision to 
increase outright purchases of JGBs from 14.4 trillion yen per year to 16.8 trillion yen, the 
Bank decided, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held last week, to increase the amount further 
by 4.8 trillion yen to 21.6 trillion yen per year. Last week's decision was made because, given 
the  likelihood  that  the  markets  will  remain  under  stress  in  the  new  fiscal  year,  the  Bank 
judged  that  continued  provision  of  substantial  liquidity  is  required  to  ensure  stability  in 
financial  markets.  With  this  decision,  the  Bank  would  make  greater  use  of  its  long-term 
funds-supplying operations, thereby facilitating smooth money market operations. 
Regarding  the  third  area,  measures  for  facilitating  corporate  financing,  the  Bank  has  been 
conducting since January 2009 new operations called "special funds-supplying operations to 
facilitate  corporate  financing."  These  enable  financial  institutions  to  obtain  funds  with  a 
maturity of up to three months with no explicit ceiling on the total quantity of funds available, 
although the maximum amount borrowed by an individual financial institution may not exceed 
the value of the corporate debt it has pledged as collateral. The interest rate on these funds 
was set at 0.1 percent, lower than the market rates for funds with corresponding maturities. 
In addition, the Bank expanded the operations in February by, for example, increasing the 
frequency  of  the  operations  to  once  a  week  from  twice  a  month  and  standardizing  the 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 7
duration of each loan to three months instead of one to three months; these changes were 
aimed  at  encouraging  a  decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates,  which  are  the  rates  actually 
applied to firms' borrowing, and relieving firms' funding concerns. 
Furthermore,  in  January  the  Bank  decided  to  conduct  outright  purchases  of  CP  totaling  3 
trillion yen from financial institutions. Last month, it also decided to purchase outright 1 trillion 
yen  of  corporate  bonds  with  a  residual  maturity  of  up  to  one  year.  The  Bank  took  these 
measures based on its recognition that a decline in the functioning of CP and corporate bond 
markets was causing a tightening of overall corporate financing conditions. These measures 
are expected to encourage financial institutions to sell CP and corporate bonds they hold and 
thus expand their lending capacity. 
The  Bank's  outright  purchases  of  corporate  debt,  however,  involve  a  relatively  higher 
probability of imposing costs on taxpayers by incurring losses, and deepen the involvement 
of the Bank in microeconomic resource allocation among individual firms. In addition, they 
involve higher risks, compared to other policy measures, of damaging the financial health of 
the Bank by causing it to incur losses and ultimately undermining confidence in the currency 
and monetary policy. Since they are an exceptional measure for a central bank, the Bank has 
been purchasing CP and corporate bonds outright based on certain necessary conditions for 
the implementation of such purchases. 
The  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England  (BOE)  have  also  been  purchasing 
corporate financing instruments, as is being done by the Bank of Japan, although the size 
and range of corporate financing instruments purchased vary according to the differences in 
the  degree  of  the  decline  of  market  functioning  and  in  the  structure  of  financial 
intermediation. Furthermore, the Fed and the BOE both announced the introduction of large-
scale  outright  purchases  of  government  bonds  from  this  month,  although  there  are 
differences  in  the  policy  objective  and  the  thinking  behind  the  introduction.  I  would  not  be 
exaggerating greatly if I said that, to address the present economic downturn, major central 
banks have been going beyond the boundaries of conventional monetary policy and stepping 
into a new sphere of policy conduct. 
In addition to these measures in the three main areas, the Bank has been taking decisive 
measures to ensure the stability of the Japanese financial system, in view of its recognition 
that persisting strains in global financial markets and the deterioration in economic conditions 
at  home  and  abroad  have  been  adversely  affecting  financial  institutions'  business 
performance and financial intermediation function. Specifically, last month the Bank resumed 
its purchases of stocks held by banks. Based on the recognition that reducing market risk 
associated with stockholdings remains an extremely important issue for financial institutions' 
management, the Bank aims to support their future endeavors to reduce such risk. Moreover, 
last week it decided to explore a new framework to provide banks with subordinated loans, 
which constitute part of their capital bases. The aim of this measure is to provide banks with 
a way to maintain adequate capital bases – along with capital-raising by banks themselves in 
the  markets  and  based  on  the  Act  on  Special  Measures  for  Strengthening  Financial 
Functions – and ultimately to ensure the stability of the financial system. In view of this aim, 
the Bank will draw up a scheme for implementation as early as possible. 
As  I  have  just  explained,  the  Bank  has  been  implementing  various  measures  in  rapid 
succession since the autumn of last year. The end of the fiscal year is only a few days away, 
but financial markets in Japan have so far remained relatively stable, as firms and financial 
institutions  have  strived  to  secure  liquidity  in  a  planned  manner  at  an  early  stage  and  the 
Bank  has  provided  large  amounts  of  liquidity  at  a  faster  pace  than  in  ordinary  years. 
However,  as  I  explained  previously,  Japan's  economic  and  financial  conditions  will  likely 
continue to be severe. In this situation, the Bank's policy priority will be placed, for the time 
being, on securing market stability and facilitating corporate financing – the second and third 
main areas of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. In any event, the Bank will continue to 
8 
 BIS Review 38/2009
examine  carefully  developments  in  financial  markets  and  corporate  financing  and  to  take 
necessary measures in a decisive manner without any predetermined view. 
Closing remarks 
Today I explained economic and financial developments at home and abroad and the policy 
responses of the authorities around the world, including the Bank of Japan. As I said at the 
beginning of this speech, the current economic downturn is a process of correcting various 
imbalances that had accumulated over the past several years, and the severe situation will 
therefore  likely  continue  for  some  time.  I  believe  that  Otaru  has  also  been  significantly 
affected  by  the  global  economic  downturn,  with  a  sharp  drop  in  exports  to  Russia  and  a 
decrease in the number of domestic and foreign tourists. 
It is also true, however, that both domestic and overseas financial markets, especially money 
markets,  have  started  to  gradually  regain  stability.  Furthermore,  the  effects  of  major 
countries'  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  as  well  as  measures  implemented  to  secure  the 
stability  of  financial  systems,  are  expected  to  be  felt  gradually.  However,  we  must  bear  in 
mind  the  important  fact  that  these  policies  and  measures  can  only  temporarily  mitigate 
financial and economic shocks and reduce the degree of the economic downturn – in other 
words, they are merely measures to buy time. Resolution of various excesses in the private 
sector  and  the  subsequent  establishment  of  new  business  models  are  indispensable  for 
realizing  sustainable  economic  growth  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  Fiscal  and  monetary 
policies are no more than a support to facilitate adjustments in and the positive efforts of the 
private sector. 
Japan's economy has been exposed to many severe downturns over the decades, but every 
time it enhanced its capability to create new products and services with added value based 
on the experience, strengthening the foundation for future growth. Good examples are the 
efforts made during the recession of the 1980s caused by the strong yen and in the 1990s 
after the bursting of the bubble economy. I hear reassuring remarks of corporate managers, 
for  example,  in  the  reports  made  at  the  meetings  of  general  managers  of  the  Bank's 
branches, such as that they are determined to continue with their investment in research and 
development,  human  resource  training,  and  mergers  and  acquisitions,  to  prepare  for  the 
future  despite,  and  also  because  of,  the  economic  downturn.  In  addition,  Japanese  firms 
have continued to work assiduously in research and development of energy-saving and eco-
friendly  technologies,  fields  in  which  they  are  competitive,  believing  these  fields  to  have 
growth potential. 
Otaru has a history of being a pioneering city, supporting the development of financial and 
economic activity in Hokkaido Prefecture. It has great potential, in that it is a city with a large 
number  of  tourist  attractions  and  functions  as  a  distribution  center  for  the  trade  between 
Northeast  Asia  and  the  whole  of  Hokkaido  Prefecture.  I  very  much  hope  that  you,  as 
corporate  managers,  are  determined  to  continue  to  develop  creativity  with  which  you  can 
meet the current economic downturn as well as the severe competition, and that, when you 
have overcome the difficulties, Japan's economy, including Otaru, will transform itself into a 
more  flexible,  strong  economy  that  can  fully  cope  with  global  economic  swings  that  may 
occur repeatedly in the future. 
The Bank will support firms' proactive activity from the financial side, and at the same time do 
its utmost as a central bank to realize the early return of Japan's economy to a sustainable 
growth path with price stability. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 9
