Elizabeth A Duke: Consumer protection 
Testimony of Ms Elizabeth A Duke, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  Subcommittee  on  Domestic  Monetary  Policy  and  Technology, 
Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington DC, 16 July 
2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Chairman Watt, Ranking Member Paul, and members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the 
opportunity  to  appear  today  to  discuss  regulatory  restructuring  and  the  role  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Board in consumer protection.  
Today, I would like to discuss why the Federal Reserve Board believes there is a compelling 
case for leaving consumer protection rule writing functions within the Federal Reserve and 
supervision  with  the  agencies  responsible  for  prudential  supervision.  While  arguments  for 
consolidating  functions  can  themselves  be  compelling,  it  is  important  to  also  consider  the 
substantial opportunities presented by existing arrangements.  
I  and  other  members  of  the  Board  are  in  strong  agreement  with  the  Administration  that  a 
fundamental lesson of the financial crisis is that we need to do a better job for consumers of 
financial products. In our view, the Federal Reserve has the resources, the structure, and the 
experience to execute an ongoing comprehensive program for effective consumer protection 
in financial services. First, we believe that replicating in another agency the deep expertise 
and  full  array  of  functions  embedded  within  the  Federal  Reserve  and  used  to  support  our 
consumer protection program would be enormously challenging.  
We also view consumer protection as complementary to, rather than in conflict with, other 
responsibilities at the Federal Reserve, such as prudential supervision and fostering financial 
stability.  These  missions  reinforce  one  another.  For  example,  sound  underwriting  benefits 
consumers as well as the institution, and strong consumer protections can add certainty to 
the markets and reduce risks to the institutions. We have demonstrated, particularly in recent 
years  with  which  I  am  most  familiar,  our  strong  ability  to  effectively  execute  our 
congressionally assigned consumer protection responsibilities. In this context, it is important 
to  note  that  the  Board  is  concerned  about  the  loss  of  the  strong  consumer  protection 
perspective  that  currently  exists  in  our  supervisory  and  other  policy  discussions.  It  is 
appropriate and beneficial that the central bank has a mission that includes an analytical and 
nuanced understanding of developments in the consumer marketplace. 
For these reasons, we stand ready to work with this subcommittee and others in Congress to 
help identify ways to further strengthen our program institutionally. I will discuss today some 
of  the  Board's  important  consumer  protection  initiatives  and  explore  several  ideas  for 
increasing  regulatory  accountability  for  consumer  protection,  institutionalizing  today's 
commitment  to  aggressive,  effective  programs,  and  maintaining  the  benefits  inherent  in 
current structures. One way to preserve the strengths of our program while reinforcing the 
requisite level of commitment and focus would be to codify consumer protection as a core 
mission  along  with  our  other  responsibilities.  Another  would  be  for  Congress  to  establish 
periodic  reporting  requirements  for  consumer  protection  similar  to  the  Federal  Reserve 
semiannual monetary policy report. 
Current consumer protection initiatives of the Board 
In order to provide a picture of consumer protection activities of the Board, I would like to 
briefly  note  some  recent  initiatives.  A  much  more  extensive  report  by  the  Board's  staff  is 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 1
provided  as  an  attachment,  titled  The  Federal  Reserve  System's  Role  in  Protecting 
Consumers. I recommend it to you.  
It has become standard practice at the Board to make extensive use of consumer testing to 
improve  disclosures  to  consumers  and  to  highlight  practices  that  simply  cannot  be 
understood  by  consumers  even  with  the  best  disclosures.  In  such  cases  we  elected  to 
prohibit the practices.  
The Federal Reserve has written strong consumer protection rules for mortgages and credit 
cards. In fact, our credit card rules served as the basis for recent Congressional legislation. 
Next  week,  we  anticipate  issuing  a  comprehensive  proposal  under  our  Truth  in  Lending 
authority  that  includes  re-designed,  consumer-tested  disclosures  and  rule  changes  for 
closed-end mortgages and home equity lines of credit. The proposal will include new rules 
governing  mortgage  originator  compensation.  I  would  add  that  discussions  with  our 
colleagues at the Department of  Housing and Urban Development (HUD) about  using this 
same  consumer  testing  protocol  for  combined  Real  Estate  Settlement  Procedures  Act 
(RESPA) and the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) disclosures are underway. 
This past year, we completed a pilot examination program of nonbank subsidiaries of bank 
holding companies, and, based on the results of this initiative, we are instituting an ongoing 
program for supervision of these entities. 
We are also active "on the ground" with consumers and groups who represent consumers' 
interests.  We  have  established  a  centralized  call  center  and  800  telephone  number  for 
receiving consumer complaints. Community affairs and Board research staff have assisted 
organizations  specializing  in  foreclosure  mitigation.  And  we  have  worked  with  nonprofits, 
financial institutions, and local leaders to advance strategies for neighborhood stabilization. 
We  have  increased  staff  resources  to  speed  our  response  time  for  drafting  new  rules  to 
address emerging trends that may pose new risks for consumers. We also have created a 
specialized unit and cross-function process that is devoted to the identification and analysis 
of  these  trends  to  provide  early  warnings  on  emerging  consumer  problems  for  our 
examination  team,  and  enhance  our  messaging  to  consumers  and  nonprofit  support 
organizations. 
Additionally, we are leading a robust and informed dialogue among community and financial 
industry stakeholders on ways to modernize the 1977 Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) 
to  reflect  changes  to  the  financial  landscape  and  new  delivery  mechanisms  for  financial 
products.  
How we function 
The  Board's  Division  of  Consumer  and  Community  Affairs  (DCCA)  has  primary  staff 
responsibility  for  carrying  out  our  consumer  protection  program.  But  the  Division  draws 
substantially on resources and expertise from other functions of the Board and the Federal 
Reserve System. The Board's experience is that the most effective programs require a multi-
disciplinary  approach  that  draws  on  a  deep  understanding  of  consumer  behaviors  and 
interests,  as  well  as  financial  markets  and  industry  operations.  Recognizing  that,  key 
elements of the division's program include: 
• 
Rulemaking  as  a  pillar  of  our  consumer  protection  program  that  utilizes  a  team  of 
attorneys to write regulations that implement legislation, update regulations, respond 
to a changing marketplace, put useful and effective disclosures in place, and prohibit 
unfair and deceptive acts and practices;  
Consumer testing to develop effective disclosures that are meaningful to consumers;  
BIS Review 91/2009
 2 
      Supervision  and  enforcement  of  state  member  banks  and  bank  holding  companies 
and  their  nonbank  affiliates  to  ensure  that  consumer  protection  rules  are  being 
followed;  
Consumer  complaint  and  inquiry  processes  to  assist  consumers  in  resolving 
grievances with their financial institutions and to answer their questions;  
Consumer  education  to  inform  consumers  about  what  they  need  to  know  when 
making decisions about their financial services options;  
Research to understand the implications of policy on consumer financial markets;  
Outreach  to  national  and  local  government  agencies,  consumer  and  community 
groups, academia, and industry to gain a broad range of perspectives, and to inform 
policy decisions and effective practices;  
Support  for  national  and  local  agencies  and  organizations  that  work  to  protect  and 
promote  community  development  and  economic  empowerment 
to  historically 
underserved communities. 
Interconnections between consumer protection and prudential supervision 
As  early  as  the  1970s,  the  Board  recognized  the  need  for  dedicated  experts  to  conduct 
consumer  compliance  examinations.  Since  that  time,  the  Board  has  had  a  separate 
examination  force,  specially  trained  in  the  intricacies  of  consumer  compliance  laws  and 
regulations.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  recognition  that  consumer  protection  supervision  is 
connected  in  important  ways  to  prudential  supervision.  As  a  result,  the  Board's  separate 
divisions  for  consumer  protection  and  prudential  supervision  work  closely  in  developing 
examination policy and industry guidance. Further, the two functions are housed under the 
same  management  structure  at  the  Reserve  Banks,  where  policy  is  implemented  through 
examinations,  applications  processing,  and  complaint  resolution.  This  structure  ensures  a 
comprehensive  picture  through  the  lens  of  both  safety  and  soundness  and  consumer 
protection for the institutions that are supervised by the Federal Reserve. 
We strongly believe that these two responsibilities should remain closely linked. Both sides 
benefit from a broader perspective of management and risks in a financial organization, and 
from a close coordination of supervisory actions. Placing consumer compliance examinations 
activities  in  a  separate  organization,  apart  from  other  supervisory  responsibilities,  would 
adversely  affect  the  complementary  nature  of  these  two  necessary  functions  and  could 
reduce the effectiveness of both programs over time. 
Interconnections between consumer protection and other important central bank 
functions 
Perhaps less well understood are the interconnections between our consumer mission and 
the functions of the Federal Reserve to promote economic and financial stability. Consumer 
protections  are  important  in  creating  consumer  and  investor  confidence  in  the  financial 
marketplace and avoiding negative spillover effects to the broader community. As the current 
crisis  illustrates,  loss  of  confidence  and  disruptions  in  consumer  credit  markets  can  erode 
economic  performance  and,  ultimately,  the  financial  stability  of  national  and  international 
markets. 
In  recent  years,  we  have  seen  tangible  evidence  of  the  importance  of  household  credit  to 
economic performance. Consumer spending makes up roughly 70 percent of gross domestic 
product (GDP), and, thus, is an important factor to achieving sustainable economic growth. 
Many staff throughout the Federal Reserve System routinely analyze data and track trends 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 3
for  consumer  credit,  spending  levels,  and  consumer  attitudes  to  monitor  this  important 
market segment.  
Our responsibilities for consumer protection and community affairs programs have provided 
the Federal Reserve, as the nation's central bank, with a valuable view of the economy and 
financial system through the lens of individual households and communities at a retail level. 
The  more  granular  view  from  Main  Street  is  consistent  with  our  regional  presence  and 
important to providing a view of economic and financial activity from multiple perspectives. 
We  also  believe  that  consumers  benefit  from  having  key  economic  policymakers  who  are 
familiar with the issues affecting individual consumers and communities. 
Recent actions to expand consumer protections and in support of consumers and 
communities 
We  believe  that  the  recent  actions  taken  on  behalf  of  consumers  represent  important 
advancements in support of consumer protection. They also demonstrate the Board's ability 
to fulfill these functions. The accompanying report describes these activities, but I would like 
to highlight several that are particularly relevant to the subject of today's hearing. 
Over the course of the past forty years, Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve primary 
rulewriting  responsibilities  for  many  consumer  protection  and  fair  lending  laws.  The 
provisions of these laws are intended to help inform consumers about financial products, to 
facilitate  their  ability  to  make  good  choices  when  selecting  these  products,  to  promote 
fairness in the marketplace, and to protect consumers against unfair and deceptive practices. 
Thus, we have primary responsibilities for writing rules under authority provided by the Truth 
in Lending Act, the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), which amended 
TILA,  and  the  Equal  Credit  Opportunity  Act  (ECOA),  among  others.  In  addition,  we  share 
rulewriting  with  other  federal  agencies  under  certain  laws,  such  as  the  Community 
Reinvestment Act and Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). Supplement A of the accompanying 
report  provides  a  complete  listing  of  the  statutes  for  which  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
rulewriting authority. 
The  Federal  Reserve  last  year  issued  sweeping  new  mortgage  and  credit  card  rules  that 
significantly expand protections for consumers of these credit products. 
Mortgage credit rules 
The  Board  used  its  authority  under  TILA  and  HOEPA  to  revise  Regulation  Z,  which 
implements these statutes, by issuing final rules to establish comprehensive new regulatory 
protections for consumers in the residential mortgage market. Importantly, the Board's new 
rules apply to all mortgage lenders, not just the depository institutions that are supervised by 
the federal banking and thrift agencies.  
The rules are designed to provide transaction-specific disclosures early enough to facilitate 
shopping and to protect consumers from unfair or deceptive acts or practices in mortgage 
lending, while supporting sustainable home ownership. They are intended to respond to the 
most troublesome practices in the mortgage industry that contributed to the recent subprime 
market  meltdown.  The  Board  also  adopted  rules  governing  mortgage  advertisements  to 
ensure that they provide accurate and balanced information and do not contain misleading or 
deceptive representations. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  next  week  we  plan  to  issue  a  comprehensive  rule  proposal  that 
includes  re-designed,  consumer-tested  disclosures  and  rule  changes  for  closed-end 
mortgages  and  home  equity  lines  of  credit.  We  also  anticipate  as  part  of  this  same 
rulemaking to propose new rules to address mortgage originator compensation. 
4 
 BIS Review 91/2009
Credit card rules  
In December 2008, the Federal Reserve issued far-reaching rules to enhance protections for 
consumer  credit  card  accounts.  These  rules  are  the  most  comprehensive  changes  to 
regulations that govern consumer credit cards ever adopted by the Board. They affect nearly 
all  aspects  of  consumer  credit  card  accounts,  including  marketing  and  advertising, 
disclosures given with applications and at account opening, billing statements, and issuers' 
ability to change account terms. These rules formed the basis for the recently enacted Credit 
CARD  Act  of  2009.  Yesterday,  we  issued  an  interim  final  rule  amending  Regulation  Z  to 
implement those provisions of the new credit card law that are effective in August. 
Consumer testing, our Consumer Advisory Council, and extensive outreach further 
inform our Consumer Protection Program 
Importantly,  in  developing  the  credit  card  rule,  as  we  had  with  the  mortgage  rules,  we 
conducted extensive consumer testing, using focus groups and one-on-one interviews with 
consumers,  as  well  as  the  more  traditional  avenues  for  receiving  input.1  The  testing  first 
identified  what  information  consumers  currently  use  in  making  decisions  about  their  credit 
card  accounts,  and  how  useful  they  found  existing  disclosures.  The  Board  used  these 
insights to develop revised credit card disclosures, which also were tested with consumers 
for comprehension and utility. 
We have found consumer testing to be increasingly integral to the consumer protection rules 
we write, as well as in the development of our consumer education materials. Since 1996, 
the  Board  has  engaged  in  extensive  consumer  surveys  and  testing  to  bring  critical  insight 
about consumers' understanding of financial products and their decisionmaking for selecting 
these products. The increasing complexity of certain consumer financial products can pose 
information overload problems for consumers and thus impair their decisionmaking. We find 
that  consumer  testing  benefits  us  in  developing  well-designed  consumer  disclosures  that 
convey  essential  information  to  consumers  in  an  effective  manner.  Consumer  testing  can 
also reveal those instances in which disclosures are unable to convey adequate information 
to  facilitate  consumer  choice  and  help  highlight  those  areas  where  rules  are  warranted  to 
safeguard consumers and to prevent unfair and deceptive practices. 
Consumer  testing  is  used  to  supplement  our  other  means  for  gathering  input  from 
consumers, the financial-services industry, and the general public on pending rules and other 
consumer-related policies. For example, the Federal Reserve's Consumer Advisory Council, 
a  30-member  body  representing  consumer  and  community  organizations,  the  financial 
industry, academics, and state agencies, provides invaluable perspectives on policy matters 
pertaining to our consumer protection responsibilities. We also actively consider the views of 
the  broad  range  of  consumer  and  community  organizations  and  financial  services  industry 
representatives  we  meet  with  or  otherwise  hear  from  to  inform  our  views  on  consumer 
policies. 
Pilot review of targeted nonbank mortgage subsidiaries 
The  recent  problems  in  the  subprime  mortgage  market  revealed  gaps  in  supervision  and 
enforcement with respect to nonbank mortgage lenders. Most subprime loans were issued by 
entities  outside  the  supervisory  jurisdiction  of  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  federal  bank 
regulators,  and  consequently,  these  entities  were  not  subject  to  examinations  to  assess 
                                                 
1   See  Design  and  Testing  of  Effective  Truth  in  Lending  Disclosures:  Findings  from  Qualitative  Consumer 
Testing  Research,  submitted  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  of  Governors  by  Macro  International,  Inc. 
(December  15,  2008),  and  Design  and  Testing  of  Effective  Truth  in  Lending  Disclosures:  Findings  from 
Experimental  Study,  submitted  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  by  Macro  International,  Inc.  (December  15, 
2008). 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 5
compliance  with  federal  consumer  protection  laws.  We  believe,  therefore,  that  it  is 
appropriate  for  Congress  to  consider,  as  part  of  regulatory  reform,  a  strengthened 
supervisory and enforcement scheme, in partnership with state regulators and enforcement 
officials, for closing the regulatory gap with respect to independent nonbank lenders. 
Recognizing  the  critical  need  to  conduct  on-site  reviews  of  credit  practices  of  nonbank 
lenders,  the  Board,  in  July  2007,  initiated  a  multiagency  partnership  to  conduct  targeted 
consumer  compliance  reviews  of  selected  nonbank  lenders  that  had  significant  subprime 
mortgage operations. The joint effort is the first time multiple agencies have collaborated to 
plan  and  conduct  consumer  compliance  reviews  of  independent  mortgage  lenders  and 
nonbank  subsidiaries  of  bank  and  thrift  holding  companies,  as  well  as  mortgage  brokers 
doing business with, or working for, these entities.  
The  agencies  involved  –  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision  (OTS),  the 
Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC),  and  state  agencies  represented  by  the  Conference  of 
State Bank Supervisors and the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators – 
developed  detailed  work  plans  for  the  targeted  consumer  compliance  reviews.  The  pilot 
program has been completed and the Federal Reserve is fully committed to implementing its 
own  program  of  supervision  of  nonbank  subsidiaries  of  holding  companies  on  an  ongoing 
basis.  As  with  the  pilot,  we  will  continue  to  work  cooperatively  and  share  information  with 
other agencies with overlapping jurisdictions. 
Our 
Consumer 
Information 
Promoting consumer awareness  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  a  long  history  of  providing  useful  consumer  information  and 
promoting awareness of emerging financial market trends and how those trends will affect 
consumers. 
website 
(http://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerinfo) includes 23 consumer topics, providing useful 
information  on  bank  accounts,  consumer  credit,  and  home  mortgages.  We  have  also 
developed calculators to help consumers explore mortgage choices and mortgage financing. 
We recently launched English and Spanish versions of our credit card repayment calculator, 
which allows consumers to estimate how long it will take to pay off their credit card bills if 
they make only minimum payments. The calculators are available on our website. 
In response to increasing reports of foreclosure rescue scams, we launched a coordinated 
effort  to  warn  homeowners  already  struggling  to  pay  their  mortgages.  A  new  informational 
piece,  5  Tips  for  Avoiding  Foreclosure  Scams,  is  the  latest  in  our  ongoing  "5  Tips"  plain-
language consumer information series. The rapid growth of this problem led us to purchase 
30-second spot advertisements in movie theaters in 18 cities experiencing high foreclosure 
rates. The advertisements were intended to raise public awareness about these scams. The 
Federal Reserve expects to do more of this type of innovative outreach to consumers. 
Collaboration across the Federal Reserve System in response to the home mortgage 
crisis 
The Federal Reserve System's unique ability to respond at both a national and regional level 
allowed  the  Federal  Reserve  to  take  an  active  leadership  role  in  shaping  a  public  policy 
response as the mortgage crisis deepened. 
For  example,  we  created  the  Homeownership  and  Mortgage  Initiative  (HMI).  Using 
economists  and  community  development  experts  from  across  the  system,  the  Federal 
Reserve developed a comprehensive strategy to provide information, data, and solutions that 
respond 
foreclosures  and  stabilizing 
communities  that  are  adversely  affected  by  large  clusters  of  foreclosures.  Additionally,  the 
Federal  Reserve  System  is  providing  online  data  about  subprime  lending  patterns  and 
the  challenges  of  preventing  unnecessary 
to 
6 
 BIS Review 91/2009
performance. The data are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website.2 
These dynamic maps and data illustrate subprime and alt-A mortgage loan conditions that 
may  assist  community  groups,  policymakers,  and  local  governments  as  they  prioritize  the 
use  of  their  resources  and  develop  plans  to  lessen  the  impacts  that  delinquencies  and 
foreclosures may have on local economies.  
We  have  worked  with  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks  to  convene  a  series  of  regional 
conferences:  Recovery,  Renewal,  Rebuilding:  A  Federal  Reserve  Foreclosure  Series,  to 
clarify the challenges and the strategies for moving toward solutions by examining effective 
practices,  creative  solutions,  and  innovative  ways  to  prepare  for  the  future.3  And  we  have 
forged  a  partnership  with  NeighborWorks  America,  a  congressionally  chartered  nonprofit 
corporation,  to  identify  strategies  to  address  the  challenges  that  foreclosed  homes  can 
present,  such  as  decreased  home  values  and  vacant  properties  that  can  deteriorate  from 
neglect. This collaboration is focused on finding ways to mitigate the impact of foreclosures 
and vacant homes across the country and to help stabilize neighborhoods.4
Recent actions taken to strengthen our Consumer Protection Program 
We believe that an effective consumer protection program requires an ability to detect and 
respond  to  changing  and  emerging  markets  and  products,  particularly  for  those  that  pose 
risks  to  consumers.  Along  these  lines,  we  have  taken  a  number  of  specific  actions  and 
initiatives to strengthen our consumer protection program in ways that enhance our ability to 
proactively respond to changing markets. 
The  Federal  Reserve  staff  continues  to  expand  our  use  of  consumer  testing  for  the 
development  of  more  effective  consumer  disclosures  and  other  rules.  We  have  created  a 
special unit to oversee consumer protections issues in the subsidiaries of the largest financial 
institutions  that  are  active  in  consumer  credit  and  payment  services,  instituted  a  new 
program for on-site examinations of nonbank consumer lending affiliates and have expanded 
our complaint resolution program to include these institutions. We also streamlined access 
for consumers to file complaints and centralized our complaint and inquiry system using a 
single 800 complaint telephone number and a new website. 
Synergies and inputs from other Federal Reserve functions 
An  important  advantage  that  the  Federal  Reserve  brings  to  performing  its  consumer 
protection mission is our ability to draw on other sources of expertise that exist at the Board 
and  within  the  Federal Reserve  System.  Our  consumer  specialists  frequently  capitalize  on 
the vast range of expertise of System economists, market specialists, consumer compliance 
and  prudential  examiners,  and  other  specialists  in  banking,  economic  analysis,  and  the 
payments systems. We have found that this array of skills and knowledge, in many respects 
unique to the Federal Reserve, is invaluable for crafting rules and policies aimed at achieving 
a proper balance between promoting a fair playing field for consumers while also allowing for 
market innovations that benefit consumers. The results, we believe, are more informed and 
thoughtful policies and activities that protect and educate consumers, expand knowledge in 
the marketplace, and support the important work of consumer and community groups.  
                                                 
2   See 
of 
"Dynamic  Maps 
www.newyorkfed.org/mortgagemaps/. 
Nonprime  Mortgage 
Conditions 
in 
the 
United 
States," 
3   See 
additional 
and 
http://www.clevelandfed.org/Our_Region/Community_Development/Events/Seminars/2008/20080827/Overvie
w_4Forums.pdf. 
http://stlouisfed.org/RRRseries/ 
conferences, 
information 
the 
on 
4   See http://www.stablecommunities.org/. 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 7
Research activities support consumer and community affairs functions 
The  expertise  provided  by  the  research  divisions  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  and  the 
Reserve  Banks  is  one  example  of  the  ancillary,  but,  nonetheless,  vital  expertise  that  our 
consumer protection staff utilizes in carrying out its responsibilities. The Board's economists 
conduct  research  and  data  collection  and  perform  analyses  of  developments  in  the 
marketplace that may have implications for consumers. For example, economists reviewed 
available data on market mortgage pricing and performance to help the Board determine the 
appropriate metric and threshold to be used in defining which home loans would be subject 
to the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act rules. 
Research economists also play a central role in assuring the integrity of data made available 
to  the  public  by  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council  (FFIEC)5  under  the 
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) and the regulations that implement the Community 
Reinvestment  Act.  Economists  review  the  data  for  quality  assurance  and  provide  analytic 
assessments of the data each year. The economists further support fair lending enforcement 
activities by providing other federal and state regulators with an assessment of possible fair 
lending issues as revealed through this analysis. Beyond activities that support enforcement 
of consumer protection rules with respect to individual institutions, economists conduct basic 
research to learn more about CRA, fair lending and related matters. Past research on these 
topics has included an examination of the effects of CRA on local communities and on the 
performance and profitability of CRA-related lending. More recently, economists at the Board 
conducted an assessment of the relationship between the CRA and the subprime mortgage 
crisis. 
Every three years, the Board sponsors the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) that is used 
to gather unique data on the financial and other circumstances of a nationally representative 
sample  of  U.S.  households.  One  of  the  synergies  provided  by  the  Federal  Reserve's 
consumer  protection  function  is  that  it  has  direct  access  to  Board  economists  who  design 
and interpret the results of the SCF. A similar benefit is achieved with respect to the Federal 
Reserve activities in connection with assessing credit record data and how they are used in 
the marketplace. Economists have conducted extensive research on the content and quality 
of credit records, and on the use of credit scoring and the effects of scoring on the availability 
and affordability of credit for the population at large and for different population segments. 
This, in turn, informs our rulemaking and other policy decisions. 
Federal Reserve Bank activities 
The Federal Reserve's twelve regional banks monitor the status of the regions' economies, 
financial  institutions,  and  communities.  The  Reserve  Banks  are  tasked  with  studying  their 
District's  economy.  Their  research  factors  into  monetary  and  other  policy  decisions.  They 
also implement the Board's supervisory policies under delegated authority, examining banks 
within  their  jurisdiction,  and  engaging  in  community  economic  development  activities. 
Specific  activities  vary  from  District  to  District  due  to  the  specific  circumstances  of  their 
regions. Examples of these specialized activities include the following: 
                                                 
5   The FFIEC is comprised of representatives of the federal financial supervisory agencies: the Federal Reserve 
Board of Governors, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, 
the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the National Credit Union Association. 
8 
 BIS Review 91/2009
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston6
Research Center for Behavioral Economics and Decisionmaking 
The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  established  the  Research  Center  for  Behavioral 
Economics and Decisionmaking to explore the field of behavioral economics, which attempts 
to integrate insights from across the social sciences into standard economic research. This 
research program produces research with the hope of applying its lessons into more effective 
economic policy. Such research can have important implications when developing consumer 
protection rules and supervisory policies, as well as informing financial education efforts. The 
Center also analyzes and interprets outside research that may bear on the Board's consumer 
protection policy responsibilities. 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia7
Payment Cards Center 
The  Payment  Cards  Center  provides  meaningful  insights  into  developments  in  consumer 
credit  and  payments  that  are  of  interest  not  only  to  the  Federal  Reserve  but  also  to  the 
industry,  other  businesses,  academia,  policymakers,  and  the  public  at  large.  The  Center 
carries  out  its  work  through  an  agenda  of  research  and  analysis  as  well  as  forums  and 
conferences  that  encourage  dialogue  incorporating  industry,  academic,  and  public-sector 
perspectives. 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  
The Center for Community Development Investments 8
The  Center  for  Community  Development  Investments  is  an  online  clearinghouse  of 
investment  resources  that  also  encourages  collaboration,  innovation,  and  research  in  the 
community  development  investment  industry.  The  Center  is  sponsored  and  staffed  by  the 
Community Development Unit of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco with direction 
from an Advisory Committee of industry practitioners and researchers. The activities of this 
center support our ability to implement CRA and respond to emerging community issues. 
Suggestions for further reinforcing the Federal Reserve's Consumer Protection 
mission 
The Federal Reserve Board believes that that consumer protection is vitally important to the 
strength  of  the  economy  and  to  maintaining  financial  stability.  Our  four  decades  of 
experience have provided us with a core competency in this area. We are proud of our many 
significant  accomplishments,  which  attest  to  the  importance  that  the  Board  attaches  to  its 
consumer  protection  mission.  Accordingly,  as  Congress  considers legislation  to  reorganize 
agency functions with regard to consumer protection, one option that might be considered 
would be to retain the Federal Reserve's consumer protection responsibilities, and consider 
additional policies to strengthen and further reinforce our accountability going forward. Along 
these lines, I would like to offer some suggestions for how this could be accomplished. 
First,  as  I  mentioned  previously,  Congress  could  formally  codify  consumer  protection  as  a 
core mission or responsibility for the Federal Reserve, similar to monetary policy and banking 
supervision  and  regulation.  This  would  provide  a  clear  and  ongoing  understanding  that 
                                                 
6   For more information, see http://www.bos.frb.org/. 
7   For more information, see http://www.phil.frb.org/. 
8   For more information, see http://www.sf.frb.org/cdinvestments. 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 9
consumer protection matters should be viewed as an integral part of the Federal Reserve's 
overall mission. 
Second,  Congress  could  require  the  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  to  report 
periodically  regarding  the  "state  of consumer  protection,"  in  the  financial  services industry, 
similar  to  the  semiannual  monetary  policy  report  to  the  Congress.  Such  reporting  could 
include  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  actions  taken  to  strengthen 
consumer protection, the results of regulatory sufficiency reviews (as described below) and 
planned  future  actions  to  address  potentially  unfair  and  deceptive  acts  and  practices,  a 
review of enforcement actions, studies of consumer finances, availability of financial services 
especially in underserved areas, or other matters as requested by the Congress. 
Third, we plan to conduct periodic sufficiency reviews of consumer regulations and policies. 
These reviews will consider emerging trends in consumer financial services, whether existing 
regulations are adequate for protecting consumers, and will identify those areas in which new 
consumer protection measures are needed. We will develop a process that includes regional 
public  hearings  in  Washington,  D.C.  and  at  several  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks.  The 
hearings will be held every two years to gather information on consumer issues and risks – 
similar to the process required by the Credit CARD Act of 2009. As we envision this process, 
the Federal Reserve's Consumer Advisory Council would assist in preparing the agenda, and 
its  members  would  participate 
findings  and 
recommendations would be reported to Congress. 
These are very important matters. Strong, timely, and thoughtful consumer protection is vital 
for the economic health and vitality of our country. We at the Federal Reserve Board remain 
strongly committed to strengthening this function. We look forward to continuing to work with 
Congress on these critical issues. 
the  hearings,  as  appropriate.  The 
in 
10 
 BIS Review 91/2009
