Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
Business Leaders, Osaka, 31 August 2009. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to be here today to speak and to exchange views with business leaders from 
the Kansai region. I take this opportunity to express my deep gratitude for your cooperation 
with the Bank of Japan's branches in Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto. Before we exchange views, I 
will  first  speak  about  the  background  to  the  recent  economic  recovery  and  the  economic 
outlook, as well as the Bank's thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy. 
At the gathering held at the end of August last year in Osaka, I mentioned two things about 
Japan's  economic  outlook.  One  thing  was  that  growth  would  likely  remain  sluggish  for  the 
time  being.  And  the  other  was  that,  even  so,  there  was  a  remote  possibility  that  Japan's 
economy would experience a crucial adjustment phase. I presented a cautious outlook that 
growth would likely remain sluggish for the time being because I judged that the accelerated 
rise  in  energy  and  materials  prices  at  the  time  as  well  as  the  effects  of  the  bursting  of  a 
global credit bubble triggered by the subprime mortgage problem would continue to weigh on 
the economy at home and abroad in the form of balance sheet adjustments. While I believe 
that the judgment itself was a valid one, as for the part that there was a remote possibility 
that  Japan's  economy  would  experience  a  crucial  adjustment  phase,  it  turned  out  that  the 
possibility became a reality and the economy followed a bumpier road than envisaged at the 
time. Needless to say, the direct cause was the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 
last  year.  Because  of  that,  a  liquidity  crisis  emerged  on  a  global  basis,  and  we  faced  a 
serious  situation  that  confidence,  which  could  be  said  as  a  prerequisite  for  the  normal 
functioning of financial markets, collapsed. As a result, the economic conditions deteriorated 
simultaneously  and  sharply  worldwide,  the  situation  no  policy  authorities  around  the  globe 
ever  imagined.  In  fact,  looking  back  on  the  changes  in  the  International  Monetary  Fund's 
forecast for world economic growth for 2009, it was plus 3.9 percent in July last year, but was 
subsequently revised downward for several times to become minus 1.4 percent in July this 
year.  The  sheer  fact  that  the  forecast  for  the  growth  rate  was  revised  downward  by  more 
than  5  percentage  points  in  a  period  of  only  one  year  illustrates  how  rapidly  the  world 
economic conditions deteriorated during that period.  
There is finally a glimmer of recovery in the economy at home and abroad. Nevertheless, as 
many people might feel, there is still considerable uncertainty about future developments. 
Developments in the global economy 
I.  
I will start with the current global economy.  
As  I  have  just  mentioned,  the  factors  behind  the  global  economic  slowdown  since  last 
autumn, which correlate with each other, can be broadly divided into two factors. One is the 
global accumulation of excesses during the mid-2000s and the adjustments of the balance 
sheets  of  firms,  households,  and  financial  institutions  emanated  in  the  process  of  the 
unwinding of excesses. The other is the liquidity crisis triggered by the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers, and the resulting panicky contraction of financial and economic activity.  
Let me explain the first factor little more in detail. Up to the mid-2000s, the world economy 
had  marked  high  levels  of  growth  at  around  5  percent  for  four  consecutive  years.  With 
hindsight, centering on the United States and Europe, a large credit bubble was formed and 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 1
excesses in financial and economic activity in various aspects emerged during that period. In 
the area of financial activity, credit and leverage increased substantially as exemplified by the 
subprime  mortgage  problem.  The  economic  activity  also  overheated.  The  examples  are  a 
substantial increase in housing investment in the United States and a surge in demand for 
durable  goods  around  the  world.  In  the  meantime,  a  bullish  economic  outlook  prevailed 
among  firms,  and  they  substantially  augmented  their  production  capacity.  However,  high 
growth supported by the credit bubble cannot continue for long.  
The  world  growth  started  to  slow  around  the  beginning  of  2008.  The  essence  of  what  is 
happening now is an adjustment to bring excessive capital stock and debt back to normal 
levels,  and  business  fixed  investment  and  private  consumption  are  contained.  Financial 
institutions have also been striving to reduce their impaired assets and to resolve excessive 
leverage. In such a process, financial institutions' proactive lending capacity will necessarily 
decline. Therefore, during the period of balance sheet adjustments, it is inevitable that the 
global economy remains under downward pressure. 
If  such  balance  sheet  adjustments  are  to  impose  "chronic  illness"  on  the  economy  over  a 
long  period,  the  liquidity  crisis,  which  was  the  second  factor  behind  the  global  economic 
downturn, would bring a powerful "acute pain" that contracted economic activity at a stroke. 
As I have mentioned, triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers, providers of funds, such 
as  financial  institutions  and  institutional  investors,  became  extremely  cautious  about 
counterparties' creditworthiness. That led to a sharp decline in transactions, not only in the 
interbank  market  where  banks  exchange  funds  but  also  in  the  CP  and  corporate  bond 
markets where firms raise funds. As a result, the functioning of financial markets declined at 
a stroke, and the funds necessary for economic activity did not prevail. That, together with 
firms and households' intensified anxiety, shrank the global financial and economic activity in 
a panicky manner. 
The  global  economic  conditions  seem  to  have  stopped  worsening  this  spring.  That  is 
because the "acute pain" has started to dissipate for the following three reasons. First, ample 
fund  supply  by  central  banks  and  an  aggressive  injection  of  public  funds  into  U.S.  and 
European financial institutions have proved effective, and global financial markets have been 
regaining  stability.  Second,  inventory  adjustments  have  progressed  as  a  result  of  a 
substantial  production  cutback.  And  third,  once  plunged  demand  is  now  showing  signs  of 
gradual recovery, thanks to the effects of a large-scale economic stimulus around the globe. 
Those developments are likely to continue for some time. If that is the case, what becomes 
more  important  from  now  is  how  to  assess  the  effects  of  balance  sheet  adjustments 
centering  on  the  United  States  and  Europe,  which  was  the  first  factor  behind  the  current 
economic  downturn.  However,  that  point  is  associated  with  high  uncertainty.  It  takes  a 
considerable  period  of  time  to  complete  the  balance  sheet  adjustments  following  the 
experience  of  a  large  bubble.  A  possibility  cannot  be  denied  that  the  factors  including  the 
continued decline in the U.S. commercial real estate prices will make the adjustments more 
significant  than  envisaged  in  terms  of  duration  and  magnitude.  Meanwhile,  emerging 
economies  including  China  have  recently  been  showing  growth  slightly  stronger  than 
expected.  A  large-scale  economic  stimulus  in  China  has  exerted  favorable  effects  on  the 
neighboring East Asian countries, seemingly playing a role of raising economic growth of the 
regions  as  a  whole.  The  Bank  will  also  pay  attention  to  how  the  bold  monetary  easing  in 
advanced  countries  affects  emerging  economies  where  the  problem  of  balance  sheet 
adjustments is relatively small. 
The current state of and outlook for Japan's economy 
II.  
Based on the picture of the global economy, I will now move on to the current state of and 
outlook  for  Japan's  economy.  From  the  autumn  of  last  year,  Japan's  economic  conditions 
worsened  far  more  sharply  than  those  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  where  the  current 
crisis had started. Japan's real GDP growth recorded a more than 10 percent decline on an 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2009
annualized basis for two consecutive quarters in the October-December quarter of last year 
and  the  January-March  quarter  of  this  year.  The  reason  why  economic  conditions 
deteriorated  in  Japan  more  seriously  than  those  in  other  countries  was  that  the  high-tech 
manufacturing industries including automobiles, electrical machinery, and general machinery, 
which  benefited  from  the  recent  high  growth  of  the  global  economy,  had  a  high  share  in 
Japan's  economy.  A  fall  in  global  demand  especially  for  durable  goods  and  capital  goods 
owing  to  the  rapid  contraction  of  global  economic  activity  directly  hit  those  industries, 
resulting in a substantial decline in exports and production.  
Since this spring, as the "acute pain" of the global economy has started to dissipate, there 
has been a reversal of the mechanism which I have just mentioned. That was illustrated by 
the April-June real GDP growth rate of 3.7 percent, on an annualized basis, which was the 
highest growth in the G-7 countries. With progress having already been made in inventory 
adjustments  both  at  home  and  abroad,  the  recovery  in  exports  and  production  has 
increasingly  become  obvious,  centering  on  automobiles  and  electronic  parts.  In  particular, 
against a backdrop of China's strong demand for electrical appliances, exports to East Asia 
first rebounded early this spring. Signs of improvement remain observed not only in the real 
economy,  but  also  in  corporate  financing.  The  issuing  rates  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds, 
which  surged  from  last  autumn,  have  declined  to  the  levels  seen  before  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers. While only a handful of firms with high ratings could issue corporate bonds 
up to the end of last year, the situation improved significantly such that the issuance was a 
record  high  this  June.  Firms'  financial  positions  have  continued  to  improve  particularly  at 
large firms. While some yelps were once heard from firms' managers and treasurers on their 
financial  positions,  they  seem  to  have  materially  regained  their  composure  recently,  albeit 
still not being able to dispel uncertainty about the future outlook. 
Looking  ahead,  Japan's  exports  are  expected  to  continue  to  increase  as  the  overseas 
economies  start  recovering.  The  resultant  recovery  in  corporate  profits  and  the  effects  of 
various  policy  measures  will  likely  bring  about  a  gradual  recovery  in  business  fixed 
investment and private consumption. Therefore, the Bank's baseline scenario is that "Japan's 
economy will start recovering from the latter half of fiscal 2009."  
However, I will hasten to add that the Bank judges that the pace of recovery is highly likely to 
be  only  moderate.  Given  that  the  global  adjustments  of  balance  sheets  will  continue,  it  is 
hard to assume a marked and rapid recovery in exports. In addition, against a backdrop of 
excessive  capital  stock  and  the  severe  employment  and  income  situation,  business  fixed 
investment and private consumption are likely to remain relatively weak for the time being. 
As I have mentioned earlier, it is still not clear how the balance sheet adjustments centering 
on the United States and Europe will proceed. The Bank will continue to carefully examine 
financial  and  economic  developments  at  home  and  abroad,  while  paying  due  attention  to 
various risks surrounding Japan's economy. 
The Bank's thinking on prices 
III.  
I will now move on to the developments in prices in Japan. Since recording an increase of 
2.4 percent in the summer 2008, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index 
(CPI) for all items excluding fresh food has been on a declining trend and has been negative 
since March this year. The rate of change for July, released at the end of last week, marked 
a decrease of 2.2 percent on a year-on-year basis, the largest decrease ever recorded. The 
same can be said about other countries. Looking at the rates of change in consumer prices 
for all items in July, they were negative in all G-7 countries but for the United Kingdom – for 
example, minus 2.2 percent in Japan, minus 2.1 percent in the United States, and minus 0.7 
percent in Germany. In addition, the average rate of change for G-7 countries declined year 
on year by 4.6 percentage points during the past year. 
The major reason for the recent acceleration in the price decline in Japan was the prices of 
imports  such  as  resources  and  energy  being  lower  than  the  high  levels  observed  up  until 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 3
around the summer last year. From the autumn this year, the effects of higher prices of last 
year are expected to diminish gradually. Going forward, price developments will, in principle, 
be  affected  by  the  supply-demand  balance  of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  In  that  regard,  if 
economic  conditions  recover  in  line  with  the  projection  that  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  the 
supply-demand balance of the economy will improve gradually, and the year-on-year rate of 
decline  in  the  CPI  will  likely  moderate.  However,  the  supply-demand  balance  has  been 
deteriorating  greatly,  reflecting  the  sharp  deterioration  in  economic  conditions  from  the 
autumn of last year, and the pace of improvement in the supply-demand balance is expected 
to  be  slow,  reflecting  the  aforementioned  economic  outlook.  Therefore,  the  downward 
pressure on prices is likely to persist for a long period. The situation is the same in the United 
States  and  Europe,  and  the  view  is  prevailing  in  many  countries  that  it  will  take  a 
considerable period of time for the growth rate of prices to return to a desirable level, while 
the level itself differs between countries. 
What is critical in the conduct of economic policy is whether there is a possibility of the price 
declines  leading  to  a  vicious  circle  that  a  decline  in  prices  will  induce  a  deterioration  in 
economic  conditions,  which  will  in  turn  lead  to  a  further  decline  in  prices  –  the  so-called 
deflationary spiral. To that end, there are two key factors for judgment. The first is whether 
the stability of the financial system is being maintained. Looking back in history the cases in 
which  price  declines  caused  a  contraction  in  economic  activity,  most  cases  coincided  with 
the  period  of  significant  financial  system  instability,  as  typified  during  the  U.S.  Great 
Depression in the 1930s. Japan's financial system has so far been generally stable, and in 
that regard the Bank does not judge that the risk of the economy falling into a deflationary 
spiral has increased. And the second is whether firms and households' inflation expectations 
in  the  medium  to  long  term  decline.  Various  survey  results  and  market  developments 
suggest that firms and households' expectations for inflation in the medium to long term have 
so far been stable. 
By  also  taking  into  account  those  points,  the  Bank  has  been  closely  monitoring  price 
developments. 
The Bank's thinking behind monetary policy conduct 
IV.  
After  having  explained  economic  and  price  developments,  I  will  lastly  briefly  refer  to  the 
Bank's conduct of monetary policy and the thinking behind it.  
I  have  explained  the  significant  changes  in  the  global  economy  since  last  year  by 
summarizing  the  causes  into  two  factors:  the  liquidity  crisis  and  the  balance  sheet 
adjustments.  When  a  great  stress  is  imposed  on  financial  markets,  what  a  central  bank 
should do as a top priority is to provide ample liquidity and ensure the stability of the financial 
markets and the financial system. To avoid the risk of the economy falling into a deflationary 
spiral, a central bank should properly and promptly act as "the guardian of liquidity."  
Meanwhile,  it  varies  from  country  to  country  the  extent  to  which  the  balance  sheet 
adjustments by the private economic entities are needed. In any event, those adjustments 
are an inevitable process for the global economy to return to a sustainable growth path. The 
problem  is  that,  if  the  pace  of  adjustments  is  too  fast,  economic  activity  will  deteriorate 
further. In those circumstances, the role required of the policy authority of each country is to 
strike  a  delicate  balance  between  encouraging  necessary  balance  sheet  adjustments  to 
proceed  smoothly,  and  preventing  them  from  moving  too  rapidly  so  as  to  induce  a  further 
deterioration in economic conditions. 
Since  last  autumn  the  Bank  has  reduced  the  policy  interest  rate  to  0.1  percent,  and  has 
taken various measures to ensure the stability of financial markets and facilitate corporate 
financing, including the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral, the 
outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds, and the special funds-supplying operations to 
facilitate  corporate  financing.  In  addition,  by  being  particularly  focused  on  maintaining  the 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2009
stability of the financial system, the Bank has also taken measures such as the purchase of 
stocks held by banks and the provision of subordinated loans to banks. While not a few of 
those measures have been extraordinary ones as policy instruments of a central bank, the 
Bank  has  judged  it  appropriate  to  carry  them  out  as  temporary  measures  in  light  of  the 
difficult economic and financial situation.  
At present, Japan's economic conditions are showing some signs of recovery. At the same 
time, the Bank fully recognizes that the outlook is associated with great uncertainty. While 
there  might  be  many  possibilities,  the  Bank  will  pay  attention  for  the  time  being  to  the 
downside risks to economic activity and prices, and continue to do its utmost as the central 
bank to bring Japan's economy back to a sustainable growth path with price stability. In the 
meantime,  as  for  the  treatment  of  temporary  measures,  the  Bank  will  properly  make 
decisions  without  a  predetermined  view  upon  thoroughly  examining  the  state  of  corporate 
financing and financial markets. 
In  closing,  leaving  the  issues  of  monetary  policy,  I  will  emphasize  the  importance  of  the 
efforts  to  raise  the  productivity  level  of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Needless  to  say,  what 
determines the long-term growth path of a country's economy is an increase in the level of 
productivity. While Japan's ratio of business fixed investment relative to GDP is now at a high 
level  among  the  advanced  countries,  when  considered  together  with  Japan's  recent  low 
growth rates, it suggests the low returns of domestic investment. The rise in the investment 
efficiency  and  the  productivity  level  of  the  economy  as  a  whole  will  be  brought  about  by 
advancing  the  development  of  high  value-added  products  as  well  as  pursuing  optimal 
resource  allocation  at  various  levels,  including  within  firms,  between  firms,  between 
industries,  and  between  regions.  The  main  characters  that  address  the  issue  of  raising 
productivity are of course people of the private firms. For such efforts, the Bank is and will be 
of service through creating a stable economic and financial environment.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 5
