Elizabeth A Duke: Stabilizing the housing market – focus on 
communities 
Speech  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the American Bankers Association National Conference for Community 
Bankers, Phoenix, Arizona, 16 February 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 It  is  great  to  be  back  here  with  community  bankers.  The  last  time  I  addressed  this 
conference,  I  was  a  community  banker  and  also  chairman  of  the  American  Bankers 
Association. I never dreamed that I would be back four years later as a member of the Board 
of Governors. Before I took office, I wrestled with the question of how I could contribute to the 
work of the Board and how difficult it might be to change from the perspective of a banker to 
the perspective of a public policy maker. So I asked a friend of mine, who had spent most of 
his career as an attorney before becoming an appellate court judge, just how he had made 
the transition from advocate to jurist. He told me that he found that he developed a different 
framework  for  decisionmaking,  a  different  mindset,  but  one  that  was  enriched  by  his 
experience and knowledge of the law. He said it happened quite naturally and predicted that 
I would experience the same thing. And he was right. So I thought I would begin by talking a 
little about how I approach my role at the Fed and then discuss the housing and mortgage 
markets, with particular emphasis on the impact this crisis is having on communities. I want 
to emphasize that any opinions I express here today are mine alone and do not represent the 
opinions of anyone else within the Federal Reserve System.  
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), as you all know, is responsible for overseeing 
open market operations, which is the principal tool of monetary policy. On a voting basis, it is 
composed  of  all  of  the  members  of  the  Board  of  Governors,  the  president  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, and 4 of the 11 remaining Reserve Bank presidents, who vote 
on  a  rotating  basis.  While  only  five  vote,  all  of  the  Reserve  Bank  presidents  contribute 
equally  to  the  discussion.  My  contributions  to  the  discussion  of  current  and  projected 
financial and economic conditions are shaped largely by my conversations with bankers, my 
knowledge of bank management principles, and the Main Street perspective on the economy 
that I developed in my years as a banker working with consumers and small businesses.  
In  the  six  months  that  I  have  been  at  the  Board,  actions  taken  by  bankers  have  had  a 
tremendous  influence  on  the  economy.  As  part  of  preparing  for  FOMC  meetings,  I  call  a 
number  of  bankers  at  different  size  banks  around  the  country  to  get  their  assessments  of 
conditions in their banks and in their markets. My questions recently have focused primarily 
on  the  effect  of  government  initiatives  and  on  lending  conditions.  I  also  think  through  the 
actions that I might take as a banker if confronted by prevailing circumstances. For example, 
in evaluating the likely impact of the Treasury's recent Capital Purchase Program, I mentally 
walked through what would have been my own decision tree when trying to decide whether 
to apply for capital and, if I did receive capital, how I might use it. 
In  addition  to  the  FOMC,  I  sit  on  the  Board's  Committee  on  Supervisory  and  Regulatory 
Affairs and chair the Committee on Consumer and Community Affairs. In these roles, I have 
been  able  to  use  my  deeply  ingrained  knowledge  of  existing  regulations,  including  their 
purposes  and  origins,  as  well  as  my  familiarity  with  the  examination  process.  And  while  I 
have  long  been  an  advocate  for  reducing  regulatory  burden,  I  have  never  questioned  the 
need for strong regulation and supervision, only the efficiency of its implementation. So, now 
I have the opportunity to shape the implementation of new regulations and review existing 
ones, including those for safety and soundness as well as for consumer protection. But, as 
you know, regulations are only one part of the Federal Reserve's role in ensuring a sound 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 1
banking  industry;  those  regulations  must  be  complemented  by  strong  supervision.  That  is, 
not only do we establish a set of rules for bankers to follow, but we also ensure that while 
abiding by those rules, the banking industry remains in an overall safe and sound condition.  
In fulfilling my new role as a policymaker, I find that there are some basic beliefs that I held 
as a banker that continue to guide me. 
• 
I believe that the banking business plays a special role in the economy and carries 
with  it  special  responsibilities.  These  responsibilities  come  from  the  role  of  the 
financial  system  as  the  circulatory  system  of  our  economy.  And  with  respect  to 
insured  depository  institutions,  given  the  federal  safety  net  provided  by  deposit 
insurance, access  to  the  payment  system,  and  the  availability  of  discount  window 
borrowings, bankers have a responsibility to operate in a safe and sound manner.  
I  believe  that  rigorous supervision and  enforcement  are  necessary  companions  to 
regulation. One of the lessons we have learned in the current crisis is that different 
levels of supervision and enforcement can cause problems, even when institutions 
are ostensibly following the same regulations. Nowhere was this more evident than 
in the mortgage origination market, in which banking organizations and firms outside 
the banking supervision system were all originating mortgages but were subject to 
very different levels of oversight.  
I believe in the separation of banking and commerce. The lending policies of banks 
should have as their purpose the efficient channeling of savers' funds to their most 
productive uses. The allowance of banks to affiliate with commercial firms threatens 
the ability of banks to continue to serve as efficient and objective intermediaries of 
credit  and  has  the  potential  to  expose  banks  to  the  operational,  financial,  and 
reputational  risks  of  commercial  affiliates.  It  also  has  the  potential  to  extend  to 
commercial affiliates the federal safety net afforded to banks in recognition of their 
role in the economy.  
I  believe  that  a  bank  holding  company  should  act  as  a  source  of  financial  and 
managerial  strength  to  its  banking  subsidiaries.  That  is,  a  bank  holding  company 
should stand ready to use available resources to provide adequate capital funds to 
its  subsidiary  banks  during  periods  of  financial  stress  or  adversity,  and  it  should 
maintain  the  financial  flexibility  and  capital-raising  capacity  to  obtain  additional 
resources for assisting its subsidiary banks. The reasoning behind these functions is 
that  a  bank  holding  company  derives  certain  benefits  at  the  corporate  level  that 
result,  in  part,  from  the  ownership  of  an  institution  that  has  access  to  the  federal 
safety  net,  including  deposit  insurance.  This  principle  is,  naturally,  very  familiar  to 
almost  all  bankers,  since  it  is  embedded  in  Federal  Reserve  regulation,  but  it  is 
worth repeating from time to time.  
Finally, I believe that strict adherence to consumer protection is necessary to protect 
consumers and the financial system as a whole. We have now witnessed the severe 
consequences of inadequate consumer understanding of financial products and of 
lending  to  consumers  without  regard  to  their  ability  to  sustain  the  payments. 
Reasonable  regulations,  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve's  recent  rule  changes  for 
mortgages and credit cards, can help protect consumers and encourage responsible 
lending. 
    Much of my time is currently absorbed by activities related to this last point, as well as the 
broader  housing  and  mortgage  crisis.  In  addition  to  my  Board  committee  assignments,  I 
represent the Fed on the oversight board of the HOPE for Homeowners (H4H) program, an 
FHA program created by the Congress that allows lenders to refinance a delinquent borrower 
into  an  FHA-insured  fixed-rate  mortgage  if  the  lender  and  borrower  agree  to  certain 
conditions.  Again  representing  the  Fed,  I  also  recently  joined  the  board  of  directors  of 
NeighborWorks  America,  a  national,  congressionally  chartered  nonprofit  organization 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2009
focused on affordable housing and, in the face of growing needs, on responses to problems 
facing communities as a result of the housing and mortgage crisis. 
Today  I  would  like  to  share  my  thoughts  about  the  problems  in  housing  markets  and 
mortgage lending, with a focus on how they affect communities. Every time someone talks of 
troubled  mortgages  on  bank  balance  sheets,  they  are  also  talking  about  distressed 
homeowners, distressed neighborhoods and distressed communities. I've heard many of you 
say to me, "We didn't cause this problem. We didn't make any subprime mortgages. It's not 
fair that we should have to pay the price." I understand that many of you may be frustrated 
because you feel you have acted in a prudent manner while others have not. But additional 
parties are also suffering from the imprudent actions of others, such as the homeowners in 
your  community  who  dutifully  pay  their  mortgages  but  still  see  their  houses  fall  sharply  in 
value. More broadly, the recovery of the macroeconomy and the financial system are being 
inhibited by ongoing problems in the housing and mortgage markets. At this moment, we all 
simply  need  to  do  whatever  we  can  to  address  the  enormous  challenges  facing  our 
communities, including those of us who believe we were being prudent and were not a cause 
of the difficulty in the first place. With that in mind, let me delve a bit more into the details of 
the current housing problems and offer some thoughts about what might be done to improve 
the situation. 
The current weakness in housing markets  
Housing activity remains extraordinarily weak. Sales of new and existing homes have been 
running at a pace that is 60 percent of that seen at the peak in 2005. Single-family housing 
starts are now less than one-quarter of their peak level. With the cutbacks in construction, 
inventories of unsold new homes have declined, but the months' supply – that is, inventories 
relative to sales – is still very high by historical standards. The inventory of existing homes for 
sale is also quite elevated – and it would be even higher if not for would-be sellers who have 
withheld or withdrawn their homes from the market amid poor selling conditions. 
We have also seen sharp drops in home prices. When home prices were at their peak three 
years ago, most analysts agreed that housing valuations seemed to be substantially higher 
than  warranted  by  fundamentals.  However,  home  prices  at  the  national  level  are  now  18 
percent  off  their  peak,  with  some  states,  such  as  California  and  Florida,  experiencing 
declines on the order of 40 percent.1 These declines may have reversed much, or perhaps 
all, of the earlier overvaluation. That said, futures markets and many analysts foresee further 
declines.  Expectations  that  house  price  declines  have  not  yet  reached  their  trough  are 
probably  deterring  some  prospective  homeowners  from  making  purchases  and  thereby 
contributing to the current weakness in housing demand. 
A key factor inhibiting recovery is that the adverse conditions in the housing and mortgage 
markets have been, and continue to be, mutually reinforcing. As I am sure you are painfully 
aware,  delinquencies  on  mortgages  have  risen  sharply  in  recent  years.  By  way  of 
background, the problems began in the nonprime mortgage market. As house prices boomed 
in the middle part of this decade, mortgage originators relaxed underwriting standards and 
extended mortgages with low or no down payments to households with weak credit histories 
or those that did not fully document their income. Many of these loans had low initial interest 
rates  that  reset  to  market  rates  after  a  couple  of  years,  which  resulted  in  a  significant 
increase in the monthly payment. Had house prices continued to rise, many borrowers would 
have been able to refinance to avoid higher payments and perhaps to extract accumulated 
home equity to use for future payments. However, the downturn in house prices meant that 
many borrowers did not have sufficient equity to refinance. Payment problems began to rise, 
                                                 
1   Figures based on data from LoanPerformance, a division of First American CoreLogic. 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 3
which, in turn, led lenders to tighten standards and made it even more difficult for borrowers 
to  obtain  new  loans,  which  put  even  more  upward  pressure  on  delinquencies.  Eventually, 
investors became unwilling to fund higher-risk mortgages at any price. 
Although the current problems appear to be rooted in high-risk subprime lending, I would like 
to  dispel  the  notion  that  these  problems  were  caused  in  any  way  by  Community 
Reinvestment  Act  (CRA)  lending.  The  CRA  is  designed  to  promote  lending  in  low-  to 
moderate-income  areas;  it  is  not  designed  to  encourage  high-risk  lending  or  poor 
underwriting. Our analysis of the data finds no evidence, in fact, that CRA lending is in any 
way  responsible  for  the  current  crisis.  In  our  analysis  of  loan  originations,  we  found  that 
approximately 60 percent of higher-priced loans went to middle- or higher-income borrowers 
or neighborhoods, which are populations not targeted by the CRA. Additionally, more than 20 
percent of the higher-priced loans that were extended in low- to moderate-income areas, or 
to low- to moderate-income borrowers, were loans originated by lenders not covered by the 
CRA. In fact, the analysis found that only 6 percent of all higher-priced loans were made by 
CRA-covered lenders to borrowers and neighborhoods targeted by the CRA. This very small 
share  makes  it  hard  to  imagine  how  CRA  could  have  caused,  or  even  contributed  in  a 
meaningful  way,  to  the  current  crisis.  Further  support  for  this  conclusion  comes  from  our 
finding that serious delinquency rates for subprime loans are high in all neighborhood-income 
categories,  not  only  those  in  lower-income  areas,  as  might  be  thought  if  the  CRA  were  a 
contributing force to the subprime crisis.2
The problems in the high-risk mortgage market, together with the more general pullback in 
risk-taking across virtually all financial assets, reduced the willingness of lenders to fund all 
types of mortgages. We are now seeing widespread payment problems in every category of 
mortgages.  To  be  sure,  the  deterioration  partly  reflects  households  straining  to  meet  their 
mortgage obligations amid the broader weakening of macroeconomic conditions. However, it 
also  reflects  the  fact  that  reduced  home  equity  and  tighter  mortgage  credit  have  impaired 
borrowers' ability to refinance their mortgages in order to cope with income loss, unexpected 
expenses, or adverse life events.  
According  to  the  latest  data,  25  percent  of  subprime  loans  and  13  percent  of  near-prime 
loans are now seriously delinquent – that is, more than 90 days past due or in foreclosure. 
The serious delinquency rate for prime mortgages, at between 3 percent and 4 percent, is 
much  lower  than  for  nonprime  loans,  but  it  has  doubled  over  the  past  year.  Foreclosures 
have  also  risen  sharply.  The  available  data  suggests  that  lenders  initiated  2-1/4  million 
foreclosures last year, more than twice the number seen in 2006.3 In the past, about one-half 
of foreclosures initiated were cured through a repayment plan or some other arrangement, 
but the remaining one-half resulted in the loss of a home. The share resulting in home loss 
could well be higher now given the large numbers of distressed households and the bleak 
underlying economic conditions.  
Addressing the problems in housing and mortgage markets 
Several  considerations  underscore  the  need  for  policymakers  to  take  further  actions  to 
address the current problems in the housing and mortgage sectors. To begin, the weakness 
in the housing sector remains a significant drag on the macroeconomy and is reinforcing the 
strains  in  the  financial  system.  Moreover,  the  wave  of  foreclosures  has  the  potential  to 
                                                 
2   See  Glenn  Canner  and  Neil  Bhutta  (2008),  "Staff  Analysis  of  the  Relationship  between  the  CRA  and  the 
Subprime Crisis," memorandum, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 21. 
3   Estimates  of  subprime  and  near-prime  delinquency  rates  are  for  loans  in  securitized  pools,  based  on  data 
from  LoanPerformance,  a  division  of  First  American  CoreLogic.  Estimates  of  prime  delinquency  rates  are 
based  on  data  from  McDash.  Estimates  of  foreclosures  initiated  are  based  on  data  from  the  Mortgage 
Bankers' Association. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2009
exacerbate the problems going forward. In past housing cycles, house prices have tended to 
fall below the level warranted by fundamentals, presumably as weak market conditions led 
sellers to make aggressive price cuts. The potential for an overcorrection of house prices in 
this  cycle  seems  particularly  acute  given  the  potential  for  foreclosures  to  create  a  glut  of 
properties for sale. A high level of foreclosures results in lower prices, and lower prices tend 
to accelerate the pace of foreclosures. And, of course, further large declines in house prices 
would accentuate the broader problems in the macroeconomy and financial system through 
the channels that I just discussed. 
Foreclosures  also  cause  significant  distress  among  the  families  that  lose  their  homes. 
Whether  the  foreclosure  is  the  result  of  inadequate  underwriting  by  the  mortgage  lender, 
irresponsibility on the part of the homeowner, or uncontrollable life events such as job loss, 
the result is the same: Displaced families with depleted resources and impaired credit have 
difficulty finding a new place to live. They may have to move significant distances, which may 
affect their ability to retain their jobs and disrupt other aspects of their lives as well as the 
lives  of  their  family  members.  In  addition,  one  in  five  foreclosures  appears  to  be  affecting 
renter-occupied  units.  The  families  in  these  units  may  also  be  displaced,  even  if  they  are 
paying their rent on time and abiding by the terms of their lease agreement.  
Such  disruptions,  apart  from  creating  personal  and  emotional  strains,  can  also  have 
detrimental  economic  effects.  Large  numbers  of  displaced  families  will  further  strain 
inadequate  supplies  of  rental  housing  that  are  affordable  to  low-  and  moderate-income 
families. Although the overall supply of rental housing has been slowly expanding in recent 
years, new units have largely been built for the higher end of the market, with median asking 
rents  being  38  percent  higher  than  average,  while  more-affordable  units  have  been 
demolished  or  permanently  removed  from  the  inventory.4  In  the  current  environment,  this 
lack  of  new  production  has  been  exacerbated  by  the  restricted  availability  of  financing  for 
multifamily  housing,  reduced  support  by  government-sponsored  enterprises  for  multifamily 
housing, and lower utilization of the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program. 
In  areas  where  foreclosures  are  concentrated,  communities  will  suffer.  Clusters  of  vacant 
properties can foster crime, such as vandalism and arson, and studies have shown that they 
lead to lower house prices throughout the neighborhood.5 Municipal governments may have 
to  spend  more  on  maintaining  properties  and  preventing  crime  just  when  resources  are 
stretched  thin,  in  part  because  of  the  reduced  tax  revenue  associated  with  lower  house 
prices. Such spending may well crowd out the provision of other types of public services. 
Fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus  directed  at  improving  employment  conditions  and  federal 
support for housing finance will ultimately strengthen the housing market. However, we also 
need  measures  that  directly  address  the  foreclosure  problem  associated  with  the  current 
crisis.  In  designing  such  measures,  we  must  consider  that  there  are  different  types  of 
borrowers.  First,  there  are  distressed  borrowers  who  can  avoid  foreclosure  through  an 
appropriate  modification  of  their  loan.  Second,  there  are  some  borrowers  who,  due  to 
resources  or  circumstance,  will  be  unable  or  unwilling  to  sustain  their  mortgage  payments 
even  with  reasonable  loan  adjustments  from  the  lender  or  support  from  government 
programs. In such cases, foreclosures will happen, and we need to limit both the direct costs 
to the lender and the borrower as well as the broader social costs. Of course, there is a third 
group  of  borrowers  –  those  who  are  still  successfully  meeting  their  mortgage  obligations. 
                                                 
4   Harvard  University,  Joint  Center  for  Housing  Studies  (2008),  "America's  Rental  Housing:  The  Key  to  a 
Balanced National Policy". 
5   See, for example, William C. Apgar, Mark Duda, and Rochelle Nawrocki Gorey (2005), "The Municipal Cost of 
Foreclosures: A Chicago Case Study," Housing Finance Policy Research Paper 2005-1 (Minneapolis, Minn.: 
Homeownership Preservation Foundation, February); and John P. Harding, Eric Rosenblatt, and Vincent W. 
Yao  (2008),  "The  Contagion  Effect  of  Foreclosed  Properties,"  Social  Science  Research  Network  working 
paper 1160354 (New York: SSRN, July). 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 5
One might be tempted to view these households as a lesser concern, but we must be mindful 
that they will be more likely to shift into one of the distressed groups if we do not reduce both 
the number of foreclosures and the cost of the foreclosures that do occur. 
Reducing preventable foreclosures 
To help those distressed households for which foreclosure can be prevented, servicers must 
implement  effective  and  sustainable  modifications.  Key  private  and  public  steps  toward 
preventing  unnecessary  foreclosures  have  already  been  taken,  but  much  more  must  be 
done.  While  community  bankers  typically  do  not  have  large  portfolios on  which  to  perform 
wholesale  modifications,  I  would  urge  you  to  be  sure  that  you  are  making  reasonable 
accommodations whenever possible to keep homeowners in their homes.  
While speed and volume in modifications are important, in my view, it is equally essential that 
the new obligations be sustainable in the long run. By "sustainable" I mean that the payment 
should be fixed for the life of the loan, it should be affordable, and it should be based upon 
verified income. In changing the terms of the mortgage, servicers may start with changing the 
interest rate or adjusting the maturity to make the payments more affordable, but they also 
need to consider whether writing down loan principal amounts make sense. Doing the latter 
may be more effective at reducing the probability of redefault.6 These design principles for 
modifications are all included in the Homeownership Preservation Policy recently adopted by 
the Federal Reserve Board.7 The Federal Reserve announced that it would apply this policy 
to the residential mortgage assets held by the special purpose vehicles established by the 
Federal  Reserve  to  facilitate  the  acquisition  of  Bear  Stearns  by  JPMorgan  Chase  and  to 
assist the American International Group, Inc. 
Reducing the costs when foreclosures cannot be prevented 
Without in any way minimizing the need for continued emphasis on foreclosure prevention, I 
don't  believe  we  can  fully  formulate  appropriate  policy  responses  to  the  crisis  unless  we 
acknowledge and address the large numbers of foreclosures that are not avoidable. We are 
likely  only  beginning  to  see  the  serious  costs  of  the  foreclosures  that  have  already  been 
initiated,  both  because  of  the  often-substantial  amount  of  time  required  to  complete  a 
foreclosure  and  because  the  costs  likely  compound  as  the  number  of  foreclosures  grows 
larger.  Moreover,  even  under  optimistic  assumptions  for  the  number  of  loan  modifications 
and  other  forms  of  private  and  public  assistance  that  may  be  realized,  the  pace  at  which 
foreclosures are initiated is likely to remain extremely elevated for some time. Just as public 
focus, experimentation, and policy debate have informed best practices with regard to loan 
modifications,  we  must  also  begin  the  work  of  developing  responsible  protocols  for  the 
management of foreclosures and real estate inventory. Minimizing the amount of time that 
properties  remain  vacant  and  maximizing  the  price  at  which  they  are  sold  will  serve  the 
                                                 
6   The available evidence, though not conclusive, suggests that the homeowner's equity position is, along with 
affordability, an important determinant of default rates, for owner-occupiers as well as investors. See Shane 
Sherlund  (2008),  "The  Past,  Present,  and  Future  of  Subprime  Mortgages,"  Finance  and  Economics 
Discussion  Series  2008-63  (Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  November); 
Kristopher  Gerardi,  Christopher  L.  Foote,  and  Paul  S.  Willen  (2008),  "Negative  Equity  and  Foreclosure: 
Theory  and  Evidence,"  Public  Policy  Discussion  Papers  08-3  (Boston:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston, 
June);  and  Andrew  Haughwout,  Richard  Peach,  and  Joseph  Tracy  (forthcoming),  "Juvenile  Delinquent 
Mortgages: Bad Credit or Bad Economy?" Journal of Urban Economics. 
7   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  "Board  Announces  Policy  to  Help  Avoid 
Preventable Foreclosures on Certain Residential Mortgage Assets Held, Owned, or Controlled by a Federal 
Reserve  Bank,"  press  release,  January  30;  and  Board  of  Governors  (2009),  "Homeownership  Preservation 
Policy for Residential Mortgage Assets," Board policy, January 30. 
6 
 BIS Review 17/2009
interests of both lenders and the communities. During the time properties do remain vacant, 
servicers  have  a  responsibility  to  follow  local  codes  and  ensure  that  the  properties  are 
secured and maintained. At this moment, lenders and communities alike are woefully under-
resourced and unprepared for the volume of real estate that will need to be processed. 
Some  attention  has  already  been  focused  on  getting  renters  or  owners  into  real  estate 
owned (REO) and vacant properties and thus off of servicers' books – something that is in 
the shared interest of servicers, investors, and communities, particularly as the inventories of 
these  types  of  properties  mount.  At  the  national  level,  there  is  some  movement  to  enable 
state  and  local  governments,  as  well  as  nonprofits,  to  purchase  properties  from  servicers' 
REO inventories where sales are otherwise stagnant. Such efforts are challenging in many 
areas because of a lack of financial resources and experience in the kinds of activities that 
are required. Some help will be provided through the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 
2008,  in  which  the  Congress  set  aside  $3.92  billion  to  assist  state  and  local  governments 
with  REO  purchases  and  related  efforts.  The  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban 
Development  created  the  Neighborhood  Stabilization  Program  (NSP)  to  distribute  these 
funds.  
Many servicers are stepping up their efforts to sell their large and growing inventories of REO 
properties, although setting an appropriate price in the current environment remains difficult. 
To  facilitate  REO  sales,  the  National  Community  Stabilization  Trust  (NCST),  a  new  entity 
formed  by  four  national  nonprofit  intermediaries,  is  trying  to  create  a  common  platform  for 
servicers  to  efficiently  sell  REO  properties  to  public  entities  and  nonprofit  organizations. 
Some REO owners, such as Fannie Mae, are also creating dedicated sales channels to sell 
REO  properties  to  public  entities  and  nonprofits,  either  through  the  NCST  or  through 
discounted bulk sales. And some local governments are crafting comprehensive approaches 
using the NSP funds to bring in private- and public-sector entities to manage and sell REO 
inventories. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  taken  steps  to  help  address  the  costs  of  foreclosures  on 
communities. The Community Affairs offices of the Board of Governors and all 12 Reserve 
Banks  held  a  series  of  forums  in  2008,  entitled  "Recovery,  Renewal,  Rebuilding,"  that 
explored  the  problems  and  highlighted  promising  solutions.  We  have  also  partnered  with 
NeighborWorks America to support its efforts to help community leaders grappling with these 
issues; that effort has led to the creation of new tools, training, and the spread of information. 
But  current  efforts  are  not  sufficient  to  deal  with  the  scale  and  scope  of  the  problem,  and 
more needs to be done. State and local governments and nonprofits are working hard but 
often lack the capacity and scale to address the magnitude of the REO disposition problem. 
More dollars alone will not solve this problem. State and local governments need to do more 
to partner with private-sector entities that have experience managing scattered-site housing 
inventories, including rental housing. In addition, we need to make sure that we are using all 
of  the  available  public-sector  capacity  –  such as  state  housing  finance  agencies and  local 
public  housing  authorities  –  that  have  experience  managing  affordable  rental  housing 
inventories. Finally, we need to do more to explore creative solutions to speed the acquisition 
of REO properties so that they do not languish vacant. 
Given the likely number of properties that will enter foreclosure and the time and resources 
involved  in  the  foreclosure  process,  financial  institutions  can  help  minimize  the  cost  by 
developing  clear  policies  and  procedures  for  approval  of  short  sales  and  deeds-in-lieu-of-
foreclosure.  For  homeowners  who  cannot,  or  no  longer  wish  to,  stay  in  their  homes,  such 
strategies release them from their obligation and avoid foreclosure. Some institutions already 
offer a so-called fresh start or cash-for-keys program, in which they provide a small payment 
to  consumers  in  exchange  for  voluntarily  surrendering  the  deed  to  the  home.  Such 
arrangements  reduce  the  cost  of  foreclosure  and  provide  consumers  with  relocation 
assistance.  Other  lenders  are  offering  borrowers  the  option  to  remain  in  their  home  as 
renters  rather  than  owners.  More  lenders  should  consider  these  options,  perhaps  in 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 7
conjunction with loan modification programs, as further inducement for borrowers to engage 
in discussions about loan resolution. At the same time, governments might develop policies 
to accelerate foreclosure in cases where the property has been vacated and the lender has 
agreed to secure and maintain the property.  
If  renters  occupy  the  property,  servicers  of  REO  properties  should  extend  existing  lease 
arrangements whenever possible and while tenants are abiding by the terms of their lease. 
Some  REO  owners,  including  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  are  already  taking  steps  to 
minimize the disruption and displacement to renters living in foreclosed-upon properties. If a 
property  is  likely  to  sit  vacant  for  long  periods  of  time  and  create  problems  for  the 
surrounding area, servicers might consider sale of REO properties to, or partnerships with, 
responsible third parties, including local governments and nonprofit groups.  
Financial  institutions  should  look  for  ways  to  partner  with  community  groups  and 
governments to support strategies to stabilize communities affected by foreclosure. They can 
bring invaluable technical capacity to plan and execute stabilization efforts. Banks can also 
support efforts to reuse REO properties by providing home loans to new homebuyers and by 
financing nonprofit entities and others for the acquisition and rehabilitation of REO properties. 
In addition, they can help victims of foreclosure to rebuild their credit histories and thereby 
facilitate their re-entry into the economic mainstream. 
Finally, regulators should consider whether existing regulations regarding real estate held for 
extended periods of time on bank balance sheets act as an obstacle to creative solutions to 
the foreclosure problem. 
Conclusion 
In  summary,  broad  policy  measures  are  a  central  ingredient  to  restoring  the  health  of  the 
U.S. economy and global financial system. However, as I have discussed today, there is also 
a  pressing  need  for  more  targeted  policy  measures  that  specifically  address  the  current 
problems  in  the  housing  sector.  We  need  considerable  public  support  for  housing  finance 
until  private  credit  and  securitization  markets  are  restarted.  We  need  to  strengthen  and 
augment  our  efforts  to  reduce  preventable  foreclosures.  In  addition,  we  need  to  turn  far 
greater attention to limiting the costs of foreclosures that do occur. Such efforts are not only 
in the interest of the families who are directly affected and their immediate communities, but 
are  also  in  the  interest  of  the  financial  institutions  involved  and  the  broader  economy. 
Because much of the cost does not occur as soon as a foreclosure has been initiated and 
can  grow  with  time,  we  must  be  forward-looking  and  affirmatively  engage  in  efforts  to 
mitigate the consequences now. 
As  community  bankers,  you  have  a  long  history  of  engagement  in  your  communities.  You 
have  served  on  the  boards  of  public  and  nonprofit  entities  focused  on  housing.  You  have 
built  Habitat  for  Humanity  houses,  and  you  have  rebuilt  entire  neighborhoods  following 
natural disasters. Your financial resources will be needed as we work toward solutions for the 
current crisis, but, even more important, your experience, expertise, contacts, and creativity 
will be needed. If you believe in the saying that "all real estate markets are local," you also 
understand that it will take local knowledge to assess community needs and craft solutions. If 
you are not quite sure where to start, contact your local housing nonprofit or Federal Reserve 
Bank. Contact municipal authorities or housing counselors. Partner with other banks in your 
market or do it alone. But do it today. As always, your communities depend on you. 
8 
 BIS Review 17/2009
