Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook 
Address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  to 
invited foreign embassy representatives, Norges Bank, Oslo, 2 April 2009. 
The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive 
Board’s monetary policy meeting on 25 March, Monetary Policy Report 1/09 and on previous speeches. Please 
note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since  our  last  meeting  about  a  year  ago,  the  international  economic  environment  has 
changed  dramatically.  In  my  presentation  today,  I  will  focus  on  how  the  international 
downturn  has  influenced  the  Norwegian  economy  and  the  outlook  for  our  economy.  The 
crisis  has  its  core  in  the  financial  system,  and  I  will  therefore  discuss  the  need  for  a  new 
international financial architecture. Finally, I will comment on the Government Pension Fund 
– Global and how the financial crisis has influenced its investments and returns. 
Sudden global downturn in the real economy 
In September 2008, the turbulence in financial markets erupted into a full-blown global crisis. 
On  15  September  Lehman  Brothers  filed  for  bankruptcy.  The  next  day,  money  markets 
seized  up.  Confidence  between  banks  had  been  compromised.  Liquidity  dried  up,  interest 
rates rose sharply and equity prices fell. Exchange rate volatility – the daily fluctuations in the 
exchange rate – showed a marked rise. Bond markets in turn shut down. In the days and 
weeks  that  followed,  banks  tightened  credit  standards  on  new  loans  to  households  and 
enterprises. 
Global economic growth was already slowing, but the situation deteriorated in the last few 
months of 2008. The turnaround hit hard, with synchronised effects on virtually all financial 
and goods and services markets, not only in the US but also in Europe, Asia, Latin America 
and Oceania. For a long period there were hopes that growth in China and other emerging 
market economies would hold up. But they are also now severely affected by the crisis. 
The world economy is now in the deepest downturn in the postwar period, and will contract in 
2009,  for  the  first  time  in  over  60  years.  What  is  happening  now  is  more  than  a  normal 
fluctuation in the business cycle. The world is facing a crisis of confidence, with faltering faith 
in the future and a loss of confidence in banks, counterparties and contractual partners. The 
authorities  have  taken  extraordinary  action,  as  in  a  state  of  emergency,  deploying  a  wide 
range of established and new policy instruments.  
Banks have been nationalised and state ownership has increased. Central banks have cut 
policy  rates  substantially.  Government  authorities  have  employed  credit  easing  and 
quantitative  easing  to  increase  the  money  supply  by  purchasing  private  bonds  and 
government debt.  
Government  authorities  worldwide  have  increased  budget  deficits.  In  many  industrialised 
countries, deficits will rise to about 5 per cent and for some as much as 10 per cent.  
How the international downturn has influenced the Norwegian economy 
Turning  to  the  Norwegian  economy,  our  export  industry  is  being  severely  affected  by  the 
sharp  global  downturn,  and  this  is  having  repercussions  on  other  Norwegian  business 
sectors. Mainland GDP is expected to fall by 1 per cent this year.  
BIS Review 42/2009 
 1
As in other countries, a wide range of instruments is being used to counteract the effects of 
the  financial  crisis.  In  order  to  curb  the  fall  in  activity,  government  expenditure  will  be 
increased by over 10 per cent this year. 
Norges Bank’s bank lending survey shows that banks have been tightening credit standards 
substantially,  particularly  for  corporate  loans.  To  boost  the  credit  market,  a  separate 
government fund1 will buy private bonds.  
The government has also provided loans and guarantees for exports and expanded lending 
limits  for  the  Norwegian  State  Housing  Bank  and  other  special  vehicles  for  government 
financing.2  
At present, our banks are financially sound, but they need to strengthen their core capital in 
order to be able to supply credit as normal. The authorities are offering risk capital to banks, 
including core Tier 1 capital without voting rights, through a newly established State Finance 
Fund. 
To facilitate the funding of banks operating in Norway, a swap arrangement was established 
allowing  banks  to  exchange  covered  bonds  for  up  to  NOK  350  billion  in  government 
securities. A number of  banks have made use of this facility, so far in an amount totalling 
NOK 90 billion. The arrangement provides banks with Treasury bills. Banks have used these 
as collateral for loans, sold them or kept them as liquidity reserves.  
Norges  Bank  has  also  expanded  its  use  of  its  ordinary  instruments.  We  have  supplied 
additional liquidity through our loan facilities and made arrangements for banks to furnish a 
greater  range  of  securities  as  collateral  for  the  loans.  We  have  also  provided  loans  with 
longer-than-usual  maturities.  The  longest  maturities  have  been  two-  and  three-year  loans, 
which have been geared to small banks.  
Norges Bank has also supplied NOK through currency swaps and offered US dollar loans to 
Norwegian banks. Norges Bank entered into a swap agreement with the Federal Reserve, 
authorising a loan of up to USD 15 billion. 
The measures have been effective. Money market rates, which for a period were above 8 per 
cent, are now approximately 3 per cent. In this period Norges Bank reduced the key policy 
rate  by  3.75  percentage  points  to  2  per  cent  on  25  March.  Banks’  lending  rates  have 
decreased considerably. Credit flows have improved, but access to credit is still difficult for 
enterprises. Money market premiums have fallen. In the first quarter of 2009, premiums on 
three-month  interest  rates  in  Norway  stood  at  1.2  percentage  points.  Norwegian  money 
market premiums are expected to edge down ahead in line with premiums in global markets. 
The  global  downturn  led  to  a  marked  fall  in  prices  for  oil  and  other  commodities  through 
autumn 2008. Oil prices have for a period hovered around USD 40-50 per barrel. Oil futures 
prices have fallen and indicate an oil price of around USD 60 per barrel in 2010.  
Other  commodity  prices  that  are  important  for  the  Norwegian  economy  have  also  fallen 
sharply. Metal prices are particularly sensitive to cyclical developments. Futures prices for a 
selection  of  raw  materials  indicate  unchanged  or  moderately  rising  prices  in  the  next  few 
years. Many countries that have been hit by the economic setback will see an improvement 
in their terms of trade and growth in their disposable income. 
The current downturn followed a period of very high global and domestic economic growth, 
supported by favourable trading conditions. Few countries benefited more than Norway from 
                                                 
1   Folketrygdfondet will manage the new Government Bond Fund. 
2   The  Government  has  increased  the  capital  of  Kommunalbanken  Norway  (the  local  government  funding 
agency),  it  has  increased  the  scope  of  GIEK  (the  central  government  export  credit  agency)  and  Innovation 
Norway, and has offered state loans to Eksportfinans Norway (the credit institution for export financing). 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2009
the economic upturn, which drove up prices for oil, gas and other export commodities. At the 
same  time,  an  increasing  number  of  cheap  consumer  goods  were  imported  from  new  EU 
countries and from Asia. Norway’s real disposable income increased by  more than 40 per 
cent from 2002 to 2008, more than that of any other western country. But our terms of trade 
are  now  deteriorating.  Some  of  the  gains  of  the  past  few  years  have  dissipated,  and  our 
disposable income might fall by close to 10 per cent in 2009.  
In periods of substantial uncertainty, investors will seek to repatriate investments in foreign 
currency.  The  fragility  of  the  Norwegian  krone  was  illustrated  when  investors  fled  the 
currencies  of  small  countries,  and  the  krone  weakened  considerably.  When  speculators 
withdrew, daily fluctuations increased and hedging against exchange rate volatility became 
more  expensive.  The  krone  fell  to  a  record-low  level  in  December  last  year,  but  has 
appreciated since then.  
Consumer  price  inflation  reached  a  peak  in  October  of  2008,  but  has  slowed  markedly 
thereafter  and  was  2.5  per  cent  in  February.  Underlying  inflation  is  still  above  target  and 
stood at approximately 3 per cent in February. Looking forward, inflation will abate. 
Norges Bank has over a number of years focused on anchoring inflation expectations around 
the  target  of  close  to  2.5  per  cent  over  time  and  has  given  weight  to  predictability,  with  a 
recognisable response pattern.  
The downturn has not affected long-term inflation expectations to any great extent. According 
to  an  expectations  survey,  inflation  expectations  five  years  ahead  among  experts  in  the 
financial industry, the social partners and academia were virtually unchanged from the fourth 
quarter of 2008 to the first quarter of 2009. 
After a prolonged upturn, both output and employment are falling in Norway. The turnaround 
had already occurred just over a year ago, but in the period to autumn last year, it appeared 
that capacity utilisation would gradually decrease to a normal level. As the global economic 
outlook deteriorated, it became clear that the slowdown in our economy would occur more 
rapidly  and  be  more  pronounced  than  envisaged  earlier.  In  November,  regional  network 
contacts  reported  an  abrupt  and  marked  turnaround  in  activity.  They  now  report  that  the 
labour  supply  is  no  longer  a  constraint  on  production.  The  enterprises  in  the  network  are 
expecting output and employment to fall further over the next six months.  
Unemployment  has  increased  since  autumn  last  year,  but  is  still  at  historically  low  levels. 
Unemployment is projected to rise to almost 5 per cent at the end of the year. Wage growth 
is expected to come down this year from a high level in 2008. Lower corporate profitability, 
rising unemployment and lower consumer price inflation will probably result in low negotiated 
pay increases this year.  
The export sector has been particularly hard hit by the global downturn. Traditional exports 
have fallen markedly since autumn last year. A contraction in the world economy will result in 
a  substantial  decline  in  Norwegian  exports  ahead.  Moreover,  due  to  the  marked  fall  in 
commodity  prices,  export  prices  are  now  very  low.  A  weak  krone  may  help  to  maintain 
profitability in Norwegian export enterprises.  
Expensive  and  reduced  access  to  credit,  high  interest  expenses  and  uncertainty  about 
developments ahead amplified the downturn towards the end of 2008. Private consumption 
fell  markedly,  the  decline  in  housing  investment  accelerated  and  mainland  business 
investment started to fall. The downturn in the world economy and the abnormal conditions in 
financial markets are expected to continue to mark the Norwegian economy ahead. Mainland 
GDP is projected to contract by 1 per cent between 2008 and 2009. 
Norwegian government finances are sound, with substantial net wealth, although the surplus 
will  be  reduced  by  the  fall  in  oil  prices.  The  automatic  stabilisers  in  the  national  budget 
together with discretionary fiscal policy will stimulate the mainland economy by the equivalent 
of  5  per  cent  of  GDP  from  2008  to  2009.  Fiscal  policy  is  assumed  to  become  less 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 3
expansionary between 2010 and 2012. Government oil revenue spending is expected to be 
brought back into line with the fiscal rule when cyclical conditions eventually normalise.  
We assume that prospects for higher unemployment, a fall in house prices and a high level 
of debt will induce households to build up financial buffers and reduce debt. The saving ratio 
is expected to increase considerably. Net lending is projected to be positive this year after 
being negative since 2004. As household borrowing has been considerable in recent years, 
deleveraging in the household sector is important to long-term stability in the economy. 
The outlook ahead and monetary policy assessments 
Inflation will be curbed by lower capacity utilisation. The marked increase in unemployment 
now envisaged will result in lower pay increases this year and next.  
Prospects for weaker growth and lower inflation imply a lower interest rate than presented in 
the interest rate projection from our previous forecast in December. There is also a risk that 
the global downturn will be deeper and more prolonged than expected. If this proves to be 
the case, growth in the Norwegian economy will not pick up as quickly and inflation will fall 
more sharply than we currently assume. The objective of avoiding a pronounced downturn 
indicates in isolation that the interest rate should be rapidly reduced to a low level. 
On the other hand, we have already made substantial reductions in the key policy rate. With 
a low interest rate, households may save less and the turnaround may occur more rapidly 
than  we  assume.  This  indicates  in  isolation  that  changes  in  the  interest  rate  should  be 
gradual or that further interest rate cuts should be put on hold.  
Overall, the outlook and balance of risks suggest that the key policy rate should be gradually 
reduced further to a level of around 1 per cent in the second half of 2009. This is about 1 
percentage point lower than in Norges Bank’s forecast from 17 December last year. 
With the low interest rate added to government fiscal measures, our analysis indicates that 
growth in the economy will be positive from the second half of this year. Growth will be driven 
by a rise in private consumption as a result of a low key policy rate, growth in real wages and 
higher  government  transfers.  Activity  in  the  economy  will  be  boosted  by  strong  growth  in 
government  spending.  The  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  Norges  Bank’s 
interest rate changes will translate into lower lending rates for households and businesses. 
At the same time, owing to tighter credit standards in banks, monetary policy appears to be 
somewhat less effective than normal.  
Inflation is projected to fall below 2 per cent in 2010, before gradually moving up towards the 
target towards the end of the projection period as the output gap gradually closes. There is a 
risk that the structural changes brought about by the crisis may result in persistently lower 
productivity growth and perhaps higher unemployment. 
It appears that inflation will remain considerably lower in the years ahead than we expected 
in December. Both the objective of stabilising inflation around the target and the objective of 
ensuring stable developments in the real economy suggest that the interest rate should be 
low. 
Financial architecture  
In many countries, banks’ share of GDP has increased considerably over the past few years. 
This  share  is  smaller  in  Norway  than  in  other  countries  and,  as  a  result,  the  Norwegian 
economy has been less exposed to the financial crisis. Although banks in Norway have not 
been as oversized as in many other countries, banking still contributes to fluctuations in our 
real economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2009
Banking is procyclical. In upturns, loan losses are low, increasing banks’ profits. Access to 
equity capital is ample, providing the basis for strong lending growth. 
Losses increase in downturns, and the supply of equity capital can dry up, compelling banks 
to restrict their lending. The impact is stronger since the value of property used as collateral 
fluctuates  in  step  with  cyclical  developments.  At  the  same  time,  counterparties  and  rating 
agencies  may  require  higher  capital  levels.  When  credit  is  rationed  by  banks  with  large 
market shares, in regional or national terms, sound investment projects are also postponed. 
This results in an adverse feedback loop, with banks incurring higher loan losses and weaker 
earnings – as economic activity stalls. 
Banks operate with very low levels of equity capital. A manufacturing enterprise or a firm in 
the  service  sector  should  preferably  have  an  equity  ratio  of  between  30  and  70  per  cent, 
depending on the level of risk involved. Banks can operate with a far lower level of equity 
capital because they are supposed to diversify risk, have sound management systems and 
be well regulated and under supervision. 
In Norway, banks’ equity capital makes up six per cent of their assets. Before the Second 
World  War,  the  ratio  was  over  10  per  cent,  falling  to  five  per  cent  in  the  postwar  period. 
Government  capital  injections  resulted  in  a  rise  in  equity  capital  at  the  beginning  of  the 
1990s, but the ratio has fallen again in recent years. 
Equity capital in investment banks in the US and Europe was very low, as low as 2-3 per 
cent of total assets. Many of these banks have now collapsed. 
The authorities in many countries are working to enhance financial market resilience. Three 
changes are particularly relevant for the Norwegian banking sector: 
First, for a given risk assessment, capital requirements must be higher. 
Second,  banks  must  not  be  allowed  to  reduce  capital  below  a  minimum  level  even  if  they 
extend loans that, according to models, seemingly involve low risk. 
Third, banks must build up strong capital buffers over and above the minimum requirement in 
normal times. Then banks would not have to increase capital when the turnaround occurred. 
On the contrary, they would be able to absorb losses, thereby avoiding the need to ration 
credit in bad times. 
Norwegian  banks  do  not  have  sufficient  buffers  today  to  safeguard  their  own,  their 
shareholders’ or the economy’s best interests. That is why the government is now supplying 
risk capital. There should be no doubt that banks have the capital they need. 
In  addition,  banks’  funding  methods  make  them  vulnerable.  Earlier,  Norwegian  banks 
primarily  obtained  funds  through  deposits  by  households  and  enterprises.  In  recent  years, 
banks  have  borrowed  heavily  in  both  domestic and  foreign markets.  During  the  crisis,  this 
proved to involve high liquidity risk for banks. Long-term credit markets have now dried up. 
The government and Norges Bank have therefore taken on the role of lender. In the future, in 
regulations and  in  practice,  deposits  must  again  take  precedence  as  the  largest  source  of 
funding for banks. Bonds collateralised by high quality mortgages, so-called cover bonds, will 
probably also be important. 
The G20 group is now discussing how to tackle the crisis and prevent it happening again. It 
will be important to avoid protectionism and trade wars. 
Moreover, the ambition is to establish a new and more sustainable financial architecture.  
Markets are integrated and banks are global, while the supervisory authorities are national 
and the application of rules varies. Supervisory authorities must be strengthened and adopt a 
uniform  approach  to  banks,  and  regulations  must  be  improved.  There  has  been  some 
competition between countries to establish national financial centres. This has had an impact 
on  national  supervisory  authorities,  who  have  therefore  tended  to  be  reluctant  to  impose 
stringent  requirements  on  the  banking  sector.  It  is  important  to  avoid  slippage  in the  rules 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 5
towards an agreed minimum level that is too low. For Norway, it is essential that rules are 
applied  stringently  and  uniformly  in  all  the  Nordic  countries  since  banks  based  in  Sweden 
and Denmark have large market shares in Norway and Norwegian banks have ambitions in 
Scandinavia. 
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  little  cooperation  across  countries  in  the  field  of 
macroeconomic policy. The view has been that all is well as long as each country keeps its 
own house in order. This is an important point of departure, but we have now presumably 
learned  that  imbalances  and  risk  arise  when  large  countries  do  not  sufficiently  take  into 
account that their own choices also influence those of others. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) must be given a more important role. The Fund must 
enhance  its  surveillance  activities  and  its  advice  must  be  acted  upon  to  a  greater  extent. 
However, this probably requires changes in the IMF’s governance structure. Countries that 
are now gaining in economic strength are seeking greater influence, and the IMF must also 
improve  its  reputation  in  these  countries.  We  have  to  ensure  that  the  Fund  has  sufficient 
resources to grant loans to member countries that are particularly hard hit by the financial 
crisis. The financial resources of the IMF are being discussed at the G20 summit in London. 
The IMF aims to double its lending capacity and has called on member countries to provide 
the necessary funding. Several countries have responded positively, among them Norway. 
The Government has offered to make available a contribution of up to NOK 30 billion to the 
IMF, subject to approval by the Storting. The US has asked for the NAB3 to be increased 
substantially. Even a special one-time allocation of SDRs4 to strengthen global liquidity may 
be considered. 
The Government Pension Fund – Global  
Let me now turn to the Government Pension Fund – Global. 
International  capital  markets  have  been  a  boon  to  Norway.  We  drew  on  borrowing 
opportunities  abroad  when  the  petroleum  industry  was  being  built  up. We  did  the same  in 
order to expand welfare schemes and to finance the countercyclical policy of the mid-1970s 
and  the  early  1990s.  National  oil  and  gas  resources  are  now  converted  into  equities  and 
bonds abroad in the Government Pension Fund – Global. 
The Pension Fund was formally established in 1990, but it was not until 1996 that the first 
allocation  –  NOK  2  billion  –  was  made.  The  Fund  is  fully  integrated  with  the  government 
budget,  and  the  same  priorities  are  imposed  on  spending  from  the  Fund  as  on  any  other 
government  spending.  This  means  that  all  Norway’s  petroleum  revenues,  as  well  as  the 
return, go into the Fund. Then, as part of the budget resolution, the Storting decides on an 
annual  transfer  from  the  Fund  to  cover  the  government  budget  deficit.  This  procedure 
effectively  prohibits  use  of  the  capital  in  the  Fund  for  purposes  not  considered  sufficiently 
important to be prioritised in the regular budget process. High oil prices led to record-high 
inflows  of  capital  into  the  Fund  of  NOK  384  billion  in  2008.  The  Fund’s  market  value  was 
NOK 2 276 billion at the end of the year. The Ministry of Finance has decided to increase the 
allocation to equities in the Fund from 40 to 60 per cent. 
The  financial  crisis  has  dealt  a  blow  to  our  investments  in  global  equity  and  fixed  income 
markets.  The  annual  real  return  since  Norges  Bank  commenced 
the  operational 
management of the Fund is now just 1 per cent, which is well below the assumed long-term 
return of 4 per cent. The Fund has not reaped a risk premium in the equity market as we had 
expected.  During  the  same  period,  considerable  revenues  have  been  generated  from  the 
                                                 
3   New Arrangements to Borrow. 
4   Special Drawing Rights. 
6 
 BIS Review 42/2009
exploitation  of  petroleum  resources.  Global  capital  markets  give  us  an  opportunity  to 
distribute the spending of these revenues across current and future generations. There are 
no other options for investing this wealth that could have shielded the Fund from the global 
economic downturn. Other government assets, such as shareholdings in domestic industries 
and subsea resources in the North Sea have also fallen sharply in value, at market prices. 
Real household housing wealth has also declined since summer of 2007 to the end of 2008. 
The return on the Government Pension Fund – Global generated in 2008 was 3.4 per cent 
lower than that on the benchmark portfolio. This is considerably lower than expected in the 
light  of  our  investment  strategy,  which  features  a  large  number  of  small  and  independent 
positions.  This  performance  was  due  primarily  to  the  investments  in  the  fixed  income 
portfolio,  which  proved  to  be  less  well-diversified  than  expected,  and  to  investments  that 
exposed us to changes in liquidity premiums. 
The Fund currently has extensive holdings of bonds, that despite high ratings, are difficult to 
trade in today’s market. Realised losses have been limited. The flipside of large book losses 
is that this portfolio has a high yield, reflecting not only the increase in credit risk but also 
high liquidity premiums and fears and uncertainty in the market. History has seen a number 
of deep financial crises, and market conditions will return to normal in time. The true value of 
the bond portfolio will, at the very latest, be realised when the loans are repaid. More than 90 
percent of the fixed income portfolio is rated A or better. Even though rating agencies do not 
always prove to have the best evaluations, this still illustrates our conservative investment 
strategy. 
The Fund is a long-term savings plan and capable of riding out large swings in the markets. 
This is the very foundation of the investment strategy with its high allocation to equities. Our 
ability to adhere to this strategy in a critical phase – even if this should persist for some time 
–  is  crucial if  the  Fund  is  to  deliver  the  returns  we  expect  in  the  longer  term.  We  need  to 
attach importance to the real value of equity investments and safeguard assets by spreading 
the  Fund’s  investments.  Norges  Bank  therefore  supports  the  strategy  that  the  government 
has chosen for the Fund. 
Under  the  Fund’s  strategy,  more  equities  will  be  bought  when  equity  prices  fall  and  fewer 
when they rise. The Fund therefore purchased a large volume of equities from 2001 to 2003 
and is buying a considerable volume now. Of the equities now owned by the Fund, 40 per 
cent were purchased last year when prices were moving down.  
As a result, ownership in the business sector in the US, Europe and Asia has increased – in 
companies’ human capital, in their machinery and equipment, brands and organisation. The 
Fund now has holdings in almost 8000 companies and owns approximately 0.77 per cent of 
global equity markets. In the long run, and even though many companies have now folded, 
investing in companies may perhaps be at least as safe as extending loans.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 7
   8 
 BIS Review 42/2009
    9
BIS Review 42/2009 
     10 
 BIS Review 42/2009
    BIS Review 42/2009 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 42/2009
    BIS Review 42/2009 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 42/2009
    15
BIS Review 42/2009 
     16 
 BIS Review 42/2009
    17
BIS Review 42/2009 
     18 
 BIS Review 42/2009
   BIS Review 42/2009 
 19
