Masaaki Shirakawa: International policy response to financial crises 
Remarks by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  Kansas  City's  Annual  Economic  Symposium,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,  21  August 
2009. 
 Introduction 
I will explore the future of international coordination between central banks in the wake of the 
current financial crisis. Here, I mean by coordination between central banks that they attempt 
to respond to and stave off a global crisis effectively in an organized way without any outside 
pressure.  
The current crisis has posed enormous challenges on many fronts to policymakers. As the 
starting point for discussing those challenges, I think it is important to highlight three facts. 
First, the global economy has encountered a crisis more frequently in the past 20 years than 
before. Second, the current crisis has grown literally into a global crisis. The global economy 
has  contracted  sharply  since  the  fall  of  2008,  as  often  described  as  falling  off  a  cliff.  By 
contrast, the prior crises such as Japan’s post-bubble period and the East Asian crisis still 
remained  local,  even  though  they  exerted  significant  adverse  effects  on  the  domestic  or 
regional  economy.1  Third,  the  soundness  of  financial  institutions  before  the  crisis  differed 
significantly  between  those  countries  in  question.  Asian  financial  institutions,  including 
Japanese  institutions,  as  well  as  Canadian  and  Australian  ones,  had  smaller  exposure  to 
complicated structured products, compared with U.S. and European institutions. Those three 
points provide a sound basis for considering how to forestall a crisis. 
Causes for global financial crisis 
Here, I will try to summarize some stylized facts about the unfolding of crises, including the 
current  one.  During  a  pre-crisis  period,  benign  economic  conditions,  just  like  the  “Great 
Moderation”  prior  to  the  current  crisis,  usually  prevail  for  some  time,  and  the  risk-taking 
attitude  of  economic  agents  becomes  aggressive.  In  economic  analysis,  economic  agents’ 
preferences  are  assumed  to  remain  unchanged  over  time.  But,  in  reality,  risk  perception 
becomes optimistic and risk tolerance is elevated under benign economic conditions.  
Unfortunately,  our  knowledge  of  a  mechanism  of  such  endogenous  changes  in  the  risk-
taking  attitude,  or  risk-taking  channel,  is  quite  limited.  Institutional  arrangements,  such  as 
regulation, valuation, and compensation, shape incentives at a micro level. Given institutional 
arrangements,  an  actual  implication  of  such  incentives  is  importantly  influenced  by  the 
financial and economic environment at a macro level. In that respect, low inflation and high 
growth  coupled  with  low  volatility  of  the  two  certainly  play  an  important  role  in  fostering 
bullish  sentiment.  In  addition,  a  sense  of  unlimited  availability  of  liquidity  transforms  such 
bullish sentiment into excessive risk-taking. 
In the process of risk-taking, financial imbalances are being accumulated in various forms, 
such as expansion of credit and leverage, an increase in maturity mismatches, and a surge 
in asset prices. The build-up of financial imbalances is hardly sustainable over time and a 
balance  sheet  adjustment  eventually  takes  place.  The  adjustment  initially  proceeds  in  a 
gradual pace. Then a crisis comes to the surface in the form of a severe liquidity shortage 
triggered  by  some  shocks,  and  it  deepens  when  confidence  among  financial  market 
                                                 
1   Japan's 1990s is often referred to as the “lost decade.” For the appropriateness of such characterization, see 
Shirakawa (2009a). 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 1
like  excluding 
food  and  energy  prices.  Thus, 
participants  collapses.  Market  liquidity  declines  in  wide-ranging  markets  and  an  adverse 
feedback  mechanism  starts  working  between  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy. 
Capital  shortages  at  financial  institutions  become  apparent,  although  the  very  distinction 
between a liquidity shortage and a capital shortage becomes blurred in a crisis.  
Then,  what  made  the  current  crisis  truly  a  globalized  one,  in  contrast  to  the  aftermath  of 
Japan’s bubble burst and the East Asian crisis? 
First, during the pre-crisis period, excess liquidity prevailed on a worldwide basis, and thus, 
the financial imbalances expanded massively and spread out over a wide range of regions 
around the globe. A variety of factors worked in a complicated manner behind the scenes, 
and  expectations  for  the  continuation  of  low  interest  rates  among  industrial  countries 
certainly  played  an  important  role  in  expanding  financial  imbalances  by  generating  a  false 
sense of abundant liquidity. 
By  contrast,  in  the  case  of  Japan’s  bubble,  the  outstanding  performance  in  terms  of  both 
inflation and growth was to a large extent an isolated phenomenon. Headline CPI for Japan 
remained already at a low level, just below 1 percent on average between 1985 and 1989, 
whereas  that  for  G-7  excluding  Japan  and  Germany  still  remained  around  5  percent.  The 
overall  picture  of  inflation  performance  remained  almost  unchanged  when  using  the  core 
measures, 
there  was  virtually  no 
synchronization in expectations for prolonged low interest rates on a worldwide basis. 
Second, the increased interconnection between financial institutions made the adjustment in 
the  current crisis  more  acute  and  globally  synchronized.  Financial  institutions  had become 
highly interconnected on a worldwide basis before the crisis. A case in point is a surge in 
cross-border lending. Cross-border lending by banks in industrial countries toward emerging 
economies continued to increase over time, and has accelerated since 2003. Lending toward 
Central  and  Eastern  Europe  by  euro  area  banks  was  more  conspicuous.  That  process 
inevitably  involved  the  expansion  of  a  dual  mismatch,  that  is,  a  currency  and  maturity 
mismatch,  which  was  supported  by  a  sense  of  abundant  liquidity  in  both  domestic  and 
foreign  currencies.  In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  fragility  stemming  from  the  dual  mismatch 
abruptly  exerted  severe  funding  pressures,  further  deepening  the  crisis  in  many  countries, 
including emerging economies.  
By contrast, during Japan’s bubble era in the late 1980s, the increase in cross-border lending 
was not globally observed and mostly limited to Japanese financial institutions.  
As  a  related  issue,  “the  global  savings  glut”  is  often  pointed  as  one  of  the  causes  for  the 
global  credit  bubble,  but  I  am  a  little  skeptical  about  that  line  of  argument.  It  is  true  that 
savings by emerging economies are one of its determinants, since global real interest rates 
are  determined  so  as  to  equate  the  savings  and  investment  in  the  global  economy.  To 
understand the phenomenon of the global credit bubble, however, gross capital flows are far 
more important than net capital flows. The gross capital flows do not necessarily correspond 
to the savings-investment balances at a national and regional level. In fact, it was euro area 
banks that strikingly expanded cross-border lending, while the euro area as a whole did not 
register a current account surplus. 
International coordination: assessment on the current crisis responses 
To  the  extent  that  a  crisis  becomes  increasingly  globalized,  greater  cooperation  among 
policymakers  will  be  called  for.  How  should  policy  responses  so  far  be  assessed  from  the 
viewpoint of international coordination?  
I  will  start  with  positive  developments.  First,  governments  and  central  banks  in  many 
countries  have  carried  out  aggressive  macroeconomic  policy  responses  to  stave  off  a 
significant deterioration in economic activity. Second, many countries have provided public 
capital to financial institutions and instituted government guarantees on their liabilities. Third, 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2009
coordination between central banks in conducting money market operations has advanced 
significantly.  A  case  in  point  is  the  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  at  many  central 
banks, backed by the U.S. dollar swap arrangements with the U.S. Federal Reserve. Fourth, 
the  prior  collaborative  efforts  by  central  banks  and  private  financial  institutions  in  reducing 
settlement risk have proven effective. The functioning of currency swap markets, which plays 
a  key  role  in  linking  interbank  markets  in  many  countries,  crucially  depends  on  perceived 
settlement  risk.  In  that  regard,  the  continuous  linked  settlement  (CLS)  mechanism,  which 
started in 2002, proved quite effective. Without such a payment-versus-payment service for 
foreign exchange transactions, the global financial system would have been in deeper turmoil 
through the amplification of counterparty risk due to further risks associated with time zone 
differences.  
Of  course,  it  is  a  hard  fact  that  various  limits  exist  in  international  coordination.  First, 
measures  to  stabilize  the  financial  system  in  each  country  have  hastily  been  introduced 
without necessary harmonization between the countries. That has created some gaps in the 
range of government guarantees for depositors and creditors between the countries, thereby 
triggering  sudden  international  shifts  in  deposits.  Second,  financial  institutions  have  been 
increasingly  asked  to  serve  for  the  domestic  “interests”  and  sort  of  “financial  nationalism” 
seems  to  have  emerged.  Third,  in  some  countries,  the  aggregated  balance-sheet  size  of 
domestic financial institutions expanded far beyond nominal GDP, thus making it increasingly 
difficult to take necessary policy actions, including public capital injections. 
The observations I have just mentioned indicate the limitations in international coordination, 
in the sense that the global or world-wide optimum has not necessarily been chosen. Like it 
or not, that is a reality and such limitations do arise for a couple of reasons. First, with public 
money injections, a government is in a position to pay more attention to taxpayers’ interests, 
and naturally has incentives for ring-fencing interests of its own country. Second, bankruptcy 
legislation  for  financial  institutions  differs  between  countries.  As  the  Bank  of  England 
Governor  Mervyn  King  put  it,  “global  banking  institutions  are  global  in  life,  but  national  in 
death.”2  
Challenging conventional wisdom 
The limitations I have just mentioned are, for the most part, sort of a coordination failure due 
to the very existence of sovereign nations. We cannot deny the importance of making efforts 
to avoid a coordination failure, but it seems more productive for each policymaker around the 
globe to address the common factors causing crises. In that regard, we should take seriously 
the fact that the frequency of crises has increased in the last 20 years, and the crises have 
also  become  increasingly  globalized.  For  those  reasons,  it  seems  natural  to  reflect  on  the 
relationship between that fact and conventional wisdom underpinning monetary policy, and 
financial regulation and supervision.  
Put it simply, the prevailing philosophy among central banks and other policy authorities rests 
on  three  forms  of  “pre-established  harmony,”  if  you  please.  First,  macroeconomic  stability 
can be achieved by monetary policy, which pursues low and stable inflation. Macroeconomic 
stability is complementary to financial stability. Second, financial stability can be achieved by 
pursuing a microprudential approach. To that end, the authorities need to properly regulate 
and supervise individual financial institutions. As a key tool, capital adequacy regulation has 
become  increasingly  sophisticated  to  calibrate  risk  involved  in  a  specific  activity.  Third, 
financial  institutions  with  a  sufficient  capital  position  can  easily  raise  liquidity  in  financial 
markets. Thus, liquidity consideration has been assigned only an ancillary role in regulation 
and supervision. 
                                                 
2   See Financial Services Authority (2009). 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 3
Way of thinking about monetary policy management 
It is a good time to review the prevailing philosophy in light of the current crisis. 
On the first form of the pre-established harmony on macroeconomic stability, monetary policy 
aimed  at  low  and  stable  inflation  was  so  successful  in  the past  two  decades.  Oddly,  such 
success  of  monetary  policy  also  turned  out  to  be  a  part  of  the  problem.  Given  human 
psychology and institutional arrangements, the unfounded expectations for the continuation 
of  low  interest  rates  were  responsible  for  creating  perverse  incentives  under  benign 
economic conditions. Such perverse incentives in turn induced the process of accumulation 
and  manifestation  of  financial imbalances,  thereby  destabilizing  the  economy  in  the  longer 
term.3  
The issue we are facing is sometimes inappropriately described as an intra-temporal trade-
off between price stability and financial stability. The actual trade-off here is an inter-temporal 
trade-off between the current and the future economic stability. Lively debate on the possible 
role of monetary policy is going on. Monetary policy alone cannot or should not stave off a 
bubble.  Indeed,  it  bears  a  more  modest  but  important  task.  Monetary  policy  should  avoid 
accelerating  a  bubble  through  creating  unfounded  expectations  for  the  continuation  of  low 
interest  rates,  since  incentives  are  underpinned  ultimately  by  the  financial  and  economic 
environment at a macro level.4  
Capital adequacy regulation and incentives 
The  second  form  of  pre-established  harmony  on  microprudential  policy  also  needs  to  be 
reexamined. A macroprudential perspective is definitely needed in assessing risks as well as 
in designing regulations. 
The very fundamental problem is how to stem intrinsic moral hazard due to the limited liability 
of  stockholders.  In  the  past  20  years,  the  financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities 
have attempted to tighten capital adequacy regulation. With low leverage, however, financial 
institutions  faced  difficulty  in  achieving  sufficiently  high  return-on-equity  to  satisfy  bank 
stockholders,  which  then  induced  the  expansion  of  “shadow  banking.”5  An  alternative 
business strategy was to raise return-on-asset, but the franchise value of financial institutions 
tended  to  be  declining  over  time  due  to  financial  deregulation  and  intensified  competition. 
The declined profitability put pressure on some financial institutions to take an excessively 
high risk.6
The  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  count  on  self-discipline  at  private  financial 
institutions as well, because the authorities are well aware that they are unable to monitor 
every  detail  of  business  activity  at  private  financial  institutions.  At  the  same  time,  as  the 
authorities hardly count solely on such private initiatives, they impose regulations on private 
financial institutions to avoid the manifestation of systemic risk. Central to the issue is how to 
balance public regulation and self-discipline at private financial institutions as well as capital 
adequacy regulation and other forms of public regulation.7  
                                                 
3   See  Rajan  (2006)  and  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2009)  for  the  further  discussion  on  perverse 
incentives under benign economic conditions. 
4   See Shirakawa (2009b, c) for further discussion on implications of incentives at micro- and macro-level on a 
financial crisis. 
5   Gorton (2009) points out the importance of understanding the “shadow banking system” as a genuine banking 
system in designing new financial regulation. 
6   See, for example, Institute for International Finance (2009) for the discussion on the profitability of financial 
institutions and the stability of the financial system as a whole. 
7   Nishimura  (2009)  points  out  the  importance  of  striking  a  balance  between  benefits  and  costs  in  designing 
financial regulation. 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2009
Given the limited liability of stockholders, strengthening capital adequacy regulation alone will 
not be effective enough to constrain the short-sighted behavior of stockholders and business 
executives. In any event, the most important challenge to ensure financial stability is how we 
can  strengthen  credit  underwriting  discipline  and  liquidity  management,  which,  after  all, 
provide the most reliable protection for the sound financial system.8  
In  that  regard,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  pendulum  has  swung  back  and  forth  in  the 
discussion of  models  for  financial regulation  and  supervision.  Simply  put,  the  Asian  model 
was downgraded after the Asian crisis, and the Anglo-Saxon model was also downgraded 
this time, although the exact meaning of those models has remained vague. It should be also 
noted  that  the  soundness  of  financial  institutions  before  the  crisis  differed  between  the 
countries. With that observation, I do not intend to suggest that one model is superior to the 
other. Rather, that seems to suggest the importance of versatility of financial regulatory and 
supervisory models.9 In view of the situation in each country, we need to think over what kind 
of  combination  of  public  regulation  and  self-discipline  is  desirable,  and  what  kind  of 
combination of capital adequacy regulation and other forms of public regulation is desirable. 
For  example,  even  in  the  age  of  globalization,  the  factors  influencing  incentives,  such  as 
executive compensations, differ considerably between the countries. 
Liquidity transfer 
Turning to the third form of pre-established harmony on the availability of liquidity, as shown 
by the experience of the current crisis, counterparty risk, whether actual or perceived, plays a 
crucial role in aggravating a crisis. Even a well-capitalized financial institution cannot easily 
raise liquidity in financial markets in a crisis. Thus, we should put more emphasis on building 
financial infrastructure less vulnerable to shocks. One of the key actions here is to ensure 
smooth  liquidity  transfer  across  currencies,  time  zones  and  regions.  The  payoff  of  such 
efforts will be more solid and substantial, even though it does not make the headlines. 
Necessity of cooperation and coordination between central banks 
In relation to the three challenges above, I will next explain the necessary efforts in the area 
of cooperation and coordination between central banks. 
First, regarding monetary policy, each country should make every effort to put its own house 
in order. Central banks also need to put more collaborative efforts into making an analysis of 
global  financial  conditions  and  enhancing  further  information  sharing.  I  find  it  increasingly 
important to monitor the international dimension of the risk-taking channels with regard to the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  That  dimension  is  typically  observed  as  the 
common lender channel, by which I mean internationally active financial institutions playing a 
role in transmitting monetary policy effects, and global investors taking carry-trade positions 
in various forms.  
Next,  in  terms  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  putting  its  house  in  order  in  each 
country is again the most important principle for ensuring financial stability. The experience 
following the collapse of Lehman Brothers shows its importance succinctly. On top of that, it 
is  crucial  to  make  further  effort  to  redesign  the  regulatory  framework  to  stave  off  a  future 
crisis.  In  that  regard,  we  are  working  definitely  in  the  right  direction  to  embrace  a 
macroprudential perspective. As we are charged with so many tasks in our agenda, some 
caution should be needed not to lose a holistic view. G20 and Financial Stability Board (FSB) 
                                                 
8   Fisher (2009) emphasizes the importance of incentives as the principle lesson from the current crisis. 
9   See Goodhart (2009) for an assessment of the Anglo-Saxon model of banking and financial regulation and 
supervision in light of the current crisis. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 5
have  correctly  proposed  to  review  the  capital  adequacy  standards,  with  a  reservation  of 
implementing  most  of  the  new  rules  once  recovery  is  assured.10  Such  a  policy  direction 
seems relevant in light of the amount of risk actually taken by internationally active financial 
institutions  in  recent  years.  In  implementing  the  policy,  however,  we  also  need  to  pay 
attention  to  the  endogenous  changes  in  financial  institutions’  risk-taking  stemming  from 
strengthened capital regulation. 
Finally,  coordination  between  central  banks  is  required  in  the  area  of  money  market 
operations, and, more generally, banking policy. A crisis is likely to be amplified by concern 
over  funding  liquidity.  That  underscores  the  importance  of  the  efforts  to  transfer  liquidity 
smoothly on a global basis.  
U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations, carried out under coordination between major central 
banks, have been highly effective under such conditions. In that case, other central banks 
than the Fed have an incentive to implement operations to secure the stability of domestic 
financial markets and domestic financial institutions. The Fed also has a natural incentive to 
secure  the  stability  in  U.S.  dollar  denominated  financial  markets.  As  a  result,  U.S.  dollar 
funds-supplying operations are mutually beneficial for both the Fed and other central banks. 
That  point  is  markedly  different  from  “international  policy  coordination”  in  monetary  policy, 
easily placing strain on bilateral relations in key variables, such as foreign exchange rates 
and the balance of payments.  
Through the current crisis, we have reconfirmed that it is important to make currency swap, 
repo, and other collateralized markets more robust, and that central banks need to promote 
private initiatives in that direction. From that perspective, central banks need to make further 
coordination in providing liquidity, accepting cross-border collateral, and extending operating 
hours for the payment and settlement systems provided by central banks.  
Concluding remarks 
In closing, I emphasize the importance of promoting human interaction in further developing 
coordination between central banks.  
Since the summer of 2007, central banks have communicated with each other intensively at 
various levels, from top central bankers to mid-class staffers using various tools, such as e-
mails,  conference  calls,  and  face-to-face  conversations.  Such  efforts  have  contributed  to 
preventing the crisis from worsening further.  
Financial markets are inevitably incomplete in economists’ terminology, and it is professional 
judgment that fills the gap inherent in the incomplete contracts. In that sense, the deepened 
mutual trust, the accumulated practical and operational know-how, and the strong network of 
central  banks,  which  have  been  established  during  the  process  of  crisis  management, 
provide a basis for substantive cooperation. A  new international financial system, if that in 
fact comes true, will emerge from the wealth of human network.  
References 
Bank for International Settlements, 79th Annual Report, 2009. 
Financial  Services  Authority,  The  Turner  Review:  A  Regulatory  Response  to  the  Global 
Banking Crisis, 2009. 
Fisher,  Peter  R.,  “The  Market  View:  Incentives  Matter”  in  John  D.  Ciorciari  and  John  B. 
Taylor eds., The Road Ahead for the Fed, Hoover Institution Press, 2009. 
                                                 
10   See G20 (2009) for the proposal for strengthening financial regulation and supervision. 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2009
Goodhart, C. A. E., “Banks and the Public Sector Authorities,” Paper presented at PBC-BIS 
Shanghai conference on August 6-8, 2009. 
Gorton, Gary, “Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand: Banking and the Panic of 2007,” 
mimeo 2009. 
G20, G20 Finance Ministers’ and Central Bank Governors’ Communiqué – 14 March, 2009. 
Institute  for  International  Finance,  Restoring  Confidence,  Creating  Resilience:  An  Industry 
Perspective on the Future of International Financial Regulation and the Search for Stability, 
2009. 
Nishimura, Kiyohiko G., “Financial System Stability and Market Confidence,” Speech at the 
Japan Society of Monetary Economics' Spring Annual Meeting, May 16, 2009. 
Rajan,  Raghuram  G.,  “Monetary  Policy  and  Incentives,”  Address  at  the  Bank  of  Spain 
Conference on Central Banks, June 2006. 
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “Way  Out  of  Economic  and  Financial  Crisis:  Lessons  and  Policy 
Actions,” Speech at Japan Society in New York, April 23, 2009a. 
______,  “Preventing  the  Next  Crisis:  The  Nexus  between  Financial  Markets,  Financial 
Institutions and Central Banks,” Speech at the London Stock Exchange, May 13, 2009b. 
______,  “Some  Thoughts  on  Incentives  at  Micro-  and  Macro-level  for  Crisis  Prevention,” 
Remarks  at  the  Eighth  Bank  for  International  Settlements  Annual  Conference  in  Basel, 
Switzerland, June 26, 2009c. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 7
