Zamani Abdul Ghani: Strenthening vigilance during turbulent times 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  International  Financial  Crime  and  Terrorism  Financing  Conference  2009, 
Kuala Lumpur, 16 April 2009. 
 It is a pleasure to welcome all of you to this conference in particular, and to Malaysia and 
Kuala Lumpur as well. Today marks the inaugural of an international conference on financial 
crimes and terrorism financing, organized by the Compliance Officers Networking Group in 
Malaysia, or CONG in short. Let me take this opportunity, first of all, to thank the members of 
the organising committee. This committee comprises of staff of members of the Institute of 
Bankers Malaysia, the Securities Industry Development Centre, (SIDC), and the Malaysian 
Institute  of  Insurance,  as  well  as  staff  of  the  Anti-Money  Laundering  Unit  of  the  Royal 
Malaysia  Police.  Members  of  the  CONG,  deserve  a  special  commendation  for  the  efforts 
taken to conceptualise and make this conference a reality. Despite being the first conference 
of its kind to be organized in Malaysia, and the challenges encountered while organising this 
conference, we see today a room filled to capacity. I have the honour of being the Chairman 
of Malaysia's National Coordination Committee to Counter Money Laundering or the NCC, 
which comprised of 15 government ministries and agencies. On behalf of the NCC, I would 
also like to say "Tahniah" or congratulations to the CONG and the co-organisers. Indeed, the 
spirit of "acting for greater good" is clearly manifested by all those who are involved in the 
organisation of this conference.  
We are also very pleased in having participants as well as experts and resource persons of 
multilateral  agencies  from  as  many  as  12  different  countries.  The  attendance  of  so  many 
participants  and  experts  from  the  domestic  and  the  international  community  for  this 
conference speaks volumes for the importance of this subject and the universal relevance of 
the  issues  to  be  deliberated  in  this  conference.  I  would  like  to  extend  my  heartfelt 
appreciation to the speakers and moderators who had make their way to Kuala Lumpur from 
all around the globe; it is indeed an honour to have all of you here to speak at this important 
conference.  Our  thanks  to  those  international  multilateral  institutions  in  working  with  long-
established  domestic  and  regional  organisations  in  participating  or  organising  regional 
conferences  on  topical  issues.  On  a  few  occasion,  we  have  observed  some  multilateral 
institutions upstaging these regional bodies. This is not beneficial nor the right thing to do. It 
is better to collaborate and avoid duplicity so that, overall, it will be a win-win for all parties.  
I.  
Remaining vigilant in facing turbulence amid economic downturn regionally 
and globally  
The  current  global  financial  crisis  is  centred  in  the  advanced  economies  and  the  severe 
financial  instability  and  the  resultant  economic  downturns  has  affected  and  infected  the 
developing  world  as  well.  This shows  that  we  live  in  an  increasingly  interconnected  world. 
Global financial stability hinges on collective action at the international level, as well as the 
existence of effective national systems. Financial stability is also closely linked with financial 
integrity. The lack of anti-money laundering and the combating of the financing of terrorism, 
or  AML/CFT  regime,  can  contribute  to  undermine  the  soundness  and  stability  of  financial 
institutions  and  systems,  discourage  foreign  investment,  and  distort  international  capital 
flows.  The  global  financial  crisis  amplifies  such  risks.  In  fact,  2009  is  anticipated  to  be 
another  highly  challenging  year,  in  which  the  full  impact  of  the  economic  slowdown  will 
continue to be global in nature. In this more fragile environment, problems in one country can 
quickly spread to other countries in the region or in other parts of the world. This, therefore, 
brings  us  to  the  first  theme  of  my  speech  that  is  for  everyone  to  remain  vigilant.  In  the 
financial  sector  in  particular,  financial  system  and  institutions  should  continue  to 
BIS Review 46/2009 
 1
support the economy and protect it from abuses, including by money launderers and 
terrorist financiers.  
For Malaysia, the Government has recently announced a RM60billion stimulus package, i.e., 
the second stimulus package, and we expect to see its full impact during 2009 and 2010. We 
are  quite  fortunate  that  the  banking  system  entered  this  difficult  period  from  a  position  of 
strength.  It  is  important  to  have  a  high  level  of  vigilance  to  ensure  that  the  banking  and 
finance  sector  continues  to  support  the  economy.  Surveillance  has  been  and  will  be 
intensified to detect vulnerabilities that may emerge in this period of uncertainty. As such, the 
financial institutions as well as the designated non-financial businesses and professions, or 
the DNFBPs, must be ready to respond to emerging risks and threats. These risks and 
threats  include  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing  that  may  undermine  the  efforts 
undertaken to maintain financial stability.  
For  this  purpose,  it  is  apparent  that  the  efforts  to  further  strengthen  the  AML/CFT  regime 
need  to  be  intensified.  Individual  countries  may  benefit  from  robust  AML/CFT  regimes  as 
enhanced  financial  sector  integrity  and  stability  facilitates  their  integration  into  the  global 
financial  system.  They  will  also  contribute  to  more  transparent  governance  and  effective 
fiscal administration.  
At  the  international  level,  there  is  renewed  interest  to  review  policies  relating  to  banking 
secrecy and transparency, which are two of the factors identified to have contributed to the 
current  financial  meltdown.  In  this  regard,  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF)  has 
initiated a study to assess the effectiveness of its policy tools in response to the current 
financial  and  economic  crisis.  The  FATF  is  now  identifying  policy  tools  which  may  need 
further  strengthening  and  evaluating  whether  new  policy  tools  or  responses  may  be 
needed to meet any new challenges. This is an opportunity for us to provide feedback to the 
FATF on its 40+9 Recommendations, including implementation challenges.  
Against  this  backdrop,  the  theme  of  this  conference,  “Strengthening  Vigilance  During 
Turbulent  Times”,  aptly  describe  what  I  believe  should  be  considered  by  every  institution 
during  this  challenging times.  This  is  further  supported  by  the  key  content  of  the  sessions 
covering the critical issues to be deliberated by the stakeholders involved in AML/CFT.  
Emerging trends and risks of money laundering and terrorism financing 
II.  
It is a permanent battle to put in place a robust AML/CFT regime that could effectively deter 
and detect serious offence by removing the economic incentives attached to the crime. There 
will be continuous and sustained attempts to out-maneuver the AML/CFT system. For this, 
let me share some thoughts with you on the second theme of this speech, which is on the 
emerging trends of money laundering and terrorism financing in this region.  
Today,  while  the  purpose  and  criminal  intent  remains  unchanged,  i.e.,  to  disguise  illegal 
proceeds as legitimate assets, the launderers are now using more complex structures and 
sophisticated methods to launder money and circumvent the preventive measures that has 
been put in place. Allow me to share four examples as follows: 
1. 
It  is  observed  that  instead  of  the  simple  structuring  of  transactions  (or  smurfing), 
recent  cases  have  highlighted  the  increasing  use  of  third  parties  to  layer  the 
proceeds of crime to distance them from its origins. The setting up of front shops 
and  complex  trust  accounts  using  nominees  are  some  of  the  common  tools 
increasingly being used by the perpetrators;  
As  reflected  in  the  FATF  Strategic  Surveillance  Survey  2008,  there  is  also  an 
increasing trend of criminals leveraging on technology advancements to further 
their activities. For this, the use of internet banking, e-money, remittance platform and 
other use of internet technologies for money laundering activities are on the rise. New 
2. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2009
3. 
4. 
technologies are also being used to perpetrate crimes such as dealing in illegal drugs 
over the internet and e-crimes, including phishing and internet auction frauds;  
There are also instances on the use of dummies, or an international network of 
shell companies as well as other intermediaries to handle the transactions; and  
The  use  of  electronic  fund  transfers  as  one  of  the  preferred  methods  for  the 
layering of criminal proceeds once they enter the legitimate financial system. There 
are  cases  where  these  proceeds  are  smuggled  out  of  one  country,  deposited  in 
another country or other countries, and then wired back to the country of origin.  
Strategic focus to strengthen the national AML/CFT regime  
III.  
As the challenges to address the emerging trends intensify, it becomes imperative that the 
overarching  objective  upon  which  an  AML/CFT  regime  has  been  built  remains  intact  and 
achievable. The key is to sustain the robustness of the AML/CFT regime to effectively deter 
and detect money laundering and terrorism financing offences. Thus the third and the last 
theme of my speech is on Malaysia's strategic focus in strengthening the national AML/CFT 
regime. Against this backdrop, five key areas has been identified.  
First  is  to  strengthen  collaboration  and  cooperation  among  key  stakeholders. 
Foremost is to enhance the public-private sector partnership as synchronised actions 
deliver  better  result.  The  move  to  increase  the  resources  for  money  laundering  and 
terrorism financing investigations by the domestic law enforcement agencies, which 
currently is the emerging trend, needs to be supported with swift actions from the FIU 
and  prompt  response  from  reporting  institutions.  Another  is  that,  at  the  international 
level, Malaysia will continue to enhance multilateral and bilateral relationships. I am happy to 
inform  that  we  have  recently  concluded  an  MoU  with  the  National  Bank  of  Cambodia, 
bringing  the  total  number  of  MoUs  signed  to  18.  We  have  and  will  continue  to  provide 
assistance to countries in the Asia/Pacific region.  
Second is to provide greater focus in enhancing the competency and capacity of key 
stakeholders,  i.e.,  the  analysts,  law  enforcement  officers  and  compliance  officers. 
Despite the unfavourable economic condition, human resources and capacity building remain 
as one of our top focus. We plan to roll out capacity building programmes for analysts and 
enforcement  officers  covering  fundamental,  intermediate  and  advance  level  training 
programmes.  The  Certified  Financial  Investigators  Programme,  or  CFIP,  i.e.,  our  flagship 
basic programme for financial investigators has produced 83 investigators with knowledge on 
the  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Anti-Terrorism  Financing  Act  2001,  as  well  as  financial 
investigation techniques. We are open to collaborate with our foreign counterparts to conduct 
advanced level workshops.  
The third area is to further improve the quality of analysis. High quality STRs underpins 
an effective mechanism as quality STRs provide valuable intelligence for investigations. It is 
our expectation that the board of directors and senior management of institutions to play their 
roles in ensuring that the compliance programme is fully implemented and that any money 
laundering  and  terrorism  financing  activities  are  promptly  detected  and  reported.  Hence,  I 
urge all reporting institutions to improve both the quantity and quality of STR submitted. In 
the  same  vein,  the  FIU  will  continue  to  improve  its  feedback  mechanism  to  reporting 
institutions.  
The fourth area is to give greater emphasis on compliance. This is important so as to 
improve  the  compliance  level  among  the  reporting  institutions  in  order  to  preserve  the 
integrity and stability of the financial system. More focus will be given to enhance and raise 
the  compliance  level  among  DNFBPs  in  view  of  the  emerging  risks.  To  this  end,  greater 
collaboration  between  the  FIU  and  the  various  self-regulatory  organisations  would  be 
pursued actively during the year.  
BIS Review 46/2009 
 3
The fifth and last area is to ensure that the enforcement of the AML/CFT regime should 
be  achieved  without  undue  increase  in  the  regulatory  cost.  It  is  important  that  the 
controls  in  place  are  commensurate  with  the  associated  money  laundering  and  terrorism 
financing  risks  and  the  risk  mitigation  measures  are  adequate.  This  underscores  the 
progressive  introduction  of  more  risk-based  approach  in  the  national  AML/CFT  regime.  I 
understand that this is among key topics to be discussed in this conference, and I am sure it 
will generate interesting discussions between the experts and the participants.  
Today's conference provides a platform to widen the knowledge and understanding on the 
critical  issues  confronting  the  effective  implementation  of  the  AML/CFT  regime.  Please  do 
take advantage of and benefit from this opportunity.  
On this note, I wish you a productive and successful conference.  
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 46/2009
