Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Current challenges confronting central banks 
Opening  and  keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  SEACEN-BNM  Banking  and  Financial  Law  School  2009  "Current 
Challenges in Central Banking – Legal Perspective", Lanai Kijang, 24 September 2009. 
 for 
the 
foundations 
to  strengthen 
functioning  of 
financial  stability, 
to  achieve  more  efficient 
It is my great pleasure to speak at the 5th Banking and Financial Law School 2009, jointly 
organized by the South East Asian Central Banks (SEACEN) Research and Training Centre, 
the  Institute  of  Bankers  Malaysia  and  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  The  theme  for  this  year's 
Banking  and  Financial  Law  School  on  "the  legal  perspective  of  the  current  challenges  in 
Central  Banking"  has  particular  relevance  in  the  present  environment.  Indeed,  global 
attention is now focussed on an overhaul of the financial architecture in the efforts to address 
the fundamental weaknesses that have surfaced in this recent global financial crisis.  
The  current  policy  debates  cover  a  wide  ranging  set  of  issues  that  include  far-reaching 
regulatory  reforms 
institutional 
arrangements 
financial  markets,  effective 
coordination of financial stability measures and greater clarity of central bank mandates in 
promoting  monetary  and  financial  stability.  The  theme  of  this  conference  also  has  special 
relevance to us at Bank Negara Malaysia, as our new Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009 will 
come into force later this year. We are very honoured to host the conference for this year and 
are pleased to welcome so many distinguished members of the legal fraternity, in particular, 
from other parts of the world to join us at this forum.  
My remarks today will focus on three key challenges confronting Central Banks, and how the 
legal  aspects  impact  the  effectiveness  of  Central  Banks.  The  first  relates  to  building  the 
capacity  to  manage  the  increasing  uncertainties  generated  by  financial  innovation,  the 
increasing  prominence  of  the  non-regulated  sector  and  the  increasing  interconnectedness 
between financial institutions and markets. Such developments have not only resulted in the 
emergence of new risks to the financial system but have also changed the dynamics of how 
risks in the financial system are transmitted to the real economy. In this environment, it is 
vital  to  have  a  legal  and  regulatory  framework  that  is  robust  and  dynamic  enough  to 
enable the central bank to respond to these developments.  
The  second  challenge concerns  the  effective  implementation  of  financial safety nets  and 
the  effective  coordination  of  the  different  components  of  the  safety  net  to  maintain  public 
confidence  and  to  support  continuous  financial  intermediation.  Appropriate  legislation  and 
regulations  that  ensure  credibility  and  integrity  of  the  safety  nets  are  an  essential  part  of 
maintaining financial stability.  
The  third  relates  to  the  increasingly  and  highly  complex  financial  and  economic 
integration associated with globalisation. This has resulted in a significant expansion 
in  cross-border  financial  activities  and  introduced  new  sources  of  risks  to  domestic 
financial  systems.  The  recent  crisis  raised  many  issues  for  which  clear  solutions,  or  even 
consensus,  have  yet  to  emerge,  including  on  the  propensity  for  home  bias  in  the  policy 
responses, suitable approaches to cross-border resolutions, and the significant challenge of 
coordinating  policies  across  different  legal  and  institutional  frameworks.  This  is  an  area 
where  the  legal  framework  remains  highly  fragmented.  A  sustainable  solution  will  require 
legal reforms in particular, to provide certainty and clarity in dealing with crises. 
As events in the current global environment have demonstrated, central banking has become 
significantly  more  challenging.  The  issues  confronting  central  banks  today  are  far  more 
diverse and complex, prompting the re-examination of the role of central banks, the capacity 
to  manage  and  contain  risks  to  monetary  and  financial  stability,  and  the  governance 
BIS Review 113/2009 
 1
arrangements  and  the  policy  instruments  that  are  needed  to  support  the  effectiveness  of 
central banks.  
The  new  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  Act  2009  which  was  passed  by  Parliament  in  July  this 
year  represents  the  culmination  of  more  than  two  years  work  to  address  the  issues  and 
challenges that are confronting Central Banks in this rapidly changing environment. The Act 
elaborates extensively giving greater clarity on the mandates for which we are accountable 
and providing enhanced powers to undertake these mandates. In the principal objective of 
promoting  monetary  stability,  it  is  recognised  that  price  stability  is  to  be  achieved  in  an 
environment  of  sustainable  growth  of  the  economy.  Consideration  is  thus  given  to  the 
sustained  implications  of  monetary  stability  measures  on  the  real  economy.  The  law 
therefore requires the Bank to take a balanced view to avoid the adoption of rigid frameworks 
that may result in strong biases that would lead to a fundamental and sustained damage to 
the economy. This balance is also extended to the explicit role of the Bank in developing an 
inclusive financial system in its responsibility to develop a sound and progressive financial 
system. These considerations are particularly important for emerging market economies so 
as to ensure balanced economic progress and development. 
The  new  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  Act  2009  also  institutionalises  the  autonomy  for  the 
formulation of monetary policy, thus providing for the integrity and credibility of the decisions 
made. It also provides for greater flexibility in monetary policy implementation, allowing for a 
diversified  range  of  instruments  that  can  now  be  deployed  for  the  implementation  of 
monetary policy. As financial markets trend towards greater sophistication and demonstrate 
periods of extreme volatility, central banks must have commensurate capabilities to conduct 
monetary  policy  operations  in  order  to  maintain  price  stability.  Equally  important  is  the 
mandate  to  provide  oversight  over  the  money  and  foreign  exchange  market  to  ensure  the 
orderly development and functioning of the markets. These necessary powers are however, 
combined with a system of checks and balances to enable the Bank to act decisively, but yet 
having in place safeguards so as to enhance transparency and accountability.  
More extensive powers to achieve financial stability 
In the area of financial stability, our new Central Bank Act incorporates an explicit mandate of 
the  Central  Bank  for  financial  stability.  This  mandate  is  articulated  in  terms  of  the  risks  to 
financial  stability  that  includes  risks  that  disrupts  the  financial  intermediation  process 
(including the orderly functioning of the financial markets), or which affects public confidence. 
The  Act  also  provides  comprehensive  provisions  for  heightened  surveillance,  pre-emptive 
actions  and  expanded  resolution  powers  to  facilitate  the  swift  and  orderly  resolution  of 
financial crises. The Bank may also take appropriate intervention actions to avert risks that 
stem from unregulated entities.  
The  Act  further  acknowledges  the  importance  of  coordinated  policy  measures  across 
different  agencies  whose  actions  can  affect  financial  stability.  Accordingly,  the  new  Act 
provides  for  cooperation  arrangements  with  other  supervisory  authorities  and  the  ability  of 
the Central Bank to make recommendations to such authorities on measures or safeguards 
for  promoting  financial  stability.  These  new  powers  are  complemented  by  strengthened 
institutional arrangements in the form of the establishment of a Financial Stability Executive 
Committee that will be formed to ensure the effective coordination of regulatory authorities in 
financial resolution. 
Enhanced governance and accountability framework  
With these enhanced powers, the governance and accountability framework in the Act has 
also  been  strengthened  considerably.  This  relates  to  the  enhanced  role  of  the  Board  of 
Directors' in the oversight of the management of the Bank. In providing enhanced powers to 
the Central Bank to address financial stability issues and the strengthening of the oversight 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2009
function  of  the  Bank,  correspondingly,  focus  has  also  been  given  to  governance,  internal 
controls and risk management by the Bank. For this purpose, the Central Bank of Malaysia 
Act  2009  empowers  the  Board  to  establish  three  specific  committees,  namely  the  Board 
Governance Committee, Board Audit Committee and Board Risk Committee that are chaired 
by a non-executive director, to ensure the independence of the oversight on the functioning 
of the Bank. 
A comprehensive financial system safety net  
Let me now turn to the second key area confronting central banks, namely the need to have 
in place an effective financial safety net. The global experience in these recent two decades 
has  shown  that  crises  have  continued  to  plague  the  world  and  have  resulted  in  massive 
costs to the economy. Financial safety nets serve two primary purposes, that is to avert risks 
to financial stability and to reduce the costs to the financial system and economy in the event 
of a crisis. They also serve an important social purpose of protecting savers and investors. 
The first component of the financial safety net is the existence of an effective regulatory and 
supervisory system to ensure the sound management of financial institutions and the ability 
to  deal  with  problems  affecting  financial  stability.  This  includes  adequate  powers  and 
instruments  to  mitigate  losses  to  the  system  in  the  event  of  a  crisis,  restore  stability  and 
ensure the continuity of the financial intermediation process. The second is the lender of last 
resort facility that is provided by central banks to address liquidity stresses faced by financial 
institutions. Thirdly, is the deposit insurance scheme that provides a guarantee on deposits 
to protect the savings of small depositors and reduce the prospects for disruptions that could 
threaten the stability of the financial system.  
The  effectiveness  of  the  financial  safety  net  depends  on  several  factors.  They  include  the 
capacity  of  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  to  assess  risks,  the  effective 
coordination  between  the  different  components  of  the  safety  net,  clear  communication 
strategies and a strong and comprehensive legal framework that supports the operation of 
the  safety  net.  In  Malaysia,  the  Malaysia  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  Act  (MDIC  Act) 
which  establishes 
(MDIC)  provides 
comprehensive intervention powers for the protection of depositors. This is complemented by 
an extensive operating framework developed between the Central Bank and the MDIC which 
clearly  sets  out  the  responsibilities  and  obligations  of  both  agencies  in  promoting  financial 
stability  and  in  financial  resolution.  In  the  area  of  consumer  protection,  amendments  to 
Malaysia's  financial  services  legislation  are  also  being  put  in  place  to  provide  for  the 
establishment,  roles  and  functions  of  a  financial  ombudsman  to  deal  expediently  and 
efficiently with disputes concerning financial services between consumers and the financial 
institutions. 
Let me now turn to the challenges arising from greater financial globalisation and the growing 
importance  of  international  cooperation  in  ensuring  sustainable  economic  and  financial 
integration  across  national  borders.  In  this  environment  regulators  are  confronted  with  the 
challenge of adapting regulatory and legal norms from a nation-centric system to norms that 
are more reflective of international business and finance. The issue is how to complement 
the  domestic  agenda  and  the  international  agenda.  Regulatory  problems  arise  not  only 
because of the need for domestic regulators – operating within diverse national regulatory 
norms  and  cultures  –  to  cooperate  and  coordinate  in  the  domestic  environment  but  also 
across jurisdictions.  
Operational  and  legal  issues  in  cross-border  resolution  arise  where  the  regulatory 
frameworks of different countries do not provide for a common solution in areas such as the 
unwinding  of  financial  transactions  and  the  enforceability  of  secured  parties'  rights  to 
collateral  in  the  foreign  jurisdiction.  Failure  to  address  such  resolution  issues  promptly, 
generally  within  a  matter  of  days,  can  lead  to  increased  uncertainty  and  potential  cross-
border  conflicts.  Authorities  must  also  have  access  to  information  that  is  not  regularly 
the  Malaysian  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation 
BIS Review 113/2009 
 3
exchanged in the normal course of supervisory cooperation. This needs to be supported by 
consistent  requirements  for  the  coordinated  execution  of  regulatory  actions.  Equally 
important  is  an  effective  legal  infrastructure  for  the  mediation  of  claims  against  insolvent 
institutions with international operations 
Concurrence among regulatory authorities on key elements of effective resolutions would be 
an important step forward. Greater harmonization and clarity about the triggers for action, the 
tools  to  return  insured  funds  quickly  to  depositors,  the  authority  to  implement  a  quick 
resolution,  and  the  legal  powers  to  restructure  and  continue  key  banking  functions  would 
allow for more effective crisis management. Hence, it is not just about opening our borders; 
we  need  to  examine  how  our  domestic  regulatory  framework  interfaces  with  that  of  other 
countries. 
International cooperation 
The regional cooperation among central banks in East Asia have advanced significantly in 
this  recent decade  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian  Financial  crisis.  The focus  of  cooperation 
has  been  in  the  areas  of  financial  stability,  financial  markets  and  payment  and  settlement 
systems.  The  participation  in  the  working,  technical  and  high  level  committees  have 
contributed  towards  efforts  to  facilitate  the  adoption  of  international  standards  for  banking 
supervision  and  financial  stability  taking  into  consideration  the  regional  perspective.  It  has 
also contributed towards identifying supervisory priorities and areas of concern that will have 
an impact on financial stability, and towards improving techniques relating to supervision and 
surveillance.  Challenges  pertaining  to  cross-border  issues  such  as  regulatory  arbitrage, 
competition laws, regulatory harmonisation are, however, yet to be fully resolved. 
The new Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009 gives Bank Negara additional flexibility and the 
mandate to engage in international cooperation. The Act allows for the Bank to engage with 
foreign supervisory authorities to coordinate and cooperate on financial stability measures. 
The new constituent law also incorporates a specific provision for the Bank to participate and 
provide  appropriate  resources  in  arrangements,  schemes,  programmes,  or  initiatives  with 
any  other  central  banks  or  international  financial  institutions  or  authorities  to  promote 
bilateral, regional and international monetary, financial or economic co-operation.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the supporting legal framework for central banking and the financial system is 
a key element to addressing the challenges faced by central banks. I have highlighted three 
areas which are currently very relevant in the current global financial system. Central banks 
in  the  advanced  financial  systems  have  resorted  to  unorthodox  measures  to  prevent  a 
systemic collapse of the global financial system. While action has been based on the sense 
of  urgency  and  to  avoid  a  total  collapse  of  the  system,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  an 
extensive  review  of  the  legislation  needs  to  be  made.  The  more  challenging  part  is  to 
effectively  address  cross-border  issues  facing  national  financial  systems.  Regardless  of 
whether we are in a state of crisis, these challenges will continue to be relevant given that 
conditions will continue to be dynamic and the trend towards a more globalised world will not 
reverse.  
On this highly complex subject, this two day conference will likely generate highly engaging 
discussions. I wish the Banking and Financial Law School a highly productive outcome and 
hope that your stay in Malaysia will be enjoyable and memorable.  
4 
 BIS Review 113/2009
