Anselmo L S Teng: Industrial transfer and financial services viewed from 
the perspective of Macao 
Keynote speech by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at 
the  5th  Pan  Pearl  River  Delta  Regional  Cooperation  and  Development  Forum,  Nanning, 
14 August 2009. 
 Honourable Heads of Delegation, 
Dear Delegates, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good day! 
I would like to express gratitude to the host and Mr. Ma Jing, President of the People’s Bank 
of  China  Guangzhou  Branch  who  have  given  me  an  opportunity  to  communicate  with  you 
over how we can make use of the opportunity provided by industrial transfer to promote the 
development  of  financial  services.  At  the  same  time,  I  would  like  to  make  use  of  the 
opportunity to greet the financial practitioners from other provinces who attend this meeting 
and  hope  that  we  can  enhance  our  link  with  a  view  to  fulfilling  our  common  target  of 
achieving regional development. 
Industrial transfer is a relocation of assets for more profitable results. Through more effective 
combination  with  other  production  factors,  a  higher  economic  growth  can  be  achieved.  In 
general, industrial transfer can be realized via different forms, such as partnership, mergers, 
re-organization, cooperation and capital pooling. In the process of transfer and acceptance, it 
will  involve  a  financial  platform  to  facilitate  initiation  of  investment,  finance,  merger  and 
acquisition which will certainly give rise to a demand for financial services and enhancement 
of  financial  efficiency.  The  demand  needs  to  be  satisfied  through  innovation  of  financial 
products  and  services,  business  channels  and  management  expertise  which  financial 
institutions are expected to provide. The whole process can strengthen the foundation of the 
financial  institution,  reinforce  its  competitiveness  and  resistance  against  risks,  which  to  a 
certain extent enhances the safety and stability of the financial system as a whole. 
Industrial transfer obviously triggers demand and development of financial services. Yet, the 
success of an industrial transfer depends on the result of a series of interactions and related 
promotions, which may involve financial elements and non-financial elements, such as the 
incentive,  guidance  or  encouragement  arising  from  government  policy  relating  to  industrial 
transfer.  Market  demand  cannot  be  neglected.  The  impact  on  local  inhabitants  and 
environment,  the  economic  gains  before  the  enterprise,  the  capability  of  the  region  to 
accommodate the transfer should be considered. This will include accessory industries and 
professional services, local financial services including investment and credit services which 
the newly relocated industry badly needs. So much the better if a bank which treasures its 
clients will set up a branch in that location to provide tailor-made financial services. 
Now, I would like to revisit the stages of economic development and industrial development 
of  Macao  in  the  past  400-odd  years,  which  is  of  help  in  making  a  conclusion  on  past 
experience, uncover its pattern and put forward the views. 
As  we  all  know,  Macao  is  a  tiny  but  open  economic  entity.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  an 
international city where old and new, western and eastern cultures mix. In the past 400 years 
of development, Macao economy experienced prosperity – recession – recovery – stagnation 
– recession. Recovery came back after return to China and then we experienced high growth 
rate. Simultaneously, its industrial structure also had a mutation in tandem with development. 
At  the  moment,  after  10  years  of  fast  growth,  Macao  economic  structure  is  facing  a  new 
metamorphosis and a need for further diversification. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 1
Macao port opened in 1535. We can demarcate its economic development into four stages. 
The  first  stage  was  1535-1840.  In  the  300  years,  especially  the  100  years  from  late  16th 
century to early 17th century, Macao was one of the most prosperous trading ports in the Far 
East. It was a hub for marine trade between the East and the West. The second stage was 
1841-1960. In view of the rise of Hong Kong, Macao was not able to maintain its position as 
an  entrepot  in  the  Far  East.  In  1847,  the  Macao  Government  under  Portuguese 
administration  announced  legalization  of  gambling.  The  third  stage  was  1961-1999,  the 
Macao economy started its modernization and diversification. First, gaming developed along 
the natural path to modern tourism services. Second, processing and export flourished. 
Under the locomotive effect of tourism services industry and processing and export industry, 
real estate, construction, banking and insurance burgeoned. Thus, the four major pillars of 
economy  gradually  came  into  shape;  they  were  tourism  services  industry,  processing  and 
export  industry,  real  estate  and  construction  industry,  as  well  as  banking  and  insurance 
industry.  In  the  ten-odd  years  from  the  80’s  to  early  90’s,  Macao’s  economy,  due  to  the 
opening-up of China, grew by leaps and bounds. The economy expanded rapidly due to very 
rapid  growth.  In  1993,  with  the  popping  of  economic  froth,  there  was  an  imbalance  in 
economic  structure,  Macao  then  experienced  recession  for  a  number  of  years.  The  fourth 
stage  is  1999  to  now.  After  return  to  the  Motherland,  the  Macao  economy  recovered  and 
started  rapid  growth  again.  During  this  period,  the  financial  industry  made  use  of  the 
opportunity  offered  by  economic  growth,  consolidated  the  foundation  for  sustainable  and 
stable development. 
A brief look back of past history of the Macao economic development and change in industry, 
we  can  perceive  the  pattern;  the  two  significant  developments  of  Macao  financial  industry 
were brought about by the rapid growth of the economy and prosperity. In the 70’s and 80’s, 
the  policy  to  diversify  manufacturing  industry  enabled  new  manufacturing  industries  to 
flourish.  Coupled  with  the  prosperous  development  of  other  pillar  industries  and  the 
legislation promulgated in 1982 which allowed banks in Macao to expand their activities, the 
financial system had a rapid growth which in turn stimulated economic development. In 1999, 
after  the  return  to  the  Motherland,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Central  Government  and 
leadership of the MSAR Government, Macao  experienced economic consolidation to rapid 
growth. The financial industry also benefited from phenomenal economic growth. Financial 
products became highly diversified and differentiated. Services network, channel and related 
quality  were  enhanced.  Risk  control,  management  and  resilience  continued  to  be 
strengthened. In the face of this unprecedented global financial crisis, our financial system 
emerged relatively unscathed, while the operating results continued to stay at a high level. 
All along, capitals from the Mainland, Portugal and Hong Kong dominate the Macao banking 
industry and account for a large chunk of the market. Together with branches of the US, the 
UK, France, Singapore and Chinese Taiwan banks, the banking system of Macao as a whole 
is pivotal to the industrial transfer of Macao. 
In the 80’s to the beginning of the 90’s in last century, the Pearl River Delta was the ideal 
relocation  area  in  attracting  industrial  transfer  due  to  its  comparative  advantage  in  its 
convenient location, availability of labour and cheap land cost. Macao enterprises made full 
use of the opportunity provided by the reform/opening-up policy of the nation to move their 
labour-intensive production base to this area. 
From  a  micro  point  of  view,  the  migrant  enterprise,  in  the  course  of  transfer,  will  face  the 
problem if it can obtain the much sought financial services in the new location. How the local 
financial  institutions  can  provide  the  necessary  funding  services  for  the  migrant  enterprise 
under controlled risk is an issue for financial regulator. Generally speaking, the local financial 
institution has limited information on the migrant enterprise. There is insufficient knowledge 
of  the  financial  condition  of  the  migrant  enterprise,  its  cash  flow,  its  profitability,  its  debt 
servicing ability, the quality of management, hence it gives rise to risk not compatible with 
information available. The financial institution has difficulty in conducting due diligence on the 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2009
credit risk and other related risks. This will ultimately undermine the borrowing capacity of the 
migrant enterprise and hence the chance to secure a loan. In the event that the collateral 
offered  by  the  migrant  enterprise  is  not  domiciled  in  the  Mainland  (e.g.  in  Macao),  the 
situation  will  become  more  complicated.  As  the  legal  system  and  jurisdiction  of  the  two 
regions are different, particularly when it involves cross border asset pledge, execution and 
settlement. The limitation will impose a constraint on the related credit transaction, giving rise 
to  risk  attached  to  cross  border  asset  pledge.  Such  difficult  situation  applies  to  Macao 
enterprises operating on the Mainland and vice versa. 
To solve such a problem, banks of the two regions can, as permissible by law, or under full 
authorization from client, exchange information of client, obtain the required information for 
credit  appraisal,  so  as  to  eliminate  risk  arising  from  insufficient  information.  On  the  other 
hand,  for  asset  pledge  across  the  border,  arrangement  can  be  made  to  eliminate  such 
uncertainties. The Macao enterprise can pledge its assets to a Macao bank who will provide 
a  guarantee  to  Mainland  bank  who  intends  to  provide  the  credit  to  the  Macao  enterprise. 
When a Mainland enterprise operates in Macao, the same model can be adopted. As such, 
banks in the two jurisdictions can enhance such credit guarantee operation model, such as 
setting  out  the  legal  documents  and  format  relating  to  credit  guarantee  which  are  legally 
enforceable. It will certainly help to solve cross border asset pledge issue. 
From a wider angle, industrial transfer can happen in one nation or cross border. All along, in 
view of its unique geopolitical and historical condition, Macao plays an important part in the 
liaison  platform  for  economic  and  commercial  cooperation  between  China  and  Portuguese 
speaking  countries  (including  Angola,  Brazil,  Cape  Verde,  East  Timor,  São  Tomé  and 
Príncipe,  Guinea-Bissau,  Mozambique  and  Portugal).  These  countries  are  from  four 
continents  (Asia,  Europe,  South  America  and  Africa).  They  are  endowed  with  abundant 
natural resources and have a total population of 200 million. Given the historical background 
of  Macao,  its  relation  with  the  Mainland,  interaction  between  Macao  and  Portuguese 
speaking  countries,  it  can  perform  certain  functions  to  facilitate  the  process  of  industrial 
transfer in the Pan Pearl River Delta region or even the Mainland, such as introducing factors 
of production from Portuguese speaking countries, accessories or even partnership. It can 
also help Mainland enterprises to establish in Portuguese speaking countries. 
For  the  financial  services  which  are  pertinent  in  industrial  transfer  involving  China  and 
Portuguese speaking countries, banks of Macau can be of help. All along, Mainland capitals 
and Portuguese capitals are major players in the Macao banking sector. Mainland capitals 
operating in the Macao banking sector come from mega banks of the Mainland. They have a 
network  with  wide  coverage.  At  the  same  time,  Portuguese  capitals  operating  in  Macao 
banking  sector  come  from  banking  conglomerates  which  have  outlets  in  most  of  the 
Portuguese speaking countries. These China and Portugal funded banks have a long record 
of communication, interaction and cooperation in Macao. They can effectively solve or assist 
in  solving  possible  financial  services  problems  arising  from  the  process  of  cooperation  in 
industrial transfer between China and Portuguese speaking countries. As a matter of fact, the 
process  may  bring  in  motivation  and  initiation  to  stimulate  financial  innovation  of  Macao 
banks and Mainland banks. 
Based on the above analysis, retrospection and experience of Macao, I have the following 
observations: 
1) 
For  an  economy  which  has  an  immature,  underdeveloped  and  incomplete  financial 
market,  or  when  the  economy  is  at  its  initial  stage  of  development,  the  function  of 
financial institutions is of utmost importance. Thus, the services provided by financial 
institutions  should  satisfy  the  needs  arising  from  economic  development,  with  the 
ultimate goal of achieving a hand-in-hand growth through interactions. 
When  an  economy  has  developed  to  a  certain  stage,  financial  services  should 
outpace economic development to play the role of navigator for further burgeoning of 
2) 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 3
3) 
4) 
the  economy.  At  the  same  time,  financial  services  can  serve  a  function  in  risk 
management, providing security for stable development of the economy. 
Industrial  escalation  and  transfer  provide  a  wide  horizon  and  more  business 
opportunity  for  financial  innovation.  Therefore,  in  the  course  of  accommodation  of 
industrial transfer, a fine financial environment has been created. There is a further 
need  for  promoting  modern  financial  system  and  order  in a  proactive manner.  This 
will  effectively  perform  the  leverage  function  of  rational  allocation  of  resources  we 
expect  from  a  financial system  which  will  actually  enhance  financial innovation  and 
service quality. 
In  the  course  of  economic  globalization,  cross  border  industrial  transfer  will  be 
accelerated. In the process, we should start from cooperation between governments 
which  should  be  extended  to  practical  and  cross  border  cooperation  between 
financial institutions. Such cooperation helps financial industry to grow which in turn 
prompts industrial escalation and transfer. Through the function of financial services 
cooperation  platform,  better  and  more  efficient  use  of  resources  can  be  realized 
which facilitates economic development. 
At last, we come back to the Pan Pearl River Delta Region, which includes nine provinces 
and  the  two  SAR’s  of  Hong  Kong  and  Macao.  We  are  striving  to  achieve  in  this  holistic 
system  a  rational  regional  layout,  improvement  in  environment,  high  efficiency  in  industrial 
operation, streamlined work mechanism and co-ordination in regional industrial transfer. In 
the  course  of  action,  the  retrospection  mentioned  above  combined  with  analysis  of  past 
experience  can  be  of  help.  In  December  last  year,  the  State  Council  promulgated  “The 
Outline of the Plan for the Reform and Development of the Pearl River Delta”. The message 
is  clear  that  the  plan  for  various  economies  of  the  region  to  become  one  entity  is  on  the 
drawing board already. It is my conviction that Macao’s platform function and its indigenous 
banking system will be able to play a more important role in the process of industrial transfer 
in the region through the implementation of the Outline mentioned above. The MSAR, as a 
member of the Pan Pearl River Region, gladly and candidly hopes that we can, through all 
possible channels, participate in regional cooperation and development. 
The above is my initial view and observation. I hope it will provide food for further thought 
and discussion. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2009
