Jean-Claude Trichet: The external and internal dimensions of Europe’s 
competitiveness 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Institute 
of International and European Affairs, Dublin, 26 February 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
These are very challenging times – for Ireland, for Europe and for the global economy. I am 
very pleased to be here in Dublin today. When, last year, the Institute of International and 
European  Affairs  kindly  invited  me  to  give  a  lecture  on  Europe’s  competitiveness,  I  was 
delighted to accept the opportunity to look at Europe’s economy from  a broad perspective 
and to focus particularly on the growing challenge of globalisation. As the title for my address 
today  I  have  chosen  “The  external  and  internal  dimensions  of  Europe’s  competitiveness”, 
because it is my deep conviction that these two dimensions are closely related. And they are 
also related to the current situation, as we shall see.  
I  will  therefore  also  take  the  opportunity  to  talk  about  the  economic  crisis,  its  impact  on 
Europe as a whole and on the Irish economy. Developments in the international economy 
were always likely to have a particular impact on this country, reflecting its very open nature 
and its strong dependence on international trade and financial flows. But it is important that 
we  recognise  the  global  nature  of  this  crisis,  in  which  public  authorities  everywhere  are 
confronted  by  the  adverse  effects  of  the  market  turbulence  on  their  own  economies  and 
financial systems. And it is important to recognise that despite these difficulties, we have not 
lost the things that have made our real economies so successful in recent years, notably our 
talented workforces, our dynamic businesses and our openness to trade. 
Let me start by focusing on the topic suggested to me by the hosts of today’s event. I would 
like to address some specific aspects of the external performance of the euro area and the 
euro area countries. And I would like to discuss how they relate to key internal dimensions 
including integration, flexibility and competition, drawing your attention to policy changes that 
are  necessary  to  maintain  and  improve  Europe’s  competitiveness.  As  I  will  argue,  those 
reforms will not only help the European economy to succeed in an increasingly globalised 
world: they are also crucial for getting through the current situation.  
Defining competitiveness 
1. 
So  what  do  we  mean  by  “competitiveness”?  For  many  people,  competitiveness  is  a 
disconcerting word, suggestive of pressures to change and constant adjustments. And as we 
know, these pressures can have personal and social costs. But there are very large benefits 
– we need to stay competitive for the long-term welfare of the people of the euro area. 
What  does  the  word  competitiveness  mean  to  economists?  In  a  narrow  sense,  it  is  often 
used  to  refer  to  international  price  competitiveness  as  measured  by  various  indicators  of 
effective exchange rates. At the European Central Bank we analyse developments according 
to a whole host of such indicators. This concept of competitiveness is linked to the “external 
performance”  of  a  country,  typically  measured  in  terms  of  export  growth,  shares  of  export 
markets  or  current  account  balances.  Developments  in  price  competitiveness  have  always 
been  important  drivers  of  an  economy’s  ability  to  compete  in  international  markets.  But  in 
recent years, other factors have become increasingly important in the face of the structural 
changes engendered by globalisation. These relate to export specialisation, which includes 
the  range  and  the  quality  of  the  products  a  country  exports,  and  the  particular  markets  it 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 1
exports  to.  In  this  regard,  it  is  important  that  our  countries  take  advantage  of  their  high 
technological advancement and well-educated labour forces, to produce higher quality and 
more sophisticated goods and to redirect their exports towards strongly growing markets.  
Looking even more closely into the domestic structure of an economy we come to the notion 
of  productivity.  Productivity  and  competitiveness  are  two  different  concepts,  but  there  are 
close links between them. “Competitiveness”, when more broadly defined, includes a notion 
of relative productivity. Under this definition, the most competitive economy is the one with 
the  best  prospects  for  “generating”  highly  productive  firms,  contributing  to  longer-term 
economic growth and, ultimately, to the welfare of its citizens.  
Recent advances in trade theory have stressed the connections between the external and 
internal  dimensions  of  competitiveness,  which  have  become  increasingly  relevant  in  a 
globalising economy. Some of the latest economic models of trade1 see global competition 
as a selection mechanism, in which only the most productive firms do business outside their 
national borders.2 Less productive firms, by contrast, which are unable to bear the transport 
and other costs related to foreign trade, are either forced out of business or remain confined 
to their domestic market. Countries in which highly productive firms can thrive are therefore 
also likely to do better in terms of their overall export performance, as this will allow more 
firms to compete successfully in international markets. In general, these are countries with 
more  intense  domestic  market  competition,  better  technology  and  greater  openness  to 
foreign competitors.3 
These  new  models  also  stress  the  importance  of  countries’  institutional  framework  which 
may make market access easier and push domestic firms to innovate. According to this body 
of  economic  knowledge,  continuing  efforts  to  promote  stronger  competition  and  further 
market integration within Europe appear to be important tools for supporting and enhancing 
the global competitiveness of European firms.  
Globalisation and Europe’s external competitiveness 
2.  
Applying  these  concepts  to  Europe,  how  do  we  assess  our  external  competitiveness;  how 
are European firms performing in globalised markets?  
Globalisation has given a boost to world trade. Over the past two decades world trade has 
grown  one  and  a  half  times  faster  than  world  output,  and  the  difference  has  even 
considerably  higher  in  recent  years  as  world  trade  growth  accelerated  very  strongly. 
Transport costs have dropped dramatically, as have tariffs, and the surge in information and 
communication technology has facilitated a global exchange of goods and services as well 
as globalised supply chains. More and more goods and services have become tradable, and 
domestic  companies  have  increasingly  engaged  in  international  trade.  The  euro  area  has 
actively  contributed  to  the  rise  in  international  trade.  Our  continent  has  a  long  history  in 
trading, but the openness of the euro area has increased that business markedly. In the mid-
1990s, exports of goods and services from the euro area were equivalent to around 30%4 of 
GDP;  now  they  are  equivalent  to  around  44%  of  GDP.  Earlier  observers  who  said  that 
                                                 
1   For an overview, see, for instance, Bernard et al (2007). 
2   More  particularly,  once  countries  become  more  exposed  to  trade,  higher  foreign  competition  will  have  two 
impacts: On the one hand, this will lead to shrinking operating profits of domestic firms in domestic markets, 
which  will  force  the  least  productive  firms  to  exit  the  market.  On  the  other  hand,  for  those  firms  that  are 
productive enough to cope with the additional costs of foreign activity (i.e. transport costs or costs related to 
administrative  duties  or  institutional  and  cultural  barriers),  the  opening  of  distant  markets  also  provides 
additional opportunities to enlarge their market shares and to get additional profits from foreign venues. 
3   See, for example, Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) and Ottaviano, Taglioni and di Mauro (2009). 
4   Source: ECB calculations based on IMF World Economic Outlook. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2009
European integration could lead to a closing vis-à-vis the outside world have proved to be 
utterly wrong: quite the opposite has happened.  
Of  course,  Europe’s  trade  has  grown  not  only  because  of  Asia’s,  and  particularly  China’s 
emergence as a fully-fledged trading partner, but also by the growing role of the central and 
eastern  European  countries.  But  even  though  we  are  roughly  comparable  in  size  to  the 
United States, the euro area is about ten percentage points more open, and we are much 
more open than Japan, despite our larger size. This is an indication of why Europe has a key 
stake in global economic developments.  
Europe’s  openness  is  also  remarkable  in  international  finance:  over  the  past  decade,  the 
stock of outward and inward foreign direct investment has virtually doubled as a percentage 
of  GDP.  And  even  more  strikingly,  the  euro  area  is  more  open  financially  than  other 
advanced countries, like the United States and Japan. In 2007, international financial assets 
and liabilities of the euro area, as a percentage of GDP, reached almost 160%, compared 
with about 135% for the United States and 90% for Japan. And this explains why Europe is 
largely  exposed  to  the  current  global  financial  crisis  and  it  underscores  to  which  extent 
Europe has an important stake in global financial stability.  
Greater openness in trade and finance has of course created new challenges, which have 
rarely  been  as  visible  as  today.  And  just  as  with  the  global  financial  crisis,  global  trade 
integration  calls  for  constant  adjustment.  As  low-cost  competitors  have  emerged,  the  euro 
area  –  just  like  other  advanced  economies  –  has  recorded  some  losses  in  world  export 
market shares. These losses partly reflect the mechanical effect of the increasing shares of 
the new entrants, but the challenge for advanced economies remains: to adjust their export 
portfolios  according  to  their  technological  comparative  advantages,  towards  higher  quality 
products, and towards products that are more skill-intensive and capital-intensive.  
So what is the comparative advantage of the euro area in the global economy? Recent ECB 
analysis5  has  looked  at  so-called  Balassa  indices  of  revealed  comparative  advantage. 
According to these indices, a country specialises in a specific product or sector, if the share 
of that product or sector in the country's exports is higher than the share of that product or 
sector  in  world  exports.  This  analysis  suggests,  somewhat  surprisingly,  and  in  contrast  to 
other advanced economies, that the euro area specialisation overall has not changed much 
over last one and a half decades. There has been neither a decline in the specialisation in 
labour-intensive  products,  nor 
towards  more  research-intensive 
production. This might reflect structural rigidities that constrain the ability of euro area firms to 
adjust  rapidly,  but  it  could  also  mean  that  euro  area  firms  have  so  far  not  been  under 
significant  pressure  to  make  substantial  changes  in  their  specialisation  –  particularly  in 
medium-high-tech exports.  
But this general picture for the euro area does however not necessarily hold for all euro area 
countries. Overall, there have been substantial differences in the export performance across 
individual countries. And euro area countries have witnessed significant differences in cost 
competitiveness since the launch of the euro. This explains why the ECB has always said 
that an appropriate peer surveillance of the evolution of competitiveness indicators, including 
cost competitiveness and unit labour costs was of the essence.6 
the  expected  shift 
                                                 
5   For more details, see di Mauro and Forster (2008), providing an update of the earlier analysis by Baumann 
and di Mauro (2007). 
6   See  also  ECB  (2008),  Monitoring  labour  cost  developments  across  euro  area  countries,  Monthly  Bulletin, 
November 2008, pages 69-85. 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 3
The internal dimension of European competitiveness 
3.  
This brings me naturally to the second part of my talk, the internal dimension of European 
competitiveness.  Understanding  the  causes  of  growing  labour  cost  differentials  or  the 
cumulative  increases  in  labour  costs  across  euro  area  countries  is  very  important  for 
improving the adjustment process of countries within Economic and Monetary Union.  
From  an  economist’s  perspective,  increases  in  unit  labour  costs  stem  from  higher 
compensation per employee or lower productivity, or a combination of the two. In the case of 
the  euro  area,  the  main  source  of  difference  in  recent  years  has  been  differences  in  the 
growth rates of compensation per employee, rather than differences in productivity growth. 
Let’s  look  at  the  reasons  behind  these  differences  and  the  options  that  countries  have  to 
improve their situation. Such analysis is particular important at this time. Some countries may 
not only be affected by the global downturn and the financial crisis; they may also need to 
adjust in order to undo domestic imbalances. 
I see four main developments which have arisen in the Monetary Union and which help to 
explain  the  observed  differences  in  increases  in  labour  costs  in  a  number  of  euro  area 
countries.  
• 
First,  some  countries  might  have  entered  the  euro  area  at  a  moment  where  this 
overall  cost  competitiveness  was  clearly  hampered  for  a  number  of  reasons. 
Germany offers a clear example of such an economy due to the strong increases of 
unit labour costs associated with the reunification. A lower level of increases in unit 
labour cost than the average of the euro area was advisable for such economies. 
Second, the opposite case has also been observed. Some countries have entered 
the euro area in a position of relative “over-competitiveness”. The Netherlands for 
instance had in 1999 a very strong competitive position due to the success of their 
longstanding previous strategy of competitive disinflation. A higher level of increases 
of unit labour cost during several years is explainable in such a situation. 
Third, some countries might be or might have been catching up in terms of growth. 
Then  they  may  have  experienced  relatively  strong  trend  increases  in  per  capita 
GDP.  To  the  extent  that  these  income  per  capita  developments  are  sustainable, 
relatively strong wage increases are justifiable by reference to the fundamentals of 
the economy.  
  These  three  first  developments  are  economically  justified  and  need  not  be  a  concern  to 
policy makers. 
• 
However,  there  is  a  fourth  type  of  developments  which  poses  problems  for  the 
economies concerned. Some euro area countries have witnessed a long period of 
strong  growth  in  domestic  demand.  These  demand  pressures  were  related  to 
expectations of consumers or firms about future income and profit prospects, which, 
it  is  now  clear,  were  overly  optimistic.7  This  situation  was  often  accompanied  or 
intensified  by  an  insufficiently  tight  fiscal  stance,  even  if  headline  fiscal  numbers 
(such as the deficit and the debt ratio) still suggested a healthy fiscal situation.  
Technically  speaking,  governments  and  the  public  have  mistakenly  taken  a  cyclical  or 
temporary expansion to be an upward shift in potential output and long-term income growth. 
They  thus  took  insufficient  account  of  the  impact  of  a  possible  downturn  in  activity  on  the 
public  finances  and  private  income.  In  simpler  terms,  this  means  nothing  less  than 
extrapolating  the  good  times  almost  for  ever  and  accordingly  increasing  spending  and 
indebtedness.  
                                                 
7   See Campa and Gavilán (2006) and Blanchard (2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2009
In  our  economic  models,  we  often  speak  about  “forward-looking  agents”,  portraying 
households, firms and governments as making rational economic calculations with a watchful 
eye on the future. But in reality, we have to be aware of too many “forward-spending” agents, 
private and public alike. Such a situation can stoke inflation and bring cumulated losses in 
competitiveness, lower export performance and a high current account deficit. Moreover, it 
has  often  resulted  not  only  in  pressures  on  the  prices  of  goods  and  services,  but  also  in 
asset price inflation, notably in the housing market. 
In  addition,  in  some  cases  sizeable  wage  increases  in  the  public  sector  during  normal  or 
good times may have provided the wrong signals for wage bargaining in other sectors.  
The  accumulation  of  relative  losses  in  competitiveness  and  the  build-up  of  domestic 
imbalances need, at some point, to be corrected. The correction within a monetary union can 
and must be achieved through lower unit labour costs increases relative to the average of the 
Union.  In  an  environment  of  flexible  wages  and  prices,  this  adjustment  could  proceed 
smoothly  without  significant  losses  in  output  and  employment.  However  if  the  economy 
concerned suffers from structural rigidities in product and labour markets, a more protracted 
and more painful adjustment in output and employment will then finally take place.8  
As enhancing flexibility has been a message that the ECB has championed for a long time, 
let me focus on such rigidities, which unfortunately appear to affect most countries. I believe 
there should be more public awareness that insufficient attention of wage setting to current 
and  expected  productivity  developments  makes  any  correction  to  previous  losses  of 
competitiveness more painful in terms of output and employment losses.  
Competitiveness, the crisis and the challenges for policy 
4.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  current  difficulties  in  the  international  economy,  which  are  having 
such a strongly negative impact on the Irish economy. For many years, Ireland has been a 
great  success  story:  openness  to  trade  and  a  high  degree  of  flexibility  have  allowed  the 
country to benefit substantially from globalisation during the last decades. It now has a very 
high  income  per  capita,  and  it  is  characterised  by  a  skilled  workforce,  a  flexible  labour 
market, moderate taxation and a business-friendly regulatory environment.  
None  of  these  advantages  have  been  lost  as  a  result  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  But 
crucially for Ireland, this unprecedented international shock has come at the same time as 
the economy has been undergoing a necessary rebalancing in the composition of its growth, 
intensifying  the  challenges  it  faces.  In  particular  the  construction  and  the  banking  sectors 
need to adjust. 
The Irish government is acting resolutely to address the situation. With the public finances, 
important action is being taken to make immediate savings, and plans are being drawn up for 
a return to compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact. A fiscal policy that convincingly 
reduces future public deficits is indeed absolutely essential. In addition, measures have been 
taken  or  are  under  way  to  recover  lost  competitiveness  and  to  exploit  the  country’s 
comparative advantages in its high-tech, high-skills industries. 
What is crucial at this moment for all economic policy actors, is to take measures that are 
both supportive in the current environment and in the longer-term interests of the economy. 
Many  euro  area  countries,  despite  some  progress,  still  exhibit  structural  impediments 
triggered by a rigid legal and regulatory environment. Unemployment is a clear concern right 
now in many parts of the euro area, and we surely do not want to lose human capital or scar 
a large proportion of the people of working age. As I mentioned before wage restraint would 
help a lot in this respect. More generally, in order to minimise job and output losses related to 
                                                 
8   See European Commission (2006). 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 5
the current downturn, it is vital that euro area governments and social partners pursue four 
objectives:  
• 
First, wage setting needs to take account of the competitiveness and labour market 
conditions in a responsible and timely manner.9  
Second, national authorities should pursue courageous policies of spending restraint 
especially in the case of public wages. A prudent fiscal stance should be always in 
place.  
Third,  the  completion  of  the  Single  Market,  particularly  in  services  and  network 
industries, should be achieved. A deeper integration of markets is crucial to foster 
competition  and  open  product  and  labour  markets.  Measures  that  hinder  free 
competition  and  cross-border  trade  must  be  avoided.  In  this  context,  it  is  of  the 
utmost importance to resist protectionist measures.  
Fourth,  in  the  context  of  the  Lisbon  agenda,  the  necessary  reforms  that  enhance 
competition  and  improve  long-term  growth  prospects  in  the  euro  area  must  be 
implemented.  
   Especially in these difficult times such reforms are very important in all euro area countries to 
counteract the economic downturn and limit its negative impact on employment. The price of 
delaying  reforms  is  particularly  high  at  the  current  stage.  For  many  years,  we  have  been 
saying that we need structural reforms – more openness, more competition. The crisis offers 
us the opportunity and the obligation to seize the moment and implement the right reforms. 
These would help the economy overcome the crisis and be stronger afterwards. 
I also want to call on European policy makers as a whole. As a lesson from the current crisis, 
we should consider ways how to strengthen our surveillance of competitiveness within the 
European Union, and in particular the euro area. This should help countries to build stronger 
buffers  in  good  times.  And  it  should  also  help  to  avoid  excessive  increases  in  unit  labour 
costs.  In  other  words,  this  would  prevent  us  from  again  extending  public  and  private 
spending beyond sustainable levels and experiencing difficulties similar to the current ones. 
Conclusion 
5.  
Let me draw to a close. As you know, the great Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw was 
not at all impressed by the economics profession. His was the famous disparaging remark 
that “if all economists were laid end to end, they would not reach a conclusion”. Certainly in 
these  very  challenging  times,  it  is  not  easy  for  all  economic  policy-makers  to  reach 
agreement on the way forward. But let me offer some conclusions on which I hope we can all 
agree.  
The euro area is resolutely addressing the challenges of the global financial turbulence, the 
global imbalances and the resulting global slowdown. Looking forward, we need to continue 
with  our  efforts  to  make  the  euro  area  stronger,  more  flexible,  more  resilient  and  more 
prosperous. The ECB’s Governing Council, of which Governor Hurley has been a member 
for many years, is tirelessly working to make the euro area better off.  
I  am  also  optimistic  about  the  prospects  for  this  country.  The  Irish  economy  clearly  faces 
severe challenges over the next few years – and hard decisions will have to be taken. But in 
many  ways,  the  Irish  economy  is  an  excellent example  of  some  of  the  characteristics  that 
foster global competitiveness – in its openness, its flexibility and its high levels of education. 
And this has paid off in significant increases in income per capita. 
                                                 
9   For a review of wage arrangements across euro area countries, see DuCaju et al. (2008). 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2009
Some things will of course have to change. But none of the positive characteristics are lost 
nor  should  they  be  lost in  the  crisis.  In  my  view,  the  open nature  of  this  economy  with  its 
associated flexibility and adaptability means that Ireland will be well placed to benefit greatly 
from the eventual recovery and to compete effectively in the global economy in the future.  
References 
Baumann, U. and F. di Mauro (2007), “Globalisation and euro area trade – interactions and 
challenges”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 55, March. 
Bernard,  A.B.,  Jensen,  J.B.,  Redding,  S.J.  and  P.K.  Schott  (2007),  „Firms  in  international 
trade“, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 3, pp. 106-130. 
Blanchard  O.  (2007),  “Current  account  deficits  in  rich  countries”,  NBER  working  paper  no. 
12925.  
Campa  J.M.  and  A.  Gavilán  (2006),  “Current  account  in  the  euro  area:  an  intertemporal 
approach”, Documento de trabajo del Banco de Espana, no. 0638. 
di Mauro, F. and K. Forster (2008), “Globalisation and the competitiveness of the euro area”, 
ECB Occasional Paper No. 97, September. 
DuCaju  P.,  Gautier,  E.,  Momferatou,  D.  and  M.  Ward-Warmendiger  (2008),  “Institutional 
features of wage bargaining in 22 EU countries, the US and Japan”, ECB Working Paper no. 
974, December. 
ECB  (2008),  “Monitoring  Labour  cost  developments  across  euro  area  countries”,  Monthly 
Bulletin, November, pp. 69-85. 
European Commission (2006), “The EU economy: 2006 review. Adjustment dynamics in the 
euro area – Experiences and Challenges”, European Economy n.6. 
Melitz,  M.  and  G.  Ottaviano  (2008),  “Market  size,  trade  and  productivity”,  Review  of 
Economic Studies, 75, pp. 295-316. 
Ottaviano,  G.,  D.  Taglioni  and  F.  di  Mauro  (2009),  “The  euro  and  the  competitiveness  of 
European firms”, Economic Policy, pp. 5-53, January. 
BIS Review 23/2009 
 7
