Loi M Bakani: PNG Economic Survey – “From Boom to Gloom” 
Commentary by Mr Loi M Bakani, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, on 
the PNG Economic Survey: “From Boom to Gloom”, at the 2009 Papua New Guinea Update, 
Port Moresby, 16 April 2009. 
 The survey is focused on: (1) the likely end of macroeconomic stability and economic growth 
that the PNG economy has enjoyed in the period 2003 to 2007/08, driven by high commodity 
prices and prudent management of macroeconomic policies – fiscal and monetary, although 
the survey does not explicitly give credit to the sound management of fiscal and monetary 
policies; (2) the start of turbulent times arising from the adverse impact of lower commodity 
prices caused by lower demand for PNG’s export commodities, itself the consequence of the 
downturn  in  global  economy;  and  (3)  a  comparison  of  the  National  Government’s 
management of the revenue windfalls of the 2000s and 1990s.  
The primary common factor that is analyzed extensively in the survey is international prices 
of primary export commodities, and the secondary but also important factor is government 
policies, both macro (fiscal and monetary) and micro economic policies. 
In the boom period, high international export commodity prices gave rise to increased foreign 
exchange reserves, Government revenue, steady appreciation of the kina exchange rates, 
and low and stable inflation rates. Government expenditure was within its means. Whether 
there  was  enough  productive  government  expenditure  as  opposed  to  consumption 
expenditure is another issue. On paper, there was promotion of capital, infrastructure, and 
other productive expenditures. Actual effective spending of this was below budgeted levels. 
The  survey  did  not  explicitly  give  credit  to  prudent  fiscal  (balanced  budget)  and  monetary 
policy  management.  These  contributed 
improved  business  confidence  and 
macroeconomic stability and growth that the economy enjoyed. Government spending and 
private  sector  credit  growth  supported  the  expansion  in  the  economy.  The  survey  gives 
evidence of these; 6.5 percent real GDP growth in 2007 and 7.3 percent in 2008 quoted from 
the 2009 National Budget, and employment growth, using the Bank of PNG’s employment 
index.  
In the start of the gloom period, especially the second half of 2008, the declines in prices of 
PNG’s  major  export  commodities  will  be  the  telling  factor  behind  reduced  Government 
revenue, foreign exchange inflows, potential depreciation of the kina and high inflation rate. 
Already, total government revenue was lower than budgeted in 2008 while expenditure was 
within budget but higher than the revenue, which resulted in a larger budget deficit compared 
to a projected budget surplus.  
While the Bank acknowledges that its reaction in adjusting monetary policy in 2008 to market 
conditions  was  a  little  late  it  has  to  be  pointed  out  that  (i)  the  link  between  monetary 
aggregates (money supply) and inflation is weak and not as strong as in other economies, 
and  that  (ii)  the  most  influential  variables/factors  of  inflation  are  the  exchange  rate  and 
imported  (foreign)  inflation  of  PNG’s  major  trading  partners.  With  these  in  mind,  while 
monetary  expansion  in  the  form  of  credit  growth  contributed  to  an  extent  to  aggregate 
demand and therefore to inflation, the most influential factors on inflation in 2008 were the 
increased  food  and  fuel  prices  in  2007  and  the  first  half  of  2008  and  their  lag  effect,  and 
strong  domestic  demand.  With  respect  to  the  high  credit  growth,  the  Bank  continued  to 
closely monitor the quality of loans and as evident, there was no increase in non-performing 
loans  by  banks.  It  is  also  important  to  appreciate  that  the  Bank  viewed  the  credit  growth 
necessary to stimulate economic growth after low growth rates of real GDP were recorded 
prior to 2007. Indeed, the Bank stood ready to tighten monetary policy in the event evidence 
to 
BIS Review 84/2009 
 1
of inflationary pressures emerged in the economy. Relying on the release of actual inflation 
data had a part in the slow response of the Bank.  
Within domestic demand, monetary policy was picked on by the survey as being responsible 
but increased government spending and public consumption from the export earnings, both 
important  factors  contributing  to  strong  domestic  demand,  were  not  clearly  emphasized. 
Also,  very  importantly,  the  kina  appreciated  against  the US  and  Australian  dollars  and  the 
prices of fuel and food declined in the second half of 2008. These would have some positive 
flow  on  effects  to  domestic  prices,  but  we  have  not  seen  business  houses  passed  on  the 
benefits  of  reduced  import  costs  to  consumers.  This  is  something  that  the  survey  missed. 
BPNG hopes that there is still a lag effect of the appreciation, that is, goods bought under the 
appreciated rates will be sold at lower price. Firms must be fair and pass on the benefits to 
consumers. However, the latest (2009) depreciation of the kina against the key currencies-
US  and  Australian  dollars  may  give  them  an  excuse  not  to  reduce  prices  of  goods  and 
services or delay further any downward adjustment to domestic prices.  
Coinciding with the declining commodity prices in 2008 was an increase in total government 
spending  in  excess  of  total  revenue.  Experience  of  the  1990s  show  that  when  there  is 
excessive Government spending there can be downward pressure on the exchange rate and 
high  inflation.  And  monetary  policy  is  burdened  with  the  task  of  restoring  macroeconomic 
stability.  That  is,  monetary  policy  could  become  preoccupied  with  the  Government’s  debt 
management.  We  have  to  avoid  this.  We  may  be  going  through  this  cycle  again.  In  this 
respect,  the  survey  then  makes  some  comparison  of  the  revenue  windfall  and  its 
management in the 1990s with that of the 2000s.  
In the 1991 to 1994 period the main growth area in expenditure were salaries and benefits 
and current transfers or simply – recurrent expenditure which were financed by substantial 
amounts of domestic debt.  
In the 2000’s, there was restraint on public sector salaries and current transfers, especially in 
2003,  although  revenue  had  already  increased  substantially.  Also  starting  in  2003,  the 
reduction in public debt took place. By 2007, the public debt/GDP ratio had been reduced to 
around 33 percent from 63 percent in 2003. This decline reflected the increase in nominal 
GDP  and  also  a  deliberate  and  prudent  debt  management  policy  to  prepay  expensive 
overseas loans using the windfall revenue. But then recurrent expenditure started increasing 
and  by  2007,  salaries  and  benefits  increased  by  40%  from  2002.  This  is  unproductive 
expenditure and I agree with the survey that it would be difficult to reduce it under a situation 
where  budget  revenue  is  declining,  unless  drastic  reforms  in  the  public  service  to  achieve 
efficiency are undertaken.  
We hope to avoid the experience of the 1990s where monetary policy became burdened with 
Government’s debt management. The difference now is that the Central Banking Act 2000 
safeguards  monetary  policy  from  any  political  interference  and  influence.  But  to  achieve 
macroeconomic  stability  and  growth,  it  requires  close  coordination  between  fiscal  and 
monetary policies.  
Overall, the survey pointed out that the Government managed the revenue windfalls of the 
2000s better than in the 1990s. But we have to be mindful that some of the windfall revenue 
are kept in trust accounts with commercial banks and Bank of PNG. Whether these funds will 
be  effectively  spent  for  the  intended  purposes  remains  to  be  seen.  More  time  will  lapse 
before  we  know.  Good  management  of  the  windfall  revenue  and  effective  spending  for 
improvement in the delivery of goods and services also requires good governance and micro 
reforms. While the Government should be acknowledged in the survey for putting aside in 
trust accounts some of the windfall revenue, and also coming up with long term development 
plans  (National  Strategic  Plan  2010-2050),  which  should  be  supported  with  resources. 
Prudent  management  of  the  windfall  revenue  held  in  the  trust  accounts  is  a  challenge  for 
Government  to  ensure  that  it  is  used  efficiently  and  for  areas  that  will  enhance  revenue 
generation in future. But a closer assessment of most of these trust accounts show that they 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2009
are  likely  to  end  up  as  recurrent  expenditure,  and  not  of  investment  type.  The  issue  of 
efficiency in delivery of services requires micro reforms.  
This  is  where  the  survey  also  deliberated  on  some  areas  of  micro  reform  necessary  to 
sustain economic growth in future. They are: (i) competition in mobile telecommunications, 
about  which  the  survey  acknowledges  the  gains  in  the  competition  between  Telikom  and 
Dicigel, (ii) competition in air transportation, about which the survey pointed out benefits for 
travelers on certain travel routes (e.g., Brisbane-Port Moresby-Brisbane) served Qantas/Air 
Niugini and Virgin Blue/Airlines PNG (iii) business regulations (iv) dealing with construction 
permits  (v)  reducing  costs  of  trade  (vi)  streamlining  contract  enforcement.  These  reforms 
should  be  pursued  as  the  benefits  for  the  economy  are  substantial.  The  Bank  has 
consistently called for these reforms in its six-monthly monetary policy statements.  
In  concluding,  the  survey  focused  on  the  appropriate  theme  that  is  relevant  today  for  the 
Government as it is already experiencing the effects of low commodity prices on its budgeted 
revenue  for  2009.  It  is a  challenge  not  to  repeat  the  experiences  of  previous  years  where 
expenditure is not adjusted whenever there is a shortfall in revenue. The Government should 
not resort to debt financing but take a strong stand to cut expenditure in non essential areas. 
The effective use of the trust funds has to be undertaken in an orderly manner so that it does 
not exert pressure on liquidity and inflation. This is a form of Government’s fiscal stimulus 
required  to  keep  the  economic  momentum  going.  Close  coordination  between  fiscal  and 
monetary  policies  is  therefore  necessary  in  order  to  achieve  long  term  macroeconomic 
stability and sustainable growth.  
In terms of the timing of the survey, it is early to assess the full impact of the decline in export 
commodity prices on the economy. It is desirable thus to assess this impact later and how 
the Government had reacted to such impact. This could be looked at in the next survey of the 
economy.  But  raising  these  issues  now  as  the  Government  is  starting  to  experience  the 
effects of lower commodity prices is important, and the authors should be commended for 
undertaking  this  survey  at  this  time.  Lessons  drawn  from  the  past  commodity  boom  and 
gloom should be used as a guide as we face the challenge of a commodity gloom in 2009.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 84/2009 
 3
