Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro@10 – achievements and responsibilities 
Remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
ceremony of the European Parliament to mark the 10th anniversary of the euro, Strasbourg, 
13 January 2009. 
 Mr President,  
Honourable members of the European Parliament,  
It is an immense honour and a great pleasure for me to take part in this celebration of one of 
Europe’s most momentous achievements, the euro.  
One  of  Europe’s  founding  fathers  –  Jean  Monnet  –  once  said:  “When  an  idea  meets  the 
needs of the time, it ceases to belong to its creators and becomes more powerful than those 
responsible for it”. And he added: “There is no such thing as premature ideas, there are only 
ripe times that one should wait for”.  
For  decades,  the  single  European  currency  was  merely  an  idea  shared  by  a  few  people. 
Many  others  said  that  it  could  not  be  done,  or  that  it  was  bound  to  fail.  Today,  the  single 
currency is a reality for 329 million citizens. The creation of the euro will one day be seen as 
a decisive step on the long path towards an “ever closer union” among the people of Europe.  
Since the introduction of the euro, fellow Europeans have enjoyed a level of price stability 
which  previously  had  been  achieved  in  only  a  few  of  the  euro  area  countries.  This  price 
stability is a direct benefit to all citizens. It protects incomes and savings, and it helps to bring 
down  borrowing  costs,  thus  promoting  investment,  job  creation  and  prosperity  over  the 
medium and long term. The single currency has been a factor of dynamism for the European 
economy. It has enhanced price transparency, increased trade, and promoted economic and 
financial integration within the euro area and with the rest of the world.  
In  recent  months  we  have  seen  another  benefit  of  the  euro:  the  financial  crisis  is 
demonstrating that in turbulent financial waters it is better to be on a large, solid and steady 
ship rather than on a small vessel. Would Europe have been able to act as swiftly, decisively 
and coherently if we did not have the single currency uniting us? Would we have been able 
to protect many separate national currencies from the fallout of the financial crisis? I believe 
that we can be proud of the reaction of European authorities, parliaments, governments and 
central banks. Together we have shown that Europe is capable of taking decisions, even in 
the most difficult circumstances. 
We owe the historic success of the euro to the determination and perseverance of a series of 
visionary leaders. And we owe it to the effective interplay between European institutions. The 
European Parliament played a crucial role at the pioneering stage. The Parliament was the 
first European institution to make proposals for a single currency, back in 1962. And in the 
past ten years, since the establishment of the ECB, our institutions have maintained a very 
close and fruitful dialogue. This dialogue has involved over 50 hearings of the members of 
the Executive Board before this Parliament. The dialogue between the Parliament and the 
ECB is a very important exchange in terms of accountability, allowing the ECB to explain its 
decisions and actions to the general public and their elected representatives.  
Ladies and gentlemen, during its first years of existence, the euro had to face major trials: 
the  establishment  of  a  sound  and  credible  central  bank  and  the  creation  of  a  stable  new 
currency inspiring confidence. These challenges were overcome successfully and the euro is 
today firmly established. Hence, this is certainly a time for celebration. But it is no time for 
complacency. Current challenges are pressing, and new challenges will arise. The continued 
success  of  EMU  will  depend  on  how  these  challenges  are  addressed.  This  is  the  main 
responsibility for all authorities involved.  
BIS Review 5/2009 
 1
Let me mention three major challenges.  
First,  the  financial  crisis.  The  crisis  has  revealed  fundamental  weaknesses  in  the  global 
financial  system.  We  are  playing  an  active  part  in  the  global  efforts  to  address  these 
weaknesses and redesign the regulatory and institutional framework. A lot of work remains to 
be done.  
Second,  Economic  Union.  The  solidity  of  the  single  currency  rests  on  two  pillars:  a 
monetary policy firmly geared towards price stability and a set of sound economic policies. 
The particular challenges on the economic front include the firm and credible implementation 
of the Stability and Growth Pact, constant efforts to render our economies more productive, 
innovative and dynamic, and the avoidance of major competitive divergences within the euro 
area.  
Third,  enlargement.  When  we  started  out  ten  years  ago,  we  were  11  countries.  As  of  1 
January  this  year,  we  are  now  16  countries.  This  says  a  lot  about  our  historic  endeavour. 
Handling  enlargement  in  the  best  fashion  possible  is  a  very  inspiring  and  demanding 
challenge for all of us. 
The  euro  is  a  historic  achievement.  What  matters  most  today  is  our  responsibility  for  the 
future.  New  challenges  are  arising.  If  these  challenges  are  faced  with  utmost  lucidity  and 
audacity, they can generate the powerful ideas which Jean Monnet referred to, and which 
have advanced us so far on the path of stability and prosperity in Europe. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
2 
 BIS Review 5/2009
