Duvvuri Subbarao: Impact of the global financial crisis on India – 
collateral damage and response 
Speech by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Symposium 
on  “The  Global  Economic  Crisis  and  Challenges  for  the  Asian  Economy  in  a  Changing 
World” organized by the Institute for International Monetary Affairs, Tokyo, 18 February 2009. 
 Global outlook 
The  global  economic  outlook  deteriorated  sharply  over  the  last  quarter.  In  a  sign  of  the 
ferocity  of  the  down  turn,  the  IMF  made  a  marked  downward  revision  of  its  estimate  for 
global growth in 2009 in purchasing power parity terms – from its forecast of 3.0 per cent 
made in October 2008 to 0.5 per cent in January 2009. In market exchange rate terms, the 
downturn is sharper – global GDP is projected to actually shrink by 0.6 per cent. With all the 
advanced  economies  –  the  United  States,  Europe  and  Japan  –  having  firmly  gone  into 
recession, the  contagion  of  the  crisis  from  the  financial sector  to  the  real  sector  has  been 
unforgiving  and  total.  Recent  evidence  suggests  that  contractionary  forces  are  strong: 
demand has slumped, production is plunging, job losses are rising and credit markets remain 
in seizure. Most worryingly, world trade – the main channel through which the downturn will 
get transmitted on the way forward – is projected to contract by 2.8 per cent in 2009.  
Policy  making  around  the  world  is  in  clearly  uncharted  territory.  Governments  and  central 
banks  across  countries  have  responded  to  the  crisis  through  big,  aggressive  and 
unconventional  measures.  There  is  a  contentious  debate  on  whether  these  measures  are 
adequate and appropriate, and when, if at all, they will start to show results. There has also 
been a separate debate on how abandoning the rule book driven by the tyranny of the short-
term, is compromising medium-term sustainability. What is clearly beyond debate though is 
that  this  Great  Recession  of  2008/09  is  going  to  be  deeper  and  the  recovery  longer  than 
earlier thought.  
Emerging economies 
Contrary to the “decoupling theory”, emerging economies too have been hit by the crisis. The 
decoupling theory, which was intellectually fashionable even as late as a year ago, held that 
even  if  advanced  economies  went  into  a  downturn,  emerging  economies  will  remain 
unscathed  because  of  their  substantial  foreign  exchange  reserves,  improved  policy 
framework,  robust  corporate  balance  sheets  and  relatively  healthy  banking  sector.  In  a 
rapidly  globalizing  world,  the  ”decoupling  theory”  was  never  totally  persuasive.  Given  the 
evidence  of  the  last  few  months  –  capital  flow  reversals,  sharp  widening  of  spreads  on 
sovereign  and  corporate  debt  and abrupt  currency  depreciations  –  the  “decoupling  theory” 
stands totally invalidated. Reinforcing the notion that in a globalized world no country can be 
an island, growth prospects of emerging economies have been undermined by the cascading 
financial crisis with, of course, considerable variation across countries.  
Questions that will be addressed 
India too has been impacted by the crisis – and by much more than it was suspected earlier. 
What I propose to do in the rest of my speech is to address the following four questions:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Why has India been hit by the crisis?  
How has India been hit by the crisis?  
How have we responded to the challenge?  
BIS Review 20/2009 
 1
(iv) 
What is the outlook for India?  
Why has India been hit by the crisis? 
There is, at least in some quarters, dismay that India has been hit by the crisis. This dismay 
stems from two arguments.  
The first argument goes as follows. The Indian banking system has had no direct exposure to 
the  sub-prime  mortgage  assets  or  to  the  failed  institutions.  It  has  very  limited  off-balance 
sheet activities or securitized assets. In fact, our banks continue to remain safe and healthy. 
So, the enigma is how can India be caught up in a crisis when it has nothing much to do with 
any of the maladies that are at the core of the crisis.  
The second reason for dismay is that India's recent growth has been driven predominantly by 
domestic  consumption  and  domestic  investment.  External  demand,  as  measured  by 
merchandize exports, accounts for less than 15 per cent of our GDP. The question then is, 
even  if  there  is  a  global  downturn,  why  should  India  be  affected  when  its  dependence  on 
external demand is so limited?  
The  answer  to  both  the  above  frequently-asked  questions  lies  in  globalization.  Let  me 
explain.  First,  India's  integration  into  the  world  economy  over  the  last  decade  has  been 
remarkably  rapid.  Integration  into  the  world  implies  more  than  just  exports.  Going  by  the 
common measure of globalization, India's two-way trade (merchandize exports plus imports), 
as a proportion of GDP, grew from 21.2 per cent in 1997-98, the year of the Asian crisis, to 
34.7 per cent in 2007-08.  
Second,  India's  financial  integration  with  the  world  has  been  as  deep  as  India's  trade 
globalization, if not deeper. If we take an expanded measure of globalization, that is the ratio 
of total external transactions (gross current account flows plus gross capital flows) to GDP, 
this ratio has more than doubled from 46.8 per cent in 1997-98 to 117.4 per cent in 2007-08.  
Importantly, the Indian corporate sector's access to external funding has markedly increased 
in the last five years. Some numbers will help illustrate the point. In the five-year period 2003-
08, the share of investment in India's GDP rose by 11 percentage points. Corporate savings 
financed  roughly  half  of  this,  but  a  significant  portion  of  the  balance  financing  came  from 
external sources. While funds were available domestically, they were expensive relative to 
foreign  funding.  On  the  other  hand,  in  a  global  market  awash  with  liquidity  and  on  the 
promise of India's growth potential, foreign investors were willing to take risks and provide 
funds  at  a  lower  cost.  Last  year  (2007/08),  for  example,  India  received  capital  inflows 
amounting to over 9 per cent of GDP as against a current account deficit in the balance of 
payments of just 1.5 per cent of GDP. These capital flows, in excess of the current account 
deficit,  evidence  the  importance  of  external  financing  and  the  depth  of  India's  financial 
integration.  
So, the reason India has been hit by the crisis, despite mitigating factors, is clearly India's 
rapid and growing integration into the global economy. 
How has India been hit by the crisis? 
The  contagion  of  the  crisis  has  spread  to  India  through  all  the  channels  –  the  financial 
channel, the real channel, and importantly, as happens in all financial crises, the confidence 
channel.  
Let us first look at the financial channel. India's financial markets – equity markets, money 
markets, forex markets and credit markets – had all come under pressure from a number of 
directions.  First,  as  a  consequence  of  the  global  liquidity  squeeze,  Indian  banks  and 
corporates  found  their  overseas  financing  drying  up,  forcing  corporates  to  shift  their  credit 
demand to the domestic banking sector. Also, in their frantic search for substitute financing, 
corporates  withdrew  their  investments  from  domestic  money  market  mutual  funds  putting 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2009
redemption  pressure  on  the  mutual  funds  and  down  the  line  on  non-banking  financial 
companies  (NBFCs)  where  the  MFs  had  invested  a  significant  portion  of  their  funds.  This 
substitution  of  overseas  financing  by  domestic  financing  brought  both  money  markets  and 
credit markets under pressure. Second, the forex market came under pressure because of 
reversal  of  capital  flows  as  part  of  the  global  deleveraging  process.  Simultaneously, 
corporates  were  converting  the  funds  raised  locally  into  foreign  currency  to  meet  their 
external  obligations.  Both  these  factors  put  downward  pressure  on  the  rupee.  Third,  the 
Reserve Bank's intervention in the forex market to manage the volatility in the rupee further 
added to liquidity tightening.  
Now  let  me  turn  to  the  real  channel.  Here,  the  transmission  of  the  global  cues  to  the 
domestic  economy  has  been  quite  straight  forward  –  through  the  slump  in  demand  for 
exports. The United States, European Union and the Middle East, which account for three 
quarters of India's goods and services trade are in a synchronized down turn. Service export 
growth is also likely to slow in the near term as the recession deepens and financial services 
firms – traditionally large users of outsourcing services – are restructured. Remittances from 
migrant workers too are likely to slow as the Middle East adjusts to lower crude prices and 
advanced economies go into a recession. 
Beyond  the  financial  and  real  channels  of  transmission  as  above,  the  crisis  also  spread 
through the confidence channel. In sharp contrast to global financial markets, which went into 
a seizure on account of a crisis of confidence, Indian financial markets continued to function 
in  an  orderly  manner.  Nevertheless,  the  tightened  global  liquidity  situation  in  the  period 
immediately following the Lehman failure in mid-September 2008, coming as it did on top of 
a turn in the credit cycle, increased the risk aversion of the financial system and made banks 
cautious about lending.  
The purport of the above explanation is to show how, despite not being part of the financial 
sector problem, India has been affected by the crisis through the pernicious feedback loops 
between  external  shocks  and  domestic  vulnerabilities  by  way  of  the  financial,  real  and 
confidence channels.  
How have we responded to the challenge? 
Let me now turn to how we responded to the crisis. The failure of Lehman Brothers in mid-
September  was  followed  in  quick  succession  by  several  other  large  financial  institutions 
coming  under  severe  stress.  This  made  financial  markets  around  the  world  uncertain  and 
unsettled. This contagion, as I explained above, spread to emerging economies, and to India 
too. Both the government and the Reserve Bank of India responded to the challenge in close 
coordination  and  consultation.  The  main  plank  of  the  government  response  was  fiscal 
stimulus while the Reserve Bank's action comprised monetary accommodation and counter 
cyclical regulatory forbearance.  
Monetary policy response 
The Reserve Bank's policy response was aimed at containing the contagion from the outside 
–  to  keep  the  domestic  money  and  credit  markets  functioning  normally  and  see  that  the 
liquidity stress did not trigger solvency cascades. In particular, we targeted three objectives: 
first, to maintain a comfortable rupee liquidity position; second, to augment foreign exchange 
liquidity; and third, to maintain a policy framework that would keep credit delivery on track so 
as  to  arrest  the  moderation  in  growth.  This  marked  a  reversal  of  Reserve  Bank's  policy 
stance  from  monetary  tightening  in  response  to  heightened  inflationary  pressures  of  the 
previous  period  to  monetary  easing  in  response  to  easing  inflationary  pressures  and 
moderation in growth in the current cycle. Our measures to meet the above objectives came 
in  several  policy  packages  starting  mid-September  2008,  on  occasion  in  response  to 
unanticipated  global  developments  and  at  other  times  in  anticipation  of  the  impact  of 
potential global developments on the Indian markets.  
BIS Review 20/2009 
 3
Our policy packages included, like in the case of other central banks, both conventional and 
unconventional  measures.  On  the  conventional  side,  we  reduced  the  policy  interest  rates 
aggressively and rapidly, reduced the quantum of bank reserves impounded by the central 
bank and expanded and liberalized the refinance facilities for export credit. Measures aimed 
at managing forex liquidity included an upward adjustment of the interest rate ceiling on the 
foreign  currency  deposits  by  non-resident  Indians,  substantially  relaxing  the  external 
commercial  borrowings  (ECB)  regime  for  corporates,  and  allowing  non-banking  financial 
companies and housing finance companies access to foreign borrowing. 
The  important  among  the  many  unconventional  measures  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India are a rupee-dollar swap facility for Indian banks to give them comfort in managing their 
short-term  foreign  funding  requirements,  an  exclusive  refinance  window  as  also  a  special 
purpose vehicle for supporting non-banking financial companies, and expanding the lendable 
resources  available  to  apex  finance  institutions  for  refinancing  credit  extended  to  small 
industries, housing and exports.  
Government's fiscal stimulus 
Over the last five years, both the central and state governments in India have made a serious 
effort to reverse the fiscal excesses of the past. At the heart of these efforts was the Fiscal 
Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act which mandated a calibrated road map 
to fiscal sustainability. However, recognizing the depth and extraordinary impact of this crisis, 
the  central  government  invoked  the  emergency  provisions  of  the  FRBM  Act  to  seek 
relaxation  from  the  fiscal  targets  and  launched  two  fiscal  stimulus  packages  in  December 
2008 and January 2009. These fiscal stimulus packages, together amounting to about 3 per 
cent  of  GDP, 
included  additional  public  spending,  particularly  capital  expenditure, 
government  guaranteed  funds  for  infrastructure  spending,  cuts  in  indirect  taxes,  expanded 
guarantee  cover  for  credit  to  micro  and  small  enterprises,  and  additional  support  to 
exporters. These stimulus packages came on top of an already announced expanded safety-
net for rural poor, a farm loan waiver package and salary increases for government staff, all 
of which too should stimulate demand.  
Impact of monetary measures 
Taken together, the measures put in place since mid-September 2008 have ensured that the 
Indian financial markets continue to function in an orderly manner. The cumulative amount of 
primary liquidity potentially available to the financial system through these measures is over 
US$ 75 bln or 7 per cent of GDP. This sizeable easing has ensured a comfortable liquidity 
position starting mid-November 2008 as evidenced by a number of indicators including the 
weighted-average call money rate, the overnight money market rate and the yield on the 10-
year benchmark government security. Taking the signal from the policy rate cut, many of the 
big banks have reduced their benchmark prime lending rates. Bank credit has expanded too, 
faster than it did last year. However, Reserve Bank’s rough calculations show that the overall 
flow of resources to the commercial sector is less than what it was last year. This is because, 
even though bank credit has expanded, it has not fully offset the decline in non-bank flow of 
resources to the commercial sector. 
Evaluating the response 
In evaluating the response to the crisis, it is important to remember that although the origins 
of  the  crisis  are  common  around  the  world,  the  crisis  has  impacted  different  economies 
differently. Importantly, in advanced economies where it originated, the crisis spread from the 
financial  sector  to  the  real  sector.  In  emerging  economies,  the  transmission  of  external 
shocks  to  domestic  vulnerabilities  has  typically  been  from  the  real  sector  to  the  financial 
sector.  Countries  have  accordingly  responded  to  the  crisis  depending  on  their  specific 
country circumstances. Thus, even as policy responses across countries are broadly similar, 
their precise design, quantum, sequencing and timing have varied. In particular, while policy 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2009
responses  in  advanced  economies  have  had  to  contend  with  both  the  unfolding  financial 
crisis and deepening recession, in India, our response has been predominantly driven by the 
need to arrest moderation in economic growth.  
What is the outlook for India? 
The outlook for India going forward is mixed. There is evidence of economic activity slowing 
down. Real GDP growth has moderated in the first half of 2008/09. The services sector too, 
which  has  been  our  prime  growth  engine  for  the  last  five  years,  is  slowing,  mainly  in 
construction,  transport  and  communication,  trade,  hotels  and  restaurants  sub-sectors.  For 
the first time in seven years, exports have declined in absolute terms for three months in a 
row during October-December 2008. Recent data indicate that the demand for bank credit is 
slackening  despite  comfortable  liquidity  in  the  system.  Higher  input  costs  and  dampened 
demand  have  dented  corporate  margins  while  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  crisis  has 
affected business confidence. The index of industrial production has shown negative growth 
for two recent months and investment demand is decelerating. All these factors suggest that 
growth moderation may be steeper and more extended than earlier projected. 
In  addressing  the  fall  out  of  the  crisis,  India  has  several  advantages.  Some  of  these  are 
recent developments. Most notably, headline inflation, as measured by the wholesale price 
index,  has  fallen  sharply,  and  recent  trends  suggest  a  faster-than-expected  reduction  in 
inflation. Clearly, falling commodity prices have been the key drivers behind the disinflation; 
however, some contribution has also come from slowing domestic demand. The decline in 
inflation  should  support  consumption  demand  and  reduce  input  costs  for  corporates. 
Furthermore,  the  decline  in  global  crude  prices  and  naphtha  prices  will  reduce  the  size  of 
subsidies to oil and fertilizer companies, opening up fiscal space for infrastructure spending. 
From the external sector perspective, it is projected that imports will shrink more than exports 
keeping the current account deficit modest. 
There are also several structural factors that have come to India's aid. First, notwithstanding 
the  severity  and  multiplicity  of  the  adverse  shocks,  India's  financial  markets  have  shown 
admirable  resilience.  This  is  in  large  part  because  India's  banking  system  remains  sound, 
healthy, well capitalized and prudently regulated. Second, our comfortable reserve position 
provides  confidence  to  overseas  investors.  Third,  since  a  large  majority  of  Indians  do  not 
participate in equity and asset markets, the negative impact of the wealth loss effect that is 
plaguing  the  advanced  economies  should  be  quite  muted.  Consequently,  consumption 
demand  should  hold  up  well.  Fourth,  because  of  India's  mandated  priority  sector  lending, 
institutional  credit  for  agriculture  will  be  unaffected  by  the  credit  squeeze.  The  farm  loan 
waiver  package  implemented  by  the  Government  should  further  insulate  the  agriculture 
sector from the crisis. Finally, over the years, India has built an extensive network of social 
safety-net  programmes,  including  the  flagship  rural  employment  guarantee  programme, 
which should protect the poor and the returning migrant workers from the extreme impact of 
the global crisis.  
RBI's policy stance 
Going forward, the Reserve Bank's policy stance will continue to be to maintain comfortable 
rupee and forex liquidity positions. There are indications that pressures on mutual funds have 
eased  and  that  NBFCs  too  are  making  the  necessary  adjustments  to  balance  their  assets 
and  liabilities.  Despite  the  contraction  in  export  demand,  we  will  be  able  to  manage  our 
balance of payments. It is the Reserve Bank's expectation that commercial banks will take 
the signal from the policy rates reduction to adjust their deposit and lending rates in order to 
keep credit flowing to productive sectors. In particular, the special refinance windows opened 
by the Reserve Bank for the MSME (micro, small and medium enterprises) sector, housing 
sector and export sector should see credit flowing to these sectors. Also the SPV set up for 
extending assistance to NBFCs should enable NBFC lending to pick up steam once again. 
BIS Review 20/2009 
 5
The  government's  fiscal  stimulus  should  be  able  to  supplement  these  efforts  from  both 
supply and demand sides. 
When the turn around comes 
Over the last five years, India clocked an unprecedented nine per cent growth, driven largely 
by domestic consumption and investment even as the share of net exports has been rising. 
This was no accident or happenstance. True, the benign global environment, easy liquidity 
and  low  interest  rates  helped,  but  at  the  heart  of  India's  growth  were  a  growing 
entrepreneurial  spirit,  rise  in  productivity  and  increasing  savings.  These  fundamental 
strengths  continue  to  be  in  place.  Nevertheless,  the  global  crisis  will  dent  India's  growth 
trajectory as investments and exports slow. Clearly, there is a period of painful adjustment 
ahead of us. However, once the global economy begins to recover, India's turn around will be 
sharper and swifter, backed by our strong fundamentals and the untapped growth potential. 
Meanwhile, the challenge for the government and the RBI is to manage the adjustment with 
as little pain as possible.  
6 
 BIS Review 20/2009
