Ardian Fullani: Risks for Albania’s financial stability 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference 
with  the  IMF  Mission  Chief  for  Albania,  Mr  Gerwin  Bell  and  the  Minister  of  Finance, 
Mr. Ridvan Bode, Tirana, 7 April 2009. 
 The  Bank  of  Albania’s  Supervisory  Council  has  pronounced  directly  and  transparently  on 
risks  our  country’s  financial  stability  will  be  faced  with  over  the  current  year.  In  its  latest 
statement  on  “Financial  Stability  over  the  second  semester  of  2008”,  and  meeting  the 
obligations  deriving  from  the  Law  “On  the  Bank  of  Albania”,  an  explicit  rating  of  risks  has 
been made, which I would like, availing myself of this opportunity, to once more point out to 
the public: 
• 
First, the economic growth rate slowdown over 2009 makes difficult the achievement 
of  fiscal  policy  indicators  in  line  with  2008  year-end  forecasts.  External  trade 
developments  will  impact  on  reduced  collection  of  budget  revenues,  while  the 
tightening  of  financial  conditions  in  the  economy  negatively  affects  the  banking 
sector’s ability to finance the budget deficit. Therefore, in order to achieve the target 
on budget deficit level, reallocation of public expenditures according to importance, at 
the needed quantity and throughout the financial year is necessary. In practical terms 
this  means  that  whenever  possible,  all  the  efforts  should  be  made  to  maintain 
sources  of  revenues,  to  find  alternative  financing  sources,  to  cancel  non-urgent 
expenditures,  to  re-define  projected  expenditures  for  this  year,  which  are  not  yet 
contracted or effected. 
Secondly, external sector’s performance in the economy, mainly in the form of export 
slowdown, reduced remittances and increased imports, affected the foreign exchange 
market equilibrium, exercising pressure on the national currency’s exchange rate at 
the  beginning  of  the  current  year.  The  flexible  exchange  rate  is  a  correcting 
instrument, which automatically helps preventing external sector misbalances in the 
economy.  However,  over  a  shorter  run,  fast  and  uncontrolled  exchange  rate 
fluctuations negatively affect the psychology the public, thus concealing speculative 
operations  of  different  subjects.  Hence,  there  are  created  premises  for  contagion, 
with  negative  effects  on  operators’  confidence  in  the  national  currency  and  in  the 
capability  of  foreign  currency  borrowers  to  timely  repay  their  debts.  Expected 
reduction of economic growth rate for 2009 will reflect the reduced domestic demand 
and therefore, it is likely to be associated with a drop of its share in terms of foreign 
commodities. As a result, the overall trade volume may decline, effecting a necessary 
correction  of  current  account  deficit  of  the  country’s  economy  and  putting  foreign 
currency supply/demand factors in a more stable balance. 
Thirdly, it is necessary to recover stable paces of public deposit growth in the banking 
sector. Only in this way, the coverage of an increasing clientele with banking products 
and at more beneficial costs will be enabled. I repeat, the banking sector’s position 
concerning  liquidity  indicators  and  business  capitalization  is  good  and  its  constant 
surveillance  is  a  priority  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  We  are  confident  that  the  last 
decision  of  the  People’s  Assembly  of  Albania,  which  adopted  an  increase  of  the 
whole value of deposit insurance to ALL 2.5 million, will impact on a faster return of 
withdrawn  deposits  to  the  banking  system.  The  current  level  of  deposit  insurance, 
likewise that of the European countries, fully and forever guarantees the savings of 
the major part of Albanian households. At present there are no objective reasons for 
the people to be concerned about the insurance of their savings held at banks. Every 
reluctance on putting savings at banks would unnecessarily increase the value of the 
missing  income,  due  to  non-benefiting  of  interests  and  other  banking  services.  I 
  BIS Review 49/2009 
 1
 underline that the Albanian banking sector is the best place, where our households 
should place their savings, thus increasing their values. 
Fourth,  returning  of  deposits  to  the  system  is  necessary  also  for  enabling  a  better 
financial performance of the banking sector, in terms of financial soundness. During 
the current year, the banking activity is expected to be less profitable, as a result of 
reduced  lending  and  increased  costs,  in  order  to  add  deposits  and  provisioning  for 
covering bad loans. It is important that the Albanian banking sector, after some years 
of a satisfactory profit, has mostly utilized it for firming up the banking sector’s capital. 
Moreover, through a specific regulatory act, the Bank of Albania has requested from 
the banking sector not to allocate the 2008 profit, in the form of dividend. In this way, 
banking activity capitalization is further strengthened, providing more guarantees for 
the financial soundness of the banking sector. Recently the Bank of Albania has been 
carrying out consecutive tests, to find out how the banking sector would react, if faced 
with ever more pessimistic circumstances. Analyses obtained from numerous stress-
tests  made  on  the  whole  system  and  on  individual  banks  reveal  that  neither  the 
banking system  in  general,  nor  any  bank  of  systemic  importance  in  particular  have 
been affected relative to liquidity and capitalization level. In spite of the expansion of 
risks  spectrum  and  a  more  difficult  year  for  extension  of  the  banking  activity,  the 
financial system and the banking sector will remain stable. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2009
