Mario Draghi: Restoring confidence with more transparency 
Interview by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, with the Wall Street Journal, at 
the World Economic Forum, Davos, 2 February 2009. 
 WSJ: Are there any signs markets are stabilizing or improving and if so, how much should 
we read into it?  
Mr. Draghi: There are markets that have started to function again, though at a reduced level. 
Spreads  on  the  interbank  market  have  narrowed  considerably,  and  the  corporate-bond 
market has shown signs of being alive. There has been a flurry of new issuances in the first 
few weeks of January. We will get little bits of good news and we can enjoy them. But we 
shouldn't make too much out of it.  
WSJ: What is the priority for regulators at the moment?  
Mr. Draghi: Credit circuits have been clogged now for more than a year. The very first thing 
to  do  is  restore  confidence  in  the  banking  sector,  because  it's  clear  that  until  that  is  done 
there will be no significant flow of private capital to the banking sector.  
WSJ:  How  do  you  restore  that  confidence  when  the  market  has  become  so  skeptical  and 
skittish?  
Mr. Draghi: The only thing we can do to help restart the market is to tell the world that there 
are  certain  kinds  of  real  products  that  are  simple  to  understand,  easy  to  price  and  satisfy 
certain legal conditions.  
WSJ: How do you do that beyond emergency measures and into the medium and long term?  
Mr. Draghi: There needs to be significant progress in developing greater transparency so we 
can understand what's on banks' balance sheets and what valuations are.  
WSJ: More specifically?  
Mr. Draghi: In the future, there is going to be an unavoidable move toward standardization. 
With  standardization,  regardless  of  whether  you  have  regulation,  you  will  have  a  powerful 
push  toward  transparency,  because  people  would  understand  and  price  products  with  full 
knowledge of them. It is also of primary importance that we create a centralized clearing and 
settlement process.  
WSJ:  Aren't  you  afraid  that  the  push  for  more  regulation  will  put  a  brake  on  financial 
innovation?  
Mr.  Draghi:  We  want  to  create  a  system  which  doesn't  destroy  the  prospectives  of  the 
banking  industry.  Standardization  may  well  hamper  growth  of  financial  innovation,  but  this 
growth will be more sustainable through time. 
WSJ:  All  things  considered,  what  do  you  think  the  banking  landscape  will  look  like  in  the 
future?  
Mr. Draghi: What we want is a financial industry, and banking sector especially, where you 
have more capital, less debt, more rules and much stronger supervision. You can have that 
only if there is a level playing field and broad endorsement by political leaders. It has to be 
done in a way that you keep the market alive. That's the art of doing it.  
WSJ: You talk about engaging political leaders. The G-20 is looking at a variety of changes 
to the global financial regulatory system. What do you hope will come out of it?  
Mr. Draghi: I am confident that this group will not only endorse a global response but also 
contribute to shaping it.  
BIS Review 11/2009 
 1
WSJ:  Is  there  a  sense  that  we  could  see  political  leaders  make  a  coordinated  statement 
about their goals – for instance, increasing transparency – and then leave it to each nation's 
discretion on how to implement the shared goal?  
Mr.  Draghi:  Yes.  I  think  that  is  exactly  the  process.  There  is  a  great  need  for  political 
endorsement at the global level. Then implementation is going to be, unavoidably, national. 
There is a shared sense that one of the great benefits for the financial-services industry was 
that over the last, say, 20 years, it has became global. Nobody denies this benefit now. We 
will lose all this if we become protectionist again by taking up initiatives purely at a national 
level.  
WSJ: If you achieve all these goals, is the end result a world in which crises become less 
likely?  
Mr. Draghi: No. I think crises are part and parcel of the market functioning. Our aim is to 
make sure you don't amplify normal market oscillations, either by regulation or by individual 
behavior. That's the ideal regulatory action plan.  
2 
 BIS Review 11/2009
