Jean-Claude Trichet: What lessons can be learned from the economic 
and financial crisis? 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
“5e Rencontres  de  l’Entreprise  Européenne”,  organised  by  La  Tribune,  Roland  Berger  and 
HEC, Paris, 17 March 2009. 
 Monsieur le Président, 
Mesdames et Messieurs, 
The  “Rencontres  de  l’Entreprise  Européenne”  were  established  –  if  I  may  interpret  your 
mission – as a tribute to entrepreneurship, the engine of growth in Europe and, more broadly, 
in the global economy.  
Looking  around  this  room,  I  see  myself  surrounded  by  many  entrepreneurial  people  who 
create the conditions for sustainable growth, who invest in both physical capital and human 
capital, and who are patient enough to wait for deferred payoffs. As a central banker, I very 
much appreciate the medium-term orientation of business. The current crisis has exposed a 
different and less far-sighted kind of investment attitude. I want to draw some parallels, and 
make some distinctions, between the two forms of economic activity and the lessons to be 
learned from them.  
Tonight,  I  would  like  to  examine  the  roots  of  the  current  crisis  and  the  policy  responses, 
which are taken to address it and to inspire a new sense of direction. I will also explain what I 
see as the main factors that can provide the basis for a resurgence of growth in the not so 
distant  future.  A  future  that  will  see  companies  and  their  employees  in  the  real  economy 
return to the forefront of economic activity.  
Throughout,  I  will  take  inspiration  from  the  words  of  Jean  Monnet:  “To  abandon  a  project 
because  it  meets  too  many  obstacles  is  often  a  grave  mistake:  the  obstacles  themselves 
provide the friction to make movement possible.” (Jean Monnet, Mémoires, 1976).  
Financial excesses 
In the last ten years, we saw a dramatic shift in influence away from entrepreneurship in the 
real economy to speculation and gambling in the financial sector. The assumption and the 
hedging of genuine economic risk gradually ceased to be the main concern of international 
finance. This is the risk that companies face when introducing innovative new products and 
new  processes.  Over  time,  the  creation  and  assumption  of  financial  risk  became  the  core 
activity of the financial industry. This is the risk inherent in arbitrage and deliberate exposure 
to asset price changes. At some point, the financial system seemed to be no longer there 
primarily to hedge existing economic risks, but more and more to create and propagate risks 
on its own.  
In the past two decades, financial innovation and liberalisation made important contributions 
to  the  overall  productivity  of  our  economies.  But  as  the  demand  for  finance  increased 
throughout the 1990s, intermediaries had growing incentives to develop innovative funding 
techniques. The securitisation of assets, for example – the transformation of bilateral loans 
into tradable credit instruments – had tremendous potential to facilitate the diversification and 
efficient management of risk. As such, it was a powerful and useful tool.  
But securitisation also meant that banks and non-banks were able to sell credit – or place it 
off-balance sheet – immediately after it had been extended. This alchemy enabled lenders to 
expand the volume of their operations and conserve on capital. Fatally, the same mechanism 
weakened  lenders’  incentives  for  prudent  screening  and  steady  monitoring.  The  resulting 
BIS Review 31/2009 
 1
declines in underwriting standards and lending oversight was one of the main sources of the 
excessive credit boom. 
The  credit  boom  had  three  multipliers.  First,  ill-designed  compensation  schemes  for  loan 
managers reinforced the shortening of lenders’ horizons. In the eyes of many loan managers, 
the short-run gains from an expansion of credit obscured the need for any consideration of 
the potential losses that their institution could incur over the longer term.  
Second, the complex structure of securitised products made it difficult for the ultimate holders 
to assess the quality of the underlying investment. This perpetuated the boom, as it took time 
for investors to discover and reassess the underlying risks.  
Third, international imbalances and their potential to encourage liquidity creation on a global 
scale  acted  as  the  macroeconomic  –  and  perhaps  most  powerful  –  multiplier.  A  chronic 
shortage of savings in some of the world’s advanced economies was funded by an excess of 
savings in other parts of the world. These global macroeconomic imbalances contributed to 
the  creation  of  international  liquidity  and  therefore  further  fuelled  credit  and  debt 
accumulation. In the period before the start of the crisis, the oil and commodity price shock 
augmented the savings glut even further. 
The policy response 
The interplay of the forces that I have described went into reverse – suddenly, although not 
unexpectedly – sometime in the middle of 2007. Liquidity dried up, and the entire financial 
sector  was  put  under  severe  strain.  The  collapse  of  a  major  and  highly  interconnected 
financial player in mid-September of last year then turned the crisis of confidence into full-
blown distress. This development also triggered the economic downturn that we are currently 
facing, and that has created a need to restore confidence throughout the global economy.  
The European Central Bank moved pre-emptively. It ensured the continued functioning of the 
money market at the very first signs of the turbulences in August 2007. We have not shied 
away from action at any time since then. Our actions have been early, resolute and broadly 
based.  
What did the ECB do and why? And how did these actions support the financial sector and 
the real economy? In times of distress, banks and other financial intermediaries instinctively 
reduce their exposure to risks. Individually, they try to change the composition of their assets; 
they reduce illiquid investments and increase liquidity. Collectively, this process leads to what 
is known as “deleveraging”. Banks’ intermediation is reduced in the aggregate, and loans to 
companies are curtailed. If this process unfolds in a disorderly manner, it can cause severe 
damage for borrowers and for the broader economy.  
At  the  first  signs  of  liquidity  hoarding  by  banks  in  August  2007,  the  ECB  took  several 
measures to protect against a disorderly correction in credit. Banks were not only concerned 
about the volume of liquidity that they could secure, but also about the horizon over which 
liquidity was expected to remain available to them. Therefore, we provided liquidity with long 
maturities,  as  a  way  to  insure  banks  against  future  liquidity  shortfalls.  This  helped  bolster 
public confidence that banks would continue to be able to meet their obligations. At the same 
time,  it  encouraged  banks  –  which,  as  you  know,  are  so  central  to  Europe’s  financial 
architecture – not to discontinue lending relationships with their customers.  
Since the intensification of the crisis in September and October 2008, the ECB has – under 
profoundly  changed  global  conditions,  falling  commodity  prices  and  rapidly  receding 
inflationary  pressures  –  stepped  up  its  crisis  resolution  measures,  including  through  non-
standard means, to protect the viability of our financial system. Again, our primary concern in 
the area of support to the financial sector has been to preserve the availability of credit for 
companies and households at accessible rates. One can therefore describe our policies as 
enhanced credit support. Under our generalised “fixed-rate full-allotment” procedure, in place 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2009
since October, eligible euro area banks have been granted access to unlimited liquidity from 
one  week  to  six  months’  duration  at  our  main  policy  interest  rate.  Another  non-standard 
measure has been the considerable expansion of the list of eligible assets that banks can 
pledge as collateral. This has eased banks’ balance sheet constraints, and encouraged them 
to extend new credit or continue rolling over maturing loans to firms.  
As the inflationary pressures that we were still observing until last summer, receded rapidly, 
we  have  also  been  able  to  grant  unlimited  access  to  central  bank  credit  at  a  sharply 
decreasing cost. Our key policy rate has been reduced by 275 basis points since the crisis 
worsened in the autumn. At present, the Eurosystem is providing unlimited refinancing at a 
rate of 1.5%. And sound and creditworthy banks can secure overnight credit at an interest 
rate  which  is  in  between  the  main  policy  rate,  namely  1.5%,  and  the  deposit  rate,  namely 
0.5%.  At  present  the  overnight  rate  is  at  a  level  unseen  in  the  entire  post-war  history  of 
European monetary affairs. Being able to borrow at such low costs, banks can grant credit to 
other banks and to their non-bank customers at conditions that are very accommodative by 
historical and international standards. Thanks, in particular, to smaller spreads between the 
interbank money market rates and the OIS rates, the 6-month and 12-month EURIBOR rates 
are lower than the corresponding LIBOR rates for contracts denominated in US dollars.  
Enhanced  credit  support  has  also  meant  a  considerable  expansion  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
balance sheet. The size of our balance sheet is currently around €600 billion above its pre-
crisis volume. This measures the size of the additional intermediation we are undertaking – 
substituting for the market. The size of our balance sheet represents today around 16% of 
euro area GDP compared with 10% before the crisis; the Federal Reserve System’s balance 
sheet is around 13% of US GDP. The additional intermediation has prevented a seizing up of 
the  whole  credit  market.  Short-term  interest  rates  on  loans  to  households  and  businesses 
have declined. The pass-through of the ECB interest rates to the economy has proceeded in 
accordance with past regularities.  
How  does  this  policy  course  of  enhanced  credit  support  compare  with  the  approaches  of 
some other central banks grappling with tumult in financial markets? Since mid-September 
2008 the Federal Reserve has pursued a policy of direct “credit easing”. These measures are 
targeted  at  directly  addressing  instability  or  declining  credit  availability  in  critical  non-bank 
channels of intermediation. 
The euro area and the  United States have significantly different financial structures. While 
the  United  States  has  a  primarily  market-based  financial  system,  the  euro  area  is  largely 
bank-centred. A few illustrative figures give an idea of the differences. At the end of 2007, the 
stock of outstanding bank loans to the private sector amounted to around 145% of GDP in 
the euro area, but only 63% in the United States. Correspondingly, the incidence of direct 
debt  securities  was  81%  of  GDP  in  the  euro  area  and  168  %  in  the  United  States.  The 
structures  of  private  credit  outstanding  in  the  euro  area  and  the  United  States  are  almost 
mirror images: the recourse to banks on this side of the Atlantic makes up two-thirds of non-
equity external finance. On the other side, the equivalent proportion is only around 30%.  
This has important explanatory power for interpreting the approaches that we have taken in 
the euro area and in the United States. In the context of the euro area, guaranteeing firms 
and households a steady access to credit largely means ensuring the banking system has 
appropriate  liquidity.  In  the  euro  area,  it  is  natural  for  “credit  easing”  to  be  implemented 
primarily through the participation of banks.  
As regards non-conventional measures, let me recall the following. We have already decided 
upon a number of them, including the non-standard commitment decided at our last meeting 
to prolong the unlimited supply of liquidity at fixed rates as long as needed, and in any case 
beyond the end of 2009. Moreover, as I said in my press conference of 5 March, we are in an 
ongoing process of studying further measures and assessing the possible need for them. 
Reviewing  our  actions  over  the  past  few  months,  there  is  one  further  point  that  I  wish  to 
highlight: the central bank was not alone in tackling this financial and economic crisis. I have 
BIS Review 31/2009 
 3
been  deeply  impressed  by  the  action  plan  drawn  up  by  euro  area  governments  and  the 
European  Commission  since  last  October  within  an  extremely  short  period  of  time.  In  the 
past,  some  outside  observers  have  questioned  the  euro  area’s  ability  to  act  in  a  timely 
fashion in the event of a major economic emergency. Last October euro area governments 
and  the  European  Commission  demonstrated  their  strength  and  unity  of  purpose. 
Governments’  coordinated  bank  recapitalisation  and  guarantee  schemes  proved  vital  for 
preserving the viability of the euro area financial system in extremely tense conditions. 
The way forward 
Looking ahead to the resolution of this crisis, the following is a good starting point: we should 
start  by  distinguishing  carefully  between  the  many  things  that  were  wrong  and  need  to 
change, and the many other things that were right and that we can continue to count on. A 
number of “monuments” and “totems” of the pre-crisis economic universe have now lost most 
of their value. From this standpoint, the reforms proposed by the Financial Stability Forum 
and currently considered by the G20 should be implemented with vigour. At the same time, 
other elements have maintained their worth. It is on these elements that we should build the 
future of this continent. I will mention three assets on which we can count in this effort.  
The  first  asset  is  our  single  currency.  The  euro  has  certainly  proven  its  worth  during  the 
crisis.  If  the  countries  of  Europe  that  now  make  up  the  euro  area  had  been  forced  to 
withstand  the  financial  turmoil  alone,  with  their  floating  currencies,  currency  crises  would 
have been likely. The crisis in the European Monetary System in 1992 and 1993 naturally 
comes to my mind. With the benefit of hindsight, we can see the introduction of the euro ten 
years ago as a forward-looking response to the challenges of today. And let us not forget that 
the process leading to the introduction of the euro owes a great deal to the prescience of 
President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing and Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, who in the late 1970s 
conceived the European Monetary System and the precursor to the euro, the ECU. 
A second lasting resource for Europe is a macroeconomic policy framework oriented towards 
the medium term. With hindsight observers now acknowledge that macroeconomic policies in 
some economies have in the past been insufficiently focused on medium-term stability and 
sustainability. In the euro area policy commitments to price stability over the medium term 
and to the long-run sustainability of public finances helped, by and large, to contain the size 
of macroeconomic imbalances. This has contributed to job creation. In the past ten years, the 
euro area created more than 2 million jobs in excess of the number created over the same 
period in the US economy.  
The third asset is a group of factors that have made our real economies in Europe successful 
in recent years: our openness to trade; our balanced and dynamic business structures; our 
talented and well-trained workforces. 
None  of  these  factors  is  single-faceted.  It  is  well  known  that  international  comparisons  of 
productivity growth started to paint a bleak picture of the euro area countries in the middle of 
the 1990s. While the measured pace of growth of output per hour worked halved after 1995 
in our economies, it almost doubled in the United States. In trying to understand the causes 
of that poor performance we discovered that the share of the population in tertiary education 
was almost two-thirds higher in the United States than in the European Union and that US 
and Japanese performance was superior in terms of patents granted. But we also discovered 
that  the  EU,  and  the  euro  area  in  particular,  was  home  to  at  least  two  of  the  world’s 
innovation  leaders  –  Germany  and  Finland  –  and  that  this  country,  France,  together  with 
Belgium is on a par with the United States in terms of the structural conditions required for 
innovation, investment in research and development, and the successful application of know-
how. Furthermore, we learned that the financial sector, a principal user of information and 
communications technologies, was the main source of the greater dynamism in the United 
States. Conversely, a smaller share of that sector in total value added was seen as the main 
obstacle to the diffusion of such technologies, and thus a drag on overall productivity, in the 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2009
euro area economies. Today, this much smaller share of financial services in the euro area 
economy  can  probably  act  as  a  partial  protection  against  the  recessionary  forces  that  the 
downsizing of those activities is exerting on many of our international partners.  
The  openness  of  our  economies,  too,  has  been  seen  as  a  major  challenge,  not  an 
opportunity.  Certainly,  greater  openness  has  meant  that  our  economies  have  been  more 
exposed to the international crisis. But the trend towards global trade integration has resulted 
in  a  major  adjustment  of  production  patterns  in  the  euro  area.  Many  countries  have 
profoundly  adjusted  their  export  portfolios  according  to  their  technological  advantages  and 
towards  products  that  are  more  skill-intensive  and  more  capital-intensive.  This  upgrade  of 
our production structure will make European firms better prepared to withstand a decline in 
trade volumes.  
From  an  economic  perspective,  resilience  is  a  virtue,  protectionism  is  a  sin.  Fiscal  and 
monetary  authorities  constantly  endeavour  to  shield  their  jurisdictions  from  shocks  and 
disturbances  that  can  destabilise economic  behaviour  and  expectations,  and  thus  damage 
aggregate incomes and collective welfare. But this must be done without building walls and 
fortresses around the economy. Open markets are the valuable result of a long and painful 
process  of  trade  liberalisation  that  has  lasted  over  60  years.  This  process  has  dismantled 
barriers between countries and has included an expanding share of the world population in a 
network of exchange and growing economic prosperity. And we know from past experience 
in the 20th Century that protectionism would be a recipe for economic disaster.  
Conclusions  
More than ever, in the present very demanding circumstances, confidence is key. The global 
economy was hit in mid-September 2008 by an unprecedented abrupt loss of confidence. It 
was perhaps the first time in economic history that a single negative event was able, within a 
few days, to have a simultaneous and negative effect on all private economic agents in every 
economy, industrialised and emerging. This is why we are presently in uncharted waters, and 
the risk of abrupt economic and financial phenomena and unprecedented behaviour on the 
part of economic agents remains.  
Public  authorities,  executive  branches,  and  central  banks  must  do  all  they  can  to  regain, 
preserve  and  foster  confidence  among  households  and  corporations  to  pave  the  way  for 
sustainable  prosperity.  This  calls  for  actions  to  be  measured.  We  must  maintain  the 
appropriate  balance  between  the  need  to  take  immediate  action  commensurate  with  the 
gravity of today’s situation and the equally undeniable obligation to return to a path that is 
sustainable in the medium to long term. Confidence of households and corporations today 
depends crucially on their trust in the capacity of authorities to preserve the soundness and 
sustainability of fiscal positions in the years to come. Confidence of economic agents today 
depends equally on their trust in the determination of central banks to preserve price stability 
– in Europe less than 2% but close to 2% - in the medium and long run. 
It  is  essential  to  achieve  this  balance  between  the  measured  audacity  of  today’s  non-
conventional decisions and the credible determination to ensure a path that is sustainable in 
the medium and long term. Exaggerated swings without perspective would delay the return 
of  sustainable  prosperity,  because  they  would  undermine  confidence,  which  is  the  most 
precious ingredient in the present circumstances. 
Europe can count on the ECB to continue to strike the right balance between audacity and 
wisdom, in line with its mandate. In acting in this way, the ECB will continue to offer a solid 
anchor of stability and confidence.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 31/2009 
 5
