Shamshad Akhtar: Launch of microfinance initiatives 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Launch of 
Microfinance Initiatives, Karachi, 19 December 2008. 
 1.  Approximately  30  million  Pakistanis  are  living  in  poverty.  Despite  consensus  that 
microfinance is an effective tool to alleviate poverty, there is a wide gap between demand 
and supply of financial services for the poor and marginalized segments of population. The 
current  outreach  of  microfinance  services,  1.8  million  customers,  while  a  significant 
improvement over last few years, is a mere 5% of the potential microfinance market. Where 
there  are  challenges  there  are  also  numerous  opportunities  for  growth  of  microfinance 
businesses. SBP and the Government of Pakistan are committed to increasing outreach and 
facilitating  the  development  of  the  microfinance  sector.  To  kick  start  real  action,  SBP  with 
industry developed a Microfinance Strategy which was adopted in 2007. This strategy has 
set growth targets of increasing the numbers of microfinance borrowers to 3 million by the 
end of 2010 and 10 million by 2015. 
2. The microfinance outreach increased by 47% at the end of December 2007 and by 13% 
as  of  September  of  2008  as  the  concept  of  commercialization  or  for-profit  microfinance 
business  started  to  permeate.  NGOs  and  MFIs  have  been  seeking  additional  sources  of 
funding  in  an  effort  to  expand  their  operations  and  distribution  of  services.  The  enabling 
regulatory  environment  promoted  by  the  SBP  has  helped  MFIs  to  create  innovative 
partnerships  with  commercial  banks  or  transform  themselves  into  a  regulated  entity  which 
allows  them  to  accept  deposits  and  utilize  mainstream  sources  of  capital.  Pakistan  has 
proven  to  be  leader  in  the  Asian  region  in  commercialized  microfinance  and  is  the  first 
country to introduce a comprehensive legal, regulatory, and supervisory framework for formal 
microfinance in Asia. 
SBP initiatives for the promotion of microfinance 
3. To realize the growth targets of microfinance, SBP has identified three concurrent steps 
the industry needs to undergo in order to fulfill set goals: 
1) 
2) 
3) 
4. In order to develop these critical areas of the microfinance industry, SBP has undertaken 
several steps, which include, but not limited to: 
(i) 
Sustainable cost-covering operating/business model; 
Mobilize private domestic capital; and 
Build human resource systems. 
State Bank launched the Financial Inclusion Program, aimed at eliminating market 
failures. FIP is a £50 million program funded by the UK Department for International 
Development (DFID) with several initiatives aimed at improving access to financial 
services for poor and marginalized groups and for small enterprises in Pakistan. 
State  Bank  has  issued  Branchless  Banking  Regulations,  which  is  the  regulatory 
framework to promote banking in remote areas using technology. 
SBP encouraged microfinance institutions to transform into regulated entities. 
SBP  encouraged  partnerships  between  the  post  office  (PO)  network  and  MF 
providers.  Post  Offices  already  manage  over  4  million  savings  accounts,  mainly 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
BIS Review 21/2009 
 1
small  accounts  below  Rs  10,000,  through  more  than  12,000  branches.  There  is 
scope for the Post Office and MF providers to join forces with the latter acting as 
intermediaries for funds raised by POs, especially as MF providers are constrained 
by limited funding. 
SBP is encouraging new international players including BRAC and ASA who have 
already started microfinance operations in Pakistan. 
SBP has set up a special Micro finance focal group with an independent head and 
qualified staff to support these and other financial inclusion initiatives. 
(v) 
(vi) 
4. Many of these initiatives are recent and have yet to demonstrate effect vis-à-vis improved 
outlook  for  microfinance.  However,  the  effectiveness  of  some  of  these  initiatives  may  be 
improved in light of inferences drawn from microfinance industry trends. Broadly, the current 
outlook  for  microfinance  remains  optimistic,  but  we  must  examine  emerging  trends  with 
caution. 
• 
First,  the  industry  is  still  young  and  continues  to  be  largely  dependent  on  donor 
assistance  to  grow,  which  though  necessary  at  infancy  stage  is  an  unsustainable 
approach to long-term development. It is, however, critical that MFBs move toward 
deposit  mobilization  to  increase  funds  for  on-lending  to  achieve  of  the  National 
Strategy of reaching 10 million clients by 2015. 
Second,  cost-efficiency  is  especially  important  in  the  current  environment  of  the 
global  financial  crisis  where  rising  cost  of  borrowing  will  eventually  impact  cost  of 
lending for MFIs and MFBs as they move towards commercial funding. Hopefully, 
the  introduction  of  international  players  may  encourage  local  organizations  to 
develop  cost  efficient  structures  and  improve  the  quality  of  available  human 
resource. 
Third,  resource  deficiency  exists  for  microfinance  not  only  in  the  form  of  funding. 
Human resource capacity must also be strengthened to provide quality microfinance 
services.  Capacity  building  will  take  time  as  human  resource  development  will 
primarily  have  to  come  from  organic  means  given  the  unique  nature  of  the 
microfinance industry. 
Lastly,  there  are  concerns  over  gender  and  regional  participation  will  have  to  be 
critically  examined  and  addressed  in  order  to  make  microfinance’s  ability  to  fight 
poverty more meaningful. 
   New initiatives 
5. Today the biggest challenge faced by microfinance is scaling up. Although microfinance 
operations can become successful in achieving sustainability, however, initially these cannot 
grow on solely deposit mobilization or retained earnings, nor can it raise capital in financial 
markets. In order for microfinance to play a bigger role in improving livelihood opportunities 
for  the  poor  and  alleviate  poverty,  it  must  be  scaledup  significantly  and  must  become 
sustainable to be able to generate profits and mobilize deposits and capital from alternative 
sources.  This  would  require  a  number  of  things  including  institutional  strengthening  and 
specific interventions to resolve market failures. The commercialization for greater outreach 
and  sustainability  require  greater  institutional  building  blocks  which  in  turn  require  new 
partnerships. 
6. I am pleased to announce that SBP today is launching three facilities for the support of 
microfinance sector to promote financial inclusion. 
1) 
2) 
The Microfinance Credit Guarantee Facility 
The Institutional Strengthening Fund; and 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2009
The Improving Access to Finance Services Fund 
3) 
7.  These  measures  are  expected  to  ease  liquidity  constraints  of  microfinance  providers  in 
view  of  the  tighter  liquidity  conditions  and  sudden  spike  in  inflation  which  has  severely 
affected the poor and marginalized segments of the society. 
The Microfinance Credit Guarantee Facility 
8. This is expected to increase the flow of credit to microfinance sector. The facility aims to 
incentivize  banks/DFIs  to  channelize  funds  to  MFBs/MFIs  for  on  lending  to  low  income 
segment of the population. The facility will provide credit guarantees of up to 40 percent of 
the  funding  provided  by  Banks/DFIs  and  aims  to  develop  market  and  graduate  poor 
borrowers to mainstream financial service providers. The facility will be established at SBP 
with  UK  Government  Financial  Inclusion  Program  grant  funds  equivalent  of  up  to  GBP  10 
million to be used as the guarantee fund. The State Bank has issued necessary guidelines 
for operationalizing the facility which were finalized after due consultation with stakeholders. 
9. Commercial banks are allowed options to undertake microfinance business directly and in 
partnership  with  MFIs  by  providing  wholesale  funds  to  them  for  on-lending  through  four 
different  modes  i.e.  a)  MF  counters  in  existing  branches,  b)  standalone  MF  Branches,  c) 
establishment  of  independent  subsidiary  MFB,  and  d)  linkage  with  NGO-MFI.  The  MCG 
facility  is  expected  to  help  raise  local  currency  funds  for  eligible  MFIs/MFBs.  The  loans 
portfolio  under  the  guarantee  scheme  will  be  administered  by  banks.  The  facility  will  also 
help build links between micro borrowers and formal financial institutions. The familiarization 
of the bank with the client should eventually lead to the "graduation" of the borrower. The 
facility shall provide partial Guarantee to minimize the perceived risk premium by  covering 
part  of  the  losses  incurred  on  funds  made  available  to  MFBs/MFIs  with  the  advantage  of 
leveraging the guarantee fund a number of times while keeping the incentive for banks/DFIs 
to collect the loan. The lending of MCG facility will help these institutions to play their role in 
the growth of micro credit more effectively. 
The Institutional Strengthening Fund 
10. This Fund is designed to build capacity of the microfinance sector. The fund is expected 
to enhance potential for growth and create depth in outreach by improving human resource 
quality, service delivery and increasing service availability to potential microfinance clients. 
The  fund  is  established  at  the  State  Bank  under  the  UK  Government’s  Financial  Inclusion 
Program  that  involved  funds  equivalent  to  Pound  Sterling  10  million  for  institutional 
strengthening.  The  fund  will  provide  grants  for  capacity  building  to  generate  on-lending 
resources through commercial sources, equity investments or deposit mobilization strategy 
through improvement in management, governance, internal controls and functions. The fund 
will also provide grants for employing cost reduction mechanisms for increasing outreach in 
rural  and  remote  areas  through  product  innovation,  development  or  use  of  technology.  In 
addition,  the  fund  will  provide  grants  for  business  development  services  to  MFI  clients  or 
improving  quality  of  services;  and  developing  capacity  for  transformation  of  MFIs  into 
licensed microfinance banks. 
11. SBP has developed detailed guidelines, selection criteria and application format for ISF. 
The fund will primarily focus on institutions that are already regulated, or are in the process of 
seeking  a  license  or  have  solid  plans  for  restructuring  in  the  near  future.  SBP  regulatory 
oversight will ensure transparency and good governance practices, which will ultimately lead 
to greater investment in the microfinance industry. Moreover, ISF is capped at US$1 million 
per year per grantee and subject to at least 25% matching grant from the grantee. Grants 
may be made on an annual basis and institutions that qualify for funding in a year may also 
qualify for funding in another year subject to good performance and submission of another 
successful proposal through the approved application procedure. 
BIS Review 21/2009 
 3
Improving access to financial services 
12. This component is designed to enhance capacity of the microfinance sector and promote 
financial  literacy.  The  fund  has  been  established  at  the  State  Bank  with  help  of  an 
endowment  of  USD  20  million  under  the  ADB-supported  “Improving  Access  to  Financial 
Services Program – IAFSP”. The fund will provide benefits for and have positive impacts on 
rural and urban communities, in particular the poor & the women. 
13. These benefits are quantitative and qualitative in nature and include (i) capacity building 
and  training  of  financial  services  providers  to  promote  expansion  into  rural  areas;  product 
and  service  innovation,  including  savings,  remittances  and  Islamic  financial  services; 
adoption  and  integration  of  new  technologies  and  applications  for  improving  access  to 
financial services; (ii) capacity building and training of Government and regulatory authorities 
to  support  development  of  an  inclusive  financial  sector  and  implementation  of  measures 
under the Program; and (iii) literacy programs (financial and basic) conducted by or on behalf 
of financial services providers for clients and potential clients to improve access to financial 
services and the utilization of finance. 
14. To initiate provision of grants SBP has developed detailed guidelines, selection criteria 
and application format for the IAFSF. The fund will initially focus on regulated institutions to 
ensure 
the 
microfinance industry. Grants shall be provided to projects that meet the criteria for improving 
basic & financial literacy of current and potential microfinance consumers besides promoting 
utilization  of  cost  effective  means  for  financial  service  delivery  and  expanding  outreach  to 
rural and remote areas. 
15. In conclusion, I would like to highlight that all the SBP initiatives have strong support of 
the  industry  simply  because  of  the  partnership  we  have  with  the  Pakistan  Micro  Finance 
industry  and  network.  Ultimate  success  of  these  initiatives  lies  with  both  the  banking  and 
microfinance  industry  and  we  count  on  their  continued  dedication  for  promotion  of 
microfinance industry. 
transparency  and  good  governance  practices 
investment 
to  attract 
in 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2009
