Erkki Liikanen: Finland, EMU and the euro 
Remarks  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  Norges  Bank  (Central 
Bank of Norway), Oslo, 8 May 2009. 
 Introduction 
A  few  years  ago,  the  Nobel  laureate,  economist  George  Akerlof  heard  that  his  distant 
relative had bought a house in Trondheim for more than USD 1 million. To him, it was a lot 
of money anywhere, but particularly a sign of high property values in Scandinavia.  
He later told this story to Robert Shiller, another well-known economist. Perhaps this was 
not only a Scandinavian story. They decided to look at it at greater length for the insight it 
offers  into  the  patterns of  booms  and  busts  and  notably  the  twin  crises  of  confidence  and 
crisis that are currently everywhere in the world.  
These  reflections  were  recently  published  as  a  book  by  Akerlof  and  Shiller,  “The  Animal 
Spirits”.  The  distant  Norwegian  relative  was  the  inspiration  for  a  very  interesting  analysis. 
This  was  the  first  time  I  have  seen  a  Nordic  experience  presented  as  the  first  sign  of  the 
excesses that lead to the boom and bust cycle we are going through today.  
In contrast, the Nordic banking crises of the late 1980s and early 1990s and their resolution 
have, for some time, been part of most major analyses that have aimed at putting the present 
financial crisis in an historical context. That time, Finland, Norway and Sweden had similar 
institutional  arrangements  and  shared  qualitatively  similar  experiences.  In  today's  crisis, 
things are different. Finland is the only Nordic country that has joined the Euro area. It may 
be  interesting  to  have  a  brief  discussion  on  how  this  situation  came  about  and  how  we  in 
Finland feel about it in the current situation.  
 Finland applied for membership of the European Union in March 1992 while the country was 
experiencing a prolonged bust; in fact, a depression. We concluded negotiations early March 
in 1994, a few days before Norway.  
Finland did not ask for any derogation in the Treaty of Maastricht. We joined the EU in 1995 
and became part of ERM in 1996. And consequently, in 1999, Finland joined the euro area 
as one of the founding group of eleven countries.  
To pool our currency with 10 others was no small decision. On the political side, it marked a 
major step towards deeper integration within the EU. On the economic side, it established a 
whole new framework for the Finnish economy and economic policies.  
We  have  today  more  than  a  decade  of  experience  of  life  as  a  small  member  of  a  large 
currency  union.  This  decade  has  spanned  a  diverse  set  of  economic  circumstances.  It 
started with the dotcom boom that soon turned into a bust. Finland was a part of it, due to a 
significance of her ICT industries.  
It continued with the deflation scare, gradual recovery, through the long-rate conundrum, and 
into  the  commodities  boom.  And  finally,  it  turned  into  the  second  decade  amidst  a 
spectacular, vertigo-inducing collapse of some global financial and trade structures that we 
started to take for granted.  
Even though Finland had not asked for any derogation when joining the EU, the decision to 
adopt the euro was not without challenges. Initially, there was a lot of scepticism. In 1996 
opinion polls put support for the euro below 30 per cent.  
But that scepticism soon started to dissipate. Strong political leadership certainly played an 
important  role.  Today  three  quarters  of  the  population  consider  the  euro  beneficial  to  the 
BIS Review 57/2009 
 1
Finnish economy, on the whole. Among economists, there are hardly any voices questioning 
the wisdom of our decision to join the euro.  
In this speech I shall try explain how an unpopular currency became popular. I will illuminate 
our experience from three angles, each of which was present in the debate leading to our 
eventual decision to join.  
The first angle is one of business cycle management. Finland was not really seen as a part 
of an optimal currency area with the rest of the eleven countries. We had our own, rather 
idiosyncratic  business  cycle.  Would  the  common  monetary  policy  exacerbate  cyclical 
volatility in Finland?  
The second angle is one of crisis management. At the time when the decision to join was 
made, Finland’s deep depression of the early 1990's was fresh in our memories. At that time, 
our recovery was aided by a substantial depreciation of the Finnish markka. How would the 
loss  of  exchange  rate  policy  affect  our  ability  to  survive  truly  adverse  economic 
circumstances?  
The third, and final, angle deals with politics and decision making; to what extent would we 
have a say on our own fate? Apart from the obvious aspect of shared monetary policy, our 
membership in the euro area also meant closer cooperation and coordination of fiscal and 
financial policies and in international fora. Would we be able to find ourselves an active role 
in the Eurosystem, or become a passive bystander while the bigger players take decisions?  
Let me start with business cycle management.  
Euro and the business cycle 
Before  we  joined  the  EMU,  there  was  a  lively  debate  about  its  pros  and  cons.  It  was 
generally acknowledged that EMU would reduce certain sources of uncertainty. In particular, 
there would be less exchange rate uncertainty, and also interest rates were expected to be 
more stable – and, on average, lower. EMU would also bring about microeconomic efficiency 
benefits  such  as  lower  costs  of  currency  exchange,  more  price  comparability  and  greater 
competition,  as  well  as  deeper,  more  competitive  and  more  efficient  money  and  other 
financial markets.  
On  the  other  hand,  a  great  deal  of  attention  was  devoted  to  the  asymmetry  of  economic 
structures in Finland vis-à-vis the rest of the euro area. While macroeconomic trends in the 
core  EU  countries  such  as  Germany,  France  and  the  Benelux  countries  usually  were 
broadly similar, economic fluctuations in Finland had historically diverged a lot from the core. 
Our cycles had had different timing and greater amplitude than other members.  
This  was  due  to  the  specialised  structure  of  the  Finnish  economy.  Production  and  foreign 
trade  were  dominated  by  a  narrow  group  of  industries.  A  traditional  major  player  was  the 
paper  and  pulp  industry,  which  had  a  history  of  large  fluctuations  in  both  prices  and 
quantities.  
An  increasingly  important  contribution  was  also  made  by  the  ICT  (Information  and 
Communication Technology) industry, the growth of which was largely driven by the success 
of one company, Nokia. The Finnish economy was becoming sensitive to developments in 
the telecom sector, although this was not yet fully understood at the time of the "asymmetry 
debate".  
Finland  stood  apart  from  the  euro  area  also  with  respect  to  its  geographical  trade 
specialisation.  Only  one  third  of  our  exports  went  to  the  euro  area,  which  made  Finland 
particularly vulnerable to disturbances outside the currency union.  
Exchange rates were seen as a particular risk: fluctuations in the external value of the euro 
could  have  a  disproportionally  strong  effect  on  Finnish  production.  This  concern  was 
magnified by concerns that Sweden and the UK, our most important trading partners, might 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2009
stay  outside  the  currency  union  –  or  even  the  exchange  rate  mechanism  –  as  in  fact 
happened.  
So, in economic terms, there were cons as well as pros, to joining the currency union, and it 
was  not  clear  which  were  more  important.  The  final  decision  was  driven  by  political 
considerations  at  least  as  much  as  by  economic  ones.  Membership  in  the  currency  union 
guaranteed Finland a seat at all the tables where decisions were to be made. If an “inner 
circle” were to emerge inside the EU, Finland would be part of it.  
So, Finland joined the ERM in October 1996, and introduced the euro in 1999. What has our 
experience  been  over  the  ten  years?  To  what  extent  have  the  fears  or  the  benefits 
materialised?  
Interestingly, many of the asymmetric shocks feared by the opponents to Finland's adoption 
of the euro have already materialised over this relatively short period.  
The  ICT  industry  experienced  a strong  boom-bust  cycle  around  the  turn  of  the  century.  In 
Finland the downturn of the cycle was reflected more in growth expectations and asset prices 
than in production quantities. The Helsinki Stock Exchange price index, which is dominated 
by the ICT industry, tripled between early 1999 and early 2000, compared with an increase of 
DJ Euro Stoxx of about 50% over the same period. Thereafter, both indices fell. By early 
2003 the Helsinki index was about 75% below its peak, compared to about 60% for the DJ 
Euro Stoxx.  
Also Finland saw large fluctuations in its exchange rates. The exchange rate of the euro vis-
à-vis the dollar first depreciated nearly 30% and then appreciated by 50%.  
Contrary  to  the  EMU  opponents'  expectations,  neither  the  positive  external  shock 
experienced at the turn of the century nor the initial depreciation of the euro served to push 
Finland's  economy  into  an  inflationary  spiral.  And  later  on,  the  Finnish  economy  was  also 
able to weather the recession of the ICT industry and the appreciation of the euro relatively 
painlessly.  
The  Finnish  inflation  rate,  which  was  brought  under  control  during  the  inflation-targeting 
regime  before  joining  the  EMU,  has  remained  modest.  On  average,  since  2000,  Finnish 
inflation has been within the range of the ECB's definition for price stability and below the 
euro area average. The GDP growth in Finland has fluctuated more or less in tandem with 
the euro area, but the average rate of growth has been about one percentage point higher in 
Finland 
these  years,  and  until  very  recently, 
unemployment continued along a steadily declining path.  
Why  have  the  asymmetries  manifested  themselves  in  such  a  subdued  manner?  No  doubt 
part of it was luck. The effects of these asymmetric shocks were, to some extent, mitigated 
by other coincident factors, such as the success of Finnish exporters on the growing Chinese 
market.  
But  I  believe  structural  factors  have  also  been  significant,  and  the  euro  has  been  an 
important  factor  in  bringing  about  structural  change.  The  single  currency,  and  the 
commitment to succeed within its constraints, has contributed to a process of transformation, 
which in turn has changed the Finnish economy in a profound fashion. This change started 
already before the single currency, but the euro has brought further discipline and helped to 
sustain the momentum. I will list a few such structural factors.  
First, wage setting. With no exchange rate policy available to correct mistakes, wage setting 
must be done responsibly. By and large, and notwithstanding some slippages, this has been 
the case. At the aggregate level, wage setting has been anchored by low and stable inflation 
expectations  and  guided  by  long-term  competitiveness  rather  than  short-term  cyclical 
developments. (The one important exception took place in the wage negotiations of 2007). At 
the  same  time,  wage  flexibility  at  the  microeconomic  level  is  now  acknowledged  as  an 
important part of a well-functioning market economy.  
the  euro  area.  Throughout 
than 
in 
BIS Review 57/2009 
 3
Second, public finances. Single currency, and the stability and growth pact, has supported 
the resolve for fiscal consolidation in Finland. Since the turn of the millennium, and until this 
year, the Finnish public sector has stayed in surplus, all the while bringing tax rates gradually 
down.  This  has  been  an  important  factor  underpinning  confidence  in  the  Finnish  economy 
throughout  economic  fluctuations.  Strong  emphasis  on  fiscal  discipline  is  important  now, 
amidst  the  crisis,  and  will  be  even  more  important  in  the  years  to  come,  given  the 
demographic transformation Finland is entering.  
Third,  the  euro  has  supported  Finland’s  commitment  to  making  itself  into  an  open  and 
competitive economy. Openness to trade has been recognised as a prerequisite for growth, 
particularly  for  a  small  country.  A  small  country  can  only  exploit  economies  of  scale  by 
specialising, becoming a world player in a few fields, and importing most of the rest. Finland's 
economic strategy has been geared to this aim. Governments of various political coalitions 
have sought to keep the business climate favourable. Research and development has been 
a priority – Finnish R&D expenditure as a share of GDP ranks at the top of Europe, alongside 
with Sweden. And of course, high-quality education is a crucial part of an innovation-driven 
society.  
Of course the euro alone has not made this happen. But the euro sealed a clear break with 
the past. It gave us truly independent central banking institutions with an assured orientation 
to price stability. It sealed our transition from an economy where past mistakes could always 
be  corrected  and  unprofitable  industries  propped  up  by  devaluing  the  currency,  to  an 
economy where decisions had to be made for the long term and competitiveness was more 
about quality and know-how than price.  
All in all, the experience so far, in terms of our ability to withstand asymmetric shocks, has 
been overwhelmingly positive. Instead of accentuating the economic cycle, the euro has in 
fact proved to be a stabilising factor – an anchor that has helped to make the whole economy 
more long-term oriented and less prone to cyclical fluctuations.  
Let me next move on to the second broad angle, namely crisis management in a currency 
union.  
Euro and crisis management 
The world economy is today going through an unprecedented crisis. The crisis is remarkably 
symmetric: For the large majority of countries, it cuts 5-8 percentage points off their growth 
rate this year.  
Finland  will  take  a  hit  comparable  to  that  experienced  by  other  open  economies  whose 
production is weighted towards investment goods, such as Germany, Sweden and Japan. 
Visibility  remains  very  poor  but,  at  this  point,  we  anticipate  that  the  Finnish  economy  will 
contract by some 5 per cent this year.  
Clearly, the symmetric nature of the crisis has consequences for the role of the exchange 
rate as a policy tool. An asymmetric shock may change a country's equilibrium exchange rate 
so that its market exchange rate needs to adapt to restore equilibrium. A symmetric shock, 
on  the  other  hand,  does  not  change  the  equilibrium  exchange  rate.  An  attempt  to 
compensate  for  its  effects  by  changing  the  exchange  rate  would  be  merely  beggar-thy-
neighbour  policy  and  a  recipe  for  trouble  on  the  international  front.  So,  the  active  use  of 
exchange rate policies would be out of the question.  
Norway and Finland are both part of the Nordic-Baltic Constituency of the IMF and the 
World  Bank.  In  this  Constituency  we  have  a  broad  range  of  different  monetary  policy 
regimes  as  well  as  floating  and  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes.  Some  countries  have  done 
well; others have been under considerable stress. For some, independent exchange rate has 
been unproblematic, for others it has been a source of vulnerability. Right or wrong, for those 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2009
experiencing  the  greatest  difficulties,  membership  in  the  euro  area  has  become  a 
centrepiece of their strategy out of the crisis.  
So, does the euro form a shelter or a straitjacket in this crisis? Put another way, how would 
the Finnish markka do today, if it still existed? This is a difficult question, not least because 
this kind of counterfactual analysis is inherently impossible, and I will not pretend to know the 
answer. But let me just say that we have been happy to sit out the storm within the euro area 
rather than outside it.  
The  exchange  rate  is  not  a  straightforward  policy  instrument.  Although  in  principle,  it  may 
support faster adjustment of real imbalances, experience has shown that it becomes difficult 
to control precisely when the challenges are greatest. In times of crisis, the exchange rate 
tends  to  respond  to  financial  disturbances  rather  than  to  real  imbalances  and,  more  often 
than not, it becomes a constraint on policies rather than a useful adjustment channel.  
Membership in the euro area eliminates one potential adjustment channel, but above all, it 
eliminates a major source of uncertainty at times when uncertainty is already high. We are 
glad to accept that trade-off.  
The final viewpoint to euro membership relates to the role of a small national central bank in 
the decision making process of a large currency union.  
Decision making in the Eurosystem: Getting your voice heard 
This is one aspect of the single currency that is often misunderstood; what actually is the role 
of national central banks in the ECB and in the Eurosystem? Over the past ten years we at 
the  Bank  of  Finland  have  been  asked  often  why  the  Bank  of  Finland  still  matters.  Isn’t 
everything decided in Frankfurt? What is the role of National Central Banks?  
How do the ECB and Eurosystem operate? As a result of the Maastricht Treaty and practices 
established  over  these  ten  years,  the  institutional  structure  of  the  Eurosystem  is  carefully 
balanced. The hub remains relatively small in comparison to the spokes. In important ways, 
the Eurosystem remains highly decentralised.  
All important decisions are taken by the Governing Council, which usually meets in Frankfurt. 
A large majority of the Council (all but six members of the Executive Board) are governors 
from National Central Banks.  
They  sit  around  the  table  making  decisions  in  their  personal  capacity  as  members  of  the 
Governing Council, not as representatives of their countries. They are fully independent in 
this role as are the members of the European Commission or the European Court of Justice.  
But when each of them is also a head of a National Central Bank, it is clear that their staff is 
deeply involved in preparing all issues on the agenda of the Governing Council meetings. So 
when  the  governor  takes  off  to  Frankfurt,  he  is  thoroughly  prepared  and  carrying  loads  of 
papers and briefing notes in his briefcase.  
The  single  currency  has  delivered  many  important  benefits,  but  higher  productivity  in  the 
making  of  monetary  policy  is  not one  of  them.  All  important  decisions  are  prepared  at  the 
ECB and in the 16 National Central Banks in parallel.  
There is a certain degree of division of labour, but much of that work is done at the same 
time by all. This is important. It serves as a mechanism of checks and balances. It helps to 
avoid the pitfalls of "groupthink" – a sort of consensual corporate culture that stifles creativity 
and critical thinking – and it ensures that relevant viewpoints seldom get neglected. This is a 
way to guarantee that decision-making is “wisdom-based” as a senior central banker once 
said.  
BIS Review 57/2009 
 5
The  ECB  always  produces  its  own  analysis,  and  in  a  way  has  preferential  access  to  the 
Council agenda, but the ECB analysis is tested against the analysis prepared in each of the 
national central banks and the judgment of the members from the Governing Council.  
One must also remember that the implementation of monetary policy is decentralised. The 
National  Central  Banks  are  responsible  for  liquidity  operations  with  their  counterparties, 
which can be any financial institution from an EEA country which has a counterparty status in 
the  country  of  the  NCB.  This  means  that  National  Central  Banks  are  active  in  the  market 
every banking day. 
Decision making by the Governing Council is supported by a web of ECB expert committees, 
working groups and task forces where a governor nominates a member. These bodies have 
no decision making power, but they serve as fora in which some differences can be ironed 
out  and  the  groundwork  laid  for  the  Council.  Roughly  80s  Bank  of  Finland  officials  travel 
regularly to meetings of such groupings.  
Finland is one of the smaller shareholders in the Eurosystem. The Bank of Finland holds less 
than  1½  per  cent  of  the  ECB's  subscribed  capital.  But  when  it  comes  to  monetary  policy 
decisions, everyone has one voice and one vote around the table. It would be naïve to claim 
that  the  size  of  the  country  has  no  effect  on  the  weight  of  one's  voice,  but  in  reality  size 
matter less than one might think. By and large, it is the weight of one's arguments, not the 
size of the country that is key to influence in the Eurosystem.  
What  is  clear,  though,  is  that  a  small  central  bank  has  fewer  resources  to  devote  to 
preparatory  work  than  a  larger  central  bank.  This  is  why  a  small  central  bank  must  make 
efficient use of its limited resources. Small size can sometimes be turned into an advantage. 
Communication is easier in a small organisation, and excess bureaucracy is less of a risk.  
A  small  central  bank  also  must  prioritise  –  it cannot  be  a  jack-of-all-trades.  It  must  decide 
early on which issues and processes to invest in, pick those issues that matter the most and 
try to master them thoroughly.  
Being influential means following research closely and, if necessary, investing in research of 
one's own. But it also requires the right attitude, being forward looking and mentally prepared 
to take an active role. And, of course, it requires constant networking and the ability to listen, 
not only to lecture.  
After ten years of experience as part of the euro area, we at the Bank of Finland do not feel 
that giving up our own currency has diminished our ability to influence our own fate. On the 
contrary, we feel that we have managed to establish a role as a decision maker in tables that 
would be far beyond our reach if we were still managing our own currency. Not all decisions 
coming out of those tables are to our liking, but this, again, is a trade- off that we are happy 
to accept.  
 I have presented you with three viewpoints to life as a small country with a larger currency 
area. And from each of these viewpoints, our experience has been a positive one. In terms of 
cyclical  stabilisation,  Finland  has  been  able  to  absorb  and  adapt  to  sizeable  asymmetric 
shocks without substantial macroeconomic difficulties. At the same time, leaving exchange 
rate policies behind has helped Finland develop a structurally stronger economy.  
In  terms  of  crisis  management,  the  experience  has  been equally  reassuring.  In  a  financial 
storm, a big ship with a strong anchor is the place we prefer to be. We do not miss our small, 
old, boat, even though in that boat, we held the rudder and could, in theory, steer ourselves.  
And finally, in terms of decision making, we feel as much in charge of our fate as we ever did 
before.  We  have  lost  one  potential  policy  instrument  or  adjustment  channel,  but  we  have 
gained  a  say  on  issues  and  at  tables  in  which  The  Bank  of  Finland  is  still  very  much  an 
organisation with a mission.  
6 
 BIS Review 57/2009
All  in  all,  membership  in  the  euro  area  has  served  Finland  very  well  so  far.  This  view  is 
widely shared, by the general public as much as by economists. Ten years is still a short time 
to make a final judgment, so perhaps this should be seen as an interim report. But, given the 
quite varying challenges thrown at us by this decade, our ride could have been a good deal 
bumpier. So, at least, I think this qualifies as a good start.  
BIS Review 57/2009 
 7
