Ben S Bernanke: Financial innovation and consumer protection 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  System's  Sixth  Biennial  Community  Affairs 
Research Conference, Washington DC, 17 April 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 The concept of financial innovation, it seems, has fallen on hard times. Subprime mortgage 
loans,  credit  default  swaps,  structured  investment  vehicles,  and  other  more-recently 
developed financial products have become emblematic of our present financial crisis. Indeed, 
innovation,  once  held  up  as  the  solution,  is  now  more  often  than  not  perceived  as  the 
problem. I think that perception goes too far, and innovation, at its best, has been and will 
continue to be a tool for making our financial system more efficient and more inclusive. But, 
as we have seen only too clearly during the past two years, innovation that is inappropriately 
implemented can be positively harmful. In short, it would be unwise to try to stop financial 
innovation,  but  we  must  be  more  alert  to  its  risks  and  the  need  to  manage  those  risks 
properly.  
My remarks today will focus on the consumer protection issues raised by financial innovation. 
First,  though,  I  want  to  say  how  pleased  I  am  to  join  you  for  the  sixth  biennial  Federal 
Reserve  System  Community  Affairs  Research  Conference.  We  all  want  to  see  our 
communities grow and thrive, especially those that have been traditionally underserved. But 
the people in this room know as well as anyone that, when it comes to consumer protection 
and  community  development,  good  intentions  are  not  enough.  Hard-won  knowledge,  as 
exemplified  by  the  empirical  work  presented  here  during  the  past  two  days,  is  required.  I 
applaud your diligent and tough-minded research in analyzing what works and what doesn't. 
Only with such knowledge can efforts to spread prosperity more widely become increasingly 
effective. 
Sources of financial innovation 
Where does financial innovation come from? In the United States in recent decades, three 
particularly important sources of innovation have been financial deregulation, public policies 
toward credit markets, and broader technological change. I'll talk briefly about each of these 
sources. 
The process of financial deregulation began in earnest in the 1970s, a period when stringent 
regulations  limited  competition  and  the  range  of  product  offerings  in  the  markets  for 
consumer  credit.  For  example,  Regulation  Q,  which  capped  interest  rates  on  deposits, 
hampered  the  ability  of  depository  institutions  to  attract  funding  and  thus  to  extend  credit. 
Restrictions on branching were a particularly significant constraint, as they limited the size of 
the market that individual depository institutions could service and thus their scope to reduce 
costs  through  economies  of  scale.1  The  lifting  of  these  regulations,  especially  branching 
                                                 
1   For a listing of these rules, see Dean F. Amel and Daniel G. Keane (1986), "State Laws Affecting Commercial 
Bank Branching, Multibank Holding Company Expansion and Interstate Banking," Issues in Bank Regulation, 
vol. 10, no. 2 (Autumn), pp.30-40. Research indicates that non-interest expenses, wages, and loan losses all 
declined  following  the  lifting  of  branching  restrictions  leading  to  lower  loan  prices.  Also,  the  lifting  of 
geographic restrictions lead to larger and more diversified banking institutions. See Randall S. Kroszner and 
Philip  E.  Strahan  (forthcoming),  "Regulation  and  Deregulation  of  the  U.S.  Banking  Industry:  Causes, 
Consequences,  and  Implications  for  the  Future,"  in  Nancy  Rose,  ed.,  Economics  of  Regulation,  NBER 
Conference Volume. 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 1
restrictions, allowed the development of national banking networks. With national networks, 
the  fixed  costs  of  product  innovation  could  be  spread  over  larger  markets,  making  the 
development and marketing of new products more profitable. 
Many  public  policy  decisions  have  affected  the  evolution  of  financial  products  and  lending 
practices. One particularly important example was the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 
(CRA), which induced lenders to find ways to extend credit and provide services in low- and 
moderate-income  neighborhoods.  Another  important  set  of  policies  was  the  government's 
support  for  the  development  of  secondary  mortgage  markets,  particularly  through  the 
government-sponsored  enterprises,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac.  Secondary  mortgage 
markets  were  rudimentary  and  thin  in  the  1970s;  indeed,  the  Federal  Reserve's  Flow  of 
Funds  accounts  do  not  even  record  private  securitization  activity  until  the  early  1980s.  As 
secondary  mortgage  markets  –  an  important  innovation  in  themselves  –  grew,  they  gave 
lenders  both  greater  access  to  funding  and  better  ability  to  diversify,  providing  further 
impetus to expansion into new markets and new products. 
On the technological front, advances in information technology made possible the low-cost 
collection, processing, and dissemination of household and business financial data, functions 
that were once highly localized and, by today's standards, inefficiently managed.2 As credit 
reporting  advanced,  models  for  credit  scoring  gradually  emerged,  allowing  for  ever-faster 
evaluation  of  creditworthiness,  identification  of  prospective  borrowers,  and  management  of 
existing accounts.  
All these developments had their positive aspects, including for people in low- and moderate-
income  communities.  Prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  CRA,  as  you  know,  many  of  these 
communities  had  limited  access  to  mortgages  and  other  forms  of  consumer  credit. 
Subsequent  innovations  in  financial  products  and  services,  processes,  and  technology 
helped at least some underserved consumers more fully enter the financial mainstream, save 
money, invest, and build wealth, and homeownership rates rose significantly. 
Yet with hindsight, we can see that something went wrong in recent years, as evidenced by 
the currently high rates of mortgage delinquency and foreclosure, especially in minority and 
lower-income neighborhoods. Indeed, we have come almost full circle, with credit availability 
increasingly restricted for low- and moderate-income borrowers. And the damage from this 
turn in the credit cycle – in terms of lost wealth, lost homes, and blemished credit histories – 
is likely to be long-lasting. One would be forgiven for concluding that the assumed benefits of 
financial innovation are not all they were cracked up to be.  
A number of factors explain the recent credit boom and bust, including problems stemming 
from financial innovation. From a consumer protection point of view, a particular concern has 
been  the  sharp  increase  in  the  complexity  of  the  financial  products  offered  to  consumers, 
complexity  which  has  been  a  side  effect  of  innovation  but  which  also  has  in  many  cases 
been associated with reduced transparency and clarity in the products being offered. I will 
illustrate  the  issue  in  the  context  of  some  familiar  forms  of  consumer  credit:  credit  cards, 
mortgages, and overdraft protection. 
Credit cards, mortgages, and overdrafts: some instructive examples 
The  credit  card  is  an  example  of  financial  innovation  driven  by  technological  advance, 
including improvements in communications, data management, and credit scoring. When the 
first  general-purpose  credit  card  was  issued  in  1952,  it  represented  a  way  to  make  small 
loans  more  quickly  and  at  a  lower  cost  than  the  closed-end  installment  loans  offered  by 
retailers  and  finance  companies  at  the  time.  Moreover,  this  form  of  credit  doubled  as  a 
                                                 
2   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007), Report to the Congress on Credit Scoring and Its 
Effects on the Availability and Affordability of Credit, (Washington: Board of Governors, August). 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2009
means of payment. Card issuers benefited by spreading fixed costs over multiple advances 
of  credit,  over  larger  customer  bases,  across  geographic  areas,  and  among  many 
merchants.3 From the consumer's perspective, credit cards provided convenience, facilitated 
recordkeeping,  and  offered  security  from  loss  (by  theft,  for  example).4  Their  use  gradually 
expanded among American families, rising to 43 percent in 1983 and to 70 percent by 2007. 
Among  lower-income  families,  usage  increased  from  11  percent  in  1983  to  37  percent  in 
2007.5  
Mortgage  markets  saw  similar  product  innovations.  For  example,  in  the  early  1990s, 
automated underwriting systems helped open new opportunities for underserved consumers 
to obtain traditional forms of mortgage credit. This innovation was followed by an expansion 
of  lending  to  borrowers  perceived  to  have  high  credit  risk,  which  became  known  as  the 
subprime  market.  Lenders  developed  new  techniques  for  using  credit  information  to 
determine  underwriting  standards,  set  interest  rates,  and  manage  their  risks.  As  I  have 
already mentioned, the ongoing growth and development of the secondary mortgage market 
reinforced  the  effect  of  these  innovations,  giving  mortgage  lenders  greater  access  to  the 
capital  markets,  lowering  transaction  costs,  and  spreading  risk  more  broadly.  Subprime 
lending rose dramatically from 5 percent of total mortgage originations in 1994 to about 20 
percent in 2005 and 2006.6
Innovation thus laid the groundwork for the expansion of credit card and mortgage lending 
that has taken place over the past 15 years or so, as well as some other forms of credit like 
auto loans. However, while innovation often brought consumers improved access to credit, it 
also brought increased complexity and an array of choices that consumers have often found 
difficult to evaluate properly. 
Take the case of credit cards. In the early days, a card may have allowed the user to make 
purchases  or  obtain  cash  advances,  with  a  single,  unchanging  annual  percentage  rate,  or 
APR, applied to each feature. Card fees were typically limited to an annual fee, a charge for 
cash advances, and perhaps fees for making a late payment or exceeding the credit limit. In 
contrast, today's more-complex products offer balance transfers and treat different classes of 
purchases  and  cash  advances  as  different  features,  each  with  its  own  APR.  In  addition, 
interest rates adjust much more frequently than they once did, and the array of fees charged 
for various features, requirements, or services has grown. 
More-complex plans may benefit some consumers; for example, pricing that varies according 
to consumers' credit risk and preferences for certain services may improve access to credit 
and  allow  for  more-customized  products.  Growing  complexity,  however,  has  increased  the 
probability that even the most diligent consumers will not understand or notice key terms that 
affect  a  plan's  cost  in  important  ways.  When  complexity  reaches  the  point  of  reducing 
transparency,  it  impedes  competition  and  leads  consumers  to  make  poor  choices.  And,  in 
some cases, complexity simply serves to disguise practices that are unfair and deceptive.  
                                                 
3   Dagobert L. Brito and Peter R. Hartley (1995), "Consumer Rationality and Credit Cards," Journal of Political 
Economy, vol. 103 (April), pp. 400-33. 
4   Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  (2006), Report  to  the  Congress  on  Practices  of  the  Consumer 
Credit  Industry  in  Soliciting  and  Extending  Credit  and  their  Effects  on  Consumer  Debt  and  Insolvency 
(Washington: Board of Governors, June). 
5   See  note  4,  Report  to  the  Congress  on  Practices  of  the  Consumer  Credit  Industry,  table  6;  and  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007), 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances, Board of Governors. 
6   See Chris Mayer and Karen Pence (2008), "Subprime Mortgages: What, Where, and to Whom?" Finance and 
Economics  Discussion  Series  2008-29  (Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System, 
June); and Inside Mortgage Finance (2007), The 2007 Mortgage Market Statistical Annual vol. 1; The Primary 
Market (Bethesda, Md.: Inside Mortgage Finance Publications). 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 3
Mortgage products have likewise become much more complex. Moreover, in recent years, 
the  increased  complexity  has  sometimes  interacted  with  weakened  incentives  for  good 
underwriting, to the detriment of the borrower. The practice of securitization, notwithstanding 
its benefits, appears to have been one source of the decline in underwriting standards during 
the recent episode. Depending on the terms of the sale, originators who sold mortgage loans 
passed  much  of  the  risk  –  including  the  risks  of  poor  underwriting  –  on  to  investors. 
Compensation structures for originators also caused problems in some cases. For example, 
some incentive schemes linked originator revenue to particular loan features and to volume 
rather than to the quality of the loan. Complexity made the problem worse, as the wide array 
of  specialized  products  made  consumer  choices  more  difficult.  For  example,  some 
originators offered what were once niche products – such as interest-only mortgages or no-
documentation loans – to a wider group of consumers. And, we have learned, loan features 
matter.  Some  studies  of  mortgage  lending  outcomes,  after  controlling  for  borrower 
characteristics, have found elevated levels of default associated with certain loan features, 
including  adjustable  rates  and  prepayment  penalties,  as  well  as  with  certain  origination 
channels,  including  broker  originations.7  Although  these  results  are  not  conclusive,  they 
suggest that complexity may diminish consumers' ability to identify products appropriate to 
their circumstances. 
The vulnerabilities created by misaligned incentives and product complexity in the mortgage 
market  were  largely  disguised  so  long  as  home  prices  continued  to  appreciate,  allowing 
troubled borrowers to refinance or sell their properties. Once housing prices began to flatten 
and  then  decline,  however,  the  problems  became  apparent.  Mortgage  delinquencies  and 
foreclosure  starts  for  subprime  mortgages  increased  dramatically  beginning  in  2006  and 
spread  to  near-prime  (alt-A)  loans  soon  thereafter.  By  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008,  the 
percentages of loans 60 days past due, 90 days or more past due, and in foreclosure were at 
record highs.8
Credit cards and mortgages are not the only product classes for which innovation has been 
associated  with  increased  complexity  and  reduced  transparency.  I  will  cite  one  more 
example: overdraft protection.  
Historically,  financial  institutions  used  their  discretion  to  determine  whether  to  pay  checks 
that  would  overdraw  a  consumer's  account.  In  recent  years,  institutions  automated  that 
process with predetermined thresholds.  
Although institutions usually charged the same amount when they paid an overdraft as when 
they returned the check unpaid, many consumers appreciated this service because it saved 
them from additional merchant fees and the embarrassment of a bounced check. However, 
technological innovations allowed institutions to extend the service, often without consumers' 
understanding  or  approval,  to  non-check  transactions  such  as  ATM  withdrawals  and  debit 
card  transactions.  As  a  result,  consumers  who  used  their  debit  cards  at  point-of-sale 
terminals to make retail purchases, for instance, could inadvertently incur hundreds of dollars 
in overdraft fees for small purchases. In response to this problem, the Board last December 
                                                 
7   Lei  Ding,  Roberto  Quercia,  Wei  Li,  and  Janneke  Ratcliffe  (2008),  "Risky  Borrowers  or  Risky  Mortgages: 
Disaggregating Effects Using Propensity Score Models," Working Paper (Chapel Hill, N.C.: UNC Center for 
Community  Capital).  See  also  Elizabeth  Laderman  and  Carolina  Reid  (2009),  "CRA  Lending  During  the 
Subprime  Meltdown  (470  KB  PDF),"  in  Revisiting  the  CRA:  Perspectives  on  the  Future  of  the  Community 
Reinvestment  Act,  pp.  115-33  (San  Francisco:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco,  February).  Other 
studies do not find evidence of consistent harm from stemming from certain practices or products. See, for 
example, Morgan J.  Rose (2008), "Predatory  Lending Practices and Subprime Foreclosures: Distinguishing 
Impacts by Loan Category," Journal of Economics and Business, vol. 60 (January-February), pp. 13-32; and 
Christopher L. Foote, Kristopher Gerardi, Lorenz Goette, and Paul S. Willen (2008), "Just the Facts: An Initial 
Analysis of Subprime's Role in the Housing Crisis," Journal of Housing Economics, vol. 17 (December), pp. 
291-305. 
8   Mortgage Bankers Association (2009), National Delinquency Survey, MBA, March. 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2009
proposed regulatory changes that would give consumers a meaningful choice regarding the 
payment of these kinds of overdraft fees, and we expect to issue a final rule later this year.  
respect 
responsibilities  and  authorities  with 
Protecting consumers in an era of innovation and complexity 
In  light  of  this  experience,  how  should  policymakers  ensure  that  consumers  are  protected 
without stifling innovation that improves product choice and expands access to sustainable 
credit?  The  first  line  of  defense  undoubtedly  is  a  well-informed  consumer.  The  Federal 
Reserve  System  has  a  long-standing  commitment  to  promoting  financial  literacy,  and  we 
devote  considerable  resources  to  helping  consumers  educate  themselves  about  their 
financial options.9 Consumers who know what questions to ask are considerably better able 
to find the financial products and services that are right for them. 
The  capacity  of  any  consumer,  including  the  best  informed,  to  make  good  choices  among 
financial  products  is  enhanced  by  clear  and  well-organized  disclosures.  The  Board  has  a 
number  of 
to  consumer  disclosures, 
responsibilities  we  take  very  seriously.  In  the  past  year  or  so,  the  Board  has  developed 
extensive new disclosures for a variety of financial products, most notably credit cards, and 
we are currently in the midst of a major overhaul of mortgage disclosures.  
In designing new disclosures, we have increased our use of consumer testing. The process 
of exploring how consumers process information and come to understand – or sometimes 
misunderstand – important features of financial products has proven eye-opening. We have 
used what we learned from consumer testing to make our required disclosures better. For 
example, our recently released rules on credit card disclosures require certain key terms to 
be included in a conspicuous table provided at account opening; we took this route because 
our  field  testing  indicated  that  consumers  were  often  already  familiar  with  and  able  to 
interpret  such  tables  on  applications  and  solicitations,  but  that  they  were  unlikely  to  read 
densely written account agreements. 
We have also learned from consumer testing, however, that not even the best disclosures 
are  always  adequate.  According  to  our  testing,  some  aspects  of  increasingly  complex 
products  simply  cannot  be  adequately  understood  or  evaluated  by  most  consumers,  no 
matter how clear the disclosure. In those cases, direct regulation, including the prohibition of 
certain practices, may be the only way to provide appropriate protections. An example that 
came up in our recent rulemaking was the allocation of payments by credit card issuers. As 
creditors began offering different interest rates for purchases, cash advances, and balance 
transfers, they were also able to increase their revenues through their policies for allocating 
consumer payments. For example, a consumer might be charged 12 percent on purchases 
but  20  percent  for  cash  advances.  Under  the  old  rules,  if  the  consumer  made  a  payment 
greater than the minimum required payment, most creditors would apply the payment to the 
purchase  balance,  the  portion  with  the  lower  rate,  thus  extending  the  period  that  the 
consumer  would  be  paying  the  higher  rate.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  consumer  is 
effectively prevented from paying off the cash advance balance unless the purchase balance 
is first paid in full.  
In an attempt to help consumers understand this practice and its implications, the Federal 
Reserve  Board  twice  designed  model  disclosures  that  were  intended  to  inform  consumers 
about  payment  allocation.  But  extensive  testing  indicated  that,  when  asked  to  review  and 
interpret  our  best  attempts  at  clear  disclosures,  many  consumers  did  not  demonstrate  an 
understanding of payment allocation practices sufficient to make informed decisions. In light 
of the apparent inadequacy of disclosures alone in this case, and because the methods of 
payment allocation used by creditors were clearly structured to produce the maximum cost to 
                                                 
9   See, for instance, materials on the Consumer Information portion of the Federal Reserve's website. 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 5
the  consumer,  last  year  we  put  rules  in  place  that  will  limit  the  discretion  of  creditors  to 
allocate consumers' payments made above the minimum amount required. We banned so-
called double-cycle billing – in which a bank calculates interest based not only on the current 
balance, but also on the prior month's balance – on similar grounds; we found from testing 
that the complexity of this billing method served only to reduce transparency to the consumer 
without  producing  any  reasonable  benefit.  These  actions  were  part  of 
the  most 
comprehensive change to credit card regulations ever adopted by the Board. 
Similar issues have arisen in the mortgage arena. Many of the poor underwriting practices in 
the subprime market were also potentially unfair and deceptive to consumers. For example, 
the  failure  to  include  an  escrow  account  for  homeowners'  insurance  and  property  taxes  in 
many  cases  led  borrowers  to  underestimate  the  costs  of  homeownership.  In  this  case, 
allowing greater optionality – which we usually think of as a benefit – had the adverse effects 
of increasing complexity and reducing transparency. Restricting this practice was one of the 
new  protections  in  the  residential  mortgage  market  that  the  Board  established  in  a 
comprehensive  set  of  rules  released  in  July.  Banning  or  limiting  certain  underwriting 
practices, which the new rules do for the entire mortgage market, also helps to address the 
incentive  problems  I  discussed  earlier.  For  institutions  that  we  supervise,  these  incentive 
issues  can  also  be  addressed  by  requiring  that  lenders  set  up  compensation  plans  for 
originators that induce behavior consistent with safety and soundness. 
Where  does  all  this  leave  us?  It  seems  clear  that  the  difficulty  of  managing  financial 
innovation in the period leading up to the crisis was underestimated, and not just in the case 
of  consumer  lending.  For  example,  complexity  and  lack  of  transparency  have  been  a 
problem for certain innovative products aimed at investors, such as some structured credit 
products.  
Conclusion 
I  don't  think  anyone  wants  to  go  back  to  the  1970s.  Financial  innovation  has  improved 
access  to  credit,  reduced  costs,  and  increased  choice.  We  should  not  attempt  to  impose 
restrictions  on  credit  providers  so  onerous  that  they  prevent  the  development  of  new 
products and services in the future. 
That  said,  the  recent  experience  has  shown  some  ways  in  which  financial  innovation  can 
misfire. Regulation should not prevent innovation, rather it should ensure that innovations are 
sufficiently transparent and understandable to allow consumer choice to drive good market 
outcomes. We should be wary of complexity whose principal effect is to make the product or 
service  more  difficult  to  understand  by  its  intended  audience.  Other  questions  about 
proposed  innovations  should  be  raised:  For  instance,  how  will  the  innovative  product  or 
practice perform under stressed financial conditions? What effects will the innovation have 
on the ability and willingness of the lender to make loans that are well underwritten and serve 
the  needs  of  the  borrower?  These  questions  about  innovation  are  relevant  for  safety-and-
soundness supervision as well as for consumer protection. 
In  sum,  the  challenge  faced  by  regulators  is  to  strike  the  right  balance:  to  strive  for  the 
highest  standards  of  consumer  protection  without  eliminating  the  beneficial  effects  of 
responsible  innovation  on  consumer  choice  and  access  to  credit.  Our  goal  should  be  a 
financial  system  in  which  innovation  leads  to  higher  levels  of  economic  welfare  for  people 
and communities at all income levels. 
6 
 BIS Review 47/2009
