Jürgen Stark: Monetary and fiscal policy – criteria and timing for the 
phasing out of crisis measures 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the 80th Kieler Konjunkturgespräch, Berlin, 15 September 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
A year ago today the investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy protection. This 
dramatic  event  has  had  adverse  effects  on  the world  economy,  including  the  euro area.  It 
has led to the most severe and synchronised economic downturn since the 1930s. But recent 
information is encouraging. The massive response to the crisis on the part of governments 
and  central  banks  seems  to  be  bearing  fruit.  Available  data  suggest  that  the  free  fall  in 
economic  activity  has  come  to  a  halt  and  the  global  recession  is  bottoming  out.  However, 
uncertainty remains high, with data on economic activity likely to remain volatile.  
The key challenge in the period ahead will be to unwind in a timely manner the extraordinary 
and unprecedented measures taken in response to the crisis. The criteria and timing for the 
phasing out of the crisis measures will be the main topic of my speech today. But first, I will 
start  by  giving  you  a  brief  overview  of  the  current  economic  outlook  on  the  basis  of  the 
Governing Council’s assessment. I will then describe the measures implemented by the ECB 
and fiscal authorities in more detail.  
The economic outlook  
Given recent developments, there are reasons for cautious optimism regarding the outlook 
for economic activity. Economic activity turned out better than expected in the second quarter 
of 2009.  
As  regards  the  future,  the  economic  recovery  is  likely  to  be  very  gradual.  The  revival  of 
global  trade,  the  rebuilding  of  inventories  and  the  positive  impact  of  policy  stimulus  and 
liquidity support measures are expected to be the main drivers of economic activity, and we 
may see a positive quarter on quarter growth rate already in the third quarter this year. But 
the  quarterly  growth  pattern  might  be  very  uneven,  and  the  uncertainty  surrounding  this 
outlook  remains  unusually  high,  given  that  some  of  the  factors  supporting  growth  are 
temporary in nature.  
This outlook is broadly in line with the September 2009 ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
for growth in the euro area, which have been revised upwards compared with the June 2009 
Eurosystem staff projections. This is the first upward revision since March 2007. 
In the view of the Governing Council, the risks to this outlook remain broadly balanced. On 
the  upside, the  positive  impact  of  the  policy  measures  implemented  may  be  stronger  than 
expected.  Confidence  may  improve  faster  than  assumed.  On  the  downside,  the  financial 
sector  is  still  strained,  and  we  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  a  stronger  or  more 
protracted negative feedback loop between the real economy and the financial sector may 
develop. Concerns also relate to a renewed increase in international commodity prices, an 
intensification of protectionist pressures and a disorderly correction of global imbalances.  
As  regards  prices,  annual  inflation  rates  turned  negative  this  summer.  However,  this  is  a 
temporary  phenomenon,  which  was  largely  driven  by  past  developments  in  energy  prices. 
Annual inflation rates are expected to turn positive again within the next few months, but to 
remain relatively subdued. This is confirmed by both our economic and monetary analysis.  
BIS Review 109/2009 
 1
This  inflation  outlook  is  consistent  with  the  September  2009  ECB  staff  projections,  which 
have  been  revised  slightly  upwards  compared  with  the  June  projections,  mainly  owing  to 
higher energy prices. The Governing Council considers the risks to this outlook to be broadly 
balanced.  On  the  downside,  the  downward  pressure  on  prices  could  be  stronger  than 
expected,  due  to  the  sharp  contraction  in  economic  activity  over  the  past  year  and  the 
modest  scale  of  the  recovery  which  is  foreseen.  On  the  upside,  renewed  increases  in  oil 
prices and stronger than expected increases in administered prices and indirect taxes in the 
wake of fiscal consolidation efforts cannot be ruled out.  
The ECB’s policy response  
Let me briefly recall how the ECB has responded to the intensification of the crisis a year 
ago.  First  of  all,  with  inflationary  pressures  receding  rapidly  since  last  autumn,  we  have 
reduced the rate at the main refinancing operations by 325 basis points to the lowest levels 
seen since the start of Monetary Union. The Governing Council regards the current rates as 
appropriate. 
In addition, we have taken a number of non-standard measures in order to: 
• 
• 
First, support the orderly functioning of the money market;  
Second, ease funding conditions for banks and thereby enhance the flow of credit to 
the economy above and beyond what could be achieved through policy interest rate 
reductions alone. 
Third, improve market liquidity in important segments of the private debt securities 
market.  
 These  measures  have  come  to  be  known  as  our  “enhanced  credit  support  approach”.  Its 
focus has been on banks, as they are the main source of funding in the euro area economy. 
Overall, our approach comprises five main building blocks:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
First, the full accommodation of banks’ liquidity requests at a fixed rate.  
Second, the expansion of the list of assets eligible as collateral. 
Third, the lengthening of the maturities of long-term refinancing operations.  
Fourth, the provision of liquidity in foreign currencies.  
And finally, financial market support through outright purchases of covered bonds in 
order to stimulate a market that has traditionally been an important source of funding 
for banks.  
This is the only decision we have taken which directly affects a market segment other than 
the money market, and the total sum allocated to the programme – €60 billion – may appear 
modest  compared  with  asset  purchases  performed  by  some  other  central  banks.  Our 
planned purchases amount to about 5% of the eligible outstanding covered bonds. 
Let me emphasise that we have very deliberately refrained from buying government bonds, 
so as to safeguard our independence from political influence. For the same reason, we have 
implemented our measures without any form of government guarantee.  
The  implementation  of  the  non-standard  measures  has  led  to  a  significant  increase  in  the 
size  of  the  Eurosystem  balance  sheet.  By  the  end  of  August  2009,  the  simplified  balance 
sheet  of  the  Eurosystem  stood  at  around  €1,500  billion  –  about  16%  of  euro  area  GDP. 
Compared with its size in July 2007, shortly before the outbreak of the financial turmoil, the 
balance sheet is currently about two-thirds larger. 
It is difficult to assess the impact of our measures precisely, but we are satisfied that spreads 
in the money market have declined significantly since last autumn and are now back to the 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2009
levels seen before the bankruptcy of Lehman  Brothers. Together with the policy rate cuts, 
this  has  contributed  to  a  substantial  decline  in  lending  rates  to  households  and  firms.  For 
example,  the  interest  rate  offered  by  monetary  financial  institutions  (MFIs)  on  loans  to 
households for house purchase with a floating rate and an initial rate fixation of up to one 
year has about halved since October last year.  
The subdued developments in lending have attracted some attention, particularly given that 
our measures were designed to support lending activity. However, if we consider how credit 
has  developed  during  economic  downturns  in  the  past,  the  recent  developments  in  credit 
appear  to  be  broadly  in  line  with  the  recent  developments  in  economic  activity  and  the 
current outlook. In particular, in the past loans to firms have tended to lag turning points in 
the business cycle. One explanation for this may be that firms tend to use their own funds 
first and only afterwards resort to external financing, which leads to low demand for credit 
around  the  turning  point.  Based  on  past  experience,  the  current  levelling-off  of  loans  to 
households would normally be associated with a further contraction in loans to firms until at 
least early 2010. Having said this, we will of course continue to monitor the developments in 
credit very  closely in the period ahead, especially with a  view to assessing to what extent 
supply-side constraints have the potential to limit the availability of credit.  
for 
interbank 
financial  assistance, 
including  government  guarantees 
Fiscal policy response to the crisis 
Let me now move on to the fiscal policy response to the crisis. Fiscal policies have played an 
important  role  in  containing  the  adverse  impact  of  the  financial  and  economic  crisis.  Euro 
area governments have demonstrated their ability to take rapid and coordinated steps both to 
support the financial system and to stimulate economic activity. 
Government support for the banking sector represents a key element in the stabilisation of 
the  whole  financial  system  and  the  prevention  of  a  further  detrimental  impact  on  the  real 
economy. The measures adopted in response to the financial crisis consist of various types 
of 
lending, 
recapitalisation  of  financial  institutions,  increased  coverage  of  retail  deposit  insurance  and 
asset relief schemes. 
As well as addressing the sources of the crisis by supporting systemically important financial 
institutions, fiscal policies have provided extensive stimulus to aggregate demand. As a first 
line  of  defence,  a  significant  fiscal  impulse  has  been,  and  continues  to  be,  delivered  via 
automatic  stabilisers,  which  are  relatively  strong  in  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time, 
European  governments  have  agreed  to  adopt  expansionary  fiscal  measures  in  order  to 
mitigate the effects of the economic downturn.  
The  past  few  decades  have  been  characterised  by  a  considerable  degree  of  scepticism 
towards  the  effectiveness  of  fiscal  policies  that  go  beyond  the  operation  of  automatic 
stabilisers. In some respects, recent calls from academics and policy-makers alike for fiscal 
activism  represent  a  shift  in  this  paradigm.  This  has  also  led  to  a  re-emergence  of  old 
disputes between academic macroeconomists.  
It  must  be  stressed,  however,  that  the  government  measures  adopted  in  response  to  the 
economic  crisis  carry  considerable  fiscal  costs.  The  effectiveness  of  fiscal  stimuli  crucially 
depends  on  the  expectations  and  reactions  of  economic  agents.  In  this  context,  the 
perception of the measures as being temporary and trust in the sustainability of fiscal policies 
are crucial. So far, fiscal activism seems to have been reasonably well coordinated, timely 
and targeted. But the challenge of ensuring that the measures are temporary remains. The 
determination of euro area governments to avoid further fiscal stimuli is welcome. However, 
the  current  support  measures  cannot  be  sustained  forever.  Timely  and  credible  exit 
strategies for withdrawing the existing fiscal stimuli must be developed and communicated as 
soon as possible.  
BIS Review 109/2009 
 3
To  this  end,  central  banks  and  fiscal  authorities  will  have  to  be  prepared  to  unwind  their 
extraordinary support measures.  
The phasing-out of crisis measures 
Let me be clear: the fact that we are discussing exit strategies by no means implies that we 
are  about  to  implement  them.  But  for  them  to  be  effective,  we  need  to  be  transparent. 
Otherwise, investors may become fearful of inflation and concerned about the sustainability 
of  public  finances.  This  would  no  doubt  push  up  long-term  interest  rates.  For  the  same 
reasons,  households  might  expect  higher  taxes  in  the  future  and  raise  the  share  of  their 
income that they would rather save than spend. All these effects would, of course, jeopardise 
the gradual recovery and undermine the effectiveness of the policy stimulus. 
Monetary policy 
As regards our area of responsibility, we are well prepared to phase out the measures we 
took in response to the crisis. The way these measures were implemented provides us with 
reasonable  flexibility  in  unwinding  them.  For  example,  unless  we  decide  otherwise,  the 
maturity and size of our operations will automatically decrease, starting next year.  
Consistent  with  our  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability,  we  have  applied  certain  criteria  in 
implementing  the  credit  support  measures  and  interest  rate  decisions.  In  unwinding  our 
support we will continue to apply those criteria. Not least thanks to our political independence 
and our credibility, we are well equipped to act in a timely manner when the need arises.  
Two elements appear to be key. First, of course, we need to have a goal in mind. Second, 
we need to think about how to manage the transition from where we are now towards that 
goal.  
As  regards  the  decision  parameters,  the  first  area  concerns  the  withdrawal  of  monetary 
policy  stimulus  in  terms  of  the  key  ECB  interest  rates.  The  criterion  for  how  and  when  to 
withdraw the stimulus will be our assessment of risks to price stability.  
The second area relates to the phasing-out of the liquidity and credit support that we provide 
to  banks.  In  this  case  the  instrument  is  the  size  and  maturity  composition  of  our  liquidity-
providing operations. The criterion for phasing out these operations will be our assessment of 
the financial situation and, specifically, how funding risk evolves, without compromising our 
price stability mandate.  
These two areas are interrelated. However, our interest rate decisions are guided exclusively 
by our assessment of risks to price stability. Our credit support measures have in addition 
been driven by the goal of alleviating funding risk and thereby forestalling a wider systemic 
crisis which would jeopardise our primary objective of price stability.  
The interest rate instrument and the size and maturity composition of our liquidity-providing 
operations  are  instruments  that  can  be  used  independently  of  each  other,  but  only  to  a 
certain extent and not continually for different purposes. Specifically, concerns about funding 
support must not come to dominate monetary policy considerations.  
The level of our key interest rates will, as always, be adjusted in response to changes in the 
outlook for price stability. But, because our non-standard measures were targeted at specific 
problems in the money market, our decisions about how and when to unwind them will also 
depend on how funding risk evolves. We would expect a gradual recovery in funding markets 
and further improvements in credit conditions for the non-financial sector to go hand in hand 
with  the  establishment  of  a  sustained  economic  recovery.  But  it  is  impossible  to  forecast 
these developments with any certainty.  
4 
 BIS Review 109/2009
A scenario cannot be entirely ruled out where upside risks to price stability emerge while the 
problems in money markets persist. We might then have to maintain the structure and size of 
our balance sheet. But, at the same time, we would have to raise interest rates to counter 
upside risks to price stability. We would be confronted with the need to steer money market 
interest rates to higher levels while excess liquidity continued to prevail in money markets.  
It  is  therefore  crucial  to  monitor  the  sources  of  funding  constraints  for  banks.  We  need  to 
judge  whether  these  funding  constraints  relate  to  individual  banks  rather  than  to  the 
functioning  of  the  money  market  and  the  banking  system  as  a  whole.  Our  operational 
framework is not designed to counter funding problems at the individual bank level. Rather, 
our funding support is designed to alleviate funding risk to the extent that it is systemic.  
Therefore, we would seek to re-establish the key features of the operational framework that 
was  in  place  before  the  crisis  and  to  revert  to  a  situation  in  which  the  one-week  main 
refinancing operation is the main tool for steering short-term money market rates and we are 
“rate-takers” in the longer-term money market. 
Based on our economic and monetary analyses, we will continue to monitor very closely all 
developments over the period ahead. We will ensure that the measures taken are unwound 
in a timely fashion and the liquidity provided is absorbed in order to counter effectively any 
threat to price stability. 
To  sum  up  the  monetary  policy  considerations:  the  monetary  policy  measures  and  non-
standard measures taken during the financial crisis have been effective in alleviating funding 
concerns of  banks.  But  we  need  to  be  aware  that,  if  the measures  are  maintained  for  too 
long, there can be negative side effects.  
Both central bank and fiscal measures may contribute to weaken the incentives for banks to 
clear troubled assets from their balance sheets and to monitor their credit risk carefully. This, 
in turn, may reinforce the very problems that currently impair the functioning of the financial 
system. In a low interest rate environment this can foster lending to unprofitable business. 
That,  in  turn,  would  harm  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy  and  thereby  prepare  the 
ground for weak growth to persist.  
Very  low  interest  rates  can  also  hamper  the  functioning  of  the  money  market:  The  lower 
money  market  interest  rates  are,  the  lower  the  incentive  for  banks  to  trade  funds  in  the 
market  rather  than  depositing  them  safely  with  the  central  bank.  Market  participants  might 
change their behaviour and get accustomed to the non-standard measures, which would be 
detrimental to the recovery of money markets. 
On our part, as soon as upside risks to price stability emerge, and with a view to avoid to 
contribute to the emergence of another asset price bubble, we would have to act accordingly.  
For all these reasons, it is paramount to have a clear exit strategy in place.  
Fiscal policy 
The ECB’s exit strategy follows naturally from our mandate and independence from political 
influence.  The  credibility  we  enjoy  is  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  long-term  inflation 
expectations have remained firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s definition of 
price stability throughout the crisis.  
Fiscal  authorities  are  not  in  the  same  position.  One  indication  of  this  is  the  widening  of 
government  bond  spreads  in  the  euro  area  vis-à-vis  German  ten-year  bunds  since  last 
autumn, which signals market doubts about the fiscal authorities’ resolve to bring fiscal policy 
back onto a sustainable path. Let me therefore briefly elaborate on why it is important that 
governments commit to clear exit strategies. 
In  principle,  unsustainable  fiscal  policies  represent  an  upside  risk  to  price  stability  as  the 
possibility  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  debt-burdened  governments  may  resort  to  monetary 
BIS Review 109/2009 
 5
financing.  But  let  me  be  clear:  this  is  not  an  option  for  governments  in  the  euro  area. 
However, high inflation in other countries would also make it more difficult to preserve price 
stability here. 
Second, while governments bolstered private confidence via financial and economic support 
in  the  crisis  phase,  in  the  exit  phase  confidence  must  be  preserved  via  the  timely  and 
credible  withdrawal  of  the  unsustainable  stimulus  measures.  Exit  strategies  may  reduce 
market concerns about fiscal sustainability, and they may help to limit Ricardian behaviour on 
the part of consumers, which could otherwise offset the impact of the fiscal stimulus. 
Third, recent calls for a persistently greater role for government owing to failures in market 
systems must be rejected. Historical experience shows that the market principle remains by 
far the best basis for an economic system, although we know that markets need rules and 
that  the  existing  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  has  to  be  enhanced.  The  role  of 
government should be scaled down after the crisis. No matter how serious the current crisis 
is,  governments  should  ultimately  cease  to  perform  non-government  tasks  and  the  private 
sector should step in again. 
Fourth, fiscal positions in most euro area countries represents a challenge for the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact.  Any  weakening  of  the  peer  pressure  mechanism  on  which  the  fiscal 
framework  rests  must  be  avoided.  Full  compliance  with  the  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  is  necessary  in  order  to  preserve  confidence  in  the  whole  framework  and 
contribute to the credibility of fiscal exit strategies in individual countries. 
Fifth,  the  fiscal  costs  of  crisis  measures  are  expected  to  be  considerable.  Government 
support  for  the  financial  sector  gives  rise  to  government  debt  and  extensive  contingent 
liabilities  owing  to  government  guarantees.  The  effects  of  automatic  stabilisers  and 
discretionary fiscal stimuli lead to a sharp deterioration in fiscal balances. All these factors, 
together  with  the  expected  adverse  fiscal  impact  of  population  ageing,  pose  considerable 
risks to fiscal sustainability. It appears unlikely that countries will be able to rely on strong 
GDP  growth  to  reduce  their  debt  burdens.  In  this  respect,  unwinding  fiscal  stimuli,  while 
necessary,  is  clearly  insufficient  to  restore  sustainable  public  finances.  The  structural 
adjustment  of  fiscal  policies  to  the  new  economic  environment  will  be  needed.  Moreover, 
potential  costs  stemming  from  guarantees  provided  to  the  banking  sector  should  be  taken 
into account.  
Finally, the phasing-out of most non-standard monetary policy measures is highly predictable 
and  withdrawal  will  be  communicated  in  due  time.  The  same  level  of  transparency  should 
apply  to  fiscal  policies.  Governments  should  provide  a  clear  and  credible  medium-term 
timetable for fiscal exit strategies in order to help maintain a predictable environment, both 
for economic agents and for the conduct of monetary policy. 
General principles for fiscal exit strategies 
Based  on  these  considerations,  governments  should  develop  and  communicate  ambitious 
and  realistic  fiscal  exit  and  consolidation  strategies  as  soon  as  possible.  Structural 
adjustment will have to be implemented in order to reduce high debt ratios and return public 
finances to a sustainable path. The timing, pace and sequence of the exit strategy is starting 
to be a major challenge. Let me summarise the main criteria for the fiscal exit strategy and 
the main principles on which they should be based. 
First, as regards involvement in the financial sector, the primary criterion for the exit strategy 
is the condition of the banking sector. Given the vital role of the banking system, the timing 
and sequence of the withdrawal of the assistance provided to the financial sector is of the 
utmost importance and, in the short to medium run, even more challenging than the task of 
unwinding fiscal stimuli. A balance between the need to safeguard financial stability and the 
need  to  restore  market  principles  must  be  maintained.  The  stability  of  the  banking  sector 
must not be put at risk. However, the over-long involvement of governments will change the 
6 
 BIS Review 109/2009
behaviour  of  market  participants  and  may  have  detrimental  effects  to  competition  in  the 
banking sector and lead to an ineffective allocation of resources. 
Second,  as  regards  the  exit  from  high  government  deficit  and  debt,  governments  should 
ensure  that  the  withdrawal  of  fiscal  measures  starts  no  later  than  the  economic  recovery. 
Part  of  this  job  will  be  done  automatically  via  fiscal  stabilisers  and  some  fiscal  stimulus 
measures are designed to be temporary. Additional fiscal adjustment is, however, needed. 
The  phasing-out  of  stimuli  to  support  demand  should  be  closely  linked  to  the  pick-up  in 
economic activity. Given the current economic outlook and projected public deficit and debt 
developments, euro area governments have decided to refrain from additional expansionary 
measures. This decision is very welcome. However, they have not so far committed to clear 
fiscal  exit  strategies.  Exit  strategies  should  be  set  out  in  the  context  of  current  and 
forthcoming excessive deficit procedures and within the next round of stability programmes. 
Otherwise,  persistent  high  deficits  and  debts  would  contribute  to  high  risk  premia  on 
government bond interest rates. Higher sovereign real long-term interest rates may then be 
transmitted to the rest of the economy and crowd out private demand. 
Third, the timing and pace of consolidation should take into account additional criteria such 
as  growth  prospects  after  the  crisis,  the  size  of  government  deficits  and  debts  and  the 
prospects  for  long-term  sustainability.  Given  the  substantial  effort  needed,  structural 
adjustments should be significantly more ambitious than the benchmark of 0.5% of GDP per 
annum would suggest and should differ across countries. Debt simulations show that while a 
no-policy-change scenario implies an explosion of government debts, even a 0.5 percentage 
point structural adjustment would not be sufficient to bring debt ratios to the level of 60% of 
GDP over an acceptable time horizon. In particular, highly indebted countries and those with 
a sharp deterioration in their fiscal balances should therefore make a consolidation effort of 
at least 1 percentage point per annum. 
Fourth,  the  consolidation  strategies  should  be  designed  in  line  with  the  Treaty  and  the 
Stability and Growth Pact, which constitute the appropriate and credible framework for fiscal 
policy  coordination  in  the  euro  area.  The  Pact  provides  for  a  degree  of  flexibility  that  is 
sufficient for the current circumstances. Any loosening of the framework beyond that level is 
not warranted, as it may pose the risk of eroding the incentive mechanisms. Fiscal strategies 
should respect deadlines for the correction of excessive deficits set by the ECOFIN Council 
in line with the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Fifth,  in  any  case,  fiscal  consolidation  cannot  be  limited  to  the  correction  of  excessive 
deficits.  The  pace  of  consolidation  needs  to  be  maintained  and  stepped  up  in  good  times 
until the medium-term objectives are achieved.  
The  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  that  countries  that  failed  to  build  up  safety  margins 
during good times had little or no capacity to counter the economic downturn. In this respect, 
medium-term objectives must be sufficiently ambitious in order to create room for manoeuvre 
in fiscal terms before the next economic downturn and to prepare public finances for future 
expenditure associated with population ageing. All efforts should be made to ensure that the 
opportunity to consolidate public finances during the forthcoming good times are not missed 
again in some countries. 
Before concluding, I would like to emphasise that the institutional framework of the euro area 
leaves no room for an coordination between the single monetary policy of the ECB and the 
national  fiscal  policies.  The  Treaty  sets  up  a  clear  allocation  of  responsibilities  between 
monetary policy and national fiscal policies, with a view to ensuring a smooth functioning of 
monetary union. The institutional framework grants to the Eurosystem full independence from 
political  influence  and  interference  and  assigns  to  the  ECB  the  primary  objective  of 
maintaining  price  stability.  At  the  same  time,  fiscal  authorities  are  responsible  for 
safeguarding the sustainability of public finances.  
This  does  not  mean  that  there  are  no  interactions.  The  Governing  Council  has  always 
welcomed  a  constructive  and  open  exchange  of  information  on  the  current  economic 
BIS Review 109/2009 
 7
situation and structural reforms with other bodies and institutions at the European level. The 
outlook  for  fiscal  policy  plays  a  key  role  in  our  projections  for  economic  activity  and  our 
assessment  of  risks  to  price  stability.  In  the  same  way,  because  our  policy  decisions  are 
exclusively  based  on  our  assessment  of  risks  to  price  stability,  our  responses  can  be 
predicted by fiscal authorities. The channels for the exchange of information between fiscal 
and monetary authorities are also well developed. But there cannot and will not be any pre-
commitment  to  a  particular  course  of  monetary  policy  action.  This  would  undermine  the 
ECB’s independence and therefore violate our mandate.  
From a fiscal policy point of view, it should be noted that although the exit from  monetary 
measures will be uniform across the euro area, it is likely to have asymmetric fiscal impacts 
given the current substantial heterogeneity of fiscal positions. A potential increase in market 
interest  rates  will  have  a  much  stronger  impact  on  highly  indebted  countries,  in  particular 
those with outstanding government bonds with short maturities. The need for fiscal flexibility 
under  a  single  monetary  policy  places  a  clear  premium  on  timely  and  credible  fiscal 
consolidation in all euro area member countries. 
Conclusion  
To conclude, in response to the crisis, governments and central banks across the globe have 
taken immediate and unprecedented measures. Governments have implemented measures 
to rescue the banking sector and stimulate the economy. Central banks have lowered rates 
to  very  low  levels  in  response  to  receding  inflationary  pressures  and  risks;  and  they  have 
provided ample liquidity to the banking system, so as to support the transmission mechanism 
of monetary policy. The key questions are when and how to phase out these measures once 
the overall situation starts to return to normal.  
This is the most challenging task for both governments and central banks. But I am confident 
that  the  ECB’s  broad-based  monetary  policy  strategy,  which  has  shown  itself  to be  robust 
and forward-looking, will continue to serve us well in handling this challenge. The fact that 
our  risk  assessment  is  rooted  in  both  economic  and  monetary  analysis  ensures  that  all 
relevant information is taken into account.  
The crisis is not yet over. The time to exit has not yet come. But I can assure you that we will 
continue to monitor very closely all developments in the period ahead, in order to be in the 
best possible position to continue to deliver on our task of maintaining price stability over the 
medium term, and thereby support the purchasing power of euro area citizens. 
 
8 
 BIS Review 109/2009
    9
BIS Review 109/2009 
     10 
 BIS Review 109/2009
    11
BIS Review 109/2009 
     12 
 BIS Review 109/2009
    13
BIS Review 109/2009 
    14 
 BIS Review 109/2009
