Rundheersing Bheenick: Interview with Mauritius Times  
Interview with Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, and Mauritius 
Times, published on 10 April 2009. 
 *  The  Minister  of  Finance  has  expressed  his  apprehensions  regarding  the  budget 
deficit, which he says is going to be manageable this year but likely to worsen in 2010. 
Are we really in for bad times? 
These are very abnormal times of  a kind not witnessed in living memory, so whatever we 
have inherited as the acceptable norm in terms of the level of fiscal deficit for a country like 
ours should not be a constraint right now. The major priority today is to get out of the present 
crisis afflicting the world economy, where our major markets are disappearing, which implies 
that  the  economic  model  that  we  have  been  applying  is  being  redefined  under  our  very 
noses. We should not be prisoners of outmoded ways of thinking whereby the fiscal deficit 
should stay around or less than 3%. That is the norm-in normal times! Even in Europe, where 
they have all signed up to this, they are happily giving themselves exemptions from these 
commitments because the priority right now is to get the economy going again.  
* Even at the cost of a higher deficit? 
Absolutely,  because  that  has  become  a  categorical  imperative.  Yes,  even  at  the  cost  of  a 
higher deficit in the short term so long as that deficit is substainable and can be financed. 
There is no point to have a very low level of deficit at the price of a collapsing economy. Our 
notion of the acceptable norm for the fiscal deficit arises from the need not to crowd out the 
private sector; it also derives from the capacity to finance the deficit either from taxpayers or 
from capital markets. Neither is the private sector investing right now, nor are capital markets 
functioning. So, temporarily while all the rules of the game are being changed, we have to 
give up this mode of thinking, do whatever it takes to get the economy started again, and 
make sure that once the global recovery starts we are well-positioned to be able to capitalise 
on that recovery.  
* What does it take to kickstart the economy? 
The answer to this question does not depend very much on what we do or don’t do in the tiny 
economy of Mauritius, a large part of it depends on what happens at the global level. The 
G20  meeting  has  in  that  respect  exceeded  my  expectations.  I  was  involved  in  the 
preparations  for  it  at  the  African  level;  we  went  to  meetings  with  African  ministers  and 
Governors  in  Tunis,  Abidjan  and  Dar  Es  Salaam,  organised  by  the  ADB,  African  Union, 
Economic Commission for Africa, and others and I can tell you that few of us were expecting 
this kind of highly positive outcome and coherent vision; we can say that this has been one of 
the  best  summits  in  recent  memory.  The  global  community  at  the  level  of  the  G20,  which 
accounts  for  three-quarters  of  global  GDP,  has  shown  what  are  the  possible  avenues  to 
explore to find a speedy solution out of the current crisis. That’s happening and it’s going to 
go beyond rhetoric. There is a commitment to review progress on these undertakings by the 
end of this year, there is a change happening here, and the US hegemony in these matters is 
frittering away before our very eyes to usher in the new world economic order that we have 
been  talking  about  for  as  far  as  I  can  remember.  Responsibility  for  the  surveillance  of  the 
global financial system and for extending that surveillance to non-banks, and commitment to 
keep trade flows open and to keep capital markets working – all these are acquired. That is 
part of what it takes to get the global economy going again and prevent it from slipping back 
into protectionism and monetary/financial mercantilism, which is its new avatar. For us it vital 
that we do not compound the problem by having the wrong policies domestically. 
BIS Review 46/2009 
 1
* Namely? 
Basically  the  types  of  policy  reforms  that  we  have  been  engaged  in  for  quite  some  time 
through successive governments have turned the country into what it is today. We are quite 
respected  for  having  the  right  policies  in  place:  we  do  not  have  the  heavy  hand  of 
government  interfering  everywhere;  we  have  policy  predictability  and  the  absence  of 
arbitrariness in economic decision-making; we have plenty of space for the private sector to 
operate – these are things which not very common in Africa. We should safeguard all this 
because our underlying policy stance is basically correct so long as we do not yield to short-
term temptations which will create problems for us down the line. The G20 leaders have said 
that they are going to monitor progress themselves to make sure that there, the prospect of 
recovery  which  they  hold  out  becomes  a  reality  which  is  going  to  be  with  us  very  quickly. 
While the global economic problems are being addressed by global leaders, we in our tiny 
part of the world should make sure that we keep the Mauritian economy on an even keel. 
There are voices clamouring for special attention for their particular sector but we must not 
allow ourselves to go overboard. We must be prudent, we must make sure that the entire 
economic apparatus of Mauritius, which has served us so well over the years, survives this 
crisis. 
* But we have not felt the full impact of the storm as yet. Is there much that we can do 
to weather the impending storm?  
We  are  a  completely  open  economy;  it  was  never  on  the  cards  for  us  to  be  completely 
immune from what is happening in the major economies, whether they are source markets 
for  tourists  or  capital  flows  or  destination  markets  for  our  exports.  There  was  no  question 
about our being immune… it was just a question of the leads and lags in the system catching 
up  with  us.  If  it  seemed  as  if  we  had  weathered  it  very  well  in  the  first  round,  it  was  only 
because the effects of the storm in our major markets had not yet worked themselves out in 
ways  that  matter  to  us:  export  orders  or  tourist  flows  or  capital  flows.  As  the  slowdown 
became a recession elsewhere, the effects are beginning to be felt here. We feel that there is 
probably  worse  to  come…  the  same  drag  in  the  system  which  immunised  us  on  the  way 
down will delay the transmission of the recovery on the way up. 
* When is that going to happen? 
That will depend on the time it is going to take for the measures adopted by the G20 to work 
themselves  out  and  to  begin  to  show  up  in  rising  investor  and  consumer  sentiment  in  the 
major markets. Till then, there won’t be any change in consumer spending or in capital flows 
which affect us, and we will not as a result see any improvement in our underlying conditions. 
That  will  only  come  when  the  consumers  in  western  markets  start  buying  our  export 
products. Or when the traveller starts travelling again to distant tourist destinations. Or when 
the investor starts investing again in far-away markets. When is this going to happen? It’s 
anybody’s  guess!  There  is  at  present  very  poor  visibility  a  few  months  ahead;  forecasting 
right now has become a very dangerous thing. Your paper last week quoted JK Galbraith's 
quip  about  economic  forecasting  being  an  activity  invented  to  make  astrology  look 
respectable. How true this is today!  
What we can say for sure is that the crisis is going to be over before long. Exactly when… we 
don’t  know.  No  crisis  has  lasted  forever  in  the  past  because  things  cannot  keep  getting 
much, much worse forever. But for things to show the first sustainable signs of improvement, 
consumers  must  start  consuming,  investors  must  start  investing,  and  banks  must  start 
lending. None of these conditions apply at this point in time at the global level. Until these 
three things happen, nothing much will change in the underlying economic conditions. The 
best  forecast  as  of  now:  it  won’t  happen  for  the  next  four  quarters  at  the  earliest.  A  few 
knowledgeable observers called the bottom of the market months ago. Others have seen the 
green shoots of recovery. Let us by all means look at the bright side of things but let’s not 
hallucinate. The recovery is not for tomorrow, and this in spite of the best efforts of the G-20. 
We’ll probably see the first signs of a recovery same time next year. We will have to survive 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2009
until then and make sure that economic conditions in terms of employment, social stability, 
financing our yawning balance of payments deficit, reserve level, indebtedness etc. do not 
become worse pending the recovery. And we must not in the meantime take wrong policy 
measures in response to short-term pressures. Whatever policy measures we take right now 
should  be  temporary,  reversible,  flexible  and  affordable;  and  there  be  must  a  clear  exit 
strategy especially if we are moving away from market-determined measures. 
* No need for redefining or revisiting the economic model then? 
We  have  been  revisiting  our  economic  model  constantly.  For  example,  when  the  Cotonou 
Convention  with  the  EU  did  away  with  the  Sugar  Protocol,  we  carried  out  some  re-
engineering of the industry, and it is still going on – the sugar sector reform package is part 
of it. When the Multi-Fibre Agreement was dismantled, we had to go and fight for ourselves 
on open markets with no quota protection. When AGOA provided us with a small, temporary 
respite,  we  knew  it  was  not  to  last  forever.  There  is  thus  some  reengineering  going  on 
constantly;  “Alterations-as-usual-during-business”  –  should  be  put  up  on  the  door  of 
Mauritius Inc. We keep altering things and we have to continue doing that. The global crisis 
has thrown up a new set of challenges for us; for us the good thing about it is that many of 
them are temporary challenges. But no crisis leads to a situation where, at the end of it, it’s 
back to square one in the pre-crisis mode of operation. The world will be different whether in 
terms of regulating the banking sector, market access or whatever. There are some lessons 
to be drawn from this crisis which should lead us to make some changes. The government, 
private sector operators and employees cannot do as if the crisis did not happen. The crisis 
has happened, it has highlighted some structural weaknesses in some parts of the economic 
apparatus, and we have to draw the lessons that are required because everybody else in the 
world is doing precisely that. You have to adjust to the brave new post-crisis world.  
*  Is  all  the  talk  about  regulating  more  firmly  the  financial  sector  and  taking  action 
against “tax havens” merely a screen to deal with a situation that even the West and 
its economists may not have fully understood? 
There is an element of scapegoating in picking on the tax havens. It is not an essential part 
of  what  brought  the  world  to  the  crisis  we  are  living  through  presently.  It  may  be  quite 
important for some countries that lose tax revenues in these havens; it is quite normal that 
people should pay their taxes and the way you pay your taxes must be linked to the place 
where you have your normal operations or where you derive your revenue from. We should 
by all means discourage harmful tax competition or regulatory arbitrage. But this is nothing 
new.  If  you  go  back  historically  the  whole  talk  about  transfer  pricing,  especially  by 
multinationals as they were then called, started from this. If we go even further back, we had 
the likes of Luxembourg, Liechtenstein and others of this world, that were harbouring these 
very opaque and murky entities. It was there, as far as I remember before the Second World 
War.  What  is  new  now  is  that  you  have  many  other  jurisdictions  that  have  joined  in  this 
exercise so that you have many more of these offshore financial centres some of which are 
tax havens. I must here dispute any allegation about Mauritius being a tax haven. We are not 
one, we have never been one and we have always rejected this kind of charge. We have 
never  rolled  out  the  welcome  mat  for  money  launderers  and  tax  dodgers.  We  have  a 
transparent and cooperating jurisdiction, and we are proud of it.  
*  Are  you  saying  that  our  level of  financial  regulation  and  international  commitment 
have  been  beyond  reproach  for  years?  So,  why  was  it  an  issue  at  all  to  go  and 
persuade OECD about the obvious? 
We  never  had  any  difficulty  with  the  people  who  come  to  supervise  our  compliance  with 
international  rules  and  regulations.  The  IMF  and  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  and, 
subsequently the FSAP, have jointly with the IMF have been monitoring our jurisdictions for 
more than 15 years now. We also always pass through with flying colours with respect to the 
Report on Standards and Codes, which deals with compliance with all international norms, 
specially with regard to tax compliance. We are a clean, reliable and trustworthy jurisdiction. 
BIS Review 46/2009 
 3
And  since  the  list  of  tax  havens  has  been  produced  by  the  OECD  the  day  after  the  G20 
meeting, I think it was worthwhile for us to make our case known just in case there was a 
danger that somebody somewhere might include us in the wrong list. For me personally this 
risk was very remote in the sense that we have always been aboveboard in this matter. The 
Financial Services Commission, our sister regulator, is doing a great job since we set it up a 
long time ago as MOBAA. We have no reason at all to reproach ourselves. The FSC and all 
the  management  companies  and  others  involved  in  this  business  have  a  shared 
responsibility for keeping this good image for Mauritius. 
To come back to your question, I think the attempt to pin the blame for part of the crisis on 
tax havens was very much a case of scapegoating. The real issue was a critical failure of 
supervision  and  regulation  in  some  key  markets.  There  was  also  a  real  failure  in  global 
surveillance,  in  the  lack  of  an  early  warning  system,  in  ensuring  that  the  right  incentives 
systems were in place in crucial areas of the banking, especially the shadow-banking and 
finance sector. A system which allowed people to get bonuses based on bad risks that they 
were accumulating for their enterprises, or which closed its eyes to rating agencies getting 
paid by the very people they were rating or which provided for walk-in loans at loan-to-value 
ratios which would make a prudent banker shudder, just could not last. So there was a total 
failure  all  along  the  line  and  if  you  add  in  that  picture  things  like  hedge  funds,  hot  money 
flows, securitisation, credit-default swaps etc., you have the perfect recipe for disaster. Why 
pick on tax havens? 
* You were speaking earlier about the wrong policies that we should not adopt in the 
wake  of  the  financial  crisis.  What  is  your  view  of  the  Stimulus  Package  proposed 
here? Are we not simply aping countries in the West that have a completely different 
dynamic compared to Mauritius? 
You must go beyond the title of the reform package that we have announced; they can be 
called stimulus packages because that is what the IMF has called all countries, which have 
the fiscal space to do so, to launch to be able to shore up the economy while waiting for the 
global  recovery.  I  have  no  difficulty  that  we  embarked  on  that  because  we  did  have  the 
necessary fiscal and monetary space. That’s what we did, last September, when we started 
working, that is the Central Bank together with the Treasury, to launch the Stimulus Package. 
And I would like to bring out here something which many people in Mauritius have not quite 
appreciated:  the  G20  communiqué  makes  mention  of  a  quarter  billion  dollars  being  made 
available  for  trade  financing.  There  is  no  better  way  to  emphasise  the  importance  of  this 
instrument to keep trade flowing. Here, in Mauritius, we did precisely the same thing, a full 
four months earlier in the context of our Additional Stimulus Package, whereby the Central 
Bank has made available a package of $100 million for the purpose of trade financing. We 
blazed a new trail. This is the first time in our history that the Central Bank has come up with 
such a package. We had to go for it because we depend critically on open trade channels 
and  we  resorted  to  it  at  a  very  critical  time  to  keep  trade  flows  going,  both  inward  and 
outward,  when  credit  lines  had  been  called  off.  This  is  an example  of  one  measure  tailor-
made for our own specific requirements.  
Now where the Stimulus Package differs from that of other countries in two crucial respects: 
first, the latter have a liquidity problem, so that they have to inject liquidity across the board, 
or second, they have a banking crisis, so that they have to recapitalise banks. We are not 
recapitalising  banks,  and  we  are  not  injecting  liquidity  –  we  have  excess  liquidity,  we  are 
doing the reverse, in fact. Our problem relates to our exporters’ order books – orders have 
disappeared  or  the  order  flow  is  disrupted.  That  will  have  a  knock-on  effect  on  their 
employment,  which  will  in  turn  have  a  knock-on  effect  our  balance  of  payments.  We  are 
coming to their help right now to prevent them from going under. The export manufacturing 
enterprises must  keep  their  whole  chain  of  production  going  because  if  you  allow  them  to 
collapse now they will not be able to resume production at the same level of efficiency when 
the recovery is here. We do not want to compromise the export sector, and that is why our 
Stimulus  Package  contains  a  large  element  of  burden-sharing  between  government, 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2009
commercial  banks  and  the  operators  themselves  based  on  a  viable,  sustainable  business 
model.  
*  Aren’t  we  throwing  good  public  money  after  bad  money  just  to  save  a  few 
industries? 
We could have been accused of doing that if we had not put not extra conditions in place to 
be able to access public money. I must add that the Central Bank is actually participating in 
the  Working  Committee  because  we  need  to make  sure  that  our  economic  operators  who 
can survive the crisis are not driven into bankruptcy because of cash flow problems arising 
from  temporary  export  difficulties.  We  know  the  world  economy  is  going  to  recover;  the 
western  consumer  is  going  to  start  consuming  again,  and  we  want  to  make  sure  that  our 
exporters  are  there  with  the  right  products  at  the  right  price  when  that  happens.  It  is  a 
transitional device, a shared burden. We are not providing public money free, it is not a grant. 
We are either taking over assets of the private sector, asking them to inject new capital and 
asking their own regular commercial bankers to provide some money as well. So this is very 
much  a  shared  responsibility.  One  should  expect  no  less  from  a  responsible,  caring,  and 
concerned government, acting as a good paterfamilias. 
* Private sector spokespersons are saying that you can’t save jobs and industries at 
the same time. Are these two considerations mutually exclusive? 
I would not wish to get involved in a narrow sectoral squabble; a two-cornered fight between 
le patronat and the trade unions, or a classic tri-partite debate. I understand the concern with 
lightening their wage bill which I suspect is what this argument is all about. For the country’s 
interest, we must make sure that once the crisis is behind us, Mauritius is in a position to pay 
its way internationally. To do that, we need to have exporters and investors and workers. Our 
exporters  must  be  able  to  export  at  internationally  competitive  prices.  Now  if  to  be 
internationally  competitive,  they  have  to  get  rid  of  some  of  their  labour,  that  is  a  business 
decision that the exporter must take. It’s not possible for us, at our level, to say to exporters 
that they must get rid of X% or Y% of their staff. Exporters must themselves decide what kind 
of staff and productivity level they require just as they decide what export markets to target, 
what specific niches or products or product ranges to zero in on …. As a general approach, I 
do not think that any government which is providing public money to shore up any sector in 
the face of a crisis will agree to provide a financial lifeline without asking further questions 
regarding staff being laid off and so forth. It will seem too much like coming to the help of the 
fat cats while the small fry are being laid off. We have to provide support across the board in 
an equitable manner, for what is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander.  
* What you are saying is that government must make sure that it not only supports the 
fat cats but also shelters the vulnerable members of the population from the adverse 
effects of the crisis? 
There  is  one  crucial  dimension  which  we  very  often  tend  to  forget  when  we  discuss  such 
issues of social support. In Mauritius we have a very extensive Welfare State, which we have 
preserved  in  the  face  of  sustained  attacks  from  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions  at  different 
points  in  time  when  they  have  tried  to  get  the  public  sector  to  back  down  on  provision  of 
universal healthcare or to restrict itself to primary health care only and to give up other parts 
of the health care system. They have also tried to get us to give up on our free education 
system,  on  universal  old-age  pension  and  all  this  because  it  was  not  in  keeping  with  one 
essential  tenet  of  the  Washington  Consensus:  Moins  d’Etat,  Mieux  d’Etat.  We  have 
maintained all these social support measures, which are lacking right now in the West. Today 
we are a tremendous increase in poverty levels in the United the States and in those parts of 
Europe  where  they  do  not  have  much  welfare  support.  So  whenever  we  address  social 
support issues, bear in mind that we have a huge social transfer budget. We tend to take this 
for granted. There is now an extra effort to be done in terms of trying to help the families that 
may be affected by job losses. I do not think anybody can guarantee that there will be no job 
losses. I think that there is no way for us to expect realistically that there will be no job losses 
BIS Review 46/2009 
 5
in Mauritius when our target markets are breaking new records of joblessness with each new 
batch of data releases. We must resign ourselves to the prospect of job losses, especially in 
the tourism sector and in the EPZ sector where orders are getting few. I hope that job losses 
will be limited in both numbers and duration and that they will be very much a measure of last 
resort. But if that were to happen, the Workfare Scheme, that is tailor-made for this kind of 
situation, will be of tremendous help for workers laid off during this transitional period. But we 
must also bear in mind that some of the people who are likely to be put on shorter working 
weeks  or  laid  off  may  have  other  commitments.  For  example,  they  may  themselves  be 
indebted to banks, and we must also try to persuade the same commercial banks that are 
coming  to  the  help  of  the  big  operators  to  try  to  apply  a  moratorium  or  standstill  on  loans 
given to the “ti-dimounes” in a spirit of solidarity. And this to ensure that the “ti-dimounes” as 
well may be able to survive until the end of the crisis.  
* We do not need to legislate for that to be possible? 
I think it is very difficult to legislate to tell somebody to love his neighbour – either you are 
disposed to do it and you don’t need any law to encourage you, or you are not disposed to 
do any such thing and it’s difficult to force you to do it by law. This is an area where the spirit 
of social solidarity beats the law hands down. We have been hearing a lot about corporate 
social responsibility …… it’s in the eating that we’ll see the proof of this particular pudding! 
Banks  have  a  symbiotic  relationship  with  their  clients,  whether  big  or  large;  they  have  no 
interest in driving their clients bankrupt. We have to find a way of surviving this crisis jointly 
so that banks can resume lending. An appeal to the bankers’ solidarity especially when their 
profit margins are still comfortable should do.  
*  You  expect  banks  to  love  their  neighbours  especially  that  they  are  making 
supernormal profits?  
Our banks  have  made  good profits and we have good reason to be happy about  it. If the 
banks  were  not  making  profits,  then  we  will  be  involved  as  taxpayers  in  recapitalising  the 
banks and possibly taking them over in the process. But what we ask right now  is for the 
banks not to allow the real economy and real sector operators to collapse. So prop up the 
real  economy  without  departing  too  much  from  market-based  lending  principles.  It  is  a 
temporary problem, it is a transitional difficulty and we must find flexible approaches that are 
reversible once the recovery is here – and, believe me, the recovery is coming. And all of us, 
government, employers, workers, and yes, bankers and your central bank, we have shared 
interest in ensuring that this incoming tide lifts our boat somewhat higher than others. How 
else can we preserve our lead on our competitors on the African continent and elsewhere. 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2009
