Jean-Claude Trichet: The ECB's response to the crisis 
Statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
European American Press Club, Paris, 20 February 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
Please allow me first of all to thank the European American Press Club for organising this 
event  and  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  the  financial 
turbulence. I will describe, in this context, the steps taken by the European Central Bank. 
I  had  the  pleasure  of  addressing  you  in  January  2005,  when  I  talked  about  the  euro’s 
successes  and  challenges.  Four  new  countries  have  since  joined  the  euro  area,  with  the 
result that 329 million citizens now share the same currency.  
The  financial  turbulence  intensified  significantly  in  September  of  last  year  and  has  quickly 
spread from the financial sector to the real economy. In sharing my thoughts on this subject, I 
will talk about the role of the operational framework of the Eurosystem, which comprises the 
European Central Bank and the national central banks of the euro area. I will describe the 
measures  implemented  by  the  European  Central  Bank  in  response  to  this  difficult  and 
unprecedented  situation,  and  I  will  stress  the  role  played  by  cooperation  between  central 
banks at the international level. 
The current turbulence poses a serious challenge to the financial system as a whole and to 
economic  policy-makers  and  regulatory  authorities  around  the  world.  Since  August  2007 
central bankers have sought to address the increased volatility and risk in financial markets. 
This  environment  deteriorated  considerably  in  September  and  October  of  last  year,  when 
several  market  sectors  effectively  closed  and  a  systemically  important  financial  institution 
went bankrupt. 
The primary objective of the European Central Bank is to maintain price stability (defined as 
price  increases  below,  but  close  to,  2%)  over  the  medium  term.  Achieving  this  objective 
involves  more  than  just  establishing  our  monetary  policy  stance  and  setting  key  interest 
rates.  Under  our  operational  framework,  we  also  implement  our  monetary  policy  by 
conducting  open  market  operations  with  a  view  to  steering  short-term  interest  rates  in  the 
interbank money market.  
Since the financial market turbulence began in August 2007, the Eurosystem’s open market 
operations have, in addition to steering short-term interest rates, also sought to ensure that 
solvent banks have continued access to liquidity. Our endeavours in this area have focused 
on helping to alleviate the tensions hampering the functioning of the money market.  
The Eurosystem’s “intermediation role” has grown significantly over the last five months. We 
are now providing – and this is quite exceptional – unlimited refinancing to the banks of the 
euro  area  for  maturities  ranging  from  one  week  to  six  months  in  exchange  for  eligible 
collateral. This measure was necessary in order to counter the increased tensions observed 
for the shortest maturities in the money market, where a sharp steepening of the yield curve 
had been observed for  unsecured loans. For instance, the spread between the unsecured 
three-month EURIBOR and the rate on overnight index swaps, which is normally extremely 
small at around 4-5 basis points, reached a historic 186 basis points in October 2008.  
I  would  now  like  to  describe  in  detail  the  means  by  which  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  has 
been implemented during the period of financial market turbulence, as such aspects are of 
considerable importance in the context of the current crisis. 
BIS Review 21/2009 
 1
The role of the Eurosystem’s operational framework during the period of financial 
market turbulence 
There is no doubt at all that the current turbulence represents the biggest challenge that the 
Eurosystem’s operational framework has had to face since it was established more than ten 
years  ago.  Recent  experience  has  shown  that  certain  structural  characteristics  of  our 
framework have played a decisive role in the stabilisation of short-term money market rates, 
thereby contributing to financial stability.  
• 
First, the fact that a large number of counterparties – hundreds of banks throughout 
the  euro  area  –  are  eligible  for  the  Eurosystem’s  refinancing  operations  and 
marginal lending facility allows liquidity to be provided to the wide range of banks 
that need it where the money market fails to function correctly. 
Second,  the  very  large  volume  of  our  refinancing  operations  has  allowed  the 
Eurosystem  to  provide  refinancing  to  eligible  counterparties  which  no  longer  have 
normal access to the interbank money market.  At the same time, the Eurosystem 
has continued to steer  liquidity in an appropriate manner in the course of reserve 
maintenance periods. 
Third,  the  fact  that,  since  the  creation  of  the  euro,  a  wide  variety  of  assets  have 
been accepted as eligible collateral in refinancing operations has allowed banks to 
obtain refinancing against those assets through the Eurosystem.  
Fourth, the Eurosystem’s operational framework has, since the creation of the euro, 
allowed financing to be provided to banks for several months (three months), which 
is not generally the case for other central banks.  
   The European Central Bank’s response to the financial crisis 
I will now look in greater detail at the various ways in which the European Central Bank has 
responded  to  the  financial  crisis,  the  rationale  underlying  those  actions  and  the  effects  of 
those  measures.  I  will  focus  on  the  means  by  which  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  has  been 
implemented, which are of vital importance in the light of the current crisis.  
The first phase of the turbulence  
During the first phase of the financial market turbulence, which ran from August 2007 to mid-
September  2008  and  was  characterised  by  a  systemic  shortage  of  liquidity,  the  ECB 
modified the technical procedures used for the supply of liquidity in normal times, using all of 
the  room  for  manoeuvre  provided  by  its  operational  framework  for  the  implementation  of 
monetary policy. 
• 
First,  the  Eurosystem  adjusted  the  distribution  of  liquidity  over  the  reserve 
maintenance  period,  providing  liquidity  earlier  than  in  normal  times.  Thus,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  reserve  maintenance  period we  systematically  allotted  liquidity in 
excess  of  the  theoretical  benchmark  amount  in  our  main  refinancing  operations, 
while  still  aiming  for  balanced  liquidity  conditions  at  the  end  of  the  maintenance 
period.  The  total  amount  of  liquidity  provided  in  the  course  of  the  maintenance 
period thereby remained unchanged. These measures sought to take account of the 
changing profile of banks’ demand for liquidity. 
Second,  the  Eurosystem  also  provided  the  banking  system  with  liquidity  through 
open  market  procedures,  which  had  rarely  been  used  –  if  at  all  –  prior  to  the 
turbulence.  Particularly  in  response  to  banks’  increased  demand  for  longer-term 
financing,  the  Eurosystem  extended  very  significantly  the  average  maturity  of  its 
lending to euro area banks. Consequently, with a view to leaving the total amount of 
BIS Review 21/2009
 2 
  outstanding  refinancing  unchanged,  the  amount  of  liquidity  provided  through  one-
week main refinancing operations was reduced accordingly.  
It is also important to note that international cooperation between central banks was 
strengthened at a very early stage through increased exchanges of information and 
the collective monitoring of market developments, and then, in mid-December 2007, 
through concerted measures in the implementation of monetary policy (which for the 
ECB  meant  providing  euro  area  banks  with  liquidity  in  US  dollars).  In  the  past, 
cooperation  between  central  banks  had  traditionally  concerned  the  area  of 
exchange rate policy. 
These  measures  allowed  the  Eurosystem  to  manage  the  tensions  observed  in  short-term 
interest rates, as well as having a positive effect on conditions in longer-term markets. 
The second phase of the turbulence  
However,  in  mid-September  2008  concerns  regarding  credit  risk  increased  significantly, 
tensions immediately spread from the United States to the euro area and the money market 
more or less stopped functioning. At that point, the Eurosystem intensified its actions with a 
view  to  allowing  solvent  banks  to  carry  out  their  activities.  As  a  result,  a  number  of 
unprecedented additional steps were taken.  
• 
Thus,  in  mid-October  the  ECB  took  the  quite  exceptional  step  of  adopting  a  fixed 
rate  tender  procedure  with  full  allotment  for  all  of  its  weekly  main  refinancing 
operations  and  its  longer-term  refinancing  operations  with  maturities  of  up  to  six 
months. This will remain in place for as long as is necessary given the situation in 
the markets.  
It also increased the number and frequency of longer-term refinancing operations, 
conducting three additional refinancing operations per month – two with a maturity of 
three months and one with a maturity of six months – and introducing a special-term 
refinancing  operation  with  a  maturity  corresponding  to  the  duration  of  the  reserve 
maintenance period. 
In parallel, the ECB implemented a new series of exceptional measures seeking to 
temporarily extend the list of assets eligible for use as collateral in Eurosystem credit 
operations. 
Finally, the ECB increased the US dollar financing provided to its counterparties by 
conducting  fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment  and  maturities  ranging 
from one week to three months through swap agreements concluded with the US 
Federal Reserve System. 
   These  measures,  which  reflect  the  very  significant  strengthening  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
intermediation  role  during  this  period  of  turbulence,  have  allowed  solvent  banks  continued 
access  to  liquidity  despite  the  dysfunctional  nature  of  the  money  market.  They  have  also 
helped  to  alleviate  the  tensions  observed  in  certain  sectors  of  the  money  market.  For 
example,  the  spread  between  unsecured  longer-term  EURIBOR  rates  and  the  rates  on 
overnight index swaps has declined considerably – although it remains elevated, significantly 
higher than the levels observed prior to September 2008. 
In practice, these measures allow euro area banks to obtain as much euro liquidity as they 
wish, whether through our weekly operations or our longer-term refinancing operations, using 
a wide range of assets as collateral. In total, the Eurosystem’s balance sheet rose by about 
EUR 600 billion since end-June 2007 and today, an increase of about 65%; with the assets 
reflecting the strong increase in the volume of liquidity provided and the liabilities reflecting 
banks’ concomitant recourse to the deposit facility. These measures have proved effective in 
overcoming  the  liquidity  shortage  in  the  interbank  market.  However,  they  cannot  eliminate 
the  increased  concerns  regarding  credit  risk.  In  this  regard,  the  conditions  in  the  money 
BIS Review 21/2009 
 3
market have not yet normalised and remain strongly affected by an elevated degree of risk 
aversion. 
The increase in the Eurosystem’s intermediation role has proved necessary in response to 
the current dysfunctional nature of the money market, but this cannot – and must not – be 
regarded as anything other than a temporary measure. The Eurosystem wishes, of course, to 
see a return to interbank lending and traditional intermediation activity by banks. The ECB’s 
recent decision to return to 200 basis points the corridor formed by the interest rates on the 
standing facilities either side of the rate on the main refinancing operations aims to stimulate 
interbank  activity.  In  this  respect,  we  are  observing  a  reduction  in  banks’  demand  for 
refinancing in our open market operations and a correlated decline in recourse to the deposit 
facility. In parallel, we are witnessing an increase in the volumes underlying the calculation of 
the EONIA.  
Cooperation between central banks 
Faced with the development of the financial market turbulence, central banks have already 
taken numerous steps to counter systemic liquidity risk, demonstrating their determination in 
this regard on numerous occasions. 
Since December 2007, the ECB, thanks to a swap agreement with the US Federal Reserve 
System,  has  been  providing  euro  area  banks  with  liquidity  in  US  dollars  in  exchange  for 
eligible collateral. 
This  exceptional  measure  seeks  to  alleviate  the  tensions  observed  in  short-term  funding 
markets. Since the launch of these operations, the range of maturities covered has grown 
and  the  amounts  allotted  have  increased,  with  financing  being  allotted  by  an  increasing 
number  of  central  banks.  As  regards  the  Eurosystem,  the  framework  for  this  facility  was 
extended  in  October  of  last  year  when  the  ECB  decided,  in  agreement  with  other  central 
banks,  to  offer  financing  in  US  dollars  at  various  maturities  by  means  of  fixed  rate  tender 
procedures  with  full  allotment.  Since  October  2008  the  ECB  has  also  provided  euro  area 
banks  with  liquidity  in  Swiss  francs  through  a  swap  agreement  concluded  with  the  Swiss 
National Bank.  
The financial turbulence has shown that, by stimulating confidence, particularly in periods of 
considerable uncertainty, cooperation between central banks in various areas can prove an 
effective response to both national and global challenges.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like in conclusion to say a few words about a most important 
question,  I  mean  confidence.  The  intensification  of  the  financial  crisis,  which  occurred  last 
September,  was  triggered  by  an  abrupt  loss  of  confidence  striking  simultaneously  the 
financial  system  as  well  as  the  real  economy,  the  industrialised  countries  as  well  as  the 
emerging economies. 
Improving confidence is one of the necessary conditions to overcome the present woes. The 
European  Central  Bank  and  its  Governing  Council  do  everything  which  is  possible  to 
preserve,  enhance,  strengthen  confidence.  More  than  ever  our  institution  has  to  be  an 
anchor  of  stability,  therefore  an  anchor  of  confidence,  in  these  uncharted  and  turbulent 
waters.  The  euro  area  and  our  329  million  fellow  citizens  can  count  on  the  ECB  and  the 
Eurosystem  to  take  the  necessary  decisions  whilst  having  always  in  mind  monetary  and 
financial stability as an aim in the medium and long term. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2009
