Ben S Bernanke: Four questions about the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia, 14 April 2009.  
 I  am  pleased  to  have  the  privilege  of  speaking  today  to  the  students  and  faculty  of 
Morehouse  College,  the  only  all-male  historically  black  institution  of  higher  learning  in  the 
United  States.  It  is  sufficient  to  note  that  Martin  Luther  King,  Jr.,  was  a  graduate  of 
Morehouse.  Yet  a  roster  of  distinguished  alumni  that  also  includes  former  Atlanta  Mayor 
Maynard  Jackson,  former  U.S.  Surgeon  General  David  Satcher,  and  filmmaker  Spike  Lee 
testifies to the success of your stated mission of "producing academically superior, morally 
conscious leaders for the conditions and issues of today."  
My remarks today will focus on the ongoing turmoil in financial markets and its consequence, 
the  global  economic  recession.  The  financial  crisis,  the  worst  since  the  Great  Depression, 
has severely affected the cost and availability of credit to both households and businesses. 
Credit is the lifeblood of market economies, and the damage to our economy resulting from 
the  constraints  on  the  flow  of  credit  has  already  been  extensive.  With  recent  job  losses 
exceeding  half  a  million  per  month,  this  year's  college  graduates  are  facing  the  toughest 
labor market in 25 years. In the communities in which you and I grew up, many families are 
trying to cope with lost employment and depleted savings or are facing foreclosure on their 
homes.  Firms  have  shut  factories  and  cancelled  construction  projects.  States  and 
municipalities are scrambling to find the funding to provide critical services. And although we 
naturally tend to be most aware of conditions in the United States, we should not overlook 
the  impact  that  the  crisis  is  having  virtually  everywhere  in  the  world,  particularly  on  many 
citizens of countries that struggle economically even when the global economy is doing well. 
In  the  midst  of  all  of  these  concerns,  many  Americans  have  recently  celebrated  Easter  or 
Passover. As you may know, a highlight of the traditional Passover meal occurs when the 
youngest child asks four questions, the answers to which tell the history of the Jews when 
they were slaves in Egypt and during their exodus to the Promised Land. In the spirit of the 
holiday, today I will pose and answer four important questions about the financial crisis. Of 
course, my answers will have to be brief, but we will have more time for additional questions 
at the conclusion of my prepared remarks. 
How did we get here? 
The first question I would like to address is: How did we get here? What caused our financial 
and economic system to break down to the extent it has? Not surprisingly, the answer to this 
question is complex, and experts disagree on how much weight to give various explanations. 
In my view, however, to tell the story fully – and, in particular, to understand its international 
scope  –  we  need  to  consider  how  global  patterns  of  saving  and  investment  have  evolved 
over the past decade or more, and how those changes affected credit markets in the United 
States and some other countries.  
At the most basic level, the role of banks and other financial institutions is to take the savings 
generated  by  households  and  businesses  and  put  them  to  use  by  making  loans  and 
investments.  For  example,  financial  institutions  use  the  funds  they  receive  from  savers  to 
provide loans that help families buy homes or allow businesses to finance inventories and 
payrolls. Financial markets, such as the stock and bond markets, perform a similar function, 
as when a firm raises funds for a new factory by selling a bond directly to investors. When 
the  financial  system  is  working  as  it  should,  it  allocates  funds  both  prudently  (that  is,  with 
proper attention to risk) and efficiently (to the most productive uses). 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 1
Importantly, in our global financial system, saving need not be generated in the country in 
which it is put to work but can come from foreign as well as domestic sources. In the past 10 
to 15 years, the United States and some other industrial countries have been the recipients 
of  a  great  deal  of  foreign  saving.  Much  of  this  foreign  saving  came  from  fast-growing 
emerging market countries in Asia and other places where consumption has lagged behind 
rising incomes, as well as from oil-exporting nations that could not profitably invest all their 
revenue at home and thus looked abroad for investment opportunities. Indeed, the net inflow 
of foreign saving to the United States, which was about 1-1/2 percent of our national output 
in 1995, reached about 6 percent of national output in 2006, an amount equal to about $825 
billion in today's dollars. 
Saving  inflows  from  abroad  can  be  beneficial  if  the  country  that  receives  those  inflows 
invests them well. Unfortunately, that was not always the case in the United States and some 
other countries. Financial institutions reacted to the surplus of available funds by competing 
aggressively  for  borrowers,  and,  in  the  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis,  credit  to  both 
households  and  businesses  became  relatively  cheap  and  easy  to  obtain.  One  important 
consequence was a housing boom in the United States, a boom that was fueled in large part 
by  a  rapid  expansion  of  mortgage  lending.  Unfortunately,  much  of  this  lending  was  poorly 
done,  involving,  for  example,  little  or  no  down  payment  by  the  borrower  or  insufficient 
consideration by the lender of the borrower's ability to make the monthly payments. Lenders 
may have become careless because they, like many people at the time, expected that house 
prices would continue to rise – thereby allowing borrowers to build up equity in their homes – 
and that credit would remain easily available, so that borrowers would be able to refinance if 
necessary. Regulators did not do enough to prevent poor lending, in part because many of 
the worst loans were made by firms subject to little or no federal regulation. 
Mortgage markets were not the only ones caught up in the credit boom. The large flows of 
global  saving  into  the  United  States  drove  down  the  returns  available  on  many  traditional 
long-term investments, such as Treasury bonds, leading investors to search for alternatives. 
To  satisfy  the  enormous  demand  for  investments  both  perceived  as  safe  and  promising 
higher returns, the financial industry designed securities that combined many individual loans 
in  complex,  hard-to-understand  ways.  These  new  securities  later  proved  to  involve 
substantial risks – risks that neither the investors nor the firms that designed the securities 
adequately understood at the outset. 
The  credit  boom  began  to  unravel  in  early  2007  when  problems  surfaced  with  subprime 
mortgages – mortgages offered to less-creditworthy borrowers – and house prices in parts of 
the  country  began  to  fall.  Mortgage  delinquencies  and  defaults  rose,  and  the  downturn  in 
house prices intensified, trends that continue today. Investors, stunned by losses on assets 
they had believed to be safe, began to pull back from a wide range of credit markets, and 
financial institutions – reeling from severe losses on mortgages and other loans – cut back 
their lending. The crisis deepened last September, when the failure or near-failure of several 
major financial firms caused many financial and credit markets to freeze up. Stock prices fell 
sharply  as  investors  lost  confidence  in  the  financial  sector  and  became  gloomy  about 
economic prospects. Declining stock values, a teetering financial system, and difficulties in 
obtaining credit triggered a remarkably rapid and deep contraction in global economic activity 
and employment, a contraction that has persisted through the first months of 2009. Both the 
ongoing financial crisis and economic contraction have posed major challenges to economic 
policymakers. 
What is the Fed doing to address the situation? 
Those  challenges  bring  me  to  my  second  question:  What  has  the  Federal  Reserve  been 
doing to address the economic and financial crisis? 
The Fed's mandate from the Congress is to promote maximum sustainable employment and 
stable prices. In addition, the Fed is expected to contribute to financial stability by acting to 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2009
contain financial disruptions and prevent their spread outside of the financial sector. Thus, 
we have been serving as a first responder to the crisis.  
The  Fed's  basic  policy  tool  for  influencing  economic  activity  and  inflation  is  its  ability  to 
control very short-term interest rates – specifically, the federal funds rate, which is the rate 
that banks pay each other for overnight loans. Lower interest rates can be used to stimulate 
private-sector  borrowing  and  spending  at  times  like  the  present  when  the  economy  is 
suffering from a lack of demand. In September 2007, shortly after the turbulence in financial 
markets began and signs of economic weakness started to appear, the Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC), the body that determines the Federal Reserve's monetary policy, began 
to aggressively reduce the federal funds rate. By the spring of 2008, we had cut that interest 
rate  from  5-1/4  percent  to  2  percent,  a  highly  proactive  policy  that  helped  to  cushion  the 
economy from some of the effects of the financial turmoil. But, as I mentioned a moment ago, 
the  intensification  of  the  financial  crisis  in  the  fall  of  2008  led  to  a  further  significant 
deterioration  in  the  economic  outlook.  The  FOMC  responded  with  additional  interest  rate 
cuts, and since December, our policy interest rate has been essentially zero. In addition, the 
FOMC  has  made  clear  that  it  expects  economic  conditions  to  warrant  holding  the  federal 
funds rate low for an extended period. 
However, given the ongoing problems in credit markets, conventional monetary policy alone 
is not adequate to provide all the support that the economy needs. The Fed has therefore 
taken a number of steps to help the economy by unclogging the flow of credit to households 
and  businesses.  In  doing  so,  we  have  demonstrated  that  the  Fed's  toolkit  remains  potent, 
even though the federal funds rate is close to zero and thus cannot be reduced further. 
We have taken a wide range of actions to help restore the flow of credit, of which I will only 
mention a few of the most important. One set of actions involves making short-term loans to 
banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  Banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries  normally 
make longer-term commitments – such as residential mortgages and business loans – yet 
rely  on  funding  that  may  be  relatively  short-term,  such  as  customer  deposits  that  can  be 
withdrawn  at  any  time.  To  have  the  confidence  to  commit  to  longer-term  loans  and 
investments,  banks  must  be  sure  that  they  will  have  ample  access  to  funding  when 
necessary. To give this assurance to banks, the Federal Reserve has made clear that it will 
provide  short-term  credit  to  sound  financial  institutions  as  needed.  Indeed,  serving  as  a 
lender  of  last  resort  to  financial  institutions  is  a  method  that  central  banks  have  used  for 
centuries to try to calm financial crises. 
To underscore our commitment to providing short-term funding to banks when they need it, 
we have lowered the interest rate we charge for short-term loans and extended the term of 
the loans to up to three months. We have also begun to auction funds to financial institutions, 
thereby  allowing  the  interest  rate paid  to  depend  on  the  level  of  demand.  Importantly,  this 
lending is extremely safe from the point of view of both the Fed and the taxpayer. Not only is 
our lending short-term and restricted to healthy institutions, but we require that the borrowers 
pledge, as security, collateral whose value exceeds the amount we are lending. The Fed's 
lending  to  financial  institutions  has  helped  to  ease  conditions  in  a  number  of  key  financial 
markets, reduced important benchmark interest rates (such as the London interbank offered 
rate, or Libor, to which payments on some mortgages and other types of loans are tied), and 
increased the willingness of banks to make credit available. 
A second strategy the Fed has employed is to use targeted lending to help free up critical 
credit  markets  outside  of  the  banking  system.  A  good  example  of  targeted  lending  is  our 
efforts  in  the  commercial  paper  market.  Commercial  paper  is  a  form  of  short-term  debt 
issued  by  a  variety  of  businesses  to  finance  their  operations;  paychecks  and  payments  to 
suppliers  can  depend  on  it.  Among  the  largest  investors  in  commercial  paper  are  money 
market  mutual  funds.  At  the  peak  of  the  crisis  last  fall,  many  people  who  had  invested  in 
money market mutual funds lost confidence in those funds and withdrew their money; this 
loss of funding forced money market mutual funds to reduce their own investments, which in 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 3
turn caused serious problems in the commercial paper market. Through a series of lending 
programs, and in coordination with steps taken by the Treasury, the Federal Reserve helped 
restore  confidence  in  both  money  market  mutual  funds  and  the  commercial  paper  market. 
Over time, withdrawals from money market mutual funds have been replaced by modest net 
inflows, and borrowers in the commercial paper market have seen significant improvements 
in the cost and availability of funding.  
More  recently,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  also  initiated  a  lending  program,  with  the 
cooperation of the Treasury, designed to free up the flow of credit to households and small 
businesses. Among the forms of credit on which the program is currently focused are auto 
loans,  credit  card  loans,  student  loans,  and  loans  guaranteed  by  the  Small  Business 
Administration. We are currently reviewing other types of credit for possible inclusion in this 
program. In all cases, we will be taking the appropriate measures to minimize the risk of loss 
to the Federal Reserve. 
Restoring stability to the market for housing and home mortgages has been a particular area 
of  concern.  To  address  this  problem,  the  Fed  has  employed  a  third  type  of  policy  tool  – 
namely, buying securities in the open market. The FOMC has approved purchases of well 
over  $1  trillion  this  year  of  mortgage-related  securities  guaranteed  by  the  government-
sponsored  mortgage  companies,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac.  Buying  mortgage-related 
securities  helps  to  drive  down  the  interest  rates  that  consumers  pay  on  mortgages,  and, 
indeed, the rate on a traditional 30-year fixed-rate mortgage has recently fallen to less than 5 
percent, the lowest level since the 1940s. Certainly, the housing market remains depressed, 
but lower interest rates and house prices are making houses more affordable. For example, 
two years ago, when mortgage rates were higher than 6 percent, payments on a mortgage 
covering 80 percent of the cost of a $215,000 home would have been more than $1,000 per 
month;  today,  the  price  of  that  same  house  may  have  fallen  to  $170,000,  and,  at  today's 
mortgage interest rates, the monthly payment would be about $700. Lower mortgage rates 
are  also  helping  some  homeowners  refinance  their  mortgages  to  reduce  their  monthly 
payments.  
The Federal Reserve will continue to take the necessary steps to unclog the credit markets 
and strengthen the economy. We will also continue to work closely with other agencies, such 
as the Treasury and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), each of which has 
also taken a variety of actions to help stabilize financial markets, as well as with other central 
banks around the world.  
Does the Fed's aggressive response risk inflation down the road? 
The  multifaceted  policy  response  that  I've  described  has  been  aggressive.  I  am  confident 
that  such  a  proactive  policy  response  is  well  justified  by  the  serious  ongoing  problems  in 
financial  markets  and  the  economy.  However,  some  have  raised  the  third  question  I  will 
address:  Could  the  Fed's  aggressive  actions  to  stabilize  the  economy  today  lead  to  an 
inflation problem down the road? 
I mentioned earlier that the Fed's mandate from the Congress is to foster price stability as 
well as maximum sustainable employment. The FOMC treats its obligation to ensure price 
stability extremely seriously. Price stability supports healthy economic growth, for example, 
by making it easier for households and businesses to plan for the future. In practice, price 
stability does not require that inflation be literally zero; indeed, although inflation can certainly 
be too high, it can also be too low. Experience suggests that inflation rates that are close to 
zero  or  even  negative  (corresponding  to  deflation,  or  falling  prices)  can  at  times  be 
associated with poor economic performance. Cases in point include the United States in the 
1930s and the more recent experience of Japan. In their latest quarterly projections of the 
economy,  most  members  of  the  FOMC  indicated  that  they  would  like  to  see  an  annual 
inflation rate of about 2 percent in the longer term. Right now, because of the weakness in 
economic conditions here and around the world, inflation has been running less than that, 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2009
and  our  best  forecast  is  that  inflation  will  remain  quite  low  for  some  time.  Thus,  the  Fed's 
proactive  policy  approach  is  not  at  all  inconsistent  with  the  goal  of  price  stability  in  the 
medium term. 
Although inflation seems set to be low for a while, the time will come when the economy has 
begun to strengthen, financial markets are healing, and the demand for goods and services, 
which is currently very weak, begins to increase again. At that point, the liquidity that the Fed 
has put into the system could begin to pose an inflationary threat unless the FOMC acts to 
remove some of that liquidity and raise the federal funds rate. We have a number of effective 
tools  that  will  allow  us  to  drain  excess  liquidity  and  begin to  raise  rates  at  the  appropriate 
time; that said, unwinding or scaling down some of our special lending programs will almost 
certainly  have  to  be  part  of  our  strategy  for  reducing  policy  stimulus  once  the  recovery  is 
under way.  
We are thinking carefully about these issues; indeed, they have occupied a significant portion 
of recent FOMC meetings. I can assure you that monetary policy makers are fully committed 
to  acting  as  needed  to  withdraw  on  a  timely  basis  the  extraordinary  support  now  being 
provided to the economy, and we are confident in our ability to do so. To be sure, decisions 
about  when  and  how  quickly  to  proceed  will  require  a  careful  balancing  of  the  risk  of 
withdrawing  support  before  the  recovery  is  firmly  established  versus  the  risk  of  allowing 
inflation to rise above its preferred level in the medium term. However, this delicate balancing 
of risks is a challenge that central banks face in the early stages of every economic recovery. 
I believe that we are well equipped to make those judgments appropriately. In addition, when 
the time comes, our ability to clearly communicate our policy goals and our assessment of 
the outlook will be crucial to minimizing public uncertainty about our policy decisions. 
Why did the Fed and the Treasury act to prevent the bankruptcy of some major 
financial firms? 
The final question is as difficult as it is important: Why did the Fed and the Treasury act to 
prevent  the  bankruptcy  of  some  major  financial  firms,  such  as  the  investment  bank  Bear 
Stearns and the insurance company American International Group, or AIG? We must answer 
that  question  not  only  because  the decisions  have  been  controversial,  but  also  because it 
bears on the steps we need to take as a country if we are to avert a repetition of the crisis. 
As  a  general  rule,  my  strong  preference  is  that  any  firm  that  cannot  meet  its  obligations 
should bear the consequences of the marketplace. But recent circumstances have been truly 
extraordinary.  Consider  the  situation  on  September  16  of  last  year,  when  the  insurance 
conglomerate AIG faced pressures that threatened to force it imminently into bankruptcy. At 
that time, the strains in the global financial system were unprecedented and extreme, and the 
confidence of financial market participants in the system was rapidly eroding. The investment 
bank  Lehman  Brothers  had  filed  for  bankruptcy  the  day  before,  and  the  mortgage  giants 
Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  after  suffering  losses  that  threatened  their  solvency,  had 
effectively been taken over by the government just two weeks earlier. As waves of panic and 
fear washed over the markets, the Fed and the Treasury became very concerned about the 
stability of a number of other major financial firms. 
Large,  complex  financial  institutions  tend  to  be  highly  interconnected  with  other  firms  and 
markets, and AIG was more interconnected than most. For example, AIG had insured many 
billions of dollars of loans and securities held by banks around the world, and its failure would 
have  rendered  those  insurance  contracts  worthless,  imposing  large  losses  on  the  global 
banking  system.  In  addition,  banks  had  extended  more  than  $50  billion  in  credit  to  the 
company,  much  of  which  would  have  been  lost.  Many  other  serious  consequences  would 
have followed from a default by AIG: Insurance policyholders would have faced considerable 
uncertainty  about  the  status  of  their  policies;  state  and  local  governments,  which  had  lent 
more than $10 billion to AIG, would have suffered losses; workers whose 401(k) plans had 
purchased $40 billion of insurance from AIG against the risk of loss would have seen that 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 5
insurance disappear; and holders of AIG's substantial quantities of commercial paper would 
have also borne serious losses. 
But much more important, the disorderly failure of AIG would have put at risk not only the 
company's  own  customers  and  creditors  but  the  entire  global  financial  system.  Historical 
experience shows that, once begun, a financial panic can spread rapidly and unpredictably; 
indeed,  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  a  day  earlier,  which  the  Fed  and  the  Treasury 
unsuccessfully tried to prevent, resulted in the freezing up of a wide range of credit markets, 
with  extremely  serious  consequences  for  the  world  economy.  The  financial  and  economic 
risks posed by a collapse of AIG would have been at least as great as those created by the 
demise of Lehman. In the case of AIG, financial market participants were keenly aware that 
many major financial institutions around the world were insured by or had lent funds to the 
company.  The  company's  failure  would  thus  likely  have  led  to  a  further  sharp  decline  in 
confidence in the global banking system and possibly to the collapse of other major financial 
institutions.  At  best,  the  consequences  of  AIG's  failure  would  have  been  a  significant 
intensification  of  an  already  severe  financial  crisis  and  a  further  worsening  of  economic 
conditions.  Conceivably,  its  failure  could  have  triggered  a  1930s-style  global  financial  and 
economic meltdown, with catastrophic implications for production, incomes, and jobs. 
The Federal Reserve and the Treasury agreed that in the environment then prevailing, AIG's 
failure  would  have  posed  unacceptable  risks  for  the  global  financial  system  and  for  our 
economy.  Accordingly,  the  Federal Reserve,  with  the  full  support  of  the  Treasury,  made  a 
loan  to  AIG  to  prevent  its  failure.  The  loan  imposed  tough  terms;  in  addition,  senior 
management was replaced, and shareholders lost almost all of their investments. However, 
because the firm avoided a declaration of bankruptcy, creditors of AIG were protected. 
In my view, preventing the failure of AIG was the best of the very bad options available, but it 
nevertheless  involved  major  costs,  including  financial  risks  to  the  taxpayer.  The  American 
people also quite correctly see as unfair that AIG was saved from bankruptcy because of the 
dangers  to  the  system  that  its  failure  would  have  posed,  even  as  many  other  companies, 
including  nonfinancial  and  smaller  financial  firms,  have  not  received  the  same  treatment. 
Allowing  AIG  to  at  least  partly  avoid  the  discipline  of  the  marketplace  also  sets  a  bad 
precedent. 
For these reasons, it is essential that we make changes to the financial rules of the game to 
prevent a similar episode from occurring in the future. First, we must ensure that all types of 
financial institutions, especially large and interconnected ones like AIG, receive strong and 
effective  government  oversight.  AIG's  regulatory  oversight  was  limited,  which  allowed  it  to 
take dangerous risks largely out of sight of federal regulators.  
Second, the AIG experience demonstrates that federal regulators urgently need a new set of 
procedures for dealing with a complex, systemically important financial institution on the brink 
of failure. Such rules already exists for banks: If a bank approaches insolvency, the FDIC is 
empowered  to  intervene  as  needed  to  protect  depositors,  sell  the  bank's  assets,  and  take 
any necessary steps to prevent broader consequences to the financial system. However, for 
an insurance conglomerate like AIG, or for a large financial holding company that owns many 
subsidiary  companies,  these  rules  do  not  apply.  Among  other  things,  a  good  system  for 
resolving  nonbank  financial  institutions  would  allow  federal  regulators  to  unwind  a  failing 
company in ways that minimize disruptions in financial markets. An effective regime would 
also provide the authorities greater latitude to negotiate with creditors and to modify contracts 
entered into by the company, including contracts that set bonuses and other compensation 
for  management.  More  generally,  we  need  significant  reforms  to  financial  regulation  and 
financial  practices  that  will  reduce  the  risk  of  future  financial  crises  like  the  one  we  are 
currently experiencing. The Federal Reserve strongly supports such reform efforts. 
6 
 BIS Review 45/2009
Conclusion 
The  current  crisis  has  been  one  of  the  most  difficult  financial  and  economic  episodes  in 
modern history. Recently we have seen tentative signs that the sharp decline in economic 
activity may be slowing, for example, in data on home sales, homebuilding, and consumer 
spending, including sales  of  new  motor  vehicles.  A  leveling  out  of  economic  activity  is  the 
first  step  toward  recovery.  To  be  sure,  we  will  not  have  a  sustainable  recovery  without  a 
stabilization of our financial system and credit markets. We are making progress on that front 
as well, and the Federal Reserve is committed to working to restore financial stability as a 
necessary step toward full economic recovery.  
I  am  fundamentally  optimistic  about  our  economy.  Among  its  many  intrinsic  strengths  are 
universities  and  colleges  like  Morehouse,  which  help  talented  students  gain  not  only  a 
command of a body of knowledge but also the capacity to think creatively and independently. 
Institutions like this one train the professionals, entrepreneurs, and leaders who will shape 
our economy in the future. Today's economic conditions are difficult, but the foundations of 
our  economy  are  strong,  and  we  face  no  problems  that  cannot  be  overcome  with  insight, 
patience,  and  persistence.  The  Federal  Reserve  will  certainly  do  its  part  to  help  restore 
prosperity and opportunity to our economy. 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 7
