Lars E O Svensson: Monetary policy with a zero interest rate 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  SNS  – 
Centre for Business and Policy Studies, Stockholm, 17 February 2009. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Sveriges 
Riksbank’s website. 
 The Riksbank conducts a policy of flexible inflation targeting, which aims to stabilise inflation 
around  the  inflation  target  and  also  to  stabilise  the  real  economy.  To  achieve  this,  the 
Riksbank sets the repo rate and publishes a forecast for the repo rate in the years ahead. 
The  repo  rate  and  the expectations  of  future  repo  rates  that  arise from  the  repo rate  path 
affect market interest rates, which in turn affect aggregate demand and inflation. During the 
financial crisis, the functioning of the financial markets has deteriorated and the transmission 
mechanism from the repo rate path to inflation and the real economy has weakened. In order 
to improve the functioning of the financial markets and strengthen the link between the repo 
rate path, market rates, inflation and the real economy, the Riksbank has taken a number of 
special measures.1  
Although the discussion of monetary policy often focuses on the repo rate and the repo rate 
path, it is important to realise that it is the real interest rate and the real repo rate path that 
mainly  affect  aggregate  demand,  not  nominal  interest  rates.  The  real  interest  rate  is  the 
nominal interest rate minus expected inflation. When the Riksbank cuts the repo rate the real 
repo rate also normally falls as inflation expectations are normally sluggish. In a situation with 
very weak aggregate demand, a low level of resource utilisation and low inflation a low and 
perhaps even a negative real interest rate is required to stimulate the real economy and thus, 
as  far  as  possible,  stabilise  inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and  resource  utilisation 
around a normal level. The Riksbank cannot, however, cut the repo rate more than to zero. 
But even if the repo rate is set at zero, the real interest rate may be too high to have the 
desired stimulation effect on the real economy. In such a situation monetary policy faces a 
binding  zero  lower  bound  for  the  interest  rate.  The  major  question  is  then  how  monetary 
policy should be conducted, to avoid a binding zero lower bound and to escape from such a 
situation by using means other than lowering the interest rate. 
Why  is  it  not  possible  to  reduce  the  nominal  interest  rate  below  zero?  The  reason  is  that 
money in the form of banknotes and coins yields a zero interest rate. If the interest rates for 
various accounts and securities such as Treasury bills and bonds were to become negative, 
households,  firms  and  authorities  would  prefer  to  retain  cash  in  the  form  of  banknotes 
instead  of  lending  it  or  depositing  it.  With  a  zero  interest  rate,  households,  firms  and 
authorities become indifferent about the choice of whether to hold securities such as treasury 
bills and bonds or to hold cash.2 A so-called open market operation in which the central bank 
increases the monetary base and thus liquidity by buying treasury bills and bonds and paying 
with cash, then becomes ineffective in the sense that the interest rate is still zero and the 
only thing that happens is that households, firms and authorities hold more cash and fewer 
Treasury  bills  and  bonds.  A  situation  with  a  zero  interest  rate  is  therefore  also  called  a 
liquidity trap. 
The issue of monetary policy when the interest rate is zero has become topical again. Since 
the autumn of last year, the outlook for the global economy has deteriorated further. At the 
same time as forecasts for inflation and growth have been revised downwards, policy rates 
                                                 
1   For more information on these measures, see www.riksbank.se. 
2   This applies when the amount of cash held does not fall below the level needed for transaction purposes. 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 1
have  been  lowered  and  are  now  approaching  zero  in  several  countries.  In  December  last 
year, the Federal Reserve, for example, cut its policy rate to an interval between 0–0.25 per 
cent, while in Japan the policy rate is 0.1 per cent and in Switzerland 0.5 per cent.  
Inflation throughout the world is also falling rapidly. It is possible that the level of inflation can 
become negative and that we will thus see deflation in some countries. Deflation for a short 
period is not a major problem. We even had this in Sweden a few years ago. But if deflation 
is prolonged, and especially if inflation expectations fall and deflation expectations arise, the 
situation can become very problematic. The combination of very low policy rates, a weak real 
economy and the risk of deflation has thus revived the debate about how monetary policy 
can and should be conducted in the event of a zero interest rate bound. 
In  the  1990s,  Japan  experienced  a  long  period  with  a  zero  interest  rate,  deflation  and, 
compared with previous decades, weak real economic development. The experience gained 
in Japan has stimulated extensive discussion and a great deal of research at universities and 
central banks on monetary policy in connection with a zero interest rate bound. At Princeton 
University,  Ben  Bernanke,  Paul  Krugman  and  I  conducted  research  on  this  subject.3  The 
Japanese  experience  and  the  research  conducted  on  monetary  policy  with  a  zero  interest 
rate are now topical again. 
For Sweden, a scenario with deflation and a zero interest rate is as yet not particularly likely. 
However, at the Riksbank we must of course be prepared for all eventualities and consider 
what measures would be possible and appropriate in such a situation. We must also think 
about  how  we  can  minimise  the  risk  of  ending  up  in  such  a  situation.  Many  observers 
criticised  the  Japanese  central  bank  for  having  reacted  far  too  slowly  and  for  being  too 
cautious about testing various methods to escape from their liquidity trap. I believe that we at 
the Riksbank should be prepared with analyses and measures at an early stage. Today I will 
therefore address the problem that a situation with a zero interest rate represents and the 
possible alternative solutions. I will, among other things, discuss a price level target and a 
method that in my research I have called the “Foolproof Way” of escaping from a liquidity 
trap.  Finally,  I  summarise  how  effective  the  alternatives  may  be  and  how  they  can  be 
selected depending on how serious the situation with a zero lower bound for the interest rate 
is deemed to be. 
In  a  situation  with  a  zero  lower  bound  for  the  interest  rate,  fiscal  policy  acquires  a  very 
important role. How effectively an expansionary fiscal policy can stimulate the real economy 
is,  however,  dependent  on  a  number  of  factors,  for  example  the  degree  of  Ricardian 
equivalence – that is the extent to which a reduction in public saving gives rise to increased 
private saving. The initial size of the national debt, the structure of public expenditure and the 
distribution  between  expenditure  increases  and  tax  reductions  in  the  national  budget  may 
also be decisive for the impact of fiscal policy on the real economy. Here, however, I only 
discuss monetary policy alternatives in the event of a zero interest rate. 
The problem: real interest rate too high 
I have already said that, in the case of a binding zero lower bound for the interest rate, the 
real interest rate is too high compared to the level appropriate to stabilise inflation around the 
inflation target and at the same time stabilise the real economy. To be precise, it is the real 
market rate, that is the market rate met by households and firms minus expected inflation, 
that is too high. The market rate exceeds the repo rate with a spread that is determined by 
                                                 
3   See  Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2003),  "Escaping  from  a  Liquidity  Trap  and  Deflation:  The  Foolproof  Way  and 
Others,"  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  17(4),  145-166,  for  literature  references  and  a  review  of  this 
research. My own contribution to this research can be found on my website, www.princeton.edu/svensson. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2009
 = Nominal market rate – expected inflation 
 = Repo rate + spread – expected inflation.  
various  risk  and  liquidity  premia.  This  spread  is  now  unusually  large  due  to  the  financial 
crisis. This means that the market rates are positive even if the repo rate is zero.  
With some simplification, the real market rate can be specified as: 
Real market rate 
 
Even if the repo rate is reduced to zero, the real market rate can be too high, because the 
spread is large and/or because the expected inflation is low.4
The  real  market  interest  rate  can  thus  be  lowered,  if  the  spread  can  be  reduced.  The 
measures  implemented  by  the  central  banks  and  other  authorities  in  various  countries  to 
improve the functioning of the financial markets, what Ben Bernanke calls "credit easing",5 
can  reduce  the  spread  and  thus  contribute  to  a  lower  market  rate.  However,  even  if  the 
various  spreads  are  still  larger  than  normal,  it  is,  quantitatively  probably  only  a  rather 
moderate reduction of the real market rate that is possible in this way. The really substantial 
effect on the real market rate can instead be achieved if inflation expectations can be raised.  
It is particularly dangerous if, instead, expectations of deflation arise, that is expectations of 
negative  inflation.  The  real  interest  rate  may  then  become  far  too  high.  A  nightmare  for 
central  banks  is  a  downward  spiral,  in  which  a  too  high  real  interest  rate  slows  down  the 
economy and leads to increasing deflation and expectations of decreasing inflation, which in 
turn lead to a still higher real interest rate that slows down the real economy even more and 
leads to even greater deflation.  
With  a  zero  lower  bound  it  is  therefore  important  for  the  central  banks  to  affect  and  raise 
inflation expectations in some way. How this should be done is the real problem with a zero 
lower bound for the interest rate bound and a liquidity trap. It may even be necessary to raise 
inflation expectations above the inflation target for a while in order to achieve a sufficiently 
low real interest rate. This means that the central bank must get people to believe that it will 
knowingly and deliberately strive to exceed the inflation target. How can a central bank that 
normally  strives  to  create  low  inflation  expectations  and  meet  the  inflation  target  promise, 
with any credibility, that it will exceed the inflation target in the future?6
When we discuss and evaluate various policy alternatives for monetary policy in a liquidity 
trap, we should thus start from the most important criteria for assessing their effectiveness – 
how effective alternatives will be in affecting inflation expectations.  
The solution: affect inflation expectations 
A credible inflation target 
An established and credible inflation target above zero and a transparent monetary policy will 
help  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  do  not  fall  too  low  and  to  reduce  the  risk  of 
expectations of deflation arising. The Riksbank has a major advantage in this respect in that 
we already have a well-established inflation target. By publishing well-founded forecasts for 
                                                 
4   The appendix to this speech shows, in a simple so-called new-Keynesian model, how the output gap depends 
on expectations regarding the repo rate path, the spreads, the future price level and the path for the natural 
interest rate; see equations (6) and (7). 
5   See Bernanke, Ben (2009), “The crisis and the policy response”, speech at the Stamp Lecture, London School 
of Economics, January 13, 2009, www.federalreserve.gov. 
6   As Paul Krugman put it in his insightful Brookings essay – how will the central bank "credibly promise to be 
irresponsible”. Krugman, Paul R. (1998). “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap”. 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 49, 137-206. 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 3
inflation,  the  real  economy  and  the  repo  rate,  the  central  bank  can  affect  expectations  of 
inflation and future repo rates. Even if the real economy becomes weak and inflation low or 
even negative in the short term, the central bank can, with a good and convincing analysis, 
present  forecasts  in  which  inflation  returns  to  the  inflation  target  and  the  real  economy 
stabilises.  This  means,  all  in  all,  that  the  central  bank's  forecasts  and  scenarios constitute 
central tools in the effort to influence inflation expectations. Central banks that already have 
well-established  numerical  inflation  targets  may  therefore  find  it  easier  to  hold  up  inflation 
expectations and create credibility for their policy. In countries that do not have a numerical 
inflation target it may be good to introduce such a target in a situation with a binding zero 
lower  bound  for  the  interest  rate,  although  it  would  of  course  have  been  better  to  already 
have the inflation target established and credible before ending up in such a situation.  
Inflation targets do, however, have a disadvantage . Following a period of unwelcome low 
inflation below the inflation target, inflation targeting entails, as it is usually applied, that the 
central bank subsequently seeks to maintain a level of inflation in line with the target. The 
central  bank  does  not  thus  attempt  to  compensate  for  the  previously  low  inflation  with  a 
period  of  inflation  above  the  target.  If  firms  and  households  consequently  believe  that 
inflation will be very low in the short term and thereafter equal to the inflation target, then the 
average expectations in the slightly longer term will still be low and under the target. In such 
circumstances, with a zero interest rate, the real interest rate may still be too high even if the 
inflation target is credible in the longer term. One way to avoid this disadvantage is instead to 
have  a  so-called  price  level  target,  or  what  may  also  be  referred  to  as  “average  inflation 
targeting”. 
A credible price level target 
A price level target in the form of a path for the price level, in which the rate of increase in the 
price level is given by the inflation target, has several advantages compared with a standard 
inflation target in a situation with a zero interest rate. Unlike an inflation target, a price level 
target has a “memory” in the sense that lower inflation or deflation during a period of time 
whereby  prices  fall  below  the  target  path  will  be  compensated  for  by  a  correspondingly 
higher inflation in a later period to attain the price level target path once again. If the price 
level target is credible, the long-term inflation expectations will be stable, even if low inflation 
or deflation is expected in the short term. If prices have already fallen below the price level 
target,  a  credible  price  level  target  will  lead  to  short-term  expectations  of  inflation  rising 
above the long-term average. With an unchanged nominal rate the real interest rate will then 
fall and the real economy will be stimulated. A credible price level target will thus entail an 
inherent automatic stabilisation in a situation with a zero interest rate.7 A price-level target 
can  be  seen  as  an  average  inflation  target  for  a  longer  period  of  time,  for  instance  five 
years.8
In a case where there is a risk that inflation will be too low, or even negative, for a couple of 
years  it  may  be  appropriate,  in  order  to  avoid  the  disadvantage  with  a  standard  inflation 
target that I mentioned above, to tighten the inflation target and temporarily interpret it as a 
target of 2 per cent for average inflation over the next five years, for example. This would 
mean that the central bank would then compensate for low inflation during the first years with 
higher  inflation  in  the  subsequent  years  so  that  the  five-year  average  is  on  target.  The 
Australian central bank, the Reserve Bank of Australia, actually formulates its target in this 
                                                 
7   For a few years beginning in 1931 the Riksbank had a price level target, after leaving the gold standard. To 
date, the Riksbank is the only central bank in the world to have had an explicit price level target. See Berg, 
Claes,  och  Jonung,  Lars  (1999),  "Pioneering  price  level  targeting:  The  Swedish  experience  1931-1937," 
Journal of Monetary Economics 43(3), 525-551. 
8   See Nessén, M. and Vestin, D. (2005). ”Average inflation targeting”. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking. v. 
37, iss. 5, pp. 837-63. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2009
way: "[T]he appropriate target for monetary policy is to achieve an inflation rate of 2-3 per 
cent on average over the cycle".9 If the central bank by means of convincing analyses and 
forecasts can gain credibility for such a temporary price level target – a temporary average 
inflation target – the price level target's inherent stabilisation of the real economy could then 
be used.10
Observe inflation and price level expectations – the exchange rate as an indicator 
As  expectations  of  the  future  inflation  rate  and  the  price  level  are  so  important  to  the 
development  of  the  real  interest  rate  in  the  event  of  a  binding  zero  lower  bound  for  the 
interest rate, it becomes even more important to observe and measure these expectations. 
There are several ways for a central bank to observe expectations of the future price level. 
The  Riksbank,  for  example,  commissions  Prospera  to  conduct  quarterly  surveys  about 
expectations for inflation one, two and five years ahead. Inflation expectations can also be 
estimated by comparing market rates for nominal and indexed bonds. In this way, the central 
bank can observe whether measures taken to influence inflation expectations are having any 
effect. 
When  the  interest  rate  is  zero  the  exchange  rate  becomes  an  interesting  indicator  of 
expectations  of  the  future  price  level.  According  to  the  interest  rate  parity  condition,  the 
current  exchange  rate  is  determined  by  the  expected  future  exchange  rate,  current  and 
expected  future  interest  rate  differentials  between  domestic  and  foreign  interest  rates  and 
expected  future  currency  risk  premia.  The  future  exchange  rate  depends  on  future  price 
level, the future real exchange rate and future foreign price level. For exchange rates and 
price levels expressed in logarithms we can specify the following relation: 
Current exchange rate 
= Expected future (exchange rate – interest rate differential + foreign exchange risk premium) 
= Expected future (price level + real exchange rate – foreign price level – interest rate differential + 
foreign exchange risk premium) 
With  an  expected  future  domestic  interest  rate  that  is  zero  or  low,  future  interest  rate 
differentials  and  foreign  exchange  risk  premia  for  a  small  open  economy  are  largely 
exogenous and given. At a reasonably long horizon, the expected future real exchange rate 
is given by a neutral real equilibrium rate and is largely exogenous for a small economy. The 
expected  future  foreign  price  level  is  also  exogenous  for  a  small  open  economy. 
Consequently, under these conditions, the expected future price level is practically the only 
endogenous variable that affects the current exchange rate. With this reasoning, the current 
exchange rate, all other things being equal, becomes a direct indicator of the expected future 
price level. By observing the exchange rate, the central bank can thus observe expectations 
of the future price level. Higher inflation expectations and thereby a higher expected future 
price level lead then to a depreciation of the currency today, all else being equal. A measure 
that raises expectations of future inflation and the future price level should thus show up in a 
depreciated  currency.  A  strengthening  of  the  currency  may  therefore  be  ominous  and 
interpreted as a sign that inflation expectations are falling.11
                                                 
9   www.rba.gov.au. 
10   A  well-argued  proposal  on  a  combination,  a  hybrid,  between  a  price  level  target  and  an  inflation  target  is 
presented  in  Giavazzi,  F  and  Mishkin,  F.  S.  ”An  Evaluation  of  Swedish  Monetary  Policy  1995-2005”. 
(2006/07:RFR1), www.riksdagen.se. 
11   See equations (8) and (9) and more details in the appendix to this speech.  
BIS Review 19/2009 
 5
The exchange rate as a policy instrument – "The Foolproof Way" to escape a liquidity 
trap 
The direct link between the current exchange rate and the expected future price level first 
leads, as mentioned, to the insight that the current exchange rate depends on the expected 
future price level and can be used as an indicator of the latter. But the link also leads to the 
idea  that  cause  and  effect  can  be  reversed.  Instead  of  the  expected  future  price  level 
determining  the  current  exchange  rate,  the  current  exchange  rate  can  determine  the 
expected future price level. To be more precise, the exchange rate can be used as a policy 
instrument when it is no longer possible to lower the interest rate because it is already zero. 
Unlike the policy rate, the exchange rate has no upper or lower limit, as Bennett McCallum 
pointed  out early  in  the discussion of  Japan's  liquidity  trap.12  When  the  real  economy  and 
inflation can no longer be stimulated by cutting the policy rate, it is still possible to achieve 
the same stimulation by using the exchange rate as a policy instrument and depreciating the 
currency. 
This is the background to my proposal of a “Foolproof Way” for a small open economy to 
escape from a liquidity trap.13 The Foolproof Way consists of the following three parts:  
1. 
A price level target is introduced in the form of a path as I described earlier. In the 
event  that  unwelcome  low  inflation  or  deflation  has  already  arisen,  the  price  level 
target can be set correspondingly higher than the current price level.  
An exchange rate target that is consistent with the price level target is announced 
and the exchange rate is pegged to this exchange rate target until the price level 
target is attained. If, for example, the price level is to be raised by 10 per cent, the 
exchange rate target is set so that the currency depreciates by 10 per cent.  
When the price level target has been attained, the currency is allowed to float and 
monetary  policy  returns  to  normal,  either  with  the  old  inflation  target  or  with  the 
continued  use  of  a  price  level  target  if  this  is  deemed  to  be  advantageous  in  the 
longer term. 
2. 
3. 
It is easy for the central bank to implement part (2) and keep the exchange rate at a given 
level  when  the  currency  is  strong  and  would  appreciate  if  it  were  allowed  to  float.  Initial 
doubts among the market participants and the risk of this method failing means that it would 
appear to be a good deal to buy domestic currency cheaply and then sell it at a higher price 
when  the  method  fails.  This  would  lead  to  a  high  demand  for  the  domestic  currency.  The 
central bank, however, could sell as much domestic currency as it likes and would only see 
its  foreign  exchange  reserves  increase  correspondingly.  A  large  foreign  exchange  reserve 
and  monetary  base  might  be  considered  inflationary,  but  higher  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations are exactly what the central bank wants in this situation.  
The difficult thing, in contrast, is to maintain a fixed exchange rate when the currency is weak 
and would depreciate if it was allowed to float, as was the case of the speculative attacks the 
Swedish krona was subjected to during the fixed exchange rate regime in the early 1990s. In 
such  a  situation,  the  central  bank  would  have  to  buy  the  domestic  currency  and  pay  with 
foreign exchange reserves, which are finite and would eventually run out. When the market 
realises  that  there  is  a  difference  between  maintaining  a  fixed  exchange  rate  when  the 
                                                 
12   McCallum, B. (2000), “Theoretical analysis regarding a zero lower bound on interest rates”. Journal of Money, 
Credit, and Banking. v. 32, 870-904. 
13   See Svensson, Lars E.O. (2001), "The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of Escaping from a 
Liquidity  Trap,"  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies  19(S-1),  February,  277-312;  Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2003), 
"Escaping  from  a  Liquidity  Trap  and  Deflation:  The  Foolproof  Way  and  Others,"  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, 17(4) 145-166. 
6 
 BIS Review 19/2009
currency is strong and when it is weak, the high demand for the domestic currency will cease 
and the foreign exchange reserves will return to a more normal level. 
This method is a very drastic action. It shows that the central bank really means business 
and lends credibility to the price level target. It may therefore affect expectations of the future 
price  level  much  more  than  any  other  measure.  The  method  is  verifiable  as  it  consists  of 
action and not just talk, and its logic is very clear. Raised inflation expectations would reduce 
the real interest rate, stimulate the real economy and increase inflation, and the price level 
would  move  upwards  towards  the  price  level  target.  The  real  economy  would  also  be 
stimulated directly by the fact that exporting and import-competing sectors would be affected 
positively  by  the  short-term  real  depreciation  that  would  arise  due  to  the  short-term 
sluggishness of the price level. As the price level moves up towards the price level target, the 
real exchange rate will, however, return to its neutral level. 
Does this method represent a competitive devaluation? The answer is that this is no more of 
a competitive devaluation than any other form of monetary policy expansion. Note that if the 
zero lower bound for the interest rate did not exist, the central bank could reduce the real 
interest  rate  by  reducing  the  nominal  rate.  This  nominal  rate  reduction  would  lead  to  a 
depreciation  of  the  currency.  The  currency  depreciation  in  part  (2)  achieves  the  same 
currency depreciation directly instead of indirectly via a reduction of the nominal interest rate. 
The  method  is  thus  no  more  of  a  competitive  devaluation  than  a  reduction  of  the  nominal 
interest  rate  would  be,  if  such  a  reduction  were  possible.  It  is  quite  simply  a  method  that 
entails  a  certain  degree  of  monetary  policy  expansion,  but  by  using  means  other  than  the 
policy rate. Every measure that managed to increase expectations of the future price level 
would  in  fact  also  automatically  lead  to  a  weakening  of  the  currency.  Using  the  exchange 
rate as a policy instrument should therefore not be seen as more controversial than using 
any other method that leads to expectations of a higher future price level.  
Is this method to the disadvantage of other countries? The method is to the advantage or 
disadvantage of other countries depending on whether a normal monetary policy expansion, 
an interest rate cut, is to the advantage or disadvantage of other countries. The effects of a 
small,  open  economy's  monetary  policy  on  other  countries  is  normally  limited,  and  the  net 
effect  depends  on  a  number  of  circumstances.  Monetary  policy  is  normally  conducted  in 
each  country  without  regard  to  such  effects.  The  impact  that  a  currency  depreciation  or  a 
monetary expansion in a larger country has on the trade balance of other countries depends 
on both income and substitution effects. The former is positive due to the greater output and 
the greater demand for foreign imports, while the latter is negative due to changes in the real 
exchange rate and the terms of trade. Depending on the initial position, the positive income 
effect  can  be  quite  substantial.  However,  as  the  income  and  substitution  effects  normally 
have  different  signs  it  can  be  expected  that  the  net  effect  is  normally  fairly  small.  This  is 
supported by simulation studies.14
Today, however, we have a situation in which the two largest economies in the world, the US 
and  Japan,  both  have  a  zero  interest  rate.  If  the  authorities  in  these  countries  want  to 
stimulate  the  real  economy  by  lowering  the  real  interest  rate  further  by  creating  higher 
inflation  expectations,  they  clearly  cannot  do  this  by  depreciating  their  currencies  against 
each  other  at  the  same  time.  They  will  instead  have  to  create  such  expectations  by  other 
methods. If one of the countries manages to raise expectations of its future price level it will 
be sufficient in principle, however, for the other country to keep the exchange rate constant 
for  its  expected  future  price  level  to  also  rise.  Roosevelt’s  decision  to  allow  the  dollar  to 
depreciate by 40 per cent against gold during the depression in the 1930’s can be mentioned 
                                                 
14   Coenen, G. and Wieland, V. (2003). “The Zero-Interest-Rate Bound and the Role of the Exchange Rate for 
Monetary Policy in Japan” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 1071-1101. 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 7
as an example of a currency depreciation carried out with the express purpose of raising the 
price level in the country.15
”Quantitative easing”: ineffective if it is not expected to be permanent 
Why not just increase the money supply in order to create expectations of a higher future 
price  level?  As  long  as  the  interest  rate  is  zero  then  households  and  firms,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  are  indifferent  about  the  choice  between  money  and  securities  such  as 
Treasury bills or bonds. An increased supply of money will then have no effect other than 
households  and  firms  holding  more  money  and  fewer  bills  and  bonds.  However,  at  some 
time  in  the  future  the  economy  will  return  to  normal,  the  interest  rate  will  be  positive  and 
households and firms will no longer be indifferent when choosing between money and these 
securities. Somewhat simplified, we can say that the money supply will once again become 
approximately proportional to the price level. A larger money supply in the future will lead, all 
else being equal, to a higher price level in the future. If the central bank could thus credibly 
commit to a permanent and lasting increase in the money supply, the expected future price 
level would rise. The problem here is, however, that there is no way for the central bank to 
make  a  credible  commitment  to  a  larger  money  supply  in  the  future.  There  is  nothing  to 
prevent  the  central  bank  from  reneging  on  such  a  commitment  and  reducing  the  money 
supply  in  the  future  in  order  to  reduce  future  inflation  and  keep  it  in  line  with  the  inflation 
target.16
Experience  from  Japan's  period  of  "quantitative  easing"  also  shows  that  the  extreme 
expansion  of  approximately  70  per  cent  of  the  monetary  base  between  March  2001  and 
March 2006 did not noticeably affect expectations of inflation and the future price level.17 For 
example, the yen did not depreciate as it should otherwise have done. Firms and households 
clearly believed that the expansion of the monetary base was temporary and not permanent, 
which subsequently proved to be true. The monetary base fell back to normal levels when 
the interest rate was later raised to above zero.  
Other measures 
A number of other measures for addressing a situation with a zero interest rate have been 
proposed.  Even  if  short-term  interest  rates  are zero  or  close  to  zero,  bond  rates  at  longer 
maturities  may  still  be  positive.  If  the  central  bank  therefore  buys  long-term  bonds  it  may 
perhaps  be  able  to  squeeze  down  the  long-term  interest  rates  somewhat,  which  should 
stimulate the real economy. The central bank can also promise to keep the policy rate at zero 
for  a  prolonged  period  in  order  to  create  expectations  of  lower  future  interest  rates  and  a 
more  expansionary  monetary  policy  in  the  future.  This  should  also  stimulate  the  real 
                                                 
15   Bernanke,  Ben  (2002),  “Deflation:  Making  Sure  ‘It’  Doesn't  Happen  Here”,  speech  21  November  at  the 
National Economists Club, Washington, D.C., www.federalreserve.gov. 
16   As Paul Krugman put it in his insightful Brookings essay – how will the central bank "credibly promise to be 
irresponsible”. Krugman, Paul R. (1998). “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap”. 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 49, 137-206. 
17   Quantitative easing and credit easing are not the same thing. The first method entails deliberately increasing 
the monetary base and having a quantitative target for this. The monetary base can then be seen as supply-
determined by the central bank. The second method consists of providing new loan opportunities for the banks 
in order to improve the functioning of the financial markets and reduce spreads. This method also results in an 
increase in the monetary base, but this can be seen as demand-determined by the banks. See Bernanke, Ben 
(2009), "The crisis and the policy response", speech at the Stamp Lecture, London School of Economics, 13 
January,  www.federalreserve.gov,  for  further  discussion.  (18)  For  a  more  detailed  derivation  and  detailed 
discussion, see Svensson, Lars E.O., (2006), “Monetary  Policy and Japan’s Liquidity  Trap",  working paper, 
www.princeton.edu/svensson. 
8 
 BIS Review 19/2009
economy. Personally, I believe that the stimulation that the central bank can achieve in this 
way is very moderate, perhaps a few tens of basis points on the real interest rate in the best 
case. By influencing inflation expectations more directly, the real interest rate can be reduced 
by several percentage points. 
Monetary policy alternatives with a zero interest rate bound: concluding comments 
As  both  Japan  and  the  United  States  now  have  a  zero  interest  rate  and  several  other 
countries are now cutting their interest rates close to zero, it is natural that monetary policy 
with  a  zero  interest  rate  should  be  increasingly  a  subject  for  discussion  and  debate.  The 
most  recent  Monetary  Policy  Report  contains  an  article  on  monetary  policy  with  a  zero 
interest  rate,  and  there  is  also  an  alternative  scenario  in  Chapter  2  assuming  weaker  real 
economic development and a repo rate path that is at zero during part of the forecast period. 
Although it is not particularly likely that we in Sweden will be subjected to a strongly binding 
zero  lower  bound  for  the  interest  rate,  it  is  wise  to  be  prepared  for  this  eventuality  and  to 
have carefully considered the monetary policy alternatives that would then be available, and 
which of these would be appropriate, depending on how serious the zero lower bound was. 
A zero lower bound on the interest rate means that the real interest rate is still too high to 
sufficiently stimulate the real economy, despite the policy rate being cut to zero. It is the real 
market rate that is important in the real economy, and this corresponds to the policy rate plus 
a spread arising due to various risk and liquidity premia, minus expected inflation. Although 
the  policy  rate  is  zero,  nominal  market  rates  are  positive  as  a  result  of  the  spread.  The 
various  measures  taken  by  central  banks  and  other  public  authorities  during  the  financial 
crisis  to  ensure  that  the  financial  markets  function  more  efficiently  and  that  the  spreads 
decline thus fulfil a function that is at least as important, even if the repo rate is at zero. It is 
reasonable to suppose, however, that their stimulating effect is much smaller than the effect 
a central bank can achieve with measures that focus on inflation expectations. 
The major danger with a zero lower bound for the interest rate is that inflation expectations 
will be too low and even negative, and that the real interest rate will thus become too high. It 
is  thus  necessary  to  keep  watch  on  inflation  expectations,  to  counteract  expectations  of 
falling  inflation,  and  preferably  to  create  expectations  of  higher  inflation.  In  this  type  of 
situation it may be desirable to create expectations that actually exceed the inflation target. 
The  Riksbank’s  current  regime,  with  a  credible  inflation  target  and  the  publication  of 
forecasts,  including  their  motivation,  for  inflation,  the  real  economy  and  the  repo  rate, 
provides  a  very  good  base  for  maintaining  confidence  in  monetary  policy,  for  upholding 
inflation  expectations  and  preventing  them  from  falling  too  low,  or  even  from  falling 
unchecked. 
If, contrary to expectations, this should not prove sufficient, and inflation expectations were to 
threaten to become too low, it is possible that tightening the inflation target, in the form of a 
temporary target for prices, might work better. This type of temporary price target could be 
introduced  in  the  form  of  an  average  inflation  target,  so  that  inflation  over  the  coming  five 
years should on average be 2 per cent. If inflation then falls below 2 per cent during a period 
of time, it must be kept above 2 per cent during a period of time to ensure the average will be 
2  per  cent.  With  a  well-motivated  average  inflation  target  it  may  be  easier  to  justify  this 
monetary policy and to create confidence in allowing inflation to exceed 2 per cent during a 
period of time in order to provide a sufficiently low real interest rate. 
If not even this, contrary to expectations, were to prove sufficient and inflation expectations 
were to remain low and impossible to influence, or were to change to lasting expectations of 
deflation, then a possible last resort is my suggestion of a foolproof way of getting out of a 
liquidity trap. This method entails a price level target where the currency is depreciated and 
the exchange rate held at a temporary exchange rate target until the price level target has 
been  attained.  This  dramatic  method  is  most  efficient  in  creating  expectations  of  a  higher 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 9
future price level and could provide sufficient stimulation to the real economy. I consider it 
very unlikely that this method would be needed in Sweden, but I believe it is good that it is 
available as a last resort. On the other hand, “quantitative easing” in the form used in Japan, 
that  is,  a  temporary  targeted  increase  in  the  banks’  reserves  with  the  central  bank,  would 
probably be completely ineffective. 
There are probably many in the central bank world who are hesitant about openly discussing 
the advantages and disadvantages of monetary policy in a zero interest rate situation and the 
unconventional  methods  that  are  available.  Many  would  perhaps  even  prefer  to  exclude 
some of the alternatives without any particular justification. With a zero lower bound for the 
interest rate the central bank’s credibility and its possibilities to affect inflation expectations 
are even more important than usual. I myself am convinced that the central bank’s credibility 
can best be served by an open and transparent discussion of all of the available alternatives. 
This discussion should be held in good time before any of these alternatives may be needed, 
but in the hope that none of them will be needed. With a broad understanding that forceful 
measures are available, and with a readiness by the central bank to resort to these methods 
if the situation should so require, the general public and the market need not fear that the 
central bank will lose control of the situation and of inflation expectations in a situation with a 
zero interest rate. 
10 
 BIS Review 19/2009
Appendix 
How the current output gap is determined at the zero lower bound 
 BIS Review 19/2009 
 11
 12 
 BIS Review 19/2009
How the current exchange rate depends on the expected future price level 
  BIS Review 19/2009 
 13
