Marion Williams: Going back to basics – building strategic alliances 
toward improved governance and productivity 
Speech by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Opening of 
the Week of Excellence, Bridgetown, 23 February 2009. 
 Dr. the Hon. David Estwick, Minister of Economic Affairs; Senator Sir Roy Trotman, General 
Secretary of the Barbados Workers Union and Chairman of CTUSAB, distinguished heads of 
the  Private  Sector  Agency,  the  Barbados  Employers  Confederation,  and  the  Barbados 
National  Productivity  Council;  Dr.  Hensley  Sobers,  Director  of  Human  Resources,  Central 
Bank,  Chairman;  specially  invited  presenters  and  coordinators;  other  distinguished  guests, 
ladies and gentlemen. 
We are delighted to welcome all of you to the Central Bank of Barbados and to thank you, 
the Social Partners, for the foresight in conceptualising this important seminar. The Central 
Bank is pleased to be associated with the event. 
As we begin this year's Week of Excellence, it is important to review some of the important 
events which have occurred since we last met together. 
Firstly,  the  winds  of  financial  uncertainty  continued  to  affect  the  international  financial 
environment. It has spread from the US to Europe, to Asia and Latin America. No country 
has been unaffected. This has been followed by an erosion of business confidence abroad 
and cost cutting measures, including lay offs, have followed. 
Secondly,  as  expected,  with  the  weakness  of  the  US  and  the  UK  in  particular,  the  world 
slipped  into  a  recession  which  has  begun  to  affect  some  third  world  economies,  including 
some in our own region. For Barbados the areas most affected are tourism and construction 
and as the credit market tightened, new capital inflows. 
In  the  context  of  the  current  international  financial  uncertainty,  it  is  fitting  that  the  social 
partners have decided to re-focus our minds on the importance of "Going Back to Basics". 
The  theme,  of  our  conference,  Going  back  to  basics:  building  strategic  alliances  toward 
improved Governance and productivity is timely and appropriate. 
In  this  environment,  there  are  important  roles  for  the  private  sector,  labour  unions  and 
government. Today our focus will primarily be on the employee – employer nexus. 
In  previous  years  we  focused  on  measurement  issues,  management  approaches  and  the 
need for tenacity and follow-through. We also stressed the need for managers as leaders of 
an emerging developed society to improve their own service, and to take full responsibility for 
managing and motivating the levels of service excellence which we desire of our employees. 
But as we call upon our inner strength and seek the mental toughness required to cope with 
the current uncertainties, it is vital that we go back to basics. This going back to basics can 
mean different things to different persons, groups or agencies. 
For  the  individual,  going  back  to  basics  means  managing  your  money  wisely.  It  means 
spending but not over-extending oneself. This is old-fashioned wisdom that remains new and 
relevant in the context of the current international financial uncertainty, in spite of how far we 
think  we  may  have  come,  technologically  and  economically.  Going  back  to  basics  for  the 
individual means going back to smooth social interaction that has been the hallmark of our 
pride and industry – politeness, tolerance and the ability to listen to the other point of view, 
especially  by  those  who  are  role  models  for  our  youth.  The  NISE  initiative  has  been 
exemplary in its commitment to excellence in service and we applaud them. For those in the 
corporate sector, going back to basics means prudent liquidity management, diversification 
of investments, vigilance in the assessment of risk, enhanced disclosure in the presentation 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 1
of  financial  statements,  improved  corporate  governance  and  the  building  of  strategic 
alliances with labour and Government. As we have noticed, on the global scene many of the 
global problems had their genesis in poor corporate governance and oversight, compounded 
by inappropriate incentive structures which compromised corporate soundness and system 
stability. 
The  building  of  strategic  alliances  with  labour  begins  with  respect  for  the  individual,  which 
underpins all discussion of productivity improvement, pay for performance, profit sharing and 
even wage restraint. Fortunately in the public sector and in the Central Bank, we have stayed 
with the basics on several vital fronts, and this has laid a solid foundation which will help us 
to weather the current storm. 
Barbados  has  also  retained  its  basic  traditional  emphasis  on  social  care  and  poverty 
alleviation  as  seen  in  ongoing  efforts  to  sustain  pensions,  tax  credits,  micro  credit, 
employment  and  the  like.  In  this  environment  an  adequate  safety  net  could  be  more 
important than before. It is comforting to know that in the case of Barbados the infrastructure 
is already there. 
Excellence 
Excellence  requires  putting  a  framework  in  place  that  will  lead  to  enhanced  productivity. 
Thus,  excellence  is  a  process  that  may  at  first  involve  only  limited  gains  and  small  steps, 
often without immediate or even tangible results 
The  Social  Partners  continue  to  share  a  common  vision  of  the  need  to  move  forward  in 
unison, as far as possible, in order for the society to progress and develop. A high degree of 
maturity  and  foresight  is  essential  in  dealing  with  the  expectations  of  employees  and 
employers alike. The Social partners have over the last decade demonstrated that there are 
gains from dialogue, sharing of information and judicious use of mediation when necessary. 
Indeed the Barbados model of social partnership has made a name for itself not only in the 
Caribbean, but further afield and countries are trying to emulate it. 
The continued collaboration of the social partners is even more vital in this environment as 
we enter a new era of challenge on many fronts, where we will grapple with the demands of 
regional  collaboration  as  we  are  presently  experiencing  and  the  required  infrastructural 
support,  international  and  regional  financial  uncertainty  and  global  recession.  In  an 
environment where the national pie is shrinking there will be need to restrain wages in line 
with productivity gains even more so than before and to relate this to ensuring the viability of 
business. At the same time we cannot compromise on areas such as workplace safety for 
our workers and a comfortable working environment. In addition, on the Government side, 
on-going  tax  initiatives  designed  to  benefit  the  private  sector  and  the  workers  will  be 
important. 
The  private  sector  has  become  more  complex  and  vibrant,  and  benchmarking,  pay-for-
performance  schemes  and  other  productivity  enhancement  initiatives,  are  becoming  more 
commonplace  among  leading  companies.  However,  it  is  important  going  forward  for  the 
private  sector  to  become  more  competitive  because  the  trend  toward  more  liberal  trading 
regimes and the signing of recent agreements will eventually mean even greater competition 
at home, especially in services, and greater opportunities abroad. It would be useful during 
this lull in the previously hectic pace of corporate expansion to pause and reflect on how the 
corporate sector can best position itself in the likely future resurgence of economic activity 
and to do so more competitively. 
Economy  
On  the  economic  front,  the  tourism  sector  has  begun  to  weaken  as  the  economies  of  our 
major  markets  deal  with  major  economic  downturns  and  overall  real  growth  has  been 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2009
sluggish as Barbados continues to feel the effects of the international recession. This has of 
course brought economic challenges. While the unemployment rate has remained in single 
digits there is a likelihood of some deterioration in the near future as Barbados begins to be 
more impacted by the widening and deepening global economic recession. 
In  order  to  lessen  the  impact  of  the  global  recession,  keeping  employment  up  will  be 
important, since, if we cannot do so, spending will decline and a decline in spending means a 
worsening  of  the  impact  of  the  recession.  It  will  be  important  for  the  social  partners  to 
collaborate  closely  to  arrest  this  development.  Having  said  this,  it  is  clear  that  businesses 
cannot continue to pay wages and salaries at the same level if their sales are declining. This 
would be a recipe for making losses and for eventual closure altogether. A feasible option is 
for businesses to offer shorter hours or week on and week off to workers instead of complete 
layoffs. I cannot repeat too often that this option will help to keep the wheels of commerce 
turning  and  mitigate  the  impact  of  layoffs,  not  only  for  the  individuals  involved  but  for  the 
economy as a whole. This greater labour market flexibility will often require a greater level of 
management coordination and administration than straight layoffs and management may well 
have to be more closely involved in seeing that operations can run as smoothly as before 
with few hiccups. However, the result for the business over the longer term, where this can 
be accommodated, could be worthwhile and certainly the results for the Barbados economy 
could  be  a  less  painful  response  to  economic  recession.  For  salaried  workers  this 
arrangement may require greater negotiation between workers and employers and greater 
support  from  the  social  partners.  This  is  a  time  for  us  to  think  outside  the  box  and  to 
concentrate on the medium term viability of our economy and the viability of our businesses. 
Where  businesses cannot  survive  without  taking  action  to  reduce  costs  the  consequences 
can be more disastrous for both the employee and for the business. Of course, businesses 
should  not  take  advantage  of  the  situation  and  should  only  revert  to  this  method  if  it  is 
necessary. It is a question of judgement. 
Let me say that Barbados has not yet been severely affected by the global recession but we 
know that it will affect us. We have enough time to position ourselves to mitigate the impact 
and we should take steps to position ourselves to deal with it when it comes. 
In closing, I wish to again say that we at the Central Bank are happy to be associated with 
the Social Partners in promoting this Week of Excellence. As I always repeat, and I think it is 
important to do so, aiming for excellence is a continuing process. If ever we think that it is a 
condition that is achieved and for which we can cease to strive, then we misunderstand the 
process. Reaching for excellence must be constant if we are to see improvements in the way 
we do things. We must all be on board. During this week we therefore remind ourselves that 
we  should  continually  reach  for  excellence.  Let  me  welcome  all  of  you  once  more  to  the 
Central Bank and may your deliberations be fruitful and rewarding as you discuss this year's 
topic:  "GOING  BACK  TO  BASICS:  BUILDING  STRATEGIC  ALLIANCES  TOWARD 
IMPROVED GOVERNANCE AND PRODUCTIVITY". 
Thank you all. 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 3
