Lucas Papademos: Strengthening macro-prudential supervision in 
Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference on “After The Storm: The Future Face of Europe’s Financial System”, organised 
by  Bruegel,  National  Bank  of  Belgium  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  Brussels, 
24 March 2009. 
 Introduction 
I.  
This conference has provided an excellent forum for an enriching and stimulating debate on 
“The Future Face of Europe’s Financial System”, a subject which is both topical and highly 
policy relevant. In my remarks, I will focus on two issues:  
• 
First,  what  are  the  key  lessons  of  the  ongoing  financial  crisis  for  EU  financial 
supervisory policy; 
Second,  what  are 
responsibilities  of  macro-prudential 
supervision,  and  what  are  the  instruments  and  institutional  requirements  for  the 
effective performance of macro-prudential tasks.  
the  objectives  and 
 The lessons of the crisis for financial supervisory policy 
II.  
A  first  lesson  of  the  financial  crisis  is  that  it  has  been  a  consequence  of  factors  and 
processes  that  have  affected  both  the  overall  macro-financial  environment  as  well  as  the 
behaviour of individual institutions and the functioning of specific market segments. It was the 
joint  influence  of  both  macro  and  micro  factors  that  resulted  in  market  excesses  and  the 
emergence of systemic risks of unprecedented magnitude and complexity. 
At  a  macroeconomic  level,  large  and  persisting  global  imbalances,  rapid  credit  expansion 
over a protracted period of time, in a benign environment of low inflation and high growth, 
fostered  a  huge  increase  in  leverage,  a  significant  underpricing  of  risk  and  a  consequent 
divergence  of  asset  prices  from  fundamental  values.  At  a  micro-economic  level,  financial 
innovations, notably the securitisation process, although in principle should have helped to 
better  diversify  and  distribute  risk,  were  implemented  in  a  manner  that  fostered  improper 
incentives and resulted in the loosening bank lending standards, the creation of complex and 
opaque  products  whose  real  value  and  embedded  risk  was  difficult  to  assess,  and  the 
establishment of off-balance sheet investment vehicles that led to the concentration of (credit 
and market) risk and maturity mismatches that contributed to the severity and duration of the 
crisis. 
A  second  lesson  of  the  crisis  is  that  the  nature  and  magnitude  of  the  systemic  risk  in  the 
financial sector is not related only to the potential illiquidity or insolvency of large banks or 
other  big  regulated 
the  degree  of 
“interdependence”  or  “interconnectedness”  between  financial  institutions  and  between 
markets.  This  “interconnectedness”  reflects  a  variety  of  direct  and  indirect  linkages  in  the 
financial system and it involves institutions and markets that are regulated as well as those 
that are not subject to sufficient, or any, regulatory oversight. This second category includes 
not  only  hedge  funds  but  also  off-balance  sheet  financial  entities,  such  as  structured 
investment  vehicles,  as  well  as  the  securitisation  market,  and  the  market  for  credit  default 
swaps (CDS). In this respect, two points are relevant for the design of the regulatory policies. 
First, the size of some of the non-bank financial institutions and the overall magnitude of the 
activities  of  the  “non-bank,  non  regulated  sector”  have  become  significant  and  can  pose 
systemic  risks.  Second,  and  as  a  consequence  of  the  first,  the  “interconnectedness”  of  all 
it  also  depends  on 
institutions,  but 
financial 
BIS Review 35/2009 
 1
institutions  and  markets  implies  that  it  is  the  “collective”  behaviour  of  all  that  determines 
endogenously systemic risk and its potential impact on the real economy. 
A third lesson is that the increasing financial integration in Europe and globally has important 
implications  for  the  cross-border  distribution  and  propagation  of  systemic  risk  and  the 
appropriate  institutional  setting  for  the  prevention  and  management  of  a  crisis.  More 
specifically, the regulatory framework and the supervisory arrangements in Europe must be 
broadly compatible with those in other large economic areas, notably the United States and 
vice  versa.  And  within  the  EU,  the  growing  presence  and  significance  of  cross-border 
financial institutions (the largest 43 cross-border banking groups in the EU accounted for 76 
%  of  total  EU  bank  assets  at  the  end  of  20071  requires  the  strengthening  of  the  pan-
European character of supervision.  
A  fourth  and  final  lesson  that  I  want  to  stress  is  that  effective  crisis  prevention  and 
management  call  for  close  cooperation  and  efficient  information  exchange  between  the 
supervisory authorities in various jurisdictions as well as between the central banks, whose 
tasks include the safeguarding of financial system stability, and the supervisors of individual 
institutions. The  effectiveness  of such  cooperation,  which  is  relevant  both  within  countries, 
and  across  borders,  crucially  hinges  on  the  exchange  of  relevant  information  in  a  timely 
manner. 
What  broad  conclusions  can  we  draw  from  these  lessons,  and  more  generally  from  the 
recent experience, for supervisory policy? Although the severity of the ensuing problems has 
differed  across  institutions  and  countries,  overall  the  crisis  revealed  that  micro-prudential 
supervision in many cases proved inadequate to identify, in a timely manner, the nature and 
size of accumulating risks and to impose appropriate remedial action. Moreover, although the 
build-up  of  financial  imbalances,  the  underpricing  of  risk  and  the  rise  in  the  degree  of 
leverage  in  the  financial  system  had  been  identified  as  sources  of  potential  instability  by 
international institutions and central banks, including the ECB, their warning signals, which 
had become progressively louder over time, did not trigger appropriate responses either by 
market participants or by the authorities responsible for the oversight of individual financial 
institutions or specific market segments. 
There  is,  therefore,  a  manifest  need  to  strengthen  both  the  macro-prudential  and  micro-
prudential supervision of the financial system and to do so in a way that achieves valuable 
synergies  and  has  a  mutually  reinforcing  impact  on  the  stability  of  the  financial system.  In 
particular,  the  role  of  macro-financial  factors,  of  the  interconnectedness  of  markets  and 
institutions  and  of  cross-border  financial  integration  in  determining  the  size,  nature  and 
propagation  of  systemic  risk  calls  for  the  strengthening  of  macro-prudential  supervision  in 
Europe and globally. This should help prevent the recurrence of similar episodes of market 
excesses  and  corrections  in  the  future,  with  disruptive  effects  on  the  real  economy,  and  it 
should help ensure that the financial system is dynamically stable and resilient to shocks. 
The framework for macro-prudential supervision in the EU 
III.  
What are the implications of the lessons of the crisis of these broader policy conclusions for 
the appropriate design and the effective functioning of the EU supervisory framework? I will 
address this question by taking as a “frame of reference” the pertinent recommendations of 
the  Report  of  the  de  Larosière  Group  that  was  broadly  welcomed  by  the  European 
Commission. The Report is a comprehensive and valuable contribution that deals with a wide 
range  of  issues  concerning  financial  regulation,  supervision  and  global  cooperation.  I  will 
focus on the envisaged framework for macro-prudential supervision, as outlined in the two 
                                                 
1  
In the euro area, the largest 30 cross-border banking groups accounted for 73% of euro area total bank assets 
at the end of 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2009
recommendations,  16  and  19,  both  because  of  the  importance  of  establishing  such  a 
framework – since it does not yet exist and is urgently needed – and because of the central 
role that the ECB and the European System of Central Banks are proposed to play. 
The  Report  recommends  that  a  new  body  –  called  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Council 
(ESRC) – should be set up, to be chaired by the ECB President, and which should function 
under the auspices and with the logistical support of the ECB. The new body should pool and 
analyse  all  information,  relevant  for  financial  stability,  pertaining  to  macro-economic 
conditions  and  to  macro-prudential  developments  in  all  the  financial  sectors.  The  general 
task  of  this  body  will  be  to  “form  judgements  and  make  recommendations  on  macro-
prudential  policy,  issue  risk  warnings,  compare  observations  on  macro-economic  and 
prudential developments and give directions on these issues”. Let me elaborate on two sets 
of  issues:  (1)  the  functions  of  the  macro-prudential  framework;  and  (2)  a  number  of 
necessary conditions pertaining to instruments, institutional requirements and procedures for 
the effective performance of macro-prudential policies.  
The main functions of the macro-prudential framework include: 
• 
the  identification  and  assessment  of  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  EU  financial 
system (including all markets, institutions and infrastructures); 
the issuance of risk warnings; and  
the adoption of related recommendations on macro-prudential policies.  
• 
• 
These functions could be complemented by other relevant tasks: 
• 
the  definition  of  specific  macro-prudential  reporting  requirements  for  financial 
institutions to fill significant information gaps; 
an advisory role on EU regulatory measures that are relevant for macro-prudential 
supervision.  This  role  could  also  include  the  identification  of  possible  regulatory 
gaps stemming from financial innovation that could pose systemic risks. 
 The  performance  of  these  tasks  requires  the  support  of  appropriate  analysis  and  a 
comprehensive  information  base.  The  interconnectedness  of  financial  institutions  and 
markets  within  the  EU  but  also  globally  implies  that  the  monitoring  and  assessment  of 
potential  systemic  risks  should  be  based  on  a  broad  set  of  relevant  macro-economic  and 
macro-financial  data  and  indicators,  as  well  as  information  provided  by  micro-prudential 
supervisors  and  information  obtained  from  market  intelligence.  The  development  of  the 
appropriate  structure  and  the  procedures  for  bringing  together  all  types  of  pertinent 
information, also in a manner that ensures strict confidentiality in the use of micro data, will 
represent a major challenge, which will require analytical sophistication, market knowledge 
and  supervisory  expertise.  Moreover,  the  monitoring  of  risk  exposures  across  institutions, 
markets and borders will have to rely on the close cooperation with the relevant supervisory 
authorities (banking, insurance and securities supervisors) within the EU and globally. 
The analysis necessary for carrying out the macro-prudential tasks can partly be based on 
the  economic  and  monetary  analyses  undertaken  by  central  banks  for  the  formulation  of 
monetary policy. But it will have to be complemented with the further development and use of 
models for macro-stress testing and of financial stability indicators. These analytical tools can 
help  monitor,  and  assess  the  implications  for  systemic  stability,  of  risk  exposures  across 
institutions  and  markets,  for  instance,  the  common  credit  exposures  of  interconnected 
financial institutions to other firms, sectors or regions; or the market risk exposures through 
holdings  of  securities  or  common  positioning  of  interconnected  institutions  in  relevant 
markets (i.e. potentially leading to so-called “crowded trades”). 
Macro-prudential  analysis  and  supervision  focus,  by  definition,  on  the  monitoring  and 
assessment of systemic risk in the whole financial sector. This risk, which can emerge both 
during  the  upswing  and  the  downswing  of  an  economic  and  financial  cycle,  reflects  the 
BIS Review 35/2009 
 3
effects of macroeconomic forces and the collective behaviour of institutions and other market 
participants. Central banks, whose primary objective is the preservation of price stability –a 
necessary though not sufficient condition for the stability of the financial system– and which 
maintain close links with the money and financial markets in order to perform their monetary 
policy  tasks,  are  well  suited  to  be  the  authorities  mainly  responsible  for  macro-prudential 
supervision. In the EU, the ECB and the European System of Central Banks stand ready to 
carry out the analytical and statistical work necessary so that the new EU body responsible 
for macro-prudential supervision can perform its functions effectively. At the same time, the 
involvement  and  cooperation  of  supervisory  authorities  is  also  essential.  In  addition  to  the 
proposed  participation  of  the  chairpersons  of  CEBS,  CEIOPS  and  CESR,  as  well  as  one 
representative  of  the  European  Commission,  the  heads  of  national  supervisors  could  be 
invited  to  join  the  national  central  bank  governors  as  required  by  the  subjects  being 
discussed.  
Appropriate links should also be established between the ESCB and the proposed European 
System  of  Financial  Supervision.  These  links  should  contribute,  inter  alia,  to  effective 
information-sharing as well as to providing an additional channel through which the “output” 
of the deliberations of the new EU macro-prudential supervisory body will be communicated 
to the micro-prudential supervisors and help trigger appropriate policy measures. This could 
include changes to capital requirements and liquidity buffers in order to respond to identified 
emerging systemic risk. And this observation brings me to my last two points. 
The  de  Larosière  Group  emphasised  that  once  a  macro-prudential  risk  warning  has  been 
issued “it must be clear to everyone who should act and according to which timetable”. It is 
therefore  essential  that  a  suitable  mechanism  is  in  place  to  ensure  that  the  required 
supervisory or regulatory actions are implemented in an effective and timely manner.  
No reflection on the appropriate macro-prudential framework for Europe would be complete 
without  due  consideration  of  its  international  dimension.  This  global  financial  crisis  has 
underscored the importance of concerted policy responses globally. The early identification 
and assessment of risks and vulnerabilities, the issuance of risk warnings, and the adoption 
of the related macro-prudential policies should be key responsibilities in a reformed global 
framework for financial oversight, in which the IMF and the FSF should play a key role, but all 
relevant parties, including the new EU macro-prudential supervisory body, should be closely 
involved. Our European framework should fit in, and be compatible with the global approach 
to be adopted.  
Conclusion 
IV. 
In conclusion, let me emphasise that the establishment of the proposed EU body responsible 
for  macro-prudential  supervision,  the  effective  performance  of  its  tasks,  the  efficient 
translation  of  its  risk  assessments  and  macro-prudential  policy  recommendations  into 
appropriate  policy  measures  will  require  addressing  a  number  of  legal,  institutional  and 
organisational issues. One such issue is the institutional relationship and fruitful collaboration 
between  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Council  and  the  envisaged  European  System  of 
Financial Supervision. We should all contribute to addressing these issues in a constructive 
and  timely  manner,  for  the  strengthening  of  macro-prudential  supervision  in  Europe  is  an 
important and urgent policy objective. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2009
