Donald L Kohn: Interactions between monetary and fiscal policy in the 
current situation 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Conference  on  Monetary-Fiscal  Policy  Interactions,  Expectations, 
and Dynamics in the Current Economic Crisis, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
23 May 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Our current economic situation has altered some of the usual interactions between monetary 
and fiscal policy. One change regards the relative effects of monetary and fiscal policy. The 
depth and persistence of economic weakness has meant that traditional monetary policy – 
the target for the federal funds rate – has become constrained from easing as much as might 
be desirable under the circumstances, and, as a consequence, the target federal funds rate 
is  anticipated  to  remain  near  zero  for  some  time.  But  as  a  result,  fiscal  stimulus  has 
potentially become more effective in boosting economic activity than it usually would be.  
Another  change  involves  the  potential  for  monetary  policy  actions  to  have  greater  fiscal 
implications than usual. The Federal Reserve has extended both its open market operations 
and lending programs in unprecedented ways to ease financial conditions and to help revive 
economic  activity.  In  our  open  market  operations,  we  have  embarked  on  large-scale 
purchases  of  intermediate-  and  long-term  Treasury  securities,  agency  debt,  and  agency-
guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in order to put further downward pressure on 
borrowing  costs,  greatly  increasing  the  degree  of  maturity  transformation  on  our  balance 
sheet.  In  addition,  our  traditional  liquidity  operations  have  been  extended  to  include  new 
borrowers and new markets, with the potential for greater credit risk than usual. 
In  my  view,  our  nontraditional  policy  actions  have  been  necessary  to  avert  a  far  worse 
economic  outcome,  and  they  remain  consistent  with  the  traditional  goals  and  principles  of 
monetary policy. Moreover, as I will be discussing, we have structured these policies with the 
aim of accomplishing our objectives with few, if any, fiscal consequences. I will conclude with 
some  thoughts  about  the  transition  back  toward  more  typical  monetary  policy  as  the 
economy and financial markets improve.1 
Fiscal policy when monetary policy is at the zero lower bound 
During  normal  economic  circumstances,  most  economists  do  not  view  expansionary  fiscal 
policy as an especially effective tool for producing a sustained increase in aggregate demand 
and  in  resource  utilization.  Ordinarily,  financial  market  participants  would  expect  monetary 
policy  to  react  by  increasing  the  target  federal  funds  rate  over  time  to  keep  output  near 
potential  and  inflation  near  its  desired  level.  Thus,  the  enactment  of  a  sustained  fiscal 
expansion would trigger an increase in expected short-term interest rates and hence long-
term interest rates. The higher long-term rates would also tend to reduce asset values and 
boost the foreign exchange value of the dollar. As a result, any initial increase in aggregate 
                                                 
1   The views presented here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors 
or the Federal Open Market Committee. Eric Engen, David Reifschneider, and John Roberts of the Board's 
staff contributed to these remarks. 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 1
output and employment from the fiscal expansion would be soon crowded out by reductions 
in household spending, business investment, and net exports.2 
But  in  the  current  weak  economic  environment,  a  fiscal  expansion  may  be  much  more 
effective in providing a sustained boost to economic activity. With traditional monetary policy 
currently constrained from further reductions in the target policy rate, and with many analysts 
forecasting  lower-than-desired  inflation  and  a  persistent,  large  output  gap,  agents  may 
anticipate that the target federal funds rate will remain near zero for an extended period. In 
this  situation,  fiscal  stimulus  could  lead  to  a  considerably  smaller  increase  in  long-term 
interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar, and to smaller decreases in asset 
prices, than under more normal circumstances. Indeed, if market participants anticipate the 
expansionary  fiscal  policy  to  be  relatively  temporary,  and  the  period  of  weak  economic 
activity and constrained traditional monetary policy to be relatively extended, they may not 
expect any increase in short-term interest rates for quite some time, thus damping any rise in 
long-term  interest  rates.  Moreover,  if  the  initial  boost  to  aggregate  spending  from  fiscal 
stimulus  raises  inflation  expectations,  then  real  short-term  interest  rates  would  tend  to 
decline,  given  that  the  nominal  short-term  interest  rate  is  constrained  at  the  zero  lower 
bound. All told, the result is likely to be considerably less of the usual crowding out of fiscal 
stimulus in these circumstances, thereby increasing the effectiveness of fiscal policy to boost 
the level of aggregate economic activity in the short to medium term. 
This scenario is supported by simulations using the Federal Reserve staff's FRB/US model, 
assuming all agents have rational expectations.3 For example, suppose the level of federal 
government  purchases  is  increased  permanently  by  1  percent  of  gross  domestic  product 
(GDP). Under normal circumstances, the fiscal spending multiplier – that is, the percentage 
response of real GDP to the boost in government spending – starts out at about 1 but then 
quickly  falls  to  zero  as  long-term  interest  rates  rise  so  that  private  spending  and  exports 
decline.  However,  if  financial  market  participants  anticipate  that  the  federal  funds  rate  will 
remain at zero for an appreciable period of time following the hike in government spending, 
the  simulated  short-run  fiscal  multiplier  rises  to  1.3  for  some  time.  Model  simulations  also 
indicate that the fiscal spending multiplier may rise even further – to around 2 – if the fiscal 
stimulus is expected to be temporary and to last no longer than the period when monetary 
policy holds short-term interest rates at the zero lower bound.4 
To  be  sure,  greater-than-usual  uncertainty  surrounds  estimates  of  the  size  of  the  fiscal 
multiplier under current circumstances, and its magnitude could be somewhat smaller than 
suggested  by  these  model  simulations.  With  lenders  unusually  cautious,  household  and 
business spending may react less than would normally be expected to low real interest rates 
because  tight  nonprice  credit  terms  are  restricting  access  to  borrowed  funds.  Also,  the 
above-normal  levels  of  uncertainty  faced  by  households  and  firms  could  damp  the 
responsiveness of consumption and investment spending to the boost in household income 
and business earnings generated by the fiscal stimulus. Finally, any increase in uncertainty 
about the longer-term trajectory of government borrowing could raise term premiums. 
                                                 
2   Of course, sustained changes in fiscal policy may have supply-side implications that affect the long-run level 
of potential output, and hence actual gross domestic product. Except to the extent that these long-run changes 
alter the equilibrium real rate of interest, however, they have only minor implications for monetary policy. 
In the FRB/US model, about 40 percent of households are estimated to be rule-of-thumb consumers, implying 
that they generally spend most of their current income. The remaining households are life-cycle consumers, 
implying  that  their  spending  decisions  are  influenced  by  their  expected  permanent  income rather than their 
current  income.  However,  these  consumers  are  nonetheless  relatively  sensitive  to  expected  changes  in 
income  over  the  next  several  years  because  they  are  assumed  to  discount  future  income  at  a  high  rate, 
reflecting its uncertain nature. 
3  
4   These basic results are also borne out by simulations using the Federal Reserve staff's estimated dynamic 
stochastic  general  equilibrium  (DSGE)  model  of  the  U.S.  economy,  EDO,  and  its  calibrated  multicountry 
DSGE model, SIGMA. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2009
Nontraditional monetary policies  
Current economic and financial conditions have not only changed the potential effectiveness 
of  fiscal  stimulus,  but  they  also  have  altered  the  way  in  which  monetary  policy  seeks  to 
support  economic  activity  and  foster  price  stability.  With  the  target  federal  funds  rate 
effectively  at  zero,  our  traditional  monetary  policy  tool  can  no  longer  provide  additional 
stimulus to the economy. Moreover, heightened uncertainty and pressures on intermediary 
balance  sheets  have  impaired  the  usual  channels  of  credit  intermediation.  In  these 
circumstances,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  provided  additional  monetary  stimulus  by  easing 
financial conditions more directly through its interventions in a variety of financial markets. In 
effect, we have stepped up our intermediation by making large volumes of asset purchases 
and loans, which have been associated with a very substantial increase in bank reserves on 
the liability side of our balance sheet. 
In open market operations, we have announced our intention to purchase up to $1.75 trillion 
in longer-term Treasury notes and bonds, agency debt, and agency MBS during this year. 
This program is intended to stimulate real economic activity by holding down intermediate- 
and  long-term  interest  rates  by  bringing  down  the  term  premium  on  these  securities  –  a 
mechanism  that  is  distinct  from  the  traditional  channel  whereby  a  shift  in  the  stance  of 
monetary  policy  affects  longer-term  yields  by  changing  the  expected  path  of  short-term 
interest rates.5 The preliminary evidence suggests that our program so far has worked; for 
example, our announcements regarding the large-scale asset purchase program coincided 
with  cumulative  restraint  on  the  average  level  of  longer-term  interest  rates,  perhaps  by  as 
much as 100 basis points by some estimates. 
That  the  Federal  Reserve  is  holding  a  portfolio  of  long-term  assets  on  its  books  is  not 
especially unusual – prior to the onset of the financial crisis, we held about $150 billion of 
Treasury  securities  with  maturities  of  more  than  five  years.  Moreover,  we  have  long  been 
authorized  to  purchase  securities  issued  by  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs). 
However,  in  the  current  circumstance,  the  scale  of  our  intended  holdings,  and  the  related 
expansion of the Fed's liabilities to acquire these assets, is unprecedented. Holding such a 
large portfolio of long-term assets does expose the Federal Reserve, and thus the taxpayer, 
to potential losses as short-term interest rates rise. We could end up financing our holdings 
of some low-yielding long-term assets with more expensive short-term liabilities or, we might 
have  to  sell  some  of  these  assets  at  a  loss  as  long-term  rates  rise.  But  in  gauging  the 
potential  cost  to  taxpayers  associated  with  future  interest  rate  movements,  several 
considerations are important to keep in mind. First, some of the Treasury and GSE debt that 
we are acquiring will run off over the next few years without any need for outright sales, as 
will some of the MBS as individuals sell or refinance their homes. Second, the yield curve 
currently has a steep upward slope. Accordingly, we are now earning an abnormally high net 
rate  of  return  by  funding  our  acquisition  of  long-term  assets  with  almost  zero-cost  excess 
reserves – and this relative yield relationship is likely to last for some time. Thus, in judging 
the potential budget cost over time, any possible future interest-rate-related losses need to 
be  balanced  against  the  current  elevated  level  of  our  net  interest  income.  Third,  our 
purchases  of  long-term  securities  are  boosting  economic  activity  and,  in  the  process, 
increasing government tax receipts relative to what they would have been in the absence of 
such  purchases.6  All  in  all,  although  we  have  now  taken  more  interest  rate  risk  onto  our 
                                                 
5   The mechanism for this effect seems to work, in part, through the habitat preference of investors for long- and 
short-term debt. Moreover, through indirect effects on other financial markets, LSAPs can also be effective in 
reducing interest rates on many other types of household and business credit. 
6   Although any calculation of the effect of our asset purchases on the economy is highly uncertain, estimates 
from our models suggest that nominal GDP could be as much as $1 trillion higher over the next several years 
than it would be without the large-scale asset purchase program. Such stimulus would not only significantly 
improve the economic welfare of our nation's citizens, but also could provide the federal government with as 
much as about $175 billion in greater tax revenues than it would otherwise receive. 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 3
balance  sheet  than  usual  (at  a  time  when  the private  sector  wants  to avoid  this  risk),  that 
action may boost, rather than reduce, the cumulative net income of the Treasury.  
Turning  to  our  credit  facilities,  our  usual  lending  through  the  discount  window  has  been 
extended  to  new  intermediaries  –  including  primary  dealers,  money  market  mutual  funds, 
and participants in securitization markets such as hedge funds and pension funds. And we 
have intervened more directly in severely impaired markets, such as those for commercial 
paper  and  securitized  consumer  and  mortgage  debt.  We  believe  these  interventions  have 
been  successful  in  supporting  economic  growth  by  bringing  down  interest  rates  on  the 
instruments involved, preventing fire sales of assets by intermediaries that would otherwise 
not have access to liquidity, and facilitating new lending. 
These unusual extensions of our lending facilities have raised concerns about the Federal 
Reserve taking on credit risk. While those concerns are understandable, I want to emphasize 
that  we  have  taken  a  variety  of  steps  to  minimize  credit  risk  in  setting  up  the  various 
nontraditional and temporary credit facilities that we have made available to a number of new 
borrowers.  For  almost  all  the  loans  we  have  made,  we  look  first  to  sound  borrowers  for 
repayment  and  then  to  underlying collateral.  Moreover,  we  lend less  than  the  value  of  the 
collateral, with the size of the "haircuts" depending on the riskiness of the collateral and on 
the  availability  of  market  prices  for  the  collateral.  Some  of  our  lending  programs  involve 
nonrecourse  loans  that  look  primarily  to  the  collateral  rather  than  to  the  borrower  for 
repayment.  In  these  instances,  we  typically  have  taken  only  the  highest-quality  collateral, 
and, in many cases, we have coordinated with the Treasury to have other sources available 
to  absorb  any  losses  that  might  nonetheless  occur.  An  example  of  a  program  that  relies 
importantly  on  monetary-fiscal  coordination  is  the  Term  Asset-Backed  Securities  Loan 
Facility,  whereby  protection  against  credit  risk  takes  the  form  of  capital  provided  by  the 
Treasury, using funds appropriated by the Congress for the Troubled Asset Relief Program. 
To be sure, loans or credit protection offered in association with government help to stabilize 
individual  systemically  important  institutions  likely  have  higher  credit  risk  than  our  more 
general  liquidity  facilities.  But  even  in  these  few  cases,  which  occurred  under  emergency 
conditions, we have taken steps to protect the Federal Reserve from credit losses and have 
asked the Treasury to take these loans off our balance sheet. To reduce the risk of future 
problems  here,  a  new  regulatory  regime  should  be  developed  that  will  allow  the  U.S. 
government to address effectively at an early stage the potential failure of any systemically 
critical financial institution. 
Finally,  there  is  the  question  of  whether  the  Federal  Reserve  has  become  involved  in  the 
inherently fiscal function of allocating credit to specific sectors of the economy. Because of 
the  lack  of  liquidity,  risk-taking,  and  arbitrage  in  markets,  we  have  been  forced  to  counter 
tight  financial  conditions  through  interventions  in  particular  markets,  which  can  have 
differential effects. But our actions have been aimed at increasing credit flows for the entire 
economy, and they have been effective in that regard. For example, our large-scale asset 
purchases  of  agency  securities  and  agency-guaranteed  MBS  have  helped  mortgage 
markets,  but  they  also  appear  to  have  put  downward  pressure  on  other  long-term  interest 
rates, as we expected. Similarly, our other efforts to supply liquidity to the financial system 
have been intended to be broad based, helping banks, investment banks, and money market 
mutual  funds  perform  their  intermediary  functions  and  helping  restart  widely  utilized 
securitization markets. 
Both the Treasury and the Federal Reserve understand, and have acknowledged in the joint 
statement released on March 23, that it is important for the Federal Reserve to avoid credit 
risk  and  credit  allocation.7  Our  lender-of-last-resort  responsibilities  should  only  involve 
                                                 
7   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and U.S. Department of the Treasury (2009), "The Role of 
the Federal Reserve in Preserving Financial and Monetary Stability: Joint Statement by the Department of the 
Treasury and the Federal Reserve," joint press release, March 23. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2009
lending that is appropriately secured. Actions taken by the Federal Reserve should also aim 
to  improve  financial  and  credit  conditions  broadly  and  not  to  allocate  credit  to  narrowly 
defined sectors or classes of borrowers, as any decisions to influence the allocation of credit 
is the role of fiscal policy. Moreover, I believe the essential role for an independent monetary 
policy  authority  pursuing  financial  stability,  economic  growth,  and  price  stability  remains 
widely appreciated. Indeed, the joint statement of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve also 
included an agreement to continue to pursue additional tools to control our balance sheet to 
reinforce  our  ability  to  conduct  an  independent  policy  in  pursuit  of  our  macroeconomic 
objectives – the final topic that I will discuss today. 
Transition back to more traditional monetary policy 
An  important  issue  with  our  nontraditional  policies  is  the  transition  back  to  a  more  normal 
stance  and  operations  of  monetary  policy  as  financial  conditions  improve  and  economic 
activity  picks  up  enough  to  increase  resource  utilization.  These  actions  will  be  critical  to 
ensuring price stability as the real economy returns to normal. The decision about the timing 
of a turnaround in policy will be similar to that faced by the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) in every cyclical downturn – it has to choose when, and how quickly, to start raising 
the federal funds rate. In the current circumstances, the difference will be that we will have to 
start this process with an unusually large and more extended balance sheet. 
In my view, the economy is only now beginning to show signs that it might be stabilizing, and 
the upturn, when it begins, is likely to be gradual amid the balance sheet repair of financial 
intermediaries and households. As a consequence, it probably will be some time before the 
FOMC will need to begin to raise its target for the federal funds rate. Nonetheless, to ensure 
confidence in our ability to sustain price stability, we need to have a framework for managing 
our balance sheet when it is time to move to contain inflation pressures. 
Our expanded liquidity facilities have been explicitly designed to wind down as conditions in 
financial markets return to normal, because the costs of using these facilities are set higher 
than would typically prevail in private markets during more usual times. Indeed, some of our 
emergency  facilities  –  the  Term  Securities  Lending  Facility  and  the  Primary  Dealer  Credit 
Facility – have already seen reduced use as funding markets have returned to more normal 
functioning. Managing the assets acquired under our large-scale asset purchase program will 
require a different set of techniques. As I have already noted, some portion of these assets 
will run off on their own. In addition, we can actively manage the asset levels down by selling 
the  assets  outright  or  on  a  temporary  basis  through  reverse-repurchase  transactions. 
Moreover, we could run off these holdings slowly while still raising the federal funds rate if we 
increased the rate paid on excess reserves held at the Federal Reserve. In principle, the rate 
paid  on  excess  reserves  should  act  as  a  floor  on  the  federal  funds  rate;  although  recent 
experience  suggests  that  it  may  not  establish  a  hard  floor,  that  experience  has  been 
influenced  by  the  unwillingness  of  banks  to  arbitrage  in  size  in  the  current  circumstances 
when they are worried about their capital. Finally, as I've already noted, the Administration 
has  said  it  will  work  with  us  and  the  Congress  to  get  us  an  additional  tool  for  absorbing 
reserves.  
Conclusion  
Experiences  studied  over  a  range  of  countries  and  periods  of  history  tell  us  that  central 
banks  need  a  degree  of  insulation  from  short-term  political  pressures  if  they  are  to 
consistently foster the achievement of their medium-term macroeconomic objectives of price 
stability  and  high  employment.  This  independence  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  has 
been  supported  by  minimizing  the  fiscal  implications  of  monetary  policy  operations.  The 
Federal Reserve has attempted to maintain this separation while extending the range of our 
open  market  operations  and  discount  window  lending.  But  changing  policy  interaction  and 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 5
greater cooperation between fiscal and monetary authorities have been an inevitable aspect 
of  effective  policy  initiatives  to  meet  our  macroeconomic  objectives  in  the  current  financial 
and economic crises. As the economic recovery takes hold, we will need to return to more 
normal modes of operation – a circumstance this central banker is very much looking forward 
to. 
6 
 BIS Review 63/2009
