Željko Rohatinski: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Croatia 
Address  of  Dr  Željko  Rohatinski,  Governor  of  the  Croation  National  Bank,  at  a  press 
conference, Zagreb, 18 February 2009. 
 I  am  glad  that  you  have  responded  to  our  invitation.  At  a  similar  gathering  less  than  two 
months ago, we informed you about CNB's views of the then current economic situation and 
our  preliminary  expectations  regarding  trends  in  2009.  In  the  interim,  some  of  our 
assumptions have proved to be correct and the CNB has taken, and will continue to take, 
appropriate measures. Now I would first like to inform you about the measures taken, putting 
them in the context of wider international and domestic developments. 
The slowdown in economic growth, evident in the second and third quarters of 2008, in the 
fourth quarter virtually turned into stagnation at an annual level, so that – despite the annual 
growth rate of about 2.3 percent for 2008 as a whole – the slowdown in economic activity is 
obviously continuing into 2009. The two key problems in the Croatian economy, deteriorating 
over the years, have been seriously aggravated under such circumstances: the problem of 
the current account deficit, estimated at about EUR 4.5bn or 11 percent of GDP in 2008, and 
that of external debt, standing at EUR 39bn at the end of 2008 and accounting for 94 percent 
of GDP. These two major problems will determine general economic trends in 2009 as they 
represent the main challenge for overall economic policy. This policy will have to address the 
issue of preventing the escalation of their negative consequences against a background of 
the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis,  which  is,  in  both  its  aspects,  affecting  Croatia  as 
well. 
This policy will be faced with several serious limitations. The first is related to a drop in export 
demand, estimated at about 3 percent in the goods and services sector. The second involves 
a sharp decrease in foreign direct investments, due to the fact that not much is left to be sold 
following the privatisation of a share in Ina. The third limitation relates to a halt in the growth 
of foreign borrowing by enterprises, caused by the capital market contraction, and is further 
exacerbated by concerns about to what extent it will be possible to refinance their existing 
debt  in  2009.  The  fourth  limitation  is  posed  by  the  high  repayments  of  total  external  debt 
falling due this year, approximately amounting to EUR 12.8bn in principal and EUR 1bn in 
interest, which is about one third of GDP. This amount includes an approximate EUR 6bn in 
outstanding principal of enterprise and government debt. In consequence of these external 
limitations, import financing will be impossible to keep at the present level. Accordingly, we 
estimate  a  decrease  of  about  8  percent  in  imports,  and  of  about  5  percent  in  imports 
excluding oil, which would also result in the current account deficit narrowing from about 11 
percent of GDP in 2008 to 6-6.5 percent of GDP in 2009. 
Such a situation leaves little room for maneuver when it comes to deciding on the economic 
policy to be implemented in this year, and probably in the following year. This policy should 
be aimed at halting the growth of domestic consumption, changing its structure and creating 
savings at all levels. The previously-mentioned external limitations and such economic policy 
will inevitably produce a negative impact on economic growth and on the society as a whole. 
The main concern in this regard should not be about whether the GDP rate will be reduced 
by 1 or 2 or 3 percent, but about maintaining a healthy core of the economy and ensuring its 
financing and operation under these aggravated conditions. 
It need not be emphasised that the financial sector and its stability play a major role in this 
process. There are two parallel objectives that need to be achieved in order for this stability 
to be sustained: one is to maintain the country's external liquidity and the other is to maintain 
the stability of the exchange rate. These two objectives are interrelated and inseparable. A 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 1
failure to achieve them would result in the activation of all types of risks: currency risk, credit 
risk,  risk  of  a  rating  drop,  risk  related  to  the  price  increase  and  halted  inflow  of  foreign 
currency funds, in short, of risks leading to the collapse of the financial system. There is no 
doubt that the normal functioning of the financial system would be undermined and that all 
the participants that directly or indirectly constitute this system, and have a major impact on 
its functioning, especially banks, would be affected. 
It is a well-known fact that banks in Croatia had good financial results at the end of 2008 and 
that they even outperformed their parent banks. Their rate of return on capital exceeded 10 
percent  and  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  stood  above  14  percent,  which  enabled  them,  and 
continues to enable them, to safely conduct their business operations. However, it is also the 
fact  that  their  operating  conditions  have  considerably  changed  and  that  this  change  is 
reflected  on  the  possible  modalities  of  their  operation  in  2009.  The  changed  conditions 
include a decline in external financing and an increase in its costs, a rise in domestic foreign 
exchange demand and an increase in domestic borrowing requirements of the government, 
which will, in this way too, have to refinance the repayment of a portion of its external debt. 
This  change  in  the  conditions  has  also  resulted  in  banks'  efforts  to  influence,  through 
proposed arrangements with the CNB and some other channels, some aspects of the central 
bank's monetary policy. During the negotiations between the Ministry of Finance and a bank 
consortium on the granting of a EUR 750m loan, banks caused an unprecedented situation, 
conditioning  the  granting  of  the  loan  upon  four  major  changes  to  be  made  in  the  CNB's 
policy. These requirements were as follows: to abolish the limits imposed on credit growth, or 
to  monitor  this  growth  on  the  basis  of  original  currencies  in  which  loans  are  granted,  to 
reduce the kuna allocated portion of reserve requirements from 75 to 50 percent, to ensure 
sufficient levels of kuna liquidity in order to constantly keep the money market interest rate 
below  10  percent,  and  to  harmonise  the  central  bank's  exchange  rate  control  mechanism 
with banks. 
I  would  like  to  clarify  the  background  to  these  requests,  not  with  an  intention  to  criticise 
banks,  but  to  explain  which  elements  the  central  bank  takes  into  account  in  defining  and 
implementing  its  measures.  Let  me  start  with  the  statement,  coming  not  only  from  the 
banking circles, that under the deteriorated foreign borrowing conditions there is no point in 
insisting  on  curbing  the  growth  of  banks'  credit  placements,  especially  in  a  situation  when 
banks themselves are planning for the growth in 2009 to remain below the prescribed limits. 
Some were also of the opinion that some banks have to altogether cease lending because of 
the imposed limits. However, banks' household and corporate placements increased by 11.2 
percent at the end of January this year relative to December 2007, which was the basis for 
the calculation pursuant to the decision to limit banks' placement growth. With the limit for 
growth set at 13 percent, banks in January had sufficient room for normal credit growth. The 
"catch" was, however, in the foreign currency clause, which, each time when the exchange 
rate  depreciates  to  a  more  significant  degree,  increases  the  nominal  value  of  loans  and 
lowers the limits for banks. This is not a problem with loans indexed to the euro, as the kuna 
has depreciated versus the euro by only 0.7 percent in the past 13 months. However, it has 
depreciated by 12.3 percent against the Swiss franc, so that banks having a large share of 
loans indexed to the Swiss franc have found the limits "too low", and have also had to slow 
down their placement growth in order to avoid purchasing CNB bills. 
In this regard, I would like to stress that on several occasions in 2006 and 2007 we publicly 
warned against risks connected with loans indexed to the Swiss franc, both for clients and for 
commercial banks. Deputy Governor Vujčić spoke of it in the Parliament, but our warnings 
fell  on  deaf  ears.  Interests  on  these  loans  were  lower  than  interests  on  other  loans  so 
demand grew. In the meantime, even with such low interest rates, due to the appreciation of 
the  Swiss  franc,  the  kuna  value  and  repayments  of  these  loans  sizeably  increased.  As  a 
result  came  the  banks'  wish  to  solve  their  limit  problems  by  removing  restrictions  on 
placements  and  monitoring  loans  on  the  basis  of  their  original  currency.  As  regards  this 
issue,  the  CNB  cannot  and  will  not  do  anything.  We  warned  against  the  risks,  all  market 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2009
players were aware or should have been aware of this. They opted for such loans and are 
now faced with the consequences. Thus, we do not see any restrictions on the growth of total 
bank  placements  arising  from  the  effects  of  regulation.  Provided,  of  course,  that  the 
exchange rate remains stable. However, some banks seem not to share these expectations. 
Therefore,  I  think  that  recent  references  to  the  exchange  rate  depreciation  as  being  very 
likely were aimed at stepping up banks' requests for removal of limits on placements. True, 
against  strong  depreciation,  maintaining  these  limits  could  lead  to  a  credit  crunch  in  the 
country. But this is an unrealistic scenario. 
The second and the third bank requests relate to the increase in kuna liquidity, while in the 
background lurks their wish to ensure additional sources of liquidity for continued growth of 
their  placements  through  intensified  CNB  issuing  activities.  This  is  irregardless  of  the  fact 
that experience has shown that high kuna liquidity creates direct depreciation pressure on 
the kuna exchange rate. 
The  last  request,  having  to  do  with  harmonised  efforts  of  banks  and  the  central  bank  in 
maintaining the exchange rate stability involved a scenario under which the CNB would close 
out  banks'  short  position  under  a  previously  agreed  exchange  rate  at  the  end  of  each 
business day. In other words, the stability of the exchange rate would be maintained solely at 
the expense of the central bank's foreign exchange reserves. 
The CNB, of course, did not concede to such request. It is good that the Ministry of Finance 
managed  to  secure  a  credit  arrangement  worth  EUR  750m  without  attempts  to  exert 
pressure on the CNB. However, these elements are still present. 
As for the functioning of the banking system under these new circumstances, everything we 
know tells us that the stability of the financial system is imperative for maintaining a normal 
economic situation in the country and for the functioning of the economy as a whole. This 
necessarily presupposes the stability of the exchange rate as the key factor for price stability. 
All market participants must give their contribution, including commercial banks, not out of 
altruism but in their own best interest. Rising inflation, rising interest rates, the risk of loan 
repayment  defaults,  disturbances  in  external  payments,  if  it  comes  to  that,  would  all  have 
significant  adverse  effects  on  the  operation  of  banks.  One  only  needs  to  recollect  what 
happened in other countries, such as Hungary, not to mention any others, and the problems 
banks were faced with because of such disturbances. 
For  this  reason,  we  feel  that  banks  in  Croatia,  regardless  of  being  foreign-owned,  cannot 
operate  without  taking  account  of  the  state  of  the  economy,  their  clients  and  the  financial 
system of the country as a whole. It is their interest that must prevail despite the problems 
faced  by  their  parent  banks.  In  this  regard,  we  explained  to  Mr  Pröll,  the  Austrian  finance 
minister, that the CNB would not look favourably upon attempts to withdraw capital, deposits 
or  pay  out  total  accumulated  profits,  because  that  would  destabilise  the  domestic  banking 
system.  In  such  a  case,  the  CNB  would  be  forced  to  undertake  protective  measures, 
regardless  of  thus  connected  risks.  We  received  assurances  that  there  would  not  be  any 
withdrawals. 
The second imperative relates to foreign currency assets at commercial banks, that is, liquid 
foreign currency claims of EUR 7.6bn (roughly the amount of the CNB's net foreign currency 
reserves), which under the circumstances must be used for maintaining the stability of the 
financial system. In October, we repealed the marginal reserve requirement in the amount of 
EUR 460m, we introduced two changes in the system of currency allocation of the reserve 
requirement (effect: EUR 1.1bn) and we have recently lowered the minimum rate of foreign 
currency claims from 28.5 to 25 percent, thus releasing EUR 840m. Today we lowered this 
rate  from  25  to  20  percent,  releasing  a  further  EUR  1.25bn.  Our  further  activities  will  be 
aimed  at  direct  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market:  today  we  already  sold  EUR 
185m in the foreign exchange market at the average foreign exchange rate of 7.44 kuna for 
one euro, while the value of the previous intervention was EUR 328m, which means that in 
the past three weeks more than half a billion euros was sold to banks. These interventions 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 3
were  aimed  at  preventing  sudden  short-term  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  However,  foreign 
exchange interventions cannot remain the CNB's only instrument. Indirectly, we will influence 
the stability of the kuna exchange rate through kuna liquidity: today, for example, out of the 
HRK 8.5bn bids submitted at the repo auction, a half was accepted. 
Hence, we do not intend to change the decision limiting banks' placements growth and we 
expect the fiscal policy to do its part in preserving stability. We are aware that restrictive kuna 
liquidity policy leads to the growth of money market interest rates, but this growth does not 
need  to  be  automatically  transferred  in  the  growth  of  interest  rates  on  household  and 
corporate  loans.  Still,  objectively  speaking,  it  would  be  difficult  to  expect  interest  rates  to 
decline.  This,  however,  does  not  mean  that  the  CNB  is  socially  insensitive.  We  feel  that 
debtors are better protected by preventing the foreign exchange rate from depreciating than 
by  preventing  interest  rate  growth.  Interest  rates  have  gone  up  by  one  to  two  percentage 
points, while depreciation is spoken of in two digit numbers. I would like us to remember the 
1990s  when  it  was  said  that  inflation  of  15  percent  a  month  was  not  the  greatest  evil  our 
economy could face and that it would be sufficient only to index salaries, the exchange rate, 
and interest rates for the system to work. But then inflation soon reached 40 percent a month 
and the system collapsed. A similar thing would happen with the exchange rate. Once the 
genie is out of the bottle it is hard to put it back. In a situation like this, the exchange rate is 
either  defended  or  let  go.  There  is  no  in  between.  We  all  know  where  depreciation  would 
take us. 
This is our view of the situation in 2009. Whether we will succeed in all our plans, we cannot 
guarantee. Great many things do not even depend on us, not even on the market players in 
Croatia  but  on  external  factors.  In  any  case,  we  will  do  everything  that  is  in  our  power  to 
come out of this situation alive and with as few wounds as possible. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2009
