Axel A Weber: 6th Bundesbank Lecture 
Welcoming remarks by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the 6th Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, 4 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
1  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to welcome you to this year’s Bundesbank Lecture here in the very heart 
of Berlin.  
I am particularly grateful that Dominique Strauss-Kahn, Managing Director of the IMF, will be 
our speaker. My special welcome to Dominique and thanks for accepting our invitation. It is 
an honour to have you here.  
Let me now say a few words regarding both this event and our speaker for today. 
On the event 
2  
The Bundesbank Lecture Series has two objectives: First, to provide a high-level forum for 
public debate on economic and monetary policy issues. Second, to raise the Bundesbank’s 
profile in the German capital.  
Today’s gathering marks the 6th anniversary of the Lecture Series, which started in 2004. 
The  previous  speakers  were:  Alan  Greenspan,  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Tommaso  Padoa-
Schioppa, Ben Bernanke and Mario Draghi. 
On the subject 
3  
The  financial  crisis  has  been  the  dominant  topic  for  more  than  two  years  now.  Since  the 
crisis intensified last September, policymakers have been fighting it on many fronts.  
• 
Central banks have acted through massive interest rate cuts and an extremely large-
scale provision of liquidity, but also through recourse to unconventional measures.  
National  governments  have  initiated  substantial  fiscal  stimulus  packages  and  bank 
rescue measures.  
 These extensive efforts are having stabilising effects on the financial markets and the real 
economy.  The  global  recession  is  bottoming-out,  and  strains  in  banking  and  financial 
markets are abating. 
Nonetheless,  huge  uncertainties  remain.  The  crisis  is  not  yet  over  and  there  will,  in  all 
likelihood, be further tests ahead.  
However, as forward-looking decision-makers, we are well advised to take a step back and 
consider the longer term as well. In this context, I would like to stress two issues:  
• 
First,  we  need  to  reform  the  financial  market  architecture  to  make  markets  more 
resilient and less prone to speculative exuberance. In order to achieve this, we have 
to use the current political momentum.  
Second,  credible  exit  strategies  will  be  needed  at  the  right  moment  all  around  the 
globe.  
 Both issues represent important preconditions for a return  to sustainable growth and price 
stability.  
BIS Review 103/2009 
 1
The issue of credible exit strategies includes winding down excessive liquidity and rebuilding 
fiscal balances: Without a doubt, fiscal stimuli and bank rescue measures were warranted, 
but they have markedly increased debt. A substantial fiscal consolidation is needed in order 
to maintain confidence in fiscal sustainability – all the more so as demographic challenges 
are looming.  
In addition, we have to step up efforts to rebalance economic growth. The global recession 
and the financial crisis may have dampened the level and/or growth rate of potential output, 
in which case structural reforms have a role to play. 
So far, the measures I have listed are based on national policies – even though they concern 
many  countries.  But  there  is  also  a  truly  international  aspect,  namely  reducing  global 
imbalances.  
These constituted an integral part of the global pattern of low interest rates and large capital 
inflows,  particularly  into  the  USA.  Reducing  such  imbalances  implies  the  continued 
implementation of policies that redistribute the pattern of global demand, including exchange 
rate issues, such as the choice of exchange rate regimes and reserve currencies.  
Hence, there is no time for complacency and policy responses to the crisis should not lose 
momentum!  
The IMF is working hard on several fronts to help its members combat the crisis. It closely 
tracks  economic  and  financial  developments  worldwide,  analyses  risks  and  gives  policy 
advice  to  countries  and  regions.  It  has  significantly  expanded  lending  to  assist  EMEs  and 
low-income economies hit by the crisis.  
It  is  also  intensifying  its  collaboration  with  the  FSB  (which  brings  together  central  banks, 
supervisory  bodies  and  international  financial  institutions)  in  order  to  provide  an  early 
warning of macroeconomic and financial risks and the actions needed to address them.  
In  a  nutshell,  in  doing  so,  the  IMF  aims  to  foster  global  cooperation,  to  secure  a  stable 
international monetary system and financial stability, and to promote high employment and 
sustainable economic growth.  
The current crisis highlights that an international body like the IMF is an indispensable part of 
the international structures which exist for economic analysis, cooperation and coordination.  
On Dominique Strauss-Kahn 
4  
Dominique Strauss-Kahn has been the Managing Director of the IMF since November 2007.  
This position – together with his economic, political and international expertise – makes him 
an excellent speaker on the global financial and economic crisis.  
Prior  to  assuming  office  at  the  IMF,  he  was  a  long-time  member  of  the  French  National 
Assembly. He served both as Minister of Economy, Finance and Industry (1997-1999) and 
as Minister of Industry and International Trade (1991-1993).  
Dominique began his career as an assistant professor and was subsequently engaged as a 
professor of economics at the Universities of Nancy and Paris. From 2001 to 2007, he taught 
economics  at  the  Paris  Institute  of  Political  Studies.  He  was  also  a  visiting  professor  at 
Stanford University in 2000.  
The title of his speech is “Beyond the crisis – sustainable growth and a stable international 
monetary system” – a highly relevant and interesting topic to all of us.  
I am looking forward to hearing your insights. The floor is yours. 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2009
