Elizabeth A Duke: Credit availability and prudent lending standards 
Testimony of Ms Elizabeth A Duke, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 25 March 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus and members of the Committee, I am pleased to 
appear today to discuss several issues related to the state of the banking system. First, I will 
discuss  the  condition  of  the  banking  system,  credit  conditions,  and  bank  underwriting 
standards.  Then  I  will  describe  Federal  Reserve  activities  to  enhance  liquidity  in  financial 
markets  and  improve  conditions  in  financial  markets.  Finally,  I  will  discuss  the  Federal 
Reserve's efforts to ensure the overall safety and soundness of the banking system as well 
as promote credit availability.  
As you are well aware, the Federal Reserve has taken significant steps to improve financial 
market conditions, and has worked with the Treasury and other bank and thrift supervisors to 
address issues at U.S. banking organizations. We remain attentive to the need for banks to 
remain in sound financial condition while at the same time to continue lending prudently to 
creditworthy  borrowers.  Fortunately,  many  banks  continue  to  lend  in  this  environment,  but 
with  the  shutdown  of  most  securitization  markets  and  the  evaporation  of  many  types  of 
nonbank credit, it is that much more important right now for the U.S. banking system to be 
able to carry out its credit intermediation function. 
Background 
The Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority for bank holding companies, 
state-chartered  banks  that  are  members  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (state  member 
banks), and certain other financial institutions and activities. We work with other federal and 
state  supervisory  authorities  to  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking  industry, 
foster  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  and  provide  for  fair  and  equitable  treatment  of 
consumers  in  their  financial  transactions.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  not  the  primary  federal 
supervisor  for  the  majority  of  commercial  bank  assets.  Rather,  it  is  the  consolidated 
supervisor of bank holding companies, including financial holding companies, and conducts 
inspections of those institutions. 
The primary purpose of inspections is to ensure that the holding company and its nonbank 
subsidiaries do not pose a threat to the soundness of the company's depository institutions. 
In fulfilling this role, the Federal Reserve is required to rely to the fullest extent possible on 
information and analysis provided by the appropriate supervisory authority of the company's 
bank, securities, or insurance subsidiaries. The Federal Reserve is also the primary federal 
supervisor of state member banks, sharing supervisory responsibilities with state agencies. 
In this role, Federal Reserve supervisory staff regularly conduct on-site examinations and off-
site monitoring to ensure the soundness of supervised state member banks. 
The  Federal  Reserve  is  involved  in  both  regulation  –  establishing  the  rules  within  which 
banking organizations must operate – and supervision – ensuring that banking organizations 
abide by those rules and remain, overall, in safe and sound condition. A key aspect of the 
supervisory process is evaluating risk-management practices. Because rules and regulations 
in many cases cannot reasonably prescribe the exact practices each individual bank should 
use  for  risk  management,  supervisors  design  policies  and  guidance  that  expand  upon 
requirements  set  in  rules  and  regulations  and  establish  expectations  for  the  range  of 
BIS Review 35/2009 
 1
acceptable  practices.  Supervisors  rely  extensively  on  these  policies  and  guidance  as  they 
conduct examinations and assign supervisory ratings. 
Beginning in the summer of 2007, the U.S. and global economies entered a period of intense 
financial turmoil that has presented significant challenges for the financial services industry. 
These challenges intensified in the latter part of 2008 as the global economic environment 
weakened  further.  As  a  result,  parts  of  the  U.S.  banking  system  have  come  under  severe 
strain, with some banking institutions suffering sizable losses. 
State of the banking system  
I would now like to briefly summarize overall conditions at U.S. commercial banks and large 
banking  holding  companies  (BHCs).  For  U.S.  commercial  banks  as  a  group,  profitability 
measures  deteriorated  dramatically  during  2008.  Indeed,  commercial  banks  posted  a 
substantial  and  rare  aggregate  loss  for  fourth  quarter  of  2008,  the  first  time  this  has 
happened  since  the  late  1980s.  This  loss  in  large  part  reflected  write-downs  on  trading 
assets,  high  goodwill  impairment  charges,  and,  most  significantly,  increased  loan-loss 
provisions  taken  in  response  to  deteriorating  asset  quality,  higher  net  charge-offs,  and 
weakening economic conditions. As of year-end 2008, loans delinquent 30 days or more or 
on nonaccrual status exceeded 4.5 percent of total loans, the highest level since the early 
1990s. Moreover, nonaccruing loans – those most likely to result in additional charge-offs – 
reached  almost  two-percent  of  loans,  a  ratio  more  than  double  that  of  year-end  2007. 
Despite poor earnings performance, capital ratios held up relatively well, with reported tier 1 
and total risk-based capital ratios increasing over the course of the year. The performance of 
state member banks tracked that of the industry as a whole. 
The earnings performance of the 50 largest U.S.-based bank holding companies (BHCs) as 
a group, which together represent more than three-fourths of all assets at BHCs, deteriorated 
rapidly during the last two quarters of 2008. In aggregate, these companies reported a fourth 
quarter  net  loss  of  $42.7  billion  –  versus  a  $25.5  billion  third-quarter  loss  –  due  mainly  to 
elevated loan-loss provisions, very large goodwill impairment charges, and a continuation of 
heavy trading asset write-downs. For the year, these companies generated a $67 billion loss. 
Nonetheless,  regulatory  capital  ratios  actually  improved  during  2008  –  supported  by 
substantial  private  capital  investments  in  these  companies  during  the  first  half  and  by  the 
Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP) investments by the U.S. Treasury toward the end of 
the  year.  As  a  consequence,  these  bank  holding  companies  in  aggregate  continued  to 
maintain capital ratios well in excess of minimum regulatory requirements. 
Conditions in credit markets 
As  Chairman  Bernanke  noted  in  presenting  the  Board's  most  recent  monetary  policy 
testimony to Congress in February, the U.S. economy is  undergoing a severe contraction. 
From past experience, we know that borrowing by households and nonfinancial businesses 
has  tended  to  slow  during  economic  downturns.  Since  1953,  the  inflation-adjusted  growth 
rate of debt owed by households and nonfinancial businesses has fallen, on average, about 
2 percentage points at an annual rate in the year following a business cycle peak (as dated 
by the National Bureau of Economic Research, or NBER). The inflation-adjusted slowdown in 
debt  growth  during  the  past  year  has  been  much  more  pronounced  than  in  previous 
downturns: Annualized debt growth for households and nonfinancial businesses in the fourth 
quarter of 2008 (the most up-to-date reading) was, adjusted for inflation, about 7 percentage 
points slower than it was during the NBER-designated peak in the fourth quarter of 2007. 
The slowdown in debt growth has differed by type of borrower. For example, after increasing 
nearly 6 percent in the fourth quarter of 2007 (unadjusted for inflation), home mortgage debt 
declined  at  an  annual  rate  of  1.5  percent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year.  The  decline  in 
home mortgage debt has been sharper in this period than in any other recession for which 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2009
we have good data – dating back to the 1950s. Non-mortgage consumer credit also declined 
in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year  –  at  an  annual  rate  of  3.25  percent.  The  pull-back  in 
consumer credit has also been somewhat sharper than the average experience during the 
previous  nine  NBER  recessions.  Among  businesses,  growth  in  debt  for  nonfinancial 
corporations slowed from a 12.5 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2007 to a 1.5 
percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of last year. The slowdown in debt growth for this 
sector is also more substantial than has been experienced in past recessions. 
This simple comparison of the current slowdown in credit market flows to those in previous 
recessions  ignores  the  many  important  changes  to  the  financial  landscape  that  have 
occurred  during  the  past  half-century.  Significant  among  those  changes  was  the  large 
increase  in  the  flow  of  credit  coming  from  nonbank  sources.  For  example,  holdings  of 
household  mortgages  by  banks,  savings  institutions,  and  credit  unions  decreased  from  a 
share of more than 50 percent in 1985 to a share of about 30 percent of the total at the end 
of 2007. Similarly, banks held about 70 percent of outstanding consumer credit in 1985, but 
only about 45 percent in 2007. Of course, banks remain vital financial intermediaries, as the 
current  financial  crisis  demonstrates.  The  severe  turmoil  in  markets  for  securitized  assets 
has served to increase banks' importance. And the significance of banks in the provision of 
credit extends far beyond their direct loans. Banks supply credit indirectly by providing back-
up  liquidity  and  credit  support  to  other  financial  institutions  and  conduits  that  also 
intermediate credit flows. 
In 1950, banks' share of financial intermediation was about 50 percent, it fell and then rose to 
about  48  percent  in  the  mid-1970s,  then  declined  to  about  33  percent  at  the  turn  of  the 
century.  If  one  adjusts  the  data  to  include  "credit  equivalents"  for  the  off-balance-sheet 
activities of banks, then the adjusted market share of financial intermediation for banks would 
remain above 40 percent in recent years.  
In terms of direct lending, weekly data that the Federal Reserve Board collects from banks 
shows  that  total  bank  loans  and  leases  increased  almost  4  percent  during  2008.  The 
increase in bank lending for the year as a whole was below the roughly 10 percent pace of 
growth  seen  in  both  2006  and  2007.  Much  of the  increase  in  bank  lending  last  year  likely 
reflected  households  and  businesses  drawing  down  existing  lines  of  credit  rather  than 
extensions  of  new  loans.  In  addition,  the  freeze-up  of  the  securitization  markets  likely 
contributed to banks' balance sheet growth. 
According  to  the  Federal  Reserve's  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  on  Bank  Lending 
Practices,  banks  have  tightened  lending  standards  sharply  over  the  past  18  months.  The 
January 2009 Survey found that respondents had tightened their lending policies for all major 
loan categories further in late 2008. Respondents also indicated that demand for loans from 
both businesses and households continued to weaken, on balance, over the survey period. 
With  regard  to  commercial  loans  in  particular,  many  survey  respondents  pointed  to  a  less 
favorable  or  more  uncertain  economic  outlook  as  a  reason  for  tightening  their  lending 
standards  and  terms  over  the  previous  three  months.  Most  respondents  indicated  that  a 
worsening of industry-specific problems and their bank's reduced tolerance for risk were also 
important factors in their decision to tighten lending policies for commercial loans. Among the 
few respondents that saw an increase in loan demand over the previous three months, all 
indicated  that  business  borrowing  had  shifted  to  their  bank  from  other  bank  or  nonbank 
sources  because  the  other  sources  had  become  less  attractive.  In  addition,  more  than  30 
percent reported that inquiries from potential business borrowers had decreased during the 
survey period. 
For commercial real estate (CRE) lending, 80 percent of domestic banks reported that they 
had tightened their lending standards over the previous three months, slightly less than the 
roughly 85 percent that reported doing so in the October survey. Of note, about 30 percent of 
the respondents indicated that the shutdown of the commercial mortgage backed-securities 
(CMBS) securitization market had led to an increase in CRE lending at their bank over the 
BIS Review 35/2009 
 3
second  half  of  2008,  whereas  about  15  percent  indicated  that  the  shutdown  of  the  CMBS 
securitization market had reduced the volume of their CRE lending. 
Survey  respondents  also  noted  continued  tightening  for  consumer  products,  including 
residential real estate lending and revolving home equity lines of credit (HELOCs). Notably, 
only four of the nearly 80 respondents reported making subprime mortgage loans over the 
previous three months. 
Stepping back, it is now clear that in recent years banking and financial markets experienced 
a period in which risk was generally under-priced and where credit was too freely available. 
The  realization  by  many  market  participants  that  risks  were  larger  than  anticipated  has 
contributed to the decline in prices for financial assets. As a result, some financial institutions 
– including some banking organizations – have experienced significant losses, leading to the 
need to raise additional capital or, in some cases, sell or shut down operations. It is apparent 
that all banking institutions have now been impacted in some way by the adverse conditions 
of the current environment. 
Federal Reserve actions since 2007 
The Federal Reserve has responded forcefully to the financial and economic crisis and it will 
continue  to  do  so.  In  discussing  Federal  Reserve  actions,  I  will  first  summarize  monetary 
policy  actions  and  those  related  to  liquidity  provision,  and  then  highlight  our  supervisory 
actions. 
Monetary policy and liquidity provision 
In  terms  of  monetary  policy,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  aggressive.  As  you  know,  the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  began  to  ease  monetary  policy  in  September 
2007, and in December 2008, the Committee set a range of 0 to 25 basis points for the target 
federal  funds  rate.  We  have  also  employed  additional  tools  to  ease  financial  conditions, 
improve the functioning of credit markets, and thereby support economic activity. To improve 
mortgage  market  functioning  and  support  housing  markets  and  economic  activity  more 
broadly,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  begun  to  purchase  large  amounts  of  agency  debt  and 
mortgage-backed securities, and we recently announced substantial additional purchases of 
such  securities  through  year-end.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  announced  plans  to 
purchase  up  to  $300  billion  of  long-term  Treasury  securities  to  help  improve  conditions  in 
private credit markets. Since first announcing such purchases last November, the conforming 
fixed mortgage rate has fallen more than 1 percentage point. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  established  new  lending  facilities  and  expanded  existing 
facilities  to  enhance  the  flow  of  credit  to  businesses  and  households.  In  response  to 
heightened  stress  in  bank  funding  markets,  we  increased  the  size  of  the  Term  Auction 
Facility to help ensure that banks could obtain the funds they need to provide credit to their 
customers, and we expanded our network of swap lines with foreign central banks to ease 
conditions  in  interconnected  dollar  funding  markets  at  home  and  abroad.  Last  fall,  when 
money  markets  tightened  considerably  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  we 
established new lending facilities to provide liquidity to money market mutual funds and to 
support the functioning of the commercial paper market. 
The  U.S.  Treasury,  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  and  the  Federal 
Reserve have taken a number of actions to strengthen the financial sector and to promote 
the  availability  of  credit  to  businesses  and  households.  This  included  injecting  additional 
capital  into  banks,  increasing  FDIC  deposit  coverage,  providing  guarantees  of  selected 
senior  bank  obligations  and  noninterest-bearing  deposits,  and  establishing  new  liquidity 
facilities  to  financial  markets.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Treasury  recently 
launched the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) to facilitate the extension of 
credit to households and small businesses and anticipates that the range of eligible collateral 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2009
for this facility is likely to be expanded to other financial assets. The Federal Reserve expects 
to  assist  in  the  Treasury's  Public-Private  Partnership  Investment  Program,  announced  on 
Monday, by expanding the range of collateral eligible for the TALF program to include certain 
legacy securities. 
Supervisory activities and improvements to risk-management practices 
Many  of  the  current  problems  in  the  banking  and  financial  system  stem  from  risk-
management failures at a number of financial institutions, including some firms under federal 
supervision. Clearly, these lapses are unacceptable. The Federal Reserve has been involved 
in a number of exercises to understand, document and help address the risk-management 
lapses  and  shortcomings  at  major  financial  institutions,  including  those  undertaken  by  the 
Senior  Supervisors  Group,  the  President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets,  and  the 
multinational Financial Stability Forum.1  
Based on the results of these and other efforts, the Federal Reserve is taking vigorous steps 
to  improve  risk-management  practices  at  regulated  institutions.  Our  actions  have  covered 
liquidity risk management, capital planning and capital adequacy, firm-wide risk identification, 
residential  lending,  counterparty  credit  exposures,  and  commercial  real  estate  lending, 
among other areas. Liquidity and capital have been given special attention. 
The crisis has undermined previous conventional wisdom that a company, even in stressed 
environments, may readily borrow funds if it can offer high-quality collateral. For example, the 
inability  of  Bear  Stearns  to  borrow  even  against  U.S.  government  securities  led  to  its 
collapse.  As  a  result,  we  have  been  working  to  bring  about  needed  improvements  in 
institutions' liquidity risk-management practices. Along with our U.S. supervisory colleagues, 
we are closely monitoring the liquidity positions of banking organizations – on a daily basis 
for the largest and most critical firms – and are discussing key market developments and our 
supervisory  analyses  with  senior  management.  We  use  these  analyses  and  findings  from 
examinations  to  ensure  that  liquidity  and  funding  management,  as  well  as  contingency 
funding  plans,  are  sufficiently  robust  and  incorporate  various  stress  scenarios.  Looking 
beyond  the  present  period,  we  also  have  underway  a  broader-ranging  examination  of 
liquidity requirements. 
Similarly,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  closely  monitoring  the  capital  levels  of  banking 
organizations on a regular basis and discussing our evaluation with senior management. As 
part of our supervisory process, we have been conducting our own analysis of loss scenarios 
to anticipate the potential future capital needs of institutions. These needs may arise from, 
among other things, future losses or the potential for off-balance-sheet exposures to return to 
institutions' balance sheets. Here, too, we have been discussing our analyses with bankers 
and ensuring that their own internal analyses reflect a broad range of scenarios and capture 
stress  environments  that  could  impair  solvency.  We  have  intensified  efforts  to  evaluate 
institutions' capital planning and to bring about improvements where needed. 
Our efforts related to capital planning and capital adequacy are embodied in the interagency 
supervisory  capital  assessment  process,  which  began  in  February.  We  are  conducting 
assessments  of  selected  banking 
institutions'  capital  adequacy,  based  on  certain 
macroeconomic  scenarios.  For  this  assessment,  we  are  carefully  evaluating  the  forecasts 
submitted  by  each  financial  institution  to  ensure  they  are  appropriate,  consistent  with  the 
firm's  underlying  portfolio  performance,  and  reflective  of  each  entity's  particular  business 
activities and risk profile. The capital assessment program will permit supervisors to assess 
                                                 
1   Senior  Supervisors  Group  (2008),  "Observations  on  Risk  Management  Practices  during  the  Recent  Market 
Turbulence", March 6; President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial 
Market Developments", March 13; Financial Stability Forum (2008), "Report of the Financial Stability Forum on 
Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience", April 7. 
BIS Review 35/2009 
 5
whether  institutions'  capital  buffers  over  the  regulatory  capital  minimum  are  appropriate 
under more severe but plausible scenarios.  
To sum up our efforts to improve banks' risk management, we are looking at all areas of risk 
management – both on an individual and collective basis – to ensure that all institutions have 
their  risk-management  practices  at  satisfactory  levels.  More  generally,  where  we  have  not 
seen appropriate progress, we are aggressively downgrading supervisory ratings and using 
our enforcement tools. 
Maintaining balance in the supervisory process 
The Federal Reserve has long-standing policies and procedures in place to promote sound 
risk identification and management practices at regulated institutions that also support bank 
lending and the credit intermediation process. In fact, guidance issued as long ago as 1991, 
during  the  commercial  real  estate  crisis  that  began  in  the  late  1980s,  specifically  instructs 
examiners  to  ensure  that  regulatory  policies  and  actions  do  not  inadvertently  curtail  the 
availability of credit to sound borrowers.2 The 1991 guidance also states that examiners are 
to  "ensure  that  supervisory  personnel  are  reviewing  loans  in  a  consistent,  prudent,  and 
balanced fashion and to ensure that all interested parties are aware of the guidance." The 
1991 policy statement covers a wide range of specific topics, including: 
• 
the general principles that examiners follow in reviewing commercial real estate loan 
portfolios  
the indicators of troubled real estate markets, projects, and related indebtedness  
the factors examiners consider in their review of individual loans, including the use 
of appraisals and the determination of collateral value  
a discussion of approaches to valuing real estate, especially in troubled markets  
the  classification  guidelines  followed  by  the  agencies,  including  the  treatment  of 
guarantees  
the  factors  considered  in  the  evaluation  of  an  institution's  allowance  for  loan  and 
lease losses 
   This  emphasis  on  achieving  an  appropriate  balance  between  credit  availability  and  safety 
and soundness continues today. To the extent that institutions have experienced losses, hold 
less  capital,  and  are  operating  in  a  more  risk-sensitive  environment,  supervisors  expect 
banks to employ appropriate risk-management practices to ensure their viability. At the same 
time, it is important that supervisors remain balanced and not place unreasonable or artificial 
constraints on lenders that could hamper credit availability. 
As part of our effort to help stimulate appropriate bank lending, the Federal Reserve and the 
other federal banking agencies issued regulatory guidance in November 2008 to encourage 
banks to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers.3 The guidance was issued to encourage 
bank lending in a manner consistent with safety and soundness – specifically, by taking a 
balanced approach in assessing borrowers' ability to repay and making realistic assessments 
of  collateral  valuations.  This  guidance  has  been  reviewed  and  discussed  with  examination 
staff within the Federal Reserve System. 
Earlier, in April 2007, the federal financial institutions regulatory agencies issued a statement 
encouraging  financial  institutions  to  work  constructively  with  residential  borrowers  who  are 
                                                 
2   "Interagency  Policy  Statement  on  the  Review  and  Classification  of  Commercial  Real  Estate  Loans," 
(November 1991). 
3   "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Credit Worthy Borrowers," (November 2008). 
6 
 BIS Review 35/2009
financially unable to make their contractual payment obligations on their home loans.4 The 
statement  noted  that,  "prudent  workout  arrangements  that  are  consistent  with  safe  and 
sound lending practices are generally in the long-term interest of both the financial institution 
and the borrower." The statement also noted that, "the agencies will not penalize financial 
institutions  that  pursue  reasonable  workout  arrangements  with  borrowers  who  have 
encountered  financial  problems."  It  further  stated  that,  "existing  supervisory  guidance  and 
applicable accounting standards do not require institutions to immediately foreclose on the 
collateral underlying a loan when the borrower exhibits repayment difficulties." This guidance 
has also been reviewed by examiners within the Federal Reserve System. 
More generally, we have directed our examiners to be mindful of the procyclical effects of 
excessive  credit  tightening  and  to  encourage  banks  to  make  economically  viable  loans, 
provided such lending is based on realistic asset valuations and a balanced assessment of 
borrowers' repayment capacities. Across the Federal Reserve System, we have implemented 
training  and  outreach  to  underscore  these  intentions.  We  are  mindful  of  the  potential  for 
bankers  to  overshoot  in  their  attempt  to  rectify  lending  standards,  and  want  them  to 
understand that it is in their own interest to continue making loans to creditworthy borrowers. 
Conclusion 
The U.S. banking industry is facing serious challenges. The Federal Reserve, working with 
the other banking agencies has acted – and will continue to act – to ensure that the banking 
system remains safe and sound and is able to meet the credit needs of our economy. We 
have aggressively pursued monetary policy actions and provided liquidity to help repair the 
financial  system.  In  our  supervisory  efforts,  we  are  mindful  of  the  risk-management 
deficiencies  at  banking  institutions  revealed  by  the  current  crisis  and  are  ensuring  that 
institutions develop appropriate corrective actions. 
It will take some time for the banking industry to work through this current set of challenges 
and for the financial markets to recover. During that recovery, the economy will need a strong 
and stable financial system that can make credit available. The challenge for regulators and 
other authorities is to support prudential bank intermediation that helps restore the health of 
the  financial  system  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  We  want  banks  to  deploy  capital  and 
liquidity, but in a responsible way that avoids past mistakes and does not create new ones. 
Bankers should operate prudently in the current challenging environment, but should not let 
fear  drive  their  decisions.  The  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  work  with  other  banking 
agencies  and  the  Congress  to  promote  the  concurrent  goals  of  fostering  credit  availability 
and a safe and sound banking system. 
                                                 
4   "Federal Regulators Encourage Institutions to Work with Mortgage Borrowers Who Are Unable to Make Their 
Payments," (April 2007). 
BIS Review 35/2009 
 7
