Joseph Yam: Reflections relevant to the banking profession in Hong 
Kong 
Speech  by  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the 
Joint HKAB – HKIB Dinner in honour of Mr Joseph Yam's retirement as Chief Executive of 
the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Hong Kong, 28 September 2009. 
 Peter, friends and colleagues of the banking profession, 
Not only am I deeply touched by all of the kind and generous words that have been said this 
evening, but I have also been greatly impressed by the skits and other entertainments put on 
this evening. I had always assumed that whatever surplus talents bankers may have were 
always  used  up  on  the  golf  course.  Now  I  know  that  these  talents  stretch  in  other,  more 
cultural directions. Thank you all for such an enjoyable and unforgettable evening. 
This is a convivial occasion, and the last thing you will want to hear is a long and earnest 
speech from me. However, this will be my last formal event with you as Monetary Authority. 
And I think you all know me well enough to expect more than just a few words of gratitude – 
however heartfelt – for this splendid event. I shall be brief. Much has been said and written 
recently about the origins, progress and implications of the global financial crisis that erupted 
with such fury just over a year ago. I shall therefore simply offer a few reflections that I hope 
will be relevant to the banking profession in Hong Kong. 
The  first  observation  is  that  Hong  Kong  has,  so  far,  escaped  the  worst.  We  have  not 
experienced a collapse of our financial system, or a nationalisation of our major banks, or 
other forms of government intervention that will burden taxpayers for many years to come. In 
fact, our banking system has been resilient throughout the crisis, and the measures taken 
early on to reinforce confidence and ensure liquidity were effective and at minimal cost to the 
public  purse.  This  is  not  an  observation  to  be  made  with  any  sense  of  gloating  or 
complacency. We all recall the intense anxiety of those days, and many in our community 
have suffered losses as a result of mistakes and mismanagement in other financial systems. 
Nevertheless,  our  well-capitalised  banks  have  been  well  prepared  for  shock.  Crisis 
management,  particularly  when  public  confidence  momentarily  came  under  strain,  was 
effective. The generally cautious approach of our bankers, your refusal to get carried away 
by  innovation,  helped  minimise  the  damage:  this  is  a  vindication  of  your  reputation  for 
prudence,  and  a  great  credit  to  Hong  Kong's  banking  system.  We  also  seem  to  have 
achieved a good balance in the relationship between the supervisor and the banking system. 
An  excellent  example  of  how  that  balance  has  contributed  to  banking  stability  is  the  70% 
loan-to-value  policy  for  residential  mortgage  lending  by  banks.  This  policy,  now  a 
cornerstone of our prudential arrangements, pre-dates even the foundation of the HKMA and 
evolved  out  of  a  productive  dialogue  between  HKAB  and  the  supervisor.  It  has  survived 
strong political pressure for relaxation and market pressure for innovative credit risk transfer 
through securitisation. The policy – now nearly two decades old – fits in well with the macro-
prudential approach which, particularly in the light of the recent crisis, supervisors in other 
jurisdictions  now  consider  to  be  essential to  banking stability.  The  fact  that  no  such  policy 
existed  in  the  advanced  financial  systems  is  remarkable  enough.  But  what  is  more 
remarkable  is  the  level  of  initiative  of  the  Hong  Kong  banking  sector  itself  in  seeing  the 
importance  of  systemic  stability  and  giving  it  precedence  over  the  profitability  of  individual 
institutions. 
We might therefore observe, in the light of this and of our experience over the past year, that 
Hong  Kong  has  got  it  broadly  right  in  the  relationship  between  the  supervisor  and  the 
banking system. However, this should not lead us to the complacent conclusion that there is 
nothing much that needs changing. And indeed, no such conclusion is in our minds. Both the 
BIS Review 116/2009 
 1
Carse  Report  and  the  recent  reports  to  the  Financial  Secretary  on  the  Sale  of  Lehman-
related  products  see  room  for  development  and  improvement  in  the  way  we  carry  out  our 
work.  Quite  apart  from  our  own  Hong  Kong-specific  initiatives,  there  are  movements  for 
reform  at  the  international  level,  resulting  from  a  very  different  experience  in  the  more 
developed economies, which we cannot ignore. 
This point brings me to my second observation: the need to move with the times. The past 
year  has  seen  a  plethora  of  ideas  and  proposals  for  reforming  financial  regulations,  and 
interventions  by  government  that  were  unprecedented  in  their  nature  and  scale.  Even  in 
economies  less  deeply  affected  by  the  latest  crisis,  including  Hong  Kong,  it  has  been 
necessary  to  deepen  government  involvement,  for  example  in  more  extensive  deposit 
guarantees  or  in  more  intense  supervision  of  banks'  risk  management  –  although  it  is 
gratifying that so many of the tools that we have been able to rely on, including the apparatus 
and contingency arrangements for ensuring liquidity, have been developed in a pre-emptive 
rather than a reactive way. On the various emergency measures, I am quite sure that in the 
fullness  of  time,  these  will  either  be  turned  into  standing  arrangements  or  withdrawn, 
hopefully through smooth exit strategies. But, current sentiment is clearly demanding much 
closer regulation and supervision of banks over the longer term. Quite what form this will take 
remains to be agreed on in international forums, although the thinking already seems to be 
towards  improvements  in  the  level  and  quality  of  banks'  capital;  new  global  standards  for 
measuring,  managing  and  supervising  liquidity  risk;  and  macro-prudential  supervision  to 
reduce  the  pro-cyclical  dynamics  of  financial  markets.  No  doubt  the  details  will  take  some 
time to work out. We might be tempted in Hong Kong to respond that we have demonstrated 
clearly  this  last  year  that  we  already  have  the  ability  to  maintain  banking  stability.  The 
measures  being  contemplated  internationally  are  designed  for  repairing  and  renovating 
banking systems that have effectively collapsed: some of the measures may indeed be going 
too far. Therefore, we might conclude that we do not need to consider them for Hong Kong. 
Such an attitude would, I think, be a mistake. As an international financial centre, Hong Kong 
must  adopt  international  standards  and  best  practices.  We  have  to  move  with  the  times, 
although  that  does  not  of  course  mean  we  have  to  blindly  implement  everything  in  an 
inflexible, straightjacket manner.  
Hong Kong is, in fact, in a good position to adopt and participate in the various measures 
now  under  consideration  by  the  G20,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  its  Standing 
Committees, and other international agencies. Our voice may not be so loud or strong as that 
of the larger economies, but we still have a responsibility to speak up, to seek to ensure that 
what comes out of the international forums is balanced, and realistic for local and regional 
conditions. The increasing participation by Asian economies, including Hong Kong, in these 
international forums is a good sign that the rest of the world is paying attention to, and ready 
to learn from, the experiences of this region. The task, for Hong Kong as for all jurisdictions, 
will  be  to  translate  high-level  principles  and  universal  standards  into  local  practice,  and  to 
develop the skills to carry them out. This is an enormous challenge, but there are reasons for 
confidence in Hong Kong's case. We have had a largely positive experience in introducing 
Basel II into our supervisory system, thanks in no small part to the hard work of both HKAB 
and HKIB. 
Regulatory reform is driven not just by objective circumstances but also by changing public 
expectations.  This  brings  me  to  my  third  observation:  that  banks  and  financial  institutions 
(and, it might be added, regulators) are now operating in a more sceptical, more demanding, 
even hostile environment. We see this around the world, and, particularly in the aftermath of 
the Lehman Brothers collapse, we have seen it in Hong Kong. There is also discontent and 
anxiety  locally  that  pre-dates  the  crisis  –  for  example,  about  access  to  banking  services, 
about the risks of new technology – that result partly from the changing business landscape 
and partly from changing expectations. We must expect this trend to continue, and it will be 
necessary for the banking industry and the regulator to take more and more account of wider 
public  opinion,  and  to  tackle  areas  of  concern.  As  the  industry  organisation,  HKAB  has 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2009
already  become  quite  deeply  involved  in  such  matters:  for  example,  it  has  played  an 
important co-ordinating and think-tank role in ensuring the safety and efficiency of e-banking, 
and in promoting accessibility to banking services, particularly among vulnerable groups; it is 
also one of the joint issuers of the Code of Banking Practice, the reference-point for relations 
between banks and their customers. HKAB can, I believe, contribute even more in the future, 
and  consolidate  its  role  as  industry  representative,  by  strengthening  its  resources,  for 
example by creating a separate secretariat with a professional chief executive. 
One of the key causes of the recent financial crisis was the use – or abuse – of innovation by 
financial intermediaries for short-term private gain at the expense of longer-term stability and 
effective  working  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  And  one  of  the  reactions  to  this  has 
been a call – a very loud call in some places – for banks to go “back to basics” in conducting 
their  business.  If  such  a  reaction  were  to  lead  to  a  return  to  the  sort  of  inflexible  banking 
services many of the older among us remember, then this would be a pity. If, on the other 
hand, it were to result in greater reflection and rethinking about the true function of banking in 
society, then this would, in my view, be a healthy development. At the heart of such thinking 
must be the view that the banking system exists to provide financial intermediation in support 
of the larger economy: it cannot be some abstracted, disembodied realm of activity in which 
intermediaries compete with each other to dream up ever more complicated ways of making 
a fast profit. But such thinking should not rule out innovation, as long as the objectives are 
clear:  and  the  main  objectives  should  be  to  serve  activities  in  the  greater  economy,  to 
increase the efficiency of the financial system without sacrificing its safety. This leads to my 
fourth and final observation.  
We have many examples of such innovation in Hong Kong to draw upon, but there is one 
that is particularly appropriate on this evening of reminiscences. I refer to the introduction of 
renminbi business into banks in Hong Kong – a development which seemed revolutionary at 
the  time,  but  which  now  seems  a  very  normal  activity.  It  had  small  beginnings  and  is  a 
gradual,  cautious  process:  there  is,  of  course,  scope  for  much  further  growth  and 
development.  This  innovation  has  clear  practical  uses  in  facilitating  economic  relations 
between Hong Kong and the Mainland, in reinforcing Hong Kong's role as an international 
financial centre, and in supporting the liberalisation of China's financial system. How many of 
us here, I wonder, recall that the idea of developing renminbi business in Hong Kong was 
first broached in 2001, during one of the Annual HKAB visits to the Mainland which I had the 
privilege of joining? 
The development of renminbi business in Hong Kong, and more generally the role of Hong 
Kong in serving the need of China in international finance depend on the pace of financial 
liberalisation on the Mainland. It is therefore very much out of our hands, involving policies 
that  allow  for  greater  cross  border  mobility  of  capital,  financial  instruments  and  financial 
intermediaries.  Yet  our  survival  as  an  international  financial  centre  depends  on  our  being 
prepared for these policies of financial liberalisation. We should also be proactive in offering 
advice in policy making and be ready to provide assistance and technical support in policy 
implementation.  One  very  practical  way  of  doing  this  is  to  continue  to  use  our  financial 
system as a platform for cautious experiment in the gradual liberalisation of the renmminbi – 
a  process  that  is  of  benefit  to  our  system  and  to  the  nation  as  a  whole.  The  Basic  Law 
specifies  that  Hong  Kong's  status  as  an  international  financial  centre  will  be  maintained. 
There are many policies and programmes in train to achieve this. But surely the key for the 
future  is  in  developing  Hong  Kong  as  the  offshore  renminbi  market.  There  should  be  no 
doubt that the renminbi will become an international currency one day. For Hong Kong to be 
unprepared for this, for us to fail to see the opportunities or build the infrastructure to make 
the  best  of  it,  would  be  to  risk  marginalisation.  There  is  no  shortage  of  awareness  of  this 
point, whether at the policy or the technical level within the government. At the practical and 
business level, the banks also have a role in making use of the channels that are opened up: 
it is gratifying to note that banks are playing their role effectively and with enthusiasm. 
BIS Review 116/2009 
 3
Ladies and gentlemen, Monetary Authorities and bankers come and go. But I have no doubt 
that HKAB and HKIB, and the spirit of co-operation that they embody, will go on for ever. I 
have  no  doubt  that  you  will  continue  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  Hong  Kong  and  the 
wellbeing of all who live here for many years to come. I wish my successor, Norman Chan 
every success, and all of the happiness that I have enjoyed as Monetary Authority. As for 
myself, in two days' time I shall move from this very public role into the role of private citizen, 
with  all  of  the  pleasures  and  responsibilities  that  entails.  This  is  an  unfamiliar,  possibly 
challenging position for me. But I have never been known to decline a challenge, and I look 
forward to the freedom to plan my own days and see more of family and friends, many of 
whom are here this evening. I wish all of you the very best of health, happiness and success. 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2009
