Amando M Tetangco, Jr: BSP@16 – riding out the winds of change and 
weathering the turbulence 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the 16th Anniversary of the Central Bank of the Philippines, 
Manila, 3 July 2009. 
 Magandang, magandang umaga po sa inyong lahat!  
Fellow central bankers there is every reason to celebrate and to be happy today! Today, we 
mark the convergence of two important events: the 16th anniversary of the Bangko Sentral 
ng Pilipinas and the 60th year of central banking in the Philippines.  
At sixteen, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas is a relatively young institution; but its foundation 
runs  deep.  That  is  because  central  banking,  as  a  function  directly  linked  with  the 
development of our economy and our nation, marks its 60th year in 2009.  
And  so,  today,  in  celebrating  our  16th  year  as  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  we  also  pay 
homage to six decades of central banking as well as to the men and women who served our 
people and our country as central bankers. This is the reason why our celebration has for its 
theme: "Ako at ang Bangko Sentral: Noon, Ngayon, at Bukas."  
My  understanding  from  Managing  Director  Pete  Tordilla,  the  chairman  of  our  16th 
anniversary celebration, is that almost 500 BSPers are involved in the exciting presentations 
this morning! Marami talagang showbiz at magaling dito sa Bangko Sentral. Fellow central 
bankers, palakpakan po nating muli ang magagaling nating performers and the creative team 
behind  these  presentations  on  60  years  of  central  banking!  Salamat  sa  inyo.  You  really 
brought back old memories! Parang kaylan lang ano! 
Of course, special occasions such as this are not an excuse to miss our deadlines.  
As central bankers, we know that even as we complete tough assignments in an excellent 
manner, there are always many  more programs that we need to work on, asap! Thus, we 
sometimes  miss  the  opportunity  to  say  thank  you,  as  we  immediately  move  on  the  next 
assignment.  In  fact,  one  of  our  favorite  phrases  here  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  is  moving 
forward! Tama ba?! Tama! 
And so, today, let us pause and take the time to say thank you to our fellow central bankers. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  us  express  our  thanks  and  appreciation  with  a  well-deserved 
round of applause to the Resource Management Sector headed by Deputy Governor Andy 
Suratos;  the  Supervision  and  Examination  Sector  headed  by  Deputy  Governor  Nesting 
Espenilla; the Monetary Stability Sector headed by Deputy Governor Diwa Guinigundo; the 
Security  Plant  Complex  headed  by  Assistant  Governor  Eve  Avila;  and  the  Executive 
Management Sector headed by yours truly with strong support from Assistant Governor and 
General Counsel Jun de Zuñiga. And finally, let us also thank the hardworking members of 
the Monetary Board of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, MBMs Amatong, Villafuerte, Antonio, 
Bunye, Boncan and Sec. Favila. Palakpakan po nating lahat ang mga BSPers!  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  We  saw  through  the  presentations  the  challenges  central  bankers 
faced in the last 60 years.  
There is no better time than today to look back at the global financial turmoil over the past 12 
months and mark the lessons that punctuated the difficult episodes of what is now described 
as the deepest economic descent since the Great Depression.  
If you recall, last year I spoke about how we succeeded in reaping the fruits of low inflation 
and  high  growth.  This  year  is  completely  different,  to  say  the  least.  The  global  financial 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 1
turmoil has spawned deep economic slowdown or recession, dysfunctional financial markets, 
precipitous drop in trade, bearish equities market and continued risk aversion. Through the 
last 12 months, there has been massive wealth destruction while deleveraging continues at a 
dizzying pace. In substance and in various forms, these have characterized both developed 
and emerging markets alike. 
Ladies and gentlemen, to say that the past year has been a challenging one is clearly an 
understatement. The crisis that began half a world away has reached our shores. Thus, even 
as the Philippines entered the period of turbulence from a position of relative strength. We 
have felt the bumps and bruises in financial markets, trade, and the real sector. Already, the 
global crisis has severely slowed output growth in our country.  
Nevertheless,  the  Philippines  continues  to  distinguish  itself  for  having  one  of  the  most 
resilient  economies  around.  Moving  forward,  we  are  optimistic  that  positive  growth  will  be 
sustained this year, that the balance of payments will continue to yield a healthy surplus, and 
that our banking system will remain solid through the turbulence.  
Still, we need to be vigilant in guarding the economy against the spillover effects of the global 
crisis. 
You  may  well  ask,  how  is  the  Bangko  Sentral  responding  to  the  global  financial  and 
economic crisis?  
Well, the BSP has been providing ample liquidity to keep the financial markets functioning 
and able to fund the growth requirements of the economy, amidst the global credit crunch. 
The monetary actions we have taken since the fourth quarter of 2008 include the following: 
first, the opening of the US dollar repurchase facility to augment dollar liquidity in the foreign 
exchange market; second, the enhancement of the existing peso repurchase facility through 
relaxed  valuation  and  broader  acceptable  collateral;  third,  the  reduction  in  the  reserve 
requirements on bank deposits by two percentage points; fourth, the increase to P60 billion 
of the peso rediscounting budget to ensure adequate peso liquidity; and fifth, the launching of 
the Credit Surety Fund Program to provide financing to small businesses through guarantees 
to small cooperatives with good track record.  
The BSP has also reduced its policy rates by 175 basis points since December 2008, given 
favorable inflation outlook and well-anchored inflation expectations. This historical series of 
five rate reductions brought our overnight borrowing or reverse repurchase (RRP) facility to 
4.25 per cent, the lowest in over 17 years. The intention is to help bring down the cost of 
borrowing and reduce the financial burden on firms and households. 
Lower  policy  rates  would  also  shore  up  business  and  consumer  confidence  for  economic 
expansion.  
The  Bangko  Sentral  has  also  ensured  that  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  have  risk 
management systems in place, that banks adhere to safe and sound banking practices, and 
that  accounting  and  supervisory  rules  are  calibrated  to  adjust  to  the  new  financial 
circumstances.  
Well, how are our scorecards in relation to these initiatives?  
Evidence  suggests  that  these  initiatives  have  been  effective.  Our  policy  actions  have 
provided  a  steady  supply  of  liquidity  that  has  allowed  banks  to  continue  lending  and 
performing  their  role  as  fund  intermediaries.  Market  interest  rates  have  trended  downward 
following  the  policy  rate  cuts  by  the  BSP,  as  banks  pass  on  lower  lending  rates  to  their 
borrowers.  Inflation,  meanwhile,  continues  to  be  subdued,  and  we  continue  to  expect 
favorable inflation dynamics going forward.  
Equally important, our banking system has remained sound and stable. Other segments of 
the financial sector – including the money, bond and equities markets as well as the foreign 
exchange market – have showed signs of stabilization if not recovery.  
2 
 BIS Review 83/2009
Ladies  and gentlemen,  our  sustained  efforts  at  capacity  building  has empowered  us  to  be 
effective at monetary policy and bank supervision.  
We  have  strengthened  our  strategic  planning  and  budgeting  processes  to  continue 
sharpening our vision. We have also sustained our BEST program by sending the best and 
the brightest of our staff to the best universities here and abroad, to ensure excellence and a 
global outlook among the future leaders of the Bangko Sentral. We want them to think big, to 
think new, and to think ahead while being immersed in the deep structure of their creative 
potential.  
We have persevered in our wellness programs to keep our staff going strong and motivated. 
We have streamlined our recruitment process by opening our doors more widely to promising 
prospective employees. We have also continued to review our benefit package to ensure that 
we are able to attract and retain our most valuable resource: our professional, competent, 
and dedicated staff.  
As we review our score card for another year of central banking in the Philippines, I would 
like  to  believe  that  we  have  provided  the  leadership  and  the  vision  for  maintaining 
macroeconomic stability yesterday, today and tomorrow. We continue to receive recognition 
for this and we continue to raise the bar further. For instance, I am very pleased that 17 more 
departments and offices will be receiving ISO certifications next week, proof of our sustained 
program to align our processes with international standards. Palakpakan po natin ang mga 
bagong ISO-recipients natin!  
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  Bangko  Sentral.  Our  pledged  stewardship  of  the  Philippine 
monetary and financial system is of central value to the country's economic development. We 
have kept prices low, interest rates reasonable, the financial system sound and stable, and 
the payments and settlement system functioning efficiently. These are key elements in the 
resilient performance of the Philippine economy.  
What more should be done? Well, it is not enough that we succeeded last year and the years 
before that. For as long as millions of Filipinos continue to live in poverty, we cannot rest we 
cannot stop.  
As we continue our work to achieve our mandate, we need to ensure that we possess the 
expertise  and  competence  in  all  phases  of  central  banking;  we  need  to  develop  greater 
sensitivity to signals which we should answer with better and more responsive actions; we 
need to be swift-footed in adjusting to a dynamic environment; and we need to further fine 
tune our ability to plan ahead.  
We  also  need  to  work  on  amendments  to  the  New  Central  Bank  Act  (R.A.  No.  7653)  to 
further  strengthen  our  ability  to  achieve  monetary  and  financial  stability.  The  proposed 
amendments  will  allow  the  BSP  to  float  its  own  bonds,  enhance  the  supervisory  and 
regulatory capabilities of the BSP with additional powers and greater legal protection. We will 
redouble our efforts to push for these amendments when the Congress resumes its session.  
BSP  has  a  comprehensive  program  to  advance  ordinary  Filipinos'  understanding  of  basic 
economic  and  financial  concepts  to  empower  them  to  benefit  from  opportunities  that 
development brings.  
In  the  last  three  years,  for  instance,  the  BSP  been  to  24  locations  to  bring  its  financial 
education  lectures  to  overseas  Filipinos  and  their  families.  The  program  has  since  been 
expanded and brought overseas to countries which  have large concentrations of overseas 
Filipino workers (OFWs).  
The  integration  of  lessons  on  saving  and  money  management  in  the  curriculum  of  public 
elementary schools beginning schoolyear 2008-2009 is a major step forward in raising a new 
generation of savers in our country. This joint project of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and 
the Department of Education is targeted at 12 million public elementary pupils.  
BIS Review 83/2009 
 3
With the signing last week of a Memorandum of Agreement by the Bangko Sentral with the 
Coordinating  Council  of  Private  Educational  Associations,  we  can  look  forward  to  the 
integration of lessons on saving and money management in the private elementary schools' 
curriculum as well.  
The launching this afternoon of the savings promotion program which we call "Banking on 
Your Future" brings the banking sector on board our financial education program for millions 
of Filipino children. 
We  will  also  develop  financial  education  modules  for  out-of-school  youths  and  adults  to 
complete our program.  
Parallel  to  these  proactive  initiatives,  the  BSP  has  also  set  up  Economic  and  Financial 
Learning  Centers  or  EFLCs  in  our  regional  offices  and  branches  where  researchers  can 
access economic and financial data series produced and monitored by the BSP. It also has a 
wide collection of books, journals and periodicals on banking, finance and economics, as well 
as electronic research system. 
Indeed, BSP continues with its efforts to institutionalize and promote an inclusive program for 
the economic and financial education for Filipinos. This supports our program on inclusive 
banking and reaching out to the unbanked.  
Ladies and gentlemen, my fellow central bankers, I am sure that this time of global economic 
and financial turmoil will surely rank as one of the defining moments in economic history. It 
will have a profound impact on all countries. Its economic toll so far has been unprecedented 
and,  in  some  cases,  has  exacted  painful  social  consequences  including  job  and  income 
losses. But I know that we shall be equal to the challenges. Let us therefore commit to work 
together with greater vigor and dedication as we navigate our economy through turbulence to 
the safety of enduring balanced economic growth, for the benefit all Filipinos.  
For now, let us walk our talk by saying thank you to one another as fellow central bankers 
who work with patriotism, excellence, integrity, dynamism and solidarity, our guiding values 
here at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. 
Together  let  us  stand  proud  as  BSPers  who  can  truly  make  a  difference  in  improving  the 
lives of all Filipinos.  
Mabuhay  ang  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas!  Mabuhay  ang  mahal  nating  bansang  Pilipinas! 
Maraming salamat at masayang anibersaryo! 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2009
