Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine economy – building resilience in 
a time of uncertainty 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Economic  Forum  “Philippine  Economic  Outlook  – 
Prospects and Challenges”, hosted by Security Bank, Manila, 11 February 2009. 
 Distinguished  officers  and  staff  of  Security  Bank  led  by  its  Chairman  Mr.  Frederick  Y.  Dy, 
President and CEO Mr. Alberto S. Villarosa, other distinguished speakers, guests, ladies and 
gentlemen: good afternoon! 
It is my pleasure to join you for today’s economic briefing. I laud the efforts of Security Bank 
for making this gathering possible. I welcome opportunities such as this to help shed light on 
our current economic and financial environment, from the vantage point of the central bank, 
which I hope is not far removed from how it is in the “real” world.  
Much has already been said and written about the current environment we are in – it has 
been  described  as  being  “a  tsunami  of  historic  proportions”  to  being  the  “the  worst  crisis 
since the 1930s”. Every writer or speaker seems to want to paint a picture direr than the one 
before.  
Today, I don’t want to be included in that list – rather, I hope I can more candidly share with 
you a balanced (realistic) view.  
Let’s begin with what we now know against what is still uncertain.  
Three things stand out.  
First, we have clearly seen that, on the one hand, the crisis has moved from its epicenter – 
the US and Europe – and has begun to manifest itself in Emerging Markets, including our 
part of the world. On the other hand, however, we don’t know how much further or deeper 
the crisis’ reach and breadth would be once the dust, as they say, finally settles.  
Second,  so 
the  major  economies  have  been 
“unconventional”  –  untested  (so  to  speak)  in  these  unchartered  territories  we  now  trek. 
Unfortunately, the very nature of these prescriptions requires patience not only from those in 
the major economies but also from those at the periphery such as the Philippines. The policy 
prescriptions  clearly  need  time  to  filter  to  the  markets  and  achieve  the  necessary  effects. 
Question is, how much patience and tolerance do the markets have? Other questions that 
are perhaps racing in stakeholders’ minds are: What is the exit strategy? How would all these 
new  policy  tools  be  unwound?  How  would  any  exit  strategy  impact  other  economies, 
including the Philippines?  
Third, the impact on the Philippines of the global financial crisis has (so far) been limited, but 
we know we are not totally immune. We know the potential channels for weakness – exports 
and  remittances  (then  consequently  consumption).  Yet  again,  we  don’t  know  how  deeply 
these could and would be penetrated by external factors.  
I arrived yesterday from Kuala Lumpur, after attending a series of meetings with other central 
bank  governors  in  the  South  East  Asian  Central  Banks  (SEACEN)  and  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS) including the heads of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
and the BIS. The assessment was unanimous – the crisis we are in is unlike any other we 
have so far faced. Why so?  
1. 
It  is  the  first  truly  global  crisis.  Earlier  crises  were  generally  localized  with  the 
contagion fairly limited to nearby regions. For example, the debt crisis in the Latin 
Americas in the 1980s and then the foreign exchange crisis in Asia in the 1990s – 
the  policy  prescriptions 
from 
far 
BIS Review 20/2009 
 1
2. 
neither affected the major economies in any significant way. This time, however, it is 
the  developed  economies  that  were  first  affected  with  the  claws  of  the  crisis 
reaching the rest of the world.  
The linkages are now more enmeshed, more difficult to define and therefore more 
difficult  to  disentangle.  The  crisis  began  as  a  US  subprime  mortgage  market 
problem that US policymakers first considered a situation which could be “fixed” with 
a single stimulus package. The mortgage problem, as we now understand it, was 
triggered by search for higher yield and new markets and perpetrated by the opacity 
in  financial  markets  that  resulted  from  rapid  financial  innovation.  This  has  since 
evolved into a seizing up of liquidity in major financial centers, rapid deleveraging by 
banks and other financial institutions, generally lower asset values, unprecedented 
wealth  destruction  and 
in  consumption  and 
contraction in global trade. The turmoil in the financial markets has indeed translated 
into a slowdown in the real sector. More recently, the downturn in the real sector is 
adversely impacting on the availability of domestic and international credit.  
therewith  a  significant  decline 
I share these assessments by the major central banks with you, not to show you how “bad” 
things  are  but  to  show  you  that  there  is  now  among  global  policy  makers  a  better 
appreciation of what has happened and what is happening, including a fostering of a higher 
level of coordination and cooperation.  
Let me now move on to where we are now and what we have done so far.  
The Philippine banking system was not significantly directly impacted by the global financial 
crisis. This is because the direct exposure of Philippine banks to the troubled international 
financial institutions was minimal. Nevertheless, the BSP moved preemptively to ensure the 
Philippines  didn’t  experience  the  situation  of  credit  markets  seizing  up  and  liquidity  in  the 
financial system drying up that characterized the international financial markets at the height 
of the crisis in September 2008.  
The BSP was aware that there was ample liquidity in the system even at the height of the 
crisis. That was evident from the fact that credit growth was still at double digit (even up till 
now) and that interbank markets continued to operate smoothly with no prolonged periods of 
high interest rates. What the BSP witnessed, however, were some kinks in the distribution of 
the liquidity.  
To address these, the BSP expanded the allowable collateral for its repo facility; relaxed the 
valuation on these collaterals, increased the budget of its e-rediscounting window, reduced 
reserve  requirements,  and  provided  dollar  liquidity  in  the  spot  and  swap  FX  markets.  We 
believe  these  moves,  in  tandem  with  extensive  and  comprehensive  communication  of  our 
policy  intent  to  key  stakeholders,  helped  to  shore  up  confidence  in  the  financial  markets 
during that critical period.  
That  relative  stability  exhibited  by  the  financial  markets  then  was  critical  in  cementing  the 
environment  that  allowed  the  economy  to  post  a  within-trend  GDP  growth  and  single  digit 
inflation in 2008. Understandably the numbers are nowhere near the ideal convergence of 
historic high growth and historic low inflation that we saw in 2007, nevertheless these were 
respectable especially when pitted against those in our region.  
The Philippine economy continues to be resilient. The 4.6 percent GDP growth rate for 2008 
was broad-based with the major domestic sectors providing positive contributions to growth. I 
am confident that both domestic private and public consumption on the expenditure side, and 
services and agriculture on the demand side would continue to lift the economy in 2009. For 
this year, the GDP is expected to grow between 3.7 to 4.7 percent.  
Inflation continues to decline. For January this year, inflation went down further to 7.1 percent 
from 8 percent in December 2008. This supports our view for within-target inflation rates for 
both 2009 and 2010, and provides the BSP with room for monetary policy maneuvering to 
counter the effects of the global financial crisis on the domestic economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2009
The external position continues to be strong. As of end January, the country’s international 
reserves  registered  almost  $40  billion,  equivalent  to  six  months’  of  imports  of  goods  and 
service  and  three  times  external  debt  based  on  residual  maturity.  We are  still  projecting  a 
surplus in the BOP for this year, supported by steady remittances and BPO receipts as well 
as a lower import bill due to the significant decline in international oil prices.  
The  banking  system  remains  stable  with  very  robust  solvency.  The  industry’s  capital 
adequacy  ratio  (CAR)  as  of  end-June  2008  stood  at  15.3  percent.  Moreover,  results  of 
stress-testing  done  by  the  BSP  showed  that  despite  adverse  shocks  to  asset  quality  and 
income, banks’ CAR would still be well above both the international standard of 8 percent 
and the BSP’s minimum regulatory requirement of 10 percent.  
The banking system as a whole also remains very liquid. Proof of this is that bank lending 
continues  to  post  significant  growth.  As  of  end-November  2008,  bank  lending,  inclusive  of 
interbank  loans,  registered  a  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  22.9  percent.  We  expect  some 
slowdown in credit expansion going forward as banks tighten credit standards. Nevertheless, 
loan growth could still be at double-digit, if banks remain keen to spot lending opportunities.  
Avoiding the negative feedback loop 
What do all those numbers and data mean? How do they fit into our daily lives? We all know 
there is a key link between a stable macroeconomy and a sound financial system. On one 
side  of  this  link,  we  know  that  an  efficiently  functioning  financial  system  is  critical  to  the 
effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  fuels  economic  activity  and  growth.  On  the 
other side of this, we know that a vibrant real economy encourages the further development 
of  the  financial  system.  In  essence  they  “feed”  on  or  reinforce  each  other.  [I  leave  the 
discussion of the direction of causation for another day!] 
The  numbers  and  data  I  walked  you  through  show  that  both  our  macroeconomy  and  our 
financial system have remained sound and stable against the tide of the financial turmoil. But 
there is risk that if one of these weakens, perhaps due to further external stress, it could drag 
the other one with it. In other words, the feedback loop is negative.  
This is now occurring in the major economies – the financial turmoil has caused economic 
recession in the US, UK, Europe, Singapore, Hong Kong and Australia, to name a few. And 
we have also seen the credit markets in these economies freezing up.  
We haven’t come to this yet and we will make sure that we don’t. How shall we manage that? 
The BSP can contribute by:  
1. 
Calibrating monetary policy to ensure that there is ample liquidity in the system. The 
trend decline in inflation and our within-target inflation outlook have given the BSP 
room to be accommodative. We will, therefore continue to look for opportunities to 
be supportive of economic growth. 
Keeping  our  banking  system  safe.  Our  banks  have  benefited  from  the  series  of 
reforms  implemented  in  recent  years,  which  have  included  cleaning  up  of  banks’ 
balance  sheets,  the  strengthening  of  bank  capitalization  through  Basel  II,  and  the 
improvements  in  governance  structures.  We  will  continue  to  enhance  our  macro-
surveillance  capabilities  and 
improve  supervisory  oversight  of  risk 
management. To operationalize these, the BSP recently approved the guidelines for 
Internal  Capital  Adequacy  Assessment  Process  (ICAAP).  The  ICAAP  provides  a 
prudent  framework  that  would  force  banks  to  consider  their  own  assessments  of 
business  lines  and  the  prospects  for  these,  determine  their  risk  profile  and  then 
actively  decide  the  appropriate  level  of  capital  to  hold.  This  formalizes  the 
requirement for banks to have a more-forward looking approach to risk management 
and make them directly link risk to capital. This would improve accountability on the 
further 
2. 
BIS Review 20/2009 
 3
3. 
4. 
part of banks for their actions and hopefully avoid the situation of poor appreciation 
of risk that was at the heart of the financial turmoil in the US.  
Creating a stable macro environment, i.e., stable interest rates and exchange rates. 
This would encourage long-term business planning and lending by banks. Economic 
agents  and  banks  need  to  continue  to  be  keen  to  seize  opportunities  during  this 
downturn and be ready for the upturn.  
Continuing to encourage financial innovation and capital market development. I am 
often  asked  whether  the  BSP  would  clamp  down  on  financial  derivatives  and 
financial  innovation,  given  pundits  are  pointing  to  their  proliferation  as  one  of  the 
reasons for the current financial turmoil. My answer to that is this – I believe there is 
a  place  for  financial  innovation  in  market  development.  Its  presence  provides 
avenues to address varying risk requirements of investors and users of funds. What 
I  always  emphasize,  however,  is  that  embracing  financial  innovation  must  be 
coupled with appropriate prudential regulation, including appropriate disclosure and 
transparency standards. These would ensure that all stakeholders are fully aware of 
the risks that they are taking on. As I have said, we shouldn’t go to the extreme of 
over  regulation.  Rather,  we  should  move  towards  greater  accountability  for  our 
actions.  
How do we see things going forward? 
I had made a point earlier of saying that no one knows how deep or how much longer this 
crisis would last. But I want to stress now, this will not go on forever. There will be an upturn 
– sooner or later. (As they say, the light at the end of the tunnel.) What is crucial is we must 
be ready for that time. Slowly, we are seeing some traction in the markets. The most visible 
manifestations  of  these  are:  the  exchange  rate  level  consolidating,  the  credit  spreads 
narrowing, the stock market steadying.  
At the meetings I attended in Kuala Lumpur. The IMF analysis showed that recovery in Asia 
could be faster – given our relatively stronger position coming into the crisis. They point to 
lessons on building up reserves for insurance, managing debt levels, setting up prudential 
standards  and  cleaning  up  bank  balance  sheets  –  all  lessons  astutely  learned  from  and 
implemented by the Asian economies since 1997 Crisis. However, in the same breath, the 
IMF admitted that an Asian recovery may not occur without a recovery in the US. The recent 
events have indeed debunked the myth of Asia decoupling from the U.S. 
I see a three-fold hope in that irony. First, the strong and aggressive policy actions by the US 
could move it closer to a recovery than without such action. Second, individual economies 
outside of the US are also doing their part to shore up confidence in their own economies. 
Third,  there  is  a  heightened  desire  to  improve  the  coordination  and  cooperation  among 
national  governments  to  resolve  the  current  global  financial  crisis,  including  more  openly 
sharing information and the thinking behind policy actions. This would help fuel policy actions 
forward.  
The  current  crisis  has  brought  to  fore  that,  with  its  good  points,  globalization  also  brings 
many  challenges.  The  world’s  economies  and  financial  markets  have  become  highly 
integrated that any solution to the problems we currently face must necessarily also be of a 
global nature.  
Conclusion  
I tried to bring into my remarks this afternoon a more international/regional flavor. I have also 
tried to share the risks we face, our policy moves and our outlook – both the bad and the 
good that at the same time envelope this crisis.  
I have emphasized that the resolution strategies necessary to address the current crisis must 
have an international dimension. But this is not to say that, that is where it ends.  
4 
 BIS Review 20/2009
Indeed the difficulties we are experiencing are broadly external (global) in origin. But building 
resilience against external vulnerabilities resides in all of us. Building resilience in a time of 
uncertainty is not just BSP’s task. Even as I outlined actions that BSP is undertaking to avoid 
the negative feedback loop, avoiding this is not just BSP’s task. If there is anything that this 
crisis  has  taught  us,  it  is  that  there  should  be  greater  accountability  among  all  market 
players.  
On  the  part  of  the  banks,  there  needs  to  be  a  better  appreciation  of  the  risk  of  their 
businesses and true diligence in disclosure and transparency to stakeholders, while at the 
same time remaining adept at seizing lending opportunities.  
On the part of the corporate sector, there needs to be a broader, more critical long-term view 
of their operating environment, realizing that is necessary to ensure their own viability. 
On the part of the financial consumers, there needs to be a move to be better informed. The 
BSP has been actively undertaking its financial literacy campaign. The long-term goal is to 
instill  among  the  financial  consumers  the  responsibility  of  informing  themselves  about  the 
risks involved in financial decisions. Better informed consumers would mean lesser instances 
of market instability caused by loss of market confidence due to failed investment schemes. 
Indeed,  building  resilience  of  our  financial  system,  and  the  economy  in  general,  requires 
appropriate  action  from  the  government,  the  central  bank,  the  financial  institutions, 
businesses, down to the individual private citizens. By doing our respective responsibilities, 
we can build a financial system and economy that can withstand not only the impact of the 
current crisis, but also of other future crises. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS Review 20/2009 
 5
