Jean-Claude Trichet: Insurance companies, pension funds and the new 
EU supervisory architecture 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the CEIOPS 
conference 2009, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
All financial gatherings in our current circumstances are important occasions to reflect on the 
past and future of finance.  
Today’s gathering is focused on insurance and pension funds, two very large segments of 
the financial markets. I am therefore very grateful to Dr Bernadino – whom I congratulate on 
his recent appointment as Chairman of CEIOPS – for the possibility to share some thoughts 
with  you  on  the  role  of  these  segments  in  Europe’s  financial  system  and  its  emerging 
supervisory architecture.  
I shall also look forward to learning about your own deliberations at this conference and the 
conclusions you draw from them.  
Before  we  reflect  on  the  future,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  the  present  situation.  The 
European Central Bank’s Vice-President, Lucas Papademos, will present our latest Financial 
Stability Review and our comprehensive assessment of the financial sector in the middle of 
December.  
As you might imagine, the assessment is particularly complex at this point. This is in part due 
to  the  considerable  heterogeneity  among  financial  institutions.  But  it  is  also  complex, 
because there is a need to disentangle what might be called “self-sustainable stabilisation” 
from  that  which  is  purely  due  to  the  unprecedented  programmes  of  official  support  for  the 
financial system.  
I would like to confine myself to the euro area insurance sector.  
We  note  that  despite  the  recovery  in  financial  markets  in  the  course  of  this  year,  most 
insurers still reported lacklustre financial performances in the first half of 2009.  
This was mainly because underwriting continued to be challenged. High risk aversion among 
retail  investors  reduced  the  demand  for  life  insurance  products.  At  the  same  time, 
underwriting of other insurance products was adversely affected by the economic freefall of 
late 2008 and early 2009.  
More recently, in the third quarter, we note that many insurers reported improved results.  
We  mainly  attribute  this  to  the  recovery  in  financial  markets.  Yet  there  are  reasons  to  be 
cautious about the durability of the recent recovery of insurers’ profitability. The supportive 
environment for investment income is unlikely to continue once market conditions begin to 
normalise.  
At the same time, underwriting income is subject to the existing downside risks in the overall 
macroeconomic outlook.  
Although  there  are  few  solvency  concerns  facing  the  industry,  there  is  no  room  for 
complacency in this environment. Insurers will have to be mindful of having sufficient capital 
buffers in place.  
BIS Review 147/2009 
 1
The role of insurance companies and pension funds for financial stability 
Let me take a step back and consider the role of insurance companies and pension funds in 
financial stability.  
In the continuing debate about categories of financial institutions, a distinction is sometimes 
made  between  “systemically  important”  institutions  and  “large  and  interconnected  but  not 
systemically  important”  institutions.  In  my  view,  large  insurance  companies  and  pension 
funds belong in the first category. They play an important role for the stability of the financial 
system. 
Traditionally, insurers and pension funds have not generally been seen as being a significant 
potential  source  of  systemic  risk.  The  insurance  and  pension  fund  sectors  are  mostly 
regarded  as  relatively  stable  segments  of  the  financial  system.  They  are  not  seen  as 
interlinked to the same extent as banks are, for example, in interbank markets and payment 
systems.  
But the interaction between insurers and pension funds, financial markets, banks and other 
financial  intermediaries  has  been  growing  considerably  over  time.  Today,  therefore,  this 
traditional view needs to be challenged.  
I would like to mention three main reasons why insurance companies and pension funds can 
be  important  for  systemic  financial  stability:  their  size,  their  interconnectedness  and  the 
economic function of insurance.  
Let me talk first about size. Insurers and pension funds are very large investors in financial 
markets. The growing role of fully-funded pension systems worldwide will increase this trend. 
Collectively  within  the  euro  area,  their  investment  amounted  to  €6  trillion  at  the  end  June 
2009. 
Most of the time, given the typically long-term investment horizons of insurers and pension 
funds, they are a source of stability for financial markets. However, due to the sheer size of 
their  investment  portfolios,  reallocations  of  funds  or  the  unwinding  of  positions  by  these 
institutions  have  the  potential  to  move  markets.  In  extreme  cases,  that  could  put  at  risk 
financial stability by triggering large swings in asset prices. 
Second,  interconnectedness:  insurers  and  pension  funds  have  strong  and  important  links 
with banks and with other financial institutions. Euro area insurance companies and pension 
funds hold about €435 billion of debt securities issued by euro area banks. This represents 
about 10% of the total amount outstanding of debt securities issued by euro area banks.  
From  a  financial  stability  perspective,  we  need  to  have  a  good  understanding  of  these 
linkages  in  order  to  assess  the  potential  transmission  of  problems  from  one  sector  to 
another. 
Third, the insurance function: insurers help safeguard the stability of household and business 
balance sheets by insuring their risks. The default of an insurer could cause financial distress 
in these sectors. As we all know, this is why insurers and pension funds are supervised. 
I  mention  the  systemic  relevance  of  the  insurance  and  pension  fund  sectors  for  financial 
stability, because I consider that the system benefits from their inclusion in macro-prudential 
oversight.  
This  is  exactly  one  of  the  objectives  of  the  envisaged  reform  of  the  European  Union’s 
supervisory architecture.  
The new EU supervisory architecture  
The proposed reform of the EU’s institutional framework for financial stability is based on a 
macro-prudential and a micro-prudential pillar.  
2 
 BIS Review 147/2009
On  the  first,  the  macro-prudential  pillar,  I  am  pleased  with  the  broad  agreement  on  the 
establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board – the ESRB – to which the ECB will give 
its full support.  
The main recent milestone was the Ecofin Council in October, which endorsed the current 
legislative proposals. I would like to pay tribute to the Swedish Presidency and to Jacques de 
Larosière and the High-Level group for all their work in this respect.  
The European Parliament has started its legislative process. I have assured the Parliament 
of our continued assistance in the setting-up phase. At the same time, we are preparing on 
our side so that once legislation is passed, the ESRB can take up its work straight away.  
On the proposals for the second, the micro-prudential pillar of the new framework, I hope that 
a political agreement will be reached soon.  
In  my  view,  the  establishment  of  the  three  European  Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs)  will 
represent  a  significant  step  forward  to  ensuring  consistent  application  of  EU  legislation 
across Member States and a common regulatory and supervisory approach at the EU level.  
I strongly support the opinion that the regulatory framework should be in place as soon as 
possible for all the new EU authorities.  
I see three main benefits in the envisaged micro-prudential framework.  
First, the power to issue legally binding supervisory standards will allow for the establishment 
of  a  single  European  rulebook.  As  you  will  recall,  this  was  an  idea  of  Tommaso  Padoa-
Schioppa, a former ECB Board member. Such a rulebook will help to eliminate the current 
differences in the national transposition of EU legislation.  
Second, 
further 
convergence of supervisory action and practices. In this context, I would like to highlight the 
crucial  role  of  the  new  supervisory  authorities  in  fostering  consistent  and  effective 
approaches within the colleges of supervisors.  
The participation of their representatives in meetings of colleges should favour information 
exchange within and across supervisors’ colleges. In addition, the establishment of common 
supervisory databases should enhance the efficacy of the supervisory colleges’ action.  
Third, in times of financial distress, the ESAs can be empowered to adopt decisions fostering 
a coordinated response by the national supervisory authorities. This can promote effective 
supervisory  action  in  times  of  stress.  As  the  financial  crisis  has  shown,  swift  and  smooth 
coordination among authorities is essential.  
the  proposed  mediation  and  coordination  powers  should  promote 
The ESRB  
Let me say a few more words about the ESRB. 
I expect the ESRB to make a substantive contribution on two main fronts.  
First, the ESRB will enhance the public sector’s ability to detect and assess systemic risk in 
the European financial system. This should be achieved by monitoring all components of the 
financial  sector  that  have  a  systemic  impact as  well  as  the  interplay  between  the  financial 
system and the real economy. A sound understanding of the evolution of the linkages – the 
“interconnectedness”  –  between  financial  institutions,  financial  markets  and  financial 
infrastructures will be a key element for the successful fulfilment of the ESRB’s mandate.  
Second, the ESRB will fill a gap which – as we know with hindsight – emerged in the run-up 
to the crisis. This gap consists of the difficulty of translating risk warnings into policy action by 
the competent authorities. I am confident that the recommendations of the ESRB have the 
potential to foster adequate policy responses.  
BIS Review 147/2009 
 3
I  am  aware  that  there  is  a  wide  debate  about  the  scope  and  addressees  of  the  ESRB’s 
recommendations. In my view, the recommendations should primarily focus on the area of 
financial  regulation  and  supervision  and  take  a  macro-prudential  perspective.  They  should 
not  address  individual  financial institutions.  This  is  the competence  of national  supervisory 
authorities.  
But the ESRB could recommend supervisory authorities to use supervisory tools under Pillar 
II. Examples of such tools are loan-to-value ratios, which are measures of liquidity mismatch.  
Work  is  ongoing  in  international  fora  to  identify  specific  macro-prudential  tools.  The 
recommendations of the ESRB could also identify systemically relevant components of the 
financial  system  or  key  parameters  of  measures  to  reduce  the  potential  pro-cyclicality  of 
regulatory  requirements.  The  addressees  of  these  recommendations  could  be  the  whole 
banking/financial sector or sub-sets of the sector. 
As  regards  the  governance  of  the  ESRB,  the  proposed  composition  strikes  a  balance 
between the need for inclusiveness and the need for efficient decision-making and clarity of 
responsibilities.  This  is  reflected  in  the  fact  that,  while  the  heads  of  all  central  banks  and 
supervisory  authorities  will  participate  in  the  discussions  of  the  ESRB,  only  the  central 
banking representatives, ESA chairs and the European Commission will have voting rights. 
Finally,  I  should  restate  that  the  ECB  and  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  stand 
ready  to  provide  all  necessary  support  to  the  ESRB  so  that  the  latter  can  perform  its 
functions successfully.  In  doing  so, the  ECB  will  closely  involve  the  national  central  banks 
and exploit synergies with existing central banking activities. It will also rely on the human 
and  technological  resources  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  to  the  maximum 
extent possible. 
The interplay between the ESRB and the ESAs 
I will now turn to the interplay between the European Systemic Risk Board and the European 
Supervisory Authorities. 
An effective mechanism for cooperation and information exchange between these authorities 
will be of utmost importance. It is a necessary condition for the new institutional framework to 
work effectively.  
I see a number of areas of cooperation between the ESRB and the ESAs.  
The first relates to the exchange of information for the detection of systemic risk. The ESRB 
will need the supervisory knowledge of the financial sectors. This knowledge can be provided 
by  the  ESAs  and  the  national  supervisory  authorities  through  their  involvement  in  the 
Advisory Technical Committee, which will support the ESRB.  
The  ESRB  will  also  need  data  and  information.  The  provisions  in  the legislative  proposals 
provide for a smooth flow of information between the authorities in both directions, with full 
respect for confidentiality requirements.  
A  second  area  of  collaboration  relates  to  the  assessment  of  the  potential  impact  of  the 
identified  systemic  risks.  The  ESRB’s  toolkit  will  include  macroeconomic  stress  testing 
exercises. As the ESAs are also expected to coordinate stress tests, the ESRB will have to 
cooperate  with  the  ESAs.  The  recent  set  of  stress  tests  coordinated  by  the  Committee  of 
European  Banking  Supervisors,  in  close  collaboration  with  the  ECB  and  the  European 
Commission, may represent a useful example.  
A  third  area  of  cooperation  concerns  the  formulation  of  risk  warnings  and  policy 
recommendations. The ESAs as well as the national supervisory authorities will play a very 
important role in discussions regarding the ESRB. These discussions may potentially lead to 
the adoption of warnings and recommendations addressed to the supervisory authorities. In 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2009
cases where recommendations are addressed to national supervisory authorities, the ESAs 
will play an advisory or contributing role. 
Concluding remarks 
The proposed new supervisory framework represents a great step forward.  
The European Commission’s proposals to enhance the EU’s financial architecture are aimed 
in precisely the right direction. I strongly encourage that a political agreement is reached by 
the end of the year.  
The new setup will provide a decisive contribution to financial stability in the EU. 
To that end, the central banks stand ready to provide the envisaged support to the European 
Systemic  Risk  Board,  just  as  I  am  sure  the  national  supervisory  authorities  will  be  fully 
supportive of the European Supervisory Authorities. The smooth cooperation and exchange 
of  information  between  the  ESRB  and  the  ESAs  will  foster  the  effectiveness  and  thus  the 
credibility of the new framework. 
This is a challenging time for all the institutions involved. I wish the CEIOPS all the best for 
today’s  conference  and  every  success  for  the  establishment  of  its  successor,  which  will 
represent a quantum leap in the European Union’s supervisory architecture.  
BIS Review 147/2009 
 5
