José Manuel González-Páramo: The Euro Exhibition 
Address  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the opening ceremony for the Euro Exhibition at the Museum für 
Kommunikation, Berlin, 19 November 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished ambassadors and members of parliament, it is a great 
pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  Berlin,  at  the  beautiful  premises  of  the  Museum  für 
Kommunikation to inaugurate “The Euro Exhibition”. I would like to thank the Museum for its 
fruitful cooperation with the European Central Bank, which has given us the opportunity to 
display our Euro Exhibition here. 
This year we are celebrating the tenth anniversary of the euro. Let’s take a look back at the 
short but memorable history of our common currency. On 1 January 1999 Stage Three of 
Economic and Monetary Union began with the irrevocable fixing of the exchange rates of the 
currencies of the 11 Member States initially forming the euro area. The number of countries 
participating  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  has  grown  over  the  years.  Today,  the  euro 
banknotes and coins are legal tender in 16 of the 27 Member States of the European Union 
and  are  used  daily  by  almost  330  million  citizens  in  the  euro  area.  The  single  currency  is 
used in an area that stretches from Cyprus to Ireland and from Portugal to Finland. 
We are actually celebrating another anniversary this year. It is 20 years since the process of 
German  reunification  began  and  we  all  remember  9  November  1989  as  the  day  which 
marked the fall of the Berlin Wall. Let’s not forget that Berlin itself is a city that occupies a 
special place in German and European history. Indeed, currencies can play an important role 
in  shaping  a  national  identity  and  the  Deutsche  Mark  is  one  of  the  strongest  symbols  of 
German  reunification.  The  foundations  for  political  reunification  were  laid  by  the  treaty 
establishing monetary, economic and social union, which came into force on 1 July 1990 and 
enabled the East German mark to be converted into the highly regarded Deutsche Mark.  
These  days  it  is  the  euro  that  is  shaping  a  European  identity.  For  many,  the  euro  only 
became  a  reality  when  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  first  entered  into  circulation  on  1 
January 2002, replacing national currencies like the Deutsche Mark. In the eight years that 
we have been using the euro in our day to day lives, once complex transactions have now 
become effortless: there is no need to exchange money within the euro area and transferring 
money within the euro area has become very easy. And, as consumers, wherever we are in 
the euro area, we can make uncomplicated payments by cash, card or the click of a mouse. 
Internationally, the euro is now widely recognised as a currency of major significance. There 
are some 12.5 billion euro banknotes circulating in Europe and beyond, representing a face 
value of more than €750 billion. So, it is fair to say that we are happy with our ten years so 
far and we, at the ECB, are confidently looking forward to anniversaries to come. 
The Euro Exhibition that we are inaugurating today here in Berlin provides an opportunity to 
learn  more  about  the  euro  as  cash.  From  the  history  of  money  to  the  production  of  euro 
banknotes,  visitors  can  interact  with  the  different  displays  to  learn  about  the  various 
characteristics  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins.  Visitors  will  also  learn  how  to  check  the 
security  features  of  euro  banknotes  and  will  have  the  opportunity  to  examine  some 
counterfeit  banknotes.  In  a  few  minutes,  an  ECB  banknote  expert  will  show  you  how  to 
identify genuine euro banknotes and how easy it is to detect counterfeits. 
As the euro is the money of all citizens of the euro area, we have also taken the younger 
generations into consideration in our exhibition. We have developed a range of tools based 
on the fact that there are various ways of acquiring knowledge and of conveying messages. 
Children can enjoy the educational computer games, learn more about the features of euro 
banknotes through the interactive displays or follow the story of Anna and Alex as they catch 
BIS Review 149/2009 
 1
counterfeiters. For those of you here who have children, please make sure they do not miss 
this opportunity to learn about the euro in an entertaining and enjoyable way. 
As you walk through this exhibition, you will no doubt recognise the windows and doorways 
representing  the  “ages and  styles of  Europe”.  This  design  feature  comes  directly  from  our 
euro banknotes, which show windows on the front and bridges on the reverse side. These 
elements  symbolise  communication  and  connection  between  the  people  of  Europe  and 
between Europe and the rest of the world. Bridges represent the connection between past 
and future and symbolise our European future. Indeed, it strikes me that there is no better 
time  or  place  to  speak of  communication, connection  and a  European  future,  than  here  in 
Berlin’s Museum für Kommunikation on the twentieth anniversary of the fall of the Wall.  
The Euro Exhibition is well-travelled, having been displayed in Bratislava to mark the euro 
cash changeover in Slovakia, and also in Barcelona and Rome. After Berlin, it will continue 
its  journey  across  Europe,  to  destinations  that  include  Estonia,  Luxembourg,  Poland  and 
Greece. The Museum für Kommunikation’s partner museum in Frankfurt am Main will also 
host the exhibition next year. The ECB truly welcomes the cooperation from all partners who 
contribute  to  making  the  public  more  acquainted  with  the  euro,  our  money,  and  I  want  to 
thank Ms Kugler and her team who have made tonight’s event a reality.  
Ladies,  gentlemen,  distinguished  guests.  It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  declare  this  exhibition 
open.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2009
