Ric Battellino: Housing and the economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
6th National Housing Conference, Melbourne, 25 November 2009. 
 I have been asked to focus my comments on the economic aspects of housing. In keeping 
with this, I will start with a few words on the economy and then discuss the implications for 
the housing market. In the course of that, I would like to look at three specific questions: 
• 
• 
• 
are we building enough dwellings? 
is there enough housing finance? and 
why are dwelling prices in Australia high relative to income? 
The economic context 
The Reserve Bank has published a lot of material on the global and Australian economies 
recently,  including  the  November  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  the  minutes  of  Board 
meetings and various speeches. 
I won’t go over that material in detail, but it is worth drawing out a few highlights. 
The first point is that the global economy is clearly growing again after some very sharp falls 
in activity late last year and early this year (Graph 1). Virtually all economies recorded growth 
in  the  September  quarter,  and  the  information  available  so  far  for  the  December  quarter 
indicates that the expansion has since continued 
Graph 1 
Industrial Production*
January 2008 = 100
North Atlantic countries**
Emerging Asia***
2007
2008
2009
2007
2008
2009
Index
110
100
90
80
Index
110
100
90
80
*   Weighted using GDP at market exchange rates
**   Canada, Denmark, euro area, Norway, Sweden, UK and US
***  China, Korea, India, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand
Sources: CEIC; RBA; Thomson Reuters
  
It  is  also  clear  that  the  economies  of  the  North  Atlantic  are  lagging  behind  those  in  other 
parts  of  the  world,  particularly  those  in  Asia  where  the  economic  recovery  has  been  quite 
rapid. It is not surprising that the North Atlantic economies are lagging, as they were at the 
centre of the financial crisis. Many of the banks in that region are still at the early stages of 
balance sheet repair, which is limiting their capacity to lend. 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 1
Banks elsewhere are in much better shape. While they were caught up in the squeeze on 
global money markets that flowed from the events in the United States late last year, they 
generally  did  not  experience  severe  credit  losses.  Once  the  liquidity  pressures  passed, 
financial intermediation in these countries has tended to normalise. This is certainly the case 
in the Asian region. More generally, economies in the Asian region have responded well to 
accommodative macroeconomic policies and economic activity has rebounded. 
This  is  positive  for  Australia  as  Asian  countries  are  our  major  trading  partners.  While  the 
world  economy  as  a  whole  is  forecast  to  remain  relatively  sluggish  next  year,  economic 
growth  for  the  group  of  countries  that  comprise  our  major  trading  partners  is  expected  to 
recover to a relatively normal pace. 
Some  commentators  question  the  capacity  of  Asia  to  continue  to  grow  if  the  developed 
economies of the North Atlantic remain weak. While there is no doubt that weakness in the 
developed economies would have an adverse effect on Asia’s growth prospects, we should 
not lose sight of the fact that most of the growth in the larger Asian economies comes from 
their own domestic demand. In the case of China, for example, domestic demand contributed 
on average close to 9 percentage points per annum to growth over the past decade, while 
net exports contributed about 1 percentage point (see Table 1). Importantly, the authorities in 
most  of  these  countries  have  plenty  of  scope  to  pursue  policies  that  sustain  domestic 
demand. 
Table 1: Average Economic Growth* 
 Annual Average Growth 
1999–2008 (%) 
  Japan 
China 
India 
Korea 
Indonesia 
Taiwan 
Singapore 
1.3 
9.7 
7.1 
5.2 
4.7 
3.8 
5.6 
Contribution from: 
Domestic demand  
(% points) 
Net exports 
(% points) 
0.9 
8.7 
7.5 
4.5 
4.1 
1.6 
4.6 
0.4 
1.1 
–0.4 
0.7 
0.6 
2.3 
1.4 
*  This calculation abstracts from the fact that some of the growth of domestic demand has come from increased export 
income. 
Sources: CEIC; Thomson Reuters; RBA. 
 
The Australian economy in 2009 has held up much better than had been expected earlier in 
the  year.  Australia  is  the  only  developed  economy  where  year-ended  growth  in  GDP  has 
remained positive during the past year. It is now 18 years since Australia has experienced a 
negative in year-ended GDP growth, a very prolonged economic expansion (Graph 2). With 
the economy having only recently entered a new upswing, it is reasonable to assume that we 
will see this growth extended for a few more years yet. 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2009
Graph 2 
 
Over  the  next  few  years,  Australia  is  also  expected  to  see  a  further  expansion  of  the 
resources  sector,  including  the  development  of  some  very  large  gas  projects.  Mining 
investment,  which  is  already  at  record  levels  as  a  share  of  GDP,  could  rise  substantially 
further in the next five years or so (Graph 3). 
 Graph 3 
  
If  this  scenario  eventuates,  it  will  have  powerful  and  broad-ranging  implications  for  the 
economy. Glenn Stevens and Ken Henry have addressed these recently. I won’t go over all 
that ground again today but, as far as the housing market is concerned, the key implications 
are that: 
• 
the rate of growth in the population, which has already picked up in recent years, is 
likely  to  remain  strong,  as  demand  for  labour  will  encourage  continued  high 
immigration; 
household incomes are likely to rise solidly, which will help underpin the demand for 
housing; and  
 BIS Review 154/2009 
 3
 the construction industry is likely to face substantial competition for workers from the 
mining sector. 
While  this  suggests  a  generally  positive  environment  for  the  housing  sector,  it  will  not  be 
without its challenges.  
is  able 
Are we building enough dwellings? 
As Glenn Stevens mentioned recently, one of the key challenges will be to ensure that the 
supply  of  housing 
for 
accommodation.  There  is  a  broad  consensus  that  in  recent  years  Australia  has  not  built 
enough dwellings. A good indication of this is the very low vacancy rates in rental markets.  
This  shortfall  in  housing,  however,  is  not  because,  as  a  nation,  we  have  cut  back  on 
investment  in  dwellings.  In  fact,  the  opposite  is  true:  over  the  past  decade  dwelling 
investment has been higher – around 6 per cent of GDP – than it has typically been in the 
past (Graph 4). 
to  respond  adequately 
increased  demand 
the 
to 
Graph 4 
Private Dwelling Investment
Five year averages, current prices, per cent of GDP*
(cid:132) New dwellings
(cid:132) Alterations and additions
1984
1989
1994
1999
2004
2009
* Last observation uses data to June 2009
Source: ABS
 6
5
4
3
2
1
0
 6
5
4
3
2
1
0
  
So  how  do  we  square  up  the  seemingly  contradictory  evidence  that  overall  investment  in 
housing is relatively high, yet there seems to be a shortage of dwellings? I think four factors 
help to explain this contradiction. 
• 
First, Australians are on average spending a lot more on each new dwelling. Real 
expenditure on each new dwelling built is now 60 per cent higher than it was around 
15  years  ago  (Graph  5).  This  is  due  to  improvements  in  quality  and  increases  in 
size. 
Second,  a  high  proportion  of  dwelling  investment  is  in  the  form  of  alterations  and 
additions – i.e. upgrading existing houses rather than building new ones. Almost half 
of  all  dwelling  investment  has  been  accounted  for  by  alterations  and  additions  in 
recent years. 
Third,  a  higher  proportion  of  the  new  houses  built  are  simply  replacing  existing 
houses  that  have  been  demolished.  We  estimate  that  between  2001  and  2006, 
around 15 per cent of new houses built replaced houses that had been demolished; 
10–15 years earlier, that figure was less than 10 per cent. 
  4 
 BIS Review 154/2009
Graph 5 
  Fourth,  a  significant  proportion  of  dwelling  investment  appears  to  have  gone  into 
holiday homes or second homes. Census data show that the number of dwellings 
built has exceeded the increase in the number of households by a large margin. As 
a result, the ratio of the number of dwellings to the number of households has been 
rising over time; as at 2006, there were 8 per cent more dwellings in Australia than 
there  were  households.  Presumably,  most  of  this  surplus  reflects  holiday  houses 
and second houses (Graph 6). 
Graph 6 
 In  short,  the  apparent  contradiction  between  the  shortage  of  dwellings  and  the  high 
investment in dwellings arises because a high proportion of dwelling investment is going into 
improving the quality of existing dwellings and building accommodation additional to primary 
residences. If as a nation we want to continue to do this, while at the same time providing 
enough  dwellings  for  the  growing  population,  the  overall  amount  of  dwelling  investment 
undertaken will need to increase relative to GDP. That would raise important challenges for 
the housing industry in terms of its capacity to meet that demand. It would, of course, also 
raise  the  question  of  which  of  the  other  expenditure  components  of  GDP  should  bear  the 
offsetting fall in share. 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 5
Is there enough housing finance? 
Let me now turn to the question of housing finance. 
Over  the  past  couple  of  years,  there  has  been  a  significant  change in the  structure  of  the 
housing  finance  market,  with  lenders  that  were  funding  themselves  through  securitisation 
cutting  back  substantially  on  their  new  lending.  Increases  in  the  cost  of  funds  for  these 
lenders made it largely uneconomic for them to lend. Their declining market share has been 
picked up by the major banks, which now account for about 80 per cent of all new housing 
loans.  
These developments have led to concerns that borrowers may not have sufficient access to 
loans or that the cost of new loans may increase. However, to date at least, the evidence 
does not suggest that we should be overly concerned. 
On the question of cost, margins on standard housing loans have, if anything, narrowed a 
little  over  the  past  couple  of  years, even  for  the  major  banks.  Two  years  ago,  the  interest 
rates charged by the major banks on new variable-rate housing loans were about 190 basis 
points  above  their  cost  of  funds.  The  margin  today  is  slightly  narrower.  To  the  extent  that 
there has been a widening in banks’ margins it has been on their business lending. So far, it 
appears that there is still sufficient competition in the housing loan market for lenders not to 
have been able to widen their margins. 
The Government has helped to sustain that competition by putting in place arrangements to 
encourage the continued securitisation of housing loans. The Australian Office of Financial 
Management  (AOFM)  has  been  buying  mortgage-backed  securities  from  these  lenders  at 
yields that, during the crisis, were well below those in the secondary market (though still very 
attractive in absolute terms). This helped keep the cost of funds to these firms at levels that 
allowed them to continue lending, albeit at a much reduced rate from that of earlier years. 
The Government has recently announced an expansion in the AOFM program. At the same 
time,  issuers  of  mortgage-backed  securities  are  finding  that,  with  market  spreads  having 
narrowed substantially in recent months, it is again becoming economic to issue securities 
into the market. 
As  my  colleague,  Guy  Debelle,  said  last  week,  the  Australian  securitisation  market,  like 
securitisation markets everywhere, has suffered reputational damage from the events in the 
United States. However, Australian mortgage-backed securities have not experienced credit 
problems.  I  am  confident  that  this  fundamental  point  will  eventually  see  the  local 
securitisation market return to being an important source of funding for housing loans. 
In  the  meantime,  increased  lending  by  banks  means  that  total  new  loan  approvals  are 
relatively high. In fact, new loan approvals are at levels which indicate a degree of home-
buyer activity that has typically been associated with rising house prices (Graph 7). At the 
same time, however, existing borrowers are continuing to take advantage of the low level of 
interest rates to make accelerated loan repayments, which is restraining the overall growth of 
housing credit. Even so, housing credit is growing at an annual rate of 7–8 per cent, a pace 
which is more than adequate to fund the new investment in housing that is needed. 
6 
 BIS Review 154/2009
 20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
Graph 7 
Housing Loan Approvals and Prices
Year-ended housing price growth
(LHS)
Housing loan approvals*
(RHS)
1997
1994
* As a share of the value of the dwelling stock; excludes owner-occupier
refinancing and investor approvals for new construction and by ‘others’
2006
2003
2000
2009
Sources: ABS; APM; RBA
 2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
 Why are dwelling prices high in Australia relative to income? 
There is a common perception that house prices relative to household income in Australia 
are high both compared with other countries and with our own history.  
It is certainly the case that the ratio of house prices to income in Australia is higher now than 
it was 20 years ago. However, this is largely explained by the fact that the fall in inflation over 
that  period  has  allowed  nominal  interest  rates  to  cycle  around  a  lower  average  level  now 
than was the case earlier. That is, lower interest rates have allowed households to take out 
bigger home loans, without increasing housing loan repayments (Graph 8). In turn this has 
given households more buying capacity in the housing market, which has been reflected in 
house prices. 
 40
30
20
Graph 8 
Housing Loan Repayments*
As a percentage of household income
 40
30
1984
1989
1994
1999
2004
20
2009
* Housing loan repayments calculated as the required repayment on a new
80 per cent LVR loan for the median-priced home; household disposable
income is before interest payments. RBA estimate for September quarter 2009.
Sources: ABS; RBA; REIA
 BIS Review 154/2009 
 7
International comparisons of the relativity between house prices and income have been the 
subject of considerable research over the years. One of the complications faced by people 
working on this topic is to ensure consistency in the data that underlie the comparisons. Do 
the figures relate to capital city prices, or the prices across the whole country? Do they cover 
all dwellings or just detached houses? Is income measured as average weekly earnings or 
average household income? It is not always possible to get entirely consistent data across 
countries, so we need to be careful in interpreting the results of these comparisons. 
Most  people  do  agree,  however,  that  the  ratio  of  house  prices  to  incomes  in  Australia  is 
higher than in the United States. One explanation that has been put forward for this is that 
the Australian population is more concentrated in a few large cities, where house prices are 
higher, even relative to income. This seems like a plausible explanation, but there must also 
be a financial explanation, otherwise we would expect to observe that housing stress among 
Australians  was  higher  than  in  the  United  States,  and  this  is  clearly  not  the  case.  Arrears 
rates on housing loans in Australia have typically been lower than those in the United States, 
despite the higher ratio of house prices to income.  
There  are  a  couple  of  reasons  why  Australian  households  seem  to  be  able  to  sustain  a 
higher ratio of house prices to incomes. First, Australians seem to spend less of their income 
on non-housing consumption than is the case for US households, with a significant part of 
this difference explained by lower health costs in Australia. Australian households therefore 
have greater capacity to service housing loans. Second, the level of gearing in the United 
States  housing  market  is  noticeably  higher  than  in  Australia.  This  may  reflect  the  fact  that 
Australian  households  are  more  active  in  paying  down  their  loans  after  buying  a  home, 
possibly because owner-occupied mortgage interest rates are not tax deductible here as they 
are in the United States. The faster pay-down of mortgage debt in Australia reduces the risk 
of borrowers subsequently getting into financial difficulty. 
Overall, the experience of the last few years suggests that the Australian household sector 
as a whole appears to have the financial capacity to sustain a relatively high ratio of housing 
prices  to  income.  That  capacity  may  not,  however,  be  evenly  distributed  through  the 
population. Many 50–60 year olds, having benefited from the prolonged economic expansion 
over  almost  20  years  and  the  accumulation  of  superannuation  savings,  are  in  a  strong 
financial  position.  This  has  encouraged  a  change  in  financial  behaviour,  with  many 
households in this group being more inclined to stay geared up later in life, using the funds to 
upgrade or expand dwelling investments. It is likely that this changed behaviour has been a 
significant factor in the housing developments we have seen over the past 10–15 years. 
In  contrast,  the  typical  first-home  owner  cohort  –  those  under  35  years  of  age  –  has 
experienced a noticeable decline in home ownership over the past 10–15 years (Graph 9). It 
may be that this is being driven by demographic factors – such as the fact that young people 
are staying in education longer and delaying the formation of new households – but it may 
also be financially driven. 
8 
 BIS Review 154/2009
Graph 9 
Home Ownership Rates in Australia
 60
40
20
Total
Under 35 years
1984
Source: ABS Survey of Income and Housing (SIH)
1996
1992
1988
2000
 60
40
2004
20
2008
  
A  particular  problem  for  first-home  owners  is  that  the  rise  in  the  ratio  of  house  prices  to 
income has substantially increased the deposit needed to get into the market. On plausible 
assumptions,  the  deposit  needed  by  first-home  owners  may  now  be  around  one  and  a 
quarter years’ income, almost twice what it was 15 years ago. At one stage, lenders were 
responding  to  this  by  lowering  the  deposit  requirement,  but  this  carried  the  risk  of  buyers 
subsequently  getting  into  difficulty.  Also,  various  governments  have  sought  to  provide 
concessions  to  first-home  owners  through  grants  or  tax  relief.  However,  while  these 
measures  assist  the  first  wave  of  buyers  who  are  able  to  take  advantage  of  them,  the 
benefits  diminish  over  time  to  the  extent  that  these  concessions  become  capitalised  into 
higher house prices. 
Conclusion 
I  am  conscious  that  I  have  raised  a  lot  of  issues  and  provided  very  few  answers. 
Nonetheless, I will stop here, and leave it for your discussions over the next couple of days to 
resolve some of these issues. 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 9
