DeLisle Worrell: Countercyclical policy – what is it, and what are its 
limitations 
Address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, to the Barbados 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (BCCI), Bridgetown, 25 November 2009. 
 Members of the Diplomatic Corps 
Acting President of the Barbados Chamber of Commerce and Industry, 
Mr. Andy Armstrong 
Members of the private sector 
Members of the media 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen. 
This talk offers an opportunity to return to a topic that, as Jewel Brathwaite has picked up, I 
wrote about in January this year, when I was at the Centre for Money and Finance at UWI, 
St.  Augustine.  All  the  major  industrialised  countries  have  tackled  the  economic  crisis  with 
huge  government  stimulus  packages.  Why  aren’t  Caribbean  countries  doing  the  same? 
Admittedly some Caribbean countries have relatively high debt ratios, but their debt burdens 
have been overtaken by countries like the US and UK, in many cases. So why doesn’t the 
Caribbean  follow  the  lead  of  the  industrialised  world  in  countering  the  down  cycle  in 
economic activity with fiscal stimulus? 
The  notion  behind  countercyclical  policy  is  simply  that  government  should  step  up  job 
creation in the public service, and increase income subsidies, in order to compensate for job 
losses and declining purchasing power in the private sector. Most economists agree that it 
was  the  countercyclical  policy  of  the  Roosevelt  administration  in  the  USA  that  was 
responsible for bringing the 1929 Great Depression to an end, even though many argue that 
the growth of the American economy was firmly restored only after the end of the Second 
World War. Based on that experience, all major industrial countries are currently engaged in 
economic stimulus policies which contain a large element of countercyclical spending. 
How large is the countercyclical element of current fiscal packages in industrialised countries 
is  a  matter  of  debate.  The  most  conspicuous  portion  of  the  US  stimulus  packages,  for 
example, has been the support schemes for financial institutions rather than the funding of 
job creation by the federal, state and local governments.  What is more, the US  has much 
less  generous  unemployment  insurance  provisions  than  European  and  Asian  economies, 
and many services such as tertiary education and preventative medicine which are provided 
publicly in those economies have to be purchased privately in America. Job losses in the US 
therefore have knock-on effects on the budgets of health providers and universities in the US 
that  aggravate  the  fall  in  national  income,  to  a  far  greater  extent  than  elsewhere  in  the 
industrialised  world.  And  the  automatic  countercyclical  triggers  such  as  unemployment 
insurance payments and other income supplements are much weaker in the US. 
Expansionist fiscal policies by the world’s largest economies are an essential element for the 
recovery  of  the  international  economy,  and  it  is  not  an  accident  that  the  countries  whose 
governments  have  been  most  vigorous  in  funding  job  creation  from  the  public  purse  are 
showing the most convincing evidence of economic recovery. The workers who find jobs in 
the  design,  construction  and  renewal  of  public  works  in  turn  generate  demand  for  the 
services of transport, finance, lawyers, engineers, health, education, public utilities and other 
services.  Governments  need  to  borrow  to  fund  the  expanded  expenditure,  but  there  is  a 
ready  and  inexpensive  source  of  funding,  from  investors  in  search  of  low  risk  government 
securities. 
In contrast to largely self-reliant countries like the US, countercyclical government spending 
in small open economies like Barbados is of limited use, and may have lethal consequences. 
BIS Review 153/2009 
 1
In the US each extra dollar of income earned occasions no more than 23 cents of spending 
on imports. That means that when the US government spends $10 million to pay wages for 
new  public  works,  those  wage  earners  spend  almost  $8  million  on  goods  and  services 
provided  by  other  Americans,  and  only  a  little  over  $2  million  on  imported  goods  and 
services. In Barbados it is almost exactly the opposite. Our propensity to import is 76 cents of 
every dollar. Were the Barbados government to spend $10 million on new public works, only 
a little over $2 million of the money earned would be spent on items such as hairdo’s and bus 
fares,  and  almost  $8  million  would  be  spent  on  imports.  In  other  words,  countercyclical 
expansion in the US benefits mostly Americans, whereas countercyclical policy in Barbados 
benefits foreigners to a far greater extent than Barbadians. (A comparison of average import 
propensities for the five-year period 2003-2007 in the US and Caribbean countries may be 
found  in  the  newsletter  of  the  Caribbean  Centre  for  Money  and  Finance,  January  2009, 
available at www.ccmf-uwi.org.) 
What  is  more,  there  is nothing  that  can  be  done  to  reduce  Barbados’  import  dependence. 
Almost everything that supports the quality of Barbadian lifestyles and our high standard of 
living is imported, or has a high import content. Import substitution activities such as chicken 
production and the Pine Hill Dairy substitute imports of raw materials for imports of finished 
goods, because all their feedstocks are imported. Import substitution in Barbados is largely 
substitution between categories of imports, and it therefore does little to reduce the demand 
for foreign exchange. A high propensity to import is what economists call a structural feature 
of small open economies which enjoy a good standard of living, a feature which Barbados 
shares with similar economies worldwide. 
Therefore,  the  scope  for  countercyclical  government  expenditure  in  Barbados  is  limited 
because of its impact through imports on foreign exchange reserves. The maintenance of an 
adequate level of foreign exchange reserves is a major objective of official policy, because it 
is  the  foreign  reserves  which  guarantee  the  stability  of  the  exchange  rate  and  of  the 
macroeconomy. 
At  the  moment,  Barbados’  foreign  reserves  are  comfortably  above  the  equivalent  of  three 
months of imports, which remains the international norm for countries like Barbados which 
have an exchange rate pegged to the US dollar. Indeed, an important benefit of Barbados’ 
remarkable record of 34 years of an unchanged peg is that the country has demonstrated 
that it can maintain a stable exchange rate with far less than the international norm, in terms 
of  foreign  exchange.  Foreign  reserves,  it  should  be  remembered,  are  held  in  US  treasury 
securities,  and  are  therefore  a  loan  to  the  US  government.  It  is  not  only  the  Chinese  and 
Saudi  Arabians  who  have  been  contributing  to  financing  American  profligacy;  Barbadians 
have also been making a modest contribution. It wouldn’t make a lot of sense to take bread 
out  of  the  mouths  of  Barbadian  mothers  and  children  to  add  to  our  funding  of  the  U.S. 
government,  much  as  they  may  need  the  money.  (It  is  a  sad  irony  that  relatively  poor 
countries  like  Jamaica  are  constrained  to  hold  far  larger  foreign  reserves,  in  relation  to 
imports, because their exchange rates are prone to devaluation.) 
The  Barbados  government  therefore  needs  to  proceed  with  caution  in  incurring  extra 
spending because the domestic employment impact is limited, and the additional spending 
will  result  in  additional  import  demand.  Even  though  reserves  are  currently  more  than 
adequate, no one knows how long it will be before tourism demand will revive, and until then, 
it  would  be wise  to  proceed  cautiously,  using  the  more  pessimistic  assumptions  about  the 
pace and timing of economic recovery in Barbados’ main tourism markets. If things turn out 
better  than  our  assumptions,  the  country  will  have  foreign  resources  to  allow  for  new 
initiatives by government for the diversification of exports and services, but if things do turn 
out for the worse, the stability of the economy will not be threatened. 
Barbados  is  well  positioned  to  be  among  the  first  to  benefit  from  a  revival  in  international 
resort  tourism,  whenever  that  occurs.  The  country  now  has  a  high  proportion  of  tourism 
product in the top end of the market. Although high net worth individuals were especially hard 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2009
hit  by  the  financial  crisis,  the  high  income  market  is  expected  to  be  the  first  to  recover. 
Moreover,  Barbados  has  acquired  an  enviable  profile  internationally  as  being  among  the 
most desirable of holiday resorts. I am not quite sure how we did it, but I saw it happening 
when my wife and I lived in Maryland. When we arrived there in 1998 Barbados was known 
only to the cognoscenti, but we began to hear the country being mentioned in the media with 
increasing  frequency.  Tiger  Woods’  wedding  and  Serena  Williams’  first  visit  raised  our 
visibility, and Rihanna has of course sealed our reputation. By the time we left Maryland last 
year, Barbados was a household name, and everyone we met wanted to visit. 
The onslaught of the economic crisis has not materially altered Barbados’ economic priorities 
or the constraints which those policies must respect. The economy continues to be driven by 
exports of goods and services, mainly tourism, which provide the foreign exchange needed 
to satisfy the country’s import demand. It remains the case that policies should be directed to 
diversification,  principally  by  the  exploitation  of  tourism  niches.  Tourism  will  remain  the 
principal engine of growth for the foreseeable future, and we must move ahead of the curve 
in  renewing  the  product  and  innovating  within  the  sector,  to  avoid  the  stagnation  that  will 
otherwise  result  from  a  stale  product  range.  International  business  services,  energy  and 
environmental services are other known priorities. 
The government and private sector of this country are not short of good ideas for investment 
in these priority areas. The critical limitation is the capacity for implementation. It is not well 
known  that  some  years  ago  the  IDB  actually  cancelled  loans  that  had  been  approved  for 
Barbados’  social  and  environmental  infrastructure,  because  government  failed  to  get  the 
target projects underway, many years after the funding had been approved. This capacity for 
swift  and  efficient  implementation  of  projects,  while  observing  established  procedures  for 
accountability  and  disclosure,  needs  to  be  established  and  strengthened.  It  is  not  an 
overnight process, it is not easy to do, and it will not generate flashy headlines, but it is what 
really matters. 
Barbados’ institutional arrangements for making public policy are also a major strength of the 
economy, that enable the country to cope with the impact of the economic crisis, and to react 
in a level headed fashion. Barbados’ social partnership has now become legend, the subject 
of  articles  in  learned  journals  and  an  example  that  is  often  cited  by  international  financial 
institutions. We know how imperfect it is, but we must not lose sight of its vital importance in 
giving  voice  to  all  the  principal  agents  in  the  economy.  In  times  of  economic  difficulty, 
successful adjustment is possible only if all parties clearly understand the situation, and what 
are the realistic options for dealing with it. 
Barbados also boasts a tradition of well coordinated monetary and fiscal policy, which has 
served the country well in periods of economic difficulty. My colleagues Harold Codrington, 
Roland Craigwell, Kevin Greenidge and I have written about the economic crisis of 1991-92, 
and how the mechanisms for coordination between the Ministries of Finance and Economic 
Affairs,  and  the  Central  Bank,  facilitated  effective  policy  making.  The  Prime  Minister  has 
agreed  to  an  upgrade  of  those  arrangements,  to  take  advantage  of  new  communications 
technology  to  facilitate  the  sharing  of  data  and  analysis  between  the  economic  decision 
makers in the public sector. 
Let me summarise the argument: the government of a small open economy like Barbados 
can do little to compensate for a decline in output which results from falling demand in the 
foreign exchange sector. Government needs to temper its expenditure in order to avoid an 
erosion of foreign exchange reserves, focusing on measures to maintain the competitiveness 
of tourism and to protect those most vulnerable to the effects of the downturn. Government 
and the private sector should continue to address the priorities for the medium term growth of 
the  economy:  improving  the  pace  of  project  implementation  and  pursuing  strategies  of 
diversification  within  tourism,  further  development  of  international  business  services,  and 
new initiatives in energy and environmental services. 
BIS Review 153/2009 
 3
Finally,  I  want  to  stress  the  importance  of  open  communication,  and  the  value  that  the 
Central  Bank  places  on  opportunities  such  as  this  to  enter  into  dialogue  with  the  people 
whose  activities  all  together  constitute  “the  economy”.  I  am  sure  you  follow  carefully  the 
Bank’s quarterly reports on the economy, and I hope you keep track of the economy’s vital 
statistics, particularly the foreign reserves, which we publish monthly. Both data and analysis 
are available on the Bank’s website. It has always been the Bank’s policy to empower you to 
confirm our analysis by checking the numbers yourselves. Occasions such as this luncheon 
offer you the opportunity to raise questions that you might have regarding how we view the 
economic performance and outlook, and I am therefore happy to welcome your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 153/2009
