Guillermo Ortiz: The global financial crisis – a Latin American 
perspective 
Speech by Mr Guillermo Ortiz, Governor of the Bank of Mexico and Chairman of the Board of 
Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the conference “Financial globalization: 
culprit, survivor or casualty of the great crisis?”, Yale University, New Haven, 13 November 
2009. 
 I would like to start by thanking our hosts for inviting me to participate in this important event. 
I  would  like  to  devote  my  presentation  to  the  origins  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  its 
impact on emerging market economies, particularly Latin America. I would also like to share 
a few thoughts on some of the lessons that we have learned during this crisis with regard to 
the challenges that globalization represents to financial authorities. 
The global financial crisis 
1. 
In  many  aspects,  the  current  crisis  is  not  very  different  from  the  events  we  have  seen  in 
many emerging markets in the last decade. Macroeconomic disequilibrium derived from large 
current  account  deficits  and  fiscal  imbalances;  high  growth  rates  of  consumption  financed 
with short-term capital inflows; lax  monetary policies; financial deregulation; and excessive 
leverage coupled with inadequate regulation and supervision of financial institutions. 
All  of  this  sounds  very  familiar  to  many  emerging  market  economies  that  have  sustained 
financial crises in the last decade. However, what makes this crisis different are: 
1. 
Its  truly  global  nature:  while  contagion  resulting  from  the  problems  observed  in 
emerging market economies in recent years was significant in countries believed to 
have similar characteristics, the crisis in the U.S. economy ended up substantially 
affecting all regions around the globe. 
The second important difference is the magnitude of the crisis. The magnitude is 
not only explained by the fact that the crisis sprang from the largest economy in the 
world, but also by the high level of financial leverage that prevailed in many large 
financial institutions, as well as the disintermediation of resources from traditionally 
regulated  financial  agents  in  favor  of  less  regulated  ones  –  the  expansion  of  the 
so-called parallel banking system. 
The  third  aspect  that  characterizes  the  current  crisis  is  the  simultaneity  of  the 
events taking place in many different markets, as well as in economies as diverse as 
Germany, Korea and Mexico. 
2. 
3. 
The  trigger  of  the  crisis  may  have  been  the  bursting  of  the  housing  bubble  in  the  U.S. 
However,  the  fundamental  forces  behind  the  current  crisis  are  deeply  related  to  large  and 
increasing global imbalances among the most important world economies (an enormous U.S. 
deficit  coupled  with  surpluses  in  Japan,  China,  Russia,  and  OPEC  countries),  abundant 
liquidity worldwide, and a prolonged period of very low real interest rates. 
The  deterioration  of  financial  institutions’  balance  sheets  led  to  a  deleveraging  process, 
which contributed to a sharp fall in asset prices and to tighter credit conditions. As a result, 
lending  plummeted,  and  thus  business  investment  and  consumer  spending  in  advanced 
economies  fell.  The  problems  in  credit  markets  have  had  a  strong  negative  impact  on  the 
real economy. 
The international financial crisis began a second, much more dangerous phase after Lehman 
Brothers’ collapse for a number of reasons. 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 1
    to 
led 
liberalization  have 
financial  globalization  and 
increased  cross-border 
First, 
investments and transactions. At the same time, financial innovation has facilitated 
segmentation and the distribution of financial risks, resulting in more interconnected 
economies,  markets,  and  financial  entities  (regulated  and  non-regulated).  This 
situation  enabled  the  crisis  to  spread  rapidly,  first  among  developed  and  then 
emerging economies. 
Second,  the  widespread  use  of  optimization  models  based  on  market  prices  and 
credit  ratings  has 
financial  market  participants  acting  similarly  and 
simultaneously, resulting in illiquid markets. A necessary condition for liquidity in a 
market  is  precisely  the  existence  of  a  variety  of  opinions  about  the  prices  of  the 
goods or assets being traded. This is how individual cautionary measures, such as 
the selling of financial assets when associated risks increase, can become systemic 
problems. 
Third, authorities in some of the most developed countries failed to identify the origin 
and  anticipate  the  spread  of  the  crisis  quickly  enough.  Initial  responses  were  in 
some cases tardy and insufficient. There was neither sufficient clarity with respect to 
the  strategies  which  needed  to  be  followed  nor  sufficient  coordination  among  the 
financial authorities involved. 
Fourth, serious liquidity problems and the collapse of credit in the financial markets 
of  developed  economies  rapidly  undermined  growth  prospects,  bringing  economic 
activity  to  a  near  standstill.  The  erosion  of  household  wealth  stifled  consumption 
along with the production of goods and services, leading to a contagion effect on the 
real  economy  and  international  trade.  The  upshot  was  a  severe  slowdown  in 
economic  activity  for  both  developed  and  emerging  markets  irrespective  of  the 
conditions individual financial systems faced. 
The impact of the financial crisis on Latin America 
2. 
The relatively good economic performance of emerging Asia and Latin America throughout 
2007 led several analysts and policymakers to  embrace the decoupling hypothesis. It was 
argued that emerging market economies had successfully been able to decouple themselves 
from  the  more  developed  markets.  It  also  was  considered  that  countries  like  China  could 
become engines sustaining world growth, replacing the U.S. economy in that respect. 
However, the international risk aversion brought about by Lehman’s demise and the global 
nature  and  magnitude  of  the  crisis  soon  engulfed  emerging  market  economies.  The 
decoupling  hypothesis  did  not  stand  up,  and  financial  turbulence  in  industrial  countries 
spread  to  developing  countries  mainly  through  two  shocks  of  considerable  magnitude,  as 
follows. 
1. 
An external demand shock. The recession in global economic activity reduced the 
demand for emerging market exports, which led to two effects: 
i) 
A fall in export volumes: emerging economies’ exports have experienced a 
sharp decline. The drop in the volume of exports is due to the global slump 
and  the  adjustment  in  spending  patterns  to  sustainable  levels  in  advanced 
economies. 
Deterioration in terms of trade: the global recession has not only reduced 
the  volume  of  exports  for  emerging  countries,  but  also  led  to  a  change  in 
relative  prices.  In  particular,  commodity  prices  have  declined  significantly, 
although they have experienced some recovery recently. 
ii) 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2009
2. 
An external financial shock. The rise in international investors’ risk aversion and 
the  losses  incurred  by  many  large  cross-border  banks  have  led  to  a  substantial 
decrease in risk positions held in the majority of EMEs. 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
Restricted access to external financing: Many EMEs faced a reduction in 
the  amount  of  external  financial  funds  available.  This  shock  was  related  to 
both the increased risk aversion among institutional investors, as well as the 
deleveraging process taking place in advanced economies. 
Decrease of liquidity in EME foreign exchange and domestic debt markets: 
The  increase  in  risk  aversion  and  capital  losses  have  forced  many  global 
banks  to  reduce  their  risk  positions  in  EME  securities  and  currencies.  As  a 
consequence,  liquidity  conditions  in  these  EME  markets  have  substantially 
decreased,  leading  to  increased  volatility  and  wider  bid‐ask  spreads.  The 
loss of liquidity in EME financial markets left them highly vulnerable. The flight 
to quality away from EME domestic capital markets after the Lehman demise 
led to sharp depreciations of many EME currencies. 
Tightening of lending conditions in domestic markets: Large global banks 
usually  manage 
lines  on  a  global 
consolidated basis. The initial rise in risk aversion in mature markets and the 
capital  losses  incurred  by  many  banks  led  some  of  them  to  reassess  the 
allocation of their capital and business lines. The reallocation has hit countries 
with  a  large  foreign  bank  presence  particularly  hard.  Subsidiaries  of  foreign 
banks,  especially  those  of  parent  banks  in  trouble  in  their  home-countries, 
tightened their lending conditions. This has led to a decrease in bank lending, 
particularly  in  EMEs  with  a  large  foreign  bank  presence.  Some  of  these 
countries also experience some pressure in their domestic interbank markets 
as a result of the channeling of liquidity by their subsidiaries to parent banks 
established abroad. 
their  risks,  capital,  and  business 
The  adverse  impact  of  these  two  shocks  was  not  the  same  across  all  Latin  American 
countries. The external demand shock has had a more profound impact on countries with a 
higher degree of openness, as the fall in exports had a larger impact on domestic economic 
activity.  In  contrast,  Latin  American  countries  with  a  relatively  more  robust  internal  market 
tended  to  be  less  affected.  In  the  same  vein,  countries  with  a  low  level  of  export 
diversification,  like  Mexico,  were  particularly  affected  (Mexico  has  specialized  in  exporting 
manufactured goods to the U.S. economy). 
However, in this respect there were significant differences between what happened in Latin 
American  countries  and  what  happened  in  several  Eastern  European  and  the  Baltic 
countries.  In  Latin  American,  exchange  rate  risk  has  always  been  at  the  forefront  in  the 
minds of financial regulators. Past experiences have shown in multiple occasions that fixed 
exchange  rates  and  currency  pegs  are  doomed  to  fail  sooner  or  later.  Hence,  domestic 
regulations  prevented  the  large  foreign  currency  mismatches  that  characterized  lending  in 
many Eastern European and Baltic countries. 
Prior to the current crisis, several economies such as Hungary, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania 
experienced  un-sustainable  private  credit  booms,  usually  fueled  by  un-hedged  external 
financing. These credit booms led to huge debt overhangs and foreign currency exposures 
on  their  domestic  balance  sheets,  making  them  highly  vulnerable  to  capital  outflows.  The 
adoption of exchange rate pegs in some of these countries also contributed to the buildup of 
these  imbalances.  The  sudden  reversals  of  capital  flows  and  the  depreciation  of  many 
exchange  rates  left  debtors  and  banks  in  these  European  countries  facing  significant 
insolvency problems. 
Nevertheless,  financial  system  prudential  regulation  did  not  prevent  the  private  sectors  of 
many EMEs from incurring these currency mismatches. The risks inherent in the adoption of 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 3
free-floating foreign exchange regimes in many emerging markets heralded the development 
of OTC derivatives markets in which participants could hedge unwanted currency exposure. 
However, OTC derivatives were also used in what turned out to be mere speculative trades 
by  non-financial  firms.  The  relative  stability  of  the  foreign  exchange  markets  in  the  years 
leading up to September 2008 drew some firms to use derivative instruments in an apparent 
attempt to lower the cost of capital. 
The abrupt depreciation of many EME currencies altered the value of the derivatives held by 
non-financial firms. Thus, a negative surprise bedeviled many EMEs when it became public 
that important large corporations, mainly in Mexico, Brazil, and South Korea, were being hit 
with large losses from derivative products. The lack of information about the identity of the 
firms involved, as well as the magnitude of the losses, increased risk aversion. 
When fundamentals moved to justify sharp depreciations of exchange rates, the adjustments 
were  exacerbated  by  these  financial  structures.  The  depreciations  resulted  in  significant 
losses from the derivate positions for non-financial firms. In order to post collateral against 
these losses, firms had to demand more dollars. When firms could no longer meet collateral 
requirements, banks themselves had to buy the dollars, as they were forced to unwind their 
positions  with  the  firms.  However,  their  exposure  to  local  currency  depreciation  losses 
remained a problem. 
Regulatory policy responses to the global crisis 
3. 
Since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  financial  authorities  of  different  countries,  as  well  as 
international  organizations  and  standard-setting  bodies  have  been  working  on  a  very 
ambitious agenda to strengthen financial regulations and to create a financial system better 
suited to support sustainable economic growth. 
One of the outcomes of the current crisis has been the recognition that the G10 economies 
have lost some of their clout in favor of other countries and regions. This, together with the 
failure of some of these countries to regulate and supervise their own financial institutions, 
has  raised  the  question  of  their  ability  to  continue  leading  international  policy  coordination 
and to establish principles and standards for best practices and regulations. The result has 
been the acceptance of the idea that international efforts should be led and coordinated by a 
wider and more representative set of countries, the G20. 
The ongoing crisis has also made it clear that the current international financial infrastructure 
and  the  cooperative  efforts  adopted  in  forums  such  as  the  IMF,  the  FSB  and  the  Basel 
process, were insufficient to prevent the most severe crisis of the last six decades. However, 
it should be recognized that these organizations have lacked sufficient authority and tools to 
effectively carry out their assessments and enforce their recommendations in all countries, 
especially in developed ones. 
Not surprisingly, one of the conclusions of the G20 is on the need to implement international 
financial  standards  and  agree  to  undergo  periodic  peer  reviews  using  IMF/World  Bank 
Financial Sector Assessment Program reports, among other actions. 
An  important  number  of  initiatives  being  discussed  are  aimed  at  preventing  the  financial 
system from leveraging itself to the extent that it did before the crisis. Capital adequacy and 
liquidity are at the center of the discussions. It is important to be aware that less leverage, 
although  beneficial  from  a  prudential  perspective,  probably  implies  less  potential  for 
economic growth. 
Another  important  set  of  initiatives  are  aimed  at  modifying  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
architecture.  For  example,  in  some  countries  discussions  are  taking  place  about  moving 
banking supervision under the aegis of central banks. However, at the end of the day, what it 
is important about a building is not its size or particular style, but whether or not it serves the 
4 
 BIS Review 157/2009
2. 
3. 
purpose  for  which  it  was  built.  Buildings  should  be  designed  according  to  the  particular 
climate in which they will operate. 
I would like to share a few thoughts about some of the lessons we have learned during this 
crisis with regard to the challenges that globalization represents to financial authorities: 
1. 
Regulatory and supervisory arbitrage: For any financial regulation to be effective, 
it is of paramount importance to avoid the sort of regulatory arbitrage that has been 
taking place to date, such as financial intermediaries’ practices of booking some of 
their operations in the places, entities or conduits where they face a more favorable 
regulatory  or  supervisory  treatment.  In  this  sense,  it  is  crucial  to  advance  in  the 
international  harmonization  of  domestic  financial  regulations  –  e.g.  resolution 
regimens, accounting standards, provisioning rules, capital definitions. 
Incentive structure: Regulations will not be effective if they do not alter incentive 
structures. Financial markets have some particularities. Within these particularities 
lie  the  incentives  that  make  them  vulnerable.  And  it  seems  that  actions  taken 
towards correcting some of these vulnerabilities uncover other weaknesses: limited 
liability and deposit insurance schemes create incentives for more risk taking. The 
problem  is  that  the  growing  complexity  of  the  financial  system,  as  well  as  the 
availability  of  new  instruments  (the  products  of  financial  innovation),  considerably 
complicate the task at hand for regulators. The challenge faced by authorities is to 
create the right incentives and to understand the motivation behind innovation. 
Large cross-border banks: There is ample agreement that systemically important 
banks pose a complex challenge to financial stability. A vast stream of literature has 
always  seen  as  positive  the  consolidation  and  expansion  of  large  cross‐border 
banks. However, this crisis has highlighted the moral hazard posed by institutions 
that are deemed too big to fail, either due to size or interconnectedness. 
There  are  no  easy  answers  to  deal  with  the  problems  represented  by  large  and 
complex  institutions.  However,  it  is  clear  that  we  should  differentiate  among 
prudential measures and resolution tools. The first should be aimed at reducing the 
probability and impact of a large bank failure, and the second at making the financial 
system better able to deal with a large bank failure. 
a. 
Reducing  the  probability  of  a  large  bank  failure.  To  reduce  the 
probability  of  a  large  bank  failure  some  policy  makers  argue  in  favor  of 
imposing  additional  prudential  requirements  and  oversight  measures. 
Among  them,  there  is  a  group  supporting  the  idea  of  applying  a  capital 
surcharge to banks deemed too large or too interconnected. 
I  have  strong  considerations  regarding  this  measure.  A  capital  surcharge 
will convey the wrong message to the financial market. The message will 
be that the authorities consider that particular bank as too big to fail. This 
certainly  would  not  help  to  decrease  the  moral  hazard  posed  by  some 
institutions. Such a measure would also bring to bear particularly adverse 
effects  on  countries  that  have  truly  opened  up  their  financial  systems  to 
foreign investment and maintain a large foreign bank presence, like Mexico 
and Poland. The imposition of proportionately higher capital requirements 
for  large  cross  border  banks  would  inevitably  translate  into  higher 
intermediation costs. Foreign banks enjoy a large and dominant presence 
in  many  emerging  market  economies.  Therefore,  imposing  higher  capital 
requirements will also have potential negative impact on the achievement 
of a level playing field across countries. Furthermore, this measure would 
also represent a draw-back in terms of financial integration. 
Others  are  in  favor  of  strong  measures  such  as  breaking  up  banks  into 
utilities  and  casinos.  However,  to  draw  a  line  between  utility  and  casino 
  BIS Review 157/2009 
 5
  b. 
banking may prove too difficult to do. There might be other policies which 
could make more sense. The European Commission seems to be leaning 
towards the idea that whatever the  benefits of size in banking, the public 
interest requires smaller banks. 
Measures  should  also  be  tailored  to  the  nature  and  structure  of  the 
institutions. Different responses may be more appropriate for large and very 
complex  cross-border  structures  with  centrally  managed  capital  and 
liquidity  than  for  institutions  organized  as  simpler  networks  of  national 
banking subsidiaries, each with their own separate capital and liquidity. 
We consider that complex cross-border banks should be regulated at local 
levels.  There  are  no  global  lenders  of  last  resort,  neither  global  bank 
resolution  process.  We  do  not  have  either  a  global  pool  of  tax  payers  to 
fund the cost of rescue operations of cross border banks or an international 
court  to  deal  with  legal  differences.  Hence,  the  ultimate  responsibility  for 
banks’  depositors,  domestic  payment  systems  and,  in  general,  for  the 
functioning  of  the  domestic  economies  lies  in  the  hands  of  the  national 
authorities.  Hence,  liquidity  and  capital  regulations  should  be  subject  to 
local  regulations.  Each  subsidiary  should  be  subject  to  the  liquidity  and 
capital requirements of its local jurisdiction. 
Facilitating the orderly unwinding of large banks when they fail. The second 
issue  deals  with  policies  to  improve  the  resolution  capacity  of  authorities 
and those that make the financial infrastructure better able to deal with a 
large bank failure. These policies include the creation of conditions needed 
to facilitate a bank’s unwinding if it becomes troubled. Different international 
groups are already working on finding ways to facilitate unwinding. Simpler 
corporate  structures  and  more  compatible  national  resolution  regimens 
would make unwinding easier. 
Final remarks 
4. 
One  lesson  from  the  current  global  crisis  is  the  importance  of  investing  in  building  solid 
macroeconomic fundamentals in the aim of a more resilient economy and more maneuvering 
room to cope with external shocks. For instance, in this episode of financial turbulence, the 
most  affected  countries  have  been  those  with  larger  external  imbalances,  weaker  fiscal 
positions, and banking systems characterized by currency mismatches and other flaws. On 
the  other  hand,  those  emerging  economies  with  relatively  better  fundamentals  have  had 
more space to ease policy than they had in previous downturns. Although these economies 
are  also  feeling  a  sharp  impact  from  the  financial  turbulence  of  the  crisis,  they  have 
experienced a less disruptive adjustment process. 
Another  lesson  from  the  current  crisis  is  that  international  reserves  help  in  episodes  of 
financial stress. In principle, foreign investors interpret large holdings of foreign reserves as a 
signal  that  a  country  will  be  able  to  honor  its  external  obligations.  Thus,  a  capital  flow 
reversal is less likely. 
This means that we are likely to see strong demand for reserves in many countries over the 
next  few  years.  Thus,  under  the  current  rules  of  the  game  in  the  international  monetary 
system,  we  could  face  Triffin’s  dilemma  once  again.  In  other  words,  if  everything  else  is 
unchanged, the only means to satisfy the demand for reserves would be through high U.S. 
current account deficits, which, paradoxically, are at the root of the current crisis. Conversely, 
in  the  absence  of  high  external  deficits  in  the  U.S.,  a  shortage  of  liquidity  would  emerge, 
which could lead to a new period of economic contraction. 
Enhanced  international  monetary  cooperation  can  provide  a  way  out  of  this  dilemma. 
Certainly,  the  SDR  allocations  of  283  billion  dollars,  which  multiplied  the  existing  stock 
6 
 BIS Review 157/2009
tenfold,  have  helped  to  complement  many  countries’  international  reserves  and  boost 
confidence.  But  other  avenues  need  to  be  explored  to  reduce  the  demand  for  reserves.  I 
believe that bilateral swap agreements such as those negotiated between the U.S. Federal 
Reserve  and  a  number  of  other  central  banks  could  play  a  useful  role  in  this  regard. 
Moreover, the IMF should build on the success of the Flexible Credit Line (FCL) and consider 
more 
reserve 
accumulation. Indeed, the Fund needs to design additional financial instruments to promote 
long‐term global stability and the proper functioning of the international monetary system. 
instruments  offering  credible  alternatives 
to  self-insurance 
through 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 7
