Caleb M Fundanga: The role of professionals in economic development 
Remarks by Mr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Annual National 
Development Conference of the Zambia Institute for Policy Analysis and Research, Lusaka, 
28 November 2009. 
 Hon Minister of Finance and National Planning, Dr Situmbeko Musokotwane 
The Permanent Secretary Budget and Economic affairs, Mr Emmanuel Ngulube 
ZIPAR Executive Director – Mwilola Imakando 
Distinguished Guests, 
Members of the Press 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is indeed a pleasure for me to be invited to this very important gathering to give a Scope of 
the Conference. 
The central theme of my address today is the role that professionals are expected to play in 
economic  development  in  general  and  in  the  provision  of  public  goods  and  services  in 
particular.  You  will  agree  with  me  that  the  levels  of  professionalism  in  our  country  has 
somewhat declined in the recent past. Nowadays, it is not rare to hear of corrupt practices 
and  unethical  conduct  in  the  both  the  public  and  private  sectors.  This  has  no  doubt 
compromised professionalism. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  you  are  aware,  professionalism  entails  possessing  specialist 
knowledge and following a standard of conduct based on ethics that govern the use of this 
knowledge  when  providing  a  service  to  the  public.  Professionals  provide  essential  and 
valuable services to any society. It is for this reason that the public depend on them more 
and more as economies advance. Therefore, professional status is an implied social contract 
to provide a service over and above normal duties. In this regard, a professional is viewed as 
one  who  carries  additional  moral  responsibility  and  is  honest,  objective,  impartial  and  with 
high integrity. 
Mr  Chairman,  the  importance  of  a  professional  civil  service  in  Zambia  cannot  be 
overemphasised.  If  we  are  to  succeed  economically  as  well  as  socially,  we  need  to 
demonstrate appropriate levels of professionalism. A professional is open to views of others 
and  are  objective  and  their  decisions  are  made  in  the  best  interest  of  the  country.  As 
professional in Zambia we need to evaluate our performance and aim to constantly improve. 
We  need  to  see  ourselves  as  part  of  the  solution  rather  than  the  problem.  Further,  it  is 
important to realise that civil service is a key component of Government as it supports the 
formulation and implementation of government policies and service delivery to the public. A 
professional civil service also ensures that government objectives and goals are achieved in 
an effective and efficient manner thus assuring confidence to the public. 
In order to carry out their duties, professionals need to be guided by a code of conduct which 
stipulates  the  core  values  and  responsibilities  of  the  profession.  The  code  of  conduct  is 
usually  developed  by  the  profession  to  guide  and  to  prevent  exploitative  behaviour  and  to 
preserve the integrity of the profession. The code sets a framework for meeting standards 
and  provides  disciplinary  guidelines  for  unprofessional  behaviour.  However,  it  must  be 
understood that codes of conduct are not only meant to serve as a disciplinary guidebook but 
also  outline  ideal  ethical  standards.  In  order  to  be  effective,  Codes  of  Conduct  should  be 
understood and used by all professionals in their day to day activities. 
It is therefore pertinent for the civil service to develop appropriate codes of conduct that meet 
the expectations of the public. It is the duty of Government to ensure that the civil service is 
aware of this code of conduct and its values. In advanced countries such as Japan, Italy and 
Singapore the importance of the code of conduct is strongly upheld at all levels of the public 
BIS Review 159/2009 
 1
service. This has contributed to a strong, independent and impartial civil service, whatever 
their  political  persuasions,  that  is  able  to  serve  different  governments  in  line  with  the 
requirements of the code of conduct. 
In  order  to  enhance  professionalism  in  both  public  and  private  sectors,  it  is  key  that 
professions  demonstrate  high  ethical  standards  and  values.  I  therefore  urge  all  of  us 
professionals  gathered  here  today  to  take  ethics  seriously  in  order  to  enhance  efficient 
delivery of  services to our people. A robust and strong level of ethics can be achieved by 
providing  ethics  training  and  sensitisation  as  a  component  of  continuous  professional 
development. Although qualified professionals may be competent in their fields, it is vital to 
test  their  ethical  knowledge.  Equally  there  is  need  to  promote  Integrity  at  all  levels  of  civil 
service. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, our country needs professionals with high levels of social and moral 
awareness so that all of us are aware of the moral obligations and potential impact of our 
thinking,  decisions  and  actions.  We  need  to  be  good  role  models  for  others  in  behaviour, 
attitude  and  relationships.  Let  us  endeavour  to  act  in  a  way  that  is  professional  and  that 
retains the confidence of the public at all times. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2009
