Masaaki Shirakawa: Macroprudence and the central bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Seminar  of  the 
Securities Analysts Association of Japan, Tokyo, 22 December 2009. 
 Introduction 
It is my honor to speak today at the Securities Analysts Association of Japan. 
I believe that most of you here today have been directly or indirectly involved in the securities 
market, and that, needless to say, efforts by many related parties are essential for the sound 
growth of the securities market. One critical element of such efforts is the expert provision of 
securities analysis, and in this, securities analysts have been playing an important role. The 
Securities  Analysts  Association  of  Japan  was  established  in  1962  in  order  to  train  such 
securities  analysts,  and  since  then  has  consistently  and  greatly  contributed  to  the 
development of Japan’s securities market. So let me start by expressing herewith my sincere 
respect for the Association’s many years of effort. 
Sparked by the recent global financial crisis, there have been active discussions on how to 
prevent a recurrence of such a crisis. Those discussions cover securities market as well as 
financial markets more generally and the financial system. Last week, the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee), for example, announced a package of proposals 
on capital adequacy rules and liquidity regulations and made this available for consultation 
until mid-April 2010.1 Given that the recent crisis originated in the United States and Europe, 
there  appear  to  be  some  mixed  feelings  at  Japanese  financial  institutions  about  the 
discussions  in  progress.  However,  any  instability  in  the  global  financial  system  inevitably 
affects  Japanese  financial  institutions.  Moreover,  just  as  one  of  the  causes  of  the  recent 
crisis was that concerned parties in the United States and Europe had not sufficiently learned 
the lessons from the bubble and financial crisis in Japan and the Asian financial crisis, so 
Japanese  financial  institutions  might  face  similar  problems  in  the  future  if  they  fail  to 
sufficiently learn the lessons from the recent financial crisis in the United States and Europe. 
For this reason, it is important for Japanese financial institutions to actively take part in these 
discussions. 
Because  discussions  revolve  around  a  large  number  of  issues,  it  is  difficult  to  summarize 
them  in  a  few  simple  words.  However,  when  it  comes  to  lessons  from  the  crisis  and 
measures  to  prevent  a  recurrence,  the  most  important  keywords  in  my  view  are  “liquidity” 
and  “macroprudence.”  Against  this  background,  today  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  role  of 
“macroprudence”  and  discuss  initiatives  by  the  Bank  as  well  as  efforts  that  private  market 
participants  and  public  authorities  should  make  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system.2 
                                                 
1   Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  “Strengthening  the  Resilience  of  the  Banking  Sector”  and 
for  Liquidity  Risk  Measurement,  Standards  and  Monitoring,”  Consultative 
“International  Framework 
Documents, December 2009. 
2   On the importance of the concept of liquidity in discussing the causes of and policy responses to the recent 
crisis, see Shirakawa, M., “Liquidity” and “Payment and Settlement Systems”, speech given at the Center for 
Advanced Research in Finance, The University of Tokyo, November 2008, and Borio, C., “Ten Propositions 
about Liquidity Crises,” BIS Working Papers, No. 293, November 2009. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 1
Microprudence and macroprudence 
I. 
I should start with an explanation of the concept of “macroprudence,” but in order to do so, it 
is useful to first explain the concept of “microprudence,” with which it contrasts. It could be 
said  that  microprudence  describes  the  conventional  ideas  behind  the  policy  approach  to 
ensure financial system stability. Simplifying somewhat, microprudence consists of the idea 
that if the management of individual financial institutions is sound, the financial system, which 
is  the  aggregate  of  individual  financial  institutions,  should  be  stable,  and  regulations  and 
supervision should therefore focus on realizing soundness at such micro level. On the other 
hand,  the  idea  underlying  the  concept  of  macroprudence  is  that  stability  of  the  financial 
system  cannot  be  achieved  solely  by  such  micro-level  efforts,  and  that  it  is  necessary  to 
assess risks in the financial system as a whole by taking account of the interconnectedness 
of economic activities, financial markets, and the behavior of financial institutions, and to take 
conscious steps to base institutional design and policy responses on such assessments. As I 
will  discuss  in  detail  later,  relying  on  only  one  of  the  two  approaches  is  not  sufficient  to 
ensure financial system stability. Rather, both approaches are necessary, and one of the key 
lessons  from  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  is  that  we  need  to  pay  greater  heed  to  the 
approach that incorporates what the term “macroprudence” seeks to capture. In order to see 
what this means specifically, let us consider the background of the recent financial crisis. 
Background of the global financial crisis 
The  recent  financial  crisis  may  have  reached  a  global  scale  and  involved  new  financial 
products and players, but essentially it is a classic example of the rise and collapse of an 
economic  bubble.3  In  the  period  preceding  the  recent  crisis,  especially  around  the  mid-
2000s, the United States and some European economies experienced a large-scale credit 
bubble. It was the bursting of that credit bubble that triggered the financial crisis, which was 
further  aggravated  by  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  the  autumn  of  2008.  During  the 
bubble period, risk-taking was excessive. Looking at the behavior of financial institutions, for 
example,  this  involved  the  accumulation  of  excessive  leverage  and  maturity  mismatches 
between assets and liabilities. Typically, excessive leverage is taken to refer to an increase 
in debt beyond a point where there is an appropriate balance between capital and debt. More 
generally,  however,  excessive  leverage  can  be  taken  to  mean  excessive  risk-taking, 
including  off-balance  transactions,  relative  to  the  capital  base.  At  a  time  of  financial  crisis, 
excessive leverage will show itself in capital shortages and solvency problems suffered by 
financial institutions. On the other hand, the term “maturity mismatch” refers to the financing 
of  long-term  assets  using  short-term  debt,  and  in  the  run-up  to  the  recent  financial  crisis, 
there  was  a  considerable  increase  in  such  mismatches.  A  typical  example  of  this  is 
structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs).  These  SIVs  invested  in  medium-  to  long-term 
securitized products related to subprime mortgages and raised funds by issuing short-term 
asset-backed  commercial  papers  with  those  securitized  products  as  underlying  assets. 
However,  once  some  kind  of  a  shock  occurs,  funding  becomes  difficult,  and  such  liquidity 
risks  materialize  not  only  in  terms  of  the  domestic  currency  but  also  in  terms  of  foreign 
currencies.  In  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  apart  from  the  United  States,  U.S.  dollar 
liquidity risk was particularly serious for European financial institutions and, as you will know, 
Japanese financial institutions, too, faced shortages of U.S. dollar funds from the autumn of 
2008 through the beginning of 2009. Once there is a liquidity shortage, financial institutions 
are forced to sell their assets, resulting in a fall in asset prices, and, for financial institutions 
as  a  whole,  further  intensifies  liquidity  shortages.  Thus,  during  the  financial  crisis,  the 
                                                 
3   The extent of the financial crisis, however, has differed across regions, and financial systems in Asia, including 
Japan’s, have  proved to  be relatively robust. For details, see Shirakawa, M., “Reforming the Framework of 
Financial  Regulation  and  Supervision:  An  International  and  Asian  Perspective,”  speech  given  at  the  Bank 
Negara Malaysia – Bank for International Settlements High Level Seminar in Malaysia, December 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2009
negative spiral intensified as capital shortages and liquidity shortages mutually affected each 
other. 
Responses based on microprudence 
Crises – as I just discussed – appear in the shape of capital and liquidity shortages suffered 
by financial institutions. Therefore, a natural regulatory and supervisory approach to prevent 
the recurrence of a crisis is to sufficiently raise the minimum levels of required capital and 
liquidity financial institutions should hold. This approach focuses on reducing the possibility 
that individual financial institutions fail and could therefore be described as a response based 
on microprudence. 
With regard to capital shortages suffered by financial institutions, the recent crisis revealed a 
variety of issues. One of these is that the most remarkable increase in leverage took place 
not  in  the  traditional  banking  business  but  outside  the  banking  business.  For  example, 
financial  institutions  held  securitized  products  on  their  trading  books,  for  which  risk 
weightings under capital adequacy regulations are small, although they later turned out to be 
highly risky financial products. While the size of trading books was less than 10 percent of 
total  assets  for  Japanese  financial  institutions,  for  some  financial  institutions  in  the  United 
States  and  Europe,  it  reached  about  40  percent.  Consequently,  when  risk-asset  based 
capital  ratios  were  used  as  a  yardstick,  major  financial  institutions’  leverage,  at  least 
superficially,  did  not  seem  that  excessive,  and  their  capital  bases  appeared  sufficient. 
Investments in securitized products by major financial institutions were carried out through 
SIVs they had set up, and the funding for these SIVs was provided through credit from their 
parent  financial  institutions.  As  a  result,  as  later  revealed,  risks  were  shouldered  by  the 
parent financial institutions themselves. In a case such as this, the necessary regulatory and 
supervisory  response  would  have  been  to  accurately  gauge  the  risks  carried  by  financial 
institutions and the necessary capital, and to require individual financial institutions to hold 
more capital. 
Can problems be solved through microprudence alone? 
Such  regulatory  and  supervisory  responses  based  on  microprudence  are  necessary  and 
their importance should not be underestimated. As I will explain in detail later, the Bank also 
conducts  on-site  examinations  and  off-site  monitoring  of  financial  institutions,  carrying  out 
various  examinations  of  financial  institutions’  capital,  liquidity,  and  risk  management,  and 
giving necessary advice. However, I believe that the recent global financial crisis has shown 
that  it  is  difficult  to  achieve  financial  system  stability  and  to  contribute  to  the  sustainable 
growth of the economy, which is the ultimate aim of financial system stability, relying only on 
such regulation and supervision based on microprudential principles. 
The first reason is that without considering the relationship between economic and financial 
activities,  it  is  essentially  impossible  to  determine  the  optimal  level  of  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements.  If  absolute  priority  is  given  to  financial  system  stability,  then  capital  and 
liquidity requirements inevitably have to be raised significantly, but the inherent role expected 
of financial institutions is to engage in leveraging and maturity mismatches between assets 
and  liabilities.  Financial  institutions  carry  out  financial  intermediary  functions  with  a  certain 
amount of capital, raising funds with short-term debt instruments and investing in long-term 
assets, and provide value added through the provision of liquidity and settlement services. If 
financial institutions cannot properly fulfill their financial functions, the economy will not grow. 
Of  course,  in  reality,  a  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  100  percent  is  not  required,  but  as 
highlighted  here,  conventional  regulation  and  supervision  has  also  in  fact  been  based  on 
some  sort  of  macroeconomic  assessment  of  the  relationship  between  the  financial  system 
and  economic  activity  as  well  as  the  interaction  between  financial  systems.  However,  I 
believe  that  efforts  to  take  such  a  macroeconomic  perspective  into  account  in  a  more 
systematic manner have been insufficient. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 3
financial 
institutions  and 
The  second  reason  why  I  think  microprudence  alone  is  insufficient  is  that  financial 
institutions’ incentives are greatly affected by macroeconomic factors. On this point, I recall 
the famous remark made before the surfacing of the subprime mortgage problem by the then 
CEO of a major financial institution that “while the music is playing, you have to dance.” If, in 
the  future,  benign  economic  conditions  similar  to  that  time,  namely  high  economic  growth, 
low  inflation,  low  interest  rates,  and  low  market  volatility  continue  for  a  long  time,  would 
managers  of 
investors  choose  different  management  and 
investment  strategies?  Moreover,  even  if  one  were  to  choose  a  different  strategy  oneself, 
what  strategy  would  one  expect  competitors  to  take?  Following  this  line  of  reasoning,  it 
becomes clear that there will always be someone who takes on the risks. Ultimately, the risks 
in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  are  affected  not  only  by  micro-level  incentives  but  to  a 
great extent also by macro-level incentives, that is, the economic and financial environment. 
If  we  follow  this  line  of  reasoning,  in  order  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  financial  system, 
microprudence,  which  secures  the  soundness  of  individual  financial  institutions,  and 
macroprudence, which pays attention to risks to the financial system as a whole, are both 
equally necessary. 
Macroprudential perspectives 
II. 
There are various ways in which to assess risks in the financial system as a whole from a 
macroprudential  perspective,  that  is,  from  a  perspective  that  pays  attention  to  the 
interconnectedness  between  economic  activity,  financial  markets,  and  financial  institutions’ 
behavior.  Recently,  two  perspectives  or  “dimensions”  have  been  recognized  as  important: 
the  first  concerns  the  cross-sectional  risk  at  a  particular  point  in  time,  while  the  second 
concerns the evolution of risk in the future. 
The cross-sectional dimension 
The  “cross-sectional  dimension”  concerns  risks  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  at  a 
particular  point  in  time  and  particularly  focuses  on  the  interconnectedness  of  the  risks  of 
each financial institution’s portfolio and financial products. When the loans and investments 
of  a  financial  institution  are  concentrated  in  a  specific  industry,  the  financial  institution 
assumes  a  large  risk.  The  concentration  of  loans  to  the  real  estate  industry  is  a  classic 
example. And what goes for a specific financial institution goes also for the financial system 
as a whole. Even if the exposure of each individual financial institution is not concentrated in 
a  specific  industry,  if  many  financial  institutions  are  taking  similar  positions,  the  financial 
system as a whole assumes a large risk. If there is a shock that affects the value of a specific 
type of exposure, for example, the value of real estate, financial institutions will try to reduce 
their exposure to such assets all at the same time, but when all financial institutions take the 
same  action,  such  a  reduction  of  exposure  will  be  difficult.  Under  these  circumstances, 
market liquidity of the assets in question and funding liquidity decline significantly, and that 
will further exacerbate losses. Such herding behavior is called “crowded trade” and can arise 
for  a  variety  of  reasons.  While  it  typically  arises  through  a  convergence  of  market 
participants’  view  of  economic  prospects,  it  can  also  be  spurred  by  a  convergence  of  risk 
management  methods.  As  financial  techniques  advance,  the  management  of  risk  also 
becomes more complicated. In this situation, the incentive for financial institutions that do not 
have sufficient resources to develop their own risk management methods to adopt the risk 
management methods developed by other financial institutions increases. When this kind of 
situation  becomes  widespread,  not  only  does  financial  institutions’  exposure  to  types  of 
assets become similar, but market swings also become volatile as the timing of transactions 
becomes more synchronized. 
4 
 BIS Review 168/2009
The time dimension 
The second macroprudential dimension, the “time dimension,” concerns dynamic changes in 
risks, focusing on how risks inherent in the financial system change over time. In the run-up 
to  a  crisis,  as  seen  in  the  period  prior  to  the  recent  crisis,  benign  economic  conditions 
continue for some time, economic actors become too optimistic in their risk assessment, and 
their risk tolerance increases. As a result, as economic actors’ risk-taking stance becomes 
more aggressive, asset prices rise and leverage increases, leading to even more aggressive 
risk-taking  stances.  Our  understanding  of  such  endogenous  changes  in  the  risk-taking 
stance, that is, the risk-taking channel, is extremely limited. What is clear, however, is that 
such  changes  are  greatly  influenced  by  the  economic  and  financial  environment,  as  I 
mentioned earlier. 
Financial  imbalances  that  accumulate  in  the  process  of  risk-taking  cannot  be  sustained 
indefinitely  and  eventually  balance  sheet  adjustments  will  take  place.  Such  adjustments 
proceed gradually in the beginning. However, triggered by some kind of a shock, a crisis will 
emerge  in  the  form  of  funding  liquidity  shortages  and  become  more  severe  as  confidence 
among market participants in each other collapses. This phenomenon that the profit-seeking 
behavior of financial institutions amplifies the financial and economic cycle is referred to as 
“procyclicality”  and 
the 
aforementioned cross-sectional network perspective. 
important  dimension  of  assessment  apart 
is  another 
from 
Approaches taking account of macroprudence 
III. 
With  the  importance  of  macroprudence  having  been  recognized,  what  sort  of  approaches 
should central banks and regulatory and supervisory authorities take to protect the stability of 
the financial system? 
Monetary policy 
First, it is necessary for the central bank to take a macroprudential perspective in the conduct 
of  monetary  policy.  Needless  to  say,  the  purpose  of  monetary  policy  is  to  contribute  to 
sustainable  growth  through  price  stability.  Looking  back  at  price  developments  in  the  past 
quarter century, inflation gradually declined and it can be said that many central banks have 
been successful in terms of achieving price stability. However, in terms of financial system 
stability,  the  frequency  of  bubbles  and  financial  crises  has  increased  in  the  past  quarter 
century,  with  major  episodes  including  Japan’s  financial  crisis  following  the  burst  of  the 
bubble, the East Asian financial crisis, the credit bubble in the United States and Europe, and 
the  recent  global  financial  crisis.  Moreover,  ironically,  all  these  bubbles  arose  in  an 
environment of low inflation. While the causes of bubbles are complex, one major cause in all 
cases has been the emergence of a sense, amid continued benign economic conditions of 
high growth, low inflation, and low interest rates, that liquidity is always available at the drop 
of a hat. While I do not think that accommodative monetary conditions alone can lead to a 
bubble,  it  seems  that  it  also  cannot  be  denied  that  expectations  of  a  prolonged 
accommodative monetary environment lead to excessive leverage and maturity mismatches, 
thereby  accelerating  the  generation  of  a  bubble.  Price  stability  is  an  extremely  important 
policy  objective  for  a  central  bank,  but  if  a  central  bank  conducts  monetary  policy  by  just 
watching  short-term  price  developments,  this  may  induce  large  economic  fluctuations  and 
result  in  harming  price  stability  in  the  medium-  to  long-term.  Although  a  frequently  used 
phrase in this context is that there is “a trade-off between price stability and financial system 
stability,” this should in fact be understood in the sense that the true trade-off lies between 
“current  economic  stability  and  future  economic  stability.”  The  intensified  discussions 
following the recent financial crisis on the appropriate monetary policy framework, including 
discussions  in  countries  that  have  adopted  inflation  targeting,  reflect  these  considerations. 
Therefore, in the conduct of monetary policy, it is necessary to get into the habit of assessing 
the economy both through the lens of price developments and through the lens of financial 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 5
imbalances. This is exactly what the Bank of Japan with its assessment of monetary policy 
from “two perspectives” aims at. 
Financial supervision based on risk assessment of the financial system as a whole 
Second, I would like to emphasize the importance of proper supervision. The experience of 
the recent crisis reconfirmed that the behavior of financial institutions sometimes becomes 
excessive,  and  proper  supervision  is  necessary  to  prevent  that  from  happening.  In  this 
context,  it  is  of  course  important  for  supervisory  authorities  to  assess  the  soundness  of 
individual financial institutions by focusing on risks unique to those financial institutions and 
to provide the appropriate supervision. In addition, it is also important to assess, while noting 
the “dimensions” I have explained, the risk in the financial system as a whole and utilize the 
information  gained  to  conduct  supervision  of  individual  institutions.  This  may  be  a  typical 
example of “easier said than done,” but it represents an unavoidable challenge. 
Designing financial regulation and supervision 
The third point concerns the design of financial regulation and supervision taking account of 
a macroprudential perspective. Various discussions on this issue are going on at the moment 
and one of them focuses on reviewing capital adequacy requirements from the perspective of 
mitigating  procyclicality.  Concerning  capital  adequacy  ratios  for  banks,  one  issue  that  has 
been identified is the procyclicality caused by the decrease in credit risk during an economic 
boom  and  the  increase  in  credit  risk  during  a  recession,  but  profits  and  losses  related  to 
financial market transactions show a similar procyclical tendency. When benign financial and 
economic conditions continue for a certain period, the market risk being estimated by using 
data obtained during that period is likely to underestimate the actual size of the risk. As a 
result,  during  an  economic  boom,  financial  institutions  lend  aggressively  as  their  capital 
bases  increase  due  to  high  profits,  leading  to  further  increases  in  lending  through,  for 
example,  a  further  rise  in  asset  prices.  Similarly,  the  reverse  occurs  during  a  recession. 
Discussions  are  therefore  underway  on  how  to  mitigate  such  procyclicality,  with  ideas 
including  the  lengthening  of  the  period  assets  are  included  in  risk  accounting  to  avoid 
excessive  fluctuation  in  risk-weighted  assets  and  whether  to  introduce  a  framework  for 
countercyclical  capital  buffers.  The  underlying  idea  of  such  a  framework  is  to  implement 
capital adequacy rules in a countercyclical manner by requiring financial institutions to build 
up capital when economic conditions are favorable, which could then be drawn down when 
economic conditions deteriorate. 
I  believe  that  proposals  to  use  capital  adequacy  regulations  to  mitigate  procyclicality  and 
reinforce capital bases go in the right direction and are likely to contribute to financial system 
stability.  However,  from  a  macroeconomic  perspective,  it  must  be  avoided  that  the 
strengthening  of  regulations  impairs  economic  stability.  For  this  reason,  it  is  important  to 
secure  flexibility,  for  example,  in  the  procedure  and  timing  of  the  implementation  of  new 
capital adequacy rules by taking financial and economic conditions in countries around the 
world  into  account.  In  this  regard,  as  also  articulated  in  the  consultative  proposals  for  the 
review  of  rules  recently  released  by  the  Basel  Committee,  the  new  rules  should  be 
implemented once financial conditions have improved and economic recovery is ensured. 
The accounting system 
The accounting system is also an element affecting the behavior of financial institutions in 
addition to monetary policy and financial regulation and supervision. 
The  accounting  system  directly  affects  the  assessment  and  profitability  of  assets  held  by 
financial institutions. For instance, from autumn 2008, as the functioning of markets declined, 
prices of securitized products fell all at once, leading to concerns about capital shortages at 
financial institutions. This further paralyzed market functioning and intensified the downward 
6 
 BIS Review 168/2009
spiral.  This  course  of  events  illustrated  once  more  that  the  method  of  assessing  financial 
products  and  the  accounting  system  overall  affect  financial  institutions’  behavior  and  the 
financial  system.  Therefore,  various  international  discussions  are  taking  place  to  design  a 
system  in  the  field  of  accounting  that  could  contribute  to  financial  system  stability.  For 
example, it was shown that when market liquidity appeared to have dried up, it was possible 
to value financial assets at prices calculated by models. There are also proposals regarding 
a  revision  of  loan  loss  provisions.  The  reason  is  that  current  accrual  basis  accounting 
methods  tend  to  reinforce  procyclicality  as  banks’  profits  are  rapidly  squeezed  when 
economic  conditions  deteriorate  because  banks  have  to  increase  provisions.  While 
provisioning methods on the basis of expected losses, which allow for earlier recognition of 
future losses, are currently being discussed, my view is that it is necessary to consider such 
proposals from a variety of aspects, such as to what degree they would fulfill the intended 
goal of mitigating procyclicality, whether they can be put into practice, and whether they will 
be able to ensure transparency, which after all is the primary role of accounting. 
The role of the Bank of Japan 
IV. 
Having explained the role of macroprudence, I would now like to explain the role of the Bank 
in ensuring stability of the financial system. I would like to emphasize the following five points 
in particular. 
The  first  point  is  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  not  only  aims  at  price  stability  but  also  financial 
system stability. The Bank of Japan Act clearly stipulates that one of the Bank’s institutional 
objectives  is  “to  ensure  smooth  settlement  of  funds  among  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions, thereby contributing to the maintenance of stability of the financial system.” The 
fact that the Bank of Japan during the recent financial crisis decided to implement measures 
that are extraordinary for a central bank, such as the purchase of stocks held by financial 
institutions and the provision of subordinated loans, was ultimately to achieve the objective 
stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act. 
The second point is that the Bank plays the role of “lender of last resort.” The Bank of Japan 
is “the bank of banks” and can contribute to ensuring financial system stability by providing 
funds  as  the  lender  of  last  resort  when  it  judges  this  to  be  necessary  to  prevent  the 
materialization  of  systemic  risk.  To  avoid  that  the  provision  of  funds  gives  rise  to  moral 
hazard, the Bank has clarified its basic thinking in the form of the so-called “four principles for 
special loans.” 
The third point is that the Bank collects various types of information from financial institutions 
to secure the objective of ensuring the stability of the financial system. While macroprudence 
is important, as a prerequisite for that, microprudence is also critical. As long as the Bank 
extends loans to financial institutions as the “lender of last resort,” it needs to have sufficient 
knowledge of financial institutions’ business performance and the quality of their assets. For 
this reason, the Bank of Japan Act grants the Bank the right to conduct on-site examinations 
of financial institutions that have deposit accounts with the Bank. Of course, it is conceivable 
that  a  situation  arises  where,  by  the  time  a  financial  institution  comes  to  the  Bank,  it  is 
already too late. Therefore, in conducting on-site examinations, the Bank not only carries out 
inspections but also provides various kinds of advice and guidance when the need arises. In 
addition  to  conducting  such  on-site  examinations,  the  Bank  also  strives  to  gauge  the 
business performance and risk management, such as the liquidity management, of a wide 
range  of  financial  institutions,  including  securities  companies,  through  daily  off-site 
monitoring.  At  a  time  that  financial  markets  are  undergoing  substantial  changes,  it  is 
important  to  have  a  channel  for  obtaining  information  directly  from  financial  institutions  – 
something that was strongly reaffirmed in the phase from the autumn of 2008 onward. 
The  fourth  point  is  that  the  Bank  conducts  risk  assessments  of  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole.  The  Bank  analyzes  and  assesses  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  from  a 
macroprudential  perspective  by  making  use  of  information  from  individual  financial 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 7
institutions as well as information obtained through its daily monetary policy operations and 
operation of the payment and settlement system. At the same time, the Bank strives to use 
the  macro-assessment  obtained  in  this  way  to  inform  its  on-site  examinations  and  off-site 
monitoring.  However,  although  everyone  would  agree  that  integrating  macro  and  micro 
perspectives  is  an  important  task,  to  do  this  properly,  research  is  indispensable.  Because 
they are charged with the conduct of monetary policy, the necessary organizational culture to 
assess the economic situation based on macroeconomic analyses is well established within 
central banks. As for us at the Bank of Japan, we will continue to attach great importance to 
the information and insights we gather through on-site examinations, off-site monitoring, and 
the  Bank’s  banking  business,  and  to  strive  to  accurately  gauge  the  risks  to  the  financial 
system as a whole through our macroeconomic analyses and research activities. 
The fifth point is that the Bank is participating in the international discussions on regulation 
and supervision and is engaged in the review of such regulation and supervision. Reflecting 
the globalization of finance, there is a growing tendency for the broad framework of financial 
regulation and supervision to be determined in international discussions. The Bank, together 
with the Financial Services Agency (FSA), has been taking part in discussions on financial 
regulatory  and  supervisory  reform  at  various  international  forums  such  as  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Board, and I myself have been 
attending many of those forums. Given that a robust global financial system is in the common 
interest of all countries, I believe it is critical for each country to contribute to the construction 
of  internationally  consistent  rules  and  to  establish  a  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework 
that properly reflects differences between countries, such as in their financial structure. The 
Bank will continue to make contributions in these areas. 
When comparing systems to ensure financial system stability immediately before the recent 
crisis from a central bank’s point of view, countries can be divided into two groups. In one, 
which  includes  the  United  States,  Italy,  the  Netherlands,  and  many  Asian  countries, 
regulation and supervision was carried out by the central bank, either alone or in cooperation 
with other authorities. In the other group, which includes the United Kingdom and Australia, 
the central bank was not involved in regulation and supervision. Japan could be regarded as 
falling in between these two groups: the Bank of Japan does not have regulatory authority 
over  financial  institutions,  but,  as  mentioned  earlier,  based  on  provisions  in  the  Bank  of 
Japan  Act,  it  conducts  on-site  examinations  of  financial  institutions  and  provides  various 
kinds of advice and guidance when the need arises. 
Financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  systems  around  the  world  have  been  decided  upon 
reflecting  differences  in countries’  financial  structure,  stage  of  economic  development,  and 
historical background, and thus there is no uniform set-up that is correct for all countries. Be 
that as it may, the recent crisis has shown clearly that it is indispensable for central banks to 
be involved in one form or another in ensuring the stability of the financial system and that 
central banks should play a significant role in the area of macroprudential supervision. Here 
in Japan, we have a system where the FSA, which is in charge of financial administration 
dealing with regulation and supervision, and the Bank of Japan, which is the central bank, 
cooperate with each other and each fulfills its respective functions to ensure the stability of 
the financial system. While it seems fair to say that Japan’s financial system has remained 
relatively  stable  compared  with  those  of  the  United  States  and  Europe  during  the  recent 
crisis, the Bank will, in cooperation with the FSA, continue to strive to ensure the stability of 
the financial system. 
Closing remarks 
In closing, I would like to say a few words about the importance of information infrastructure 
in ensuring financial system stability. In order to analyze the financial system as a whole, it is 
essential to have information that is accessible to investors and other market participants. On 
this point, disclosure regarding risks inherent in individual financial institutions and specific 
8 
 BIS Review 168/2009
financial products is critical. In addition, from a macroprudential perspective the importance 
of  statistics  that  cover  financial  markets  as  a  whole  needs  to  be  underscored.  At  the 
beginning, I pointed out as one of the causes of the recent global financial crisis the widening 
of maturity mismatches at financial institutions with regard to liquidity and the lack of a habit 
to check such developments on a macro basis. Although, with the crisis having erupted, we 
now have the benefit of hindsight, the locational banking statistics released quarterly by the 
Bank  for  International  Settlements  do  show  a  remarkable  increase  in  U.S.  dollar  maturity 
mismatches  for  financial  institutions  from  advanced  economies,  and  particularly  European 
economies,  in  recent  years.4  Moreover,  although  the  experience  of  past  bubbles  clearly 
shows that fluctuations in real estate prices have a great impact on the financial system, in 
Japan, for example, little price information on real estate transactions has been gathered and 
the statistics in this field are far from satisfactory. Although the compilation of such statistics 
places  a  burden  on  those  providing  the  data,  such  data  represents  one  critical  part  of  the 
information necessary to ensure the stability of the financial system. 
While I have pointed out the importance of disclosure information and statistics concerning 
financial  institutions  and  financial  products,  it  goes  without  saying  that  what  is  ultimately 
required  is  a  proper  analysis  based  on  such  information.  During  the  recent  crisis,  trust  in 
credit  rating  information  declined.  Regarding  credit  ratings,  various  problems  have  been 
highlighted.5 But while these are indeed important issues, it would not be very balanced to 
criticize  only  credit  ratings.  I  mentioned  that  when  thinking  about  macroprudence,  two 
dimensions are important, that is, the cross-sectional dimension and the time dimension, but 
to properly reflect these two dimensions in the analysis of securities seems like a particularly 
difficult challenge. However, if this challenge is not addressed, the value of micro analysis 
also declines. At any rate, it goes without saying that the role played by securities analysts, 
who  are  experts  in  this  kind  of  analysis,  is  substantial.  One  major  element  that  underpins 
liquidity in financial markets is variety, and in that regard the role of securities analysts who 
provide  variety  of  analysis  based  on  their  independent  judgment  is  quite  important. 
Information is given meaning through the knowledge, experience, and philosophy of experts, 
and in this regard, too, we have high hopes and expectations of securities analysts. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
4   For a more detailed discussion of this issue, see the March 2009 issue of the Financial Markets Report. 
5   See, for example, “Stocktaking on the Use of Credit Ratings” by the Joint Forum under the aegis of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  the  International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions,  and  the 
International Association of Insurance Supervisors, June 2009. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 9
