Sada Reddy: Leadership in a competitive and turbulent environment 
Address  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  3rd  Fiji  Human 
Resources Institute Annual Convention, Viti Levu, 23 October 2009. 
 The President of the Fiji Human Resources Institute, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good morning 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  this 
Convention. I commend and congratulate the Executives of the Institute for hosting the 3rd 
Convention with the theme People, Key to Economic Success.  
I have been asked to speak to you today on the topic of Leadership in a Competitive and 
Turbulent Environment. 
I accepted the Institute’s invitation because I support the Institute’s role in growing dynamic 
future leaders for the nation and the opportunity to share my leadership experience with you 
since assuming office as the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji. 
Ladies and gentlemen, before I talk to you about the challenges of leadership let me take this 
opportunity to put into context the economic and financial environment in Fiji. 
My appointment as the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji in April this year came at a time 
when  the  whole  world  was  going  through  a  turbulent  time  with  the  global  recession  and 
financial  meltdown.  What  we  are  witnessing  globally  is  the  deepest  and  longest  recession 
since the Great Depression. All our major trading partners (with the exception of Australia) 
are in recession.  
The good news is that the recession may be over in a global context as most countries are 
now  expected  to  grow  from  next  year.  All  the  economic  indicators  are  pointing  to  a 
turnaround both in the developed and developing world. In fact, at present Asia is leading the 
recovery with China and India taking a lead. Most of the South East Asian countries have 
revised their GDP growth forecast upwards for next year. 
Closer to home as well, we are seeing that countries are also revising their GDP forecast 
upwards. But the pace of recovery for each country is different given their unique situations. 
In Fiji’s case we are optimistic of a positive growth of around 2 percent for next  year. We 
expect  the  recovery  to  be  on  the  back  of  a  rebound  in  tourism  and  substantially  higher 
investment by the Government in infrastructure. 
Challenges 
For the last two years, as you know, the global crisis compounded the economic difficulties 
we were already facing in Fiji. The unprecedented flooding in the Western Division early this 
year further complicated economic management. The floods severely affected our two main 
industries  namely  tourism  and  sugar.  There  was  significant  amount  of  damage  to  the 
infrastructure in terms of roads, drainage, water supply etc. 
As  you  know  a  number  of  our  traditional  industries  have  not  been  performing  well  for  a 
number  of  years.  Our  sugar  industry,  for  instance  has  been  facing  major  issues  for  some 
years. Our fish and timber industries have also not been performing to their potential. 
On the imports side, we experienced rising oil and food prices that stretched our import bill 
beyond limits and our balance of trade went into a tail spin. The global economic downturn 
BIS Review 132/2009 
 1
also  adversely  impacted  our  tourism  and  inward  remittances,  which  have  in  the  past, 
assisted to alleviate a good part of the trade deficit. The higher prices for oil and food saw 
inflation reach a twenty year high.  
The  situation  became  very  critical  with  our  foreign  exchange  reserves  plummeting  very 
rapidly.  
We  also  saw  that  with  massive  shifts  in  global  financial  flows,  the  currencies  of  our  major 
trading  partners  depreciated  significantly  against  the  US  dollar  and  with  the  Fiji  dollar 
appreciating  against  the  currencies  of  important  tourism  source  markets  like  Australia  and 
New Zealand, we became very uncompetitive in terms of tourism. 
These were the daunting challenges faced by Fiji when I took office. 
Devaluation 
I  had  to  act  decisively  and  strategically,  but  most  importantly,  in  a  timely  manner,  to 
overcome  the  extreme  challenge  of  salvaging  the  economy,  our  foreign  reserves  and  to 
protect our financial position.  
One of my first tasks upon my appointment was to immediately brief the Government of the 
difficult and critical state of our balance of payment and convince them of the need to realign 
our currency.  
The  20  percent  devaluation  in  April  was  necessary  to  stop  the  bleeding  of  our  foreign 
reserves. This was a very difficult and heart wrenching decision to take. But as leaders of 
important  policy  making  institutions,  we  have  to  take  decisions  in  the  best  interest  of  the 
country with courage and conviction. If not, we will let our country and our people down. 
As  you  know  devaluation  affects  each  and  everyone  in  the  country  one  way  or  the  other. 
Some  people  benefit  and  others  may  lose  out.  However,  from  the  country’s  point  of  view, 
devaluation is supposed to stabilize the balance of payment. 
As you may know the foreign reserve levels reached a very critical stage in April. Our foreign 
reserve level was around one month of imports and the forecast was for it to decrease even 
further in the next few weeks. However, since the devaluation, our reserve levels have now 
recovered to comfortable levels and have reached over a billion Fijian dollars now. 
Of course, this turn around in the reserves did not come about without much pain. Our import 
prices  naturally  went  up  quite  significantly  and  are  still  going  up.  This,  of  course,  leads  to 
higher  inflation  and  affects  people’s  livelihood.  You  are  noticing  that  the  inflation  rate  has 
been going up gradually and is expected to increase further before decelerating to around 2 
percent by mid-next year. 
Let me now touch on a few other policies we have put in place to assist economic recovery. 
Interest rates 
The interest rate environment that we faced in Fiji early in the year was not conducive for 
economic  recovery.  Under  normal  circumstances,  when  you  have  balance  of  payment 
difficulties, you would expect to see interest rates rising.  
But we were not in normal circumstances. The whole world was not going through normal 
circumstances.  Countries  all  over  the  world  took  unprecedented  and  non-traditional 
measures  to  deal  with  the  grave  financial  and  economic  situations  they  were  faced  with. 
Governments pumped in trillions of dollars into their economies to fend off the financial crisis. 
We had a situation in Fiji where our economy was buffeted by factors beyond our control. 
Our  export  incomes  were  drying  up  as  our  exports  started  to  decline  due  to  the  fall-off  in 
global demand for our exports. Inward remittances which became a major source of foreign 
2 
 BIS Review 132/2009
exchange for Fiji over the last four to five years started to also fall-off significantly due to the 
global crisis as our people who worked abroad started to lose their jobs and fewer people 
were getting new employment abroad. 
Now, when faced with this kind of situation and then you have some banks still increase their 
interest rates despite being asked to show restraint, there is no choice but to put regulations 
in place. It is against this background, that interest rate controls on banks and other financial 
institutions were put in place in April this year. 
These  controls  included  a  ceiling  on  lending  rates  and  also  controls  on  the  spreads.  The 
“spread” is the difference between the lending rates and deposit rates. I am pleased to say 
that  these  policies  are  working  well.  Interest  rates  have  started  to  trend  downwards  while 
deposit rates are gradually edging up. 
Now  that  foreign  reserves  have  stabilized,  the  credit  ceiling  that  was  put  in  place  in 
December 2006 has been lifted. As the economic situation normalizes, we will also consider 
further roll- back of the current policies. However, it is critical that we see both domestic and 
foreign investments start to pick up. 
Micro-finance 
Let me now talk a bit about micro-finance. I believe that as we move forward it is critically 
important that the rural sector plays a more active role in the economic growth of our country. 
We  have  to  get  more  of  our  people  who  are  currently  economically  inactive  or 
underemployed into the economic mainstream. By doing this we will – not only bring up the 
living standards of our people but also reduce the growing poverty in the country. But this 
has not been an easy task, as we discovered in the past. It is important that we do not give 
up. Our leaders must continuously seek to identify the constraints of rural development and 
work to overcome these. 
Microfinance is one area which I hold very dear to my heart. Over the years, I have been 
closely  observing  how  our  rural  sector  was  being  neglected.  I  have  witnessed  how  past 
policy failures and poor governance issues attributed to the increased poverty in the country. 
These are clearly seen in the huge increase in the squatter population mainly over the last 
ten years or so. 
I believe, with the right kind of financing and support our rural sector can grow and dominate 
the  growth  of  the  economy.  I  believe  that  we  need  to  get  the  capital  to  work  with  the 
resources, somehow.  
I  have  challenged  and  am  encouraging  the  commercial  banks  to  change  their  banking 
practices  and  not  only  concentrate  on  big  businesses.  Micro  finance  is  done  very 
successfully  in  Asia  and  South  America.  Almost  every  central  bank  in  Asia  and  South 
America has special micro-finance areas and they expect all their commercial banks to be 
actively involved in rural development. 
I  am  convinced  that  there  is  no  reason  why  commercial  banks  in  Fiji  cannot  have  micro-
finance  specialisation  as  part  of  their  operations.  If  this  is  working  well  in  Asia  and  South 
America  –  why  not  Fiji?  I  believe  that  the  key  is  to  change  mindsets  and  styles  of  their 
operations  through  designing  their  banking  services  to  suit  the  banking  needs  of  the  rural 
areas. I have set a time frame with commercial Bank’s to set up microfinance centres in each 
of their branches by January 2010. 
We are also playing our part in micro finance at the Reserve Bank. We have set up a special 
department  in  the  Bank  to  lead  research,  development  and  implementation  of  financial 
system  products,  projects  and  initiatives  such  as  micro-finance,  small  micro  and  medium 
enterprise, rural banking, financial inclusion and literacy.  
BIS Review 132/2009 
 3
The Reserve Bank in partnership with some donor agencies such as the UNDP will conduct 
a two-day workshop on micro-finance in the next couple of weeks. The aim is for all the key 
stakeholders  to  come  together  and  discuss  the  best  way  to  provide  financial  and  credit 
facilities to the rural poor specially those who are termed as “unbankable”.  
Road shows 
I believe that constant, effective and quality communication is extremely vital to the success 
of policies. This will ensure that key players are fully informed and have a good grasp and 
understanding of the policies implemented by the Reserve Bank and how they themselves fit 
into the “bigger picture”. 
I sent a team of my senior staff to go out and explain to all the key stakeholders, the policies 
that were put in place by the Reserve Bank and the reasons behind these policies. I believe 
people  must  be  fully  informed  of  why  the  Fiji  dollar  was  devalued  as  it  affects  each  and 
everyone of us. 
To date the Road Show Team has made around 30 presentations around the country – to 
the business community, commercial banks and organizations, statutory corporations, non-
governmental organizations and other interest groups. Feedback has been very positive and 
queries and issues raised by people who are not in the area of the RBF have been taken up 
with the appropriate authorities. 
Reforms 
Our  country  is  at  the  juncture  where  we  need  to  direct  all  our  energies  to  making  the 
economy grow sustainably. To make the economy grow and grow sustainably, we need to 
reform.  
I  mentioned  earlier  that  a  number  of  our  traditional  industries  have  been  in  decline  for  a 
number  of  years.  There  are  a  number  of  issues  to  deal  with  in  terms  of  the  public  sector 
delivery of services. Not only in the civil service but also in statutory bodies as well. This also 
holds true in the private sector. 
If you look closely at the reasons behind the poor performance of some of our industries and 
poor service deliveries in the public sector, you will find that the most common problems are 
linked to human resources and governance issues at institutional and at national level. 
I  am  therefore  very  pleased  to  see  that  the  Fiji  Human  Resources  Institute  is  addressing 
some of these key human resources issues during this Conference. 
Corporate  governance  and  effective  human  resources  management  are  two  critical  issues 
closely linked to the success or failure of any institution or country. With my experience in the 
RBF and also in my role as Chairman and member on several boards, I have developed a 
good grasp and appreciation of human resources and governance challenges faced in Fiji. 
These  issues  are  interlinked  and  are  complex  in  nature.  Every  organization  is  trying  to 
grapple and address human resources and corporate governance issues in their own way. 
Sharing ideas and experiences is important in improving the effectiveness and productivity in 
the way we do things. 
I urge each organization to strategically explore the challenges they face in employing and 
retaining a quality work force and to take corrective actions to deal with the situation. This I 
believe  is  easier  said  than  done.  In  the  Reserve  Bank,  we  also  lose  well-trained  staff  to 
migration  each  year.  It  is  therefore  important  that  developing  strategies  to  retain  a  quality 
workforce is addressed in a timely manner – failing which our organizations will undoubtedly 
suffer and experience low performance and productivity. 
4 
 BIS Review 132/2009
The leadership of an organization must take a lead role in human resources issues. This role 
cannot and must not be delegated down to other people in the organization and expect to 
achieve good results. I believe that strategic human resources issues must be dealt with by 
the top leaders in the organization both at the Chief Executive and Chairman levels. 
I have observed that important human resources policies and strategies are left to Human 
Resources Managers (HRM) to manage in a number of organizations in Fiji. The leaders of 
these organizations believe that it is not their job to be concerned about human resources 
issues and are more concerned with the business acumen for the organisation.  
I believe that this attitude and leadership style in any organisation will undoubtedly result in 
their demise and poor performance.  
Theodore  Roosevelt  once  said  “I  dream  of  men  who  take  the  next  step  instead  of 
worrying about the next thousand steps”.  
I  believe  that  as  a  good  leader  we  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  “bigger  picture”.  The  “big 
picture”  for  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  which  we  have  set  for  ourselves  is  our  Vision  of 
“Leading Fiji to Economic Success”. This of course is very challenging particularly during 
these global and national events.  
We also have a simplified version of the RBF Vision which helps all our staff understand the 
challenges of their jobs – the Vision is translated as “My work in the Reserve Bank of Fiji 
helps create jobs, puts more food on everyone’s table, provides more opportunities to 
our  people  to  own  a  home,  gives  our  children  a  better  education  and  secures  a 
brighter  future  for  us  all”.  This  is  indeed  quite  a  mouthful,  but  clearly  what  many  of  us 
desire for our country.  
Many  of  you  will  already  be  wondering  how  is  it  ever  possible  for  the  Reserve  Bank  to 
achieve their Vision of Leading Fiji to Economic Success given the current state of Fiji’s 
economy, which we all agree is going through some tough times. There are not enough jobs 
for everyone, food prices are high and our people are finding it difficult to put food on their 
tables. 
The environment has made achieving our Vision a daunting task and the Reserve Bank has 
not  been  challenged  with  such  intensity  before  as  our  problems  seem  to  be  compounding 
more in recent times. I believe that despite these challenges, the Reserve Bank has been 
able to manage these challenges over the years and more recently as well. I believe that the 
Reserve  Bank  has  the  leadership  and  capacity  to  overcome  these  challenges  by  working 
with  the  Government  and  all  stakeholders  –  including  us all  here  today  –  to  ensure  better 
policy coherence and coordination to safeguard our country’s future. Let us all take “the next 
step together” and “Lead Fiji to Economic Success”.  
It  has  been  said  that  it  is  relatively  easy  to  lead  when  things  are  plain  sailing  and  that 
Leaders are challenged most when things are tough. There is also a popular saying “When 
the  going  gets  tough,  the  leaders  get  going”.  When  the  situation  gets  tough  and  in  a 
quest to be more competitive and survive, Leaders will need to think “outside of the box” and 
move  “out  of  our  comfort  zones”.  Major  adjustments  and  paradigm  shifts  are  required. 
Creative thinking and in some cases unpopular policy decisions need to be implemented to 
address economic and financial challenges. It is however logical that change will be opposed 
and  difficult  to  accept  initially.  There  is  a  high  premium  on  being  level-headed,  keeping 
emotions and feelings under control and being an optimist.  
I believe that a vibrant energy for “hard work” and taking tough decisions, being consistent 
and following through on these are some traits of a good leader leading in turbulent times. An 
effective leader is always optimistic “even when the going gets tough”, never a pessimist.  
An  effective  leader  sees  opportunities  where  others  only  see  problems  and  continuously 
raises  the  bar  for  excellence  in  an  organisation.  An  effective  leader  believes  in  his  or  her 
BIS Review 132/2009 
 5
people  and  their  potential  and  capabilities  and  imposes  challenges  beyond  their  limits  to 
harness their creativity and talents.  
Leaders not only need to be knowledgeable, they now need to inspire and lead a very 
knowledgeable and highly qualified team.  
General George S Patton once said “Never tell people how to do things. Tell them what 
to do and they will surprise you with their ingenuity.” 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  and  leave  you  with  a  few  challenging  thoughts  in  line  with  the  theme  of 
today’s convention “People – Key to Economic Success”. 
1. 
2. 
How can the Institute contribute to capacity building and leadership for our nation? 
How can the Institute prevent the “brain drain” – of our professionally trained staff 
leaving Fiji for greener pastures abroad?  
How  can  the  Institute  raise  the  bar  for  productivity  and  fulfil  the  expectations  and 
aspirations  of  the  people  of  Fiji  –  and  contribute  to  Leading  Fiji  to  Economic 
Success? 
How  can  the  Institute  ensure  the  recognition  and  importance  of  human  resources 
management in organisations in Fiji? 
How  can  the  Institute  encourage  human  resources  as  a  career  of  choice  for 
students?  
3. 
4. 
5. 
I anticipate that these five challenges will pave the way for discussions over the 2 days and 
will assist with the Institute’s future plans and activities. I wish you well in your deliberations. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 132/2009
