Mark Carney: Reforming the global financial system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  Rendez-vous  avec 
l’Autorité des marchés financiers, Montréal, Québec, 26 October 2009.  
 It is a pleasure to be here at this year’s Rendez-vous avec l’Autorité des marchés financiers 
(AMF). 
After briefly reviewing the current macrofinancial environment, I intend to concentrate on the 
G-20  reform  agenda.  The  financial  crisis  has  cost  tens  of  millions  of  jobs  and  trillions  of 
dollars  in  foregone  output.  Its  aftershocks  will  persist  for  years.  To  prevent  an  even  more 
severe outcome, monetary and fiscal policies have been stretched to their very limits. 
In this context, it would be a mistake to underestimate the determination of G-20 leaders to 
reshape  the  financial  services  industry.  Last  month  in  Pittsburgh,  the  leaders  of  the  G-20 
endorsed  a  comprehensive  agenda,  whose  implementation  is  just  beginning.  As  I  will 
highlight during my remarks, Canada intends to use its presidency of the G-7 next year to 
advance some of the most important priorities. 
Current outlook 
Recent  indicators  point  to  the  start  of  a  global  recovery.  Economic  and  financial 
developments have been somewhat more favourable than the Bank had expected  in July, 
although  significant  fragilities  remain.  In  Canada,  as  expected,  a  recovery  in  economic 
activity  is  also  under  way,  following  three  consecutive  quarters  of  sharp  contraction.  This 
resumption  of  growth  is  supported  by  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus,  increased  household 
wealth, improving financial conditions, higher commodity prices, and stronger business and 
consumer confidence. 
However, heightened volatility and persistent strength in the Canadian dollar are working to 
slow growth and subdue inflation pressures. The current strength in the dollar is expected, 
over time, to more than fully offset the favourable developments since July. 
Given  all  these  factors,  the  Bank  now  projects  that,  relative  to  our  July  Monetary  Policy 
Report,  the  composition  of  aggregate  demand  will  shift  further  towards  final  domestic 
demand and away from net exports. We now expect growth to average slightly lower over 
the  balance  of  the  projection  period.  The  Bank  projects  that  the  Canadian  economy  will 
contract by 2.4 per cent this year and then grow by 3.0 per cent in 2010 and 3.3 per cent in 
2011. This projected recovery will be somewhat more modest than the average of previous 
cycles. 
Total CPI inflation declined to a trough of -0.9 per cent in the third quarter, reflecting large 
year-on-year  drops  in  energy  prices.  Total  CPI  inflation  should  rise  to  1.0  per  cent  this 
quarter, while the core rate of inflation is projected to reach its trough of 1.4 per cent during 
the same period. Owing to the substantial excess supply that has emerged in the economy, 
the Bank expects both core and total inflation to return to the 2 per cent target in the third 
quarter of 2011, one quarter later than we projected in July. 
The  main  upside  risks  to  inflation  relate  to  the  possibility  of  a  stronger-than-anticipated 
recovery in the global economy and more robust Canadian domestic demand. 
On  the  downside,  the  global  recovery  could  be  even  more  protracted  than  projected.  In 
addition, a stronger-than-assumed Canadian dollar, driven by global portfolio movements out 
of  U.S.-dollar  assets,  could  act  as  a  significant  further  drag  on  growth  and  put  additional 
downward pressure on inflation. 
BIS Review 133/2009 
 1
On  Tuesday,  the  Bank  reaffirmed  its  conditional  commitment  to  maintain  its  target  for  the 
overnight rate at the effective lower bound of 1/4 per cent until the end of June 2010 in order 
to  achieve  the  inflation  target.  The  Bank  retains  considerable  flexibility  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy at low interest rates, consistent with the framework that we outlined in the 
April MPR. 
As I said last week, our focus in the conduct of monetary policy is on achieving the 2 percent 
inflation target. The exchange rate should be seen in this context. It is an important relative 
price, which the Bank monitors closely. What ultimately matters is the exchange rate’s impact 
in conjunction with all other domestic and foreign factors on aggregate demand and inflation 
in Canada. To put it simply, the Bank looks at everything through the prism of achieving our 
inflation target. 
Current macrofinancial environment 
As  many  of  you  have  no  doubt  noticed,  it  is  currently  a  very  constructive  environment  for 
financial  institutions.  Flow  trading  and  market  making  have  become  more  attractive  and 
intermediation  spreads  have  increased.  Underwriting  fees  have  recovered  along  with  the 
capital markets; and there are very early signs that an appetite for mergers and acquisitions 
has  returned.  Banks  are  once  again  being  compensated  for  their  basic  businesses  of 
providing  liquidity  and  credit.  Interestingly,  despite  the  fall  in  measured  volatility,  industry 
VaR, while down from the peak earlier this year, is still above pre-Lehman levels. 
What  is  perhaps  less evident  is  that  these  returns  are  largely  the  product  of  public  policy. 
While medium-term challenges clearly remain, tail risk has been removed from the economic 
outlook. The very low policy interest rates and greater-than-usual clarity on policy paths are 
encouraging investors to return to the markets and to take on greater risk. 
Direct  support  to  the  industry  has  been  breathtaking,  with  some  industrialized  countries 
committing a remarkable 25 per cent of GDP to support their financial sectors. In effect, there 
was  wartime  spending  on  peacetime  calamity.  The  G-7  commitments  of  last  October 
temporarily  eliminated  counterparty  risk  for  major  institutions.  When  this  support  was 
combined  with  an 
institutions  benefited 
disproportionately. 
Even in Canada, public funding has been considerable. The $65 billion in Insured Mortgage 
Purchase  Program  (IMPP)  funding  for  banks  represents  4.3  per  cent  of  GDP.  Bank  of 
Canada  extraordinary  liquidity  facilities  have  been  smaller  than  elsewhere  but  they  still 
peaked  at  3  per  cent  of  GDP.  While  government  guarantees  have  not  been  used,  it  is 
noteworthy that Canadian bank term funding is running at less than 30 per cent of normal 
levels, largely as a result of the use of IMPP and the Bank’s facilities. 
Initially, the crisis has also had a major impact on the competitive environment for financial 
institutions. Competition globally has been substantially reduced through the combination of 
the  failure  of  institutions,  a  decline  in  cross-border  banking  and,  most  importantly,  the 
collapse of most of the shadow banking system. The reduced competitive dynamics could 
persist for some time, allowing the core of the financial sector to build sufficient capital for the 
future. Banks around the world would be well advised to take this opportunity to do so. 
to  quality, 
financial 
intense 
large 
flight 
The G-20 reform agenda 
The fundamental objective of the G-20 reforms is to create a resilient, global financial system 
that efficiently supports worldwide economic growth. The system must be robust to shocks, 
dampening rather than amplifying their impact on the real economy. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  strongly  believes  that  our  destination  should  be  one  where  financial 
institutions  and  markets  play  critical  –  and  complementary  –  roles  to  support  long-term 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2009
economic  prosperity.  The  financial  system  will  be  more  stable  if  market  infrastructure  is 
substantially  improved,  products  are  more  standardized  and  transparent,  and  banks  are 
adequately  capitalized  to  fulfill  their  market-making  and  credit  intermediation  roles.  Market 
forces  should  be  left  to  determine  the  relative  sizes  and  boundaries  of  the  banking  and 
market  sectors.  In  doing  so,  markets  can  discipline  banks  by  furnishing  necessary 
competition. 
There are two main approaches to reform:  
• 
First, protect the banks from the economic cycle; in other words, make each bank, 
individually, more resilient.  
Second, protect the cycle from the banks; that is, make the system as a whole more 
resilient.  
 Both are necessary. 
Protecting the banks from the cycle 
In effect, the objective of the first approach is to create more resilient institutions. This will 
require more capital, higher liquidity, and better risk management. 
In early September, my colleagues and I on the oversight body of the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision (BCBS) met to review a comprehensive set of measures to strengthen 
the regulation, supervision, and risk management of the banking sector. We agreed on new 
standards for banking regulation and supervision, which should help reduce the probability 
and  severity  of  economic  and  financial  stress.  These  standards  were  endorsed  by  G-20 
leaders in Pittsburgh. 
Specifically, to protect banks from the cycle, we agreed to:  
i. 
Raise the quality, consistency, and transparency of the Tier 1 capital base. Going 
forward, the predominant form of Tier 1 capital must consist of common shares and 
retained earnings. Moreover, deductions and prudential filters (such as goodwill and 
other  intangibles,  investments  in  own  shares,  deferred  tax  assets,  etc.)  will  be 
harmonized  internationally  and  generally  applied  at  the  level  of  common  equity. 
Finally, all components of the capital base will be fully disclosed.  
Introduce a leverage ratio as a supplementary measure of capital adequacy to the 
Basel II risk-based framework. To ensure comparability, the details of the leverage 
ratio will be harmonised internationally, fully adjusting for differences in accounting 
(such as netting).  
ii. 
These  two  measures  will  make  international  bank  capital  regulation  look  more  like  the 
existing capital regulations overseen by Canada’s Office of the Superintendent of Financial 
Institutions (OSFI). Other initiatives will be new, even to Canada:1
iii. 
Introduce  a  framework  for  countercyclical  capital  buffers  above  the  minimum 
requirement. The Bank of Canada is working closely with OSFI and our international 
counterparts on proposed elements of this framework.  
Create a minimum global standard for funding liquidity that includes requirement for 
a  stressed  liquidity-coverage  ratio, underpinned  by  a  longer-term  structuralliquidity 
iv. 
                                                 
1   A system-wide, or macroprudential, approach is the shared responsibility of the Department of Finance and all 
of  the  federal  financial  regulatory  authorities,  including,  of  course,  the  Bank  of  Canada,  the  Office  of  the 
Superintendent of Financial Institutions, and the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation. Ultimately, it is the 
Minister of Finance who is responsible for the sound stewardship of the financial system. 
BIS Review 133/2009 
 3
ratio.  As  in  other  areas,  standard  setters  will  need  to  take  a  comprehensive 
approach.  
Central  banks  have  real  concerns  about  ratchet  effects  (large  buffers  are  built 
beyond  the  standard),  particularly  in  light  of  the  inherent  procyclicality  of  liquidity 
(i.e., institutions want more liquidity in bad times so "buffers" cannot be drawn upon).  
One potential mitigant would be to ensure that there is a broad range of securities 
that are liquid in all states of the world. That is tougher than it sounds as anyone 
who  tried  to  repo  quasi-sovereigns  throughout  the  last  year  knows.  I  will  address 
some potential solutions to this problem momentarily.  
The Bank strongly believes that the standard should not bind in times of systemic 
crises.  
The Basel Committee will issue specific, concrete proposals on these measures by the end 
of this year. It will carry out an impact assessment in the first half of next year, and calibrate 
the new requirements by the end of 2010. Implementation will be timed to ensure that the 
phase-in of these new measures does not impede the recovery of the real economy. 
Protecting the cycle from the banks 
Protecting the cycle from the banks requires building a system that can withstand the failure 
of any single financial institution and is buttressed by resilient markets. Today, after a series 
of extraordinary but necessary measures to keep the system functioning, we are awash in 
moral hazard. If left unchecked, this will distort private behaviour and inflate public costs. 
As  a  consequence,  there  is  a  firm  conviction  among  policy-makers  that  losses  endured  in 
future  crises  must  be  borne  by  the  institutions  themselves.  This  means  management, 
shareholders and creditors, rather than taxpayers. This cannot be accomplished overnight. 
On the contrary, it is a long-term objective that should consistently guide policy choices now 
and  in  the  future.  The  following  four  measures  are  designed  to  create  a  system  in  which 
individual financial institutions are less important and markets more important:  
i. 
As is the case in Canada, all regulators should institute staged intervention regimes2 
to detect problems early.  
Banks  themselves  should  develop  "living  wills,"  or  plans  to  unwind  in  an  orderly 
fashion if they were to fail. If this process results in simpler organizations, so be it. At 
a  minimum,  the  exercise  will  underscore  the  shared  responsibility  for  financial 
stability and improve regulators’ understanding of firms’ business models.  
The Basel oversight committee agreed to "reduce the systemic risk associated with 
the resolution of cross-border banks." Closing down a multinational institution is a 
horrifically difficult challenge, but without progress in this area, the efficiency of the 
global  system  will  likely  decline,  perhaps  significantly.  For  example,  viable  cross-
border resolution is the key to ensure that a financial institution’s liquidity continues 
to be optimally distributed across its international operations.  
Finally, the Bank of Canada believes that continuously open markets are essential 
for  a  system  to  be  robust  to  failure.  The  crisis  was  clearly  exacerbated  by  the 
seizure  of  interbank  and  repo  markets.  Good  collateral  became  unfinanceable 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
                                                 
2   OSFI  has  developed  Guide  to  Intervention  for  federally-regulated  financial  institutions  that  provide  a 
framework  for  responding  effectively  to  circumstances  that  could  undermine  the  financial  viability  of  an 
institution.  It  is  based  on  a  graduated  and  progressive  set  of  responses  or  stages,  depending  on  the 
institution’s situation and degree of weakness perceived. Further information on the staging process can be 
found at www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/app/DocRepository/1/eng/practices/supervisory/Guide_Int_e.pdf. 
4 
 BIS Review 133/2009
overnight,  firms  failed,  risk  aversion  skyrocketed,  and  the  global  economy 
plummeted.  
Clearing houses for repo  
Through-the-cycle margining requirements  
Standardizing products  
Ensuring that accounting rules permit effective netting  
Adapting central bank liquidity facilities as necessary  
Promising avenues to break such (il)liquidity spirals in funding markets include:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In a similar vein, current efforts to transfer settlement of many over-the-counter derivatives 
onto clearing houses and potentially the trading of some of them onto exchanges, such as 
the  Montreal  Exchange,  have  the  potential  to  reduce  bilateral  counterparty  risk,  increase 
liquidity, and enhance transparency. As a testament to the seriousness of this initiative, the 
G-7 – where the vast majority of such transactions occur – has made this a top priority for 
implementation next year. The Bank of Canada is working with our partners, including the 
AMF and the federal Department of Finance, to develop a Canadian approach. 
Globally,  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  recent  months  –  more  than  two-thirds  of 
credit default swaps (CDS) and three-quarters of interest rate swaps (IRS) are now eligible 
for clearing houses. Of course, there is much more work to be done as actual volumes are 
still a fraction of these levels. 
For  such  initiatives  to  be  fully  successful,  regulatory  capital  requirements  should  reinforce 
incentives  to  process  standardized  products  centrally.  That  is,  trading  in  standardized 
products  should  be  capital  advantaged  and  limited  basis  risk  should  not  result  in  punitive 
capital charges. Bespoke transactions will continue to have their place, but should be subject 
to higher capital requirements so that incentives are appropriately aligned. 
Securitization needs to be made more sustainable 
A  more  resilient  financial  system  will  require  a  return  of  private-label  securitization.  When 
properly structured, securitization can diversify risk, provide competitive discipline on banks 
and  lower  borrowing  costs  for  individuals  and  businesses.  Much  more  must  be  done  to 
ensure that these objectives can be achieved. 
Securitization has been slow to come back for two reasons. First, some core buyers of senior 
tranches  (structured  investment  vehicles,  Canadian  non-bank  asset-backed  commercial 
paper  (ABCP),  balance  sheets  of  large  banks)  will  not  return.  This  alone  will  shrink  the 
market substantially. Some of this shortfall in financing capacity will be replaced over time 
with  on-balance  sheet  credit  risk,  though  the  prospect  of  leverage  ratios  will  limit  future 
buying by banks of senior tranches. 
Second, the crisis laid bare important structural deficiencies, such as the woefully inadequate 
disclosure  on  securitized  products.  Transparency  should  be  improved  so  that  risk  can  be 
identified more effectively and priced more efficiently. For example, the Bank of Canada used 
its collateral policy to improve the disclosure of bank-sponsored ABCP, creating a standard 
that should become commonplace. More generally, we advocate publication of models and 
data  underlying  securities  to  move  securitization  from  "black  box"  to  "open  source."  There 
are also a host of initiatives for underwriters to have skin in the game (keep similar products 
or first loss). 
The  Bank  is  working  with  government  and  industry  players  to  explore  the  effectiveness  of 
these and other alternatives. 
BIS Review 133/2009 
 5
An integrated approach to return risk to the private sector 
The financial panic required a bold response. While absolutely necessary, the response has 
profoundly  shifted  risk  from  the  private  to  the  public  sector.  The  expedient  should  not 
become permanent. Risks must be returned to and, borne by, the private sector. However, 
this can only happen if banks are resilient and if markets are built on solid foundations. 
This  will  require  a  set  of  reforms  that  are  internally  consistent  and  mutually  reinforcing. 
Examples just mentioned include clearing houses for CDS  and Basel II treatment  of basis 
risk or new liquidity requirements and the development of continuously open funding markets 
to  aid  in  liquidity  options.  Reforms  cannot  be  developed  and  introduced  in  a  piecemeal 
fashion; the entire package must be integrated. 
Similarly,  banks  should  take  an  integrated  approach  to  how  they  deploy  their  current 
earnings. In this regard, it may be wise to consider that both the Basel Committee and the 
G-20  are  stressing  capital  conservation  during  the  transition  to  a  new  capital  regime.  The 
compensation debate should be seen in this context. Current bumper profits can compensate 
employees, be returned to shareholders, or increase capital. The clear priority of the public 
sector is the recapitalization of the financial system to expand credit formation. The transition 
timetable for a new capital regime referenced at the start of my remarks is in part designed to 
take advantage of current higher retained earnings. The industry should be in no doubt that 
capital requirements are going up. Those who pre-fund will be in the best possible position 
over the medium term. 
Moreover,  we  all  agree  that  bonuses  should  be  tied  to  long-term  performance.  In  their 
communiqué,  the  G-20  leaders  urged  firms  to  implement  sound  compensation  practices 
immediately. The current windfall, dependent as it is on the strongest of safety nets and the 
policy-driven snap back from the brink, sits uneasily with that principle. Do firms really have a 
good handle on their medium-term profitability, given the profound regulatory and economic 
changes on the horizon? 
Conclusion: working together for common solutions 
To conclude, the financial system must transition from its self-appointed role as the apex of 
economic activity to once again be the servant of the real economy. Stronger institutions and 
a  system  that  can  withstand  failure  are  necessary  conditions.  But  full  realization  of  this 
objective also requires a change in attitude. 
The Bank of Canada has a strong preference for principles-based regulation and reliance on 
the judgment of people, rather than blind faith in the security blanket of excess capital. But 
this  approach  requires  a  sensitivity  from  the  industry,  which  has  been  absent  in  recent 
months. Relief is in danger of giving way to hubris. 
Financial  institutions  need  to  demonstrate  an  awareness  of  their  broader  responsibilities. 
Financiers  should  ask  themselves  every  day  how  their  activities  affect  systemic  risk?  And 
what are they doing to promote economic growth? 
As  a  colleague  said  during  the  crisis,  there  are  no  atheists  in  foxholes,  and  there  are  no 
ideologues in financial crises. Policy-makers had to do many unpalatable things to save the 
economy from the financial system – a financial system that begged for mercy. 
We will not remind market participants of the many oaths they swore a year ago; nor do we 
expect  scores  of  financiers  to  join  religious  orders.  However,  we  do  expect  those  fevered 
battlefield  vows  to  be  respected  through  daily  peacetime  concern  for  and  contributions  to 
building a better, more resilient financial system – a system that serves the real economy, by 
replacing those lost jobs and making up for that lost output.  
6 
 BIS Review 133/2009
