Tom K Alweendo: Accelerated economic growth and job creation – the 
need for a paradigm shift 
Annual  address  of  Mr  Tom  K  Alweendo,  Governor  of  Bank  of  Namibia,  Windhoek, 
5 November 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for attending our regular annual address. I know that we are competing for your 
time with many other events. The theme of my annual address this year is on the need for a 
paradigm shift, in order to accelerate economic growth and job creation. Before doing that, I 
would like to give you a brief update on the state of the economy and the banking system. 
As we all know the global economy went through a period of extraordinary financial instability 
in  2008  and  2009.  This  was  accompanied  by  the  worst  global  economic  down  turn  and  a 
collapse  in  trade.  No  country  escaped  the  reach  of  this  economic  storm,  and  we  were  no 
exception. Our export oriented sectors, notably minerals and tourism, have been especially 
hard hit. Consequently, the economy is expected to contract by about 1.1 percent in 2009, 
while  a  moderate  recovery  is  envisaged  for  2010.  In  part,  due  to  depressed  international 
demand conditions, inflationary pressures have been largely under control. The annual rate 
of inflation has declined to 7.1 percent in September. Declining levels of inflation has allowed 
the  Bank  of  Namibia  to  ease  monetary  conditions,  but  domestic  demand  is  yet  to  show  a 
sustained recovery. In line with the global economic recovery, there are encouraging signs of 
a recovery in the Namibian economy, but it will take a while for economic activities to reach 
pre-crisis levels and become more sustainable. 
With  respect  to  the  financial  system,  our  banks  remain  profitable.  Banks  are  adequately 
capitalized, sufficiently liquid, and non-performing loans as a ratio to total loans remain well 
below  internationally  acceptable  standards.  I  am  also  certain  that  most  of  you  have  been 
following  the  recent  debate  on  the  appropriateness  of  the  difference  between  the  Bank  of 
Namibia’s official interest rate and the commercial banks’ average lending rates.  
At the heart of the debate is whether the interest rate differential is a correct reflection of the 
risk commercial banks undertake to intermediate between the savers and borrowers.  
We do agree that commercial banks, just like any other business, need to be rewarded for 
the risk they take in conducting banking business. We also believe that the reward must be 
commensurate  with  the  risk  being  taken.  As  we  all  know,  the  banking  system  is  the  main 
transmission  channel  for  our  monetary  policy  actions.  That  means  therefore  that  for  our 
monetary policy to have the intended effect, the transmission channel must be effective. That 
is why we have started a dialogue with the commercial banks to ensure that the transmission 
mechanism works effectively. 
There are some who suggest that our actions in this regard are irresponsible. They accuse 
us of causing financial instability. They also accuse us of chasing away potential investors. 
Let  me  assure  you  that,  as  a  regulator  of  the  banking  sector,  we  are  well  aware  of  our 
responsibilities. In carrying out our responsibilities, we will always do so in the best interest of 
Namibia.  After  all,  financial  stability  is  one  of  our  main  objectives  and  we  take  our 
responsibilities seriously. 
Let me now return to the main topic for tonight. In less than five months we will celebrate our 
20th independence anniversary. Twenty years is an appropriate period to take stock of our 
achievements since independence and to reflect on the way forward. Our 20th anniversary 
as a sovereign nation is also symbolic in the sense that we will be exactly 20 years away 
from the target date of Vision 2030. According to V2030, in twenty years from now we want 
to  be  a  prosperous  and  industrialized  nation;  and  we  want  to  enjoy  peace,  harmony  and 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 1
political  stability.  More  specifically, the  Vision  states  that  Namibia  will  be  an  upper  income 
country.  That  means  that  we  should  have  a  per  capita  income  of  at  least  US$17,000  and 
unemployment of below 5 percent. Let us therefore pause for a moment and ask ourselves 
whether we are on track towards meeting these noble objectives. 
To  be  sure,  we  certainly  have  achieved  a  lot  in  the  last  twenty  years  and  we  have  every 
reason to celebrate our achievements. It is not an overstatement to say that we have been 
the  envy  of  many  countries  in  the  Sub-Saharan  African  region.  Our  achievements  can  be 
grouped under three categories, namely political, macroeconomic, and social. 
Political  stability  is  an  indispensable  condition  for  sustainable  economic  development. 
Without political stability economic development is simply not possible. We should be proud 
that in a relatively short time we were able to establish a stable and mature democracy. We 
have  managed  to  build  strong  institutions,  including  independence  of  the  judiciary,  good 
governance and protection of property rights. In just a few days from today, Namibians will 
for the fifth time go to the ballot boxes for the presidential and national assembly elections. I 
would like to wish all the political parties taking part in the elections good luck. Indeed we 
have reason to celebrate. 
As to macroeconomic stability we have equally been successful. Inflation has been low and 
stable; fiscal policy has been prudent and sustainable; and our external balance has been 
healthy over the years. Moreover economic growth has been positive, resulting into modest 
gains in per capita income.  
Recently the World Bank reclassified Namibia from being a lower-middle-income country, to 
an upper-middle-income country. This should bolster us to want to do more. We are one of 
only a few countries in Sub-Saharan Africa that has an investment credit rating. With a credit 
rating, we are able to access international capital markets at relatively better terms. While we 
may  not  need  to  borrow  externally  for  now,  external  borrowing  may  be  necessary  during 
times of crisis or when in need of additional capital to support faster economic growth.  
We also have one of the highest savings rates in the world, almost comparable to rates in 
East Asia. However, I remain concerned that up to now we failed to transform all our savings 
into  domestic  investment.  Over  the  years  we  wasted  precious  time  engaging  in  useless 
debates as how to utilise our own capital to generate higher economic growth. It is simply no 
longer  credible  on  our  part  to  request  other  countries  to  financially  assist  us  while  we  are 
happy to continue exporting our own capital. This remains a challenge that we can no longer 
afford to ignore. 
Equally, on the social front our achievements have been many and laudable. Today there are 
many more children in schools than at independence. Our national spending on education as 
a percentage of total spending is among the highest in the world. More health facilities have 
been constructed since independence. At least 90 percent of all Namibians have access to 
safe  drinking  water.  This  is  an  achievement  that  even  some  of  the  dynamic  fast  growing 
emerging market economies is yet to achieve. So our achievements are numerous and we 
should celebrate. 
While our achievements are impressive, our challenges are equally daunting. The risk is that 
if  we  do  not  address  the  challenges  facing  us  as  a  matter  of  priority,  the  gains  we  have 
achieved thus far might be eroded. 
As to whether we are likely to achieve V2030, according to our research the picture does not 
look  too  encouraging.  Indications  are  that  on  the  two  key  goals  of  per  capita  income  and 
employment creation, we are not making sufficient progress. The current per capita income 
is US$4,200. At the current growth rate, we project that by 2030, our per capita income will 
be US$10,000. This is no near the required level of US$17,000. The message is that at the 
current rate of progress, we are not getting there. 
The picture does not look any better with our efforts to reduce unemployment. According to 
the  2004  labour  force  survey,  unemployment  rate  was  36  percent.  It  is  a  pity  that  the 
2 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
responsible  people  for  collecting  employment  statistics  are  not  able  to  provide  the  latest 
unemployment figures. This is notwithstanding the fact that unemployment is at levels where 
anywhere else it will be declared as a crisis. We again project that if we continue with the 
same strategies, by 2030 the unemployment figure will be much higher than the current level. 
The  sad  thing  is  that  the  majority  of  the  unemployed,  about  60  percent,  are  the  young 
people,  especially  those  with  little  education.  We  must  realise  that  prolonged  youth 
unemployment  has  far  reaching  consequences.  Youth  unemployment  will  result  into  too 
many shattered dreams, it leads to loss of identities, and lack of zeal for life in general. The 
message is that we can no longer pretend that everything is in order. 
While  our  economic  growth  has  been  positive,  it  has  not  been  high  enough  to  make  a 
meaningful impact on poverty reduction. According to the latest poverty report, 28 percent of 
Namibians are classified as poor; and 14 percent are classified as severely poor. To put this 
in a proper context, poor means a household of four individuals, living on less than N$262 
per month. Severely poor refers to a household living on less than N$185 per month. Let us 
for a moment pause and reflect on what it means to be in this category. It could well mean 
that the person cannot feed herself; it means she cannot provide her child with the necessary 
education; and she cannot afford a decent shelter. International experience has shown that 
the best way to permanently address poverty is not through social safety nets, but through 
sustained and high economic growth. Once again, the message is that we need to act now. 
Having realised that, at the current rate, we are not likely to achieve V2030 objectives, what 
must we do. I do not pretend to have all the correct answer but all I know is that we, all of us, 
need to do something fast. Let me, however, share with you few ideas.  
A number of indicators suggest that we have been successful at managing our economy at 
the macro level. Where we do not do so well though is at the micro level. For example, the 
cost of doing business is perceived to be too high; research and development necessary for 
innovation is lacking; and there is a severe deficit of skills. I would like to advance two other 
possible reasons why our growth have been sluggish and without job creation. 
Because of the many social challenges dating back to the legacies of apartheid, we followed 
a balanced approach to economic development. This means that we decided to develop all 
economic sectors at the same time. The results of this strategy are less successful than what 
we have hoped for. While it is true that we have made progress, when compared to faster 
growing and dynamic economies we have fallen behind.  
Given  the  size  of  our  domestic  economy,  our  economic  policy  must,  out  of  necessity,  be 
more outward looking. We cannot rely on internal consumption and the only way is to adopt 
an export-led economic development strategy. With the exception of this current year, world 
trade  has  been  growing  at  an  exponential  rate  and  the  size  of  the  world  market  has 
increased  manifold.  This  provides  an  opportunity  for  small  open  economies  to  benefit. 
However, to be able to compete in the world market, we need to produce sufficient quantities 
at the right price and quality. 
Specifically,  I  would  like  to  suggest  that  we  adopt  a  targeted  approach  towards  economic 
development.  Resources,  financial  and  human,  should  be  targeted  towards  economic 
sectors with high potential for growth and job creation. Our recent research indicates that the 
sectors  with  the  highest  potential  for  faster  growth  and  job  creation  are  transport 
infrastructure,  tourism  and  agriculture.  Therefore,  we  would  like  to  suggest  that  relatively 
more resources should be channelled to these sectors over the next ten years. If we do this 
in a correct manner, the economy could grow at close to 7 percent per annum, which is more 
in line with what is required to meet Vision 2030.  
I am aware of earlier planned interventions that were abandoned because they were thought 
to  be  too  expensive.  Let  me  say  here  that  I  do  not  want  to  give  an  impression  that  the 
proposed intervention will be cheap. While it is necessary to consider the cost of intervention, 
we should do so in relation to the opportunity cost of not intervening. So far our approach to 
BIS Review 155/2009 
 3
economic  development  has  been  somewhat  too  cautious,  except  that  the  results  are  not 
encouraging.  
In  addition  to  a  targeted  approach  and  more  government  intervention,  there  must  also  be 
other  accompanying  reforms.  Here  I  have  in  mind  reforms,  for  example,  of  our  education 
system and the labour market. 
The  skills  deficit  seems  to  be  on  the  increase.  It  is  encouraging  that  Government  has 
adopted  an  ambitious  plan  to  revamp  our  education  system.  I  would  like  to  encourage 
organized business to also play its rightful role in skills development. It is as if our private 
sector still views skills development as an additional cost rather than an investment for the 
future.  We  need  to  have  a  true  partnership,  a  partnership  based  on  mutual  desire  to 
progress, between the Government and the private sector to address the problem of skills 
deficit. 
Let  us  also  agree  that  the  most  effective  way  in  which  we  can  address  the  quality  of  our 
education system is when education is once more regarded as a meaningful profession to 
pursue.  Today  education  is  regarded  as  the  profession  of  the  last  resort.  Our  research 
suggests that the young people who enrol to become teachers are those who have passed 
grade 12 with the lowest points. It is hardly surprising therefore that we have not been able to 
produce the engineers, the scientists, and the economists that we so much need. The only 
way to change this is to make teaching an attractive profession. This we can do, as a first 
step, by starting to reward our good teachers and educators commensurately.  
As  with  regard  to  the  labour  market,  it  appears  that  our  labour  market  is  too  rigid, 
unnecessarily adding to the costs of doing business. In this regard, organized labour should 
try to look beyond the interest of their immediate constituent. What is good for the workers is 
not necessarily good for the country. It does not help we protect a few jobs at the expense of 
lower  future  unemployment.  In  today’s  globalized  world,  it  becomes  virtually  impossible  to 
protect jobs. When job losses occur, however, there should be temporary social support to 
assist the unemployed from falling below the poverty line. 
One of the weakest links in the chain of our economic development cycle has been the lack 
of effective monitoring and evaluation. This weakness is in part due to weak state capacity, 
which is in turn linked to lack of skills and sometimes lack of commitment. It is necessary to 
strengthen our monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. A key reform in this regard would be 
to strictly enforce accountability. There should be consequences when agreed targets are not 
met and we should not entertain rewarding non-performance. What is clear is that if we fail to 
improve  our  monitoring  and  evaluation  structures,  a  more  government  interventionist 
approach to economic development will be a waste of resources and we might as well not do 
it. We also know that not doing it is not a viable proposition. The stakes are simply too high.  
Ultimately  development  starts  with  all  of  us.  As  individuals,  let  us  be  aware  of  the  great 
potential that is within all of us; let us believe that it can be done; as proud Namibians let us 
embrace values of hard work and sacrifice. The time is now for all of us to act; it is time to act 
with conviction and also to act differently. Let us not allow our destiny to be determined for us 
by  events  happening  around  us;  let  us  be  the  architects  of  our  destiny.  We  owe  this  to 
ourselves and certainly we owe it to the future generation.   
I thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review BIS Review 155/2009
