Rundheersing Bheenick: Coping with uncertainty – a central banker’s 
perspective 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Chartered 
Institute  of  Management  Accountants  Southern  African  Regional  Conference,  Pointe  aux 
Piments, 5 November 2009. 
 It is a pleasure for me to be here with you this morning on the occasion of the Chartered 
Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA) Southern African Regional Conference. I thank 
the Mauritius Branch of CIMA for its kind invitation. The theme of the Conference – Surfing 
the  waves:  Coping  with  uncertainty  in  the  global  village  –  conjures  up  images  of  how  the 
great upheavals of the last two years have taken us straight from the Great Moderation to the 
Great  Recession.  The  Goldilocks  economy  –  and,  for  that  matter,  much  of  the  global 
economy – has been brought crashing down by a lethal combination of three G’s:  
• 
First,  Glass-Steagall  –  which  abolished  the  distinction  between  retail  banking  and 
investment banking. 
Second, Greenspan – who would not recognise a bubble if it was staring at him in 
the  face,  to  say  nothing  about  not  doing  anything  about  it  until  the  bubble  had 
actually burst.  
Third, Greed – sheer, naked, money-grubbing greed that seized savers, investors, 
bankers, brokers, advisers, indeed everybody involved in finance.  
  These  upheavals  have  created  a  very  uncertain  world.  Central  bankers  have  of  course 
always had to deal with uncertainty. By definition, bankers must live with uncertainty. In fact, 
uncertainty  is  at  the  very  heart  of  the  financial  intermediation  business.  The  measurable 
uncertainty is often termed risk. Risks arise because banks convert short-term liabilities into 
long-term  assets.  Uncertainty  does  not  occur only  because  of  this  maturity  transformation, 
but  there  is  also  uncertainty  about  depositors’  behaviour,  about  the  sustainability  of  the 
business of the clients to whom banks have lent, and so on. In this new era where it seems 
that  many  deep  beliefs  have  been  challenged,  central  bankers  are  faced  with  an  even 
greater  degree  of  uncertainty.  The  sustainability  of  the  timid  global  recovery,  the 
sustainability  of  the  new  world  economic  order  that  is  still  unfolding  and  indeed  the 
sustainability  of  the  new  international  financial  architecture  that  is  being  jerry-built  in 
response  to  the  crisis  –  these  are  so  many  challenges  confronting  us  if  we  are  to  reduce 
uncertainty  to  manageable  levels.  Personally,  my  life-long  career  in  policymaking  has 
provided me with plenty of experience in attempting to predict the next wave and to position 
our own small economy to profit from it by purposeful actions. Unfortunately, these days, as 
the wag put it, it is difficult to make forecasts, especially about the future!  
This  morning  as  I  stand  in  front  of  an  audience  comprising  largely  members  of  the 
accounting profession, I intend to remain firmly in the shoes of the central banker. I propose 
to tell you how we have surfed the waves during the recent crisis. I shall focus my remarks 
on six key themes: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
First, the need for vigilance 
Second, the way we have coped with macroeconomic challenges  
Third, the conduct of monetary policy in an uncertain world 
Fourth, the resilience of our banking sector 
Fifth, the orderly functioning of the market 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 1
 And  sixth,  and  last,  –  but  certainly  not  least,  especially  in  front  of  an  audience 
comprising CIMA members – the responsibility of the accounting profession. 
Need for vigilance 
1. 
First, the need for vigilance. By and large all of us know that banking is a public good and 
therefore  there  is  little  need  to  look  for  additional  justification  for  prudential  banking 
supervision.  Because  we  are  committed  to  provide  banking  and  other  financial  services 
through the markets, we need to have a very strong regulator. There is a price to pay if we 
don’t  have  a  strong  regulator  –  as  indeed  there  is  a  price  to  pay  if  we  have  too  many 
regulators with their attendant regulatory overlaps or regulatory gaps. There is still a heavy 
price  to  pay  if  we  have  regulators  and  regulations,  but  regulators  fail  to  enforce  the 
regulations. For all these reasons, and particularly because banking is a public good, there is 
an overwhelming case for the central bank, or for whoever is regulating the banking sector, 
to  do  what  no  other  body  is  allowed  to  do,  namely  regulate,  inspect,  and  supervise  the 
business of  banks.  Once  the  crisis  started  unfolding,  we  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  saw  the 
need to step up our vigilance and to take prompt action to sustain investor confidence and 
buttress  long-term  financial  stability.  We  set  up  in  the  Bank  a  special  multi-divisional  cell, 
comprising  senior  officers  from  various  disciplines,  to  monitor  closely  the  evolution  of  the 
crisis and react quickly and appropriately to any sign of stress in the banking sector which, if 
left unattended, could lead rapidly to distress in the economy. 
We initiated close monitoring of the operations of banks through scrutiny of enhanced and 
granular data. These returns are analysed on a weekly basis and information submitted to 
management  regularly.  These  reports,  in  conjunction  with  feedback  on  market  activity 
generated  by  the  multi-disciplinary  cell,  enable  us  at  the  Bank  to  keep  a  close  tab  on  the 
financial systems’ activities. As the crisis developed, we began sharing some of the data with 
the Treasury as part of the coordinated response that we felt was warranted. 
We  all  know  the  importance  of  trade  channels  for  a  small  open  economy  like  ours  which 
basically relies on inward and outward trade to survive. By and large, the availability or non-
availability of trade credit was not directly under the purview of the Central Bank in as much 
as this was taken care of by the commercial banks and their network of correspondent banks 
in all the major countries. But as the crisis began to pinch and as banks became nervous 
about lending to one other, we saw some signs of potential difficulties for some local banks 
due  to  the  non-availability,  or  inadequacy,  of  foreign  exchange  credit  facilities  from  their 
usual  sources.  The  Bank  immediately  decided  to  make  available  to  commercial  banks 
operating  in  Mauritius  a  Special  Foreign  Currency  Line  of  Credit,  aggregating  USD125 
million, to finance the country’s requirements in trade. That line of credit represented more 
than  5  per  cent  of  the  total  resources  available  to  the  central  bank.  This  showed  how 
concerned we were and how prompt we were to react to emerging financing difficulties which 
would have made it impossible for us to keep our economy on an even keel. 
There were a few other things that we did even before the crisis unfolded. We at the Bank 
were the first to warn about a possible real-estate bubble in the Integrated Resort Scheme 
sector which prompted a few well-targeted attacks on the Governor but did lead to greater 
caution  on  the  part  of  banks.  Similarly,  well  before  the  sub-prime  crisis  had  assumed  the 
dimensions  it  took,  the  Bank  had  debated  the  efficacy  of  allowing  all  mortgage-related 
exposures of banks being allowed the lower risk weight of 35 per cent under Basel II.  
Coping with macroeconomic challenges 
2. 
Let me now move on to the 2nd theme, Coping with macroeconomic challenges. Mauritius, 
as a small open economy, has of course not been immune to the effects of the global crisis. 
Although we weathered fairly well the first-round effects of the global financial crisis and the 
ensuing economic downturn, the global financial crisis began to impact on economic activity 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2009
in the country in the second half of 2008, hitting the export-oriented sectors, with spill-over 
effects on the rest of the economy.  
This new situation required greater cooperation and a higher level of understanding between 
policy makers at the national level, in particular between the Treasury and the central bank. 
The last quarter of the last year saw an unprecedented level of concerted action by the Bank 
of  Mauritius  and  the  Treasury  in  an  attempt  to  shore  up  economic  activity  and  restore 
confidence in the economy. As a preventive measure to mitigate the adverse effect of the 
crisis  on  the  economy,  the  Bank  reduced  the  Key  Repo  Rate  by  a  cumulative  250  basis 
points since October 2008 to stand at 5.75 per cent at the end of March 2009. In parallel, the 
Treasury unveiled an Additional Stimulus Package to the tune of Rs10.4 billion, equivalent to 
about 3.8 per cent of GDP, in mid-December 2008 to boost economic growth, protect jobs 
and maintain purchasing power. The Bank also reduced its Cash Reserve Ratio, from 5 per 
cent to 4.5 per cent, with effect from the fortnight beginning 19 December 2008, which led to 
an immediate injection of an estimated Rs1.2 billion of extra liquidity in the system.  
Our relentless efforts to contain the adverse impact of the crisis on our economy have borne 
fruit. Economic growth for 2008 stood at 5.0 per cent, slightly below the 2007 level of 5.5 per 
cent. At the beginning of this year, it appeared that our GDP growth rate would be closer to 2 
per cent. As the crisis began to be addressed effectively, we revised this forecast and our 
GDP  growth  rate  is  now  expected  to  be  around  2.7  per  cent  in  2009,  despite  our  major 
export markets being in recession.  
The need to sustain the growth momentum requires us to come up with the right policies to 
build up and maintain resilience even in the current challenging times characterised by an 
unusually high degree of uncertainty and very poor visibility beyond a couple of quarters, if 
not  a  couple  of  months.  Our  Vice  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Empowerment has already set the tone by announcing “Shaping the Recovery” as the main 
theme of his forthcoming Budget, which he will present later this month.  
We at the Bank will remain focused on the primary object of the Bank which is to maintain 
price stability and to promote orderly and balanced economic development. We believe that 
the enhanced coordination with the Treasury, without sacrificing the Bank’s policy autonomy 
and  independence,  has  reduced  the  uncertainty  confronting  economic  operators  and 
households  and  added  to  policy  predictability.  That,  briefly,  is  how  we  coped  with  the 
macroeconomic challenges thrown up by the crisis.  
Conducting monetary policy in an uncertain world 
3. 
Let  me  move  on  to  my  third  theme.  Almost  by  definition,  central  banks  operate  in  an 
uncertain world since monetary policy works with a well-known lag – a long and variable lag. 
Conducting  monetary  policy  against  the  backdrop  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the 
ensuing economic downturn is a challenging task, particularly for small open economies like 
Mauritius. The Bank had to react appropriately and in a timely manner. Here again, extreme 
vigilance was the order of the day. As I mentioned earlier, we reduced the Key Repo Rate by 
a  cumulative  250  basis  points  over  a  period  of  six  months.  There  were  extraordinary 
Monetary Policy Committee Meetings. The recent IMF Article IV Consultation Mission which 
left over the weekend qualified the monetary and exchange rate framework applied by the 
Bank as “hybrid-inflation targeting” and declared it well-suited to the needs of the Mauritian 
economy. The IMF has gone further and concluded that, in its view, the Mauritian regime can 
be  usefully  considered  as  a  model  for  other  emerging  market  countries.  We  are  much 
encouraged by this high-level positive endorsement – which stands in sharp contrast to the 
brickbats thrown at us regularly in the local press, the business press as well as the popular 
press. 
While there are some positive signs of a budding recovery in our major export markets, the 
global  economic  outlook  is  still  subject  to  a  very  high  degree  of  uncertainty.  The  cycle  of 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 3
monetary easing by major economies appears to have bottomed out and increasing attention 
is  now  being  focused  on  so-called  “exit  strategies”  without,  however,  jeopardizing  the 
nascent  recovery.  In  the  Mauritian  context,  we  do  not  really  have  an  “exit”  problem:  the 
magnitude of fiscal adjustment required is not all that significant as the budget deficit is under 
control  and  our  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is  within  normal  prudential  limits.  The  headline  inflation 
rate has declined significantly from 9.7 per cent at the end of December 2008 to 3.6 per cent 
at the end of October 2009. However, over the medium term, the inflation outlook remains 
uncertain. Potential risks stem from the future course of oil and food prices on international 
markets, which are factors beyond the reach of domestic policy-makers. 
On  this  score,  too,  policy  has  been  very  supportive  by  lowering  inflation  and  stabilising 
inflation expectations. Our much-maligned stewardship of the Bank, including our monetary 
policy – with accusations of policy zig-zagging, questions about why the Governor was still in 
post,  and  in  one  notorious  editorial  in  a  major  local  daily,  in  November  2008,  calling  the 
Governor  the  chief  putschist  who  would  no  doubt  meet  the  same  fate  in  the  “ides  of 
December” as befell Caesar in the ides of March, a near-incitement to murder the incumbent 
–  that  policy  has  earned  kudos  from  knowledgeable  observers  who  have  examined  the 
evidence and have pronounced that it can serve as a model for others in our situation. 
The resilience of our banking sector 
4. 
In an economy whose financial system is largely dominated by banks, major uncertainties in 
the  market  can  emanate  from  the  banking  sector  itself.  While  intermediation  by  banks 
necessarily involves risk-taking, the regulation and supervision of the system should ensure 
that: first, banks clearly know the risks they are exposed to and second, banks take steps to 
measure, control, manage and mitigate those risks effectively. 
The  question  is  how  do  we  achieve  this?  How  do  we  ensure  that  the  banking  system  is 
stable and sound and thus does not generate any excessive uncertainties in the market? We 
may not agree with banks about the extent and reach of regulation. But we need adequate 
regulation  and  supervision.  We  need  a  regulatory  framework  that  encourages  prudence, 
requires maintenance of adequate capital in relation to the risk in the balance sheet, and that 
deals with issues in liquidity management. And this must be coupled with close off-site and 
on-site monitoring of compliance with the regulatory requirements. 
In Mauritius, the banking system continues to be sound, stable, well-capitalised, liquid and 
profitable. This has been possible because of seven key factors. Let me enumerate these 
one by one. 
First, banks in Mauritius have stuck to the basics of lending out of stable customer deposits. 
The  advances  to  deposits  ratio  has  remained  at  around  70  per  cent.  There  is  virtually  no 
reliance  on  inter-bank  or  volatile  wholesale  deposits  for  meeting  funding  needs.  Volatile 
deposits  represent  only  1.6  per  cent  of  total  deposits.  The  average  daily  turnover  in  the 
interbank  market  is  as  low  as  0.2  per  cent  of  the  total  assets  of  the  banking  system.  The 
quality  of  the  deposit  base  has  a  bearing  on  the  ability  of  a  bank  to  meet  its  funding 
requirements  in  a  crisis  situation.  This,  combined  with  a  strong  capital  adequacy  ratio,  is 
reflected in the resilience of the banking sector. 
Second,  domestic  banks  did  not  have  a  huge  trading  book.  The  Bank  recently  issued  the 
final guideline on Market Risk Management after analysing the trading book of commercial 
banks  over  a  period  of  more  than  a  year.  Our  analysis  revealed  that  the  trading  book 
accounted for only 2 per cent of the balance sheet of banks. Banks did not have any large 
exposure to assets prone to asset price bubble valuations. Even their liquid assets comprise 
largely investments in Government securities and paper with no credit risk. 
Third, the Bank adopted a prudential approach to regulation, not only from the viewpoint of 
financial  system  stability  but  also  to  protect  the  interest  of  depositors.  This  prompted  the 
review  of  several  guidelines  to  enhance  prudence  in  an  environment  of  increasing 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2009
uncertainty. The transition from Basel I to Basel II was effected seamlessly in March 2009, 
after a year-long parallel run. While applying the Basel II risk-weighting system, the domestic 
scenario and market conditions were always borne in mind. Banks were not given the option 
of moving over to advanced approaches because of serious reservations and uncertainties 
regarding the reliability of models built on a thin database. The lower risk weight of 35 per 
cent  on  residential  mortgages  was  only  allowed  to  be  applied  very  restrictively.  Moreover, 
considering  the  importance  of  liquidity  management,  the  guideline  was  revised  to  address 
new concerns that the crisis threw up. Banks have been advised to net-off deposits received 
by them from corporates and parastatal entities which are part of their customers’ treasury 
operations given that such deposits tend to be highly volatile. 
Fourth, enforcement. Given the systemic importance of the banking system as a whole in a 
small  country  as  ours,  the  Bank  tightened  the  supervisory  process  by  increasing  the 
frequency  of  on-site  examination  of  banks,  enhancing  the  levels  of  exchange  with  the 
regulated entities and more intensive analysis of off-site prudential returns.  
Fifth, unlike many other countries, we did not have the problem of transmission of the crisis 
through  foreign  banks.  Although  the  banking  system  in  the  country  would  appear  to  be 
dominated  by  foreign  banks  at  least  in  terms  of  numbers,  with  12  of  the  18  banks  being 
either subsidiaries or branches of foreign banks, the important positive factor has been the 
larger share of the domestic financial intermediation business that rests with local banks. In 
fact, more than 60 per cent of domestic banking assets are held by these banks. Moreover, 
none of the parents of the foreign banks having a presence in Mauritius have had to avail of 
support  from  their  respective  governments  for  shoring  up  their  capital  in  their  home 
jurisdiction. None of them have become wards of state. 
Sixth,  even  in  the  absence  of  credit  ratings,  banks  have  been  able  to  gauge  their  clients’ 
creditworthiness.  This  has  been  made  possible  because  of  intensive  knowledge  of  their 
clients and their businesses resulting from the small size of the country and the prevalence of 
relationship  banking  in  a  context  of  great  customer  loyalty.  The  establishment  of  the 
Mauritius Credit Information Bureau (MCIB) under the aegis of the Bank increased the ability 
of  banks  to  assess  their  borrowers  and  thus  contributed  to  enhance  the  quality  of  their 
assets.  For  instance,  the  non-performing  loans  ratio  of  the  banking  sector  to  domestic 
borrowers which was 8.4 per cent in June 2004 declined to 3.8 per cent in December 2008. 
Even in the crisis situation, NPL’s have gone up only marginally to 4 per cent in June 2009. 
We anticipate a further improvement in credit quality as we extend the coverage of the MCIB 
database.  
Seventh,  the  limited  role  of  ratings  agencies.  In  Mauritius,  banks  did  not  have  a  large 
portfolio  of  loans  extended  to  domestic  borrowers  on  the  basis  of  dubious  ratings  by  the 
rating agencies. We now know that a part of the added uncertainty can be attributed to the 
quality  of  ratings  and  the  doubtful  ethics  of  the  credit  rating  agencies  in  their  conduct  of 
business.  While  these  ratings  are  supposed  to  help  investors  take  decisions  without  their 
having to do too much due diligence of their own, over time rating agencies have come to 
play too important a role in the system while they themselves went largely unsupervised.  
But, in spite of their limited role in domestic financial intermediation, ratings agencies have 
not been all that benign in our part of the world. With the worst possible timing, based on 
doubtful  data  and  faulty  analysis,  they  added  to  the  nervousness  and  uncertainty  on  our 
small domestic stock market. I am referring here to the inexplicable decision of Moody’s to 
place on watch the ratings of two of the largest banks in Mauritius for a possible downgrade, 
on concerns that we fail to understand. I don’t need to tell you the importance of these two 
banks in Mauritius. They hold 60 per cent of assets in the banking sector. They account for 
40 per cent of the domestic stock market capitalisation. They generate a full 60 per cent of 
the  average  daily  share  transactions  on  the  local  stock  exchange,  if  I  take  last  week  as  a 
reference.  And  you  have  this  credit  rating  agency  threatening  to  put  these  two  banks  on 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 5
watch  for  a possible  downgrade  and,  to  add insult  to  injury,  going  further  to  warn  that  the 
country was facing unsustainable debt dynamics. 
In our view, these seven points are key to the resilience of our banking sector. The sector 
obviously  also  has  certain  characteristics  which  add  to  its  vulnerability,  thus  warranting 
vigilance and close monitoring. First, although the small number of clients enables banks to 
have a good knowledge about their businesses, concentration of credit in a few groups of 
closely-related  borrowers  accentuates  credit  risk.  This  could  have  serious  potential 
consequences  for  financial  stability.  The  Bank  is  therefore  watching  with  keen  interest 
developments in other parts of the world with regard to macro-prudential supervision to cope 
with  the  impact  of  such  inter-linkages.  Secondly,  the  two  large  banks  to  which  I  referred 
earlier and a few others as well would readily qualify as “too big to fail” and thus raise issues 
of  moral  hazard.  The  complex  structures  of  banks,  the  need  for  the  larger  banks  to  write 
down  their  “living  will”  are  matters  receiving  attention  world-wide.  We  are  closely  following 
these developments.  
The orderly functioning of the market 
5. 
This brings me to my fifth key theme. In conditions of uncertainty, the orderly functioning of 
the market is a major prerequisite. In the domestic foreign exchange market, the Bank has 
allowed the free play of market forces to determine the exchange value of the rupee. Our 
intervention  has  not  been  aimed  at  offsetting  market  forces  or  at  targeting  any  specific 
exchange rate. Our objective has been rather to smooth out any unwarranted volatility in the 
rupee  exchange  rate  and  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  market.  This  has  resulted  in 
greater stability in the exchange value of the rupee.  
It  is  very  easy  to  give  in  to  pressures  from  various  sectors  in  conditions  of  uncertainty. 
Central banks have a natural tendency to intervene anyway. It is not easy to turn a deaf ear 
to incessant appeals from export lobbies and their friends in high places to play around with 
the domestic currency. The Bank has resisted these pressures. For a full year now, the Bank 
has not intervened in the foreign exchange market – in sharp contrast to what central banks 
in many other countries have been busy doing. Perhaps the domestic forex market has now 
matured and learned to function in an orderly manner without the intervention of the central 
bank. This track record of non-intervention by the Bank since November 2008 has recently 
led the IMF to reclassify our exchange rate regime from “managed floating” to “free floating” 
in the 2009 issue of the Fund’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange 
Restrictions.  I  believe  that  this  hands-off  attitude  of  the  Bank  has  reduced  idiosyncratic 
behaviour  and  empowered  market-players.  The  possibility  of  Central  Bank  intervention  at 
any time and the increasing firepower we wield, should we wish to do so, keeps the market 
well-behaved. 
The responsibility of the accounting profession 
6. 
Let me now come to my sixth and last theme, which directly concerns your own profession. 
Accountants and auditors play a key role in contributing to the level of trust required for the 
proper  functioning  of  a  modern  market  economy.  They  prepare  financial  statements  and 
audit them so that various stakeholders of the economy are able to make informed decisions. 
In the aftermath of the crisis, bankers and regulators have paid a very heavy price and they 
have been in the front line, incurring the wrath of the public. But we all know that we, bankers 
and regulators, are basing our actions on your accounts and that accounting principles have 
played a major part in accentuating the crisis.  
Let’s  just  look  at  what  the  mark-to-market  valuation  principles  have  led  to.  By  definition, 
mark-to-market valuation principles are procyclical since they inflate the value of an asset in 
an  upswing  and  bring  it  down  in  a  downturn.  Thus,  they  accentuate  the  volatility  of  bank 
balance  sheets.  Issues  relating  to  accounting  practices  have  become  the  focus  of  recent 
6 
 BIS Review 144/2009
G-20  meetings.  In  the  context  of  the  financial  sector,  there  is  a  need  for  juxtaposing  fair 
valuation  principles  with  prudence.  The  accounting  profession  may  wish  to  reflect  on  the 
need  for  provisioning  for  potential  loss  based  on  Full  Fair  Value  Accounting  within  the 
Current Accounting Framework. It used to be said that war was too important to be left to the 
generals. Is it not possibly the case that accountancy has now become too important to be 
left to accountants? 
Let me digress here for a moment to bring up an issue that the Bank faced with accounting 
principles. In a year when we were deluged with FDI inflows and the Bank had to intervene in 
the  market  to  mop  up  excess  liquidity  through  the  issue  of  Bank  of  Mauritius  Bills  in 
exchange  for  foreign  exchange  assets  that  we  purchased,  we  felt  the  need  for  dynamic 
provisioning  because  of  very  clear  “negative  carry”  in  these  transactions.  However,  our 
pioneering  attempt  to  apply  this  approach  had  to  be  undone  in  the  midst  of  much 
incomprehension  and  recrimination.  The  proposal  did  not  meet  the  approval  of  our 
accountants and auditors because of their steadfast adherence to their accounting principles, 
to the great delight of our single shareholder who thus got an unusually large second transfer 
of  profit  from  the  Bank  in  a  year  when  it  would  have  been  more  prudent  to  provide  for 
expected  losses  on  the  horizon.  There  is  therefore  in  a  world  of  uncertainty  a  need  for 
everyone  to  be  a  bit  less  hide-bound  by  current  practice  and  to  be  a  little  more  forward-
looking. 
Let me conclude by mentioning that bankers, accountants, regulators and for that matter, all 
of  us,  function  in  a  world  of  increasing  uncertainty.  As  Keynes  put  it,  “anticipating  what 
average opinion expects the average opinion to be..” leads to herding behaviour. We cannot 
altogether eliminate uncertainty but we should certainly use our judgment to anticipate, even 
act pre-emptively and respond with alacrity to emerging situations. I have detailed how we at 
the Bank through various actions and measures have endeavoured to ensure the stability of 
the  domestic  financial  system.  To  recapitulate,  we  were  vigilant  and  took  anticipatory 
measures where possible and responded with promptitude to emerging situations. A banking 
system  working  on  sound  principles,  aided  by  prudent  regulation  and  close  supervision, 
ensured  that  the  sector  remained  sound  and  stable.  We  concerted  our  action  increasingly 
with Government initiatives. We facilitated the orderly functioning of the market. We adopted 
an  appropriate  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  management  framework.  All  this 
contributed to Mauritius weathering the storm.  
As a parting remark, let me add that for policy-makers in a small island state, situated quite 
far from its major trade partners, and surrounded by a sea of uncertainty, an ocean of threats 
and perils, the price to pay to ensure our continued economic salvation is eternal vigilance. It 
is a price that we are prepared to pay. It is a price that we pay everyday. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 7
