Petar Goshev: Macedonia – the crisis, its impact and future challenges   
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Petar  Goshev,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia,  at  the  XIV  Annual  Meeting  of  ACI  Macedonia  –  The  Financial  Market 
Association, Ohrid, 26 September 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Honorable members of ACI – the Financial Markets Association 
It  is  an  honor  to  open  the  fourteenth  annual  meeting  of  ACI  –  the  Financial  Markets 
Association held in a year of exceptional challenges for both the global financial markets and 
the financial markets in the Republic of Macedonia. I would like to address three issues, not 
for a moment forgetting the key word for a successful functioning of the financial markets – 
the trust. 
1) 
2) 
What are the reasons behind the current financial and economic crisis? 
How  and  to  what  extent  has  the  financial  crisis  spilled  over  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia? and  
What are the challenges in the future period? 
3) 
At the beginning, let me address briefly the reasons behind the current financial and 
economic crisis.  
The  financial  crisis  could  also  be  compared  with  an  illness  of  a  human  organism.  In  both 
cases, the finding of a cure first requires identification, and then remedy of the reasons that 
caused  the  illness,  i.e.  the  crisis.  Observing  the  events  over  the  several  recent  years,  the 
reasons behind the current crisis could be divided into two broad categories: macroeconomic 
and microeconomic. The macroeconomic reasons for the occurrence of the current crisis 
could  further  be  divided  into  two  groups:  a)  problems  related  to  unbalances  in  the 
international claims and b) problems caused by the maintenance of low real interest rates 
over a longer period. The first group of macroeconomic reasons includes unbalances in the 
current accounts of balance of payments among economies, which, in turn, brought about 
unbalances between the capital accounts. In that process of creating unbalances, especially 
in the decade before the crisis, the capital spilled over from the developing countries to the 
developed economies, particularly to the US. The second group of macroeconomic reasons 
resulted from the excessively long maintenance of low real interest rates. The historically low 
real short-term interest rates actually reflected adjustable anti-deflation monetary policy. The 
low long-term interest rates, on the other hand, largely reflected the high savings rate in the 
capital-exporting  countries,  particularly  in  the  Asian  developing  countries  and  several  oil-
exporting countries. These countries, seeking for sound financial instruments to place their 
savings,  increased  the  demand  for  long-term  government  securities  issued  by  the 
governments of the developed countries, thus contributing towards reduction of the long-term 
interest  rates.  The  low  interest  rates  had  multiple  effects,  including  the  acceleration  of  the 
credit growth in a number of industrial countries, swift growth in the prices of properties and 
share; and generally, taking high risks during the contest for generating higher earnings.  
The  financial  crisis,  however,  demonstrated  that  there  are  serious  problems  in  the 
area of microeconomics, as well. It turned out that the investors are insufficiently informed 
on  the  nature  and  the  risks  of  the  complex  financial  instruments;  wrong  incentive  of  the 
financial assets managers arising from the reward system based on generated earnings; the 
problem  of  objectivity  of  the  rating  agencies  which  provide  credit  rating  for  the  financial 
instruments on issuer's request. Furthermore, it turned out that also there have been non-
ignorable problems at a micro level in the area of risk measurement and monitoring, arising 
from the application of statistical models which do not take account of the infrequent events, 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 1
and after a longer period of high instability, a priory produce perceptions for globally lower 
risk level. Within the microeconomic reason behind the financial crisis, we came to the highly 
frequent issue of "shadow banking system", as an expression of the liberalistic approach for 
as  higher  deregulation  as  possible.  All  these  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic 
reasons, in environment of higher financial system complexity, created systemic risks 
which occurred in the last quarter of 2008. 
Distinguished! 
It is an axiomatic truth that the financial system functioning relies upon trust. Practically, it is 
a must, illustrated by this crisis, as well. It turned out that it is easier to undermine the trust 
rather  than  to  restore  it.  On  September  15,  2008,  Lehman  Brothers  bankrupted.  The 
avalanche  of  losing  the  trust  accelerated  in  the  complex  and  closely  connected  modern 
financial  system.  The  consequences,  quite  naturally,  were  first  evident  in  the  US  financial 
market  which  plays  an  exceptionally  important  role  in  the  funding  of  the  banks  and  the 
private  sector.  It  also  became  clear  that  the  banks'  off-balance  sheet  activities,  in 
environment  of  illiquidity  of  entire  segments  in  the  global  financial  market,  will  cause 
enormous losses which will have to be funded with the banks' capital. This, understandably, 
further increased the mistrust with respect to banks' capital adequacy rate. In a short period, 
the markets went dry. The ghosts typical for the crisis of the thirtieth (1929-1933) flied over, 
although  I  agree  with  those  asserting  that  any  comparison  between  that  and  this  crisis  is 
virtually unsuitable.  
In  mid-October  2008,  the  governments  of  the  developed  countries  started  taking 
measures to get the trust in the financial system back. On October 8, the Government of 
Great  Britain  disclosed  a  complex  plan  for  recapitalization  of  the  banking  system.  This 
measure followed the first coordinated measure for cutting the interest rates, undertaken by 
the  six  most  influential  central  banks.  Moreover,  the  governments  of  the  Euro-area  states 
adopted a joint decision to issue guarantees and inject capital for stabilization of the banking 
system. In mid-October, the US Treasury Department also announced that it will invest US 
Dollar 250 billion to recapitalize the major banks.  
The undertaken measures for stabilization of the banking system helped curbing the 
global trust crisis in the international financial system, but gaining it back goes slowly. 
Therefore,  the  financial  problems  spilled  over  the  real  sector,  bringing  about  global 
recession  primarily  caused  by  the  substantial  decrease  in  the  private  consumption  (in  the 
USA) and in the exports (of the Euro-area and Japan).  
In  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  the  financial  and  economic  crisis  in  the  developed 
economies spilled over the developing countries. Their export demand went down as a 
result of the depreciated private and investment consumption in the developed economies. 
Simultaneously, for overcoming the significant lack of liquidity in the domestic markets, some 
international  banks  reduced  their  lending  to  these  countries.  The  higher  need  for  liquidity, 
and  the  higher  risk  aversion  resulted  in  a  withdrawal  of  portfolio  investments  by  foreign 
investors. Under such conditions, the countries with high current account deficit faced with a 
higher need of external funding, which, given the high instability on the international financial 
markets,  was  very  hard.  Reasonably,  this  led  to  pressures  on  the  exchange  rates  of  the 
economies with higher external unbalances.  
How  and  to  what  extent  has  the  financial  crisis  spilled  over  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia?  
The  Republic  of  Macedonia  has  not  been  hedged  from  the  problems  shaking  the  world, 
particularly at the end of 2008 and 2009. The implications of the crisis internationally-wide 
entered  primarily  through  the  external  sector,  and  particularly  through  the  transmission 
channels given below: 
- 
the export-based production registered swift and rapid fall, due to the depreciated 
global demand, whereas the downward revision of the domestic demand took place 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2009
   in a slower pace, leading to some import reduction (particularly in the last quarter of 
the last year and the first quarter of this year), 
this uneven pace of the fall in the exports and the imports brought about widening 
the trade gap, whereas the increase in the uncertainty and establishment of bearish 
expectations caused decrease in the net inflows from private transfers, Reasonably, 
it led to higher current account deficit in this period, 
although  the  syndrome  of  sudden  cessation  was  not  present,  the  capital  inflows 
went down significantly, making the current account funding fall considerably on the 
foreign reserves, 
the  perceptions 
the  banks 
accumulating  foreign  assets,  the  households  converting  large  amounts  of  Denars 
into foreign currencies, thus creating additional pressure on the foreign reserves of 
the Republic of Macedonia. 
the  macroeconomic  risks  made 
increasing 
for 
Accordingly, the consequences of the crisis could not be avoided, which is understandable if 
the  size  and  the  openness  of  the  Macedonian  economy  are  taken  into  consideration.  The 
global  crisis  actually  emphasized  the  main  weaknesses  of  the  Macedonian  economy, 
such  as  the  high  concentration  of  the  export  in  non-propulsive  activities,  completely 
dependant  on  the  movements  on  the  international  market  and,  of  course,  the  trade  deficit 
financing  through  vulnerable  and  hardly  predictable  private  transfers.  The  blow  these  two 
components suffered from the decrease in the world economy meant significant widening of 
the deficit on the current account, which reached 13.1% of the GDP in 2008. These trends 
continued also in the first part of 2009 and together with the decrease in the capital inflows 
created serious pressures on the foreign reserves. It reflected directly on the confidence in 
the  stability  of  the  national  currency.  Thus  in  the  first  quarter  of  2009,  the  demand  for 
foreign  exchange  went  up  by  77%  compared  to  the  supply  of  foreign  exchange.  The 
increased  misbalance  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  was  equilibrated  with  the  National 
Bank interventions on the foreign exchange market, in the amount of Euro 230 million, only 
during the first quarter.  
Moreover, we were forced to undertake measures to adjust the monetary instruments 
in  function  of  foreign  exchange  rate  stability  maintenance.  At  the  end  of  March,  we 
adopted a decision on increasing the interest rate on the core monetary instrument – the CB 
bills from 7% to 9%. Such a monetary reaction was motivated by the need for increasing the 
attractiveness  of  the  CB  bills,  in  order  to  redirect  the  Denar  liquidity  from  the  foreign 
exchange market and to ease the pressures on the foreign exchange rate. Although after the 
increase  in  the  core  interest  rate  of  the  National  Bank,  from  the  beginning  of  the  second 
quarter,  moderate  stabilization  of  the  movements  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  was 
registered and the demand for foreign exchange began to decrease, however, also during 
April  and  May,  the  interventions  of  the  National  Bank  on  the  foreign  exchange  market 
continue  to  reduce  to  net  sale  of  foreign  exchange.  Simultaneously,  the  trend  of  currency 
conversion  of  the  households'  savings  from  national  into  foreign  currency  continued, 
indicating  that  although  after  the  culmination  in  March  (during  the  presidential  and  local 
elections)  the  psychological  pressures  began  to  ease,  they  are  not  completely  depleted. 
Such  accomplishments  were  the  reason  for  additional  intervention  with  new  measures.  In 
May, we increased the reserve requirement allocation rate for the banks' liabilities with 
currency component, as follows: for liabilities in foreign currency, from 10% to 13%, and for 
the  liabilities  in  domestic  currency  with  FX  clause,  from  10%  to  20%.  The  undertaken 
measures should stimulate the Denar saving and we expect to cause change in the trend of 
accumulation  of  foreign  assets  by  the  banks,  which  would  contribute  to  decrease  in  the 
demand  for  foreign  exchange  and  to  stabilization  on  the  foreign  exchange  market.  And 
definitely, part of the expectations is already happening.  
The depreciated global demand, reflected through several channels, with a decrease 
in the national economy and real decrease in the GDP in the first half of the year of 1.2%. 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 3
Also the pressures on the inflation caused by the import prices decreased, which together 
with the entering into the zone of a negative production gap, resulted in price stabilization. 
The average annual inflation rate in the first eight months of 2009 is negative and it equals –
0.3%, which is a significant downward movement, compared to the preceding year.  
Alike the pressures on the foreign exchange market caused by the indirect effect of 
the global crisis, transmitted through the movements in the balance of payments, no 
movements typical for the global money markets characteristic for the past two years 
on  the  Money  Market  in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  were  registered.  Namely,  on  the 
Money Market, in the segment of the non-collateralized borrowing, increase in the turnover 
and stable movements of the interest rate in the last two years were registered, proving that 
the mutual confidence in the banking system of the Republic of Macedonia was not impaired. 
Thus  in  2007  exactly,  when  the  global  financial  crisis  began  in  August,  the  turnover 
registered on the Money Market in the Republic of Macedonia started to increase, with the 
average monthly turnover reaching the level of Denar 1,712 million and it was higher by twice 
relative to the average monthly turnover registered in the preceding year. The turnover on 
the Money Market continued to increase also in 2008 and 2009, with the average monthly 
turnover reaching the level of Denar 3,813 million, i.e. Denar 4,187 million, respectively. The 
deepening on the Money Market is largely a result of the activities the National Bank and ACI 
–  Financial  Markets  Association  undertook  in  the  that  period:  introduction  of  electronic 
trading  platform;  introduction  of  the  interbank  interest  rate  for  selling  Denar  deposits 
calculated  from  the  quotations  of  the  reference  banks  (SKIBOR);  and  initiation  of  the 
calculation and disclosure of the interbank interest rate for concluded overnight transactions 
by the reference banks as sellers of Denar deposits (MKDONIA) etc. All of these activities 
resulted  in  improved  market  transparency,  easier  matching  of  the  supply  and  the  demand 
and creation of interest rates on the basis of information on the market condition in real time.  
Such  stable  movements  on  the  Money  Market,  exactly  in  the  segment  of  non-collaterized 
borrowing, were indicator that in the period when the rest of the world economy faces with a 
serious  banking  crisis,  the  banking  system  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  remained 
relatively  safe  and  sound.  This  is  contributed  by  several  factors:  orientation  of  the 
Macedonian banks towards traditional banking activities, direction towards domestic market 
and absence of utilization of structural products and execution of complex financial activities, 
as well as low dependence on the external sources of financing. The banks solvency (shown 
through  the  capital  adequacy  ratio,  which  equaled  16.4%  on  June  30,2009)  is  evidently 
beyond the prescribed minimal level of 8%, which provides enough capacity to absorb the 
possible negative shocks from further increase in the risks in their operating. 
However,  the  banks  in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  face  with  several  challenges.  The 
consequences  of  the  global  economic  crisis,  which  was  felt  in  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia  through  the  real  sector,  had  negative  influence  also  on  the  banking 
system.  
First, the reduced economic activity and the enhanced psychological pressures arising from 
the uncertainty regarding the duration and the consequences of the international economic 
crisis,  reflected  on  the  banks'  balance  sheets.  In  the  first  half  of  2009,  the  banks'  total 
assets reduced by 0.9%, with the annual growth rate reducing to only 3%. The decrease in 
the assets was reflection of the deposit core contraction, which went down by 2.4% in the 
same period, because of which the annual rate of change obtained negative value and on 
June 30, 2009 it equaled 0.1%. Only the banks' credit activity continued to expand, although 
with very slower dynamics relative to the preceding years. In the first quarter of 2009, the 
credit growth equaled only 1.7%, while the annual growth rate on June 30, 2009 reduced to 
14.4%. Parallel to the lower volume of activities, also the currency propensity of the banks' 
depositors was changed. They were apparent through their enhanced interest for saving in 
currency component. It resulted in additional strengthening of the currency component in the 
banks'  balance  sheets.  On  June  30,  2009,  the  share  of  the  liabilities  with  currency 
component  in  the  total  liabilities  of  the  banking  system  equaled  54.7%  and  in  comparison 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2009
with December 31, 2008, registered an increase of 5.7 percentage points, while the assets 
with  currency  component  participated  with  56.5%  in  the  banks'  total  assets,  which  is  an 
increase of 4.2 percentage points compared to the end of 2008.  
Second, the reduced volume of banks' activities, followed by higher significance of the credit 
risk in the risks spectrum the banks face with, reflected also on their profitability. The profit 
the banks realized during the six months of the year, in the amount of Denar 646 million, is 
lower almost by four times compared to that registered in the same period of the preceding 
year.  
Third, despite the intensified carefulness of the banks in the banking activities conduct, in 
the first half of 2009 the trend of deterioration of the indicators for their credit portfolio 
quality continued. On June 30,2009, the credit exposure with higher risk degree (classified 
in the risk categories "C", "D" and "E") participated with 7.6% in the total credit exposure of 
the  banks.  These  movements  in  the  banks'  credit  portfolio  primarily  reflect  the  hampered 
working conditions of the domestic credit users as a result of the economic crisis. However, 
thus  the  procyclical  nature  of  the  banking  operations  and  the  banks'  tendency  for  larger 
relaxation of the credit activity standards in periods of growth are proven, which in time of 
economic  activity  deceleration,  through  risks  reassessment,  results  in  higher  loss  volume 
due to impairment and restraint from crediting non-financial entities.  
And  the  last,  however  key  question:  What  are  the  challenges  for  the  forthcoming 
period? It is definitely clear that there is a need of a comprehensive response to the world 
financial (banking) crisis. In his new book "The Return of Depression Economics and Crisis 
of 2008"), Paul Krugman says: "How did this second colossal muddle arise? In the aftermath 
of  the  Great  Depression  we  redesigned  the  machine  so  that  we  did  understand  it,  well 
enough at any rate to avoid big disasters. Banks, the piece of the system that malfunctioned 
so badly in the 1930s, were placed under tight regulation and supported by a strong safety 
net. 
Meanwhile, international movements of capital, which played a disruptive role in the 1930s 
were  also  limited  [due  to  the  regulations].  The  financial  system  became  a  little  boring  but 
much safer. Then things got interesting and dangerous again. Growing international capital 
flows set the stage for devastating currency crises in the 1990 of the 20th century, and for a 
globalized  financial crisis  in  2008. The  growth  of  the  shadow  banking  system,  without  any 
corresponding extension of regulation, set the stage for latter-day bank runs on a massive 
scale. What we're going to have to do, clearly, is relearn the lessons our grandfathers were 
taught by the Great Depression. I won't try to lay out the details of a new regulatory regime, 
but  the  basic  principle  should  be  clear:  anything  that  has  to  be  rescued  during  a  financial 
crisis,  because  it  plays  an  essential  role  in  the  financial  mechanism,  should  be  regulated 
when there isn't a crisis so that it doesn't take excessive risks. Since the 1930s commercial 
banks have been required to have adequate capital, hold reserves of liquid assets, that can 
be quickly converted into cash, and limit the types of investments they make, all in return for 
federal guarantees when things go wrong. Now that we've seen a wide range of non-bank 
institutions  create  what  amounts  to  a  banking  crisis,  comparable  regulation  has  to  be 
extended to a much larger part of the system. We're also going to have to think hard about 
how to deal with financial globalization." At this moment, the activities and the approach of 
the  international  financial  institutions,  governments  and  central  banks  are  similar  to  such 
understanding  of  the  response  to  the  crisis.  Financial  regulations  are  being  changed 
intensively. They are directed toward broadening of the perimeter of the regulations (toward 
everything  that  could  produce  significant  risks  for  the  financial  system),  but  also  toward 
declining of its procyclical character. In that respect, activities have already been undertaken 
towards actual solutions for:  
- 
Increasing  the  quality,  consistence  and  transparency  of  the  core  capital.  Largest 
portion  of  the  core  capital  must  be  consisted  of  common  shares  and  retained 
earnings. Appropriate principles will be prepared for the legal entities who are not 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 5
organized  as  shareholding  companies  for  ensuring  high-quality  core  capital 
comparable with the quality of the core capital of the shareholding companies. Also, 
deductive  items  and  prudential  filters  will  be  harmonized  on  an  international  level 
and will be applied at the level of a shareholding capital or its equivalent in the case 
of the legal entities which are not organized as shareholding companies. Moreover, 
all components of the capital will be fully published.  
Introduction of a leverage ratio as an additional measure of the risk-based Basel 2 
framework, in order to include it in the treatment envisaged in the First Pillar in the 
future, on the basis of an appropriate analysis. So as to provide comparability, the 
details about the leverage ratio will be harmonized on an international level, with full 
adjustment of the accounting differences. 
Introduction  of  a  minimum  global  standard  for  providing  liquidity  for  the  financing 
needs  which  cover  the  compulsory  rate  of  coverage  of  the  liquidity  in  stress-
scenarios, backed by a long-term rate of structural liquidity.  
Establishing of counter-cyclical capital buffers above the minimum compulsory level. 
This  framework  will  include  measures  for  maintaining  the  capital,  such  as 
restrictions  on  the  possibility  for  allocation  of  the  capital  elements.  The  Basel 
Committee  will  take  into  account  an  appropriate  group  of  indicators,  such  as  the 
indicators of profit and credits, as a way of ensuring the creation and utilization of 
the  capital  buffers.  The  Committee  will  endorse  a  manner  of  determining  the 
provisions which will be based on the future expected losses.  
Development  of  recommendations  for  reduction  of  the  systemic  risk  related  to 
rehabilitation of the internationally active banks.  
The group of Governors and responsible persons for the supervision, supported the 
below mentioned principles for directing the supervisors in the shift toward a higher 
level of capital in the banking system:  
On the basis of the framework for counter-cyclical capital buffers, supervisors should 
require  from  the  banks  to  strengthen  their  capital  through  a  combination  of  the 
measures for maintaining the capital including activities for restricting the excessive 
payments of dividends, of purchase of own shares and compensations for the senior 
executives.  
Compensations  for  the  senior  executives  should  correspond  with  the  reasonable 
undertaking of risks and long-term sustainable operations, based on the principles of 
granting  compensations  to  the  senior  executives  issued  by  the  Financial  Stability 
Board.  
The  banks  will  be  obliged  to  react  promptly  towards  increasing  the  level  and  the 
quality of the capital in accordance with the new standards, in a way that will support 
the stability of the national banking systems and broader economy. 
        These changes are expected to strengthen significantly the stability of the financial system. 
This will increase the confidence in the financial system as a "conditio sine qua non" for the 
functioning of the financial markets. 
In the case of Macedonia, which follows and will appropriately adjust to the changes in the 
world financial system, the crisis emphasized the existing weaknesses of the macroeconomic 
reality: the high import dependence of the economy, high export concentration, vulnerability 
of the sources of financing of the balance of payments deficit and currency risk, which can be 
easily transformed into a credit risk as a threat to the financial stability. Therefore, in a short 
run,  we  have  to  maintain  the  appropriate  level  of  foreign  reserves,  as  a  precondition  for 
maintaining the confidence in the stability of the domestic currency. In a medium run, more 
serious structural adjustments are needed, which will lead to narrowing of the trade deficit, 
primarily through increased export, which will enable higher growth rates of the economy and 
6 
 BIS Review 127/2009
containing of the significance of the vulnerable sources of financing of the current account 
deficit.  As  a  conclusion,  Macedonia  has  succeeded  in  maintaining  the  confidence  in  the 
financial  system,  i.e.  in  the  banking  system.  That  was  possible  due  to  the  prudential 
macroeconomic  policies  and  sound  supervision  of  banks.  However,  the  struggle  for 
maintaining  the  confidence  is  a  constant  effort.  Risk  management  is  never  a  completed 
process. We should always have in mind that the costs for regaining the lost confidence are 
always and everywhere incomparably higher than the investment in its maintaining.  
Thank you for your attention and I wish you a successful work in the forthcoming period.  
BIS Review 127/2009 
 7
