Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Beyond the global crisis – implications for Asia’s future 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
ADB-BNM-EC Joint Conference: "Beyond the Global Crisis: A New Asian Growth Model?", 
Kuala Lumpur, 19 October 2009. 
 Bank Negara Malaysia is pleased to co-organise this conference together with the European 
Commission and the Asian Development Bank to discuss “beyond the global crisis and its 
implications for the future of Asia”. It is my honour and great pleasure to welcome you to this 
conference. 
This  current  global  economic  and  financial  crisis  presents  us  with  a  time  to  reflect  on 
strategies that will promote sustainable long-term solutions in a future where the economic 
and  financial  environment  is  going  to  be  fundamentally  different.  Although  the  global 
economy  has  since  begun  to  stabilize  with  signs  of  recovery,  and  indeed  while  an 
apocalypse has been averted, the road to a full global economic recovery will likely be long 
and arduous. The re-thinking by the global community on the wide ranging issues that are 
now confronting the world is taking place on several fronts. 
In the aftermath of the crisis, the configuration of the world economy will be transformed as 
changes in the pattern of global demand take place, as demands for greater efficiency and 
lower costs occur, as actions are taken for a reduced role of government in the economy, as 
new  regulatory  regimes  are  being  introduced,  and  as  efforts  are  being  undertaken  to 
enhance our capacity to manage systemic financial crisis. Many of these changes will involve 
cross border arrangements and collaboration. We are all stakeholders with interest in what 
the  post-recovery  world  will  look  like.  Indeed,  the  issue  of  new  economic  models  in  the 
context  of  these  developments  is  relevant  not  just  to  Asia  but  also  for  other  parts  of  the 
world. We have seen how within the short period of less than a decade, the rapid escalation 
of  debt-driven  consumption  in  North  America  led  to  chronic  financial  and  economic 
imbalances that has resulted in a significant economic dislocation on a global scale. Several 
lessons can be drawn from these developments. The Asian economic model for the future 
needs to be redefined if the economic progress is to be sustained, taking into account the 
global changes that are taking place. 
Asia's success which has been described as a “miracle” has been well documented. It has 
been acknowledged that “the miracle” is not the result of any one single factor but rather, a 
confluence  of 
factors.  Structural  change  and  pro-growth  policies  were  coalesced 
synergistically  with  hard  work  ethics.  In  many  ways,  Asia  has  maximised  its  comparative 
advantage  with  international  trade  as  a  major  source  of  growth  over  several  decades. 
Economies were transformed from being driven by the traditional commodity based sector, to 
one  that  was  driven  by  the  manufacturing  sector  that  produced  goods  for  the  increasingly 
affluent domestic markets and for the export market. 
This  strategy  and  economic  transformation  in  Asia  has  also  been  facilitated  by  the  steady 
inflow  of  foreign  direct  investment  into  the  region.  Given  the  region's  competitively-priced 
factors  of  production,  combined  with  pro-business  economic  policies,  global  producers 
relocated  their  production  bases  to  Asia.  In  terms  of  robustness,  this  model  has  survived 
several  global  slowdowns.  Even  in  the  face  of  the  1997-1998  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  the 
affected countries recovered rapidly and resumed strong growth. The fundamental strength 
of  the  Asian  economies  has  also  been  its  economic  flexibility  to  adjust  to  changing 
conditions. The challenge before us now is whether Asia, going forward, will rise to the new 
challenges  that  is  being  presented  by  the  rapidly  changing  global  environment  in  the 
aftermath of the current global economic and financial crisis. 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 1
While  Asian  financial  systems  have  shown  a  high  degree  of  resilience  during  this  global 
financial  crisis,  most  Asian  economies  have  been  markedly  affected  by  the  economic 
spillover  effects  of  the  crisis.  By  the  second  half  of  2008,  what  was  a  “localised”  financial 
crisis had spread to the rest of the world. However, the financial reforms and development of 
the financial systems in Asia during this decade since the Asian crisis have, to a significant 
extent, insulated our financial systems from these developments. However, the openness of 
the Asian economies have resulted in a significantly slower growth with economic contraction 
occurring in several countries. 
In  the  immediate  future,  several  favourable  factors  will  support  growth  in  Asia.  Strong 
fundamentals, pro-growth policies and structural factors will support an early recovery. This 
is  also  being  reinforced  by  greater  regional  integration.  Going  forward  into  the  future,  the 
global  shifts  taking  place  calls  for  a  new  economic  model,  one  that  would  leverage  on 
regional  strengths,  address  the  current  and  future  risks  and  recognise  the  new  global 
opportunities. 
In the context of these developments, this conference will be discussing these issues and the 
new directions that are likely to emerge for Asia. Also important are the lessons that we can 
draw  from  the  European  experience.  The  agenda  is  for  us  to  discuss  the  alternative 
economic models for the future, including the financial aspects and the role of policies and 
the international institutions. It is hoped that this will contribute to an increased appreciation 
and understanding of Asia and its changing role in the global economy. 
In closing, I would like to once again thank you for your participation in this conference. The 
bringing  together  of  speakers  from  Europe  and  Asia  to  discuss  these  important  issues  is 
likely to result in stimulating discussions. I wish you a successful and productive conference. 
To our guests who have travelled from far, I wish you a very pleasant stay in Kuala Lumpur. 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2009
