Daniel K Tarullo: In the wake of the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Phoenix Metropolitan Area Community Leaders' Luncheon, Phoenix, 
Arizona, 8 October 2009.  
 I am pleased to be here in Phoenix at the invitation of President Yellen. Having come across 
the country to speak to you today, I thought I would not confine myself to a single subject, but 
would instead address a number of areas about which I have been thinking. Lest you fear 
that  means  a  potpourri  of  unrelated  observations,  let  me  assure  you  that  there  is  at  least 
some  thematic  unity  in  my  remarks  –  namely,  the  challenges  we  face  in  the  wake  of  the 
financial crisis. So, with your indulgence, let me strike that rather grand theme by covering 
the current state of the economy, the task of financial regulatory reform, and some broader 
comments on credit markets.1  
The economic outlook 
Turning first to the economic outlook, let me begin by stating the obvious: After a period in 
which  there  seemed  to  be  only  two  plausible  scenarios  –  very  bad  and  even  worse  – 
financial and economic conditions have steadied. A year ago the world financial system was 
profoundly shaken by the failures of large financial institutions here and abroad. Significant 
liquidity  problems  that  had  been  building  since  early  2007  turned  into  a  full-blown  liquidity 
crisis. The economy deteriorated at a pace that was both rapid and sustained. The period 
ending in the second quarter of this year was the first time the United States had suffered 
negative GDP growth in four consecutive quarters since the Great Depression.2
As we closed out the third quarter last week, it was apparent that economic growth was back 
in positive territory. Financial markets continued to stabilize and, in some respects, improved. 
Consumer spending was showing signs of firming. Housing-related economic indicators have 
turned  positive.  Industrial  production  rose  significantly  in  the  summer,  and  not  just  for  the 
auto industry, which was effectively restarting after the disruption caused by the bankruptcies 
of General Motors and Chrysler. Growth in foreign markets, particularly emerging Asia, has 
been encouraging. 
This  turnaround  is  certainly  welcome,  but  it  should  not  be  overstated.  Although  we  can 
expect  positive  growth  to  continue  beyond  the  third  quarter,  economic  activity  remains 
relatively weak. The upturns in industrial production and residential investment, for example, 
follow  startling  declines  in  the  first half  of  the  year.  Improvement  is  gradual  and  beginning 
from very low levels.  
The employment situation continues to be dismal. While the pace of job losses has slowed 
from  the  extraordinary  levels  of  early  2009,  the  economy  has  recently  still  been  losing  on 
average about a quarter of a million jobs each month. Hopes for a steady reduction in the 
pace of job losses were once again confounded last Friday with release of the September 
employment report, which showed net job declines well above the consensus expectation of 
economic forecasters. The unemployment rate  has risen to 9.8 percent. Decomposing this 
                                                 
1   The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Federal 
Open Market Committee. 
2   As  measured  in  chained  2005  dollars  and  reported  by  the  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis  of  the  U.S. 
Commerce Department, the quarterly changes in GDP were -2.7 percent, -5.4 percent, -6.4 percent, and -0.7 
percent in the period from the third quarter of 2008 through the second quarter of 2009. 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 1
figure, we see that the only demographic group whose unemployment rate appears less than 
awful is that for college graduates – at 4.9 percent. A look behind even that figure gives little 
reason for comfort, insofar as it has nearly doubled from the level of 2.6 percent at which it 
stood  just  a  year  earlier.  Rates  for  many  race  or  age-based  demographic  groups  remain 
downright discouraging.3
Indicators apart from the unemployment rate underscore the weakness of labor markets. The 
percentage  of  working-age  people  with  jobs  has  fallen  to  a  point  not  seen  in  a  quarter 
century.4  Average  hours  worked  have  not  increased  through  the  spring  and  summer  from 
what were, by historic standards, unusually low levels. The number of part-time workers who 
want full-time jobs jumped nearly 50 percent last fall and winter and has remained elevated 
since.5  The  average  duration  of  unemployment  has  risen  almost  10  weeks  since  the 
recession began, to more than six months. 
The labor market conditions I have just described reflect the low level of resource utilization 
in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  In  this  context,  with  inflation  expected  to  remain  subdued  for 
some time, the Federal Open Market Committee indicated after our meeting two weeks ago 
that exceptionally low interest rates are likely to be warranted for an extended period. Indeed, 
with the effects of the February stimulus package diminishing next year, bank lending that is 
still  declining,  and  continued  dysfunction  in  some  parts  of  capital  markets,  there  is 
considerable  uncertainty  as  to  how  robust  growth  will  be  in  2010.  At  the  same  time,  the 
unconventional  policies  pursued  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  order  to  halt  the  crisis  have 
produced levels and types of reserves that will eventually require use of the unconventional 
exit  tools  discussed  on  numerous  occasions  by  Chairman  Bernanke  and  Vice  Chairman 
Kohn.  
The coincidence of a weak economy and an unusually large balance sheet at the Federal 
Reserve will require some judgments by the Federal Open Market Committee of a sort for 
which  there  are  not  many  historical  precedents.  Still,  just  as  with  conventional  monetary 
policy,  decisions  on  the  timing  and  pace  for  removing  accommodation  should  and  will 
depend on our ongoing analysis and forecasts of all relevant economic factors.  
Reforming financial regulation 
In one sense, the financial crisis that began in 2007 is an old and familiar tale of explosive 
growth in leverage built on assumptions of ever-rising asset prices. Financial crises are, as 
the  economist  Charles  Kindleberger  put  it,  a  "hardy  perennial."6  Instead  of  tulips  in  the 
seventeenth  century  Dutch  Republic,  South  Sea  Company  stock  in  eighteenth  century 
England,  or  the  Nikkei  and  real  estate  in  late  twentieth  century  Japan,  we  had  subprime 
mortgages and securitizations. However, like most recurring stories in human history, each 
financial crisis has its own plot twists and themes interwoven with elements common to most 
crashes. To fashion an effective and sensible response, it is necessary to understand both 
the unique and shared features of our own experience.  
The financial crisis revealed that systemic risk was very much built into our financial system. 
As shown by the intervention of the government when Bear Stearns and AIG were failing, 
and by the repercussions from the failure of Lehman Brothers, the universe of financial firms 
                                                 
3   The unemployment rate is 15.4 percent for African-Americans, 12.7 percent for Hispanics, and 25.9 percent 
for teenagers. 
4   As  reported  by  BLS,  in  September  the  ratio  of  employed  persons  to  the  (adult)  population  stood  at  58.8 
percent. The last time this ratio was lower was in 1984. 
5   BLS reports that in September there were about 9.2 million people working part-time for "economic reasons" – 
that is, because they could not find a full-time job. This compares to about 6.3 million a year previously. 
6   Charles P. Kindleberger (2000), Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises (4th ed.) at 1. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2009
that appeared too-big-to-fail during periods of stress included more than insured depository 
institutions  and  extended  beyond  the  perimeter  of  traditional  safety  and  soundness 
regulation.  During  the  years  immediately  preceding  the  crisis,  there  were  both  private  and 
public  sector  mistakes.  Within  many  financial  firms  there  was  a  massive  failure  of  risk 
management. Within government there were serious shortcomings in the regulation of both 
firms and markets. 
In truth, though, the origins of the financial crisis lay deeper. In the preceding decades our 
regulatory system had accommodated the growth of capital market alternatives to traditional 
financing by relaxing many restrictions on the type and geographic scope of bank activities 
and virtually all restrictions on affiliations between banks and non-bank financial firms. These 
changes,  in  turn,  enabled  a  series  of  acquisitions  that  resulted  in  a  number  of  very  large, 
highly  complex  financial  holding  companies  centered  on  a  large  commercial  bank.  These 
firms were subject to prudential supervision to be sure, but it was a kind of supervision that 
had not kept pace with the far-reaching changes in the industry. At the same time, there was 
a  group  of  very  large,  much  higher  leveraged  financial  firms  that  were  not  subject  to 
mandatory prudential regulation.  
Many  firms  of  both  types  relied  for  a  considerable  portion  of  their  financing  on  short-term 
capital market sources that were often poorly matched with the maturity structure of a firm's 
assets. Securitization markets played a major role in these complex, tightly wound financial 
arrangements,  which  for  a  time  seemed  to  promise  ever-increasing  credit  availability.  But 
when  questions  arose  about  the  quality  of  the  assets  on  which  this  system  was  based  – 
notably poorly underwritten subprime mortgages – a classic adverse feedback loop ensued. 
With  lenders  increasingly  unwilling  to  extend  credit  against  these  assets,  liquidity-strained 
institutions  made  increasingly  distressed  asset  sales,  which  placed  additional  downward 
pressure on asset prices, thereby leading to margin calls for leveraged actors and mark-to-
market losses for all holders of the assets. The margin calls and booked losses would start 
another round in the adverse feedback loop. 
The  causes  of  the  crisis  were  thus  embedded  in  the  very  nature  of  the  financial  services 
industry as it had evolved since the 1980s, and with the failure of the regulatory system to 
adapt  to  the  new  sources  of  financial  risk.  An  adequate  post-crisis  program  of  regulatory 
reform  must  be  equally  concerned  with  the  fundamentals  of  leverage  and  too-big-to-fail. 
There must be improvement in traditional, firm-centered regulation, sometimes referred to as 
microprudential regulation. We must also develop a macroprudential regulatory outlook – that 
is,  an  approach  that  considers  linkages  among  firms  and  markets  that  could  threaten  the 
financial system as a whole, and that watches for the emergence of risks that might not be 
apparent solely through examination of specific financial institutions.  
Both objectives will require changes by the financial regulatory agencies acting under their 
existing authority, as well as new legislation to ensure that there is sufficient authority and 
accountability  for  the  regulatory  agencies  in  adapting  their  policies.  I  believe  that  a  reform 
program is, in fact, taking shape, though important components remain the subject of debate 
within  Congress,  the  Administration,  and  the  financial  regulatory  agencies.  While  I  do  not 
have  time  today  to  cover  everything  that  the  Federal  Reserve  is  doing,  much  less  the 
activities  of  other  financial  regulators,  let  me  describe  some  of  our  initiatives  and  identify 
some  of  the  more  important  areas  in  which  I  believe  that  Congressional  action  could  be 
helpful. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  worked  with  other  U.S.  and  foreign  supervisors  to  strengthen 
capital, liquidity, and risk-management requirements for banking organizations. There is little 
doubt  that  capital  levels  prior  to  the  crisis  were  insufficient  to  serve  their  functions  as  an 
adequate constraint on leverage and a buffer against loss. Higher capital requirements for 
trading  activities  and  securitization  exposures  have  already  been  agreed  internationally. 
Efforts to improve the quality of capital have made considerable progress, with a particular 
emphasis  on  the  need  for  higher  levels  of  common  equity,  which  ultimately  provides  the 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 3
greatest protection against losses for creditors or the deposit insurance fund. We are also 
working  with  our  domestic  and  international  counterparts  to  deal  with  the  procyclical 
tendencies  that  characterize  important  areas  of  financial  regulation,  including  capital  and 
accounting standards. 
We must also adopt new regulatory mechanisms to counteract the systemic and too-big-to-
fail problems that became so embedded in our financial system. One possible approach is a 
special  charge  –  possibly  a  special  capital  requirement  –  that  would  be  calibrated  to  the 
systemic importance of a firm. Needless to say, developing a metric for such a requirement is 
a new, and not altogether straightforward, exercise. Another proposal, which strikes me as 
having  particular  promise,  is  that  large  financial  institutions  be  required  to  have  specified 
forms  of  "contingent  capital."  One  form  of  this  proposal  would  have  firms  regularly  issue 
special debt instruments that would convert to equity during times of financial stress. If well 
devised, such instruments would not only provide an increased capital buffer at the moment 
when it is most needed. They would also inject an additional element of market discipline into 
large financial firms, since the price of those instruments would reflect market perceptions of 
the stability of the firm.  
In  addition  to  changing  the  regulations  under  which  banking  organizations  function,  the 
Federal  Reserve  is  adapting  the  methods  by  which  we  supervise  those  organizations.  For 
the largest and most complex firms, we are implementing closer coordination among our on-
site examiners of those firms and with Federal Reserve Board staff in Washington. We will 
expand  our  use  of  so-called  horizontal  reviews  of  these  large  firms,  a  process  involving 
cross-firm analysis of key practices and circumstances that gives all supervisory participants 
a broader perspective on the state of the financial industry.  
We  are  also  creating  a  quantitative  surveillance  mechanism  that  will  use  supervisory 
information,  firm-specific  data  analysis,  and  market-based  indicators  to  identify  developing 
strains and imbalance that may affect multiple institutions. This program will be distinct from 
the activities of supervisors, so as to provide an independent assessment of the conditions in 
major firms, as well as to provide additional information to on-site examination teams. It will 
also provide a good starting point for the macroprudential regulatory perspective I mentioned 
earlier. 
There is, then, much to be done under existing supervisory authority. But there are limits. For 
example, under present law, our capital and other regulatory requirements apply only to firms 
that own a commercial bank. And yet, as became evident last year, systemic problems can 
arise  from  the  activities  of  non-banking  firms  as  well.  Indeed,  there  is  an  incentive  to  shift 
riskier activities to such firms. For this reason, the Federal Reserve supports proposals that 
Congress extend the reach of the regulatory system so that every systemically important firm 
is subject to consolidated supervision.  
A second important legislative initiative would be creation of a special resolution process for 
systemically important financial firms. At present we have such a process for banks, but not 
for the holding companies of which they are part or for other financial firms. A regime that 
raised the real prospect of losses for shareholders and creditors would add a third alternative 
to  the  unattractive  existing  options  of  bailout  or  disorderly  bankruptcy.  The  consequent 
increase  in  market  discipline  before  severe  financial  distress  arises  could  provide  another 
way to help contain the too-big-to-fail problem.  
A  third  relevant  proposal  for  Congressional  action  is  creation  of  an  oversight  council 
composed of the financial regulatory agencies. This council, which should be given access to 
a  wide  range  of  information  from  regulators  and  market  actors,  would  be  charged  with 
identifying emerging risks to stability and regulatory gaps across the entire financial system, 
and coordinating agency responses to potential systemic risk. It could also play a useful role 
in identifying financial firms that may deserve designation as systemically important and thus 
subject to consolidated supervision, as suggested above. 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2009
These and other actions by Congress and the regulatory agencies, completed and proposed, 
offer a real and welcome prospect of broad reform in the financial regulatory system. Still, as 
the reform process proceeds and people inevitably become involved in detailed debates on 
the  merits  of  particular  ideas,  I  would  suggest  that  there  are  two  basic  norms  that  should 
guide the outcome of this process.  
First, there is some danger that reforms and restrictions on financial activity will simply be 
piled  on  one  another,  with  insufficient  attention  to  their  cumulative  or  interactive  effects. 
Reforms  must  reflect  the  social  and  economic  desirability  of  ensuring  access  to  credit  on 
risk-sensible  terms  for  businesses  and  consumers  alike,  even  as  policymakers  strive  to 
ensure that methods of credit allocation are consistent with financial stability.  
Second,  the  reform  process  cannot  be  judged  a  success  until  it  substantially  reduces 
systemic  risk  and  the  too-big-to-fail  problem.  While  it  is  unrealistic  to  think  that  these 
concerns can be eliminated, it is critical that they be addressed head-on. We cannot know for 
certain  that  the  regulatory,  supervisory,  and  legislative  changes  to  which  I  have  already 
alluded will be up to these tasks. Accordingly, as I have said before, all participants in the 
reform  process  must  continue  to  explore  other  possibilities  –  including  potentially  quite 
innovative  possibilities  –  even  as  we  work  to  shape  and  implement  the  current  batch  of 
worthwhile proposals to these ends.  
A "new normalcy" for credit markets 
Thus  far  I  have  spoken  exclusively  from  the  perspective  of  a  member  of  the  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve in thinking about the economy, monetary policy, financial 
supervision,  and  regulatory  reform.  Before  closing,  I  want  to  make  a  few  more  general 
comments on changes, actual or potential, in credit markets. These remarks are prompted in 
part  by  the  conversations  I  often  have  with  bankers,  business  people,  and  consumers. 
During these discussions I have realized that just about everyone understands we will never 
return to the credit markets of the middle part of this decade, but very few people believe 
they understand what the "new normal" will look like once the crisis has fully passed and the 
economy  is  on  a  sustained  recovery  path.  I  suspect  that  this  uncertainty  is  itself  an 
impediment to stronger growth, since it makes financial planning more difficult.  
There are some features of the pre-crisis credit world with little to be said for them, whose 
apparent demise we should welcome. For example, mortgage lending at high rates with little 
or no down payment and non-existent underwriting is not something we want to see again, 
for both consumer protection and financial stability reasons. Likewise, a business model for 
credit  cards  based  upon  low  interest  rates  and  high,  frequent  penalty  fees  seems  at  odds 
with responsible allocation and use of credit. 
But  what  of  securitization?  There  were  undoubtedly  many  imprudent,  even  reckless, 
practices associated with the securitization process, particularly with respect to some exotic 
instruments  whose  risk  could  not  be  understood  even  by  their  creators.  There  is  little  to 
lament in their disappearance. But securitization is not in and of itself a bad thing. On the 
contrary, a well-functioning system for securitizing well-underwritten loans can make capital 
available  at  lower  cost  to  businesses,  homeowners,  and  retail  consumers.  The  failure  of 
many relatively straightforward securitization markets to revive without government support 
may be explained simply as a hangover from the excesses and still-encumbered assets of 
the pre-crisis period. Just as some have restarted, perhaps others will follow as markets for 
the underlying assets improve. But I will confess to some concern that there has not already 
been greater activity. 
Beyond  specific  financial  instruments,  there  are  clearly  fundamental  behavioral  and 
macroeconomic  adjustments 
the  offing.  The  habit  of  building  personal  savings 
predominantly through appreciation of one's home is one that many Americans will have to 
change.  Similarly,  the  growth  models  of  emerging  market  countries  dependent  on 
in 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 5
unshakeable  American  consumption  and  ever-increasing  borrowing  will  not  be  sustainable 
even as recovery becomes more established. And, needless to say, major fiscal reform here 
at home will very likely be the central issue of U.S. economic policy in the years following 
recovery from the present crisis. 
Conclusion 
My focus today on what follows in the wake of the crisis might itself be read as a touch of 
optimism,  signifying  that  the  crisis  itself  looks to  be  over.  The  sobering  counterpoint  is  my 
argument  that  some  rather  substantial  adjustments  will  be  needed  by  individuals,  financial 
firms, businesses, regulators, and nations. That there will be adjustments is not something 
we can choose. How deftly we adjust is the question whose answer will weigh heavily in our 
nation's economic performance over the next decade. 
 
6 
 BIS Review 123/2009
