Heng Swee Keat: Corporate governance developments in Singapore 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Heng  Swee  Keat,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  2009  Asian  Investors'  Corporate  Governance  Conference,  Singapore, 
19 November 2009. 
 Mr. Tan Chok Kian, Chairman, Securities Investors Association (Singapore) 
Mr. David Gerald, President & CEO, Securities Investors Association (Singapore) 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Introduction 
Good morning. I am very happy to join you today at this inaugural Asian Investors' Corporate 
Governance Conference. Thank you for inviting me to speak at this event. 
I congratulate SIAS and your partners on bringing together such a wide range of investors 
and corporate governance practitioners from across Asia. I applaud your commitment to hold 
this event annually, as it is necessary for practitioners to stay abreast of the latest corporate 
governance developments and to reflect on how we can do better.  
Corporate governance as an on-going concern 
Good corporate governance is a key pillar underpinning Singapore's reputation as a trusted 
financial and business hub. Over the years, we have sought to continually improve corporate 
governance in Singapore. This includes a review of the Code of Corporate Governance in 
2005 by the former Council for Corporate Disclosure and Governance ["CCDG"], chaired by 
Mr. JY Pillay.  
In  the  last  two  years,  following  the  transfer  of  oversight  of  corporate  governance  of  listed 
companies  to  MAS  and  the  Singapore  Exchange,  we  have  focused  on  strengthening  the 
practices of corporate governance in Singapore. In 2007, Professor Mak Yuen Teen of the 
National University of Singapore was commissioned by MAS to undertake a study aimed at 
assessing the current state of corporate governance practices in Singapore, identifying gaps 
and proposing measures for improvement.  
Professor  Mak  highlighted,  among  others,  the  need  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  Audit 
Committees  through  training,  practical  guidance  and  sharing  of  experience  among  Audit 
Committee members. 
Arising from this, the MAS, the Accounting and Corporate Regulatory Authority ["ACRA"] and 
the  Singapore  Exchange  established  a  private  sector  committee  to  develop  practical 
guidance to assist Audit Committees to better appreciate their responsibilities and enhance 
their effectiveness in performing their role. The Committee, led by Mr. Bobby Chin, worked 
intensely over 9 months and completed its work in October 2008. The Committee's output, 
"Guidebook  for  Audit  Committees  in  Singapore",  has  become  a  practical  and  valuable 
reference for directors who serve on the Audit Committees.  
We have also been supportive of efforts by the Singapore Institute of Directors to review its 
structure  and  strengthen  the  delivery  of  its  director  training  program,  so  that  it  may  better 
meet the increased demands placed on directors in this current environment. 
The continual efforts by industry practitioners, investors and regulators to improve corporate 
governance have enabled Singapore to stay ahead of the field. The World Economic Forum's 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 1
Global  Competitiveness  Report  2009,  for  instance,  ranked  Singapore  first  in  corporate 
governance standards in Asia. 
Lessons from the crisis 
In the aftermath of crises, corporate governance standards and practices often come under 
scrutiny.  For  instance,  after  the  Enron/Worldcom  failures,  critics  pointed  to  the  lack  of 
independence  of  auditors  and  Audit  Committees,  and  to  deficiencies  in  accounting 
standards.  After  the  bursting  of  the  dot.com  bubble,  attention  was  drawn  to  the  severe 
conflicts of interest by brokers and analysts. 
The recent financial crisis has been no different. Indeed, reviews by international bodies and 
national agencies have found that weak corporate governance played a role in this crisis. For 
instance,  the  OECD  report  on  "The  Corporate  Governance  Lessons  from  the  Financial 
Crisis"1  noted  that  "the  financial  crisis  can  be,  to  an  important  extent,  attributed  to  failures 
and weaknesses in corporate governance arrangements which did not serve their purpose to 
safeguard against excessive risk taking in a number of financial services companies."  
While many of the corporate governance failures that have been uncovered so far affected 
financial companies, many of the structural weaknesses may also be common to large and 
complex listed firms. It is therefore relevant for Boards of other companies to reflect on these 
findings. Let me briefly highlight a few common themes. 
The  first  relates  to  the  quality  and  composition  of  Boards.  Research  shows  that  although 
having a good balance of directors with a range of skills and experience that are relevant to 
the business of the firm is an essential foundation for good corporate governance, this was 
also often the most neglected. 
A  number  of  reports2  also  found  weaknesses  in  the  implementation  of  effective  risk 
management. In many cases, risk was not managed on an enterprise-wide basis and Boards 
were not fully apprised of the level of risk facing the company. Overseas regulators are now 
reviewing  the  role  of  Boards  in  providing  guidance  on  the  alignment  of  corporate  strategy 
with risk-appetite, as well as on appropriate internal structures in risk management. 
Not  surprisingly,  remuneration  practices  have  attracted  the  most  public  attention.  The 
alignment  of  executive  and  Board  remuneration  with  the  longer  term  interests  of  the 
company  and  its  shareholders  is  a  widely  accepted  corporate  governance  principle. 
Nonetheless, compensation practices that rewarded staff handsomely for short-term gains, 
without  any  corresponding  penalties  for  longer-term  losses,  have  been  blamed  for 
encouraging  excessive  risk  taking  in  some  institutions.  A  number  of  jurisdictions,  such  as 
Australia  and  the  US,  are  considering  legislation  that  will  address  this  by  empowering 
shareholders to have a more direct role in setting remuneration. 
Creation of the Corporate Governance Council 
Financial institutions in Singapore have generally been prudent in their business, and have 
weathered  the  crisis  well.  Listed  companies  in  Singapore  that  have  maintained  high 
standards of governance have similarly withstood the crisis. Nevertheless, we must not be 
                                                 
1   Kirkpatrick, Grant (February 2009), "The Corporate Governance Lessons from the Financial Crisis", OECD. 
2   Walker,  David  (July  2009),  "A  Review  of  Corporate  Governance  in  UK  Banks  and  Other  Financial  Industry 
Entities",  Her  Majesty's  Treasury;  G20  Working  Group  1  (March  2009),  "Enhancing  Sound  Regulation  and 
Strengthening Transparency", G20; OECD Steering Group on Corporate Governance (May 2009), "Corporate 
Governance and the Financial Crisis - Key Findings and Main Messages", OECD. 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2009
complacent. We must not let up in our efforts to improve our regulations and codes, as well 
as in the actual practices and governance culture. 
As  part  of  this  effort,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  we  will  be  establishing  a  Corporate 
Governance Council, comprising members from the private and public sectors.  
The objective of the Council will be to promote a high standard of corporate governance in 
companies listed in Singapore so as to maintain and enhance investors' confidence. In turn, 
this will enhance Singapore's reputation as a leading and trusted financial centre, and benefit 
all players involved.  
In  conceptualising  the  Corporate  Governance  Council,  the  CCDG  serves  as  a  useful 
reference.  Unlike  the  CCDG,  which  also  had  responsibility  for  promulgating  accounting 
standards and improving disclosure practices, the Corporate Governance Council's focus will 
be squarely on corporate governance matters.  
Among the Council's roles will be the identification of opportunities for continuing professional 
development of directors and the development of practical guidance for Board committees. 
By  taking  into  account  perspectives  of  relevant  stakeholders,  the  Council  can  develop 
initiatives  that  are  robust  and  balanced,  and  achieve  broad  support  and  alignment  of  all 
parties.  
MAS  will  announce  members  of  the  Corporate  Governance  Council,  and  its  terms  of 
reference, early next year. 
Review of the Code of Corporate Governance ("the Code") 
An important and immediate task for the Council once it is set up will be to conduct a review 
of Singapore's Code of Corporate Governance. 
The Code was last reviewed in 2005 and took effect for all AGMs held on or after 1 January 
2007.  The Code  has  served  us  well.  However,  this  financial crisis  has  thrown  up  valuable 
lessons on corporate governance. Members of our media, academia and the corporate and 
financial  sector  have  also  been  suggesting  possible  improvements,  and  several  overseas 
jurisdictions  have  also  completed  or  are  in  the  process  of  updating  their  own  Codes.  It  is 
therefore timely for us to embark on another review. In determining the scope of the review, 
the  Council  could  consider  the  suggestions  for  improvements  from  stakeholders,  and 
developments in other jurisdictions, taking into account the local context where relevant.  
Higher standards for banks & insurance companies 
This  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  the  failures  of  financial  institutions  with  significant 
operations  can  destabilise  the  entire  financial  system,  and  severely  disrupt  economic 
activities. MAS' approach has been to require high regulatory and prudential standards for 
locally incorporated banks and life insurance companies as well as standards of corporate 
governance  that  are  more  stringent  than  what  they  have  to  observe  as  listed  companies. 
Locally  incorporated  banks  and  significant  life  insurers  are  required  to  comply  with  the 
Corporate Governance Regulations which are mandatory as opposed to the Code which is 
applied on a "comply or explain" basis. The Corporate Governance Regulations also impose 
more stringent requirements regarding the composition of Boards and Board committees.  
MAS  is  in  the  midst  of  reviewing  the  Corporate  Governance  Framework  for  locally 
incorporated  banks  and  insurers.  The  review  will  focus  on  the  effectiveness  of  risk 
management  at  the  Board  level,  including  the  role  played  by  Boards  in  safeguarding  the 
safety and soundness of their institutions and in addressing market conduct risks. This would 
include  a  review  of  the  Board's  role  in  setting  remuneration  policies  to  manage  risks 
effectively  and  the  need  for  the  Board  to  comprise  members  with  relevant  expertise  and 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 3
experience  in  the  technical,  financial  and  operational  aspects  of  risk  management  of  the 
various lines of business of the financial institution.  
MAS will also review the need to further tighten the definition of independence by requiring 
the Nominating Committee to consider the length of service on the Board as an additional 
criterion in determining the independence of a director. 
With regards to remuneration practices, MAS has done an initial assessment of the practices 
of our local banks against the Principles for Sound Compensation Practices issued by the 
Financial Stability Board. We support the idea of aligning compensation with appropriate risk-
taking. As the core issue is the holistic management of risks across the institution, MAS will, 
in our implementation of these Principles, incorporate these into the Corporate Governance 
Framework. That way, the various governance elements pertaining to risk management can 
function in a balanced and coherent manner. 
Role of advocacy bodies 
So  far  I  have  spoken  mainly  on  the  role  of  regulators  in  setting  out  good  corporate 
governance  Codes  and  practices.  However,  the  quality  of  corporate  governance  depends 
critically on people and values. 
Industry groups such as SIAS have an important role in formulating and implementing higher 
standards of corporate governance practices. I would like to take this opportunity to applaud 
SIAS  for  being  a  tireless  advocate  of  investor  rights.  Mr.  David  Gerald,  in  particular,  has 
contributed  significantly  in  this  area.  SIAS  has  played  its  part  in  empowering  securities 
investors  through  education  and  information,  most  recently  with  regard  to  structured 
products. It has also played a role as a "corporate integrity watchdog" by actively engaging 
corporations that have fallen short of good corporate governance practices. 
The effort to promote good corporate governance practices and to cultivate ethical corporate 
culture  and  behaviour  is  also  supported  by  advocates  in  the  media,  academia  and 
professional associations.  
Our local media have highlighted good and bad practices. Several journalists have written 
thoughtful  pieces.  It  is  useful  to  have  discerning  commentary  that  points  to  deficiencies  in 
specific firms without over-generalising. 
The National University of Singapore Corporate Governance and Financial Reporting Centre, 
as  well  as  the  Singapore  Management  University  Sim  Kee  Boon  Institute  for  Financial 
Economics both publish useful indices that assess the standards of corporate governance in 
Singapore. 
Professional associations such as ICPAS, IIA, SAICSA and SID have also been playing their 
roles in this area. 
Conclusion 
In  closing,  let  me  reiterate  the  point  that  good  corporate  governance  pays  –  if  not  in 
immediate  share  prices,  at  least  in  the  resilience  of  the  firm  in  a  crisis.  Indeed,  one  key 
conclusion from the study by the Senior Supervisors Group3[3] is that financial firms that best 
rode  out  the  recent  crisis  were  ones  with  good  corporate  governance  standards, 
demonstrating "a comprehensive approach to viewing firm-wide exposures and risk, sharing 
                                                 
3   William Rutledge et al. (March 2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market 
Turbulence", Senior Supervisors Group. 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2009
quantitative and qualitative information more effectively across the firm and engaging in more 
effective dialogue across the management team." 
Better  governance  per  se  does  not  guarantee  that  there  will  never  be  a  crisis,  but  it  can 
minimise its probability and its impact if it does occur. Singapore has made good progress 
over the years in our corporate governance practices, but we must press on with continual 
improvements. As regulators, professional bodies, investors, academics and the media, we 
each have a role – let us work closely together in this journey.  
Finally, while my comments have focused mainly on Singapore, it is heartening that we have 
such a deep and diverse group of investors and practitioners from around the region. I am 
sure there will be much that we can learn from each other, and I hope that deep and frequent 
interactions  like  this  catalyse  new  ideas  and  spur  us  all  to  do  better.  I  wish  you  a  fruitful 
conference. Thank you. 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 5
