Ardian Fullani: Recent developments in the Albanian economy 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
monetary  policy  decision  of  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  Tirana, 
30 September 2009. 
 The Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed the Monthly  Report of Monetary 
Policy,  at  its  meeting  of  September  30,  2009.  After  getting  acquainted  with  the  latest 
economic – financial developments at home and at the conclusion of the discussions on their 
expected  future  performance,  decided  to  keep  the  key  interest  rate  unchanged,  at  5.75 
percent. This interest rate is in consistency with the maintaining of inflation close to the Bank 
of Albania target for a medium-term period. 
 The analysis of the latest economic and monetary developments confirmed our expectations 
for  an  overall  downturn  of  the  economic  activity  at  home  and  a  reduction  of  the  domestic 
inflationary  pressures,  for  a  relaxation  of  monetary  markets  and  a  slowing  recovery  of 
financial intermediation, and has also highlighted the still fragile equilibrium of the economic 
and monetary indicators.  
The conclusions of our discussions converged to a decision-taking to keep the key interest 
rate  unchanged.  The  purpose  of  this  position  is  to  further  maintain  and  consolidate  the 
established  balances,  thus  considering  the  macroeconomic  stability  as  an  indispensable 
precondition for a stable and long-term growth.  
The economic activity at home is backed up by an improvement of the overall global climate, 
during the last two months, by attempting improvement signs of lending activity and by the 
seasonal  effect  of  summer  time.  Global  economy  is  being  characterised  by  a  more 
moderated downturn of the economic activity at industrialised countries, accompanied with a 
growth  of  the  world  trading  activity  and  low  inflationary  pressures  at  global  level. 
Nevertheless  statistical  data  regarding  the  Albanian  economy  still  remain  at  low  level,  the 
indirect  indicators  suggest  this  later  is  characterised  by  a  positive  economic  growth,  but 
slower  compared  to  the  succeeding  years.  The  low  pace  of  both  retail  sales  and  budget 
revenues  increase,  the  exports  slowdown,  the  lower  expansion  of  lending  to  the  economy 
and  business  and  consumer’s  confidence  indexes  show  that  Albanian  economy  is  going 
through a slower growth phase relative to the one of previous year.  
This situation is also mirrored on the low inflationary pressures, revealed by the low level of 
core  inflation,  which  is  a  proper  appraiser  of  the  domestic  demand  pressures.  In  August 
2009, annual inflation pointed to 2.2 percent, remaining within the targeted band of the Bank 
of Albania, but close to its lower limit. Seasonal tendency of prices’ behaviour was confirmed 
to have the same intensity even during this period, by keeping the inflation value at the same 
rate  with  that  of  the  preceding  month.  The  average  annual  inflation  marked  2.2  percent, 
equal to the value of the previous year, revealing the full elimination of the first round effects 
of the previous year increases in terms of raw material and electric prices.  
Fiscal  policy  persisted  to  be  also  expansionary  during  July,  notwithstanding  at  more 
moderated paces. Budget revenues stood at the same rates of projection fulfilment with the 
previous months – accounting for 94 percent – while expenditure were met by 98 percent of 
the projected target, maintaining the same level with the three previous months. This effect 
provided  advantage  to  the  expansion  of  budget  deficit  in  this  period.  As  we  have 
underscored even previously, the increase of both budget deficit and public expenditure does 
support  the  economic  activity  in  terms  of  a  low  demand  of  the  economy,  but  it  also  is 
accompanied  by  the  increasing  tendency  of  the  public  debt  interest  rates.  The  increasing 
review  of  public  expenditures  and  budget  deficit  rate  is  forecasted  to  preserve  this  effect 
BIS Review 122/2009 
 1
even during the remaining part of 2009, while a more balanced fiscal position for 2010 would 
reduce  the  pressures  on  monetary  markets,  by  establishing  more  spaces  for  the  rise  of 
monetary stimulus.  
The  external  sector  data  regarding  second  quarter  2009  reveal  a  further  reduction  of  the 
Albania trade exchanges with the rest of the world in annual terms. According to preliminary 
data,  these  development  tendencies  have  persisted  even  during  July  2009.  Exports 
decreased by 17 percent relative to the same month of previous year. Imports performance 
incurred  the  same  development  declining  by  about  8  percent  in  annual  terms.  External 
economy  developments  are  accompanied  by  the  maintenance  of  high  trade  deficit  rates, 
which  affect  the  imbalance  of  the  demand  to  supply  ratios  for  foreign  currency  in  the 
economy.  
Nevertheless,  the  maintaining  of  the  exchange  rate  flexibility,  the  correcting  tendency  of 
trade deficit and the attraction of savings denominated in ALL, as higher interest rates and of 
low inflation, serve to relaxed and prudential volatilities of the exchange rate and to a strong 
position of ALL in the short-term and medium-term period. 
Monetary  indicators  of  July  have  reflected  the  more  relaxed  dynamic  of  financial 
intermediation. External sector highlights of the economy have affected the negative paces of 
the foreign currency component of money stock. However, banking system carried out the 
intermediation to increase lending in ALL extended to private and public sector with positive 
paces. Thus, while monetary supply picked up at slower annual paces, about 4.4 percent, 
M2  aggregate  maintained  high  paces  of  the  annual  growth  at  9.7  percent  as  at  July.  The 
slowdown  of  lending  pace  to  economy  in  foreign  currency  and  the  lower  supply  of  foreign 
currency inflows from external sector have led to a negative annual pace of deposits growth 
denominated in foreign currency of the system. Lending to private sector increased by 15.8 
percent in real annual terms, relative to 17.9 percent in June. Lending to business provided 
the  main  contribution  on  the  monthly  growth  of  credit,  a constant  phenomenon,  which  this 
month  appeared  particularly  more  emphasised.  Credit  denominated  in  ALL  maintained  the 
average  annual  increase  rate,  by  about  28-30  percent,  but  the  slowdown  of  lending 
denominated in foreign currency has led to the decline of credit growth pace.  
The open market operations of the Bank of Albania met the liquidity needs of the banking 
system.  Bank  of  Albania  has  injected  all  liquidity  demanded  from  commercial  banks,  by 
preserving at the same time an accurate time structure of this injection. Notwithstanding the 
improved  liquidity  situation,  yields  rates  in  primary  market  have  persuaded  the  increasing 
tendency  of  the  current  months.  The  increase  of  risk  evaluation  from  banks  is  mainly 
reflected in the determination of long-term yields that is confirmed by the rise of 2 and 5-year 
bonds yields. The performance of new deposits interest rates denominated in Euro and ALL 
appears stable during July. New credits interests’ rates denominated in ALL have persuaded 
the decline in July, while this month recorded a tightening of new loan cost denominated in 
Euro. 
At the conclusion, by framing the forecasts for a relaxed inflation and within the target set out 
by the Bank of Albania for the future, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided 
to  keep  the  key  interest  rate  unchanged.  This  movement  is  a  continuance  of  the  careful 
monetary policy pursued by the Bank of Albania during the year 2009, a policy which has 
aimed  the  transmission  of  controlled  monetary  stimulus  and  the  keeping  of  inflationary 
expectations  close  to  the  targeted  band  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  Recent  developments 
suggest  that  the  expose  of  inflationary  pressures  is  being  shifted  in  general  on  the  falling 
direction. The higher transmission of the recent increasing trend of the raw material prices in 
the world market composes a risk in terms of the increasing direction of consumer prices. 
The  performance  of  exchange  rate,  of  inflationary  expectations  and  the  country  fiscal 
position, shall continue to condition the balance of risks in future.  
2 
 BIS Review 122/2009
The  expected  relaxation  of  these  occurrences  in  terms  of  a  well-stabilised  financial 
environment  shall  provide  the  needed  spaces  for  the  growth  of  monetary  stimulus  in  the 
economy. 
BIS Review 122/2009 
 3
