Shyamala Gopinath: Philosophy and practice of financial sector 
regulation – space for unorthodoxy 
Speech by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
FSA Turner Review Conference, London, 2 November 2009. 
 It is a privilege to be invited to share my thoughts at this conference. The contribution of FSA 
in setting the terms of the debate in the aftermath of the crisis has been very significant and 
crucial.  The  clarity,  conviction  and  clinical  sharpness  of  arguments  one  encounters  while 
reading the Turner review ask of us a very fundamental question – how could the world not 
have  expected  this  crisis?  How  could  the  policy  regimes  world  over,  barring  a  few 
exceptions, failed to even recognize what now seems to be obvious? Perhaps it had to do 
with the force and might of the reigning doctrinaire regarding financial markets. 
Post  crisis,  there  was  a  natural  effort  to  understand  and  assess  the  nature  of  various 
inexactitudes  which  had  earlier  been  missed  and  incorporate  these  into  the  policy 
frameworks. Phrases such as systemic risk oversight and macro-prudential regulation have 
become the new touchstones for a repaired regulatory framework. There is a renewed effort 
to redefine the regulatory philosophy and principles around a different mould. The danger is 
in  this  organic  mould  continuing  to  derive  its  legitimacy  from  the  pre-crisis  framework. 
Hopefully,  a  crisis  of  such  magnitude  would  not  fail  to  provide  the  necessary  impetus  and 
support  for  departure  of  a  more  fundamental  nature.  I  realize  the  huge  challenge  for  this, 
given the sheer weight of the academic work of nearly four decades in the field of finance 
and the entrenched orthodoxy around it. To bring out any paradigm shift would require an 
equally  weighty  intellectual  case  for  an  alternative  model.  Yes,  this  crisis  could  provide  a 
trigger for that process but as history shows us, paradigm shifts of such magnitude do not 
follow a set path. 
It  would  however  be  imprudent  to  ignore  the  basic  lesson  of  the  crisis,  which  is  that  the 
existing framework has severe pitfalls. As with any stable ecosystem, what is needed is a 
space  for  heterogeneity  –  the  space  for  unorthodoxy.  As  identified  by  the  UN  President’s 
Commission1, “strengthening the diversity of ideas” would be a key principle in addressing 
the issues underlying the crisis. 
India has had the fortune of having a relatively stable financial system through the past few 
major crises affecting the world – the Asian crisis, the dotcom bubble and the recent financial 
crisis.  I  intend  to  divide  my  remarks  today  in  two  parts  –  I  would  like  to  start  off  with  a 
discussion on the evolution of the financial sector regulation in India, particularly focusing on 
the elements of the policy framework which have contributed to the broader stability in the 
financial sector. In the second part, I would like to share my perspectives on some of the key 
issues in the current debate on future of financial sector regulation mainly dealt in detail in 
the Turner Review. 
Indian financial system: the basic structure 
Historically,  the  Indian  financial  system  has  been  a  bank  dominated  one  and  the  gradual 
process  of  disintermediation  through  “public  markets”  has  been  of  relatively  recent  origin. 
Banking  institutions  account  for  nearly  70  percent  of  the  total  assets  of  all  financial 
institutions. The banking sector, as a whole, however has not grown disproportionately as a 
                                                 
1   Commission  of  Experts  of  the  President  of  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly  on  Reforms  of  the 
International Monetary and Financial System. 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 1
percentage of GDP and the challenge for us is to increase penetration of the banking system 
and ensure access of financial services to the large numbers excluded from the system. 
The  non-banking  finance  space  comprises  of  heterogeneous  entities  separated  across 
functional  regulatory  frameworks.  Broadly  speaking,  the  RBI  regulates  companies  taking 
public deposits and non-deposit taking entities undertaking financial services involving asset 
financing,  loan  and  investment  companies.  Other  non-banking  entities  such  as  housing 
finance companies, mutual funds, insurance companies, stock broking companies, merchant 
banking  companies,  venture  capital  funds  etc.  are  regulated  by  the  respective  sectoral 
regulators.  There  is  also  a  separate  framework  for  financial  markets  with  equity  markets 
completely under the securities regulator but the forex, interest rate and credit markets and 
the related derivatives being regulated by the central bank, i.e. RBI, which is also the banking 
regulator. 
Evolution of regulatory framework 
The  philosophy  and  practice  of  financial  sector  regulation  in  India  has  largely  evolved  in 
response to the sui generis nature of contexts and imperatives over the years, which is also 
reflected in the division of regulatory responsibilities over different markets. The bank-based 
financial system, as a concept had come in for sharp criticism in the wake of the Asian crisis, 
and  an  “arm’s-length,  market-based,  Anglo-Saxon  system”2  was  propounded  as  a  better 
model  from  a  stability,  accountability  and  governance  perspective.  The  recent  crisis  has 
again brought the centrality of banks in a financial system into focus and underlined their role 
as  ultimate  risk  repositories  and  ultimate  liquidity  providers,  whatever  be  the  form  of  the 
financial market model. 
The  gradual  process  to  introducing  structural  reforms  in  the  banking  sector  was  a  unique 
experiment  undertaken  with  the  key  objective  of  strengthening  the  banking  sector  balance 
sheets  and  governance  frameworks  in  a  non-disruptive  manner  while  managing  the  given 
political-economy  considerations.  The  reforms  were  carefully  sequenced  in  terms  of 
instruments  and  objectives.  Thus,  prudential  norms  and  supervisory  strengthening  were 
introduced  early  in  the  reform  cycle,  followed  by  interest  rate  deregulation  and  gradually 
lowering  of  statutory  preemptions.  The  more  complex  aspects  of  legal  and  accounting 
measures were ushered in subsequently when the basic tenets of the reforms were already 
in  place.  More  recently,  the  regulatory  framework  has  also  focused  on  ensuring  good 
governance  through  "fit  and  proper"  owners,  directors  and  senior  managers  of  the  banks. 
Broadly speaking, the evolution of regulatory framework for financial sector entities has been 
intrinsically  derived  from  the  objective  of  financial  stability  which  has  always  been  an 
objective for the RBI. 
A unique feature of the reform of public sector banks, which dominated the Indian banking 
sector,  was  the  process  of  financial  restructuring.  Banks  were  recapitalized  by  the 
government to meet prudential norms through recapitalization bonds (no cash payment was 
made). The mechanism of hiving off bad loans to a separate government asset management 
company was not considered appropriate in view of the moral hazard. The overhang of non-
performing loans had to be managed by the banks themselves. The subsequent divestment 
of equity and offer to private shareholders was undertaken through a public offer and not by 
sale to strategic investors. Consequently, all the public sector banks, which issued shares to 
private  shareholders,  have  been  listed  on  the  exchanges  and  are  subject  to  the  same 
disclosure  and  market  discipline  standards  as  other 
listed  entities.  The  cost  of 
recapitalization  to  GDP  has  been  low  relative  to  experience  in  other  countries.  On  a 
cumulative basis it worked out to about one percent of the GDP and the value of the equity 
                                                 
2   Rajan, Zingales, University of Chicago. 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2009
held  by  Government  is  much  above  the  amount  recapitalized.  All  these  recapitalization 
bonds have since been converted to marketable securities.  
The  financial  system  has  since  expanded  significantly  across  various  segments  and  a 
number  of  cross-sector  organisational  forms  combining  banks,  insurance  companies  and 
investment firms have emerged. In respect of certain identified conglomerates based on well 
defined  criteria,  there  is  an  inter-regulatory  mechanism  for  focused  monitoring  and 
supervision. However, in most cases, the non-banking functions are carried out in the form of 
bank-subsidiaries.  While  from  a  market  perspective,  such  a  model  may  tend  to  constrain 
growth,  this  model  offers  an  interesting  perspective  in  the  “too-big-to-fail”  debate.  I  will  be 
touching on this aspect later but internally within India there is support from certain quarters 
for a “holding company” structure. 
The  other  aspect  of  the  “too-big-to-fail”  debate,  as  succinctly  dealt  in  the  second  FSA 
discussion paper  on  Turner  Review  relates  to  the  core-banking  versus  trading  activities  of 
banks. We have a kind of hybrid model with banks being allowed to undertake proprietary 
trading as also sell insurance products. Insurance, all forms of asset management, merchant 
banking  and  broking  have  to  be  undertaken  through  separate  subsidiaries.  Issues  with 
banks’ involvement with private pools of capital are being sought to be addressed through 
appropriate capital requirements for such exposures and the reputation risk. 
As  the  financial  system  exists  today,  there  are  no  major  segments  operating  in  an 
unregulated  manner.  The  focus  of  regulation,  though,  is  primarily  on  deposit  taking 
institutions  and  systemically  important  non-deposit  taking  institutions.  The  model  for 
regulation  combines  both  direct  entity  regulation  as  well  as  overarching  market  regulation, 
where applicable. What such a framework enables is to provide a mechanism for containing 
market-based  leverage,  apart  from  a  prudential  oversight.  In  our  case,  it  proved  to  be  an 
effective  combination  since  banks’  exposure  to  such  entities  could  be  regulated  through 
absolute exposure norms or even tweaking the risk weights applicable to such exposures. 
The  problem,  I  realize,  would  be  much  more  involved  in  predominantly  market  based 
financial systems where direct bank linkages are not very obvious but even in such regimes, 
as has been clearly demonstrated, the indirect linkages of banks with the unregulated entities 
can  acquire  systemic  proportions.  That  is  why  it  would  be  important  to  ensure  that  the 
markets too should not provide leverage capabilities to such entities beyond a limit. 
Regulation of Non-Banking Finance Companies in India has gradually evolved from a focus 
on acceptance of deposits to acceptance of public funds in any form. With the growth of the 
financial system, it gradually came to be realized that even non-deposit taking entities, which 
were mostly in asset financing and loan business, could pose systemic risks on account of 
their  interactions  with  the  formal  banking  system  and  market  based  financing.  Moreover, 
many such entities in this lightly regulated segment were essentially indulging in regulatory 
arbitrage  –  what  was  not  permitted  for  banks  was  happening  through  this  channel.  It  was 
therefore  decided  in  2006  to  put  in  place  an  elaborate  prudential  framework  for  such 
identified entities having systemic implications. A gradually calibrated regulatory framework 
was  created  to  address  the  issue  of  systemic  risk,  which  included  prudential  capital 
requirements, exposure norms, liquidity management, asset liability management, creation of 
entity profile and reporting requirements, corporate governance and disclosure norms for non 
banking  finance  companies  defined  as  systemically  important.  Banks  exposure  to  these 
entities are subject to exposure norms and are separately monitored. 
As  regards  the  markets,  there  are  two  features  that  need  to  be  noted:  first,  unlike  many 
jurisdictions,  there  is  a  statutory  responsibility  on  the  central  bank,  the  RBI,  to  explicitly 
regulate  the  forex,  rate  and  credit  markets  and  related  derivatives;  and  second,  since  the 
dominant  players  in  these  markets  are  banks,  there  is  also  the  added  layer  of  entity 
regulation. The key aspects implicit in the regulation of organized financial trading in these 
markets  relate  to  the  product  specifications,  nature  of  participants,  prudential  safeguards, 
reporting  requirements  etc.  OTC  trades  in  such  markets  are  legal  only  if  one  party  to  the 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 3
counterparty  is  a  RBI  regulated  entity.  The  operational  aspects  of  trading  and  post-trade 
clearing  and  settlement  in  case  of  exchange  traded  instruments  are  regulated  by  the 
securities  regulator  i.e.  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India.  The  regulatory 
framework  takes  into  account  the  macroeconomic  situation  as  well  as  the  huge  costs  of 
economic booms and busts brought on by financial instability – a cautious approach that has 
till  now  served  us  well.  That  we  could  consider  putting  in  place  a  more  conservative 
framework  for  securitization  markets  –  incorporating  those  very  elements  which  are  now 
being included as part of Basel II framework – was possible only on account of the cautious 
approach. 
Lot of emphasis has been placed on the development of market infrastructure. As early as in 
2001, the Clearing Corporation of India was set up to settle interbank spot forex transactions 
and all outright and repo transactions in government securities whether negotiated or order 
driven  systems.  CCIl  has  also  introduced  a  collateralised  money  market  instrument  called 
CBLO  which  is  also  settled  through  the  CCP.  CCIL  has  also  commenced  non-guaranteed 
settlement of OTC trades in interest rate swaps in 2008. Once the risk management norms 
are determined they will be commencing guaranteed settlement of these trades. In the near 
future  it  will  also  act  as  central  counterparty  for  forward  contracts  which  will  mitigate  risks 
releasing counterparty exposure limits. The margins are in the form of cash and government 
bonds ensuring the quality and liquidity of the settlement guarantee fund. 
One  of  the  early  lessons  from  our  past  experience  that  we  incorporated  in  the  policy 
framework was to be very careful about the vulnerabilities originating in the external sector. 
Perhaps  not  entirely  in  conformity  with  the  then  established  policy  axioms,  we  have 
dovetailed the capital account management framework with the prudential framework. Now, 
of course, when financial stability has come to be recognized as an overarching objective, 
the  merits  of  such  a  harmonized  approach  are  being  appreciated.  As  part  of  a  differential 
approach,  the  policy  in  respect  of  financial  intermediaries,  including  banks,  is  distinct  from 
that for individuals or corporates. 
Prudential framework for banks – unorthodox measures 
In  respect  of  the  prudential  framework  for  banks,  while  there  was  a  commitment  to  move 
towards the international prudential standards for banks, in many areas a more contextual 
approach was adopted keeping in view the idiosyncratic and systemic concerns.  
• 
Counter cyclical measures were first taken on board in 2005 when risk weights and 
provisioning on certain segments were increased on account of rapid credit growth 
in these segments leading to concerns about potential impact of asset price bubbles 
and  impact  on  credit  quality.  However,  the  important  difference  was  that  Indian 
approach entailed sector-specific prescriptions. To illustrate, the housing loans and 
commercial real estate are the sectors which experienced high credit growth during 
the high credit phase of 2002-03 to 2006-07. Accordingly, the risk weights on real 
estate lending and mortgage backed securities over the years were increased. The 
objective was not so much to lean against the wind of rising asset prices but as a 
cautionary measure to contain the exposure of the banking sector to sensitive asset 
classes where rapid credit expansion was observed. 
Banks are required to hold a minimum of 25 percent of their liabilities in the form of 
liquid domestic sovereign securities. This stipulation has worked both as a solvency 
as well as a liquidity buffer.  
The credit conversion factors (CCF) used for calculating the potential future credit 
exposure for off-balance sheet interest rate as well as exchange rate contracts were 
doubled across all maturities in 2008. This was done since it was felt that the CCFs 
as  per  the  Basel  norms  did  not  fully  capture  the  volatility  in  the  interest  rate  and 
forex markets in the Indian context. 
  4 
 BIS Review 138/2009
      Banks  were  encouraged  to  build  floating  provisions  as  a  buffer  for  the  possible 
stress on asset quality later. With the same objective, all banks have been advised 
recently  to  achieve  a  certain  minimum  provision  cover.  Very  recently,  provisions 
against  commercial  real  estate  standard  loans  have  been  increased  from  0.4 
percent to one percent.  
In regard to wholesale funding markets, prudential limits were placed on aggregate 
inter-bank liabilities for banks as a proportion of their net worth. The overnight un-
collateralised  funding  market  was  gradually  restricted  only  to  banks  and  primary 
dealers  and  there  are  ceilings  for  both  lending as  well  as borrowing  by  entities  in 
these markets in order to reduce the systemic risk arising from interconnectedness. 
Other  entities  can  participate  in  the  overnight  market  but  only  on  a  collateralized 
basis. Repo markets are subject to a regulatory framework. 
To reduce systemic risk, investments by banks in subordinated debt of other banks 
is  assigned  100%  risk  weight  for  capital  adequacy  purpose.  Also,  the  bank's 
aggregate  investment  in  Tier  II  bonds  issued  by  other  banks  and  financial 
institutions is limited to 10 percent of the investing bank's total capital.  
Securitisation  guidelines  issued  in  2006  provided  for  a  conservative  treatment  of 
securitisation exposures for capital adequacy purposes, especially in regard to the 
credit  enhancement  and  liquidity  facilities.  A  unique  feature  of  these  guidelines  is 
that  any  profits  on  sale  of  assets  to  the  SPV  are  not  allowed  to  be  recognised 
immediately on sale but over the life of the pass through certificates issued by the 
SPV. The policy enabled a liquidity facility by the originator or a third party, to help 
smoothen  the  timing  differences  faced  by  the  SPV  and  was  subject  to  certain 
conditions to ensure that the liquidity support was only temporary and got invoked to 
meet cash flow mismatches. Any commitment to provide such liquidity facility, is to 
be treated as an off-balance sheet item and attracts 100% credit conversion factor 
as well as 100% risk weight. The facility was specifically prohibited for the purposes 
of a) providing credit enhancement; b) covering losses of the SPV; c) serving as a 
permanent revolving funding; and d) covering any losses incurred in the underlying 
pool of exposures prior to a draw down. 
There  are  limits  on  the  proportion  of  wholesale  foreign  currency  liabilities 
intermediated through the banking system, other than for lending for exports. Retail 
foreign  currency  deposits  from  non-residents  are  subject  to  minimum  maturity 
requirements and interest rate caps.  
The  incremental  credit-deposit  ratio  of  banks  is  monitored  as  part  of  the  macro-
prudential framework since this ratio indicates the extent to which banks are funding 
credit with borrowings from wholesale markets.  
Some thoughts on the key issues in the current debate 
India as a key constituent of the international fora designing the blueprint for the reshaped 
financial  system  such  as  G20,  FSB,  BCBS  has  been  committedly  engaged  in  the 
discussions. The exercises in multilateral conformism have, understandably, tended to round 
off some of the sharper reactions witnessed in the immediate aftermath of the crisis. It would, 
however, be myopic to ignore so early some of the fundamental issues raised by the crisis. 
While the repair of the banking system, through a strengthened prudential framework, has 
seen progress, the much needed reform of the financial markets must be the next focus area 
for global oversight bodies, particularly the G20 and the FSB. 
The financial industry has an excellent way with assuming a self-regulatory role whenever a 
crisis happens and coming out with a corrective framework. The experience shows that such 
self-framed codes of conduct have not really worked. More than the intent part, I would like to 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 5
believe that an inside view, in the realm of financial policy which necessarily has to deal with 
systemic issues, will always be an incomplete perspective.  
The  most  fundamental  issue  pertains  to  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  relative  to  the  real 
sector.  Before  the  crisis  a  view  was  gaining  ground  that  while  the  need  for  “banking”  will 
increase, there will be a seamless transition to a bank-less, market based financial system. 
Issues of competitive neutrality gained importance and the view that banks are “special” and 
therefore  need  to  be  effectively  regulated  perhaps  assumed  less  attention.  Now,  with  the 
kind  of  bank  bailouts  that  the  Governments  have  had  to  undertake,  largely  in  view  of  the 
deep  entrenchment  of  banks  in  the  major  markets,  it  is  very  clear  that  the  amorphous 
existence  of  even  the  most  deep  and  liquid  financial  markets  also  needed  the  sound 
institutional pillars of a banking system as the funding provider of the first and last resort.  
There  is  an  unequivocal  consensus  on  some  kind  of  control  on  the  operations  of  banks, 
particularly the large financial institutions having cross border presence. Any discussion on 
systemically important financial institutions needs to put the institutions in the perspective of 
the  surrounding  market  dynamics.  The  FSA  discussion  paper  has  given  a  comprehensive 
overview of all the major aspects concerning the issue viz. interpretation of failure, definition 
of systemic importance and alternative policy approaches. There is really little one can add 
but I would briefly like to comment on each of these. 
Interpretation of failure 
The paper makes an explicit distinction between failures where only common equity holders 
face losses and others where even creditors, providers of debt capital, are forced to share 
part  of  the  losses.  It  would  thus  seem  that  the  moral  hazard  issue  is  more  relevant  for 
creditors, since equity holders in all cases will have to face the losses. This point regarding 
the  influence  of  creditors  i.e.  debt  providers/debt  holders  of  different  classes  of  debt 
securities  issued  by  banks  comes  out  more  starkly  in  banking  systems  in  pre-dominantly 
market based economies. 
On this issue we need to take into account a few other dimensions arising from the ex-ante 
treatment  of  uninsured  creditors.  One  is  whether  this  will  induce  unintended  distortions  in 
market practices. The other is a more fundamental issue. One of the less appreciated fallouts 
of  the  market-based  financial  system,  which  is  that  over  the  years  there  has  been  an 
increasing tendency in encumbrance of parts of banking assets either for issuance of various 
classes  of  debt/hybrid  securities  or  to  raise  short  term  funds  through  money  markets. 
Protection  accorded  to secured  creditors  as against  unsecured  creditors  and  depositors  in 
case  of  banks,  in  a  sense,  goes  against  the  basic  model  of  banking  which  presupposes 
deposit  mobilization  by  banks  thereby  requiring  strict  regulation.  The  classic  dilemma,  the 
likes of which the public policy needs to reflect upon is the case of covered bonds which has 
now gained centre place in few of its success in some countries. From the perspective of the 
bank and investors, this is an excellent instrument with sound collateral backing. It has been 
in operation for over a century and has facilitated fundraising by banks at lower rates and 
avoids pitfalls of securitization. However, by carving out a part of good assets of the bank 
backing the bonds, these create a risk to the deposit insurance system since these investors 
have priority over other creditors. 
The above problem is further exacerbated by the exemption accorded to certain category of 
financial instruments from bankruptcy, an issue which has been widely commented upon in 
the post-Lehman phase. In all major well-developed securities markets, derivative securities 
and  repurchase  agreements  (repos)  enjoy  special  protections  under  insolvency  resolution 
laws.  Such  transactions  also  enjoy  netting  and  close-out  benefits  which  are  not  always 
available  to  most  other  creditors.  With  these  counterparties  having  first  claim  on  available 
liquidity other creditors may have an incentive to push for bankruptcy impeding the use of 
other options for an orderly resolution. Though the primary argument for this was to contain 
systemic risk, in practice this dispensation has resulted in increasing systemic risk given the 
6 
 BIS Review 138/2009
incentive structure for pushing the funding markets to more and shorter term. There is need 
to  reflect  on  how  to  involve  these  creditors  in  burden  sharing  in  the  event  of  failure  of  an 
institution. 
Defining systemic importance 
Identification of systemically important banks is a very difficult and complex issue. As brought 
out  in  the  FSA  discussion  paper  the  key  variables  to  be  taken  into  account  are  size  and 
interconnectedness.  Size,  by  itself,  may  not  be  very  useful  but  it  becomes  important  in 
respect of large conglomerates having presence across major segments as also for entities 
having  dominance  in  the  funding  markets.  Thus,  size  and  interconnectedness  need  to  be 
looked together as a matrix quadrant. 
Both  qualitative  and  quantitative  criteria  will  be  relevant;  whether  the  bank  is  largely  a 
domestic  focused  bank  or  multinational,  complex  or  a  constellation  of  subsidiaries  and 
interconnectedness with the system. A large bank will also be dominant in financial markets 
and  payment  systems.  On  interconnectedness,  an  institution  is  clearly  systemic  if  it  is  a 
dominant  player  in  the  inter-bank  market  or  other  funding  and  derivatives  markets.  The 
benchmark  will  no  doubt  be  the  guidelines  that  will  emerge  from  the  IMF/FSB  paper.  But 
emerging  market  countries  would  largely  have  to  take  into  account  the  structure  of  their 
domestic financial system and its unique features. The definition of systemic importance has 
to  be  calibrated  in  a  manner  that  it  provides  the  right  incentives  for  institutions  which  are 
large but not very interconnected or complex. 
Policy responses 
Broadly  two  kinds  of  policy  responses  are  being  debated:  (i)  reducing  the  probability  and 
impact of failure of a systemically important institution and (ii) making the financial system 
better able to deal with such a failure. The single most important element in respect of both 
the above approaches would be containment of interconnectedness in the financial system. 
The  specific  measures  being  discussed  are:  higher  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  for 
systemically important firms; preparation of “self wills” by each of the systemically important 
firms and moving all OTC derivative markets onto a CCP model. 
Although identifying an institution as systemic does present a moral hazard, in any event this 
element  is  present  even  today.  Higher  capital  and  liquidity  requirement  will  be  eminently 
sensible  to  make  such  larger  firms  internalize  the  costs  of  their  externalities.  The  use  of 
contingent  capital  can  be  explored  once  the  details  of  this  proposal  are  formulated.  Apart 
from  the  quantitative  parameters,  the  institution’s  business  model  and  its  legal  structure 
should also dictate the quantum of higher capital requirement. Less complex and less inter-
connected firms may have to be provided a different leeway. 
The  “winding  down  plan”  seems  useful  since  it  will  force  the  Board  to  understand  group 
structures  and  raises  the  credibility  of  the  threat.  It  is  however  premised  on  two  basic 
assumptions: one, the entity has been transparent enough in terms of the information content 
in  drawing  up  its  own  demise  plan  –  the  adverse  selection  issue  and  two,  the  regulatory 
authorities  would  actually  be  able  to  enforce  these  plans  in  times  of  crisis.  In  unexpected 
scenarios, as our experience has shown, the regulatory actions would largely be a function of 
contextual assessments and any readymade plans may be dysfunctional. It would however 
be interesting to see how this plan is actually operationalised. 
OTC markets: There is committed effort globally to move all OTC derivative transactions onto 
exchanges/electronic  trading  platforms  which  is  a  welcome  move..  This  is  a  more  broad-
brush  approach  but  going  forward,  I  am  sure  we  will  need  to  devise  a  more  nuanced 
approach in this regard as there will be continued need for OTC products i.e. customized to 
the needs of the real sector. Furthermore, in regard to central counterparties, it is imperative 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 7
to  examine  the  incentive  structures.  To  generate  more  income  there  is  need  for  more 
volumes and that can come only from leverage. There is, therefore, need to closely regulate 
the risk management systems and mandate margin requirements in the form of high quality 
liquid  assets.  Given  the  nature  of  their  functions  and  their  systemic  importance,  it  is 
worthwhile to consider central counterparties as “public utility” not-for profit entities. It would 
also  become  imperative  for  such  systemic  entities  to  be  brought  under  systemic  oversight 
and be regulated by the systemic regulator. 
More  than  the  above  immediate  measures,  what  is  required  is  a  debate  on  some  of  the 
fundamental  issues.  Now  that  the  centrality  of  banks  in  the  economic  system  has  been 
established, a much stricter view needs to be taken regarding the activities that banks can 
undertake  with  depositors’  money.  Should  large  systemically  critical  banks  be  allowed  to 
heavily  leverage  themselves  with  depositors’  money?  Should  the  banks  facilitate  the  high-
risk high-return leverage game to benefit private investors at the cost of depositor funds? In 
that sense, I appreciate the arguments for separation of traditional lending business of banks 
from  investment  business.  However,  the  extreme  view  is  not  very  practical.  The  “hybrid 
approach” indicated in the FSA paper seems to be the way out but I would suggest some 
form of quantitative limit – banks must have a substantial part of their assets in the form of 
traditional banking assets in order that they perform the role of supporting the real economy. 
The  exponential  growth  in  the  money  and  funding  markets  outside  the  formal  banking 
system, primarily at the shorter end, was one of the critical drivers underlying the crisis. The 
crisis has demonstrated the vulnerabilities of firms whose business models depended heavily 
on uninterrupted access to secured financing markets. The entire market structure based on 
ample liquidity available against any kind of collateral –mainly illiquid and hard to value, with 
pro-cyclical haircut and margining regime hid severe underlying systemic risks The interplay 
of  under-pricing  and  not  recognizing  both  credit  and  liquidity  risks  through  these 
collateralized markets, was an explosive amalgam exploited by many unregulated entities in 
the financial system, such as SIVs.  
Going forward, there could be a multi-pronged, focused effort in the direction of: (i) removing 
the  arbitrage  incentives  for  creation  of  complex  structures  in  the  first  place  –  tax,  capital 
requirements, regulation etc. – to create simpler structures which are transparent and easy to 
regulate (ii) developing a prudential framework for funding markets, in terms of permissible 
leverage  by  any  participating  entity  and  nature  of  collaterals;  (iii)  explicit  commitment  to 
increase competitiveness in the financial sector to remove the perverse situation of few large 
institutions influencing the market and (iv) massively scaling up the supervisory monitoring 
framework for such entities.  
There have been suggestions to have common cross border resolution mechanism or global 
fiscal burden sharing. However, these do not appear to be feasible and the most practical 
approach  would  be  to  incentivise  organization  of  a  group  as  a  “constellation  of  separately 
subsidiarised  national  banks”  in  the  case  of  systemic  entities  rather  than  as  a  globally 
integrated  bank.  There  is  inherent  tension  between  the  efficiency  gains  for  individual 
institutions  provided  by  centralized  pooling  of  capital/liquidity  and  the  objectives  of  host 
regulators/supervisors.  Supervisors  are  accountable  to  the  domestic  depositors,  creditors 
and policy holders and protecting the domestic financial system and therefore there may be 
justifiable  reasons  for  requiring  both  capital  and  liquidity  to  be  held  locally,  whether  the 
presence is by way of a branch or subsidiary. In this regard, some of the short term efficiency 
gains  may  have  to  be  compromised  in  the  interest  of  broader  financial  system  stability 
through containment of the contagion effects. 
Conclusion 
Much  of  the  current  debate  on  many  issues  centres  on  the  epicenter  of  the  crisis,  the 
developed  economies  with  relatively  advanced  financial  systems.  The  emerging  markets, 
though,  can  bring  a  different  perspective  from  their  own  past  experience.  Many  of  the 
8 
 BIS Review 138/2009
emerging countries, including India, are part of the global effort in search of a harmonized 
framework but certain key differences in perspectives in these two sets of economies need to 
be appreciated. The status of the financial sector of the emerging economies is different from 
that of the advanced economies with different set of imperatives having different implications 
for  the  trade  off  between  financial  stability  on  the  one  hand  and  financial  development, 
financial  inclusion  and  growth,  on  the  other.  For  instance,  with  regard  to  identification  and 
mitigations  of  sources  of  systemic  risk,  the  emerging  market  concerns  are  heightened 
because of the fact that many sources of systemic risk lie outside their jurisdictions. There 
could also be the issue of negative externality of larger than warranted capital requirements 
without  careful  calibration  which  could  adversely  impact  the  flow  of  credit  to  productive 
sectors, particularly in bank funding based financial systems. Emerging economies are faced 
with  the  challenge  of  managing  volatile  capital  flows  which  is  not  a  source  of  systemic 
vulnerability for developed economies. 
The financial system in India is admittedly not as advanced as in many other countries. Many 
of  the  issues  I  have  touched  upon  in  my  remarks  are  based  primarily  on  a  secondary 
assessment and understanding of the experience of global markets. These are clearly not 
settled  issues  in  our  context  and  as  we  move  forward  to  further  liberalise  our  financial 
system, many other nuances may have to be addressed. However, what our experience till 
now  has  shown  is  that  a  more  common-sensical  approach,  less  driven  by  a  doctrinaire 
mindset;  clear  prioritisation  of  objectives  and  studied  caution  while  replicating  models 
successful  elsewhere  will  be  reliable  guideposts.  We  can  certainly  have  the  advantage  of 
learning  the  right  lessons  from  the  crisis  before  progressing  further  and  we  support  the 
various  initiatives  underway  in  the  FSB  and  BCBS.  However,  we  also  realize  that  being 
responsible  members  of  global  policy  making  and  policy  influencing  bodies,  we  are  duty 
bound to bring required heterogeneity to the discussions. I hope that the reshaped financial 
system is different in a real sense.  
BIS Review 138/2009 
 9
