Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Monetary policy and asset prices 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the University of Freiburg, Freiburg, 14 October 2009. 
 Introduction1
It is a great pleasure to take part in this ceremony at the University of Freiburg.  
Freiburg  has  traditionally  provided  a  nurturing  environment  for  economic  ideas.  Some  of 
these  ideas  have  exerted  a  strong  influence  on  the  design  of  economic  systems  and 
institutions.  When  Walter  Eucken  was  recommending  that  monetary  policy  should  be  the 
responsibility  of  a  central  bank  committed  to  price  stability  and  independent  from  political 
pressures, his was a minority view in international academic circles and among most policy-
makers. It has since become best practice.  
The recent financial crisis has led some observers to question the role of monetary policy, in 
particular  with  respect  to  its  objectives.  Is  price  stability  too  narrow  an  objective?  Should 
monetary policy also be entrusted with the objective of preserving financial stability? After all, 
the  last  two  decades  have  witnessed  the  coexistence  of,  on  one  hand,  relatively  low  and 
stable inflation in large parts of the globe and, on the other hand, the dot-com boom and bust 
at  the  turn  of  the  millennium  and  the  financial  crisis  we  are  still  experiencing.  Some  have 
even  argued  that  a  monetary  policy  too  narrowly  focussed  on  price  stability  might  actually 
fuel  asset  price  bubbles.  These  questions,  and  how  they  are  addressed  by  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy strategy, will be the focus of my remarks. In this speech I will take a longer-
term perspective, without dwelling on the shorter-term prospects for the course of monetary 
policy in the euro area.  
Let me state my conclusions up front. The appropriate primary objective of monetary policy is 
to maintain price stability over the medium term. Financial stability is best ensured through 
instruments other than the policy interest rate and in the context of a broader framework of 
macro-prudential  supervision.  Nevertheless,  a  central  bank  should  actively  monitor  asset 
prices  and  credit  flows.  The  evolution  in  these  variables  provides  timely  and  useful 
information, which helps to better calibrate the course of monetary policy and to avoid the 
risk of being “behind the curve”.  
Monetary policy and asset prices: the pre-crisis consensus view 
1. 
A good starting point for my analysis is a brief summary of the “pre-crisis” consensus view 
about the relationship between monetary policy and asset prices. I stress: “pre-crisis”. There 
is no “post-crisis” consensus view yet. However, recent events have shaken so profoundly 
the conventional wisdom prevailing before the crisis that it is unlikely to remain unchanged.  
The  pre-crisis  consensus  view  was  firmly  grounded  in  the  dominant  new-Keynesian 
paradigm for monetary policy analysis, which builds upon models where financial conditions 
play at most a very limited role.2 Within that framework, financial market conditions, such as 
developments  in  asset  prices  or  in  the  quantity  of  money  and  credit,  do  not  affect 
                                                 
1  
I  would  like  to  thank  G.  Carboni,  F.  de  Fiore,  O.  Tristani  and  L.  Cappiello  for  their  contributions  and  R.  Motto  and  M. 
Rostagno for their comments. I remain solely responsible for the opinions expressed. 
2   See, for instance, C.E. Walsh (2009), “Using Monetary Policy to Stabilize Economic Activity”, paper presented 
at the 2009 Jackson Hole Conference. In my remarks I will focus on the elements of the “consensus view” that 
are directly relevant to the relationship between monetary policy and asset prices. 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 1
macroeconomic outcomes, or the transmission of monetary policy. They may reflect, or even 
anticipate, underlying economic conditions, but they do not provide any feedback on those 
conditions.  The  pre-crisis  consensus  view  also  rested  on  a  presumption  that  strong  asset 
price dynamics and misalignments tend to be associated with strong inflationary pressure. As 
a result, a central bank responding to inflation would in any case also automatically address 
financial imbalances, because financial imbalances would coincide with upward pressure on 
inflation. 
Starting  from  these  premises,  there  is  clearly  no  reason  for  monetary  policy  to  react  to 
specific  financial  market  developments.  Of  course,  a  central  bank  may  want  to  monitor 
financial and monetary developments, which should be factored into the policy process to the 
extent  that  they  contain  information  about  the  inflation  outlook  at  a  specific  policy  horizon 
(usually two years). This also explains the emphasis put by the consensus view on the output 
gap as the main determinant of inflation. 
The pre-crisis consensus view also relied on three additional reservations against an explicit 
monetary policy reaction to financial imbalances.3
First,  doubts  were  expressed  about  the  ability  of  central  banks  to  identify  asset  price 
misalignments early on and with a sufficient degree of confidence. Central banks do not have 
better  information  than  financial  markets,  and  misalignments  can  only  be  identified  with 
certainty with the benefit of hindsight. 
Second, questions were posed about the effectiveness of moderate interest rate increases in 
curtailing  the  bubble.  A  monetary  policy  tightening  of  moderate  size  would  not  be  able  to 
counterbalance the prospect of large capital gains normally available during a boom in asset 
price.  And  strong  policy-rate  hikes  would  not  be  a  viable  option  either,  as  they  may  pose 
serious risks to the economy.  
Third,  it  was  pointed  out  that  a  decisive  easing  of  the  monetary  policy  stance  after  the 
bursting  of  the  bubble  would  be  sufficient  to  avoid  substantial  economic  damages.  The 
central bank should simply be ready to intervene aggressively by slashing policy rates after 
the  collapse  of  asset  prices  in  order  to  sustain  real  economic  activity  and  minimise  the 
probability of deflation. 
Risks associated with the pre-crisis consensus view 
2.  
Let me mention two main risks associated with the pre-crisis consensus view.  
Delayed removal of policy accommodation  
2.1  
The  first  risk  is  that  the  implementation  of  such  an  approach  might  favour  a  policy  of 
“tolerance”  and  “benign  neglect”  during  the  boom  phase  and  a  policy  of  excessive 
accommodation  during  the  bust  phase.  When  this  is  compounded  with  the  central  bank’s 
legitimate fear that a premature removal of policy accommodation may weigh negatively on 
the (initially still fragile) recovery, exceptional accommodation in terms of low levels of policy 
rates may also become exceptional accommodation in terms of the duration of such a policy. 
Delaying or diluting the removal of policy accommodation as inflationary pressure associated 
with  a  turn-around  of  the  economic  cycle  gradually  builds  up  runs  the  risk  of  leaving  the 
central bank behind the curve.  
This risk seems to be an intrinsic feature of the asymmetric policy response to the boom and 
bust phases of an asset price bubble which characterises the pre-crisis consensus view. The 
                                                 
3   See, for example, Bernanke and Gertler (1999), Cecchetti et al. (2000), Borio and White (2003), ECB (2005), 
and Kohn (2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2009
for  credit.  Lenders  become  more  willing 
counter-argument,  that  the  central  bank  could  successfully  correct  this  outcome  by  simply 
raising policy rates later on as inflationary pressures eventually emerge, does not consider 
the  transmission  lags  of  monetary  policy  and  the  role  of  inflation  expectations.  A  belated 
monetary policy response would require much stronger, and thus more painful, action to be 
taken at a later stage to regain control of inflation expectations. Indeed, the longer interest 
rates  are  kept  at  low  levels,  the  greater  is  the  incentive  provided  to  investors  to hold  long 
term assets, possibly leveraging with carry trade, and the greater the capital loss occurring 
when rates are eventually raised. The potential future costs often do not receive appropriate 
weight in the policy considerations.  
Another less obvious outcome of a hesitant and belated removal of policy accommodation is 
that  it  could  set  in  motion  a  chain  of  events  that  will  ultimately  create  new  financial 
imbalances  with  potentially  high  risks  for  price  stability  and  for  the  economy  as  a  whole. 
Feedback-loop models provide a simple, yet powerful, analytical framework to illustrate some 
of  the  channels  that  may  be  at  work.  Consider  the  following  stylised  course  of  events. 
Excessively  low  policy  rates  stimulate  economic  activity  and  improve  non-financial  and 
financial firms’ profitability, providing an initial boost to asset prices. Low interest rates and 
expanding  activity  encourage  demand 
to 
accommodate this demand and to charge lower premiums on the basis of the higher value of 
collateral associated with higher asset valuations. The greater availability of credit leads to 
more  assets  being  bought,  thus  boosting  their  price.  This  sets  in  motion  a  self-sustaining 
feedback  loop.  This  endogenous  cycle  can  become  even  stronger  if  accommodative 
monetary  policy  contributes  to  a  lowering  of  credit  standards  applied  by  lenders  and  to  a 
lower perception of risk – as suggested by the risk-taking channel.4 All these effects provide 
the main ingredients for an asset price bubble and the building-up of financial imbalances.  
When the day of reckoning comes, the loop will work in reverse. The pre-crisis consensus 
view  requires  at  that  point  an  extremely  accommodative  reaction  by  the  central  bank. 
Undoubtedly,  this  kind  of  monetary  policy  gives  the  illusory  impression  that  structural 
adjustments can be postponed or, worse, are not necessary at all, thus paving the way for a 
second  boom  and  bust.  I  believe  that  more  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  inter-temporal 
dimension of this kind of policy. It is aimed at improving the situation in the short run, while 
disregarding  completely  the  risks  of  triggering  new  imbalances  in  the  future.  Ignoring  this 
inter-temporal dimension may also weigh negatively on the credibility of public institutions. As 
the  Austrian  economist  Ludwig  von  Mises  lucidly  expressed  it:  “The  individual  is  always 
ready to ascribe his good luck to his own efficiency and to take it as a well-deserved reward 
for  his  talent,  application,  and  probity.  But  reverses  of  fortune  he  always  charges  to  other 
people, and most of all to the absurdity of social and political institutions. He does not blame 
the authorities for having fostered the boom. He reviles them for the inevitable collapse. In 
the  opinion  of  the  public,  more  inflation  and  more  credit  expansion  are  the  only  remedy 
against the evils which inflation and credit expansion have brought about.”5  
The idea that the recent financial crisis can be traced back at least partly to monetary policy 
excesses at the global level at the beginning of the decade has found some support in the 
empirical  literature.  For  example,  John  Taylor  has  argued  that,  had  the  Federal  Reserve 
implemented  less  expansionary  policies  over  the  period  2002-04  and  followed  a  path  for 
interest  rates  more  in  line  with  established  regularities,  the  US  housing  boom  would  have 
been  smaller  than  it  actually  was.6  Other  analysts  have  argued,  however,  that  during  the 
years  preceding  the  crisis,  on  the  basis  of  cross-country  evidence,  there  is  no  clear-cut 
                                                 
4   See, for example, Borio and Zhu (2008), “Capital Regulation, Risk-taking and Monetary Policy: a Missing Link 
in the Transmission Mechanism?”, BIS Working Paper No 268. 
5   L. von Mises (1996), Human Action, 4th revised edition, Fox & Wilkes, San Francisco, p. 576. 
6   J. Taylor (2007), “Housing and Monetary Policy”, paper presented at the 2007 Jackson Hole Conference. 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 3
association  between  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  and  house  price  increases.7  The  final 
judgement is still pending.  
Readiness to act may prove insufficient 
2.2  
The second risk associated with the pre-crisis consensus view is that, even when a central 
bank  is  ready  and  willing  to  act  swiftly,  this  may  prove  to  be  insufficient.  In  particular,  the 
emphasis which the pre-crisis consensus view puts on the output gap and on the inflation 
forecast at a given horizon may prevent the central bank from identifying the right signals for 
the appropriate timing of policy actions.  
There  is  extensive  literature  analysing  the  challenges  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
arising from excessive emphasis on the output gap, i.e. the difference between the level of 
output and its potential, estimated under the assumption of full utilisation of resources. Real-
time estimates of potential output tend to be quite inaccurate.8 The extent of the revisions in 
the  measurement  of  the  output  gap  is  so  large  that  often  the  picture  of  the  state  of  the 
economy provided by this statistic at a particular date is turned upside down subsequently. 
The  revision  process  lasts  for  many  years,  so  it  can  be  a  long  time  before  we  know  with 
some confidence the sign and magnitude of the output gap at any particular point in time in 
the past.  
                                                  
7   See World Economic Outlook (2009), “Chapter 3: Lessons for Monetary Policy from Asset Price Fluctuations”, 
October. 
8   See,  for  example,  A.  Orphanides  (2001),  “Monetary  Policy  Rules  Based  on  Real-Time  Data”,  American 
Economic Review, vol. 91(4), 964-985. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2009
 Chart 1 provides a vivid example of this problem. It displays alternative vintages of output-
gap estimates for the United States as calculated by the IMF. Consider, for instance, spring 
2005,  when  the  Federal  Funds  Target  Rate  was  at  the  relatively  low  level  of  2.75%.  The 
initial  estimate  of  the  output  gap  was  negative  at  -1.3%.  Two  years  later  it  was  revised 
upwards  to  0.1%,  and  four  years  later,  in  2009,  it  was  revised  upwards  again  to  positive 
territory 1.4%. Interestingly, the latest estimate suggests that the US output gap was never in 
negative territory over the last decade, not even between 2001 and 2005.  
Large subsequent revisions of the output gap are not confined to specific years, but are a 
pervasive  feature.  Chart  2  shows  the  actual  size  of  these  revisions  as  estimated  by  the 
OECD  and  the  IMF  in  spring  2009.  The  size  of  revisions  and  the  disparity  between  the 
different sources is striking.  
BIS Review 126/2009 
  5
 Euro  area  output  gap  estimates  are  also  characterised  by  a  large  degree  of  revision,  and 
there is an equally large disagreement between different sources, as documented in Charts 3 
and 4. However, the latest estimates do suggest that the euro area had a negative output 
gap in the period 2002-2005.  
Overall,  the  unreliability  of  measures  of  the  output  gap  affects  the  appropriateness  of 
monetary policy prescriptions that are predicated on such a construct. And, in all likelihood, 
output-gap estimates are going to become more unreliable than ever due to the increased 
uncertainty  and  possible  time-variation  in  potential  output  brought  about  by  the  recent 
financial crisis.  
The unreliability of output-gap measures is not the only reason why a central bank may fail to 
take timely action, irrespective of its willingness to act pre-emptively. A too-narrow focus on 
inflation forecasts may be equally hazardous.  
On one hand, inflationary pressures might remain latent for years owing to compensation by 
other forces, especially if the central bank gives strong weight to measures of core inflation. 
For  instance,  globalisation  may  exert  a  disinflationary  impact  on  consumer  price  inflation 
through a rising share of imports from low-cost countries. A focus on core inflation may fail to 
detect the inflationary pressure associated with an increase in the prices of oil-related items 
and  non-energy  commodities  owing  to  rising  demand  from  the  fast  growing  non-OECD 
economies.9
On  the  other  hand,  the  relationship  between  financial  imbalances  and  inflation  depends 
crucially on the forces driving asset prices. Take for example the second half of the 1990s. At 
the  time  the  availability  of  new  technologies  and  the  widespread  use  of  the  internet  were 
expected to lift the potential growth of the economy. The possibility that the dream of a “new 
economy”  could  become  true  was  surrounded  by  high  uncertainty.  However,  it  seemed 
rational  to  invest  massively  in  the  new  technologies  so  as  to  be  ready  to  fully  reap  the 
benefits, if (and when) the new era arrived. This over-accumulation of capital can lead to a 
rise in labour productivity. Due to stickiness in nominal wages, labour compensation might 
lag the pick-up in productivity. Thus, business profits might boom, which in turn might feed 
back  into  a  higher  rate  of  investment  and  even  bigger  boost  in  productivity.  These 
                                                 
9   See,  for  example,  ECB  (2008),  “Globalisation,  trade  and  the  euro  area  macroeconomy”,  Monthly  Bulletin 
(January), pp. 75-88. 
6 
 BIS Review 126/2009
developments  may  end  up  in  long-lasting  subdued  inflationary  pressure,  or  even  declining 
inflation for an extended period of time. Disinflationary pressure is indeed the result found in 
a formal analysis of this type of situation made in a recent research paper at the ECB.10 The 
paper  shows  that  if  the  central  bank  concentrates  exclusively  on  inflation  forecasts  as  a 
summary  statistic  for  the  state  of  the  economy,  it  will  tend  to  adopt  an  accommodative 
stance. This occurs because the central bank, expecting a decrease in inflation, will cut the 
policy rate to keep inflation on target. This accommodative policy can trigger an asset price 
and credit boom that inflates the original economic expansion. Eventually, it may turn out that 
the expectations of a new era, which triggered the over-accumulation of capital, do not come 
true. The revision of these beliefs can in turn lead to an asset price bust and to recession. 
Clearly, the boom and bust would have been much smaller had the central bank followed a 
different  monetary  policy,  based  on  enlarging  its  information  set  to  include  credit 
developments.  
A more explicit role for financial conditions in monetary policy 
3.  
So far I have discussed the pre-crisis consensus view on monetary policy and asset prices 
from a general perspective. The events of the past two years have already generated far-
reaching reflections on this issue.11 Let me mention three avenues. 
First,  the  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  that  the  economic  costs  of  the  unravelling  of 
imbalances  can  be  overwhelming,  notwithstanding  extraordinary  policy  action  –  involving 
both  monetary  and 
fiscal  policies.  Recent  empirical  research  has  explored  more 
systematically the role of monetary policy in shaping the duration and depth of recessions.12 
When  no  distinction  is  made  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  downturn,  expansionary 
monetary  policy  is  found  to  be  consistently  associated  with  shorter  recessions.  However, 
when considering recessions that occur in combination with financial crises, monetary policy 
does  not  have  a  consistent  effect  on  the  duration  of  recessions.  These  results  undermine 
confidence in one of the arguments buttressing the pre-crisis consensus view, namely that 
monetary policy can forestall the negative effects of the unravelling of financial imbalances.  
Second, the crisis has highlighted the fact that asset price misalignments can have different 
consequences depending on the specific market in which they arise. It may well be true that, 
in  periods  of  booms  in  asset  prices,  expected  capital  gains  are  so  large  that  interest  rate 
movements of a standard magnitude would not be sufficient to alter investor decisions. The 
origins of the recent financial crisis, however, are not in equity prices, but rather related to 
real  estate  and  to  the  abnormal  growth  in  securitised  credit  backed  by  residential  or 
commercial properties. Leveraged financial intermediaries have also played an important role 
in the recent financial crisis.  
In  this  context,  recent  research  has  highlighted  the  fact  that  even  small  changes  in  policy 
rates  can  have  non-negligible 
to 
systematically  finance  illiquid  long-term  assets  through  short-term  borrowing.  Even  small 
changes in short-term interest rates can affect their profitability, forcing them to close some 
leveraged positions and, potentially, to partially correct any financial imbalances fuelled by 
such leveraged positions.13
institutions,  which 
implications 
financial 
tend 
for 
                                                 
10   L. Christiano, C. Ilut, R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2008), “Monetary policy and stock market boom-bust cycles”, 
ECB Working Paper No 955. 
11   See, for example, Kohn (2008) and Trichet (2009). See also White (2009). 
12   International Monetary Fund (2009). 
13   Adrian and Shin (2008). 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 7
Third, the recent financial crisis has confirmed that a central bank’s inability to identify in real 
time the precise mechanisms through which financial imbalances evolve and to anticipate the 
exact  timing  of  their  unwinding  does  not  mean  it  is  unable  to  identify  the  build-up  of 
imbalances. In the run up to the crisis several policy makers did identify the under-pricing of 
risk  as  a  major  source  of  concern.  In  this  context,  let  me  mention  that  recent  research  – 
including  research  conducted  at  the  ECB  –  has  reviewed  more  systematically  the 
implications for monetary policy of a more explicit role for financial factors in macroeconomic 
models.14  This  stream  of  research  is  still  under  development,  but  it  does  account  for  an 
endogenous interaction between macroeconomic conditions and the demand for and supply 
of credit.  
The  main  policy  implication  of  this  research  continues  to  be  that  monetary  policy  should 
pursue price stability as a primary objective. At the same time, however, it is acknowledged 
that financial imbalances can generate sizable macroeconomic costs at times of crisis, when 
they can produce undesirable economic fluctuations. This justifies a very close monitoring of 
financial conditions. These new models also show that financial conditions have an impact 
on  the  notion  of  a  natural  rate  of  interest  –  the  theoretical  interest  rate  level  which,  if 
implemented by the central bank, would ensure that price stability is maintained. Of course, 
the  practical  relevance  of  this  notion  is  limited,  since  it  is  extremely  hard  to  estimate  it 
accurately and robustly. Nevertheless, developments in financial conditions should be taken 
into account when making such estimates. 
All in all, both the experience of the past two years and recent developments in the literature 
appear  to  support  the  view  that  the  use  of  financial  indicators  in  the  context  of  a  broader 
analysis of monetary and financial conditions in the economy is beneficial.  
The ECB approach 
4.  
The  ECB  strategy  acknowledges  that  financial  imbalances  and  unsustainable  asset  price 
developments do represent threats to price stability when taking a medium-term perspective. 
Given  that  our  mandate  requires  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  on  an  ongoing  and 
continuous  basis,  rather  than  at  any  specific  arbitrary  horizon,  the  accumulation  of 
unsustainable financial imbalances is a reason for concern, even if it only poses a threat to 
price stability over the longer term.  
At the same time, the ECB strategy can help to identify financial imbalances in the context of 
its  “monetary  analysis”,  in  which  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  are  monitored,  together 
with  a  large  set  of  other  financial  indicators.  One  aspect  of  our  monetary  analysis  is  the 
identification of low-frequency trends in money and credit growth. This medium to long-term 
focus is an implicit way to protect against excessive money, credit and asset price growth in 
our interest rate decisions. The focus of the ECB monetary analysis on low-frequency trends 
is  also  consistent  with  the  fact  that  over  a  long  time  horizon,  price  stability  and  financial 
stability complement and reinforce each other. Financial imbalances, leading to excess credit 
growth, high leverage, loose credit standards, booming asset prices and under-pricing of risk, 
create the conditions for abrupt market corrections, which also endanger the maintenance of 
price stability.  
Recognising the importance of monitoring developments in money, credit, and asset prices, 
does  not  mean  neglecting  the  difficulties  associated  with  their  interpretation,  particularly  in 
periods  of  rapid  financial  innovation.  Moreover,  there  is  always  a  risk  of  reacting 
inappropriately to unusual developments, when these are instead in line with fundamentals. 
                                                 
14   See, for example, Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2003 and 2006), Cúrdia and Woodford (2008), De Fiore 
and Tristani (2007 and 2008), De Fiore, Tristani and Teles (2009), Faia and Monacelli (2007), Faia (2008), 
and Gertler and Karadi (2009). 
8 
 BIS Review 126/2009
However,  most  policy  decisions  are  confronted  with  similar  informational  problems  and 
require a difficult evaluation of the statistical evidence.  
While monetary and financial conditions are explicitly part of the analysis of the risks to price 
stability  at  the  ECB,  such  policy  is  not  a  panacea,  nor  a  certain  means  to  ensure  that 
financial crises never arise. There are limitations to what monetary policy alone can achieve. 
Excessive risk and pro-cyclicality in the financial  system can also result from factors other 
than sustained credit growth and high leverage. Hence, they require policy actions that can 
address the underlying causes of these factors. Supervisory and regulatory instruments are 
particularly well suited to preventing excessive risk-taking and the accumulation of financial 
imbalances.  
In this respect, the creation of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) should contribute 
to  foster  financial  stability.  The  ESRB  was  proposed  following  the  setting  up  of  the  de 
Larosière Group in February 2009, and its establishment was agreed by the Ecofin Council in 
June  2009.  The  main  tasks  of  the  ESRB  will  be  to  monitor  the  stability  of  EU  financial 
system, to issue warnings when the assessment of risks are deemed to be significant, and to 
suggest,  when  appropriate,  policy  recommendations.  Close  cooperation  with  national  EU 
supervisory  authorities  and  with  global  institutions  (such  as  the  IMF  and  the  Financial 
Stability  Board)  should  help  this  new  institution  and  the  central  banks  represented  on  the 
ESRB  to  deal  with  the  challenges  posed  by  increasingly  interconnected  national  financial 
systems.  
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude.  The  recent  financial  crisis  has  re-opened  the  debate  on  the  relationship 
between monetary policy and asset prices. At the heart of that debate are questions like: Is 
price  stability  too  narrow  an  objective  for  monetary  policy?  Should  monetary  policy  “lean 
against the wind”, in order to avoid asset price bubbles? 
I would answer these questions in two ways. 
First,  a  monetary  policy  which  has  price  stability  as  its  primary  objective  is  a  necessary 
condition for avoiding asset price bubbles and promoting financial stability. With the benefit of 
hindsight,  it  seems  that  some  of  the  financial  imbalances  which  built  up  prior  to  the  crisis 
resulted from monetary policies which were not fully in line with the objective of price stability. 
Either the policies were also pursuing other goals, such as supporting economic activity and 
employment,  or  they  were  not  focusing  on  the  appropriate  indicators  of  inflationary 
pressures,  attaching,  for  instance,  too  much  importance  to  output  gaps  and  too  little  to 
monetary and credit developments. The first steps to take are to put monetary policy back on 
track – so that it focuses primarily on price stability – and to improve the underlying analytical 
framework.  In  particular,  it’s  essential  to  include  monetary  and  financial  variables  in  the 
information available to central banks. They can provide the signal that the monetary policy 
stance needs to be tighter well before the business cycle reaches its peak, in order to ensure 
price stability over the medium term. 
Second, a monetary policy which is appropriate for price stability might not suffice to ensure 
financial stability. Indeed, given that asset prices react more rapidly than other prices, they 
may overshoot their long term equilibrium value and have undesirable effects on the financial 
system. If this were to happen, should monetary policy react, even if price stability is not at 
risk? In other words, should interest rates be raised even if, taking into account all possible 
indicators,  price  stability  is  not  endangered  but  there  are  risks  of  an  asset  price  bubble 
building up?  
I personally think that a case has not yet been made for such a course of action. It would 
imply  that  monetary  policy  follows  two  objectives  with  only  one  instrument,  i.e.  the  policy 
interest  rate.  The  central  bank  also  has  at  its  disposal  the  operational  framework  through 
which it injects liquidity into the system. Under certain circumstances such instruments can 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 9
be  used  to  foster  financial  stability,  as  has  been  done  recently.  When  financial  turbulence 
occurred, a modification of certain features of the main refinancing operations, for instance, 
through fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment or by enlarging the collateral basis, 
helped to counteract financial instability. However, such action may not be very effective in 
symmetrical  situations,  in  trying  to  counteract  asset  price  bubbles.  Evidently,  other 
instruments are needed and they belong more to the realm of macro prudential supervision. 
Unless  central  banks  are  explicitly  equipped  with  the  appropriate  macro-prudential 
supervisory instruments, they cannot be considered responsible for financial stability. In any 
case, providing such instruments to central banks should not be considered as a substitute 
for conducting a sound monetary policy unequivocally committed to the primary objective of 
maintaining price stability. Thank you for your attention.  
(2003), 
financial  stability? 
“Whither  monetary  and 
References 
Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007), “Liquidity shocks and asset price boom/bust cycles”, ECB 
Working Paper No 732. 
Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2008), “Liquidity, Monetary Policy and Financial Cycles”, Current 
Issues in Economics and Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January. 
Alessi, L. and C. Detken (2009), “‘Real time’ early warning indicators for costly asset price 
boom/bust cycles: a role for global liquidity”, ECB Working Paper No 1039. 
Bernanke,  B.S.  and  M.  Gertler  (1999),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Price  Volatility”,  New 
challenges for monetary policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 77-128. 
Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002), “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the 
nexus”, BIS Working Papers No 114. 
Borio, C. and M. Drehmann (2008), “Towards an operational framework for financial stability: 
‘fuzzy’ measurement and its consequences”, BIS Working Papers No 284. 
Borio,  C.  and  W.  White 
implications of evolving policy regimes”, BIS Working Papers No 147.  
Cecchetti, S., H. Genberg, J. Lipsky and S. Wadhwani (2000), “Asset prices and central bank 
policy: What to do about it?”, Geneva Reports on the World Economy 2. 
Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2003), “The Great Depression and the Friedman-
Schwartz Hypothesis”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 35(6), pp. 1119-1197. 
Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2008), “Monetary Policy and Stock Market Boom-
Bust Cycles”, ECB Working Paper No 955. 
Cúrdia,  V.  and  M.  Woodford  (2008),  “Credit  frictions  and  optimal  monetary  policy”,  NBB 
Working Paper 146. 
De Fiore, F. and O. Tristani (2008), “Credit and the natural rate of interest”, ECB Working 
Paper No 889, April. 
De  Fiore  F.  and  O.  Tristani  (2009),  “Optimal  monetary  policy  in  a  model  of  the  credit 
channel”, ECB Working Paper No 1043, April. 
De Fiore, F., O. Tristani and P. Teles (2009), “Monetary Policy and the Financing of Firms”, 
manuscript, European Central Bank. 
Detken,  C.  and  F.  Smets  (2004),  “Asset  price  booms  and  monetary  policy”,  in  H.  Siebert 
(ed.), Macroeconomic policies in the world economy, Springer.  
ECB (2005), “Asset price bubbles and monetary policy”, Monthly Bulletin, April, pp. 47-60. 
Faia, E. (2008), “Optimal Monetary Policy with Credit Augmented Liquidity Cycles”, mimeo, 
Goethe University Frankfurt. 
Faia,  E.  and  T.  Monacelli  (2007),  “Optimal  Interest  Rate  Rules,  Asset  Prices  and  Credit 
Frictions”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 31-10, pp. 3228-3254. 
the 
10 
 BIS Review 126/2009
Gerdesmeier, D., B. Roffia and H-E. Reimers (2009), “Asset price misalignments and the role 
of money and credit”, ECB Working Paper No 1068. 
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2009), “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy”, mimeo, New 
York University. 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2009),  “From  Recession  to  Recovery:  How  Soon  and  How 
Strong?”, World Economic Outlook, Ch. 3, Washington DC. 
Kohn,  D.L.  (2007),  “Monetary  policy  and  asset  prices”,  Monetary  Policy:  A  Journey  from 
Theory to Practice, ECB, pp. 43-51. 
Kohn,  D.L.  (2008),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices  Revisited”,  speech  at  the  Cato 
Institute’s Twenty-sixth Annual Monetary Policy Conference. 
Lombardo, G. and P. McAdam (2009), “Financial Market Frictions in a Small Open Economy 
for the Euro Area”, mimeo, ECB. 
Ravenna, F. and C. Walsh (2006), “Optimal Monetary Policy with the Cost Channel”, Journal 
of Monetary Economics, 53, pp. 199-216. 
Trichet,  J.C.  (2009),  “Credible  alertness  revisited”,  intervention  at  the  symposium  on 
“Financial  stability  and  macroeconomic  policy”  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 22 August. 
White,  W.  (2008),  “Should  Monetary  Policy  Lean  Against  Credit  Bubbles  or  Clean  Up 
Afterwards?”, mimeo.  
Woodford,  M.  (2003),  Interest  and  prices:  Foundations  of  a  theory  of  monetary  policy, 
Princeton University Press.  
 
BIS Review 126/2009 
 11
