Caleb M Fundanga: Africa and the global financial and economic crisis – 
an opportunity or a curse? 
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Forum 
“Developing  Africa  –  an  opportunity  for  Europe,  Italy  and  Sicily”,  Taormina,  Sicily, 
1-2 October 2009. 
 Chairperson, 
Distinguished Participants, 
Today  we  gather  at  a  time  when  the  world  economy  has  gone  through  a  tremendous 
economic and financial shock, which may well have long lasting social consequences. When 
we met last year, we were on the eve of disaster although we did not, and perhaps could not, 
appreciate the depth and severity of the crisis that we faced. In many ways we were in the 
calm before the storm. What subsequently transpired in September and October 2008, when 
financial  markets  froze  and  stock  markets  collapsed,  was  the  greatest  macroeconomic 
challenge that many of us, as practicing economists, are likely to face in our lifetime. As we 
all  know,  trade  and  output  contracted  sharply  across  the  globe  particularly  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2008 and first quarter of 2009, the downward trend in commodity prices witnessed 
since the historic highs of July 2008 accelerated, and perhaps most significantly confidence 
and trust in the market economy was severely impaired. In this regard, estimates from the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  are  that  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008  global  exports 
contracted  by  an  average  of  15.1%,  whilst  global  output  contracted  by  6.5%.1  This  broad 
based  deterioration  in  the  global  economy  was  carried  through  into  the  first  and  second 
quarters of 2009.  
The most recent projections by the IMF suggest that global growth will contract by 1.4% in 
2009 before recovering to a growth rate of 2.5% in 2010. For the United States of America 
and the Euro Area, growth in 2009 is projected to contract by 2.6% and 4.8%, respectively; 
whilst in Japan and the United Kingdom, growth is projected to contract by 6.0% and 4.2%, 
respectively. Although emerging and developing economies are projected to perform much 
better,  with  a  projected  growth  rate  of  1.5%,  this  rate  of  growth  is  significantly  below  the 
estimate  of  6.0%  growth  in  2008.  Further,  growth  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  is  projected  to 
decelerate sharply to 1.5% from 5.5% in 2008.  
Thankfully, as we meet today there is growing evidence that in many parts of the world, the 
worst  of  the  crisis  may  be  over.  At  the  epicenter  of  the  crisis,  i.e.  the  United  States  of 
America (USA) and Europe, the collapse in output has decelerated – with the most recent 
evidence pointing to some increase in growth both in terms of actual output as well as some 
of the leading indicators of output. In the USA, second quarter GDP growth figures of -1% 
indicate  a  deceleration  in  the  pace  of  contraction.  Further,  in  the  second  quarter  of  2009, 
important Euro areas economies such as Germany and France actually posted positive rate 
of GDP growth. More broadly industrial production, exports, and retail sales figures appear to 
have improved, although they remain sharply negative on an annual basis. In addition the 
broad-based  recovery  in  commodity  prices  also  suggests  that  the  global  economy  is  on  a 
path to recovery.  
However, despite this more positive outlook for the global economy, it is not clear that Africa 
has seen its worst days. For many countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, the ramifications of the 
                                                 
1   Source:  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  update  July,  2009.  Figures  for  exports  reflect  annualized 
percent change of 3 month moving average over previous 3-month moving average. 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 1
crisis are still working themselves through the system. Initially, financial markets rather than 
the financial system bore the initial brunt of the crisis in Africa, as economies experienced a 
sharp  reversal  of  financial  flows,  and  exchange  rates  depreciated  sharply,  and  capital 
markets  registered  sharp  declines  in  market  capitalization  and  trading  volumes.  Thankfully 
there  are  clear  signs  that  financial  markets  have  now  stabilized,  with  exchange  rates 
appreciating  and  inflows  of  portfolio  flows  and  FDI  showing  tentative  signs  of  recovery.  In 
Zambia, for example, between September 2008 and April 2009, the country experienced a 
negative portfolio inflow. Non-resident holdings of Treasury bills declined from around 16% of 
outstanding  bills  in  September  2008  to  zero  by  end  March  2009.  During  this  period  the 
exchange rate of the Kwacha against the US dollar depreciated by around 60%.  
Whilst non-performing loans in the banking sector rose from around 5% in July 2008 to their 
current  levels  of  around  10%,  they  remain  within  the  prudential  ceilings  above  which 
concerns of systemic risks would be warranted. The increase in non-performing loans thus 
reflects the deterioration in the real sector of the economy. It is in this sense, i.e. the absence 
of a significant volume of impaired assets in the financial system, that I describe “financial 
markets” rather than the “financial system” as bearing the brunt of the crisis. The weight of 
adjustment was reflected in exchange rates and the Balance of Payments – reflected in a 
marked draw down of international reserves. However, the ramifications of the crisis on the 
real sector of many sub-Saharan African economies are real and potentially far reaching, and 
it is to these that I now turn.  
In my reflections on the impact and implications of the global economic crisis on Africa, I wish 
to emphasize four key points: The first and perhaps the most significant effect of the global 
financial and economic crisis has been the marked slow-down in real GDP growth in SSA, to 
a  projected  1.5%  in  2009  from  an  estimated  5.5%  in  2008.  This  slow-down  in  growth  has 
occurred after a significant period of strong economic growth and investment that had laid 
the platform for sustained and significant reductions in poverty across the continent. Further, 
whilst real GDP growth is anticipated to recover to 4.1% in 2010, this is significantly below 
the minimum annual growth rate of 7% that is thought necessary to move SSA towards a 
significant  achievement  of  its  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs)  by  2015.2  There  is 
thus a strong possibility that without an appropriate policy response, SSA may be caught in a 
period  of  much  lower  growth  rates  over  the  coming  years  than  is  necessary  to  reduce 
poverty  on  a  sustainable  basis  –  reversing  the  important  gains  that  have  been  made  this 
decade.  Africa,  with  30%  of  the  global  population,  still  contains  a  large  proportion  of  the 
world’s  poor.  Africa’s  share  of  global  trade  and  investment  inflows  also  remains  small  in 
absolute terms and relative to Africa’s vast potential. 
The  second  point  I  wish  to  make  is  that  prior  to  the  crisis,  many  Governments  in  SSA 
registered improvements in fiscal space which reflected not only the broad commodity price 
boom that began at the turn of the current decade, but also painful structural reforms aimed 
at  expanding  the  market  economy  and  implementation  of  greater  fiscal  discipline.  In  this 
regard,  the  impact  of  the  crisis  for  many  Governments  in  SSA  is  lower  growth,  the  sharp 
contraction in imports as the external sector adjusted, and lower trade volumes in general, 
have led to a sharp reduction in Government revenues and a contraction in fiscal space. This 
contraction  in  fiscal  space  represents  a  grave  challenge  to  the  implementation  of  critical 
investment  expenditures  in  the  education  and  health  sectors  and  in  building  infrastructure 
that  supports  the  proper  functioning  of  the  market  economy  and  expands  its  reach, 
particularly into the rural areas, where the majority of the poor live. With deteriorating fiscal 
positions in the donor Government, there also remains a real risk of cuts in donor flows to 
                                                 
2   The  MDGs  are  to:  Eradicate  extreme  poverty  and  hunger;  achieve  universal  primary  education;  promote 
gender  equality  and  empower  women;  reduce  child  mortality;  improve  maternal  health;  combat  HIV/AIDS, 
malaria  and  other  diseases;  ensure  environmental  sustainability;  and  develop  a  global  partnership  for 
development. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2009
developing countries. In Zambia for example, Government revenues during the first half of 
2009 were 25% below the projections in the 2009 Budget, largely reflecting lower trade taxes 
as well as lower donor inflows. For Africa, as a whole, recent estimates by the IMF are that 
budget deficits will drop from a surplus of 2.8% of GDP in 2008 to a deficit of 5.4% of GDP in 
2009 – with fiscal outturns deteriorating across both oil and non-oil commodity exporters. 
The global financial and economic crisis has also impacted Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
and credit flows in Africa, with serious consequences on the ability of African economies to 
build their productive capacities. For many countries in SSA, FDI flows as well as commercial 
lines of credit have been an important source of finance for growth, particularly because of 
insufficient domestic savings and the shallowness of domestic capital markets. In Zambia, for 
example, over the past 5 years FDI flows have averaged over US$ 900 million per annum, 
particularly  in  the  mining,  agriculture,  manufacturing,  construction,  and  tourism  sectors.  I 
believe  this  is  an  important  part  of  the  reason  why  Zambia’s  real  GDP  growth  in  2009  is 
estimated at 4.5%, well above the 1.5% forecast for SSA. As indicated earlier, FDI flows to 
Africa  are  projected  to  fall  by  18%  in  2009,  relative  to  2008  inflows  of  US$  30  million.  In 
addition  trade  credits  have  been  impaired  as  has  the  access  of  Government’s  to  the 
international capital markets. Efforts, for example, by several African countries to raise long-
term  financing  in  international  markets  through  sovereign  bond  issues  have  either  failed, 
been cancelled (for example the Ghana Telecom bond issue for US$ 300 million) or have 
been delayed (for example the Eurobond issues for Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Uganda). 
My  fourth  point  is  related  to  the  actual,  as  well  as  imagined,  failures  of  the  market 
mechanism at the heart of the advanced economies, and the inevitable institutional reforms 
that need to be undertaken, as the relative boundaries of the public and private sector are 
reassessed. This is really a point of caution for SSA, because there have been calls for the 
Governments  in  Africa  to  emulate  the  actions  taken  by  developed  economies  to  support 
private sector companies and the financial sector in general in a manner that expands the 
reach of government. This course of action needs to be avoided in Africa because it risks 
undermining both public and private institutions, whose development has been an important 
part  of  the  success  of  African  economies  in  generating  high  rates  of  growth  during  this 
decade. Whilst greater fiscal discipline has led to lower and more sustainable budget deficits, 
real  yield  rates  on  long-term  government  bonds  remain  high  in  many  African  economies, 
suggesting  that  investors  have  not  yet  fully  priced  in  the  significant  improvement  in 
macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  that  their  inflation  expectations  remain  high.  Central 
banks in Africa are also constrained in their ability to inject liquidity into the financial system 
by  purchasing  available  government  or  any  other  type  of  securities  in  the  market.  This 
constraint is at two levels: first the financial systems in Africa have not been impaired and the 
money  markets  have  continued  to  function  regularly,  without  a  significant  and  prolonged 
liquidity  crisis  –  largely  due  to  the  absence  of  any  impaired  or  toxic  assets  in  the  banking 
system.  Second,  credit  expansion  to  the  non-Government  sector  remains  strong.  Both  of 
these facts suggest that any rapid expansion of Central Bank balance sheets or government 
deficits  may  be  viewed  as  inappropriate  and  would  therefore  undermine  the  credibility  of 
these institutions and their ability to anchor inflation expectations, which remain fragile.  
It  is  with  these  four  points  in  mind  that  I  pose  the  question:  Is  the  global  financial  and 
economic crisis an opportunity or a curse for Africa? I do not see the global crisis as a 
curse on Africa – some unknown force guiding us to our inevitable doom. Rather I see the 
global crisis as presenting a set of circumstances to which Africa is capable of responding 
proactively – to the great benefit of its people and indeed to the global economy. My reading 
of the current debates on the state of economics is that the poor predictive power of most 
macroeconomists in calling the financial crisis has bred the widespread belief that it is not so 
much  that  economists  failed  in  their  duties,  this  they  certainly  did;  but  that  the  science  of 
economics  itself  has  been  found  to  be  severely  wanting.  I  myself  have  a  more  balanced 
view.  There  were  certainly  ample  signs  that  trouble  was  brewing  in  the  global  economy  – 
best reflected in the growing financial imbalances across the globe, for example between the 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 3
United  States  and  China,  in  an  ever  more  interconnected  financial  landscape.  Economists 
understood  the  broad  problem,  but  somehow  failed  to  draw  or  contemplate  the  correct 
conclusions, despite our knowledge of previous episodes of financial collapse. However, the 
charge  against  the  economics  profession  also  has  merit  in  that  ultimately  these  global 
imbalances  gave  rise  to  or  produced  perverse  economic  incentives  in  financial  markets 
which existing models did not or could not contemplate. This was compounded by a lack of 
regulatory oversight of key sectors of the financial market. 
But let me return now to the question of Africa and the global financial and economic crisis. 
How  does Africa  respond  to  the  real  prospect  of  lower  growth  than  is  necessary  to 
reduce  poverty  on  a  sustainable  basis?  I  believe  that  Africa  needs  to  retain  open 
economies, expand regional markets and integration; and expand the reach and benefits of 
the  market  economy.  Zambia  has  been  an  active  and  founder  member  of  the  Southern 
African  Development  Community  (SADC)  as  well  as  the  Common  Market  for  Eastern  and 
Southern  Africa  (COMESA).  Through  these  bodies  Zambia  is  looking  to  leverage  its  own 
potential through projects such as the North-South Corridor under COMESA, which seeks to 
open up efficient transport routes for the flow of goods, service, and people, from the south to 
the north of Africa. Further, under SADC Zambia is looking to develop its vast hydro-electric 
power  potential,  estimated  at  around  6,000MW,  as  well  as  transmission  infrastructure  to 
enable Zambia to supply countries in the East African Community which face severe power 
deficits. Zambia already trades power within the SADC region, through the Southern African 
Power  Pool  (SAPP).  In  the  mining  sector,  Zambia  is  already  seeing  investment  in  value 
addition to raw materials being driven by the opportunities available in regional markets as 
close as the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and as far away as Egypt. 
How does Africa respond to the loss of fiscal space that has robbed the Government 
of  critical  resources  needed  to  build  their  economies  by  investing  in  human  capital 
and  physical  infrastructure  projects  such  as  roads,  irrigation  schemes,  and  power 
plants? First of all it is important to recognize the extraordinary response of the international 
community,  especially  through  the  G20  group  of  countries,  in  mobilizing  resources  to 
address  both  the  liquidity  needs  of  financial  markets  and  the  fiscal  challenges  faced  by 
Governments.  A  significant  amount  of  this  support  has  been  channeled  through  the 
multilateral  financial  institutions  such  as  the  IMF,  World  Bank,  and  the  various  Regional 
Development  Banks,  including  our  own  African  Development  Bank  (AfDB).  The  operating 
procedures  and  practices  of  these  institutions  have  also  been  reformed  to  a  significant 
degree  –  although  it  is  true  to  say  that  it  will  take  more  time  to  change  the  organizational 
mindset and attitude of staff.  
In  this  regard,  at  the  end  of  August  and  the  beginning  of  September,  Zambia  received  an 
SDR allocation amounting to US$ 625 million that has augmented our reserves and provided 
a boost of confidence in our financial markets. Zambia has also benefitted from increased 
support  from  bi-lateral  donors,  with  the  prospect  of  additional  resources  being  made 
available in the current calendar year from the European Union amounting to around 13% of 
all the grants that were scheduled to be received in 2009 from the EU and individual donors. 
Institutions  such  as  the  African  Development  Bank  have  also  made  changes  to  their 
procedures  aimed  at  fast  tracking  the  disbursement  of  critical  development  finance 
resources, against already approved projects.  
However, there are serious concerns that Africa has been disadvantaged in the allocation of 
resources  made  available  by  the  international  community  –  particularly  to  key  institutions 
such as the AfDB. There is also concern that whilst the principle of increased resource flows 
through  Institutions  such  as  the  IMF  should  be  targeted  beyond  the  traditional  BoP  needs 
has generally been accepted at a political level, there is some reluctance at the institutional 
level for institutions such as the IMF to venture outside of their traditional confines of their 
support. In Zambia, the Government has engaged our cooperating partners to ensure that 
the additional resource provided to help African countries deal with the global crisis can be 
utilized  to  do  just  that  –  and  not  be  simply  kept  for  a  rainy  day  that  ignores  the  current 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2009
monsoon. In my own personal interaction with the IMF, I believe that in Zambia we do have a 
good common understanding on this issue. The Government has in fact been able to draw 
on  its  PRGF  resources  to  compensate  for  the  shortfalls  in  Government  revenues  over  the 
first half of 2009 that I have alluded to earlier. However, when all is said and done, Africa still 
needs  to  mobilize  both  foreign  and  domestic  sources  of  finance  that  provide  sustainable 
sources of investment. 
How can Africa best arrest the recent reversal of FDI inflows generated by the global 
financial  and  economic  crisis  and  encourage  domestic  resource  mobilization  i.e. 
boost  domestic  savings  rates?  In  my  view,  ensuring  that  we  retain  our  focus  on 
consolidating macroeconomic stability is a critical element of Africa’s response to the current 
crisis. For many of our economies, inflation has been pushed beyond the single digit level, 
and  we  must  all  therefore  work  hard  to  re-establish  low  levels  of  inflation  as  soon  as 
possible. The ability to attract FDI inflows is also a function of the supporting infrastructure 
and  the  existence  of  a  business  environment  that  supports  innovation,  initiative,  and  hard 
work. In this regard Africa must not relent on efforts to improve infrastructure development, 
and lower the cost of doing business. This is a process which is being actively pursued in 
Zambia,  where  great  strides  have  been  made  to  reduce  the  number  of  business  licenses 
required  and  to  streamline  licensing  procedures,  in  addition  to  the  establishment  of  an 
organisation,  the  Zambia  Development  Agency,  to  spearhead  and  support  FDI  flows  and 
domestically financed investment. We do see increased interest in cross border investments 
from within our region, particularly in the financial sector.  
With respect to the need to mobilize domestic savings, Africa certainly needs to expand the 
reach of the financial sector and to make the financial sector more efficient. In Zambia, the 
majority of the population does not have access to financial products. The Bank of Zambia 
has therefore made advancing financial inclusion as one of its strategic objectives. Zambia 
has a very low population density and there are many areas that are currently not served by 
any financial institution. Reaching these areas will require the application of technology and 
the concept of branchless banking. To facilitate such innovation, a robust regulatory regime 
governing  the  payment  system  has  been  implemented  with  the  enactment  of  the  National 
Payment  Systems  Act  in  2007.  In  this  regard,  Zambia  is  learning  a  lot  from  the  advances 
made in countries such as Uganda and Kenya, where cell phone technology has expanded 
the  reach  of  financial  services  and  products.  On  its  part  the  Zambian  Government  is  also 
taking  concrete  steps  to  enhance  the  application  of  Information  and  Communication 
Technology across the broad spread of Government services and the private sector. 
How can we build better and more resilient institutions that boost confidence in the 
benefits of a market economy and can act as strong anchors of inflation expectations? 
Earlier in my remarks I did make reference to the fact that one of the greatest dangers facing 
African economies is the risks that the current crisis might trigger significant policy reversals 
that undermine important institutions such as the Government as well as the central bank. It 
is important that in Africa, the critical work of consolidating fiscal positions and improving the 
Governance  arrangements  and  financial  management  of  public  resources  is  sustained.  In 
many ways, fiscal sector reform reflected in the curtailment of fiscal dominance, have been 
the  central  platform  upon  which  macroeconomic  stability  has  been  built  and  achieved  in 
Zambia. From the central bank perspective, the Bank of Zambia has worked to improve its 
own credibility by working with commercial banks and other financial institutions to improve 
Governance  arrangements  in  the  financial  sector,  improve  the  frequency  and  level  of 
communication  between  the  bank  and  the  institutions  that  it  supervises,  as  well  as  the 
general public. Much of this work has been done under the framework of a comprehensive 
Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) that has had broad support from our cooperating 
partners. At the regional level, a new SADC Model Central Bank Act has also been approved 
by the Ministers of Finance in SADC that enshrines important principles of independence and 
good corporate governance as a yardstick to be followed by all central banks in the region. 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 5
Chairperson, 
Distinguished Participants, 
In conclusion, let me simply state that I believe that we in Africa have an opportunity and an 
obligation  to  consolidate  reform  and  ensure  that  we  can  return  to  and  surpass  the  high 
growth rates, of above 5%, witnessed in the new millennium. This is important not just for 
Africa and the challenge of reducing poverty, but also the world, as demographic changes 
shift  the  burden  of  production  onto  the  younger  generation  –  which  is  concentrated  in  the 
developing economies, including Africa. I am happy to note that my invitation for colleagues 
to visit Zambia and see the wonderful opportunities for investment and progress that exist 
have been heeded as I did receive a delegation from Italy early this year. I cannot therefore 
end  without  encouraging  all  of  you  to  visit  Zambia  when  you  have  the  opportunity  –  I  can 
assure you that you will not be disappointed. 
I thank you for your kind attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 128/2009
