Njuguna Ndung’u: Recent financial sector performance in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, on the occasion 
of the 50th anniversary celebrations for NIC Bank Limited, Nairobi, 18 November 2009. 
 Mr. James Ndegwa, Chairman of the Board of Directors of NIC Bank; 
Mr. James Macharia, Group Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer of NIC 
Bank; 
Board Members here present; 
Staff of NIC Bank; Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am delighted to be here this evening to join NIC Bank in celebrating fifty years of providing 
financial  services  to  Kenyans.  Today  indeed  marks  yet  another  landmark  event  on  NIC’s 
successful path. I am therefore grateful for the invitation to join this joyous occasion. Let me 
at  this  early  juncture  commend  the  Board,  Management  and  Staff  of  NIC  Bank  for 
successfully serving Kenyans for the last 50 years. 
• 
I am informed that NIC Bank (formerly National Industrial Credit Bank Limited) was 
incorporated  in  Kenya  on  September  29,  1959  and  started  off  as  a  non-bank 
financial institution providing hire purchase and instalment facilities. The institution 
became a public company in 1971 and was listed at the Nairobi Stock Exchange. In 
its  quest  to  meet  the  growing  customer  needs  in  terms  of  diverse  banking 
requirements, NIC Bank converted to a commercial bank and obtained its banking 
licence in 1995. In November 1997, the bank merged with African Mercantile Bank 
Limited  (AmBank)  which  allowed  the  bank  to  enhance  its  position  in  the  sector. 
Since then, the bank has grown significantly. 
Currently  the  bank  has  15  branches  countrywide  having  opened  two  branches  in 
Kisumu  and  Thika  in  the  last  one  year  while  the  Meru  branch  is  scheduled  to  be 
opened  before  the  end  of  this  year.  The  bank  has  also  expanded  regionally  to 
Tanzania after acquiring a subsidiary (Savings & Finance Commercial Bank) where 
it now owns a majority stake.  
The bank has been an innovative market leader in electronic payments solutions in 
Kenya and has continued to enhance its service delivery to its customers through 
technological  innovations  and  available  technological  platforms.  To  this  end,  the 
bank  has  introduced  NIC  on-line  internet  banking  and  NIC  mobile  phone  transfer 
services through the M-pesa services. I find  this particular service very innovative 
and integrated. 
It  is  also  noteworthy  that  good  Corporate  Governance  practices  earned  the  bank 
three  prestigious  awards  in  2007/2008  and  2009.  These  include  the  Financial 
Report Awards (FIRE) in 2007/2008 sponsored by CMA, NSE and ICPAK; the KRA 
Commissioner  General’s  Special  Commendation  Award  and  the  KRA  Most 
Distinguished Taxpayer Award won in October 2009. 
Under corporate social responsibility, the bank has initiated programs that support 
Environmental Conservation and Advancement of Education. 
    These are no mean achievements for NIC Bank. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  allow  me  to  mention  some  key  indicators  of  the  financial  sector 
performance in the last 12 months to September 2009.  
• 
Despite  the  various  local  and  global  turbulences  experienced  over  the  past  one 
year,  the  banking  sector  continues  to  exhibit  resilience  and  has  remained  stable. 
The impressive performance has been made possible by prudent risk management, 
adherence to banking regulations supported by sound legal and regulatory reforms 
that continue to be put in place in line with best practice. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  pushed  regulators  like  the  Central  Bank  to  think  of 
more  regulation  to  prevent  such  a  crisis  in  future.  But  the  emerging  wisdom  is  to 
argue for better regulation. What is it?: It is a regulatory regime that can more readily 
identify  emerging  vulnerabilities;  Avoids  regulatory  arbitrage;  A  regime  that  can 
properly price risks; and a regime that strengthens incentives for prudent behaviour.  
The sector’s assets increased by 11% to Ksh.1.31 trillion at the end of September 
2009 as banks continued to expand their lending portfolio. 
Deposits  increased  to  Ksh.1  trillion  in  October  2009  due  mainly  to  deposit 
mobilization and expansion of branch networks by banks. 
The sector recorded higher than required capital adequacy ratios. As at September 
30,  2009,  the  Capital  Adequacy  Ratio  stood  at  20%  and  was  above  the  statutory 
minimum  of  12%.  This  is  an  indicator  that  the  sector  has  a  substantial  cushion 
against periodic shocks. 
The number of branches at the end of September 2009 stood at 918 an increase of 
over 154 branches from the corresponding period in 2008. 
     Ladies and Gentlemen: 
• 
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  reiterate  that  the  Central  Bank  appreciates  the 
initiatives and innovations by the banking sector in coming up with new products and 
is committed to the creation of an enabling regulatory environment. I would therefore 
urge  the  banking  sector  to  seek  diversification  of  their  products  in  light  of  the 
dynamic banking environment to leverage on their growth and earnings.  
From the regulators point of view, we have signed an MoU with the Capital Markets 
Authority, the Insurance Regulatory Authority and the Retirement Benefits Authority 
so that we can encourage information flow and limit regulatory arbitrage, but above 
all build a strong financial sector and financial hub of the East African Community. 
The strength of Kenyan banks is now being felt in the region, specifically within the 
East  African  Community.  To  facilitate  information  sharing  and  supervisory  co-
operation amongst the Central Banks, particularly for regional banking groups, the 
five East African Central Banks signed a Memorandum of Understanding early this 
year. This arrangement will serve to mitigate cross border risks that regional banking 
groups may pose to the financial sectors of the East African countries.  
Further,  the  Central  Bank  together  with  other  stakeholders  is  working  on  a  legal 
framework that will enable banks to carry out branchless banking through the use of 
third  party  agents  such  as  SACCOs,  microfinance  institutions  and  retail  outlets  in 
order to enable Kenyans to access financial services with ease. It is expected that 
once the process is complete, the level of access of financial services by Kenyans 
will widen in depth and breadth. We continue to join hands with other actors locally 
and internationally to promote financial inclusion and access. 
In  other  developments,  following  the  recommendation  of  a  COMESA  Team  of 
Experts, the Central Bank has been picked to host the COMESA Monetary Institute 
(CMI) that will be based at the Kenya School of Monetary Studies. The institute will 
generate the required knowledge for monetary policy in the COMESA region. It will 
also  work  to  harmonise  regulation  of  financial  markets  in  the  region  among  other 
issues like a common COMESA currency. 
    Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  commend  the  banking  industry  on  their  achievements  in 
opening new economic frontiers and supporting Vision 2030. I challenge all banks not only to 
invest more resources in technology, but to also expand their outreach into the rural areas in 
the provision of loans. I do agree that the level of economic activity determines the level of 
loans and credit advanced – but we are slowly evolving from the crisis so economic activity is 
picking up. I am also aware that in such areas loans and advances are also plagued with 
inappropriate definition of property rights and problems of enforcement of contracts. These 
issues are being addressed through information capital and legal reforms. The Central Bank 
will continue to partner with banks and other market players to ensure that the sector plays 
its rightful role in Kenya’s development agenda. The NIC from its 51st year is thus poised to 
do better in a more incentivized environment. 
With these very few remarks ladies and gentlemen, it is now my honour and pleasure to wish 
you all a very pleasant evening and best wishes in your future endeavours as you celebrate 
the Golden Jubilee of NIC Bank. 
Thank you and God bless you all. 
