Paul Tucker: The debate on financial system resilience – 
macroprudential instruments  
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at Barclays Annual Lecture, London, 22 October 2009. 
 What stage have we reached in the current financial and economic crisis? 
The stage where the most hideous macroeconomic nightmare – a second Great Depression 
revisited  – is  now  probably  remote  but  where the  outlook remains  highly  uncertain  by  any 
normal standard. 
Where the banking system is recovering, but where some big UK (and overseas) banks have 
a lot left to fix. And where there has been real progress with many policy initiatives to make 
the  international  financial  system  more  resilient  in  future,  but  where  perhaps  some  of  the 
biggest issues remain unresolved, even incompletely articulated. 
After  some  scene  setting,  I  will  address  one  of  those  issues  this  evening:  whether  there 
might be macroprudential instruments that could lean against and preserve banking system 
resilience in the face of credit boom and bust. I will also provide an update on international 
plans for banks to produce recovery and resolution plans, known here as Living Wills. 
The macrobackdrop and the credit system 
At the beginning of this year,1 I thought it would take until the autumn at least to tell whether 
the  economy  was  going  to  lurch  downwards  into  a  spiral  of  falling  prices,  rising  real  debt 
burdens,  generally  enfeebled  banks  and  falling  output.  While  absolutely  nothing  can  be 
definitively ruled out, that nightmare now seems unlikely. I shall weigh that in my own policy 
considerations,  as  for  me  the  size  of  the  massive  monetary  stimulus  has  partly  been 
designed to insure against that catastrophe risk. So a key question over the coming period 
will  be  whether  or  not  conditions  are  developing  where  some  of  that  insurance  could  be 
withdrawn, consistent with leaving policy highly stimulative.2 But the economy has in actual 
fact been very weak, with output falling and unemployment rising. The policy debate in the 
months ahead therefore will turn, as more usually, on the broad outlook for the risks around 
inflation over the medium term. That will depend on the data and, in particular, whether the 
data  and  surveys  about  real  activity  and  demand  come  more  closely  into  line,  here  and 
overseas. One of the biggest questions is whether, given the policy stimulus, recovery will be 
anaemic or whether we can attain the above-trend growth needed to absorb the slack in the 
economy necessary to ameliorate downward pressures on inflation. This will be at the heart 
of  the  quarterly  forecast  round  on  which  the  MPC  is  just  embarking.  And  it  could  hardly 
matter more. Anaemic demand growth would lead to inflation undershooting the target for a 
period. And it would be likely to see firms continuing to shed labour, scrapping capital and 
delaying new investment, adding to the hardships the crisis has already brought. But I fear, 
however, that we may not be much clearer about the general trends in demand until at least 
late spring/early summer next year. There are major uncertainties about global demand and 
about  domestic  saving  given  the  need  for  many  households  to  strengthen  their  balance 
                                                 
1   See  Tucker  PMWT  (2009c),  “The  State  of  the  Markets:  Four  Issues”,  at  the  Association  of  British  Insurers 
Biennial Conference, London. 
2   For  my  thoughts  on  the  idea  of  ‘insurance’  or  ‘precautionary’  monetary  policy  settings,  see  Tucker  PMWT 
(2006b),  “Reflections  on  Operating  Inflation  Targeting”,  a  speech  at  the  Graduate  School  of  Business, 
University of Chicago, May 2006, (pp. 10-12). 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 1
sheets over time. And,  in particular, I doubt it  will be clear before then whether or not the 
financial system is sufficiently recovered to support what may well prove to be a more credit-
intensive phase of cyclical recovery. 
The  continuing  uncertainties  about  credit  supply  underline  just  how  much  an  effectively 
functioning financial system matters to the real economy. That much has been demonstrated 
beyond  doubt  by  the  massive  measures  taken  here  and  elsewhere  to  prop  the  system  up 
when the vortex beckoned. 
Those measures have rightly drawn attention to what for too long was a neglected issue: Too 
Big  To  Fail  –  or,  as  we  have  also  discovered,  Too  Interconnected,  Too  Complex  to  be 
allowed to fail in the way of an ordinary business. Like all truly big policy questions, this is a 
partly  social  question.  It  just  cannot  be  acceptable  that  the  downside  from  excessive  risk 
across the financial system as a whole falls to the general taxpayer, to households and firms 
throughout the economy, if the upside is enjoyed by a narrower group of shareholders and 
managers. This is not just an issue of economic efficiency – of the allocation of resources – 
and of leaning against the risk of even bigger crises down the road, but also of social justice. 
That is why the debate has attracted so much interest. But I hope I can persuade you that 
the  Too  Big  To  Fail  problem  matters  to  bankers  too.  Because  the  Lehman  case 
demonstrates that in a democracy, political constraints are uncertain and so even Too Big To 
Fail firms can sometimes be allowed to fail. Banks need a system in which they are better 
protected against mismanagement by their peers. 
The debate calls for technocratic solutions to be laid out, but choice amongst those solutions 
should  be  understood  and  accepted  by  society  at  large.  And  the  solution  needs  to  be  an 
international one. It is therefore good news that the G20 has commissioned work from the 
Financial Stability Board on the Too Big To Fail issue. 
So the stakes are high. By the lights of our successors, we are bound to get it wrong, but can 
we get to the right ballpark? 
Reforms to the “how” approach to the banking system oversight 
The Governor of the Bank said earlier this week that we face a choice between an overhaul 
of the regulatory regime and directly altering the structure of the banking system. As earlier 
policymakers would have put it, this is a choice between, on the one hand, regulating what 
banks and other financial firms can do and, on the other hand, leaving open the scope of 
what they may do but regulating and supervising how they do it. 
Since the thoughts on macroprudential instruments I shall go on to outline this evening are 
based on something like the existing structure of the banking system persisting, I shall briefly 
recap  what  I  have  said  in  a  series  of  speeches  earlier  this  year  about  the  current  reform 
agenda.3
The three necessary planks are re-regulation and a return to supervision; for the first time, 
agreeing effective resolution plans with banks and any other key firms; and, I would hope, a 
clear Capital of Last Resort regime designed to avoid perverse incentives. 
                                                 
3   See “Remarks by Paul Tucker”, panel session at The FSA’s Turner Review Conference, 27 March 2009, “The 
Repertoire of Official Sector Interventions in the Financial System: Last Resort Lending, Market-Making, and 
Capital”,  Tokyo,  28  May  2009,  and  “Regimes  for  Handling  Bank  Failures:  Redrawing  the  Banking  Social 
Contract”, at the British Bankers’ Association Annual International Banking Conference: Restoring Confidence 
–  Moving  Forward,  30  June  2009.  Traditionally,  in  exchange  for  being  allowed  to  profit  from  taking  risks 
inherent in providing liquidity, or monetary and credit services to the economy, banks have been subject to: 
prudential regulation; given access to liquidity insurance at the central bank; and required to finance industry-
wide insurance schemes. Those have been the key elements of the social contract for banking. This series of 
speeches explored in more detail how those components of the social contract need to be redesigned. 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2009
On regulation, as Adair Turner has said, it is clear that firms need to hold more capital; and, 
as  the  Governor  emphasised  earlier  this  week,  that  that  capital  needs  to  be  proper,  loss-
absorbing  capital.  It  is  equally  clear  that  banks  need  to  hold  a  portfolio  of  high-quality 
liquidity; that there should be no compromise about what counts as such liquidity; and that 
any banks thinking a decent treasury policy involves holding the bonds of other banks are 
way  off-beam.  That  much  has  pretty  well  been  agreed  by  international  policymakers.  The 
numbers remain to be set. 
Just as important is the necessity of reviving supervision. By that, I do not mean checking 
compliance with rules after the fact, punishing breaches; punishing offenders does not bring 
back to life a bank or the customer businesses that have collapsed with it. I mean forward-
looking  judgments  about  the  prudence  of  a  firm’s  management  and  the  resilience  of  its 
business. The FSA under Hector Sants have been saying much the same thing, and it was 
what an earlier generation focused on most. It involves supervisors making judgments; and, 
no doubt, occasionally judgments that individual banks find unwelcome. They need to cover 
competence. But also the adequacy of liquidity portfolios and the reasonableness of asset 
valuations;  over  the  decades  too  many  banks  around  the  world  have  failed  after  they 
reporting  apparently  healthy  ratios.  Not  a  new  lesson.  But  a  vital  issue  is  whether  we  are 
ready, today, collectively to back an approach based on judgments rather than on enforcing 
a book of detailed rules? If we are to tolerate supervisors where necessary substituting their 
judgment for that of managers and boards, then commentators, appeal tribunals and even 
parliamentarians  will  need  to  give  supervisors  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  occasionally.  Of 
course, such judgments need to be grounded and reasoned. 
But we need to go further than this. Today, there is a realisation that it is not enough to look 
solely at individual firms atomistically. The resilience of the system in the face of seriously 
adverse disturbances – whether from the real economy or from within the financial system – 
depends heavily on common exposures and interconnectedness. In a way, this is another re-
remembering. I am fond of quoting the following from a speech by George Blunden, a former 
Deputy Governor and the first chairman of the Basel Committee in the mid-1970s, gave over 
twenty years ago: 
“Supervisory  standards  are  set  with  an  eye  to  protecting  [banks]  from 
problems which could be created by wider, systemic developments. A bank 
may consider a course of action it wishes to take to be acceptable – as it 
may  well  be  in  a  limited  context.  But  the  same  course  might,  if  widely 
copied by other banks, have unfortunate effects on the banking system as 
a whole. It is part of the supervisors’ job to take that wider, systemic view 
and sometimes to curb practices which even prudent banks might, if left to 
themselves, regard as safe.”4
A number of things flow from this core insight. 
First, the central objective of prudential supervision is systemic stability. That is underlined 
now that the UK has moved to a system of deposit insurance where 100% of retail deposits 
up  to  £50,000  are  protected.  It  is  that  which  delivers  consumer  protection.  Supervision 
affects the incidence of calls on the insurance fund. And since such calls are met from levies 
on  the  industry,  that  means  supervision  is  in  the  business  of  containing  such  calls  to 
systemically manageable amounts. 
Second,  a  systemic  –  or  macroprudential  –  orientation  is  what  lies  behind  the  thought  of 
“systemic” add ons to capital and liquidity requirements for so-called “systemically significant” 
banks.  Personally,  I  do  not  much  like  the  notion  of  a  list  of  “systemically  important  firms” 
because, as a previous generation of policymakers taught us, what proves to be systemic 
                                                 
4   Blunden G, “Supervision and Central Banking”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, August 1987. 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 3
depends so very heavily on the circumstances. For example, it judged it safe to let Barings 
fail because the causes were clearly idiosyncratic and, just as important, the financial waters 
were calm. But essentially the same group of senior officials judged that it would not have 
been  safe,  in  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  to  leave  unaddressed  the  distress  amongst 
fringe banks in the Secondary Banking Crisis of the mid-1970s, or amongst small banks in 
the  crisis  of  the  early  1990s.  In  both  cases,  actions  were  taken  to  stop  the  problems 
spreading to larger banks. But I do agree, of course, that banks are woven into the fabric of 
the  financial  system  in  potentially  dangerous  ways  should  carry  more  capital  and  liquidity 
than  otherwise.  That  amounts  to  overturning  a  consensus  that,  assessed  on  an  atomistic 
basis,  greater  diversification  in  a  bank’s  risks  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  lower  regulatory 
requirements. The FSA published some thoughts on this area earlier today. 
Third – and this is a major departure from the past – we need a regime that recognises that 
inevitably regulation and supervision is flawed and, occasionally, will prove seriously wanting. 
However  good  a  country’s  supervision,  banks  and  other  firms  will  fail.  And  they  will  fail  in 
circumstances  that,  at  least  with  –  and  possibly  without  –  hindsight,  could  have  been 
prevented. So it has been a mistake, over recent decades and in a number of countries, to 
claim to have a regulatory framework that is not premised on zero failures when we lacked a 
resolution regime that  could cope with failures of even quite simple banks. In the UK, this 
was cruelly exposed in August 2007 when Northern Rock failed, denting confidence in UK 
mortgage banks generally. 
That is the backdrop to the suggestion, stressed by the Governor earlier this week, that the 
market  should  explore  whether  banks  can  raise  contingent  capital  from  private  sector 
investors. Beyond that, we need an effective resolution regime. 
The UK does now have a decent resolution regime for small and medium-sized banks, which 
we used directly for the Dunfermline Building Society and indirectly in getting a few cases 
satisfactorily worked through. More important for today, it is the origin of the Bank pushing 
the “Living Wills” idea, which dovetailed with international conclusions about the horrendous 
problems  of  managing  cross-border  crises.  The  G20  heads  of  government  have  made  it 
clear that something must be done about this. It is being pursued by the Financial Stability 
Board, a grouping of regulators, central bankers and finance ministry officials drawn from the 
G20 countries and a few other key centres. 
Speaking as chair of the Financial Stability Board’s working group on the resolution of cross-
border firms, I can update you on the work already in train. Basically for the top roughly 25 
banks and dealers, the authorities will work with them over the next 6-9 months to produce 
recovery and resolution plans. The effort will build on the existing supervisory colleges, but 
typically at a more senior level, and involving resolution authorities and central banks as well 
as line supervisors. After official level exchanges, there will be engagement with those firms, 
also  at  a  senior  level  (say  group  CFO).  The  desired  outputs  will  cover  two  things.  First, 
recovery  plans  for  “de-risking”  a  group  where  it  can  and  should  be  maintained  as  a  going 
concern. Second, a resolution plan when a firm needs to be wound down and put to rest, but 
with  essential  economic  functions  maintained  somehow.  The  FSA  has  explained  their 
contribution to the exercise. 
No one should think that this will be easy; or that anyone in the official sector is naïve about 
that. It will, in fact, be formidably difficult. The process is, for that very reason, designed to 
flush  out  the  issues,  so  that  they  can  be  properly  debated  and  reviewed.  There  will  quite 
probably  be  hard  questions  about  the  organisation  of  some  banks;  about  which  services 
needed to be maintained; about conflicts between the insolvency laws and special resolution 
regimes of different countries; about how losses can in the future credibly be made to fall on 
wholesale  creditors;  and,  maybe,  about  the  issues  confronting  burden  sharing  amongst 
national  authorities  if,  notwithstanding  these  efforts,  fiscal  support  nevertheless  proves 
unavoidable when an internationally active bank fails in the future. Over time, this could lead 
to  something  of  a  revolution  in  the  supervision  of  banks  –  because  of  the  inducement  to 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2009
design regulatory arrangements to cater for circumstances in which supervision had failed to 
avert distress. 
Imagine that despite all the obstacles, we make terrific progress with recovery and resolution 
plans over the next few years. To be clear, it is not that we can promise that yet: the work of 
the regulators: internationally has just begun. Rather, the point is that even that would not be 
enough. The community having finally recognised that we cannot rely wholly on regulation 
and supervision, we must not now make the analogous mistake of thinking that we can rely 
on resolution plans. 
However good, those de-risking and wind-down plans will sometimes prove flawed. That is 
why for some months I have been arguing for the need to articulate a framework for Capital 
of Last Resort provision. We must not again find ourselves in a position where the authorities 
in  different  countries  are  developing  as  they  go  along  how  capital  support  should  be 
provided:  what  triggers it,  its  terms,  and  who  pays.  I  have  aired  the  possibility  of  eventual 
losses falling on the surviving banking system, as a way of avoiding burdening the general 
taxpayer and as an incentive for firms to recognise and act upon their interest in the health of 
the  system  as  a  whole.  But  the  more  important  point  is  the  need  to  have  a  plan.  And  of 
course the fiscal support comes after drawings in any private sector provision of contingent 
capital. 
Banking and the credit system: might there be macroprudential instruments? 
At this point, I should issue another caution: that however all those issues are resolved, the 
banking-structure debate is resolved, I doubt they could prove sufficient to rule out bouts of 
instability,  even  crises,  in  the  future.  That  is  because  I  am  doubtful  that  the  tendency  to 
excess can be curbed solely by addressing the circumstances of individual firms. Booms are 
spurred by plausible illusions and collective-action problems. 
The current crisis has, in my view, been at root a crisis of liquidity – of an over abundance of 
liquidity in the upswing, succeeded by a drying up of liquidity during the crash. 
Usually, material rises in asset prices are initially triggered by reasonable perceptions of a 
favourable shift in fundamentals. In the latest episode, that plausibly included improvements 
in  monetary  policy  regimes,  in  the  flexibility  of  the  real  economy,  in  the  outlook  for  global 
costs, and in enriched instruments for hedging and dispersing risks. But it is very hard for 
anyone  to  gauge  the  extent  of  the  warranted  revaluation  of  asset  prices.  If  investors  and 
shareholders extrapolate forward ex post windfall gains into forward-looking ex ante required 
returns, funds and banks may be incentivised to increase risk in order to deliver. 
In  an  environment  of  rising  asset  prices,  continuing  strong  investor  demand  and  high 
volumes in primary and secondary markets, liquidity is typically abundant. Liquidity premia 
fall, adding to the upward pressure on asset values. That liquidity may not in fact be resilient, 
but it can easily look like it to market participants. And with the ability to fund and to manage 
risk in the markets looking straightforward, financial firms feel they can relax the supply of 
credit – to real economy borrowers and to each other. 
When  the  music  stops,  almost  whatever  the  trigger,  four  problems  arise  –  at  least.  First, 
some  borrowers  –  households,  firms  and  financial  intermediaries  –  prove  to  be  over 
indebted. Second, it can be hard to tell who has fundamental problems and who does not: 
the so-called Lemons Problem.5 Third, some of the assumptions on which financial activity 
has  been  predicated  turn  out  to  be  (or  are  seen  as  being)  invalidated;  eg,  in  the  current 
                                                 
5  
Ingves S, “A Cure for Crises: Confidence, Confidence and Trust”, a speech at the Eurofi Forum, Gottenburg, 
September  2009.  Akerlof,  George  A,  1970  “The  market  for  ‘Lemons’  Quality  Uncertainty  and  the  Market 
Mechanism”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol 84 (3), pp 488-500, August. 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 5
crisis, the reliability of ratings of ABS. Fourth, the demand for liquidity rises, and its supply 
falls back. Markets become less liquid. Rising liquidity premia and forced sales depress asset 
values. Credit supply is reined in. A vicious circle is threatened by the excess leverage and 
liquidity mismatch that have developed in the financial system during the upswing. 
During that upswing, important contributory factors will typically have included illusions about 
risk-adjusted  returns;  underestimating  the  extent  to  which  buoyant  conditions  are  being 
driven by falling liquidity premia; and a sense that, if the bubble bursts, the central bank will 
somehow  be  able  to  contain  the  spillovers.  This  amounts  to  “risk  illusion”,  which  should 
probably  be  as  much  debated  as  “money  illusion”  is  in  monetary  economics.  Separately, 
there  is  a  potent  collective  action  problem  in  getting  off  the  dance  floor.  Not  a  few  senior 
market  participants  felt  from  at  least  2006  that  financial  risk  was  underpriced,  and  that 
conditions  in,  for  example,  the  leveraged  loan  market  were  silly.  But  they  also  had  no 
conviction  about  when,  or  indeed  whether  for  sure,  the  music  had  to  stop,  and  so  feared 
individually that stepping away from the dance “too early” would crystallise business risk, as 
the  dance  would  simply  go  on  without  them  and  their  franchise  would  be  undermined  as 
customers migrated to their competitors. 
These  seem  pretty  close  to  the  circumstances  that  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  William 
McChesney Martin had in mind, over 50 years ago, when he talked about Taking Away the 
Punchbowl  just  as  the  party  gets  going.  An  intervention  of  some  kind  is  needed  from 
someone outside the dance. 
Some commentators argue that the intervention should come via monetary policy. That as 
well as steering the path of nominal demand in order to maintain low medium-term inflation 
expectations, monetary policy should seek to tame the credit cycle. As MPC colleagues have 
already argued publicly,6 we are very doubtful about that. It is likely that much higher rates 
would  have  been  needed  in  the  UK  to  choke  off  the  credit  boom,  with  the  likely  effect  of 
pushing  the  economy  into  quite  a  prolonged  recession,  with  a  persistent  and  substantial 
undershoot of our inflation target. The business cycle and the credit cycle were simply not 
closely aligned. That is not to say that monetary policy should not take into account risks to 
the inflation outlook that accumulate slowly and with great uncertainty about when and how 
they will crystallise. But it makes a compelling case that monetary policy is not sufficient on 
its own. There are essentially two objectives here. 
So  there  is  a  missing  set  of  instruments.  And  the  big  question  is  whether  a  set  can  be 
devised that stack up not only in theory but in practice; instruments that can be used in the 
real world. 
Having  first  flagged  18  months  or  so  ago  that  the  Bank  would  work  on  this  general  area, 
earlier this year I set out four questions which the debate would need to address;7 objectives, 
                                                 
6   See, Bean C. R “The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction”, Schumpeter Lecture at 
the Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, Barcelona, August 2009 and “Some Lessons for 
Monetary  Policy  from  the  Recent  Financial  Turmoil”,  remarks  at  Conference  on  Globalisation,  Inflation  and 
Monetary Policy, Istanbul, November 2008. Also Dale S, “Inflation Targeting: Learning the Lessons from the 
Financial Crisis”, remarks at the Society of Business Economists’ Annual Conference, London, June 2009. 
7   My  remarks  at  the  Institutional  Money  Market  Funds  Association  Annual  Dinner  in  London  on  2  April  2008 
included the following on macroprudential policy: “Looking ahead further, the big question will be whether the 
authorities can tame the credit cycle without sacrificing the incentives to enterprise that are so important in a 
dynamic economy. The debate about the micro regulation of banks will need to take account of whether or not 
we can deliver that macroprudential objective. For too long, the debate has got sidetracked. Into whether we 
can rely on monetary policy “mopping up” after bubbles burst. Or into whether monetary policy could be used 
to control asset prices as well as doing its orthodox job of steering nominal trends in the economy, which I 
should say can include taking account of prospective risks of inflation volatility over the medium term. Ideas 
circulating  already  include  minimum  margin  requirements  or  capital  ratios  that  vary  not  only  across 
instruments or firms but also through time as credit conditions change. We need calmly to explore whether 
there  are  also  other  possibilities.  But  let  me  make  this  absolutely  clear:  there  are  formidable  obstacles  to 
finding a solution. In the monetary sphere, a regime of floating exchange rates allows individual countries to 
6 
 BIS Review 134/2009
instruments,  whether  the  instruments  would  be  operated  under  a  rule  or  discretionary 
judgments,  and  whether  it  was  feasible  for  one  country  to  attempt  to  employ  such 
instruments in a world of freely flowing capital. I will sketch our preliminary views on those 
questions. The Bank will publish a Discussion Paper, going deeper than I can today, over the 
next  few  weeks.  We  do  not  have  all  the  answers  and  I  must  stress  that  we  are  not  in 
advocacy mode, but we have reached the point where we should like to try to inject some 
further thoughts into the debate. 
Objectives 
(a)  
A  few  generations  ago,  Federal  Reserve  Board  Chairman  Martin  (of  the  Punchbowl) 
described how the Fed approached the task it had been given by Congress in 1934, in the 
wake  of  the  Great  Crash,  to  set  minimum  margin  requirements  for  loans  to  purchase 
security: 
“The  task  of  the  Board,  as  I  see  it,  is  to  formulate  regulations  with  two 
principal objectives. One is to permit adequate access to credit facilities for 
securities markets to perform the basic economic functions. The other is to 
prevent the use of stock market credit from becoming excessive. The latter 
helps  to  minimise  the  danger  of  pyramiding  credit  in  a  rising  market  and 
also reduces the danger of forced sales of securities from undermargined 
accounts in a falling market.”8
Today’s task is somewhat broader, focused not just on securities markets, but on the stability 
of the banking system as a whole and on maintaining, through otherwise severe economic 
disturbances, the essential services banks provide to the real economy. But it is instructive 
that Chairman Martin focused on the risks of “pyramiding credit”. 
In big picture terms, candidate objectives include quelling asset price bubbles; credit growth; 
and strengthening the resilience of the banking system during credit booms. We are minded 
to favour the third – dynamic resilience of the banking system. 
Why not asset price bubbles? Essentially because we are doubtful that financial stability is 
liable  to  be  threatened  by  exuberance  in  asset  markets  unaccompanied  by  excess  credit 
growth  and  indebtedness.  It  is  the  impact  of  falling  asset  prices  on  an  over-levered  and 
liquidity-stretched financial system that imperils the provision of essential financial services. 
A  necessary  condition  for  a  pervasive  financial  system  problem  is  weakness  amongst 
financial firms. The late-90s tech bubble is arguably instructive in this respect. The collapse 
of  dot.com  shares  obviously  caused  a  lot  of  volatility,  but  it  was  the  wave  of  defaults  on 
telecom debt that threatened banking stability.9
Why  not  then  cast  the  objective  solely  in  terms  of  credit  growth?  Essentially  for  three 
reasons. First, a macroprudential instrument will alter the terms on which credit is supplied by 
the  banking  sector,  but  the  resulting  growth  of  credit  will  depend  on  demand  conditions, 
which lie beyond the direct reach of the macroprudential instruments I shall go on to discuss. 
                                                                                                                                                         
pursue their own domestic monetary objectives. But in a world in which capital flows freely, local attempts to 
control the pace of credit creation, particularly within the financial system, may not work. All of that will need to 
be thought through. But first we need to concentrate on the immediate challenges”. The four questions are 
sketched out in more detail on pages 7-9 of my remarks at the Turner Review Conference. 
8   Chairman Martin’s testimony before the US Senate Committee on Banking and Currency, 84th Congress, 1955, 
discussed by Paul H Kupiec of the FRB, April 1997, “Margin Requirements, Volatility, and Market Integrity”, 
quoting from Moore, Thomas (1966) “Stock Market Margin Requirements”, Journal of Political Economy, vol 
74, No 2, pp 158-167. 
9   The Bank of England’s June 2000 Financial Stability Report highlighted the risks to the financial sector of the 
heavy debts taken on by telecoms firms to finance purchases of licences. 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 7
Second,  and  again  anticipating  part  of  my  later  remarks,  the  residents  of  industrialised 
countries are free to borrow from abroad, so total credit growth may lie beyond the control of 
national authorities. There is no good reason to turn our backs on free flowing capital. Third, 
a “dynamic resilience” objective would not leave credit conditions untouched. 
“Dynamic  resilience  of  the  domestic  banking  sector”  should,  by  contrast,  be  something 
national authorities can influence. A required increase in banks’ capital resources or liquidity 
during  a  period  of  exuberance  would  be  likely  to  act,  in  degree,  as  a  circuit-breaker  on 
domestic  credit  supply.  So  there  would  be  an  effect  on  credit  conditions,  and  so  plausibly 
some  indirect  taming  of  the  credit  cycle  during  the  upswing.  And,  crucially,  during  the 
subsequent downswing, the macro-prudential dial could be relaxed where necessary to lean 
against  the  risks  of  a  perverse  downward  spiral.  A  broadly  symmetric  approach  would  be 
important.  Its  feasibility  would  depend  on  there  being  appropriate  minimum  capital 
requirements in the first place for normal conditions. That is part of the Basel agenda. 
So, on this view, the  mandate or mission could be expressed in terms of ameliorating the 
impairment of banking system resilience that typically occurs during credit booms. It would 
probably  be  hard  to  achieve  that  without  influencing  domestic  credit-supply  conditions,  in 
booth the boom and contraction phases. 
Possible instruments: capital requirements, risk weights and haircuts 
(b)  
There are two dimensions to pursuing this objective. One is making the system more resilient 
in the face of severe shocks by acting on its inter-connectedness. The other is seeking to 
adjust the capital and liquidity resources of the system during the up and downswings of the 
credit cycle; that is to say, over time. Internally, we refer to these as the “cross-sectional” and 
“time-series” dimensions. I am going to focus mainly on the latter this evening. 
Work  is  already  underway  in  Basel  to  reduce  the  pro-cyclical  properties  of  the  Second 
Capital  Accord  and  to encourage dynamic  provisioning  against  expected  credit  losses.  On 
the face of it, that seems unlikely to be enough to deliver a “dynamic resilience” objective in 
the terms I have described, as it would not directly address stress scenarios. That is a point 
of departure for the wider debate on extra instruments. 
Much of the existing public commentary starts from an assumption that any such instrument 
should be variation in required minimum capital ratios over the course of the credit cycle. 
We are currently doubtful about that. But we agree that macroprudential instruments directed 
broadly  at  taming  the  credit  cycle  will  be  functions  of  –  dare  I  say,  derivatives  of  –  micro 
prudential requirements on capital and liquidity. That is because, as I have discussed, the 
central  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system,  and  the  mechanisms  through  which  it  can 
amplify  the  credit  and  business  cycles,  are  leverage  (inadequate  capital)  and  maturity 
mismatch (inadequate liquidity). Today, I shall focus almost entirely on the macroprudential 
deployment  of  capital  requirements.  That  is  largely  because  the  microprudential  toolkit  for 
liquidity regulation is still in its infancy and subject to international discussion. 
So why are we doubtful about simply varying headline capital requirements through the credit 
cycle? Imagine that the authorities judge that a boom in lending to (or related to) a particular 
sector of the economy had become overly exuberant. To make it topical, assume that this 
was lending to the shadow banking system (say conduits, SIVs etc). The authority raises the 
minimum capital ratio by Xpp. The affected banks could respond in a number of very different 
ways. This could include the perverse reaction of cutting lending to unexuberant parts of the 
real  economy,  while  continuing  to  lend  on  overly  relaxed  terms  to,  in  this  example,  the 
exuberant  shadow  banking  system.  That  kind  of  thing  really  could  happen  if  such  lending 
seemed to offer terrific returns. 
What lies behind this problem is, of course, that quite often a credit boom is at least initially 
concentrated  in  one  or  a  few  sectors  of  the  economy.  That  being  so,  the  appropriate 
instrument needs to be able to work with a degree of granularity. Two options are changing 
8 
 BIS Review 134/2009
capital-ratio risk weights on exposures to particular classes of borrower; and, second, varying 
minimum collateral haircuts on secured lending. Since, by definition, the latter can apply only 
to  secured  lending,  the  Bank  has  so  far  been  giving  more  thought  to  operating  on  risk 
weights. 
Using risk weights as the instrument might also enable the authorities to address incipient 
problems  emerging  from  credit  exposures  held  in  banks’  Trading  Books  and  off-balance 
sheet exposures as well as in standard loan books. For example, in the upswing of the latest 
credit cycle, it would have been helpful to withdraw the 0% weight on 364-day lines of credit, 
which fuelled the shadow-banking system of conduits etc; and to have raised the weights on 
super-senior credit exposures held in marked-to-market trading portfolios. (By the way, the 
appropriate micro supervisory response would have been to ensure that the individual LCFIs 
were in fact managing those holdings as trading positions. It seems that some were not.) 
Of course, none of this would be straightforward. There would be a lot to be learned about 
the  transmission  mechanism.  And  using  risk  weights  as  the  instrument  would  require 
judgments  on  the  relative  as  well  as  absolute  risks  of  different  types  of  exposure.  I  must 
stress, therefore, that we are outlining these thoughts precisely so that they can be explored 
and challenged. In particular, we should think about whether a macroprudential toolkit might 
sensibly  include  variations  in  minimum  haircuts  as  well  as  in  risk  weights.  An  eclectic 
approach should not be ruled out. 
Rules or discretion? 
(c)  
As  I  have  said  on  a  previous  occasion,  we  are  doubtful  that  macroprudential  instruments 
could be operated by a rule. To steer the banking system towards increasing its resilience to 
incipient problems in a stretched sector, a whole series of judgments would have to be made. 
Whether  the  rate  of  credit  growth  seemed  excessive;  whether  terms  were  overly  lax;  or 
whether  the  “bubble  bursting”  would  materially  damage  banks.  That  would  call  for 
assessments  of  the  levels  of  indebtedness,  of  banking  system  exposures,  of  the  broad 
probabilities of those exposures turning sour, and of whether herding in the market might be 
driving the system into an ever more precarious position. Rapid growth in debt does not of 
itself signify over indebtedness; and default does not necessarily materially impair lenders’ 
resilience. One possible way of thinking about this is that the authorities could be guided by 
top-down  stress  tests  of  the  effects  on  the  banking  system  of  various  adverse  scenarios 
potentially affecting different groups of borrowers and exposures. In very broad terms, this 
would be akin to systematically applying Pillar II-type judgments under the Basel regime to 
banks  in  general.  It  would  share  with  the  Pillar  II  element  of  micro-prudential  regulation  a 
focus on circumstances that warranted a capital charge different from the Pillar 1 minimum. 
But it would differ in a number of important respects. First, the instrument would be applied to 
all banks in the jurisdiction. Individual banks would be affected differently according to the 
scale of their holding of the exposures for which a risk-weight had been varied, rather than 
on  the  basis  of  micro  supervisory  judgments  about  each  bank’s  particular  circumstances. 
Second,  for  that  reason,  the  calibration  would  depend  on  the  position  of  the  system  as  a 
whole,  including  its  weakest  systemically  significant  links  in  the  context  at  the  time,  rather 
than  the  idiosyncratic  circumstances  of  each  firm.  Third,  whereas  in  the  micro-prudential 
setting Pillar II always applies an add-on to the Pillar I minimum, a macroprudential authority 
might  reduce  risk  weights  during  the  downswing  in  the  credit  cycle.  Indeed,  it  would  be 
important that the instruments could be used symmetrically. But the risk weights that might 
be reduced would not necessarily be those that had been increased during the boom phase 
of  the  credit  cycle.  That  might  well  be  inappropriate  if  those  sectors  were  becoming 
distressed.  This  would,  of  course,  call  for  quite  difficult  practical  judgments.  Fourth,  the 
operation of the instrument would need macroeconomic as well as financial system inputs. 
Thus, to the extent that top-down stress tests were employed as one input to the calibration, 
these  could  not  be  a  standard  battery  of  mechanical  scenarios.  They  would  need  to  be 
tailored to the risks around the outlook for the economy and the financial system. That would 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 9
also entail judgments being made. Taking all that together, it seems to us implausible that 
the  instrument  could  be  applied  according  to  a  rule.  Instead,  policymakers  would  need  to 
meet periodically to make difficult judgments faced with enormous uncertainty. 
I should touch on, although I do not have time to elaborate tonight, on three consequences of 
such  an  approach.  First,  this  would  be  a  data  intensive  endeavour.  The  macroprudential 
authority  would  probably  need  information  on  sectors  to  which  the  banking  system  was 
exposed going beyond anything that has been collected to date, particularly in the non-bank 
financial sector. Whether that renders this kind of approach overly ambitious is part of what 
we should all debate. 
Second,  in  a  regime  involving  judgments,  the  macroprudential  authorities  would  need  to 
explain  publicly  the  basis  of  their  decisions  and  how  they  related  to  their  mandate  and 
specified  objectives.  Moreover,  as  in  the  monetary  policy  sphere,  transparency  might 
enhance the effectiveness of macroprudential instruments. That is because over time banks 
(and  other  lenders)  would  develop  an  appreciation  of  the  circumstances  in  which  the 
macroprudential  toolkit  might  be  deployed,  requiring  them  to  hold  more  capital  or  liquidity 
against a build-up of exposures. 
Third,  the  macroprudential  authorities  would  need  a  deep  and  broad  understanding  of  the 
financial system. While the big picture story of the current crisis is clear ex post, recognising 
it  in  advance  would  have  required,  amongst  other  things,  looking  under  the  bonnet  of  the 
structured  finance  industry  and  elsewhere  to  see  the  obscure  way  in  which  leverage  and 
liquidity  mismatches  were  accumulating.  That  would  have  helped  an  understanding  of  the 
expansion of bank balance sheets.10
Leakage 
(d) 
From the outset of this debate, I have stressed the hazards in trying to steer credit growth in 
a world in which capital can flow freely across borders. Think of a case where the domestic 
authorities increased the risk weight on mortgage lending. The measure would apply only to 
banks headquartered here or operating out of a subsidiary. It would not apply to branches of 
foreign-headquartered banks, still less to pure cross border activity. But it is easy to imagine 
that,  rather  than  borrowing  from  UK-domiciled  banks,  mortgage  brokers  could  arrange  for 
households  to  borrow  from  a  lender  based  overseas,  or  at  least  with  the  loan  booked 
overseas. In terms of the accumulation of debt in the sector concerned – in this hypothetical 
case, housing – there might, after a time, be little or no effect. That would obviously not be 
great for the risk of default by the borrowing sector concerned. But UK-based banks would 
have been required to build their defences. That might mean that, other things being equal, if 
and  when  the  borrowing  sector  got  into  difficulty,  UK-based  banks  would  be  less  likely  to 
collapse under the strain of losses. If so, the damage to financial stability would be reduced, 
and the eventual economic costs might plausibly be lower than otherwise; especially if those 
UK banks were able to take up some of the slack created by withdrawal of credit supply by 
foreign banks to sound UK borrowers. 
It  might,  though,  just  be  possible  to  go  further.  In  the  first  place,  a  domestic  authority 
increasing  capital  or  liquidity  requirements  due  to  on  lending  by  its  banks  to  a  particular 
sector could act as a signal to the home authorities of other, overseas banks. Plainly, it would 
be important to share analysis with international peers, even if things went no further than 
that.  Transparency  to  the  market  would  aid  that  dialogue.  But  it  might  be  worth  exploring 
whether  there  could  feasibly  be  some  kind  of  more  or  less  co-ordinated  or  co-operative 
macroprudential response in some instances. This would entail risk weights being varied on 
                                                 
10   For a description of how banks used structured finance to try and transfer risk see, Tucker PMWT (2007a), “A 
Perspective  on  Recent  Monetary  and  Financial  System  Developments”,  a  speech  at  the  Merrill  Lynch 
Conference for hedge funds, April 2007, (pp.8-10). 
10 
 BIS Review 134/2009
the basis of both the economy of the borrowers and conditions in the home financial system 
of the lenders, with the aim of at least avoiding conflicting policy responses. As such, it would 
be a novel overlay on the Basel Concordat agreed thirty years ago for the division of labour 
between  home  and  host  supervisors.  This  might  usefully  form  part  of  the  international 
discussion on possible macroprudential instruments. 
The cross-sectional dimension: interconnectedness 
(e)  
Finally,  to  round  up,  just  a  few  thoughts  on  the  other  dimension  to  the  macroprudential 
challenge: the “cross-sectional” issue of interconnectedness. I have already applauded the 
debate  in  Basel,  and  at  the  FSA,  on  developing  a  regime  for  supplementary  capital 
requirements for firms that are especially interwoven into the system. I would add only two 
points this evening. 
First,  just  as  top-down  stress  testing  could  be  a  useful  input  to  utilising  the  “time  series” 
instruments I have been outlining, so the “cross-sectional” add-ons would need to draw upon 
judgments  about  how  distress  at  a  particular  firm  would  ripple  through  the  system.  Stress 
testing could be one useful part of that. But it would also require a deep knowledge of the 
plumbing  of  the  financial  system  –  the  way  payments,  settlements  and  collateral  transfers 
operate. 
And so my second point is that the debate about how best to regulate the banking system 
must  not  distract  policymakers  or  practitioners 
the 
infrastructure  of  our  markets.  This  crisis  would  have  been  unimaginably  worse  without 
effectively  collateralised  payment  systems,  many  over-the-counter  derivative  contracts  and 
central-counterparty  clearing  houses.  Although  progress  in those  areas  proceed  below  the 
radar of many, we must renew our emphasis on effective financial market infrastructure. 
the  plumbing, 
improving 
from 
Conclusions 
The current crisis has reminded everyone that our primary interest in regulating the banking 
sector is the preservation of systemic stability and so of the vital services banks perform in 
our economy and financial markets. 
There are two great lessons from the crisis. One is that important banks can fail and so we 
would be wise to have robust resolution regimes and plans. The second is that the financial 
system is a system. One that contains complex and shifting inter-connections. And one that 
can generate pronounced credit cycles, which even if they initially affect only asset values, 
eventually can materially affect the real economy. This is why the macroprudential debate is 
so important. It has been a long time coming.11
This  evening  I  have  outlined  some  of  the  Bank’s  current  thinking  on  where  it  might  be 
feasible  to  develop  a  toolkit  of  useful  macroprudential  instruments.  It  is  not  a  set  of  firm 
recommendations. An open discussion is needed before anyone can reach that point. But I 
hope it is a useful contribution. We plan to expand on it in a discussion paper over the next 
few weeks. 
                                                 
11   The beginnings of the macroprudential debate can be traced back at least to Crockett, A (2000): “Marrying the 
micro- and macroprudential dimensions of financial stability”, BIS Speeches, 21 September 2000. 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 11
