Mario Draghi: Challenges to financial stability and the proposals of the 
Financial Stability Board 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the 12th Conference of the ECB-CFS Research Network “Learning from 
the Crisis: Financial Stability, Macroeconomic Policy and International Institutions”, hosted by 
the Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance, Rome, 12 November 2009. 
 The crisis and the new regulation of finance  
1.  
Conditions in the financial markets have been improving steadily since last spring, but neither 
risk premiums nor funding costs have come back to their pre-crisis level. At the onset of the 
crisis it became soon clear that the international community had to work together closely to 
find  a  way  out  of  it.  It  was  the  first  lesson  we  learnt:  before  the  crisis,  governments, 
regulators, and the financial services industry had for years been affected, in more than one 
dimension, by a sort of collective and pervasive blindness. The tremendous macroeconomic 
imbalances that had been accumulating for years, market developments also stemming from 
regulatory mistakes that had made regulators’ knowledge obsolete, the new and crucial role 
of  intermediaries’  balance  sheets  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  were  all 
phenomena that were either ignored or downplayed in their importance. Surprisingly, though 
it was widely recognized that risk was being priced and trade globally, this did not lead to 
greater international cooperation in financial regulation.  
The rapid spread of this devastating financial crisis has vividly demonstrated the power and 
force of global integration. If banks all over the world over-extend leverage and under-price 
risk, a mere change in sentiment in the US housing market can be a sufficient catalyst for a 
widespread collapse in confidence. Market liquidity evaporates, and credit supply contracts 
as  the  global  financial  system  comes  under  severe  strain.  After  the  failure  of  Lehman’s, 
markets  actually  froze  across  the  globe,  and  extraordinary  intervention  was  needed  to 
prevent systemic collapse. World trade slumped as demand plummeted. A “great recession” 
was inevitable in most advanced countries.  
Then it was rapidly acknowledged that international co-operation should become an essential 
feature of the management of this crisis.  
Financial  systems  were  underpinned  by  public  capital  injections,  massive  exceptional 
liquidity  support  and  funding  guarantees.  And  there  was  a  widespread  loosening  of 
macroeconomic policies. Authorities worked closely together to alleviate particular pressure 
points,  such  as  the  shortage  of  US  dollars  in  foreign  currency  swap  markets,  through  the 
introduction  of  temporary  bilateral  swap  agreements.  And  now,  as  market  conditions 
improve, there is a clear recognition of the need to co-ordinate across countries the exit from 
support measures, particularly where spillover risks are significant.  
Clear political leadership for this has been provided by the G20, designated as the premier 
forum for international economic and financial co-operation.  
One key objective of such co-operation is to achieve radical changes to the financial system 
regulation.  In  an  integrated  system,  where  level  playing  field  concerns  are  very  real,  this 
requires  international  policy  development  and  consistent  implementation.  In  this  area,  the 
Financial Stability Board – which I have the privilege of currently chairing – plays a key role.  
The role of the Financial Stability Board  
2. 
The  Board  was  established  earlier  this  year  by  the  G20  to  lead,  co-ordinate  and  monitor 
progress 
the  development  and 
financial  regulation  and 
in  strengthening 
to  drive 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 1
implementation  of  policies  to  support  global  financial  stability.  It  succeeded  the  Financial 
Stability Forum, but incorporated a substantial expansion of the membership to include the 
large  emerging  economies.  And  at  the  same  time,  the  mandate  was  broadened  and 
enhanced. The strengthened mandate is now enshrined in the FSB Charter that took effect 
from the Pittsburgh Summit last September.  
So why do we need a Financial Stability Board? What is the distinctive role the Board plays 
in  strengthening  the  global  financial  system?  How  does  the  Board  work  to  deliver  the  key 
objectives set by the G20 Leaders? And what are the key priorities in the coming months?  
The strength of the FSB lies in its membership. It brings together in one organization senior 
level representatives (heads or deputies) from all the relevant actors: regulatory authorities, 
central  banks  and  finance  ministries  from  24  jurisdictions  spanning  the  major  financial 
centres  across  the  globe.  Indeed,  to  ensure  broad  coverage,  and  thus  to  improve  the 
effectiveness of policy design and execution, membership is wider than the G20. And these 
national  representatives  are  joined  on  the  Board  by  the  heads  of  the  key  international 
standard  setting  bodies  and  by  high-level  officials  from  the  major  international  financial 
institutions.  
By  harnessing  the  common  aims  and  collective  responsibilities  of  this  membership,  the 
Board is uniquely placed to promote global financial stability. A number of objectives follow.  
A  primary  role  of  the  Board  is  to  undertake  the  diagnosis  of  regulatory,  supervisory  and 
financial policy changes needed to maintain financial stability. To deliver on this, it is our task 
to ensure that the work of national authorities and the international standard setting bodies is 
appropriately  prioritized,  effectively  coordinated  and  focused  on  the  health  of  the  financial 
system  as  a  system,  that  gaps  in  the  regulatory  agenda  are  identified  and  filled,  and  that 
overlaps and inconsistencies are avoided.  
Second,  as  I  will  illustrate  further  below,  many  financial  stability  policy  goals,  such  as 
resolving  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem,  span  a  wide  range  of  issues  that  require  input, 
expertise and action from a number of standard setting bodies and national and international 
agencies. The Board will oversee these multi-dimensional work programmes, to balance the 
potential  solutions  from  individual  work  streams,  and  to  offer  consistent  advice  to  political 
leaders on how to develop a strong policy framework.  
And  third,  the  Board  will  promote  consistent  implementation  and  follow  through  of  agreed 
policies and standards.  
Developing financial stability policies  
3.  
A key responsibility – and a starting point for much of the FSB’s work – is to identify sources 
of  vulnerability  in  the  global  financial  system  and  how  best  to  reduce  them.  There  are 
conjunctural  as  well  as  structural  components  to  this  assessment  and,  as  this  crisis  has 
amply demonstrated, these components interact.  
While we regularly review trends in global financial system to identify areas where risks may 
be building, our primary focus is the identification of structural weaknesses: market failures, 
such  as  the  misalignment  of  incentives,  collective  action  and  coordination  problems; 
weaknesses  in  market  infrastructure;  and  information  asymmetries  and  shortfalls.  Such 
“fault-lines”  in  the  fabric  of  the  financial  system  highlight  the  need  for  regulation  and 
supervision.  
It is vital that the authorities work closely together to deliver common and consistent solutions 
to  identified  system-wide  vulnerabilities,  given  the  potential  for  arbitrage  and  regulatory 
competition  and  the  risks  of  conflicts  between  uncoordinated  national  policy  objectives.  A 
collective  diagnosis  is  the  necessary  foundation  for  a  well  coordinated  and  effective 
response.  
2 
 BIS Review 144/2009
the  global 
the  health  of 
to  oversee,  drive 
interconnections  and 
Following  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  an  urgent  and  immediate  task  of  the  FSB’s 
predecessor, the Financial Stability Forum, was to undertake a thorough assessment of the 
main sources of the crisis, the weaknesses revealed and lessons for policy. In April 2008, the 
FSF  produced  a  report  committing  its  members  to  a  wide  range  of  concrete  actions  to 
strengthen financial system resilience. A further set of recommendations, focusing on ways 
to reduce the procyclicality of the financial system, to improve co-operation in cross-border 
crisis  management,  and  to  strengthen  compensation  frameworks,  was  published  in  April 
2009.  Together,  our  2008  and  2009  reports  were  major  inputs  into  the  Declarations  by 
Leaders at the Washington and London summits on an action plan to strengthen the financial 
system.  We  have  since  been  asked 
forward  and  co-ordinate 
implementation of the action plan, and strengthen it where needed.  
The  key  message  is  straightforward:  we  need  major  changes.  We  need  to  build  a  system 
which  is  less  leveraged,  where  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  are  much  stronger,  where  all 
institutions  or  infrastructure  capable  of  posing  significant  risk  are  subject  to  appropriate 
oversight  and  safeguards,  and  where  no  institution  is  too  big  to  fail.  And  we  need  a 
systematic effort to reverse the misalignments in incentives that came to characterize part of 
financial system.  
All this requires a regulatory and prudential framework which pays much more attention to 
system-wide 
financial  network.  We 
consequently  need  to  focus  much  more  on  the  difficult,  but  also  crucially  important, 
challenges of designing and implementing a macroprudential system of regulation. This will 
ensure  that  the  financial  system  is  a  source  of  stability  that  supports  the  economy  under 
stress, not a source of weakness that amplifies strains and causes major economic damage.  
In  undertaking  this  collective  diagnosis  and  drawing  up  a  work  programme,  an  important 
element of the FSB’s role has been to ensure that there is sufficient focus on key areas that 
cut  across  the  responsibility  of  different  international  agencies  and  groupings.  Two  good 
examples, high on the policy agenda, are procyclicality and compensation.  
There will be major corrective measures to mitigate the procyclical tendencies of the system. 
Banks  will  be  required  to  build  up  a  capital  buffer  during  the  expansionary  phases  of  the 
cycle to draw on at times of generalized difficulty. It has already been proposed to mandate a 
significant increase in the capital charges on trading activities and exposures to securitization 
instruments.  The  FSB’s  proposals  are  being  addressed  within  the  framework  for  capital 
regulation, driven by the Basel Committee; those on provisioning, accounting and valuation 
issues are taken forward by the accounting standard setters with input from the regulatory 
community;  those  on  margining  practices  in  securities  and  OTC  derivatives  markets  are 
being pursued by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the Committee 
on the Global Financial System.  
We are now entering a critical stage in the regulatory reform process: we have to take some 
difficult  decisions.  The  Basel  Committee  will  test  those  affecting  the  capital  framework 
through a comprehensive impact assessment in 2010, and phase them in as financial and 
economic conditions improve.  
Principles  on  compensation  were  published  in  the  spring.  The  FSB  followed  up  with 
implementation  standards  in  September,  which  were  endorsed  by  G20  Leaders  at  the 
Pittsburgh  Summit.  The  new  rules  apply  to  top  management  and  to  anyone  who  has  the 
power  to  make  decisions  with  a  significant  impact  on  the  balance  sheet  of  a  bank.  They 
provide  that  a  good  part  of  compensation  should  be  variable,  dependent  on  the  bank’s 
performance, but with payment deferred for at least three years and in the form of securities, 
and with a claw-back clause in the event of unsatisfactory performance by the bank or the 
executive. The aim of these rules is to counter excessive risk-taking, the pursuit of short-term 
gain and opacity in compensation. They emphasize disclosure and the control function of the 
board of directors and the shareholders. Above all, they extend regulatory jurisdiction to the 
sphere of executive compensation.  
BIS Review 144/2009 
 3
Action  is  now  urgently  required  by  national  authorities  and  by  the  standard  setters  for  the 
banking,  securities  and  insurance  industries  to  implement  these  principles  consistently.  A 
first check on their application is scheduled for March 2010.  
Rolling back moral hazard risk  
4.  
At  the  top  of  our  current  agenda  is  the  need  to  resolve  the  “too  big  (or  too  complex/too 
interconnected)  to  fail”  problem.  The  problem  has  been  around  for  years,  it  has  not  been 
addressed  and,  by  objective  measures,  our  actions  to  save  the  financial  system  this  time 
have expanded the problem. The FSB have committed to propose measures to reduce the 
risks posed by systemically important institutions by October 2010.  
Work will progress under three broad, complementary approaches.  
The  first  is  to  reduce  the  probability  and  impact  of  failure  of  a  systemically  important 
institution. Options under consideration include strengthening the resilience of the institution 
through  higher  prudential  requirements,  contingent  capital,  or  limitations  on  higher  risk 
activities,  and  policies  that  lessen  the  impact  of  failure  and  the  associated  contagion  risks 
through constraints on size and/or connectedness.  
The second approach is to improve the capability of the financial system to deal with failure, 
through  ex  ante  contingency  planning  to  develop  individual  de-risking,  and  through  further 
steps to improve national and international crisis resolution frameworks.  
The  third  approach  is  to  strengthen  the  core  financial  infrastructure  to  withstand  failure, 
including  through  arrangements  for  central  counterparties,  OTC  contract  design  and 
collateralization practices.  
Given significant differences in financial structures and systems, there is unlikely to be a one 
size  fits  all  answer  to  the  moral  hazard  problem.  But  the  underlying  challenges  and  the 
necessary  approaches  to  them  are  broadly  similar  across  jurisdictions.  Many  of  the  policy 
approaches discussed have level playing field implications for the structure of international 
banking and financial activity.  
We  need  therefore  to  ensure  that  the  policies  adopted  to  meet  these  challenges  are 
consistent  and  coordinated,  do  not  promote  arbitrage  that  undermines  their  effectiveness, 
and do not impose unnecessary constraints that lead to fragmentation of the global financial 
system.  
Strengthening policy implementation  
5.  
The FSB have been successful in formulating a common agenda that has gained widespread 
political endorsement. But that is not enough. Effective, timely and consistent implementation 
of  agreed  policies  and  standards  at  national  level  is  essential:  first,  to  resolve  collective 
action  and  coordination  problems;  second,  to  prevent  harmful  arbitrage,  spillovers  and 
regulatory competition; and third, to preserve the benefits of a level playing field across the 
global financial system.  
It is ultimately up to the national supervisors and regulators to implement the measures they 
agreed upon within the FSB. Responsibility for the surveillance on the actual implementation 
belongs to the IMF.  
However,  one  should  also  underline  that  all  24  member  authorities  have  committed  in  the 
FSB  Charter  to  implement  international  financial  standards,  and  to  undergo  periodic  peer 
reviews  of  their  adherence.  These  peer  reviews  will  be  of  two  kinds  –  country  on  country 
reviews, and thematic reviews which examine implementation of agreed policies in a given 
area across the membership.  
4 
 BIS Review 144/2009
We  will  begin  conducting  peer  reviews  in  January,  starting  with  a  review  of  the 
implementation  of  the  FSB’s  Principles  for  Compensation  that  I  spoke  about  earlier.  More 
generally,  to  further  bolster  international  consistency  in  rulemaking,  our  members  will 
participate  in  an  information  network  to  monitor  the  national  implementation  of  all  new 
measures agreed by the FSB and G20 to strengthen global financial stability. That network 
will be drawn on in future thematic reviews.  
The  FSB  aims  to  lead  by  example  to  strengthen  observance  of  international  financial 
standards  across  the  globe.  Independent,  published,  peer  reviews  of  implementation  of 
standards  within  member  jurisdictions  will  encourage  a  “race  to  the  top”  in  terms  of 
adherence. They will also reinforce the credibility of the FSB.  
Concluding remarks  
6.  
International  cooperation  has  limited  the  economic  impact  of  the  crisis,  avoiding  the  worst 
scenarios. Still, difficult challenges lie ahead of us: how to recover a balanced, sustainable 
growth  path;  how  to  build  a  new  financial  regulatory  framework  that  reflects  the  lessons 
drawn from the crisis.  
The  FSB  has  been  created  to  improve  the  design  and  implementation  of  financial  policies 
across the globe. The current framework has been shown to be seriously wanting and has 
posed enormous economic costs. It is consequently vital that authorities diagnose the current 
problems thoroughly and take bold and radical action to remedy the current deficiencies. The 
need to strengthen the resilience and robustness of the global financial system is clear and 
paramount.  
There  is  a  major  work  programme  ahead  for  international  regulatory  bodies,  for  national 
authorities, for the IMF and for the Financial Stability Board itself. In many areas, such as the 
“too  big  to  fail”  problem,  there  will  be  no  easy  answers.  In  others,  such  as  introducing  a 
macro-prudential  or  systemic  approach  to  financial  regulation,  both  academic  and  policy 
thinking is still at an early stage. And as the situation improves, the power of vested interests 
contrary to any substantive reform gets stronger. Nevertheless, we must take action in the 
near term in all areas.  
Can we prevent the next crisis? Almost by definition of the word “crisis” the response to this 
question is bound to be negative, but what we can and should do is to make our financial 
system more resilient when the next crisis will hit it. After all we have shown that we are able 
to learn from experience. This crisis had all the potential to generate the same devastation as 
in  1929,  but  this  time  both  the  structure  of  the  real  economies  was  more  robust,  and  the 
policy reaction was more perceptive and eventually successful. 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 5
