Jean-Claude Trichet: Shaping the future of global financial market 
regulation  
Transcript of a short video interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Netherlands  Bank’s  Amsterdam  Financial  Forum  2009,  Amsterdam, 
28 November 2009. 
 President  Trichet,  we  really  appreciate  your  willingness  to  address  the  Amsterdam 
Financial Forum. What would be your main messages for the Financial Forum? 
It is a great pleasure to address the Financial Forum that will discuss topical issues for the 
long-term  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Regrettably  I 
cannot join you in person. By the time you see this video, I am on my way to China for our 
euro area-China dialogue. Nevertheless, I would like to share with you some of my views on 
the ongoing regulatory reform agenda.  
I would like to pay tribute to the role of the Basel Committee and its Chair, my colleague Nout 
Wellink. The Basel Committee is one of the major fora shaping the future of financial market 
regulation. I would like to highlight in particular the Committee’s main priorities over the short-
term and the challenges it faces in the coming year.  
President Trichet, what impact did the decisions of the G20 have on the work of the 
Basel Committee and its governance? 
The leadership of the G20 in determining the new financial regulatory framework has led to a 
strengthening  of  the  Basel  Committee  and  of  its  governance.  The  Basel  Committee 
broadened its membership in June to include new representatives from the G20 countries as 
well  as  from  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore.  Strengthening  the  governance  of  the  Basel 
Committee  was  crucial  to  enhance  the  Committee’s  ability  to  carry  out  its  core  mission  of 
improving  global  supervisory  practices  and  standards.  Its  new  governance  is  expected  to 
also  contribute  to  the  effective  implementation  of  reforms,  including  in  major  emerging 
countries. 
What exactly is your role in the Basel Committee? 
I have the honour of chairing the oversight body of the Basel Committee. We have extended 
the membership to supervisory authorities and central banks of 27 countries. In September, 
we met in the new composition for the first time. This was, indeed, a very important and, I 
must say, challenging meeting given the issues at stake. I was very pleased that we reached 
agreement on a comprehensive set of priorities for the work of the Basel Committee in the 
short-term. These measures will constitute a major overhaul of the prudential framework and 
will  improve  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  In  particular,  we  have  committed  to 
improve  the  risk-weighted  capital  requirements;  to  establish  countercyclical  capital  buffers; 
and to introduce a global liquidity standard as well as a leverage ratio that will supplement 
risk-weighted capital requirements.  
Could you elaborate a little further on these issues? What will be the implications for 
financial institutions?  
First, financial institutions will have to raise the quality, consistency and transparency of 
capital. Tier 1 capital should be predominantly composed of common shares and retained 
earnings  to  increase  its  loss-absorbing  capacity.  A  common  definition  of  capital  and 
appropriate  disclosure  of  its  components  will  be  internationally  established.  This  will 
contribute to increased transparency and comparability.  
Second,  a  framework  of countercyclical capital buffers  above  the  minimum  requirement 
will  be  introduced.  The  Basel  Committee  will  set  up  appropriate  indicators  for  the  build-up 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 1
and  release  of  these  buffers.  Measures  for  the  conservation  of  capital  will  also  be 
considered, such as constraints on its distribution.  
Third, a non risk-based leverage ratio will supplement risk-based capital requirements and 
help  to  curb  excessive  balance  sheet  growth.  To  ensure  the  comparability  of  the  leverage 
ratio  at  the  global  level,  necessary  adjustments,  for  instance  in  accounting  rules,  will  be 
made. 
Fourth, banks will be subject to a minimum global standard for funding liquidity. This new 
standard will include a stressed liquidity coverage ratio that will be underpinned by a longer-
term structural liquidity ratio.  
Finally,  there  is  one  more  very  important  issue  that  I  would  like  to  mention.  This  issue  is 
compensation.  The  G20  Leaders  endorsed  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  implementation 
standards  to  align  compensation  with  prudent  risk-taking  and  long-term  performance.  The 
Basel Committee has set up a network of senior supervisors to monitor the implementation of 
these  standards.  As  discussions  around  bank  bonuses  resurface,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  that  banks  implement  these  standards  immediately,  and  in  time  for  the  2009 
bonuses. I urge supervisors to ensure timely and consistent implementation. And once again 
I urge banks to behave responsibly in this respect and resist short-term temptation. We all 
have to be conscious that in the current episode, profit developments in individual institutions 
cannot be seen in isolation from the very large public support granted to the financial system 
as a whole.  
President Trichet, are you satisfied with the results of regulation so far?  
Yes, I am quite satisfied with the progress but the proof of the matter of course lies in the 
implementation. The far-reaching measures being developed by the Basel Committee under 
the  presidency  of  Nout  Wellink  will  result,  over  time,  in  higher  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements  as  well  as  in  less  leverage  and  procyclicality  in  the  banking  system.  The 
proposals on these measures will be issued by year-end. The calibration will take place in 
2010.  Their  implementation  will  be  phased  in,  taking  into  account  expectations  for  the 
improvement of financial conditions and economic recovery.  
But even though this comprehensive package is an achievement, it does not imply that the 
work is over. The challenges related to finalisation of the package in the coming years should 
not be underestimated. These include assessing the interplay of the adopted and upcoming 
measures, and deciding on the overall level of capital in the financial system.  
What do you mean by the interplay of the various measures, will they complement or 
reinforce each other?  
There will be an important interplay of the various measures. We will undertake an impact 
assessment to analyse their cumulative effect. The aim is not to simply add-up the various 
measures,  but  to  take  into  account  their  interrelation.  We  need  to  look  at  the  measures 
already taken and assess how they combine with the upcoming changes to the definition of 
capital, the introduction of a leverage ratio and of countercyclical capital buffers.  
Are  you  not  concerned  that  these  measures  will  hamper  efficiency  of  the  banking 
sector? 
We  need  to  reach  agreement  on  the  overall  level  of  capital  in  the  financial  system 
compared  to  pre-crisis  levels,  building  on  past  and  recent  experience  including  national 
stress-testing exercises. In doing that, we need to strike a balance between a level of capital 
that promotes long-term financial stability without unduly compromising growth and efficiency 
of the banking sector. This will be no easy feat. We have challenging years ahead of us and I 
strongly urge the work of the Committee to continue at full speed. We mustn’t loose either 
the momentum or the window of opportunity for reform.  
How will these new regulations contribute to strengthening resilience of the financial 
system?  
2 
 BIS Review 154/2009
Speaking towards an audience in the Netherlands let me illustrate it with an analogy, drawing 
on a project well known to you. The Dutch have through time developed the Delta project – a 
series of defences to protect the stability of the nation, guarding it against floods. What we 
are  trying  to  build  is  the  Delta  Project  of  the  financial  system  that  will  protect  it  from  risk 
excesses. If I may say, in this sense we are fortunate that the Basel Committee is chaired by 
a Dutchman!  
As you know, the Delta Project, considered one of the seven wonders of the modern world, 
comprises different types of constructions, such as dams and dikes, that together protect the 
nation from the risk of flooding. Similarly, the set of regulatory measures being developed by 
the  Basel  Committee  will  act  together  as  a  series  of  defences  against  risks  to  financial 
stability. We also need to agree on the height of the defences we are putting in place as this 
is linked to the overall level of protection we are aiming at. This will determine the appropriate 
level of capital.  
The official goal of the Delta Project is to reduce the risk of flooding. Let this be an inspiration 
for us in our efforts to safeguard the stability of the financial system.  
Mr Trichet, thank you very much for your contribution. 
Thank you for your attention. I wish you a stimulating and constructive discussion. 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 3
