Erkki Liikanen: The crisis management role of the IMF 
Statement by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Governor of the Fund 
for Finland, at the Joint Annual Discussion, World Bank Group and International Monetary 
Fund, Istanbul, 6 October 2009. 
 I  am  honoured  to  address  this  distinguished  audience  on  behalf  of  the  Nordic-Baltic 
Constituency, consisting of Denmark, Estonia, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Sweden, 
and  Finland.  We  are  gathered  here  in  Istanbul  about  a  year  after  the  dramatic  events  of 
autumn  2008  when  the  financial  system  came  close  to  collapsing.  Fortunately,  today’s 
meeting is taking place in a calmer setting.  
Dealing with the crisis has been challenging  
The countries in my constituency are small,  open, export-oriented economies. When trade 
collapsed  as  a  result  of  the  crisis,  we  were  all  hit.  The  crisis  has  hit  the  countries  in  my 
constituency in differing ways. Some have negotiated programmes with the IMF that support 
their efforts to build the basis for sustainable recovery.  
International  cooperation,  covering  a  wide  range  of  policies,  was  crucial  in  avoiding  a  full 
melt-down of the global financial system. Prompt actions by monetary and fiscal authorities 
and joint international efforts all played a critical role.  
A well-functioning global financial system is needed to set the stage for economic recovery. 
Although the worst is clearly over in the financial markets, credit channels are still impaired. 
Looking forward, a key question is whether the financial system is able to provide sufficient 
credit to support economic recovery.  
For about two years now we have been witnessing the biggest financial and economic crisis 
since the Great Depression. Solutions have been sought open-mindedly, cooperating on a 
broad  international  basis.  This  has  been  challenging  for  policy  makers.  It  will  be  equally 
challenging  to  design  and  communicate  well-timed  exit  strategies  from  the  extraordinary 
policy measures that have been taken.  
Finally we are seeing the first signs of global recovery. In the medium term, a rebalancing of 
the  global  economy  will  be  crucial  in  ensuring  sustained  growth.  The  Fund  will  play  an 
important role in advising member countries on policies that are also optimal from a global 
perspective.  
The Fund has carried out major reforms  
The first full-fledged Early Warning Exercise, launched here at our meetings in Istanbul, is 
one example of a cooperative effort to promote global financial stability. The joint IMF-FSB 
exercise  has  benefitted  from  the  Fund's  macro-financial  knowledge,  complemented  by  the 
FSB's  regulatory  insight.  We  recognize  that  the  Early  Warning  Exercise  is  still  a  work-in-
progress, and we are looking forward to its further integration into the Fund's analytical work.  
The Fund has thoroughly reformed its lending facilities and conditionality. Member countries 
can  now  get  larger  amounts  of  financing  with  streamlined  conditionality.  Structural 
conditionality in particular has been revamped to focus on objectives rather than on specified 
actions. These measures also aim to address long-standing criticism about the intrusiveness 
of Fund lending. Clearly, the Fund is “listening and learning”.  
BIS Review 123/2009 
 1
As  a  result  of  global  efforts,  agreement  was  reached  on  tripling  the  Fund's  resources  and 
doubling its capacity for concessional lending to low-income countries. The Fund's relevance 
is no longer being questioned.  
As  the  crisis  is  now  hitting  low-income  countries,  it  is  important  to  make  sure  that  these 
countries do not lose the achievements they have made during the past decade. A new set 
of concessional lending facilities will enable low-income countries to get larger amounts of 
financing on more flexible terms. These countries will also get extra support in the form of 
relief from interest payments. Indeed, low-income countries have not been forgotten.  
The Nordic-Baltic Constituency is doing its share  
Delivery  of  financing  in  order  to  meet  the  agreed  tripling  of  the  Fund's  resources  is 
proceeding.  Member  countries  are  providing  considerable  sums  as  bilateral  loans  or  note 
purchases at this stage. My Constituency has a long-term commitment to the financing of the 
Fund. For us, continuing to finance our share is our duty.  
One  example  is  the  current  NAB,  where  my  Constituency  is  well-represented.  Fair  global 
burden-sharing will be key in reaching agreement on a new NAB, which should be a bolster 
to the Fund's quota-based financing. Going forward, we need to assess the optimal size of 
the Fund and strike the right balance between quota-based and temporary resources.  
Another example is the SDR voluntary trading mechanism. About one third of the countries 
that for years have been the market-makers for SDRs are from my Constituency. We shall 
not  shy  away  from  continuing  our  support,  but  it  is  important  to  expand  the  number  of 
voluntary agreements.  
We  have  also  been  actively  involved  in  crisis  management  in  our  own  region.  The  Nordic 
countries have committed sizable bilateral loans to Iceland and Latvia.  
However, to scale up our financing in line with the commonly agreed initiatives, we need the 
support of our citizens. If we finance, we want to have a say.  
In addition, delivery of the financing to support a doubling of the Fund's concessional lending 
is  moving  ahead.  As  you  may  know,  my  Constituency  is  already  a  notable  donor  and  we 
stand ready to provide support.  
A reformed Fund back in action  
The Fund has often been criticized for its actions – sometimes rightly so, sometimes unjustly 
so. But when the crisis hit, the Fund was seen as the natural choice to be the fire fighter: to 
respond rapidly to help countries meet their financing needs arising from the crisis.  
The Fund stepped up to the challenge and reformed itself in order to respond to the needs of 
its member countries more effectively and in a more flexible manner. It is time to put the new 
toolkit fully into action.  
Further reforms are needed and a review of the quotas is a key element. The reforms should 
be transparent and based on sound economic and financial criteria. As a starting point, all 
countries should ratify the 2008 quota and voice reform. It is vital to deliver on our promise to 
increase the voice and participation of low-income countries.  
For  the  Fund  to  be  relevant  to  all  its  members,  it  is  important  to  achieve  a  further  shift  in 
quotas  from  over-represented  to  under-represented  countries  as  defined  by  the  quota 
formula.  The  size  of  the  quota  increase  will  ultimately  depend  on  the  long-term  financing 
needs of the Fund.  
The role of the IMFC should be enhanced so that it can, with the support of the Executive 
Board, be even more actively involved in setting the strategic orientation of the Fund.  
2 
 BIS Review 123/2009
At  the  same  time,  an  institution  should  not  reform  merely  for  the  sake  of  reforming.  The 
current  Executive  Board  and  IMFC  have  universal  membership.  Where  else  can  you  find 
such a setting; where an institution can deliver when needed and the decisions are anchored 
globally because every member is represented?  
Looking forward, once recovery is on a firm footing, the Fund should again look beyond its 
crisis management role. I am pleased that our discussions here in Istanbul have shown that 
there is broad support among its membership for a strong Fund in normal times, too. 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 3
