Mojmír Hampl: European integration – a critical economist’s view 
Speech by Mr Mojmír Hampl, Vice-Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Europe at 
Sixty: 1949–2009, Metropolitan University, Prague, 20 November 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me first express my deep gratitude to the organisers for inviting me to give this keynote 
speech today. And do not take it as a standard, politically correct opening sentence. I really 
mean  it.  For  me  it  is  quite  a  rare  opportunity  to  speak  frankly  and  openly  on  such  an 
important topic, which the process of European integration certainly is, and to speak more as 
a  scholar  than  a  policy-maker.  So  I  will  try  to  do  my  best  and  to  be  outspoken  enough  to 
provoke  questions  and  comments  after  I  finish.  Therefore,  the  usual  disclaimer  is  more 
relevant than ever this time: my opinions are not necessarily the opinions of my employer. 
I  think  European  integration  is  a  process  that  provides  a  lot  of  food  for  thought  for  many 
social scientists. I will try to approach the topic from the point of view of an economist, but 
also  a  citizen  and  a  mere  mortal,  sharing  with  you  some  of  my  concerns  as  to  how  the 
process of European integration has been evolving so far and where it is most likely heading. 
These  concerns  are  supported  by  the  fact  that  as  a  member  of  the  EU’s  Economic  and 
Financial Committee, I can watch the integration process every day on-line as an insider, so 
to say. 
The title of this conference stresses the fact that European integration started 60 years ago. 
You know that exactly 60 years ago a completely different project, originally aimed to build 
up something “brand new”, also appeared quite far away from Europe – in China. What irony 
of fate that after these sixty years it is now the Chinese who seem to be on their way up, 
running fast, while the European Union is stagnating or even descending economically. What 
bitterness,  when  one  realises  that  on  its  way  up,  China  is  still  a  desperate  and  crazy 
communist  regime  that  has  just  allowed  its  citizens  a  bit  more  freedom  in  the  area  of 
economic  life.  Of  course,  a  part  of  the  explanation  lies  in  the  fact  of  simple  economic 
convergence.  But  without  any  doubt,  the  EU  is  losing  its  momentum.  Not  just  now,  in  the 
crisis; this is a longer process. In the EU it seems to me that we have started concentrating 
more on conservation or preservation of the existing wealth, rather than on wealth creation. 
The question of why the European Union is not as economically powerful and efficient as it 
would like to be, is certainly complex. However, my suspicion is that one of the answers is 
that the EU has started concentrating too much – and in many areas almost exclusively – on 
the  process  of  deeper  and  deeper  political  integration.  It  is  almost  a  mainstream  ideology 
which  states  that  the  answer  or  solution  to  virtually  any  problem  in  the  EU  is  more 
integration.  Whenever  we  discuss  problems  with  colleagues  in  Brussels,  the  mainstream 
view typically argues: we need more EU integration to solve this. And if integration has not 
brought what we hoped for, it means we need even more integration. We probably did not 
have enough of it. 
Well,  I  have  some  doubts  about  this  approach,  at  least  as  regards  the  impact  of  political 
integration on the economy. The concept is based on a simple idea that the bigger the state, 
or  the  bigger  the  economy,  the  bigger  also  the  wealth  of  the  citizens  of  such  a  state  or 
economy. This idea fails terribly when compared with simple statistics and facts. If you take a 
look at the correlation between the size of an economy and a measure of well-being such as 
GDP per capita, you will see that on average the bigger, or more populous, economies in the 
world are not generally richer economies. Rather, it is small open economies (including those 
in Europe) that tend to be richer, the only exception to this rule being the United States. So 
bigger does not mean richer. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 1
My own hypothesis is that instead of integration of jurisdictions, competition between them 
might  sometimes  be  more  beneficial  to  economic  growth.  Countries  should  compete  for 
investors, capital and labour force by making their tax systems, legal frameworks and other 
conditions as efficient and friendly as possible. Competition is sometimes useful not only on 
the markets, but also among jurisdictions and states. Political integration can, at some point, 
become  an  obstacle  to  competition,  sometimes  even  intentionally.  I  think  that  the  EU  is, 
unfortunately, right now at this stage. What a shame. 
And why is that? Well, when we choose the path of political integration, we have to watch out 
carefully for certain pitfalls – and I am not sure we have been careful enough in this respect. 
A major pitfall is the effect that we can observe whenever a group of people or institutions 
hires someone else to do a job for them. In economics, we call it the principal-agent model, 
or we say that a group of principals hires an agent. The idea is that the agent will follow the 
directions  of  the  principals.  A  simple  example:  the  shareholders  of  a  company  choose  a 
manager to run their company. But sometimes it happens in this model that the agent tries to 
turn the power structure around and to switch from one who simply follows directions to one 
who deliberately sets the agenda. This effort can often be successful because the agent is a 
relatively small group of people who hold all the relevant information and share very similar 
motivation,  while  principals  tend  to  be  much  more  numerous  and  less  informed  and  their 
objectives are often highly differentiated. 
And so, corporate managers are often able to push through their will even if it goes against 
the  interests  of  many  shareholders;  international  organisations  often  take  steps  that  their 
founding members do not like to see; and by the same token the EU administration is able to 
shape the integration process in ways that differ from what many member states previously 
intended. 
To  give  you  just  one  banal  illustration  of  this  process:  the  remuneration  of  employees  of 
international organisations and of Eurocrats is invariably higher than the remuneration they 
would be able to earn in similar positions at home. Therefore, the principals watch – with little 
joy, of course – a brain-drain in favour of their agent. Thus, an agent gets dominance over its 
principals and principals even contribute to this dominance. 
The  observation  that  agents  try  to  become  more  powerful  than  their  principals  is  usually 
considered to be beyond the boundaries of political correctness, so we rarely hear about it. 
The same holds for another hindrance to proper execution of the European integration idea, 
namely the asymmetry among different principals, that is, among different member states of 
the  EU.  In  itself,  a  difference  in  the  weight  of  a  small  state  and  a  large  state  may  make 
sense; but if certain EU member states have a much bigger informal impact than others on 
the positions that the EU takes in international political or economic forums, the big-impact 
states may be tempted to “nationalise” the voice of the EU. 
Many attempts at nationalisation of EU positions are due to what might be called the “French 
complex”:  Some  leaders  of  bigger countries  still  have  not  fully  absorbed  the  fact  that  their 
country  is  no  longer  the  superpower  it  used  to  be  and  no  longer  leads  the  world,  so  they 
often  try  to  abuse  their  EU-wide  voice  to  support  their  national  interests,  positions  and 
agenda. When they call for Europe to speak with “one voice”, they often seem to expect that 
the  single  voice  of  500  million  EU  citizens  will  be  the  voice  of  their  national  leaders, 
articulating  their  national  tastes  and  priorities.  Of  course,  the  agent,  the  European 
Commission as an executive arm of the EU, also sometimes has this temptation to define or 
steal the voice of the EU. 
Needless to say, the risk that proper integration will be derailed is particularly high when the 
two effects mentioned above are combined – when the EU administration ceases to behave 
as an agent of the less powerful principals but remains under the spell of a few very strong 
principals.  It  is  fairly  understandable  that  certain  EU  member  states  support  the  current, 
rather non-transparent way of modifying the institutional set-up: it is the only way for them to 
maintain or even strengthen the draconian mix I just described. 
2 
 BIS Review 165/2009
Given that European integration is taking place in this “European” way (in the bad sense of 
the word), it is no wonder that standard democratic politics has not left the national level: all 
formally EU-wide ideas are always translated in each individual member state into the local 
political context; there are no true EU-wide political parties, no true EU-wide politicians, no 
true EU-wide media. The debate in EU institutions rarely follows the lines that we are used to 
in standard political debates, such as whether we want more freedom or more redistribution. 
Instead, most time is spent, as I said, on procedures and institutions. The official efforts at 
gradual political integration thus give the impression of squaring the circle. 
These awkward traits in politics at the EU level then lead to some perverse implications. On 
the one hand, measures which would help Europe to retain a strong economic position – and 
here I mean especially liberalisation of markets and trade – take years or even decades to 
implement: the single market for services still does not exist and even the single market for 
labour still has fundamental exemptions. The celebrated Lisbon Strategy has turned into a 
farce; many of the structural reforms that it outlined would be beneficial economically, but few 
of them have been realised or at least enforced by the agent, the European Commission. On 
the  other  hand,  the  EU  institutions  have  repeatedly  shown  an  ability  to  produce  bizarre 
pieces  of  legislation  that  would  hardly  ever  be  passed  at  the  national  level  in  any  given 
member  state.  The  famous  Czech  writer  Milan  Kundera  would  probably  call  it  the 
“unbearable  lightness  of  legislating”.  So  my  suspicion  is  that  the  EU  is  now  in  a  position 
where it is easier to integrate than to liberalise. And these are two different things in terms of 
long-term economic growth, as I have argued. What a shame for the EU and for us. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 165/2009 
 3
