Gane A Simbe: Developing strategies for talent management in Pacific 
Public Services – the challenges of the current environment 
Speech by Mr Gane A Simbe, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Solomon Islands, at 
the 7th Pacific Public Service Commissioners’ Conference, Honiara, 29 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
Distinguished Public Service Commissioners, invited dignitaries, ladies and gentlemen.  
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  share  some  thoughts  towards  this  challenging  topic  on  your 
theme: “Developing Strategies for Talent Management in the Pacific Public Services”. 
My  talk  will  focus  on  The  Challenges  of  the  Current  Environment  that  Pacific  Islands 
countries  face  concerning  brain-drain  and  suggest  some  observations  to  stimulate  your 
discussions on this issue. 
Definitions 
In  the  context  of  my  presentation,  I  will  define  the  terms  “challenges  of  the  current 
environment” in two senses. First, is the challenge faced by Public Service Commission on 
how to manage, the “high flyer” individuals with talents and skills, who can choose to seek 
better value for their skills than working for the Public Services if their expectations are not 
met. This freedom to choose to leave, and seek opportunities elsewhere, renders the Public 
Service Commission powerless to stop and can leave shortfalls in the service delivery of the 
government. 
The second angle of my definition refers to the question of affordability that Public Service 
Commissioners and their governments face in trying to compete in the skills market for the 
best, skilled and talented workers; those with skills and talents that a country wants to retain 
for its national interests. Affordability is one of the key solutions for retaining, and attracting 
clever and skilled professionals but affordability is one of the major problems for most Pacific 
Island Public Service Commissions. 
Skilled and talented professionals are scarce resources 
Like all other resources, skilled and talented professionals for us in the Pacific are a scarce 
resource, and require proper management. Despite the fact that the training of these talented 
professionals are the outcomes of government strategic planning and budgets, unfortunately, 
the governments or the Public Service Commission for that matter, do not have the control 
over how the individuals exercise their rights and freedom to market their skills and talents. 
We also know that companies and organizations outside of the public service too are looking 
for these skilled and talented professionals. These organizations know that success or failure 
in achieving their business goals and delivering of their products or services is depended on 
employing the right skills. 
As  a  consequence  there  is  competition  among  organizations  for  skilled  and  talented 
professionals.  And  they  are  prepared  to  pay  for  the  skills  and  talent  they  require.  So  the 
challenge faced by the  Pacific Public Service Commission is to be able to compete in the 
skills market for the best people with the talents to enable delivery of government services, 
needed by the citizens. 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 1
Management of a skilled and talented employee is a difficult undertaking 
Management  of  skilled  and  talented  employees  is  not  an  easy  task.  As  Rob  Goffee  and 
Gareth Jones in an article titled –“Leading Clever People” (Harvard Business Review, March 
2007) observed, talented people are difficult to manage and please. 
They are restless; they are easily bored, they want to solve problems and not interested in 
pleasing their bosses or are led by them. They resent bureaucratic bottlenecks that slow or 
delay  them  from  achieving  their  results.  Skilled  and  talented  people  know  that  you  as  an 
employer cannot go without them. 
They know how much their skills are worth in the market; because they are members of their 
professional bodies that supply them with market information for their skills. They cannot be 
fooled  too  with  fancy  titles  and  positions  that  do  not  come  with  attractive  remuneration 
packages. Lastly, skilled and talented employees are always hunted down by companies and 
organizations that are prepared to pay more for their skills than what you are currently paying 
them. 
Our own experience in the Central Bank of Solomon Islands demonstrates the difficulties of 
managing  clever  people.  For  years  we  have  been  spending  a  good  portion  of  our  budget 
directly sponsoring our officers to receive Masters Degree level education from Universities 
in Australia to meet the skill gaps that we have identified to enable the Bank meet its legal 
mandate to conduct its monetary policy responsibilities. 
Unfortunately,  we  have  lost  most  of  these  individuals  to  organizations  who  offer  more  for 
their talents than what we can offer. Indeed it is not a good feeling when you have invested 
millions of dollars to train an officer but leaves without due regard for what you have done for 
him as an individual. But this is the challenge and the cost of the freedom and mobility of the 
educated individuals to choose the best deals for their skills. As noted in the World Health 
Organization (WHO) presentation to Ministers of Health for Pacific Countries held in Samoa 
in  2005  that  examined  why  Pacific  Health  Personnel  migrate,  unless  the  conditions  are 
favorable,  skilled  professionals  will  leave  because  of  low  pay,  poor  working  conditions, 
shortage  of  supplies  and  equipment;  and  lack  of  or  limited  educational  opportunities  for 
professional development and advancements. 
In Solomon Islands, there is currently a Special Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry looking 
at the quality of health services provided by our National Referral Hospital. What is obvious 
from the hearings is that the shortages of skilled doctors, health professionals, equipments 
and instruments are the causes of our poor health service delivery and unfortunately this is 
directly linked to the question of affordability. 
The challenge of affordability 
This leads me to the second challenge facing Pacific Public Service Commissions regarding 
skills and talent management. It is the challenge of affordability. It is the ability of the Public 
Service  Commission  to  be  able  to  match  what  the  market  is  willing  to  pay  and  attract  the 
skills and talents that it wants to retain in its workforce. 
Unfortunately,  the  question  of  affordability  is  not  as  easy  an  option  to  some,  if  not,  most 
Pacific Island countries because of resource constraints of their economies. The amount of 
money  available  to  governments  from  their  tax  bases  is  not  sufficient  to  offer  attractive 
remuneration  packages  to  compete  in  the  skills  market  and  meet  other  pressing  social 
services for the population at large. 
Furthermore, the Public Service is already the largest employer in many of the Pacific Island 
countries, and reducing the numbers of Public Service employees in order to make savings 
to  hire  the  most  needed  skilled  workers  can  be  counterproductive,  especially  if  you  are 
dealing with public servants who are members of a strong and influential trade union. 
2 
 BIS Review 166/2009
The effects of the global economic recession that countries in the region have experienced 
since  the  last  half  of  2008  have  also  compounded  the  difficulties  faced  by  small  island 
countries to the question of affordability. Until the global economy recovers, the small island 
economies  in  the  region  grow;  there  will  be  tremendous  pressure  to  raise  tax  revenue  to 
finance the human resources needs and other operational costs of our countries. 
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) in its Pacific Monitor report released in August this year, 
projects that five of the Pacific economics will experience negative growth this year and one 
country  will  not  grow  at  all.  What  this  means  is  that  governments  in  the  region  are 
continuously under pressure to raise the revenue to provide the needed social services to 
their population. 
Economies do not grow overnight and the impact of the global economic recession and the 
projected  negative  growth  will  affect  the  affordability  of  Pacific  Islands  governments  to 
compete for the best skills and talents required by their Public Services. 
What can Public Services Commission do to manage this problem? 
So, what can Public Service Commissions in the Pacific Islands countries do to resolve this 
question of brain-drain which really is a question of affordability? If our governments can pay 
the remuneration packages like other competitors, we might find the answer to the question. 
Otherwise governments in the region will need to be creative in finding ways to manage this 
issue. 
I offer the following suggestions for your considerations. 
First,  Public  Service  Commissioners  must  break  the  rules  when  setting  the  remunerations 
packages for skilled and talented professionals or employees that the Public Service must 
employ to deliver the services needed by the community. The Public Service Commissioners 
and their respective governments must remunerate those with needed talent and skills equal 
to the market remuneration package others are prepared to pay for the same skills. 
In  other  words,  the  pay  structure  for  talent  and  skills  identified  as  essential  for  effective 
delivery of government services and policy goals must be different from the general public 
servant  pay  structure.  (May  be  a  good  “break  the  rule”  option  is  to  apply  George  Orwell’s 
famous  line  in  his  book  Animal  Farm…“all  animals  are  equal  but  some  animals  are  more 
equal  than  others.”  So  that  we  can  restate  it  as  “all  public  servants  are  equal,  but  some 
public servants are more equal than others”.). 
Whilst  all  this  sounds  possible,  I  must  warn  that  it  is  not  an  easy  option  to  take  in  an 
environment where there are strong unions representing the interests of their members and 
where affordability is not easy to come by. But social service delivery to the public suffers if 
those specialized skills are not available because the country cannot afford to pay for them. 
The  second  consideration  is  for  the  Public  Service  Commissioners  to  be  more  creative  in 
creating an employment environment that would attract skilled and talented people to want to 
work for the Public Service. I call these the non monetary factors, although funds must be 
spent to make them happen. 
Public Service Commissioners must provide clean and attractive office environment for the 
officers  to  work  in.  This  includes  the  provisions  of  proper  equipments  that  can  enhance 
productivity.  Shorten  the  length  of  time  it  takes  to  hire  successful  candidates:  skilled  and 
talented people cannot wait for months to receive their letter of acceptances. They will find 
employment somewhere else if we are slow to process their engagement. 
Ensure that your newly recruited workers do not have to wait for months before they are put 
on  the  payroll  and  paid  for  their  services.  It  is  demeaning  for  a  professional  with  family 
members  waiting  months  for  his  pay  to  be  processed.  Talented  and  skilled  workers  just 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 3
cannot  tolerate  inefficiency  that  our  bureaucratic  procedures  unfortunately  require  to  be 
adhered to. 
Public Service Commissioners and their supporting technical teams must continuously scan 
the market to ensure that the remuneration of those with talents that are required is within the 
market price for the skills and talents. This means actively involved in communicating with 
the professional bodies that represent the interests of the public service employees to ensure 
that their concerns are addressed in an honest and professional manner. 
Public Service Commissioners must actively ensure that their officers are rewarded for their 
performance, and benefit from organized trainings that would enhance the officers’ abilities. 
These  can  be  challenging  issues, because  they  will  certainly  mean  securing  more  finance 
and changing of procedures. But if Public Services must compete for the best talents in the 
market  these  are  necessary  changes  to  tackle  as  part  of  their  strategies  for  talent 
management in the Public Service. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  the  challenge  faced  by  Pacific  Public  Service  Commissioners  in  addressing 
brain-drain  and  managing  the  mobility  of  talented  and  skilled  professionals  is  made  more 
difficult when affordability is the key barrier. 
Graeme Dobel of ABC Radio Australia sums the issue in stating that “a free person with skills 
is still a free person”. We are dealing with free individuals whose choices to market their skills 
to  bring  the  maximum  benefit  to  themselves  will  cause  them  to  leave  their  Public  Service 
employment. 
Public  Service  Commissioners  must  therefore be  creative  in  finding solutions  for attracting 
and  retaining  talented  individuals.  This  means  we  must  have  to  make  some  necessary 
changes in the manner we handle the remuneration packages and working conditions for the 
skilled and talented professionals we want to attract and retain. 
Thank you for listening and I wish you all success in your conference. 
References 
Asian Development Bank, 2008. Pacific Monitor, WWW.adb.org/Pacific Monitor. 
Dobel, G. 2006. “Australia Confronts Its Pacific Taboo: Pacific Workers”, Pacific Economic 
Bulletin, Volume 21, No. 3 November 2006, p.128. 
Goffee R. and Jones G. 2007. “Leading Clever People”, Harvard Business Review, March 
2007. 
World  Health  Organization, 
paper 
(WPR/ICP/ECP/7.2/001/ECP(11)  2005.4)  presented  at  Ministers  of  Heath  for  Pacific 
Countries, Samoa, 2005. 
of  Health  Personnel”, 
“Migration 
2005. 
4 
 BIS Review 166/2009
