Tarisa Watanagase: Prospects and challenges for the Thai economy in 
2010 
Dinner  talk  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  British 
Chamber of Commerce, Bangkok, 30 November 2009. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to thank the British Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to be here 
tonight. It is my pleasure to join you once again at this prominent annual gathering.  
Last year we had a fruitful discussion on “What determines the future of the Thai economy”. 
If you  may  recall, I imparted on the audience some words of wisdom  for all policymakers, 
which is to smooth short-term pain, and to achieve long-term gain. Last year’s speech took 
care of the latter part, in which the key message was a call for collective efforts to raise the 
economy’s potential output in order to achieve sustainable long-run prosperity. We, however, 
did not spend much time on the former part as we were yet to witness the complete fallout 
from the collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
Today,  we  all  know  that  our  get-together  last  September  was  at  the  onset  of  the  greatest 
economic contraction over the last 60 years. The collapse of Lehman Brothers on Sep 15, 
2008  created  a  gigantic  shockwave  in  the  world  financial  markets  with  its  ripples 
subsequently  evolving  into  an  economic  tsunami  that  wiped  out  so  much  economic  well-
being  all  over  the  world.  Its  consequences  are  still  being  felt  today  and  the  focus  of 
policymakers  has,  therefore,  shifted  to  the  immediate  task  of  giving  the  economy  a  quick 
resuscitation and lifting it out of the short-term slump. 
After  the  crisis,  foreign  direct  investments  from  the  eurozone  have  dropped  significantly. 
However, despite the weakness back home, the UK’s net FDI to Thailand still managed to 
register  a  positive  number  of  approximately  48  million  USD  for  the  first  three  quarters  of 
2009. It is, therefore, to our mutual benefit for the BCCT to have a good understanding of the 
outlook and challenges for the Thai economy from a policymaking standpoint. This will be the 
mission of my speech today and I would like to proceed in the following sequence: First, I 
would like to start by giving you an update on the current economic development; second, I 
would attempt to draw an outlook for the Thai economy for the year 2010; and third, I will 
outline the key challenges that await the Thai economy going forward. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As  you  all  know,  the  Thai  economy  was  hard-hit  by  a  sharp  drop  in  the  external  demand 
caused by this global financial crisis. The spillovers from the large decline in exports were 
far-reaching and affected all sectors of the domestic economy, with the manufacturing sector 
being hardest hit. Consequently, sentiment turned gloomy as more workers started to lose 
their  jobs.  To  make  matter  worse,  the  escalation  of  internal  political  tensions  adversely 
affected private consumption and investment.  
With  the  timely  implementation  of  accommodative  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  the  world 
economy has seen a quicker turnaround than originally expected. The most recent economic 
data  indicate  that  the  world  economy  has  stabilized.  This  was  shown  by  the  fact  that  the 
recession has ended in several countries with positive quarter-on-quarter growths from the 
second  quarter  onward.  More  importantly,  financial  institutions  that  were  the  origins  of  the 
crisis have appeared to become much more stable, though not yet returned to normal. This 
was  reflected  by  indexes  measuring  concerns  on  liquidity  and  credit  risks  in  the  financial 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 1
market such as the 3-month Libor spread and the external debt market spread which have 
continued to adjust downward. 
For Thailand, the green shoots started to emerge in the second quarter, owing primarily to a 
pick-up  in  the  world’s  demand,  large  government’s  stimulus  packages,  accommodative 
monetary policy and strong economic fundamentals. The recovery of the world economy has 
augured well for Thai exports as the sector has turned into an expansion of 5.3 percent in the 
third quarter. As a result, the manufacturing sector in the same quarter grew by 2.6 percent, 
while  the  capacity  utilization  rate  rose  from  a  low  of  54.8  in  the  first  quarter  to  reach 
62.4 percent at the end of the third quarter. 
In  addition,  domestic  demand  has  also  been  boosted  by  accommodative  monetary  policy 
and  a  rise  in  public  spending,  causing  private  consumption  and  investment  to  grow  at 
1.0 percent  and  3.7  percent  respectively  in  the  third  quarter.  As  a  result,  the  overall  GDP 
growth for the quarter came in at 1.3 percent on a quarter-on-quarter basis. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In 2010, the Thai economy is expected to stay on the course of a gradual recovery due to 
two important factors. First, the continued world recovery, and second the fiscal stimulus. Let 
me go into each of these briefly. 
First, the IMF and market consensus expect the world economy to return to positive growth 
next year, owing primarily to monetary and fiscal policies of the industrialized economies that 
are  expected  to  remain  accommodative.  Emerging  market  economies  including  Asia  are 
expected to rebound faster and stronger than developed economies. This is because Asia’s 
financial  sectors  were  not  directly  affected  by  the  current  crisis.  Brighter  prospect  for  the 
global  economy  next  year  means  our  export  sector  can  continue  to  be  our  main  growth 
engine going forward.  
Secondly, the government spending under SP2 or the Strong Thai scheme will also continue 
to support the nascent recovery. As we are all aware, we  cannot indefinitely rely on fiscal 
stimulus  to  keep  the  economy  going  so  it  is  our  hope  that  public  spending  will  eventually 
crowd in private demand so that the recovery will continue after the stimulus tapers off.  
Now let me turn to the risks associated with this outlook. Despite several good signals, the 
recovery of the world economy is still subject to a number of downside risks. In particular, the 
fact that unemployment rates remain high despite the pick-up in economic activities has led 
many  people  to  worry  that  this  might  be  a  “jobless  recovery”.  This  high  unemployment,  if 
prolonged,  could  have  a  deep  and  lasting  impact  on  both  consumption  and  the  potential 
growth of the US economy. Moreover, consumption in the US will be adversely affected by 
the decline in household wealth as well as the increase in personal saving rate. 
Other issues which may exert downward force on the world recovery include the high level of 
public debt which may put upward pressure on long-term interest rates and the US and other 
advanced countries’ financial sectors which are still weak and may not be able to support the 
recovery of the economy.  
On the domestic front, the downside risk comes from the ability of the government to swiftly 
execute the SP2 investment projects. In other words, the disbursement may not proceed as 
expected due to the lack of capacity to effectively implement many projects simultaneously. 
More importantly, political unrests which affect the stability of the coalition government may 
distract, disrupt, or in the worst case, discontinue the disbursement process.  
Taking both upside and downside risks into consideration, the Bank of Thailand’s Monetary 
Policy  Committee  assessed  that  the  Thai  economy  is  expected  to  recover  gradually, 
supported  by  better  global  economic  outlook  and  accommodative  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies.  Meanwhile,  the  inflationary  pressure  continues  to  be  subdued  for  the  time  being. 
The  MPC,  therefore,  decided  to  maintain  the  policy  interest  rate  at  1.25  percent  per  year 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2009
during  the  most  recent  meeting.  At  the  same  time,  the  BOT  is  expecting  that  the  Thai 
economy will return to a positive growth of 3.3–5.3 percent in 2010.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I believe we have a consensus that the worst of the global economic crisis is already behind 
us. At this juncture, policymakers and businesses are starting to look beyond the crisis and 
gauging  what  lies  ahead.  At  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  we  envisage  the  following  three 
challenges for the post-crisis era.  
First, the outlook for Thai export market will not be as good as the pre-crisis period. This is 
because  the  global  financial  crisis  is  likely  to  reduce  both  the  purchasing  power  and  the 
potential growth of Thailand’s major trading partners, especially the industrialized economies. 
Moreover, as the unemployment rates continue to increase in the G3 countries, protectionist 
sentiment may be intensified in an attempt to protect jobs at home.  
It is a common knowledge that, since the 1997 financial crisis, Thailand has relied on exports 
as  our  primary  engine of  growth.  This  dependency  is  expected  to  continue  for  quite  some 
time as our domestic demand is not large enough to substitute the purchasing power from 
abroad. Therefore, exporters need to be more adaptive, while policymakers need to ensure 
supportive  policies.  Having  said  that,  it  does  not  mean  we  will  abandon  our  efforts  in 
rebalancing our growth engine more towards domestic demand going forward. This can also 
be done as the balance sheet of the private sector is still in good shape. 
Now I would like to turn to our second challenge: As the world economic recovery begins to 
find  more  solid  footing,  the  exit  from  the  unconventional  measures  and  the  return  of 
monetary  policy  towards  the  normal  level  becomes  an  increasingly  important  issue.  Israel, 
Australia  and  Norway  are  already  leading  the  way.  However,  it  is  a  great  challenge  for 
policymakers to exercise an exit strategy with appropriate pace and time so as to ensure that 
the exit does not create unwarranted impacts on the economic recovery. On the one hand, a 
premature exit can derail the recovery. On the other, a delayed exit can lead to rising inflation 
and  asset  price  bubbles.  On  top  of  this,  the  coordination  of  exit  policy  among  countries  is 
also  important.  For  instance,  the  removal  of  deposit  guarantees  should  be  simultaneously 
implemented in order to avoid a disruption which may be caused by the shifting of deposits 
from a country that has lifted the guarantee to another country that has not.  
On balance, it is expected that emerging economies including Asia are likely to recover first 
as  our  economic  fundaments  remain  sound  and  the  banking  system  is  in  a  position  to 
support  economic  recovery.  As  a  result,  interest  rates  in  emerging  market  economies  are 
expected to be raised faster than the industrialized countries. These interest rate and growth 
differentials  against  the  backdrop  of  ample  global  liquidity  are  breeding  the  carry-trade 
behaviour with the USD as the funding currency this time. 
This  leads us  to  our third challenge,  which  is  how  to  prevent  the  surge  in  capital  inflows 
from creating unwarranted instabilities such as excessive volatility in the currency market and 
asset price bubbles. In response to this challenge, we are beginning to see some countries 
such  as  Hong  Kong,  Korea,  Singapore  and  China  tightening  their  prudential  standards  to 
cool  down  speculative  pressure  in  the  real  estate  sector.  In  addition,  Brazil  has  recently 
imposed measure to slow down the inflows of fund into its stock market.  
In the case of Thailand, net capital flows have turned positive in July and continued to remain 
so,  causing  the  Thai  baht  to  strengthen  as  the  current  account  is  also  in  surplus. 
Nevertheless, the Thai baht has been moving in line with other regional currencies and the 
Bank of Thailand remains vigilant in ensuring this continues to be the case. In order to make 
capital flows more balanced, we are in the process of furthering the liberalization of capital 
outflows. This would also increase the flexibility of our businesses in financial management.  
As for the issue of asset price bubbles, while the signs of accelerating asset prices observed 
in  many  countries  in  Asia  are  not  so  apparent  in  Thailand  at  this  time,  the  risk  is  not 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 3
neglected.  As  a  matter  of  prudence,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  will  continue  to  closely  monitor 
asset prices to ensure financial stability prevails in the long term.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  speech  tonight  by  reiterating  that  the  economic  recovery  in 
Thailand is expected to continue going forward. Nevertheless, the risk of an aftershock is not 
negligible  due  to  fragile  global  and  domestic  environment.  Hence,  businesses  and 
policymakers alike need to remain vigilant, but at the same time, should not be overcome by 
unreasonable fear. One important factor that will help speed up the process of recovery is 
the  return  of  investment  and  trade  within  the  country.  With  our  economic  resilience  and 
strong economic fundamentals, I would like to assure you that Thailand remains a lucrative 
place to invest. 
Despite  this  difficult  time,  the  BCCT  has  always  been  a  great  supporter  of  our  investment 
programs, an example of which is your Thailand Means Business 2008 report which is very 
relevant in terms of attracting new or re-investment from British businesses. I hope that this 
long relationship will continue to be as good as ever or even better in the coming years.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 164/2009
