Zamani Abdul Ghani: Scaling up financial inclusion through branchless 
banking 
Remarks by Mr Zamani Abdul Ghani, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at 
the  Microfinance  Policymakers  Forum  “Scaling  up  Financial  Inclusion  through  Branchless 
Banking”, Kuala Lumpur, 2 December 2009. 
 Introduction  
Good  afternoon  and  welcome  to  Malaysia.  It  is  very  encouraging  to  see  so  many  senior 
policymakers  gathered  here  today  to  participate  in  this  Microfinance  Policymakers  Forum. 
Thank you for taking the time to be here and for contributing your knowledge. The motivation 
for today's event has its roots in the forum of the United Nations Advisory Group for Inclusive 
Financial Sectors which was held in May this year in Kuala Lumpur. As many of you may be 
aware, in recognition of the importance of financial inclusion, the United Nations established 
the  United  Nations  Advisory  Group  on  Financial  Inclusion  in  2006.  The  group  advises  the 
United  Nations  and  member  states  on  issues  relating  to  the  advancement  of  the  financial 
inclusion  agenda  on  a  global  scale.  Since  its  establishment,  many  successes  have  been 
achieved.  These  include  increasing  the  public  awareness  on  the  importance  of  financial 
inclusion,  assisting  governments  in  the  design  of  regulatory  systems  that  facilitate  the 
creation of financial services for the poor, encouraging the use of holistic measures to gauge 
the progress of financial inclusion as well as collecting and disseminating best practices to 
further advance financial inclusion.  
One of the topics that received considerable attention at the UNAG forum was branchless 
banking.  Governor  Dr.  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz  had  proposed  a  regional  forum  to  exchange 
experiences  and  understanding  amongst  central  bankers  and  financial  policy  makers  on 
issues  such  as  institutional  structure,  regulatory  framework  and  supervision  requirements 
and the application of technology for promoting access to financial services.  
Branchless banking offers the means to provide the full range of financial services such as 
payments,  deposits,  credit  and  micro-insurance  services  without  the  use  of  physical  bank 
branches,  thus  reducing  significantly  the  cost  structure.  The  financial  services  could  be 
provided 
telecommunications  networks  or  network  of  non-bank 
intermediaries, such as supermarket chains or post offices.  
For the purposes of this Forum, I would like to focus my remarks on three key areas. Firstly, 
how  payment  systems  technology  is  supporting  branchless  banking  to  improve  access  to 
financial  services.  Secondly,  the  policy  and  regulatory  concerns  pertaining  to  branchless 
banking. Thirdly, Malaysia's experience in developing a more inclusive financial sector and 
supporting branchless banking activities.  
through  mobile 
Payment systems technology for branchless banking  
The  most  critical  enabler  of  branchless  banking  relates  to  the  role  of  payment  systems 
technology, principally the use of mobile phone as a banking channel and payment device. 
The pervasive availability and use of mobile phone around the globe and familiarity amongst 
its  users  makes  it  a  very  cost-effective  distribution  channel  to  improve  accessibility  to 
financial  services  to  the  unbanked  and  underserved  segment  of  the  population.  This  is 
further  complemented  by  the  proliferation  of  payment  cards,  particularly  electronic  money, 
which  enables  banking  and  payment  services  to  be  conducted  without  a  bank  account  or 
visits to traditional bank branches. According to data from the Consultative Group to Assist 
the  Poor,  or  CGAP,  there  will  be  more  than  120  mobile  money  schemes  in  developing 
countries by the end of 2009, more than double the number in 2008. CGAP estimates that by 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 1
2012 some 1.7 billion people will have mobile phones but no bank account, and 20 percent 
will be using mobile money.  
A key challenge, to implement a commercially viable and workable mobile banking solution, 
especially where population density is low, is to achieve a critical mass of users required to 
reap economies of scale to keep transaction cost low. This is even more relevant if the aim is 
also  to  promote  financial  inclusion  as  financial  services  would  have  to  be  offered  at 
affordable  costs.  Thus,  a  requirement  for  an  open  and  interoperable  mobile  platform  that 
facilitates  the  participation  of  many  service  providers  and  that  offers  a  broad  range  of 
services is critical in developing a sustainable and efficient solution for both providers and 
users.  
The other type of branchless banking is the use of non-bank financial service providers, also 
referred  to  as  Business  Correspondents  in  certain  jurisdictions.  This  approach  combines 
mobile  banking  solutions  with  person-to-person  contact,  except  that  the  customer  is  not 
engaging with a bank, but rather with a supermarket counter staff, grocery shop owner, post 
office  or  village  headman.  The  elements  of  trust,  Know  Your  Customer  and  value-added 
advisory services can be more effectively met using this approach, without the corresponding 
high investment cost of establishing physical banking branches. Today's forum provides an 
excellent opportunity for all of us here to exchange ideas and experiences in these areas.  
Policy and regulatory concerns pertaining to branchless banking  
Let  me  now  turn  to  my  second  point,  which  is  about  the  policy  concerns  of  regulators  in 
relation  to  branchless  banking  services.  The  first  concern  is  related  to  the  need  to 
continuously balance between prudential controls and allowing innovation to flourish within 
the financial sector. To site a recent well known example, the events in the US sub-prime 
markets  and  derivative  products  serve  as  a  good  lesson  where  innovation  significantly 
outpaced  the  capacity  of  the  regulatory  environment  to  exercise  prudential  oversight,  and 
prevent distress to the financial system.  
The  environment  within  which  branchless  banking  will  flourish  requires  a  great  deal  of 
innovation in terms of executing transactions, maintaining proper audit controls and ensuring 
fraudsters  do  not  take  advantage  of  unsuspecting  customers.  As  regulators  we  are 
particularly  concerned  where  deposits  are  accepted  by  non-bank  entities,  acting  in  the 
capacity of an agent to a financial institution. This is because while financial institutions need 
to comply with minimum prudential regulations, such as capital, liquidity and submission of 
financial  data  on  a  regular  basis  to  the  supervisory  authorities,  non-bank  financial  service 
providers are typically not subject to such requirements, and in the event of financial distress, 
depositors may be at risk. In order to address this concern, the regulators need to ensure a 
sound  regulatory  regime  which  is  sufficiently  accommodative  to  balance  prudence  and 
innovation.  This  not  a  simple  issue,  and  this  Forum  has  been  designed  to  explore  critical 
aspects of achieving this fine balance.  
A second key policy concern relates to undermining confidence in the payment systems. As 
different  intermediaries  get  involved,  there  is  an  increase  in  the  risk  of  losing  transaction 
integrity, corruption of data or breach of payment settlement terms. The loss of faith in the 
safety  and  security  of  transactions,  in  particular  payment  transactions,  can  result  in 
widespread  loss  of  consumer  confidence.  Another  area  relates  to  policies  governing 
competition as different players position themselves in the branchless banking arena? Issues 
such as licensing, pricing, alliances with different financial institutions and compliance with 
prudential regulations need to be considered carefully. The public and consumers may lose 
confidence if there is no sense of order in how the payment system is evolving, or there is 
wide disparity in charges and fess.  
There is a need for the major stakeholders to align with some form of regulatory approach or 
framework  which  would  provide  a  basis  for  assessing  risks,  and  to  implement  regulations 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2009
that are proportionate to the risks identified. In this Forum, some of the key elements of such 
a  regulatory  framework  will  be  dealt  with,  such  as  Know  Your  Customer,  compliance  with 
Anti-money  Laundering  regulations,  Consumer  Protection  and  achieving  greater  levels  of 
system interoperability amongst service providers. As such, branchless banking will require 
an  inter-disciplinary  approach  given  the  different  types  of  expertise  needed  to  drive  this 
important agenda.  
The third area of policy concern I would like to touch on relates to the issue of accountability 
with cross-sector regulatory requirements. There must be clarity over the accountability for 
the integrity of transactions, security of information transmitted, adherence to a consistent set 
of regulations and proper maintenance of the system. And it is important to note that higher 
standards  of  control  will  also  result  in  higher  costs  to  the  service  providers.  Cross-sector 
policy issues must be resolved, and clear accountability with respect to the operations of the 
system  must  be  established.  Systems  of  governance  to  engage  with  different  legislative 
requirements,  from  capital  requirements  to  anti-money  laundering  regulations,  must  be  in 
place. Players need to have the requisite skills and knowledge to address issues promptly 
with different stakeholders, such as customs, immigration, police and international agencies 
like Interpol. Even if the non-bank players do not need to directly engage with these issues, 
they  must  have  high  degree  of  awareness  in  order  to  work  effectively  with  their  partner 
financial institutions.  
Measures taken in Malaysia to develop a more inclusive financial sector  
Allow  me  to  now  share  Malaysia's  experience  in  addressing  financial  inclusion  and 
branchless banking. In Malaysia financial inclusion has been a high priority in our national 
agenda for many decades. Since the establishment of the Central Bank, there has been a 
conscious  policy  to  have  an  extensive  commercial  banking  branch  network  across  the 
country, to ensure the outreach, in particular, to cover the non-urban areas. Malaysia now 
has  10.2  branches  for  every  100,000  individuals  as  opposed  to  the  global  median  of  8.4 
branches for every 100,000 individuals. In Malaysia, more than 80% of the population also 
have  some  form  of  savings  account.  This  has  also  contributed  to  the  financialisation  of 
savings in the country. Deposits as a percentage of gross domestic product is 180%. This 
means that savings is mobilised even from small savers into the formal financial system. This 
allows the savings to be channelled to productive economic activity.  
To  further  drive  the  provision  of  basic  financial  services  to  the  underserved,  the  National 
Savings Bank in Malaysia has been mandated in 2006 to enhance the outreach of deposit 
services  and  micro-financing.  Their  efforts,  together  with  those  of  commercial  banking 
institutions  and  government  mandated  micro-financing  agencies,  have  resulted  in  a 
significant expansion of micro-financing. Micro-financing has increased from RM151 million 
in 2000 to RM2.2 billion in September 2009, representing an annual average growth rate of 
34%.  
The Bank also reviewed its existing legislation, and this year the new Central Bank Act of 
Malaysia  2009  came  into  effect  a  week  ago,  on  25  November  2009.  One  of  the  changes 
introduced as part of clarifying the mandate of the Bank was to explicitly articulate the Bank's 
developmental role in having a more inclusive financial sector.  
Let me briefly summarise the initiatives taken by Bank Negara Malaysia which are supportive 
of branchless banking activities. Given the extensive network of physical branches and ATMs 
in the country, branchless banking has not yet experienced significant take up. Nonetheless, 
the use of e-money for tolls and parking bays has increased significantly, and a number of 
operators are seeking to expand the market.  
In terms of addressing the policy concerns, measures were taken to put in place the payment 
infrastructure,  promote  a  broad  product  range  to  cater  for  the  different  payment  needs  of 
consumers  and  business  sectors  and  the  formulation  of  a  transparent  and  cost-effective 
BIS Review 162/2009 
 3
pricing framework to provide the incentive structure that would spur the adoption of electronic 
means of payments. Another important measure relates to the setting of common standards 
to  address  the  interoperability  of  systems  including  standardising  the  payment  messaging 
format to enable the wider acceptance of electronic payments. Finally is the need to ensure 
the security and integrity of the payment system which requires the supporting regulatory and 
legal framework to be in place. The Payment Systems Act, the E-money Guideline issued by 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Exchange  Control  Act  rules  for  cross-border  remittances 
serve as the main regulation in this area.  
In  addition  to  e-payment  channels  and  e-money  as  a  mode  for  pursuing  the  financial 
inclusion  agenda,  there  holds  much  promise  in  the  usage  of  agents  or  non-bank 
intermediaries to extend the outreach of financial services to the underserved in the Asian 
region. In Malaysia, we have facilitated the utilisation of post offices as a delivery channel for 
banks to provide simple banking services, including opening of accounts, cheque and cash 
deposits,  cash  withdrawals,  funds  transfers  and  remittances,  and  loan  repayments.  By 
engaging the services of post offices, the banks are able to leverage on the wide dispersion 
of post office branches in non-urban areas as well as the communities' familiarity and trust 
associated  with  services  offered  by  post  offices.  Malaysia's  approach  in  the  regulatory 
framework  for  such  arrangements  places  the  responsibility  the  banks  to  put  in  place  the 
necessary  safeguards  and  controls.  Such  controls  include  requirements  to  set  transaction 
limits,  establish  sound  reporting  and  monitoring  mechanisms,  and  conduct  periodic 
assessments towards ensuring that the integrity and quality of financial services provided is 
maintained at all times.  
In  addition,  substantive  consumer  education  and  protection  measures  have  been 
implemented, which would also be applicable broadly to branchless banking related issues. 
A specific department known as Consumer and Market Conduct Department was established 
in 2006 to spearhead the initiatives. These initiatives included financial education at schools 
and  for  the  general  public;  greater  disclosure  requirements  about  the  features  of  financial 
products and the associated risks; the Financial Mediation Bureau to provide an avenue for 
redress;  the  Credit  Counselling  and  Debt  Management  Agency  to  assist  individuals  in 
financial  distress;  and  a  public  service  centre  at  the  Central  Bank  and  all  its  branches  to 
provide  information  and  advice.  The  market  conduct  regulations  also  give  the  regulator 
powers to oversee fees and charges to ensure the quantum is reasonable for the services 
provided. These measures are broad enough to provide consumer protection in relation to 
branchless  banking  in  general  terms.  However,  they  may  be  less  effective  in  addressing 
some of the unique aspects of branchless banking, such as disputes with non-bank agents 
located  in  remote  or  rural  locations.  Perhaps  this  forum  could  consider  some  of  these 
aspects.  
Collaboration in terms of sharing best practices, standards and regulations would reduce the 
cost as well as expedite the development of more inclusive financial sectors. We need to be 
mindful of the fact that for effective collaboration to take place, we must have common goals 
to  bind  our  work.  In  this  case,  that  common  goal  is  the  development  of  more  inclusive 
financial  sectors,  by  making  available  a  broad  range  of  financial  services  to  the  poor  and 
micro  enterprise  segments  of  society  and  the  economy,  as  well  as  those  living  in  remote 
areas.  
Before  I  conclude,  let  me  again  stress  that  the  development  of  more  inclusive  financial 
sectors  is  an  important  objective,  and  as  policymakers  we  need  to  pursue  this  without 
compromising  on  the  prudential  standards  that  sustain  confidence  in  the  financial  system. 
Branchless banking has tremendous potential to increase the outreach of financial services 
provided  the  different  players  and  regulators  are  able  to  work  within  common  regulatory 
framework. And finally that we must adopt a collaborative stance in pursuing this important 
global agenda which can make a real difference for the millions of people that remain caught 
in poverty.  
4 
 BIS Review 162/2009
On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia I would also like to thank our principal facilitators for the 
workshop from the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, the subject matter experts from 
World Bank, the representatives from Maxis Communications Malaysia and Global Exchange 
of Philippines, and the representative from Group Speciale Mobile Association who joins us 
from London. I also welcome the participation of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion in this 
Forum, and we look forward to working with all of you on developing more inclusive financial 
sectors in the Asian region. Finally, I would like to thank all the participants who have come 
in from all over Asia to support this Forum. I wish you a fruitful forum and hope that you will 
form valuable professional relationships during this event.  
BIS Review 162/2009 
 5
