William C Dudley: Some lessons from the crisis  
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Institute of International Bankers Membership Luncheon, 
New York, 13 October 2009. 
 Thank you for having me here to speak today. It is a real pleasure to have this opportunity to 
discuss the challenges ahead in making our banking and financial system more resilient and 
robust. We have learned a great deal over the past two years about our financial system and 
its vulnerabilities. The challenge ahead is to put these lessons to good use. 
Regulators and market participants failed to fully appreciate the degree to which the various 
aspects of our financial system are interconnected, and to foresee what those tight linkages 
would mean for market function when even one reasonably large institution – let alone many 
–  became  distressed.  We  also  did  not  fully  appreciate  the  strength  of  the  amplifying 
mechanisms  that  were  built  into  our  financial  system;  the  consequence  of  which  was  to 
exacerbate the boom on the way up and worsen the bust on the way down. Contributing to 
these pro-cyclical dynamics were inadequate incentives for firms to curb their risk-taking and 
to more effectively manage the risks they did face. The inadequate level of transparency and 
disclosure, particularly in the market for structured products, were also important in making 
the  financial  system  more  fragile  and  vulnerable  to  crisis  and  in  increasing  the  degree  of 
uncertainty and contagion once the crisis was underway. Only by fully understanding these 
shortcomings can we construct solutions that will strengthen our financial system and make it 
more robust. 
The initiatives underway to strengthen our financial system span a wide range of supervisory 
and  regulatory  policy  areas,  including  ongoing  efforts  to  improve  standards  for  both  the 
capital  and  liquidity  held  by  financial  institutions,  efforts  to  improve  the  risk  management 
practices  at  financial  institutions  and  efforts  to  strengthen  the  resiliency  of  market 
infrastructures.  Today,  I  am  going  to  focus  mainly  on  the  need  to  improve  the  capital 
standards for large, systemically important financial institutions.  
For initiatives in this area to be effective, we need to make progress on three distinct, but 
related fronts:  
• 
a more thorough and complete risk capture so that the capital adequacy rules more 
effectively encompass a broader set of risk exposures than before,  
rules that encourage the conservation of capital in adverse economic and financial 
circumstances, and  
tougher regulatory requirements, including the use of a contingent capital instrument 
that would automatically replenish equity capital in times of stress.  
  As always, my remarks reflect my own views and opinions and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 
Interconnectedness 
This financial crisis has exposed how important the interconnections are among the banking 
system,  capital  markets,  and  payment  and  settlement  systems.  For  example,  the  recent 
disruption in the functioning of the securitization markets caused by the poor performance of 
highly-rated debt securities, led to significant problems for major financial institutions. Banks 
had to take assets back on their books; backstop lines of credit were triggered; and banks 
could  no  longer  securitize  loans,  increasing  the  pressure  on  their  balance  sheets.  This 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 1
reduced  credit  availability,  which  increased  the  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity, 
which caused asset values to decline further, increasing the degree of stress in the financial 
system. 
This  interconnectedness  implies  that  regulation  and  risk  management  practices  that  focus 
only on individual parts of the system will inevitably fail to address important vulnerabilities 
elsewhere.  Thus,  we  have  to  make  widespread  changes  in  how  we  approach  supervision 
and  regulation,  particularly  in  the  context  of  our  most  systemically  important  financial 
institutions. 
First, although supervision cannot lose its vertical perspective, looking firm by firm or region 
by region, it also must place more emphasis than before on gaining a horizontal perspective 
– looking broadly across banks, securities firms and other types of financial institutions, and 
across markets and geographies. 
Second, the supervision of our financial institutions and the regulation of markets need to be 
risk focused, coordinated and multi-disciplinary. In thinking about the best way to introduce 
these practices into our system, we should not kid ourselves about how difficult this will be to 
execute. It will take the right people, with the right skill sets, operating in a system with the 
right culture, tools and legal framework. The governance process surrounding systemic risk 
regulation  will  have  to  be  extremely  flexible  and  dynamic,  able  to  identify  important 
vulnerabilities as they emerge and able to act on those concerns in a timely manner. 
System dynamics 
Over  the  course  of  this  crisis,  it  has  become  evident  that  our  system  has  some  powerful 
reinforcing  mechanisms  built  into  it.  This  suggests  that  one  important  focus  of  regulation 
should  be  on  how  to  change  the  system  in  order  to  eliminate  or  at  least  mitigate  those 
destructive dynamics. Let me give you a few examples.  
In times of stress, banks may have incentives to continue to pay dividends to show they are 
strong  even  when  they  are  not.  This  behavior  depletes  the  bank’s  capital  and  makes  the 
bank weaker. To correct this shortcoming in our system, we should craft policies that either 
incent  or  require  weak  and  vulnerable  firms  to  cut  dividends  quickly  in  order  to  conserve 
capital. This would introduce a dampening mechanism into our system. 
Another example of a reinforcing mechanism is a situation in which firms have incentives to 
structure  activities  to  minimize  regulatory  capital  or  other  requirements  without  transferring 
risk.  Creation  of  off-balance  sheet  funding  vehicles,  structured  products  and  complex 
corporate  structures  to  minimize  regulatory  requirements  and  tax  obligations  reduces 
transparency, introduces new risks and limits the effectiveness of resolution regimes.  
Other examples of reinforcing mechanisms in our system are: 
• 
Collateral tied to credit ratings. Credit downgrades lead to increased collateral calls, 
which drain liquidity, forcing asset sales, further weakening the firm subject to the 
collateral calls.  
Collateral and haircuts. When volatility rises and that leads to increased haircuts, the 
result can be a vicious cycle of forced asset sales, higher volatility and still higher 
haircuts.  
Compensation  tied  to  short-term  revenue  generation,  rather  than  long-term 
profitability over the cycle. This causes risk-takers to take on too much risk because 
they are compensated on the upside. This risk-taking extends the boom, setting the 
stage for a bigger bust.  
  Although some of these practices might appear sensible from the narrow perspective of an 
individual firm or market, this crisis has shown us that when all firms or market participants 
simultaneously  take  an  action  that  appears  to  be  in  their  immediate,  narrow  interest,  the 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2009
collective  impact  on  the  system  as  a  whole  can  be  disastrous.  We  need  to  find  ways  to 
weaken  or  eliminate  these  reinforcing  mechanisms  and  we  need  to  introduce  new 
dampening mechanisms into the financial system. 
Incentives 
Some of the pro-cyclical dynamics embedded in our financial system occur because market 
participants  do  not  always  have  the  incentive  to  behave  in  ways  that  will  be  good  for  the 
system as a whole. This occurs, in part, because market participants often do not have to 
bear the full costs of their actions. For example, the incentive to take on more risk without 
regard for the broader implications of those actions arises from a number of factors, including 
poorly  constructed  compensation  schemes,  ineffective  risk  management  and  gaps  in 
regulatory oversight and risk capture.  
One problem evident during the crisis has been the reluctance of banking organizations to 
raise  sufficient  capital  to  be  able  to  credibly  have  the  resources  to  withstand  particularly 
adverse economic conditions. This reluctance stemmed, in part, from concerns about what a 
capital  raise  would  signal  about  the  firm’s  strength,  but  it  also  stemmed  from  an 
unwillingness  to  unnecessarily  dilute  shareholders.  The  reluctance  led  to  more  uncertainty 
about  the  adequacy  of  banks’  capital  positions,  which,  in  turn  increased  concerns  about 
counterparty credit risk. These worries led to a further deterioration in market liquidity. These 
dynamics tightened financial market and credit conditions, increasing the downward pressure 
on economic activity and on the financial system. 
The  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program  (SCAP)  exercise  that  we  undertook  in  the 
United States leaned against this. By forcing all of the banks that participated in the SCAP to 
have sufficient capital to help them withstand a  stress environment, this process improved 
confidence and increased the willingness of banks to engage with each other. It also made it 
easier for the banks to be able to tap the capital markets. The SCAP exercise made a bad 
state of the world less likely, helping to create a virtuous circle rather than a vicious one. 
The SCAP exercise was developed and conducted in response to the crisis and a specific 
need. Now, we need to figure out how to conduct these types of exercises on a systematic 
basis. Such exercises may even need to be hardwired into the supervisory oversight of the 
financial system.  
this  contributed 
ineffective  disclosure  undermined  market  discipline  and 
Transparency  
In some critical segments of our financial markets, both before and during the crisis, limited 
or 
the 
accumulation  of  risk.  In  the  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis,  the  lack  of  transparency 
contributed  to  increased  risk  and  leverage  in  off-balance  sheet  vehicles,  structured  credit 
products  and  in  over-the-counter  securities  such  as  asset-backed  securities  (ABS), 
commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  (CMBS),  residential  mortgage-backed  securities 
(RMBS)  and  collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDOs)  and  their  associated  derivatives.  Once 
the  crisis  was  underway,  the  opacity  of  many  of  these  vehicles,  structures  and  securities 
contributed to the concerns about counterparty credit risk. This uncertainty exacerbated the 
erosion in market liquidity conditions and further intensified the crisis.  
This lack of transparency was present in a number of different places:  
• 
Valuation.  CDOs  and  other  securitized  obligations  were  complex  and  difficult  to 
value. This reduced liquidity, pushed down prices and increased uncertainty about 
the solvency of institutions holding these assets.  
to 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 3
  Prices. The lack of pricing information led to a loss of confidence about accounting 
marks.  Sometimes  identical  securities  were  valued  differently  at  different  financial 
institutions.  
Concentration of risk. Because there was no detailed reporting of exposures, market 
participants  did  not  know  much  about  the  concentration  of  risk.  This  led  to  a 
reluctance  to  engage  with  counterparties,  which,  in  turn,  pushed  up  spreads  and 
reduced liquidity further.  
Regulatory reform 
These  four  strands  –  understanding  interconnectedness,  mitigating  pro-cyclical  system 
dynamics,  improving  incentives  and  increasing  transparency  –  should  be  critical  areas  of 
focus in our efforts to enhance the resiliency of the banking and financial system. We will do 
this  through  several  channels,  including  international  regulatory  reform,  enhanced  capital 
requirements,  the  introduction  of  common  liquidity  standards  and  clear  expectations  for 
compensation practices. Today I am going to spend some time talking about how we might 
take account of these strands to ensure that our regulatory capital regime helps to facilitate a 
more robust and stable financial system.  
In my view, the regulatory capital framework would benefit from four changes: 
Improving the risk capture associated with the capital requirements.  
• 
Introduction of rules that ensure the conservation of capital during times of economic 
• 
and financial distress.  
Imposition of higher capital requirements for systemically important institutions.  
Development  of  efficient  forms  of  capital.  In  particular,  contingent  capital  debt 
instruments that are convertible into common equity if a bank’s share price were to 
fall precipitously.  
 Capital requirements with improved risk capture 
The recent financial crisis has shown that parts of the regulatory capital framework were not 
calibrated  properly  to  account  for  the  most  complex  instruments.  Our  efforts  to  revise  the 
capital  rules  should  emphasize  the  need  to  include  these  and  other  risks  that  were  not 
appropriately captured in recent years.  
In  many  circumstances,  an  emphasis  on  improved  risk-capture  may  be  superior  to  simply 
raising the capital requirements across the board. There are two reasons for this. First, it may 
better tie capital to the risks being undertaken. This, in turn, would create more appropriate 
incentives for risk-taking. Second, it may reduce the risk of regulatory arbitrage. If the risks of 
some  activities  are  not  captured  properly,  then  banks  will  have  incentives  to  shift  their 
business toward those particular activities.  
The  Basel  Committee  has  made  very  good  progress  in  revising  the  capital  treatment  of 
trading  book  positions  and  for  structured  credit  products  –  two  areas  where  the  crisis 
revealed  critical  weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  capital  regime.  Revisions  to  the  capital 
requirements for over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives exposures as proposed by the Obama 
administration also strike me as appropriate. Not only would this more effectively capture the 
risks  that  banks  are  taking,  but  it  also  would  create  incentives  to  move  the  trading  and 
settlement  of  such  instruments  more  rapidly  to  central  clearing  parties  (CCPs)  and  to 
exchanges. The greater use of CCPs and exchanges should have several benefits, including 
reduction  of  risk  through  the  multilateral  netting  of  exposures  and  improved  transparency 
with respect to the structure and pricing for such instruments. 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2009
Capital conservation 
More  explicit  supervisory  standards  regarding  capital  conservation  would  also  be  an 
important element of an efficient capital regime. During the crisis, some banks continued to 
pay  out  dividends  even  though  their  condition  and  market  valuation  metrics  had  sharply 
deteriorated. Banks did this to try to convince investors that their bank was “sound.” But by 
depleting capital, these actions made banks and the financial system weaker.  
To  mitigate  these  dynamics,  regulators  could  require  the  reduction  and  possibly  the 
cessation  of  dividend  payments  and  share  buybacks  during  adverse  market  environments 
when particular triggers were breached. For example, limits on dividend payments and share 
repurchases as a share of earnings could be mandated to occur when common equity ratios 
fell below certain levels (recognizing that credit and mark-to-market losses deplete the capital 
structure  from  below)  or  when  market-based  measures  hit  certain  trigger  values.  Taking 
away  the  discretion  of  banks  to  deplete  capital  would  strengthen  the  banks’  ability  to 
withstand adverse environments.  
In  principle,  such  constraints  could  conceivably  be  extended  to  compensation  and  bonus 
payments.  Some  of  the  firms  that  encountered  difficulties  in  2008  paid  out  large  bonuses 
early  in  2008  despite  the  deterioration  in  market  conditions  and  in  their  own  financial 
performance. There is an opportunity to rethink capital preservation policies to ensure that 
banks’ incentives are consistent with the supervisory objectives of a safe and sound banking 
system.  
Such  capital  conservation  rules  could  operate  on  both  sides  of  an  economic  downturn  – 
conserving capital going into the downturn and rebuilding capital coming out. One example 
would  be  the  imposition  of  constraints  on  the  ability  of  banks  to  reinstate  or  increase 
dividends prematurely or to undertake share buybacks during a downturn or during the early 
stages of an economic recovery. 
Higher capital requirement for systemically important institutions 
Currently, some large systemically important institutions may have a competitive advantage 
because they are perceived to be “too big to fail.” Unless we address this disparity, we will 
have  an  ongoing  moral  hazard  problem  and  inevitable  market  structure  distortions  as 
institutions  take  steps  to  become  systemically  important  in  order  to  gain  a  competitive 
advantage.  
The  regulatory  regime  could  lean  against  this  in  two  ways.  First,  we  could  improve  the 
resolution  mechanisms  for  large,  complex  institutions  and  thereby  reduce  the  costs 
associated with failure. A more robust resolution regime would make it more feasible to allow 
the  failure  of  a  large  financial  institution  without  that  failure  threatening  the  stability  of  the 
entire  financial  system.  Second,  we  could  impose  higher  capital  requirements  on  large, 
systemically important institutions to offset the advantages such as lower funding costs that 
these institutions may garner by their perceived “too big to fail” status. This would recognize 
the interconnectedness of the financial system and the fact that the failure of a systemically 
important institution generates significant externalities, which are not, at present, borne fully 
by the equity and debt holders of such institutions. Increasing the size of the capital buffer 
would  make  the  system  more  stable  by  reducing  the  incentive  for  firms  to  get  big  just  to 
capture the perceived benefits from achieving “too big to fail” status.  
The  first  change  –  an  improved  resolution  mechanism  –  would  presumably  reduce  the 
number  of  institutions  that  –  at  any  point  in  time  –  would  be  systemically  important.  The 
second  change  –  the  imposition  of  higher  capital  requirements  on  large,  systemically 
important institutions – would reduce the likelihood of failure of such institutions.  
However,  in  assessing  the  efficacy  of  such  changes,  we  need  to  be  realistic  about  the 
difficulties in building a resolution regime that would be sufficiently robust to allow the failure 
of  any  institution  under  any  circumstance  and  in  designing  a  capital  regime  that  imposes 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 5
differential  requirements  on  large,  systemically  important  institutions.  On  the  resolution 
regime side of the ledger, it is particularly difficult to build resolution regimes that can operate 
effectively  across  different  geographic  jurisdictions.  Legal  regimes  are  different;  national 
authorities have different incentives; and coordinating resolution across multiple geographies 
in a way that treated counterparties in different jurisdictions equivalently would be a daunting 
mission.  
Similarly, designing an effective capital surcharge for systemically important institutions will 
be  very  challenging.  Broadly,  there  are  two  approaches.  We  could  either  require  a  set  of 
firms identified to be systemically important to hold additional capital or we could introduce a 
capital surcharge for firms linked to measures of systemic risk. In broad terms, the factors 
that could be used to identify systemically important financial institutions would be related to 
a  firm’s  interdependence  with  the  financial  system  and  the  impact  on  market  confidence 
should  the  firm  become  distressed.  Measures  of  size,  leverage,  liability  structure  and 
importance  in  credit  formation  and  liquidity  provision  could  all  be  indicators  of  systemic 
importance.  
Developing a consistent, objective set of measures either to size a capital surcharge or to 
identify such firms is particularly difficult. For example, introducing a single measure to size a 
capital  surcharge  such  as  firm  size,  may  create  arbitrage  opportunities  and  will  almost 
certainly  not  capture  the  full  extent  that  an  individual  firm  may  contribute  to  systemic  risk. 
Moreover,  identifying  a  set  of  systemically  important  institutions  may  reinforce  concerns 
about moral hazard. We also have the difficulty that the particular metrics used to determine 
which firms are systemically important are likely to change over time with changes in market 
structure and in the evolution of particular financial institutions.  
Contingent capital 
An  ideal  capital  requirement  regime  should  be  efficient  and  should  create  the  proper 
incentives for banking organizations to internalize the costs of their actions on the broader 
financial  system  and  macroeconomy.  Efficiency,  which  I’ll  define  here  as  minimizing  the 
amount and cost of capital needed to ensure solvency under adverse conditions, is important 
because  an  inefficient  system  will  inevitably  encourage  growth  in  activity  outside  the 
regulatory regime, and will likely drive up the overall cost of intermediation. Proper incentives 
are  needed  to  control  risk  and  better  align  the  interests  of  management  and  shareholders 
with those of the public. 
In both respects, the introduction of a contingent capital instrument seems likely to hold real 
promise. Relative to simply raising capital requirements, contingent capital has the potential 
to be more efficient because the capital arrives as equity only in the bad states of the world 
when it is needed. It also has the benefit of improving incentives by creating two-way risk for 
bank  managements  and  shareholders.  If  the  bank  encounters  difficulties,  triggering 
conversion, shareholders would be automatically and immediately diluted. This would create 
strong  incentives  for  bank  managements  to  manage  not  only  for  good  outcomes  on  the 
upside of the boom, but also against bad outcomes on the downside.  
Conceptually, contingent capital instruments would be debt instruments in “good” states of 
the world, but would convert into common equity at pre-specified trigger levels in “bad” states 
of the world. In principle, these triggers could be tied to deterioration in the condition of the 
specific banking institution and/or to the banking system as a whole.  
There are many issues that would need to be worked out regarding how best to design such 
instruments,  including  how  to  determine  their  share  of  total  capital  as  well  as  how  to 
configure and publicly disclose the conversion terms and trigger. But, in my view, allowing 
firms  to  issue  contingent  capital instruments  that  could  be  used  to  augment  their  common 
equity capital during a downturn may be a more straightforward and efficient way to achieve 
a  countercyclical  regulatory  capital  regime  compared  to  trying  to  structure  minimum 
6 
 BIS Review 125/2009
regulatory capital requirements (or capital buffers above those requirements) that decline as 
conditions in the financial sector worsen. 
So  what  might  such  a  contingent  capital  instrument  look  like?  One  possibility  is  a  debt 
instrument that is convertible into common shares if and only if the performance of the bank 
deteriorates sharply. While, in principal, this could be tied solely to regulatory measures of 
capital, it might work better tied to market-based measures because market-based measures 
tend to lead regulatory-based measures. Also, if tied to market-based measures, there would 
be greater scope for adjustment of the conversion terms in a way to make the instruments 
more  attractive  to  investors  and,  hence,  lower  cost  capital  instruments  to  the  issuer.  The 
conversion terms could be generous to the holder of the contingent capital instrument. For 
example, one might want to set the conversion terms so that the debt holders could expect to 
get out at or close to whole – at par value. This is important because it would reduce the cost 
of the contingent instrument, making it a considerably cheaper form of capital than common 
equity. 
Consider the advantages that such an instrument would have had during this crisis. Rather 
than  banks  clumsily  evaluating  whether  to  cut  dividends,  raise  common  equity  and/or 
conduct exchanges of common equity for preferred shares and market participants uncertain 
about the willingness and ability of firms to complete such transactions and successfully raise 
new capital, contingent capital would have been converted automatically into common equity 
when market triggers were hit. 
If these contingent capital buffers were large, which they could be because the cost of these 
instruments should not differ much from straight debt, then the worst aspects of the banking 
crisis  might  have  been  averted.  If  shareholders  had  faced  the  potential  of  automatic  and 
substantial dilution, they may have demanded better risk management and disclosure during 
the boom. If common equity had been automatically bolstered during the early part of crisis, 
investors would have been much less concerned about the risk of insolvency. Counterparty 
risk concerns would have been much less significant – potentially short-circuiting one of the 
important  amplifying  mechanisms  of  the  crisis.  Such  instruments  could  have  reduced  the 
likelihood of failure of large, systemically important institutions, reducing the significance of 
the “too big to fail” problem and its associated moral hazard problems.  
Harmonized standards 
The  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee  are  working  hard  and  are  making 
important progress on all these issues. But for these efforts to bear fruit, it is critical that the 
requirements that are imposed in terms of capital adequacy, liquidity and compensation be 
harmonized across regulatory regimes and applied in a consistent fashion. The absence of a 
level playing field would be a recipe for disaster.  
A lack of harmonized standards would inevitably lead to balkanization and protectionism as 
different countries took steps to protect their particular banking champions. Potentially, this 
could  lead  to  countries  requiring  capital  and  liquidity  to  be  segregated  locally.  This  would 
have a number of negative consequences. First and foremost, it could disrupt the ability for 
capital  to  flow  freely  across  borders,  interfering  and  inhibiting  globalization  in  terms  of 
financial intermediation. Second, it would reduce the diversification benefits that stem from 
banks that operate in different geographic locations. Third, it could undermine the safety and 
soundness  of  the  financial  system.  In  particular,  the  lack  of  harmonization  in  terms  of 
regulatory regimes could lead to a “race to the bottom” as firms and businesses migrated to 
the most lax regulatory regime. 
So  what  does  this  mean  for  my  audience  today  –  foreign  banks  operating  in  the  United 
States?  First,  these  institutions  should  not  expect  a  return  to  “business  as  usual.”  We  are 
committed to implementing the reforms that will prevent a recurrence of the recent financial 
crisis. 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 7
Second, as most of the current reform agenda of the Financial Stability Board and the Basel 
Committee relates to the regulatory framework as applied by your home country, we expect 
that foreign banks’ operations in the United States will fully comply with these structures as 
they are put in place in their home country as well.  
Third, we support the continued international banking presence of global banking institutions. 
National  implementation  must  not  jeopardize  the  economic  benefits  derived  from  cross-
border banking. We need to be wary about nationalistic approaches to supervision. 
Fourth, financial firms that operate in our markets should continue to be vigilant in meeting 
the expectations we have for strong risk management and compliance practices. It wasn’t too 
long ago that some foreign banking organizations faced supervisory discipline for failing to 
meet  those  standards.  Given  the  lessons  of  the  crisis,  I  would  expect  that  our  focus  and 
attention on these areas would only intensify going forward. 
Fifth, we will be particularly focused on how the new supervisory framework will apply to the 
U.S.  personnel  associated  with  the  operations  of  foreign  banks  in  the  United  States.  In 
particular,  we  will  have  substantial  concern  if  these  firms’  compensation  practices  are 
contrary to the text or spirit of the international agreements on compensation practices that 
are  in  the  process  of  being  hammered  out.  For  example,  multi-year  guaranteed  bonus 
payments  would  raise  a  red  flag  for  us  as  not  likely  being  consistent  with  the  evolving 
consensus on sound compensation practices. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
8 
 BIS Review 125/2009
