Emsley D Tromp: Recent international economic developments and 
related challenges for the Netherlands Antilles 
Speech by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  on  the  occasion  of  the  Caribbean  Financial  Action  Taskforce 
(“CFATF”) Plenary lunch meeting, Willemstad, 28 October 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow me to welcome the member countries of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force, 
the  Cooperating  and  Supporting  Nations,  and  the  representatives  of  other  international 
organizations.  It  is  indeed  with  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  that  I  am  addressing  you  this 
afternoon  on  the  occasion  of  the  plenary  meeting  of  the  Caribbean  Financial  Action  Task 
Force  (CFATF).  It  has  been  almost  20  years  since  the  G-7,  on  the  occasion  of  its  annual 
meeting,  issued  40  recommendations  to  prevent  the  misuse  of  the  financial  systems  for 
criminal  activities.  The  issuing  of  these  recommendations  can  be  considered  as  the 
beginning  of  concerted  actions  by  the  world  community  to  address  in  a  consistent  and 
effective way the issue of laundering the proceeds of criminal activities. These areas have 
subsequently  been  extended  to  include  terrorism  financing  in  the  aftermath  of  the  9/11 
attacks. 
The  Caribbean  countries  followed  rapidly  with  the  creation  of  the  CFATF  to  deal  more 
effectively with this misuse of the financial system since the international financial services 
sector represents an important pillar of our economies. Since then, important progress has 
been  achieved  on  this  front.  Needless  to  say,  that  we  have  to  continue  to  adjust  our 
legislations to the constantly changing international environment. 
I believe that this CFATF meeting is a significant event, as professionals from different parts 
of the world come together to discuss, develop, and promote the enforcement of policies to 
combat money laundering and terrorist financing.  
Having  these  policies  in  place  would  certainly  put  our  countries  in  a  better  position  in  the 
world, making us more attractive to foreign investors. Naturally, this enhanced attractiveness 
would have a favorable impact on our economic growth and employment.  
Since the establishment of the CFATF in 1990, the Netherlands Antilles has been an active 
member  of  this  organization,  supporting  efforts  to  fight  money  laundering  and  terrorist 
financing.  The  Netherlands  Antilles  fully  supports  the  efforts  of  both  the  CFATF  and  the 
FATF.  The  Central  Bank  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles  is  doing  its  utmost  to  implement  and 
comply  with  the  recommendations  of  both  organizations  through  the  supervision  of  our 
financial  institutions.  Therefore,  it  is  a  privilege  for  the  Netherlands  Antilles  to  host  this 
conference.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  since  July  2007  the  global  economy  has  experienced  a  severe 
financial crisis originating in the US housing and credit sectors. Due to increased integration 
of  goods,  services,  and  financial  markets,  the  crisis  spread  from  the  housing  and  credit 
markets in the United States to other markets and countries around the world. This crisis has 
resulted in a deep worldwide recession with severe economic and social impacts. Few, if any 
economies have not been affected. Output has contracted in the major industrial countries, 
including the United States and the Euro area, and slowed in emerging economies. 
Fortunately, global economic growth has recently started to rebound, and financial conditions 
have improved markedly.  
BIS Review 140/2009 
 1
World  economic  recovery  has  been  driven  largely  by  wide-ranging  and  coordinated  public 
intervention,  particularly  in  industrial  countries,  by  supporting  demand  and  reducing 
uncertainty and systemic risk in financial markets. 
However, the pace of recovery is expected to be slow as uncertainties remain in the financial 
markets,  and  public  intervention  will  gradually  have  to  be  withdrawn.  Against  this 
background, it is projected that the world economy will contract by 1% in 2009 and recover 
by 3% in 2010. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the global downturn has had severe repercussions for the Caribbean 
region.  Our  region  consists  of  nations  some  of  which  are  relatively  small,  very  open,  and 
prone to external shocks. Geographically, we are located in the path of one of nature’s most 
destructive  phenomena,  namely,  annually  recurring  hurricanes.  At  the  same  time,  we  also 
have  been  endowed  with  beautiful  weather  and  beaches,  which  make  our  shores  very 
attractive to foreign visitors. As a consequence, tourism has become an important pillar of 
our  economies.  In  fact,  the  Caribbean  is  one  of  the  most  tourism-intensive  regions  in  the 
world. In addition, many Caribbean economies depend heavily on inflows from remittances 
and foreign direct investments. Needless to say, we have become increasingly susceptible to 
the health of the world economy. 
Due to the global economic downturn, foreign exchange revenues from tourism have been 
dropping, reflecting the weakening US, Canadian, and European markets.  
Furthermore, foreign exchange receipts from  international financial services have dropped, 
reflecting the crisis in the international financial markets. Inflows from remittances and foreign 
direct  investments  also  have  been  declining.  As  a  consequence,  real  Gross  Domestic 
Product is expected to contract in most countries in 2009. 
It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  in  contrast  to  other  regions,  the  Latin  American  and 
Caribbean  financial  systems  have  not  experienced  widespread  episodes  of  distress.  The 
economies in this region have been able to withstand some of the financial turmoil because 
of  several  key  structural  improvements  including  stronger  policy  frameworks  that  promote 
resilience and allow for the implementation of timely policy responses to support economic 
activity. Also, in many cases, fiscal discipline brought down public debt levels significantly. 
Finally, banks in the region relied on domestic deposits to fund domestic credit and had put 
prudent lending practices in place. As a result, the Latin American and Caribbean region is 
showing signs of stabilization and recovery.  
Nevertheless, the pace of recovery is projected to be slow in those countries that are highly 
dependent on tourism and remittances. Despite signs of recovery in the United States and 
the Euro area, tourism revenues will pick up slowly because of a projected increase in private 
savings in these tourism markets. Remittances, which depend on employment conditions in 
the advanced economies, notably the United States, also are expected to recover gradually.  
To become more resilient to external shocks, many countries in the region have attempted to 
diversify  their  economies.  International  financial  services  have  been  relatively  appealing  to 
countries seeking to diversify due to its perceived high value-added component. In addition, 
the  ability  to  establish  an  international  financial  center  quickly  and  without  substantial 
physical investments, as required in other industries, has made the sector attractive to many 
islands in the region. However, activities in this industry also have been affected by the world 
economic crisis. As a consequence, foreign exchange revenues from international financial 
services have dropped recently.  
It should be noted, however, that this sector is not only affected by developments in the rest 
of the world, but also depends on how the sector is perceived by the rest of the world. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  current  world  economic  crisis  had  its  origin  in  the  US  housing 
crisis, which spilled over to the financial and other sectors and to other countries around the 
globe.  Nonetheless,  when  the  G-20  countries met  in  Washington,  London,  and Pittsburgh, 
their main focus was on those jurisdictions offering financial services. The impression was 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2009
thereby  created  that  we  are  in  part  to  blame  for  the  current  world  economic  ills.  As  a 
consequence,  despite  many  efforts  to  comply  with  the  OECD  recommendations,  many 
Caribbean jurisdictions are now on the “gray” list of this organization. Needless to say, this 
negatively affects the development of the international financial services industry and, hence, 
economic  development  in  our  countries.  I  do  endorse,  however,  the  point  that  the  fight 
against  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  should  be  a  priority  on  the  international 
agenda.  
Ladies and gentlemen, as you all know, money laundering and terrorist financing activities 
can undermine the integrity and stability of financial institutions and systems and negatively 
affect foreign investment and other capital flows. In today’s world, the problems presented by 
money laundering and terrorist financing activities are global. Money launderers constantly 
seek out for loopholes in anti-money laundering laws and schemes among countries. Those 
jurisdictions  that  have  weak  or  ineffective  controls  become  special  targets  of  money 
launderers. As a consequence, problems in one country may spread to other countries in the 
region and other parts of the world.  
It is imperative, therefore, that we take all the necessary actions to continue to enhance our 
respective jurisdictions to meet the world’s best practices. Not only will this lead to a more 
transparent  and  resilient  sector,  but  it  also  will  enhance  our  reputation  and  prevent  our 
jurisdictions from being misused for criminal activities. 
In addition to a framework to fight money laundering and terrorist financing, there are certain 
requirements for both attaining the status of an international financial center and successfully 
maintaining it. Allow me to outline some broad areas that I believe are the most important.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the first requirement is macroeconomic and political stability. Sound 
and  sustainable  macroeconomic  policies  support  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  In 
addition, political stability is a precondition for building business confidence in all sectors of 
the economy, including the international financial services sector.  
Therefore, to succeed as an international financial center, the financial community must be 
able to rely on the stability of the economy and the government.  
Another  important  requirement  is  a  strong  fiscal  and  legal  infrastructure.  A  strong  legal 
system  includes  property  rights,  contract  enforcement,  a  functional  and  credible  court 
system,  and  bankruptcy  procedures.  The  fiscal  and  legal  infrastructure  of  the  financial 
industry  should  be  able  to  continuously  reform  itself  to  adapt  to  the  constantly  changing 
international business community. Relevant legislation must be introduced and adapted in a 
timely manner. 
The  success  of  an  international  financial  center  also  depends  to  a  great  extent  on  the 
competence of its professionals operating in the sector. For that reason, access to a pool of 
skilled  labor,  including  well-trained  legal,  taxation,  accounting,  auditing,  and  company 
management professionals is crucial. 
In  addition,  good  communication  and  support  services  are  an  important  requirement  for  a 
successful  international  financial  center.  This  requirement  is  particularly  important  for  the 
quick and efficient transmission of market information to participants. 
Finally, but not the least important, is a sound regulatory framework, promoting strong and 
credible  banks  and  institutional  investors.  The  regulatory  framework  should  support 
economic development and growth, financial stability, and protect investors and depositors. 
In addition, it must be responsive to the changing financial environment.  
The international financial crisis has demonstrated quite clearly through the case of Icesave 
that small countries are severely limited in pursuing autonomous rescue operations when the 
size of the financial institutions is big compared to their GDP. Furthermore, determining one’s 
own supervisory policies has proven illusory. International coordination and cooperation have 
become  the  rule,  led  by  international  institutions  such  as  the  Bank  for  International 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 3
Settlements  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  These  institutions  set  the  standards  for 
their  members.  However,  if  countries  do  not  follow  these  rules,  they  run  the  risk  of  being 
blacklisted, thereby undermining confidence in their financial sector and investment climate.  
Ladies and gentlemen, as the world is struggling to get out of the deepest recession since 
the Great Depression, the G-20 and OECD countries will continue to keep us at the forefront 
of  their  attention  to  see  how  and  to  what  extent  we  are  compliant  with  the  best  practices. 
Given the relatively high degree of global financial integration, it is crucial for the supervisory 
authorities  in  the  Caribbean  and  the  Latin  American  jurisdictions  to  collaborate  closely  to 
address  cross-border  financial  issues  and  to  comply  with  the  internationally  supported 
recommendations.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  wish  to  conclude  my  address  by  restating  the  importance  of 
developing and promoting policies that contribute to the establishment of a solid economic 
and institutional infrastructure that fosters sound and sustainable economic development in 
the Caribbean and Latin American countries.  
This  infrastructure  includes  a  sound  and  internationally  approved  financial  system  with 
effective anti-money laundering policies and regulation aimed at preventing the financing of 
terrorism. I wish you fruitful discussions in the remaining meetings and a pleasant stay on our 
island. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 140/2009
