Jan F Qvigstad: Could the financial crisis have been avoided? 
Challenges to international cooperation and conflict 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at a seminar on the financial crisis arranged by Prio, Oslo, 8 December 2009. 
 What happened? 
Confidence between financial market participants collapsed in September last year following 
the  Lehman  Brothers  bankruptcy.  The  price  of  credit  jumped  up  both  in  money  and  bond 
markets. Equity prices declined, increasing the cost of raising new equity capital.  
The authorities worldwide responded by supplying substantial liquidity to banks and central 
bank key rates were reduced. In many countries, the authorities provided extraordinary loans 
or  took  over  banks  to  maintain  confidence  in  institutions  and  market  activity.  In  some 
countries, the authorities have purchased securities to bring down long-term interest rates. 
Stimulus has also been provided through increased public sector demand and government 
budget deficits have grown to unprecedented levels in some countries.  
The  reaction  of  households  and  businesses  was  to  increase  saving  and  private  sector 
demand declined. Credit standards were tightened and risk premiums soared. The drop in 
demand rapidly translated into a contraction in trade and output. In spring 2009, world trade 
was around 20 per cent below the level prevailing one year earlier. In many countries, the 
total  value  of  goods  and  services  production  (GDP)  declined  over  several  consecutive 
quarters.  Countries  that  were  heavily  reliant  on  exports  of  manufactured  goods  were 
particularly hard hit. Unemployment has increased sharply in countries not far from our own. 
Given  the  high  levels  of  available  resources,  there  are  prospects  of  lower  than  normal 
interest rates among our main trading partners for some time ahead.  
There are now signs that the stimulus measures are reviving growth, but production is still 
lower  than  it  was  prior  to  the  crisis.  The  challenge  going  forward  will  be  to  address  the 
problem of rising unemployment and high government debt in many countries.  
Why did it happen? 
When the Queen of England visited the London School of Economics in November last year, 
she  asked  her  host  why  no  one  had  foreseen  the  financial  crisis.  In  July  this  year,  her 
question  was  answered  by  a  panel  of  33  prominent  economists  from  British  universities, 
government institutions and the business sector. The panel did not cite only a single cause, 
but a web of causation.  
An important factor behind the crisis can be found in global macroeconomic developments in 
the years preceding the crisis. In the 2000s, China made its grand entry into global trade with 
an attendant surge in production and income. This led to higher demand for inputs, and the 
prices  of  oil  and  other  raw  materials  increased.  On  the  other  hand,  global  consumer  price 
growth was pulled down by exports of cheap goods from China and other countries with low 
production costs. Interest rates were lowered in many countries to prevent very low inflation 
or deflation. In China, a large share of income was saved, either in the form of investment in 
new  production  equipment  or  financial  assets.  The  increased  supply  of  financial  savings 
pushed  down  global  long-term  interest  rates.  Lower  interest  rates  encouraged  consumers 
and businesses in other countries to borrow capital from China and other surplus countries. 
The  foreign  debt  of  countries  such  as  the  US  and  UK  accumulated  rapidly  in  the  years 
leading up to the crisis.  
BIS Review 163/2009 
 1
Historically low interest rates prompted fund managers in Western countries to seek out new 
alternatives in their search for high yields. New financial savings products were developed 
and  spread  to  investors  around  the  world.  It  was  often  difficult,  or  even  impossible,  for 
investors to value the risk underlying the products.  
Yield potentials can also be increased by leveraging securities purchases. As long as prices 
rise, the return on equity will increase with the degree of leveraging. On the other hand, the 
risk of being left with debt, and little or no equity capital, increases when prices fall. In the 
years ahead of the crisis, high debt leveraging still appeared to be an attractive proposition in 
an environment of low credit risk and a glut of cheap credit. The result was a surge in debt 
accumulation  in  the  years  preceding  the  crisis.  Prices  in  securities  and  property  markets 
soared. The build-up of macroeconomic imbalances in the years prior to the crisis increased 
vulnerabilities  and  the  potential  amplitude  of  a  downswing.  Many  observers  warned  of  the 
risks associated with these developments but no one foresaw how the crisis would unfold, 
when it would erupt, or its severity.  
The global financial crisis has revealed weaknesses in the financial system. In retrospect, it 
is clear that financial sector regulation was not adequate. Regulation was primarily designed 
to ensure that individual banks had sufficient equity capital to protect lenders and depositors 
against losses, rather than ensuring stability in the system as a whole. For example, there 
were  no  requirements  stipulating  the  size  of  liquid  assets  a  bank  must  hold  to  weather 
periods of failure in market funding. Nor were there any minimum requirements as to funding 
stability. An example of the importance of these conditions is the collapse of the British bank 
Northern Rock in September 2007. The bank had a residential mortgage portfolio that was 
not  particularly  exposed  to  risk.  The  bank  had,  however,  expanded  rapidly  over  several 
years,  an  expansion  that  was  partly  based  on  short-term  market  funding.  When  funding 
markets failed, the bank promptly encountered liquidity problems and was compelled to turn 
to  the  Bank  of  England  for  support.  When  it  became  known  that  the  bank  had  sought 
government support, depositors quickly lost confidence and the UK experienced its first bank 
run  since  1866.  Many  other  banks  that  were  considered  to  be  solid  under  the  applicable 
regulation also encountered problems when financial market confidence evaporated.  
Something worked: the IMF, G20 and WTO  
The  IMF  is  an  organisation  for  international  cooperation  based  on  a  system  of  mutual 
assistance  among  member  countries.  The  IMF  provides  loans  to  countries  experiencing 
balance of payments problems. The loans are financed by member countries. If the problems 
stem from economic policy mismanagement, the loan will be subject to specific requirements 
such as measures to correct policy.  
When  the  crisis  occurred,  the  IMF  reacted  swiftly  to  accommodate  the  increased  need  for 
IMF  services.  The  IMF’s  role  as  lender  and  interlocutor  with  the  authorities  in  crisis-hit 
countries  probably  helped  to  limit  the  crisis.  The  IMF  provided  support  and  assistance  to 
countries  that  were  directly  affected  by  the  crisis  and  countries  that  were  innocent 
bystanders.  The  sharp  increase  in  IMF  lending  reduced  the  financial  resources  of  the 
organization. Member countries have now increased their contributions to the IMF.  
During  the  financial  crisis,  the  G20  has  played  a  prominent  role  in  the  international 
coordination of economic policy. The group launched several important initiatives during the 
crisis,  which  were  subsequently  placed  under  the  responsibility  of  the  IMF.  All  countries 
stand  to  benefit  from  the  establishment  of  international  meeting  places  that  the  major 
economies  consider  to  be  of  interest.  However,  unlike  the  IMF,  the  G20  is  not  a 
representative  body  for  all  countries.  Even  if  the  G20  account  for  a  large  share  of  global 
output, most countries are not included, such as low-income countries and regions like most 
of  Africa,  the  Middle  East  and  the  Nordic  countries.  One  possibility  is  to  develop  the  G20 
based  on  the  IMF  model  where  countries  are  represented  through  constituencies.  Small 
2 
 163/2009
countries like Norway, or at least the Nordic countries, could then be represented in a forum 
for discussion of the policies of major economies.  
In the wake of the Great Depression of the 1930s, protectionist measures were introduced in 
many  countries.  Customs  duties  were  increased  to  shield  domestic  industry.  As  a  result, 
world trade continued its decline over several years. So far, protectionist policies have been 
avoided  in  the  wake  of  the  latest  crisis,  which  makes  it  possible  to  reverse  the  sharp 
contraction in world trade more rapidly and hence reinvigorate economic growth. One reason 
why  the  mistakes  of  the  1930s  have  not  been  repeated  this  time  may  be  that  the  World 
Trade  Organisation  (WTO)  was  established  in  the  interim.  International  trade  agreements 
concluded under the auspices of the WTO contribute to binding national governments and 
prevent protectionist measures. By and large, this has worked well during the recent crisis.  
Could the crisis have been avoided? 
The macroeconomic forces that were unleashed in the years leading up to the financial crisis 
were  strong.  It  is  unlikely  that  a  single  country  could  have  stemmed  the  tide.  China’s 
participation  in  international  trade  in  goods  added  several  hundred  million  persons  to  the 
global workforce over a few years. This increased the room for strong, non-inflationary global 
growth. China was not prepared, however, to liberalise its capital markets fully. The Chinese 
government was not willing to allow its currency to float freely and the exchange rate against 
the US dollar was managed. This disabled an important stabiliser and contributed increasing 
world  trade  imbalances.  Long-term  interest  rates  remained  low  in  spite  of  substantial 
monetary  policy  tightening  in  the  US  between  2004  and  2006.  International  organisations 
such  as  the  BIS,  OECD,  IMF  and  others  noted  on  more  than  one  occasion  that  growing 
imbalances in the world economy were a source of concern. But economic policy decisions 
are the prerogative of national governments. Given the policy pursued by China, there were 
probably limits to what monetary policy in Western countries could in reality achieve in terms 
of rolling back these forces. Increased private saving in the US and other deficit countries 
would  probably  have  required  monetary  policy  tightening  sufficient  to  push  up  long-term 
interest rates. Alternatively, a substantial increase in public sector saving would have been 
necessary. Both alternatives would probably have led to an economic policy driven downturn. 
It is demanding to pursue such a policy based on the proposition that a crisis might occur in 
the future.  
Improved financial regulation would probably have reduced the severity of the financial crisis. 
Regulation and insurance have similar features: in most cases an annual premium must be 
paid in the form of slightly lower growth. This occurs because capital is not allowed to flow 
entirely freely to the highest yielding vehicles. In return, regulation can counter the build-up of 
financial imbalances. This reduces the probability that a negative event will trigger a severe 
financial crisis.  
It is not optimal to be fully insured against crises because the insurance premium would be 
too high. But the financial crisis demonstrated that the imbalances ahead of the crisis were 
unsustainable and that they could have been reduced through regulatory improvements. The 
reason  that  this  did  not  occur  may  be  that  the  risk  had  taken  on  the  form  of  several 
interwoven imbalances that no single authority had the power to correct.  
Banking and financial market regulation will be enhanced in Norway and abroad. The Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Board (FSB), as mandated by 
the G20, will soon issue recommendations for strengthening regulation of banks’ capital and 
liquidity  management.  In  the  UK,  the  regulatory  authorities  have  already  drawn  up  new 
banking regulation. A natural consequence of the financial crisis is that increased weight is 
given to ensuring system-wide stability and not only the stability of individual banks. Other 
important  questions  are  whether  systemically  important  banks  should  be  subject  to  tighter 
regulation and how to reduce the procyclicality of bank behaviour.  
BIS Review 163/2009 
 3
Recommendations  from  the  Basel  Committee  and  the  FSB  will  be  examined  by  national 
authorities  that  will  subsequently  adopt  new  regulation.  In  a  world  with  a  global  financial 
market, there are limits to how far a single country go it alone. International coordination is 
important for new regulations to have the intended effect. The crisis has opened a political 
window for tighter regulation of the financial system, but it is uncertain how long the window 
will remain open. 
4 
 163/2009
