Ben S Bernanke: Confirmation hearing 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 3 December 2009. 
 Chairman  Dodd,  Senator  Shelby,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  thank  you  for  the 
opportunity to appear before you today. I would also like to express my gratitude to President 
Obama for nominating me to a second term as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System and for his support for a strong and independent Federal Reserve. 
Finally,  I  thank  my  colleagues  throughout  the  Federal  Reserve  System  for  the  remarkable 
resourcefulness, dedication, and stamina they have demonstrated over the past two years 
under extremely trying conditions. They have never lost sight of the importance of the work of 
the Federal Reserve for the economic well-being of all Americans.  
Over the past two years, our nation, indeed the world, has endured the most severe financial 
crisis  since  the  Great  Depression,  a  crisis  which  in  turn  triggered  a  sharp  contraction  in 
global economic activity. Today, most indicators suggest that financial markets are stabilizing 
and that the economy is emerging from the recession. Yet our task is far from complete. Far 
too many Americans are without jobs, and unemployment could remain high for some time 
even  if,  as  we  anticipate,  moderate  economic  growth  continues.  The  Federal  Reserve 
remains committed to its mission to help restore prosperity and to stimulate job creation while 
preserving  price  stability.  If  I  am  confirmed,  I  will  work  to  the  utmost  of  my  abilities  in  the 
pursuit of those objectives. 
As  severe  as  the  effects  of  the  crisis  have  been,  however,  the  outcome  could  have  been 
markedly worse without the strong actions taken by the Congress, the Treasury Department, 
the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and other authorities both 
here and abroad. For our part, the Federal Reserve cut interest rates early and aggressively, 
reducing  our  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  to  nearly  zero.  We  played  a  central  role  in 
efforts to quell the financial turmoil, for example, through our joint efforts with other agencies 
and foreign authorities to avert a collapse of the global banking system last fall; by ensuring 
financial  institutions  adequate  access  to  short-term  funding  when  private  funding  sources 
dried up; and through our leadership of the comprehensive assessment of large U.S. banks 
conducted this past spring, an exercise that significantly increased public confidence in the 
banking system. We also created targeted lending programs that have helped to restart the 
flow of credit in a number of critical markets, including the commercial paper market and the 
market  for  securities  backed  by  loans  to  households  and  small  businesses.  Indeed,  we 
estimate that one of the targeted programs – the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility 
–  has  thus  far  helped  finance  3.3  million  loans  to  households  (excluding  credit  card 
accounts), more than 100 million credit card accounts, 480,000 loans to small businesses, 
and 100,000 loans to larger businesses. And our purchases of longer-term securities have 
provided support to private credit markets and helped to reduce longer-term interest rates, 
such  as  mortgage  rates.  Taken  together,  the  Federal  Reserve's  actions  have  contributed 
substantially to the significant improvement in financial conditions and to what now appear to 
be the beginnings of a turnaround in both the U.S. and foreign economies. 
Having  acted  promptly  and  forcefully  to  confront  the  financial  crisis  and  its  economic 
consequences, we are also keenly aware that, to ensure longer-term economic stability, we 
must be prepared to withdraw the extraordinary policy support in a smooth and timely way as 
markets and the economy recover. We are confident that we have the necessary tools to do 
so.  However,  as  is  always  the  case,  even  when  the  monetary  policy  tools  employed  are 
conventional, determining the appropriate time and pace for the withdrawal of stimulus will 
require  careful  analysis  and  judgment.  My  colleagues  on  the  Federal  Open  Market 
BIS Review 160/2009 
 1
Committee  and  I  are  committed  to  implementing  our  exit  strategy  in  a  manner  that  both 
supports job creation and fosters continued price stability. 
A financial crisis of the severity we have experienced must prompt financial institutions and 
regulators alike to undertake unsparing self-assessments of their past performance. At the 
Federal  Reserve,  we  have  been  actively  engaged  in  identifying  and  implementing 
improvements in our regulation and supervision of financial firms. In the realm of consumer 
protection,  during  the  past  three  years,  we  have  comprehensively  overhauled  regulations 
aimed  at  ensuring  fair  treatment  of  mortgage  borrowers  and  credit  card  users,  among 
numerous other initiatives. To promote safety and soundness, we continue to work with other 
domestic and foreign supervisors to require stronger capital, liquidity, and risk management 
at banking organizations, while also taking steps to ensure that compensation packages do 
not  provide  incentives  for  excessive  risk-taking  and  an  undue  focus  on  short-term  results. 
Drawing  on  our  experience  in  leading  the  recent  comprehensive  assessment  of  19  of  the 
largest U.S. banks, we are expanding and improving our cross-firm, or horizontal, reviews of 
large  institutions,  which  will  afford  us  greater  insight  into  industry  practices  and  possible 
emerging  risks.  To  complement  on-site  supervisory  reviews,  we  are  also  creating  an 
enhanced  quantitative  surveillance  program  that  will  make  use  of  the  skills  not  only  of 
supervisors, but also of economists, specialists in financial markets, and other experts within 
the Federal Reserve. We are requiring large firms to provide supervisors with more detailed 
and  timely  information  on  risk  positions,  operating  performance,  and  other  key  indicators, 
and we are strengthening consolidated supervision to better capture the firmwide risks faced 
by  complex  organizations.  In  sum,  heeding  the  lessons  of  the  crisis,  we  are  committed  to 
taking a more proactive and comprehensive approach to oversight to ensure that emerging 
problems are identified early and met with prompt and effective supervisory responses. 
We also have renewed and strengthened our longstanding commitment to transparency and 
accountability. In the making of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve is highly transparent, 
providing  detailed  minutes  three  weeks  after  each  policy  meeting,  quarterly  economic 
projections, regular testimonies to the Congress, and much other information. Our financial 
statements  are  public  and  audited  by  an  outside  accounting  firm,  we  publish  our  balance 
sheet  weekly,  and  we  provide  extensive  information  through  monthly  reports  and  on  our 
website  on  all  the  temporary  lending  facilities  developed  during  the  crisis,  including  the 
collateral  that  we  take.  Further,  our  financial  activities  are  subject  to  review  by  an 
independent  inspector  general.  And  the  Congress,  through  the  Government  Accountability 
Office,  can  and  does  audit  all  parts  of  operations,  except  for  monetary  policy  and  related 
areas  explicitly  exempted  by  a  1978  provision  passed  by  the  Congress.  The  Congress 
created  that  exemption  to  protect  monetary  policy  from  short-term  political  pressures  and 
thereby  to  support  our  ability  to  effectively  pursue  our  mandated  objectives  of  maximum 
employment and price stability. 
In navigating through the crisis, the Federal Reserve has been greatly aided by the regional 
structure  established  by  the  Congress  when  it  created  the  Federal  Reserve  in  1913.  The 
more than 270 business people, bankers, nonprofit executives, academics, and community, 
agricultural, and labor leaders who serve on the boards of the 12 Reserve Banks and their 
24 Branches  provide  valuable  insights  into  current  economic  and  financial  conditions  that 
statistics cannot. Thus, the structure of the Federal Reserve ensures that our policymaking is 
informed not just by a Washington perspective, or a Wall Street perspective, but also a Main 
Street perspective. 
If  confirmed,  I  look  forward  to  working  closely  with  this  Committee  and  the  Congress  to 
achieve fundamental reform of our system of financial regulation and stronger, more effective 
supervision.  It  would  be  a  tragedy  if,  after  all  the  hardships  that  Americans  have  endured 
during  the  past  two  years,  our  nation  failed  to  take  the  steps  necessary  to  prevent  a 
recurrence  of  a  crisis  of  the  magnitude  we  have  recently  confronted.  And,  as  we  move 
forward, we must take care that the Federal Reserve remains effective and independent, with 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2009
the capacity to foster financial stability and to support a return to prosperity and economic 
opportunity in a context of price stability. 
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you today. I would be happy to respond 
to your questions. 
BIS Review 160/2009 
 3
