Ben S Bernanke: Regulatory reform 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 1 October 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate the opportunity to discuss ways of improving the financial regulatory framework to 
better protect against systemic risks.  
In my view, a broad-based agenda for reform should include at least five key elements. First, 
legislative change is needed to ensure that systemically important financial firms are subject 
to effective consolidated supervision, whether or not the firm owns a bank. 
Second, an oversight council made up of the agencies involved in financial supervision and 
regulation should be established, with a mandate to monitor and identify emerging risks to 
financial  stability  across  the  entire  financial  system,  to  identify  regulatory  gaps,  and  to 
coordinate the agencies' responses to potential systemic risks. To further encourage a more 
comprehensive and holistic approach to financial oversight, all federal financial supervisors 
and regulators – not just the Federal Reserve – should be directed and empowered to take 
account  of  risks  to  the  broader  financial  system  as  part  of  their  normal  oversight 
responsibilities. 
Third, a new special resolution process should be created that would allow the government 
to wind down a failing systemically important financial institution whose disorderly collapse 
would pose substantial risks to the financial system and the broader economy. Importantly, 
this regime should allow the government to impose losses on shareholders and creditors of 
the firm. 
Fourth, all systemically important payment, clearing, and settlement arrangements should be 
subject to consistent and robust oversight and prudential standards. 
And  fifth,  policymakers  should  ensure  that  consumers  are  protected  from  unfair  and 
deceptive practices in their financial dealings. 
Taken  together,  these  changes  should  significantly  improve  both  the  regulatory  system's 
ability to constrain the buildup of systemic risks as well as the financial system's resiliency 
when serious adverse shocks occur.  
Consolidated supervision of systemically important financial institutions 
The  current  financial  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  that  risks  to  the  financial  system  can 
arise not only in the banking sector, but also from the activities of other financial firms – such 
as investment banks or insurance companies – that traditionally have not been subject to the 
type  of  regulation  and  consolidated  supervision  applicable  to  bank  holding  companies.  To 
close this important gap in our regulatory structure, legislative action is needed that would 
subject  all  systemically 
for 
consolidated prudential supervision that currently applies to bank holding companies. Such 
action would prevent financial firms that do not own a bank, but that nonetheless pose risks 
to  the  overall  financial  system  because  of  the  size,  risks,  or  interconnectedness  of  their 
financial activities, from avoiding comprehensive supervisory oversight. 
Besides  being  supervised  on  a  consolidated  basis,  systemically  important  financial 
institutions should also be subject to enhanced regulation and supervision, including capital, 
institutions 
the  same 
framework 
important 
financial 
to 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 1
liquidity, and risk-management requirements that reflect those institutions' important roles in 
the  financial  sector.  Enhanced  requirements  are  needed not  only  to  protect  the stability  of 
individual institutions and the financial system as a whole, but also to reduce the incentives 
for  financial  firms  to  become  very  large  in  order  to  be  perceived  as  too  big  to  fail.  This 
perception materially weakens the incentive of creditors of the firm to restrain the firm's risk-
taking,  and  it  creates  a  playing  field  that  is  tilted  against  smaller  firms  not  perceived  as 
having  the  same  degree  of  government  support.  Creation  of  a  mechanism  for  the  orderly 
resolution of systemically important nonbank financial firms, which I will discuss later, is an 
important additional tool for addressing the too-big-to-fail problem.  
The Federal Reserve is already the consolidated supervisor of some of the largest and most 
complex  institutions  in  the  world.  I  believe  that  the  expertise  we  have  developed  in 
supervising  large,  diversified,  and  interconnected  banking  organizations,  together  with  our 
broad knowledge of the financial markets in which these organizations operate, makes the 
Federal Reserve well suited to serve as the consolidated supervisor for those systemically 
important financial institutions that may not already be subject to the Bank Holding Company 
Act.  In  addition,  our  involvement  in  supervision  is  critical  for  ensuring  that  we  have  the 
necessary  expertise,  information,  and  authorities  to  carry  out  our  essential  functions  as  a 
central bank of promoting financial stability and making effective monetary policy. 
The Federal Reserve has already taken a number of important steps to improve its regulation 
and supervision of large financial groups, building on lessons from the current crisis. On the 
regulatory side, we played a key role in developing the recently announced, internationally-
agreed  improvements  to  the  capital  requirements  for  trading  activities  and  securitization 
exposures,  and  we  continue  to  work  with  other  regulators  to  strengthen  the  capital 
requirements  for  other  types  of  on-  and  off-balance-sheet  exposures.1  In  addition,  we  are 
working with our fellow regulatory agencies toward the development of capital standards and 
other  supervisory  tools  that  would  be  calibrated  to  the  systemic  importance  of  the  firm. 
Options under consideration in this area include requiring systemically important institutions 
to hold aggregate levels of capital above current regulatory norms or to maintain a greater 
share  of  capital  in  the  form  of  common  equity  or  instruments  with  similar  loss-absorbing 
attributes, such as "contingent" capital that converts to common equity when necessary to 
mitigate systemic risk. 
The  financial  crisis  also  highlighted  weaknesses  in  liquidity  risk  management  at  major 
financial  institutions,  including  an  overreliance  on  short-term  funding.  To  address  these 
issues, the Federal Reserve helped lead the development of revised international principles 
for  sound  liquidity  risk  management,  which  have  been  incorporated  into  new  interagency 
guidance now out for public comment.2
In the supervisory arena, the recently completed Supervisory Capital Assessment Program 
(SCAP), popularly known as the stress test, was quite instructive for our efforts to strengthen 
our  prudential  oversight  of  the  largest  banking  organizations.3  This  unprecedented 
                                                 
1   See Bank for International Settlements (2009), "Basel II Capital Framework Enhancements Announced by the 
Basel  Committee,"  press  release,  July  13;  and  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2009), 
Enhancements to the Basel II Framework (Basel: Basel Committee, July). 
2   See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2008), Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and 
Supervision (Basel: Basel Committee, September). Information about the proposed guidance is available at 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of Thrift Supervision, and National Credit Union Administration (2009), 
"Agencies Seek Comment on Proposed Interagency Guidance on Funding and Liquidity Risk Management," 
joint press release, June 30. 
3   For more information about the SCAP, see Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "The Supervisory Capital Assessment 
Program," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2009 Financial Markets Conference, held 
in Jekyll Island, Ga., May 11. 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2009
interagency process, which was led by the Federal Reserve, incorporated forward-looking, 
cross-firm, aggregate analyses of 19 of the largest bank holding companies, which together 
control a majority of the assets and loans within the U.S. banking system. Drawing on the 
SCAP experience, we have increased our emphasis on horizontal examinations, which focus 
on  particular  risks  or  activities  across  a  group  of  banking  organizations,  and  we  have 
broadened the scope of the resources we bring to bear on these reviews. We also are in the 
process  of  creating  an  enhanced  quantitative  surveillance  program  for  large,  complex 
organizations that will use supervisory information, firm-specific data analysis, and market-
based indicators to identify emerging risks to specific firms as well as to the industry as a 
whole. This work will be performed by a multidisciplinary group composed of our economic 
and market researchers, supervisors, market operations specialists, and other experts within 
the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Periodic  scenario  analysis  will  be  used  to  enhance  our 
understanding  of  the  consequences  of  changes  in  the  economic  environment  for  both 
individual  firms  and  for  the  broader  system.  Finally,  to  support  and  complement  these 
initiatives,  we  are  working  with  the  other  federal  banking  agencies  to  develop  more 
comprehensive information-reporting requirements for the largest firms. 
Systemic risk oversight 
For  purposes  of  both  effectiveness  and  accountability,  the  consolidated  supervision  of  an 
individual firm, whether or not it is systemically important, is best vested with a single agency. 
However, the broader task of monitoring and addressing systemic risks that might arise from 
the  interaction  of  different  types  of  financial  institutions  and  markets  –  both  regulated  and 
unregulated – may exceed the capacity of any individual supervisor. Instead, we should seek 
to marshal the collective expertise and information of all financial supervisors to identify and 
respond to developments that threaten the stability of the system as a whole. This objective 
can be accomplished by modifying the regulatory architecture in two important ways. 
First, an oversight council – composed of representatives of the agencies and departments 
involved  in  the  oversight  of  the  financial  sector  –  should  be  established  to  monitor  and 
identify  emerging  systemic  risks  across  the  full  range  of  financial  institutions  and  markets. 
Examples  of  such  potential  risks  include  rising  and  correlated  risk  exposures  across  firms 
and markets; significant increases in leverage that could result in systemic fragility; and gaps 
in regulatory coverage that arise in the course of financial change and innovation, including 
the development of new practices, products, and institutions. A council could also play useful 
roles in coordinating responses by member agencies to mitigate emerging systemic risks, in 
recommending actions to reduce procyclicality in regulatory and supervisory practices, and in 
identifying financial firms that may deserve designation as systemically important. To fulfill its 
responsibilities,  a  council  would  need  access  to  a  broad  range  of  information  from  its 
member  agencies  regarding  the  institutions  and  markets  they  supervise  and,  when  the 
necessary  information  is  not  available  through  that  source,  the  authority  to  collect  such 
information directly from financial institutions and markets. 
Second,  the  Congress  should  support  a  reorientation  of  individual  agency  mandates  to 
include  not  only  the  responsibility  to  oversee  the  individual  firms  or  markets  within  each 
agency's scope of authority, but also the responsibility to try to identify and respond to the 
risks those entities may pose, either individually or through their interactions with other firms 
or markets, to the financial system more broadly. These actions could be taken by financial 
supervisors on their own initiative or based on a request or recommendation of the oversight 
council.  Importantly,  each  supervisor's  participation  in  the  oversight  council  would  greatly 
strengthen that supervisor's ability to see and understand emerging risks to financial stability. 
At the same time, this type of approach would vest the agency that has responsibility and 
accountability  for  the  relevant  firms  or  markets  with  the  authority  for  developing  and 
implementing  effective  and  tailored  responses  to  systemic  threats  arising  within  their 
purview. To maximize effectiveness, the oversight council could help coordinate responses 
when risks cross regulatory boundaries, which often will be the case. 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 3
The Federal Reserve already has begun to incorporate a systemically focused approach into 
our  supervision  of  large,  interconnected  firms.  Doing  so  requires  that  we  go  beyond 
considering  each  institution  in  isolation  and  pay  careful  attention  to  interlinkages  and 
interdependencies  among  firms  and  markets  that  could  threaten  the  financial  system  in  a 
crisis. For example, the failure of one firm may lead to runs by wholesale funders of other 
firms  that  are  seen  by  investors  as  similarly  situated  or  that  have  exposures  to  the  failing 
firm. These efforts are reflected, for example, in the expansion of horizontal reviews and the 
quantitative surveillance program I discussed earlier. 
Improved resolution process 
Another  critical  element  of  the  systemic  risk  agenda  is  the  creation  of  a  new  regime  that 
would  allow  the  orderly  resolution  of  failing,  systemically  important  financial  firms.  In  most 
cases,  the  federal  bankruptcy  laws  provide  an  appropriate  framework  for  the  resolution  of 
nonbank financial institutions. However, the bankruptcy code does not sufficiently protect the 
public's strong interest in ensuring the orderly resolution of a nonbank financial firm whose 
failure would pose substantial risks to the financial system and to the economy. Indeed, after 
the Lehman Brothers and AIG experiences, there is little doubt that we need a third option 
between the choices of bankruptcy and bailout for such firms. 
A  new  resolution  regime  for  nonbanks,  analogous  to  the  regime  currently  used  by  the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for banks, would provide the government the tools to 
restructure or wind down a failing systemically important firm in a way that mitigates the risks 
to  financial  stability  and  the  economy  and  thus  protects  the  public  interest.  It  also  would 
provide the government a mechanism for imposing losses on the shareholders and creditors 
of the firm. Establishing credible processes for imposing such losses is essential to restoring 
a  meaningful  degree  of  market  discipline  and  addressing  the  too-big-to-fail  problem.  The 
availability  of  a  workable  resolution  regime  also  would  replace  the  need  for  the  Federal 
Reserve to use its emergency lending authority under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve 
Act to prevent the failure of specific institutions. 
Payment, clearing, and settlement arrangements 
Payment, clearing, and settlement arrangements are the foundation of the nation's financial 
infrastructure.  These  arrangements  include  centralized  market  utilities  for  clearing  and 
settling  payments,  securities,  and  derivatives  transactions,  as  well  as  the  decentralized 
activities  through  which  financial  institutions  clear  and  settle  such  transactions  bilaterally. 
While  these  arrangements  can  create  significant  efficiencies  and  promote  transparency  in 
the financial markets, they also may concentrate substantial credit, liquidity, and operational 
risks, and, absent strong risk controls, may themselves be a source of contagion in times of 
stress.  
Unfortunately,  the  current  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  systemically  important 
payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  arrangements  is  fragmented,  creating  the  potential  for 
inconsistent  standards  to  be  adopted  or  applied.  Under  the  current  system,  no  single 
regulator is able to develop a comprehensive understanding of the interdependencies, risks, 
and risk-management approaches across the full range of arrangements serving the financial 
markets today. In light of the increasing integration of global financial markets, it is important 
that systemically critical payment, clearing, and settlement arrangements be viewed from a 
systemwide  perspective  and  that  they  be  subject  to  strong  and  consistent  prudential 
standards  and  supervisory  oversight.  We  believe  that  additional  authorities  are  needed  to 
achieve these goals. 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2009
Consumer protection 
As  the  Congress  considers  financial  reform,  it  is  vitally  important  that  consumers  be 
protected  from  unfair  and  deceptive  practices  in  their  financial  dealings.  Strong  consumer 
protection helps preserve households' savings, promotes confidence in financial institutions 
and markets, and adds materially to the strength of the financial system. We have seen in 
this  crisis  that  flawed  or  inappropriate  financial  instruments  can  lead  to  bad  results  for 
families  and  for  the  stability  of  the  financial  sector.  In  addition,  the  playing  field  is  uneven 
regarding  examination  and  enforcement  of  consumer  protection  laws  among  banks  and 
nonbank affiliates of bank holding companies on the one hand, and firms not affiliated with 
banks  on  the  other  hand.  Addressing  this  discrepancy  is  critical  both  for  protecting 
consumers and for ensuring fair competition in the market for consumer financial products. 
Conclusion 
Thank  you  again  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  on  these  important  matters.  The  Federal 
Reserve  looks  forward  to  working  with  the  Congress  and  the  Administration  to  enact 
meaningful regulatory reform that  will strengthen the financial system  and reduce both the 
probability and severity of future crises. 
BIS Review 119/2009 
 5
