Ardian Fullani: Financial supervision and measures to strengthen 
financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  International 
Conference  for  the  10th  Anniversary  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Kosovo, 
Prishtina, 30 October 2009. 
 the 
fact 
that 
international 
financial  crisis.  Given 
Dear Governor Rexhepi, 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to participate in this Conference which is perfectly organized by the 
Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo, and to witness the amazing progress this institution 
has achieved in such a short but intense period of time. The energy and desire of the local 
staff to contribute to the history of this institution, has been rightly channeled by the vision 
and experience of several managing professionals that have given a valuable contribution in 
chairing this institution in the last years. I am sure this story will continue to be a successful 
one, based on the commitment of the management of the Central Bank of Kosovo to achieve 
and comply with the best work organizational and efficiency standards, by pursuing a clear 
long-term  policy  of  investing  in  the  quality  of  its  personnel,  and  by  supporting  actions  that 
contribute to maintaining fruitful inter-institutional cooperation. 
In addition, I want to thank the organizers for giving me the honor to speak in front of you 
today,  regarding  a  topic  that  has  become  so  relevant  in  the  last  year,  following  this 
unprecedented 
the  causes  and 
consequences of this crisis have been broadly identified and discussed, in the first part of my 
speech  I  will  focus  more  on  the  main  findings  of  the  professional  discussion that  is  taking 
place nowadays to identify a new financial supervision approach. I am sure you will elaborate 
on these issues further during this Conference. In the second part of my speech, I will try to 
give you more detailed information on how we at the Bank of Albania are thinking about the 
future approach of the public authorities and of the financial industry, in relation to necessary 
measures to strengthen financial stability.  
Very shortly I want to reiterate what has now become clear to many: the recent crisis was a 
consequence of wrong incentives which supported unbalanced financial activity development 
and  misconception  of  risk  assessment,  pricing  and  management.  Such  wrong  incentives 
were present not only to the financial industry and markets, but also to the balance sheet of 
households, businesses and entire countries. Given the nature, the size and the impact of 
this crisis, not only to the financial industry and markets but also to the real economy, public 
authorities  in  many  countries  were  forced  to  adopt  swift,  coordinated  and  extraordinary 
measures, both in the area of monetary and fiscal policies. Central banks abandoned almost 
any restriction and even adopted unconventional measures in providing ample and low-cost 
liquidity  to  the  financial  markets.  Governments  showed  a  strong  commitment  to  reduce 
systemic risk by saving important financial institutions, by providing guarantees for inter-bank 
lending, by raising the level of deposit guarantees for the public etc. Such measures, most of 
the  times  designed  as  temporary,  appear  to  have  been  successful  in  restoring  the  market 
confidence and steering the world economy back in the gradual recovery path.  
Focusing on the financial markets and institutions in the aftermath of the crisis, a number of 
issues, previously known but many times neglected, have re-appeared forcefully to request a 
serious and thorough response by the authorities. Many of these issues relate to the financial 
activity itself, others are connected more with the surrounding economic environment.  
It can be said now that the supervisory authorities of the financial markets and institutions are 
partly responsible for what happened. Despite the rhetoric, they failed to properly and timely 
BIS Review 139/2009 
 1
identify and control the risk in the financial industry. Here one can mention the soft-hand on 
bank wholesale borrowing that financed the foreign currency credit in a certain jurisdiction, 
the  neglect  for  the  special  purpose  entities  that  were  created  to  by-pass  balance  sheet 
prudential  requirements  etc.  There  are  many  reasons  for  this  weakness  and  a  number  of 
them,  in  my  opinion,  go  beyond  the  legal  and  resource  capabilities  of  the  supervisory 
authorities to act. On their own, the supervisory authorities were wrong in basing their work 
on the misconception that strong individual financial institutions are sufficient for the entire 
financial system stability. By doing so, they missed the negative effects and excesses that 
arise from the herd behavior of the financial institutions, many times a consequence of the 
pro-cyclicality that is inherent in the financial activity and the regulatory framework itself. The 
attention of the supervision was focused on the banking sector, but insufficient attention was 
given  to  its  interaction  with  the  non-banking  financial  sector,  that  by  being  much  less 
regulated,  in  the  meantime  was  increasing  in  size  and  importance.  Also,  as  part  of  their 
general and commending goal to focus their supervisory approach on the most important risk 
sources  of  the  financial  industry,  but  also  as  a  sign  of  their  objective  difficulty  to  keep  the 
pace  with  the  financial  markets  developments  and  innovations,  the  supervisory  authorities 
relied  more  and  more  on  the  market  discipline  and  on  the  sophisticated  and  unclear  risk 
models of the financial industry, that also proved to be deficient. Some times, the structure of 
the  supervisory  authorities  has  proven  to  be  fragmented  or  too  complicated,  giving  rise  to 
regulatory arbitrage by the market players. Other times, the resources needed to effectively 
perform  the  supervisory  role  have  been  limited,  negatively  affecting  the  supervisor’s 
performance.  
But this crisis showed that risk came also from other sources, out of the direct control of the 
supervisory authorities in a given jurisdiction. For example, the increasing asset prices were 
fueled  by  ample  liquidity  and  credit  conditions,  which  were  often  affected  by  international 
developments and financial flows. The borrowing in the international markets by the financial 
institutions was also affected by increasing fiscal and current accounts deficits, arising due to 
wrong  policies  that  created  imbalances  in  the  saving-consumption  behavior  of  most 
important economic players in the economy, including the households. It is now a question, 
whether some of these issues could be addressed by a more powerful role of the monetary 
policy. Financial integration, among other things, has also contributed in the rapid expansion 
of  the  financial  activity,  and  many  financial  institutions  have  become  too  big  for  a  single 
country.  This  has  occurred  at  a  time  when,  for  the  same  reason,  the  “de  facto”  power  of 
regulation  has  shifted  away  from  the  local  supervisors  toward  their  host  counterparties. 
Hence,  despite  a  steady  trend  of  convergence  between  financial  legislation  in  many 
countries,  there  are  still  marked  differences  that,  particularly  at  a  crisis  situation,  create 
strong tensions between public authorities in different countries.  
A  very  strong  effort  by  the  public  authorities  in  the  world  to  address  the  abovementioned 
issues in order to improve the supervisory standards and superstructure is now underway. 
Both  in  the  United  States  of  America  and  in  the  European  Union,  the  creation  of  special 
institutions is being envisaged, whose role will be to identify and control systemic risk through 
a  different  supervisory  approach  for  financial  institutions  with  systemic  importance.  At  the 
same  time,  such  financial  institutions  are  expected  to  become  subject  of  a  more  stringent 
regulatory  framework  in  terms  of  capital  and  liquidity  requirements,  balance  sheet 
composition  and  expansion,  and  governance  relationships.  Revising 
liquidation 
procedures for similar financial institutions with cross-border presence is another area that 
will confront the public authorities in the world with a stronger challenge.  
The main purpose of the reform of the financial regulatory framework will be to accommodate 
new incentives that will create a stronger environment for risk management in the financial 
industry.  The  main  principle  here  is  “prevention  is  the  better  cure”.  In  this  regard,  the 
perimeter of the supervision regulatory framework will be extended to include other important 
non-bank financial institutions and probably the bank holding companies. At the same time, 
the  approach  in  the  regulatory  framework  is  expected  to  feature  more  automatic 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2009
requirements  (and  less  discretionary  ones),  as  it  tries  to  move  toward  more  simplicity  and 
clarity.  The  move  toward  simplicity  and  clarity,  will  certainly  reduce  manipulability  and 
enhance transparency and credibility of the banking and financial activity. These changes will 
be  complemented  by  similar  ones  in  the  area  of  customer  protection  and  market 
transparency. The regulatory framework of the financial industry is also expected to be less 
pro-cyclical,  as  new  interesting  proposals  are  being  identified  to  adopt  a  countercyclical 
approach  for  capital  requirements,  provisioning  and  accounting.  Ensuring  responsible 
governance  for  the  banking  and  financial  institutions  is  going  to  be  another  area  of 
developments. New regulatory requirements and instruments to seek more involvement and 
higher responsibility of boards of directors for risk management and discourage uncontrolled 
risk undertaking are being identified. On the other hand, the supervisory authorities will need 
to  strengthen  their  macro-prudential  risk  assessment  capacities,  by  focusing  more  on 
systemic behaviors of the financial institutions. The central bank is expected to take a larger 
responsibility in this area, particularly in those countries where it did not use to have a strong 
supervisory role. Whatever the approach in this direction, the supervisors will need stronger 
legal powers which will ensure their ability to act in a timely and flexible way. As mentioned 
also  above,  procedures  for  managing  distressed  financial  institutions  and  for  crisis 
management will need to be revised to ensure stronger and more effective inter-institutional 
and cross-border cooperation, and in general to better address the potential conflict between 
ex-ante supervision and ex-post intervention.  
This important process of financial regulatory reform is not without risks. I believe that the 
public authorities will pay particular attention to control the tendency for over-regulation, and 
to  avoid  a  “blind”  adoption  of  the  regulatory  changes  as  well  as  asymmetric/unilateral 
approach.  Regulating  more  should  mean  regulating  better.  Undertaking  risks  is  a  natural 
thing  for  the  financial  industry  in  their  valuable  role  of  financial  intermediation.  Such 
undertaking  of  risk,  when  well  identified  and  properly  managed,  is  useful  for  increasing 
efficiency and returns of the activity, two important elements for a viable and solid on-going 
financial  performance.  Every  country  should  certainly  follow  with  particular  attention  the 
discussion and the changes that are being proposed for the financial regulatory reform, as 
this process will affect them for sure. In this regard, it is important for the public authorities to 
start  a  process  that  would  analyze  and  assess  the  impact  in  their  financial  industry  of  the 
expected  and  well  identified  proposed  changes.  Clearly,  the  practical  adoption  of  the 
proposed  changes  should  be  driven  by  the  goal  for  achieving  a  higher  convergence  with 
international standards, but it should be determined by the characteristics of the national or 
regional  financial  system,  and  their  development  goals.  In  addition,  focusing  only  at  better 
regulating 
important  and  probably 
unsustainable economic developments, is an asymmetric approach that will not deal properly 
with the risks to financial stability. In this regard, governments, businesses and households, 
should  identify  measures  and  adopt  actions  to  reduce  imbalances  in  their  own  balance 
sheets, as this will, on the other side, improve the quality of the financial industry and reduce 
risk. 
Dear participants,  
Let  me  now  focus  more  on  how  the  Albanian  economy  and  our  financial  system  was 
challenged by the international crisis, and what are some of the future measures the Bank of 
Albania believes are important to strengthen the stability of the financial system and of our 
economy.  
The recent international crisis showed that at the time of continuing financial integration and 
economic  globalization,  small  economies  like  Albania’s  or  other  countries’  in  the  region, 
should  not  count  only  on  some  natural  protection  coming  from  less  developed  financial 
markets  and  a  much  lower  level  of  indebtedness  from  the  households  and  businesses,  to 
compensate  over  time  for  potential  risks  coming  from  less  diversified  economic  growth, 
overreliance  in  remittances,  insufficient  culture  of  risk  management  in  financial  institutions 
and other economic agents – in particular for the exchange rate and liquidity risk, and very 
industry,  without  addressing  other 
financial 
the 
BIS Review 139/2009 
 3
limited space from the public authorities to introduce anti-crisis financial measures similar to 
those in the developed countries. Hence, policy measures should address these and other 
deficiencies to find a proper solution in the medium-term. Such measures should reflect the 
preference for preventive approaches.  
In fact, over the last 4 to 5 years the Bank of Albania was vigilant over time to point out areas 
of  the  banking  activity  that  required  attention  from  the  industry.  We  have  expressed  our 
concern  regarding  the  rapid  increase  in  lending,  as  we  believed  that  this  could  negatively 
affect  the  credit  quality.  The  composition  of  the  loan  portfolio,  which  is  dominated  by  the 
euro-denominated loans, has also been identified as a point of concern. Despite the fact that 
this position is supported by a strong presence of foreign currency denominated liabilities in 
banks  balance  sheets  and  very  close  economic  links  to  Euro-area  countries  like  Italy  and 
Greece,  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  consistent  in  its  approach  to  introduce  gradually 
regulatory  measures  that  would  discourage  rapid  increase  in  lending,  encourage  banks  to 
lend more in domestic currency and increase transparency toward clients on banks products 
and services. On the other side, the monetary policy has successfully anchored expectations 
of  very  moderate  growth  in  the  price  level  and  has  supported  demand  for  local  currency 
financial assets by offering sufficient positive real return.  
As  the  crisis  hit,  the  first  impact  in  our  economy  was  shown  on  the  balance  of  payments, 
reflecting  the  relationships  of  our  economy  with  the  world.  The  increase  of  unemployment 
and  the  tightening  of  financing  conditions  in  the  neighboring  countries  of  European  Union 
were followed by the decline of Albanian emigrants’ remittances that live and work in those 
countries. While the gap between the domestic and external demand was widened, this was 
accompanied with an increase of current account deficit and the mounting pressure on the 
exchange rate. At the same time, the banking sector, which heavily dominates the financial 
system in Albania, reduced its funding contribution to the domestic economy as a response 
to the increasing demand for liquidity, following the deposit withdrawal from the public and an 
increasing  borrowing  demand  from  the  Government.  The  combined  effect  of  these 
developments affected negatively the real sector of the economy, mainly the business sector. 
In  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  business  confidence  index  fell  under  its  historic  average, 
reflecting  a  more  difficult  financial  situation.  The  latter  was  also  shown  by  the  lower-than-
planned realization of fiscal revenues as well as by the decline of loan portfolio quality that 
banking sector has encountered throughout the period.  
In  the  short-term,  the  public  authorities  took  measures  to  lessen  the  impact  of  the  global 
financial  crisis  in  the  economy.  Through  the  significant  increase  of  the  fiscal  expenditures 
share  designated  for  investments,  mainly  in  infrastructure,  the  government  supplied  an 
important impetus for the support of the real sector of economy to cope with the global crisis 
effects. The Bank of Albania has also been active to provide liquidity in the interbank market, 
with  the  aim  to  preserve  the  stability  of  the  banking  sector  and  to  lessen  the  expected 
decrease of its intermediation role. We removed quantitative limits in the size of the liquidity 
injections through our week-long reverse repurchase agreements, and extended the maturity 
of  our  injection  operations  up  to  three  months.  Following  a  cut  of  the  policy  rate  by  0.5 
percentage points in January and the subdued inflationary pressures at home, the monetary 
policy paid an important attention to the financial stability, by keeping the policy interest rate 
unchanged  throughout  the  period.1  Through  this  policy,  we  intended  to  maintain  strong 
incentives  that  would  support  the  public  demand  for  financial  assets  denominated  in  the 
national currency, in the short term. At the same time, along with the Ministry of Finance, the 
Bank  of  Albania  initiated  legislative  changes  to  increase  the  deposit  insurance  level,  as  a 
necessary measure to restore the public confidence for the safety of their banking deposits. 
From the supervision point of view, the Bank of Albania established a stronger day-to-day 
                                                 
1   Two days ago, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, adopted a decision to reduce the policy rate by 
another 0.5 percentage points, to the new level of 5.25 percent. 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2009
monitoring of the banking sector developments, focusing particularly in the liquidity situation. 
This was part of a broader approach that included also changes in the regulatory framework, 
better  analysis  through  improving  stress-test  methodologies,  stronger  communication  with 
the banking sector, increasing number of publications and more presence in the media. We 
believe that such policies were important for the effective management of the banking sector 
liquidity needs, provided an orientation of lending in national currency and maintained strong 
capitalization parameters for our banks. The situation entered into a qualitative improvement 
phase after the return of public deposits growth in the banking sector. This process, which 
was developed gradually and in a stable way in the second quarter of 2009, continues with a 
steady pace.  
We  believe  that,  after  coping  with  the  short-term  effects  of  the  international  financial  crisis 
and following the improvement of the international economic situation, it is the time for the 
public  authorities  at  home  to  initiate  a  process  of  assessment  for  the  legal  and  financial 
operations  framework,  with  the  goal  to  re-establish  appropriate  balances  in  the  fiscal, 
monetary  and  banking  activity,  to  further  sustain  a  stable  economic  growth  and  maintain 
financial stability. In this regard we consider important for the fiscal policy to take respective 
correcting measures in order to keep the confidence of the resident and non-resident market 
agents  and  investors.  At  the  same  time,  the  monetary  policy  should  assess  the  possible 
effects  on  inflation  of  the  financial  incentives  it  provided  to  the  banking  sector  and  to  the 
economy,  and  later  analyze  the  possibilities  to  support  the  financial  intermediation  of  the 
banking  sector  in  the  economy  at  a  lower  cost.  To  provide  a  longer-term  response  to  the 
stable  economic  growth,  public  authorities  should 
the  compilation  and 
implementation of the strategies for future economic development, which in a medium term 
shall provide for:  
a) 
insist  on 
the establishment of a better balance on the contribution that different sectors give 
for  the  economic  growth.  In  this  regard,  it  is important  to  increase  the support  for 
economic sectors with strong growth potential, like agriculture and tourism; 
the increase of our economy’s competitiveness and its further formalization. In this 
regard, the debate should focus on finding the incentives to increase the domestic 
production and support domestic savings. Over the time these would improve our 
current account balance, and improve the availability of our foreign currency assets; 
the expansion of the economic agents’ funding sources. In this regard the authorities 
should implement policies that support the development of the non-banking financial 
sector  and  that  sustain  the  establishment  of  capital  and  debt  market  for  private 
entities. The accomplishment of these targets shall firstly require the strengthening 
of  the  financial  reporting  standards;  the  completion  and  improvement  of  the  legal 
framework for the developments of business relationships and the improvements in 
the  protection  of  creditors  and  consumer  rights,  regarding  the  financial  institutions 
and products. In more practical terms, these measures are expected to improve the 
availability of the funding sources for the economic growth, and gradually decrease 
its dependence from the banking sector; 
the  improvement  and  the  completion  of  the  legal  and  operational  framework  to 
strengthen the crisis management capacities of the public authorities. In this regard, 
the  authorities  should  identify  the  necessary  measures  for  the  prevention,  the 
treatment  and  the  elimination  of  financial  crisis  consequences.  Bank  of  Albania 
believes  it  is  important  that  each  public  authority  carry  out  an  assessment  of  its 
legal, financial, human and technological capabilities, to perform its role in the crisis-
prone situations. Needless to say, throughout this process, the coordination among 
the public authorities should be at the highest level.  
b) 
c) 
d) 
The  banking  industry  itself  is  required  to  carry  out  a  process  of  re-assessment  of  its 
development  objectives  and  models  for  the  future,  so  as  to  ensure  consistent  and  stable 
profits.  In  this  regard,  the  managing  structures  of  the  banks  are  expected  to  undertake  a 
BIS Review 139/2009 
 5
process  with  the  purpose  of:  a)  re-assessing  the  development  priorities;  b)  establishing  a 
better  balance  regarding  income  sources  and  focus  on  cost  control;  c)  enabling  a  higher 
specialization  of  their  business  and  identify  competitive  priorities;  d)  achieving  a  better 
balance  regarding  the  composition  of  their  assets  and  liabilities  according  to  the  currency, 
maturity structure, etc.; e) implementing more active policies to approach and maintain the 
public  (customers)  close  to  the  institution;  f)  strengthening  the  internal  audit  structure  and 
risks management and research capacities.  
Bank of Albania is now working with the goal that, within the needed time frame and after 
properly  consulting  with  the  financial  industry,  to  support  this  process  through  the 
introduction of changes in the regulatory and supervisory framework. With this in mind, we 
shall aim at strengthening the internal mechanisms of the banking activity that incentivize its 
more  controlled  and  balanced  expansion,  with  adequate  characteristics  of  liquidity  and 
capitalization. At the same time, Bank of Albania shall assess the need for a new supervisory 
approach for the banks with systematic importance. The transparency of banking activity in 
its  relationships  with  customers  and  public  in  general,  shall  remain  at  the  centre  of  our 
supervisory  activity.  In  general,  in  this  process  the  Bank  of  Albania,  shall  consider  the 
alternations  that  shall  occur  in  the  European  standards,  by  supporting  the  strong 
collaboration with other central banks and supervisory authorities.  
In conclusion, let me point out that the ultimate goal of the new financial regulatory changes 
that is being identified in the international level is to provide the right incentives, which over 
time will ensure a more balanced, risk-averse and stable financial markets and institutions 
activity in the future. On a global and national level, such changes should be complemented 
by  other  more  general  economic  measures  that  should  enable  an  adjustment  process  to 
ensure  a  better  alignment  of  asset  and  liabilities  in  the  balance  sheets  of  the  various 
economic agents. All this should be achieved, as we still want the social benefits of economic 
and  financial  integration.  This  means  the  path  ahead  will  witness  a  continuous  and 
challenging  effort  to  find  and  strike  a  new  and  more  appropriate  balance  between  risk 
appetite and more stable returns by the economic agents, and between short-term national 
concerns and long-term regional economic and political integration objectives.  
Once again, I wish to the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo, to its management and 
staff, a successful future! 
Thank you for your attention! 
6 
 BIS Review 139/2009
