Emsley D Tromp: Recent economic developments and their implications 
for the Sint Maarten hospitality and trade industry  
Speech by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  at 
the  SHTA  General  Membership  Meeting,  Willemstad, 
23 October 2009. 
 Our economy is currently facing many challenges. First, the world economy is experiencing 
its greatest slowdown since the Second World War. This slowdown undoubtedly affects the 
Sint Maarten economy in general, and the hospitality and trade industry in particular. At the 
same time, we are in a process of constitutional changes that will lead to a status aparte for 
Sint Maarten. This process provides us a unique opportunity to address certain weaknesses 
in our investment climate that, if corrected, would benefit the industry.  
I  have  been  asked  to  discuss  the  recent  economic  developments  and  their  impact  on  the 
hospitality  and  trade  companies  in  Sint  Maarten.  However,  before  discussing  the  local 
situation, I will take a look at the international environment. As small open economies, both 
Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten  are  very  vulnerable  to  external  shocks.  Therefore,  I  will  also 
spend some time on the benefits and costs of dollarizing the economies of Curaçao and Sint 
Maarten  to  reduce  these  external  vulnerabilities.  Finally,  I  will  discuss  some  structural 
reforms needed to stimulate sustainable economic growth in Sint Maarten.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  since  July  2007  the  global  economy  has  experienced  a  severe 
financial  crisis  originating  in  the  US  housing  and  credit  sectors.  Due  to  the  increased 
integration of goods, services, and financial markets, the crisis has spread from the housing 
and credit markets in the United States to other markets and countries around the world. This 
crisis has resulted in a deep worldwide recession with severe economic and social impacts. 
Few,  if  any  economies  have  not  been  affected  by  the  crisis.  Output  has  contracted  in  the 
major industrial countries, including the United States and the Euro area, and has slowed in 
the emerging economies.  
Fortunately, global economic growth has started to rebound recently, and financial conditions 
have improved markedly. World economic recovery has been driven largely by wide-ranging 
and coordinated public intervention, particularly in the industrial countries, through supporting 
demand and reducing uncertainty and systemic risk in the financial markets.  
However, the pace of recovery is expected to be slow as uncertainties remain in the financial 
markets and public intervention will gradually have to be withdrawn. Against this background, 
it is projected that the world economy will contract by 1% in 2009 and recover by about 3% in 
2010.  
The global economic downturn has had severe repercussions for the Caribbean region. As 
external  demand  dropped,  output  in  countries  with  relatively  large  manufacturing  sectors 
contracted.  In  addition,  foreign  exchange  revenues  from  tourism  have  been  dropping, 
reflecting the weakening US, Canadian and European markets. Inflows from remittances and 
foreign direct investment have also been declining. As a consequence, real Gross Domestic 
Product is expected to contract in most countries in 2009, including the Bahamas by 3.9%, 
Barbados by 3.0%, and Aruba by 5.5%. 
Contrary  to  most  countries  in  the  region,  the  economy  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles  is  not 
expected to contract in 2009. One of the main reasons why our economy is an exception in 
the  region,  is  the  implementation  of  the  debt  relief  program  and  the  Social  Economic 
Initiative. The inflow of debt relief funds has a positive impact on the current account of the 
balance of payments. In addition, it contributes to a cash surplus at the general government 
level and, hence, a decline in public sector debt.  
BIS Review 139/2009 
 1
Thanks to the debt relief program, our debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to decline from 82% to 
62% during 2009.  
However, an analysis by sector shows that activities in the tourism-related industries have 
been negatively affected by the world economic recession. The island of Sint Maarten was 
affected  most  severely  in  stay-over  tourism,  which  dropped  by  13%  during  the  January  – 
June period of 2009 compared to 2008. This development was seen in all markets. With 56% 
of Sint Maarten’s tourist arrivals from the United States, the recession in the world’s largest 
economy  has  taken  a  visible  toll  on  the  island.  Meanwhile,  hotel  occupancy  rates  in  Sint 
Maarten dropped from 72% in the first half of 2008 to 50% in the first six months of 2009. 
The  number  of  cruise  tourists  remained  about  the  same  during  the  first  half  of  2009 
compared to the first half of 2008.  
Activities in the trade sector, particularly the retail trade, weakened during the first months of 
2009 reflecting the decline in stay-over tourism and lower domestic demand. The following 
graph shows the developments in the turnover tax revenues in Sint Maarten, which can be 
considered an indicator of developments in the trade sector. So far, revenues in 2009 have 
been lower than in 2008.  
The transport, storage, and communication sector showed a mixed performance in the first 
half of 2009. On the one hand, airport activities, as measured by the number of passengers 
handled, declined in line with the downturn in tourism. Sint Maarten, for example, recorded a 
decline  of  12%  in  the  number  of  passengers  handled  at  the  airport  during  the  first  half  of 
2009. The number of passengers transported by the national carriers declined as well. On 
the  other  hand,  harbor  activities  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles  declined  reflecting  mainly  less 
cargo  movements.  The  Netherlands  Antilles’  manufacturing  sector  recorded  a  remarkable 
decline in value added, attributable to the poor performance of both the “Isla” refinery and the 
Curaçao dry dock company.  
The financial and construction sectors were the main contributors to economic growth in the 
first  months  of  2009.  The  increase  in  financial  sector  activities  was  driven  entirely  by  the 
good  performance  of  domestic  financial  services  as  activities  in  the  international  financial 
sector  declined  due  to  the  financial  crisis.  Construction  work  expanded  largely  because  of 
ongoing tourism-related projects. However, the growth in construction moderated compared 
to the first months of 2008, in line with the slower growth in private investment.  
In the case of Sint Maarten, license fee revenues are considered an important indicator of 
economic activity. As shown in the following graph, license fee revenues dropped over the 
period January – June 2009.  
Against  this  background  and  in  line  with  the  latest  forecast  of  world  economic  growth,  we 
expect  economic  growth  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles  to  slow  to  0.8%  this  year.  However, 
based  on  the  economic  indicators  for  the  first  six  months  of  2009,  and  in  particular,  the 
indicators for the tourism industry, the wholesale and retail sector, and license fee revenues, 
we project that Sint Maarten economy may experience a contraction this year.  
For 2010, we project the economy of the Netherlands Antilles will expand by 1.3% given the 
expected  recovery  of  the  world  economy.  The  Sint  Maarten  economy  is  also  expected  to 
expand in 2010 as the economies in its main tourism markets are projected to recover.  
Needless  to  say,  the  projected  economic  slowdown  for  this  year  translates  into  reduced 
activities in Sint Maarten’s tourism industry and the trade sector. In addition, companies that 
provide  goods  and  services  to  these  industries  will  also  experience  a  decline  in  activities. 
The  main  pressures  faced  by  these  companies  are  weak  demand,  both  domestic  and 
foreign, and tighter credit conditions.  
Given their importance, it is imperative that actions be taken to help these industries survive 
the  present  economic  slowdown,  and  subsequently,  benefit  from  the  opportunities  the 
projected economic recovery will offer.  
2 
 BIS Review 139/2009
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  currently  in  the  historic  process  of  the  dismantling  of  the 
Netherlands  Antilles.  In  the  near  future,  Sint  Maarten  will  become  an  autonomous  country 
within the Dutch Kingdom. An autonomous status will provide us with the unique opportunity 
to  address  certain  economic  issues  in  a  more  island-specific  way,  thereby  stimulating 
economic growth. This new perspective should be beneficial for the business community, in 
particular the tourism and trade industries, which are the economic pillars of Sint Maarten. 
A  crucial  factor  in  this  context  is  macroeconomic  stability.  In  my  view,  one  of  the  greatest 
threats to our macroeconomic stability is our vulnerability to external shocks. Our balance of 
payments has become more susceptible to external shocks with far-reaching implications for 
the real economy. The  rapidly expanding current account deficit during the last few years, 
financed by capital inflows from abroad, exposes an increasing external vulnerability, which 
has been masked by the recent inflows of funds related to the debt relief program. A sudden 
reversal of capital flows could deplete our foreign exchange reserves quickly, undermining 
confidence in our currency.  
As we are preparing to close the last chapter of the Netherlands Antilles, it is crucial that we 
address  these  vulnerabilities  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the  new  countries’  citizens.  With 
regard to the monetary system in the new constitutional structure, it has been agreed that the 
countries of Curaçao and Sint Maarten will form a monetary union with one central bank and 
a common currency. However, the balance of payments vulnerability compels us to consider 
alternatives, one of which is dollarization.  
Three  of  the  five  islands  comprising  the  Netherlands  Antilles,  i.e.,  the  BES  islands,  have 
chosen  to  introduce  the  US  dollar  as  the  legal  tender  once  their  new  status  takes  effect, 
while Sint Maarten is already de facto dollarized. Moreover, the US dollar is widely accepted 
in Curaçao. Therefore, it would not be such a big step to formally dollarize Sint Maarten and 
Curaçao.  
Having the dollar as legal tender removes the possibility of a balance of payments crisis with 
the risk of devaluation. An economic downturn or reversal of capital flows would not turn into 
a currency crisis. An immediate benefit from  the elimination of currency crises would be a 
reduction of the country risk premium, consequently lowering interest rates. In other words, 
the  spread  between  the  interest  rates  of  the  dollarized  economy  and  the  United  States  is 
reduced.  Lower  interest  rates  benefit  growth  by  reducing  the  cost  of  credit,  encouraging 
investments. 
In  addition,  as  a  result  of  dollarization,  transaction  costs,  related  to  the  conversion  into 
foreign currency, are lowered. Lower transaction costs would benefit trade, including tourism 
and foreign direct investments. Due to the perceived currency risk, local financial institutions 
might  be  more  inclined  to  invest  in  foreign  assets.  In  the  absence  of  currency  risk,  the 
appetite to invest capital locally might increase.  
By adopting the US dollar, the financial system becomes more open to international capital 
flows.  Capital  mobility  promotes  financial  intermediation,  competition  and  efficiency  among 
institutions, and promotes confidence in the financial system. It also encourages integration 
of the domestic financial system with the rest of the world.  
Although  the  public  finances  of  Sint  Maarten  and  Curaçao  are  closely  monitored  by  the 
budget  supervisor  CFT,  dollarization  would  provide  an  extra  long-term  constraint  for  fiscal 
policy  as  it  eliminates  the  possibility  of  printing  money  to  finance  fiscal  deficits.  Given  our 
long history of fiscal deficits and troubled adjustment programs, restrictions on increasing the 
money supply could improve our policy credibility.  
Nevertheless,  dollarization  has  some  disadvantages.  First,  the  authorities  lose  monetary 
policy as an instrument to steer the economy, limiting the available policy mix to correcting 
macroeconomic disequilibria. Second, the “lender of last resort” function of the central bank 
disappears.  Finally,  under  dollarization,  the  central  bank  would  lose  its  main  sources  of 
BIS Review 139/2009 
 3
income,  i.e.,  investment  of  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  seigniorage  from  issuing 
banknotes.  
With respect to the first argument against dollarization, the loss of a policy instrument, the 
following  counter  argument  can  be  made.  Given  the  limited  scope  to  pursue  independent 
monetary policy under the current exchange rate regime, this loss would not be substantial. 
The  recent  adjustment  periods  have  indicated  that  small  open  economies  like  ours  are 
limited to fiscal policies and structural measures to remain competitive and thus improve their 
investment climates. With regard to the issue of profitability and the function of the central 
bank as lender of last resort, it is important to put the current reality into perspective. The 
lion’s share of the central bank’s profit consists of license fees, which will continue to exist 
under  dollarization.  In  addition,  since  the  balance  of  payments  constraint  is  no  longer 
binding, the need to hold foreign exchange reserves to maintain the peg no longer applies. 
Therefore,  the  Bank’s  reserves  will  all  become  investable  funds,  thereby  preserving  the 
Bank’s profitability. To address the issue of lender of last resort, we need to accelerate the 
introduction  of  a  deposit  insurance  scheme.  Aside  from  providing  depositors  with  added 
security,  the  funds  of  such  a  scheme,  some  of  which  can  come  from  the  current  reserve 
requirements,  will  support  the  function  of  lender  of  last  resort.  Moreover,  the  government 
would have to assume this function even under the current exchange rate regime, something 
which became abundantly clear during the recent international financial crisis. 
Hence, dollarization would result in no perceptible changes in the profit of the central bank 
and hence have no impact on the government budget. Rather, dollarization might lead to an 
increase in the Bank’s profit since the balance of payments constraint always has confined 
the Bank to pursue a policy of profit maximization. The Bank also has non-interest sources of 
income in terms of the fees it charges the financial institutions to cover the costs of financial 
sector supervision. 
Realistically assessing and balancing the advantages and disadvantages of dollarization for 
Sint Maarten and Curaçao should be part of the public debate in choosing the most suitable 
monetary system for the future countries in the Kingdom. The balance seems to point in the 
direction of dollarization, given our vulnerabilities in the present world economic order.  
However,  dollarization  does  not  stand  alone  as  a  remedy  for  economic  ills.  A  series  of 
structural reforms also are needed to achieve economic growth and development in the long 
term.  These  reforms  will  improve  our  competitiveness  and  create  opportunities  for 
businesses. The first area for reform is increasing market flexibility and balancing demand 
and  supply.  In  the  absence  of  monetary  policy  instruments,  external  shocks  that  require  a 
change in real wages will not have lasting effects on the rate of unemployment if the labor 
market is flexible. This flexibility may need to take the form of downward flexibility of nominal 
wages, and low hiring and firing costs. Another aspect of the labor market that needs to be 
addressed is the reduction of the qualitative mismatch between demand and supply. In my 
opinion, education is crucial to reduce this mismatch. Our vocational institutions should take 
into account to a much greater degree the skill needs in the private sector.  
A second area for reform is the further development of our capital market, promoting more 
financing  opportunities  for  entrepreneurs  and  more  local  investment  opportunities  for 
investors. More investment opportunities for investors has become even more relevant as a 
result of the declining significance of government bonds as an investment instrument in light 
of the debt relief. The development of private debt instruments and equity-based financing 
especially should be promoted. These types of financing are still rarely used on our island, 
but  they  are  significantly  cheaper  than  bank  financing.  Specifically  for  start-ups  and  small 
and medium-sized enterprises, the establishment of a venture capital fund could be crucial to 
raise the necessary financing for promising investment projects.  
Another important area of reform is the reduction of administrative barriers. One of the most 
common complaints from the business sector is the number and complexity of government 
formalities  and  paperwork  that  frustrate  new  investment  initiatives  and,  hence,  the 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2009
opportunity for stronger economic growth. The elimination of the double layer of government 
on  the  island  is  certainly  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  Also  needed  is  a  streamlining  of 
administrative procedures aimed at eliminating all unnecessary bureaucracy, and simplifying 
the procedures for obtaining business and work permits and business visas.  
Finally, medium- and long-term policy efforts  should be aimed at  making the Sint Maarten 
economy  less  susceptible  to  future  shocks.  Hence,  the  recent  initiative  to  develop  an 
international  financial  and  business  services  sector  on  the  island  is  a  step  in  the  right 
direction.  In  addition,  the  policy  agenda  should  include  efforts  to  make  Sint  Maarten  a 
regional hub for the transportation of passengers and freight. 
We  must  realize  that  “entrepreneurial  firms”  are  the  ones  that  will  really  benefit  from  the 
arising economic opportunities. In addition, the likelihood of surviving is also higher among 
firms  that  are  creative  and  entrepreneurial.  In  this  context,  being  entrepreneurial  entails 
identifying  and  introducing  new  products,  new  ways  of  production,  distribution,  and 
marketing. At the same time, an entrepreneur is not afraid to take risks. In my opinion, our 
business  owners  should  become  more  entrepreneurial  to  maximize  the  benefits  from  the 
economic opportunities offered by the future country of Sint Maarten. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the hospitality and trade industry plays a crucial role in Sint Maarten’s 
economy as it is the major contributor to employment and GDP. As a result, we should take 
all the necessary steps to create a business environment that stimulates the creation and a 
growth  of  the  businesses  in  this  industry.  This  is  especially  relevant  in  these  times  of  the 
world  economy  recovering  from  a  severe  crisis  and  a  new  world  economic  order  is  being 
developed. Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 139/2009 
 5
