Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The progress of migration to SEPA 
Keynote address by Mrs Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  British  Bankers’  Association,  7th  Annual  Payments 
Conference, London, 23 November 2009. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak at the British Bankers' Association on the occasion of the 
7th Annual Payments Conference.  
140 years ago, on Monday 22 November 1869, one of the world’s fastest, most technically 
advanced and also most beautiful merchant sailing ships was launched. Designed to be the 
first ship to bring home the new season’s tea from China to London, the “Cutty Sark” plied 
the  oceans  for  decades.  The  ship  is  still  preserved  today,  and  you  can  marvel  at  her  in 
Greenwich, just 20 minutes from here.  
On  Monday  2  November  2009,  just  three  weeks  ago,  the  SEPA  Direct  Debit  (SDD)  was 
launched. I will not dare to speculate as to whether it is the world’s fastest, most technically 
advanced and most beautiful Direct Debit scheme, but the advent of a European direct debit 
scheme  provides  a  truly  new  payment  service  at  the  European  level.  We  would  like  to 
congratulate all those who have taken part in its development, particularly the EPC for their 
valuable contribution to this success.  
The  SDD  complements  the  SEPA  Credit  Transfer,  which  was  launched  in  January  2008. 
With these two payment products launched, and with the Payment Services Directive (PSD) 
now in force, SEPA is well in place. However, not yet completed.  
Hence, the keel has been laid for a single market for retail payments. And not just the single 
market for the euro area, but for Europe as a whole.  
SEPA  and  also  the  Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD)  are  standardising  retail  payments 
across the EU-27. So what does that mean for the UK market? The UK banking market is 
highly  interconnected  with  the  euro  area.  We  also  see  that  several  UK  banks  are  actively 
involved in the SEPA process. They have recognised that the implications of SEPA extend to 
their UK business too.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  SEPA  is  not  just  about  cross-border  payments  in  euro  and  in 
continental  Europe,  it  is  about  changing  the  retail  payments  infrastructure  throughout  the 
whole of Europe, including the UK, about bringing it up to a higher level of efficiency, quality 
and security. For example, the European PSD will significantly reduce transaction times to a 
maximum of three days and requires full transparency on the currency conversion. This will 
bring significant benefits to all bank customers – consumers and corporates, also in the UK.  
Let me in the following give you three major achievements of the SEPA process and outline 
briefly the way forward of the SEPA project.  
What has been achieved so far, and what are the next steps?  
The SDD launch has been the greatest SEPA achievement this year, and perhaps even of 
the entire project. The preparations for the launch of SEPA Direct Debit have taken up a lot 
of  the  banking  industry’s  time  and  energy.  Discussions  within  the  European  Payments 
Council (EPC), the European self-regulatory body for retail payments, started as far back as 
2002.  
Acting as a catalyst for change and supporting the work of the European Commission and 
the industry, the Eurosystem has helped to successfully remove all remaining obstacles for 
the launch of SDD in November 2009.  
BIS Review 151/2009 
 1
The SEPA project has made a lot of progress after clarity was provided on the Multilateral 
Interchange  Fees.  In  particular,  in  March  2009,  a  Joint  Statement  of  the  European 
Commission and the Eurosystem has outlined the way forward on the future SDD business 
model.1 This was instrumental to a new Regulation which offers an interim arrangement for 
cross-border  and  domestic  SDD  interchange  fees  and,  hence,  was  crucial  for  the  EPC  to 
conclude its work on the SDD.2 
This new Regulation on cross-border payments also requires that all euro area banks that 
currently  offer  euro  direct  debits  at  national  level  must  also  be  reachable  for  cross-border 
euro direct debits by 1 November 2010.3 By guaranteeing the reachability, we hope that this 
will provide a strong impetus to the market take-up of the SDD.  
The  second  achievement  in  2009  in  the  migration  process  to  SEPA  has  been  the  close 
stakeholder  involvement.  Here  –  I  think  –  that  the  EPC  has  made  considerable  efforts  to 
involve stakeholders in the further development process of the SEPA payment schemes. For 
example, the EPC invited all stakeholders to put forward suggestions for amending the SCT, 
Core SDD and Business-to-Business SDD Rulebooks for the November 2010 releases. The 
outcome of this has received large support in a public consultation during summer 2009.  
Still, this public consultation has also shown that stakeholders continue to see the need for 
improvements in the SEPA products. We welcome, therefore, that the EPC has organized 
dedicated  workshops  providing  a  discussion  forum  with  their  stakeholders  on  the  issues 
raised in the consultation process. 
Also in the area of cards, the EPC has established a “Group of Stakeholders”, focusing on 
standardisation  and  contributing  to  the  maintenance  and  evolution  of  the  SEPA  cards 
standards.  
I hear that these workshops and group had a good start and all the participants have shown 
themselves eager for a constructive dialogue.  
Only briefly, I would like to highlight a third, albeit smaller achievement in the SEPA process 
in  2009.  During  this  year,  the  security  of  payments  has  been  more  prominent  on  the 
European  agenda.  This  topic  had  been  a  bit  neglected  in  previous  years,  at  least  at  the 
European level. Within the EPC, a “Good Practices” guide for the security of payments in the 
customer-to-bank  domain  has  been  published.  There  was  considerable  need  for  such  a 
guide,  especially  in  the  field  of  internet  banking,  online  payments  and  card  payments.  We 
have to realise that in today’s world information can too easily be accessed, stolen and used 
for 
fraudulent  purposes.  The  costs  of  fraud  may  not  have  reached  commercially 
unacceptable levels, but in some countries they have reached socially unacceptable levels. 
So, we very much welcome the EPC taking a stance on these issues.  
The Eurosystem will also continue to monitor also this facet of the work on the integration of 
European  payments.  Improving  information  security,  as  well  as  preventing  fraud  should 
remain a key focus of attention in 2010.  
Ambition needed: SEPA for Cards and eSEPA  
A frequently asked question is whether the financial crisis has had an impact on the SEPA 
project and the pace of migration. During the financial crisis, banks’ retail payments business 
                                                 
1   Joint  Statement  of  the  European  Commission  and  the  ECB  on  the  future  SDD  business  model,  24  March 
2009. 
2   Regulation  (EC)  No  924/2009  on  cross-border  payments  in  the  Community  and  repealing  Regulation  (EC) 
No 2560/2001. 
3   For non-euro area banks the reachability deadline for euro direct debits is 1 November 2014. 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2009
has proven to be a solid and stable source of revenue. At the same time, I understand that 
the retail payments are also a costly part of banks’ operations. The aim of SEPA is to make 
payments  in  euro  more  efficient,  not  just  for  customers  but  also  for  banks,  which  would 
strengthen the case for investment in the SEPA project.  
Despite the financial crisis, cashless payments increased, on a global basis, by almost 9% to 
250 billion transactions per year in 2008. Of this growth, card payments were the strongest 
driver.4 In the European Union, card payments reached a total of over 29 billion transactions 
in  2008,  also  growing  at  a  rate  of  almost  9%.5  This  shows  the  immense  potential  of  this 
means of payment to generate revenue for the financial industry through growth, even at a 
time when interchange fees are under pressure. 
In  my  view,  SEPA  offers  tremendous  opportunities  for  further  harmonisation  of  the  use  of 
cards, making them an even more attractive means of payment.  
But, besides the harmonization of card standards, more competition in the European cards 
market can bring additional benefits to consumers.  
Therefore, the Eurosystem remains convinced that an additional European card scheme is 
needed.  Three  initiatives  are  under  way:  PAYFAIR,  EAPS  and  “Monnet”.  The  Eurosystem 
has maintained close contacts with all these initiatives to create an additional European card 
scheme.  
We  are  pleased  to  see  that  one  of  the  initiatives  has  recently  started  a  pilot  with  a  large 
merchant, and that another initiative is operational among some of its constituent schemes, 
especially for ATM withdrawals. We are hopeful that these initiatives, whether separately or 
jointly, will come to fruition in the near future.  
In essence, for SEPA for Cards to become a success, card payments need to be positioned 
as  a  real  alternative  to  cash:  efficient,  fast  and  guaranteed.  This  could  and  should  be 
delivered by the already existing card schemes and the foreseen additional ones. However, 
this  will  not  be  enough.  A  successful  SEPA  for  Cards  also  needs  the  harmonisation  of 
technical  standards,  basic  business  rules  and  certification  practices  across  schemes.  Only 
this will bring an integrated cards market into effect. 
SEPA by its nature of harmonizing the retail payments market will promote more competition 
and hence will be a key driver of innovation in the market. New developments have already 
taken  off  in  the  field  of  eSEPA.  eSEPA  means  the  provision  of  various  retail  payment 
services by means of electronic channels – such as internet – in order to offer benefits to 
payment service users in the form of easier access, better functionality and a more attractive 
user experience.  
More  and  more  companies  and  consumers  operate  online.  Hence,  the  market  needs  to 
create European e-payment – or online – solutions, which will bring even more efficient and 
transparent  trading  at  the  retail  level.  For  example,  an  “e-payment”  is  an  internet  banking 
payment. The web-merchant receives a payment guarantee confirmation in real-time and the 
goods can be released immediately. In addition, they have a security advantage, insofar as 
the merchant does not have to handle and store his clients’ confidential banking details. We 
welcome  that  the  EPC  is  currently  developing  a  framework  for  the  interoperability  of  such 
online payment schemes. 
The Eurosystem strongly encourages the EPC to finalise the e-Payments framework in the 
near  future.  Moreover,  we  encourage  the  EPC  to  consider  establishing  a  European 
e-payments scheme or to taking over one of the existing schemes.  
                                                 
4   Capgemini, RBS and EFMA, World Payments Report 2009, September 2009. 
5   ECB, Payments Statistics (formerly known as the Blue Book) (see www.ecb.europa.eu). 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 3
Moving  forward  with  an  e-payments  solution  give  a  flying  start  to  “SEPA  for  online 
payments”. Moreover, it could take the wind out of the sails of providers who make use of 
banks’  infrastructures  but  are  not  subject  to  the  same  strict  security  requirements.  In  my 
view, security is of crucial importance, especially for the online world. 
Overall, e-SEPA online services would come to the great benefit of corporate customers and 
consumers. At the same time, e-SEPA will be an additional revenue source to the banking 
sector.  
When can the payments industry expect to reach the full SEPA finishing line?  
As  I  have  outlined,  the  key  implication  of  SEPA  is  that  the  whole  economy  –  consumers, 
corporates  and  banks  –  will  benefit  from  it.  So  how  can  we  bring  this  project  closer  to 
success? 
Let me mention two important ingredients, namely, first, a further improvement in the SEPA 
governance and, second, the necessity of a SEPA migration end date.  
On  first  point:  SEPA  governance.  The  EPC  clearly  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  organising  the 
stakeholder  involvement  around  the  design  of  the  SEPA  products,  currently  the  SCT  and 
SDD Rulebooks, and the SEPA Cards Framework.  
However, the governance of a project like SEPA requires that stakeholder involvement at the 
European level is made more balanced, bringing together stakeholders from all sides of the 
SEPA project. A new body could be created with a wide range of stakeholders represented in 
order to discuss and resolve issues that are hindering the realisation of SEPA.  
Such a governance body is not intended to replace the European Payments Council, which 
is  delivering  useful  work  from  the  supply  side.  The  main  objective  is  to  involve  also  the 
demand side and the relevant authorities as well. The European Commission is elaborating 
the  possible  modalities  of  such  a  “SEPA  Council”  and  envisages  the  creation  of  a  SEPA 
Council before the end of 2009.  
On SEPA migration, challenges still lie ahead.  
The  use  of  SCTs  has  been  increasing  steadily  since  their  launch  in  January  2008.  By 
September 2009, they had reached 4.6% of the overall credit transfer volume.6  
We  also  see  some  positive  signs  ahead:  public  administrations  in  several  countries  are 
planning to migrate to the SEPA products either in the remainder of this year or in the first 
half  of  2010.  And  now  that  SEPA  Direct  Debit  has  been  launched,  companies  with  cross-
border activities are expected to migrate.  
Still,  the  current  figures  show:  Further  action  is  needed  to  fully  migrate  to  the  SEPA 
instruments.  
An end-date for SEPA migration; has the self-regulatory process reached its limits?  
This  brings me  to  my  second  important  ingredient  for  a successful  migration  to  SEPA:  An 
end date for SEPA migration. It is clear that maintaining dual systems is costly for all, not 
only for banks, but also for the SEPA users. Therefore, it is in the interest of all stakeholders 
to  migrate  quickly  to  the  SEPA  instruments.  So  what  will  make  industry  and/or  customers 
stop using the old products and switch to SEPA?  
A SEPA migration end-date for credit transfers and for direct debits would make clear that 
migration  cannot  take  forever.  The  European  Commission  in  collaboration  with  the 
                                                 
6   ECB, SCT Indicators (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/sepa/timeline/use/html/index.en.html). 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2009
Eurosystem  is,  therefore,  investigating  the  possibility  of  a  Regulation  to  facilitate  the 
migration to SEPA.  
The Eurosystem considers a legally binding instrument necessary for a successful migration 
to SEPA and hence fully supports such regulation. I also see a lot of support for this way 
forward  in  the  market.  Therefore,  we  should  continue  our  efforts  in  setting  a  realistic  but 
ambitious end-date for migration to SCT and SDD to reap the full benefits of SEPA.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  SEPA  is  not  just  about  making  life  easier  for  European  citizens  and 
companies by removing obstacles to cross-border payments. SEPA is also about removing 
barriers to the single market, making payments more efficient, introducing more competition 
to the payments industry and speeding up innovation. Hence, rapid SEPA migration would 
bring tremendous benefits to the European economy as a whole.  
The single market for goods and services – created with the Maastricht Treaty 16 years ago 
– now needs a single market for financial services.  
SEPA  is  removing  the  national  barriers  and  setting  the  standard  for  the  retail  payments 
business in the whole of Europe, including the UK, and beyond. The harmonization of the 
retail payments market will also benefit the UK banks, corporates and customers by spurring 
efficiency and innovation.  
Therefore,  SEPA  migration  needs  a  further  leap  forward.  This  entails  existing  SEPA 
instruments, but also innovations such as eSEPA. We also need to be more ambitious in the 
field of cards, need to pay more attention to the security of payments, and we need a proper 
stakeholder involvement and governance.  
In short, SEPA has to set sail and chart course to its destination for which you decide the 
cruising speed.  
Thank you for you attention! 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 5
