Martín Redrado: Institutional framework and economic growth 
Speech by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the Bank of 
Mexico international conference, Mexico City, 19 October 2009. 
 Institutional  framework  and  economic  growth  is  a  most  challenging  topic.  Institutions  are 
increasingly relevant to economics and they bear an incontestable relation to growth. In turn, 
the  world  is  undergoing  institutional  financial  architecture  reconstruction  to  resume  the 
sustainability path. I think, therefore, that this topic could not be timelier.  
Let me focus on the institutional progress made by emerging markets and, in particular, by 
Latin America. Here we can make a distinction. On the one hand, we have what I consider to 
be new macroeconomic institutions in our region, which had distinctive effects both on the 
growth process of the past few years and on the economic policy responses to the crisis. On 
the other, in the microeconomic reform agenda, the region is structurally lagging behind, and 
recent progress has been more mixed.  
In this sense, I will specifically refer to one of the main institutional reforms across both the 
macro- and microeconomic areas – the strengthening of local and regional currencies, the 
development  of  finance  markets  in  those  currencies,  and  the  growing  importance  of  such 
currencies for regional integration.  
The new macroeconomic paradigm in Latin America has been built upon the lessons from 
our history of macroeconomic volatility, and still needs to consolidate itself definitively finding 
the right balance between credibility and flexibility.  
While there are several ways to implement it according to the specificities of each country, 
the  basic  principles  –  which,  in  my  view,  have  already  been  institutionalized  –  can  be 
summarized into five pillars: (1) robust monetary and financial policy approaches, (2) more 
flexible  exchange  rate  regimes,  (3)  fiscal  solvency,  (4)  external  sustainability  with  market 
openness, and (5) financial policies that favor the creation of liquidity and solvency buffers.  
Our monetary and financial policy options are part of an extensive review of the importance 
central  banks  should  assign  to  the  various  goals  set,  particularly,  what  role  and  weight 
should be given to price stability, output stability and financial stability. 
In  my  opinion,  the  monetary  policy  paradigm  is  changing  following  the  present  crisis  – 
financial  stability  has  come  to  play  a  role  it  has  never  played  before  in  the  central  bank 
agenda worldwide: it is no longer taken for granted, but needs to be sought and defended 
every day. This is happening nowadays in developed countries where financial stability has 
historically been a tool rather than an objective, taking into account the depth of their capital 
markets.  
In developing countries, instead, with our long  history of recurrent crises, financial stability 
and the need to preserve the money market infrastructure – rather than players themselves – 
through prudential tools were already an explicit part of central bank objectives.  
As  the  present  crisis  unfolds,  we  see  that  both  developed  and  emerging  countries  with 
monetary  schemes  based  on  a  single  tool  such  as  the  interest  rate  have  had  to  adjust 
themselves as they go along. Indeed, financial stability objectives have been implicitly as well 
as explicitly added, and the tools adjusted to new priorities – many central banks have had to 
revise their usual regulation, operation and intervention mechanisms.  
We still lack a single, homogeneous definition of “financial stability,” with the concept varying 
from one central bank or international agency to the other. It is clearly difficult to objectively 
determine  what  financial  stability  really  is  and,  along  with  that,  how  to  take  on  these 
challenges in operating terms.  
BIS Review 133/2009 
 1
We  have  reached  a  point  where  economic  theory  is  having  a  hard  time  keeping  up  with 
praxis. Recent literature has shown results that are ambiguous vis-à-vis to those produced 
by the usual “technology”. As regards the rules implemented via the interest rate channel, in 
the past 15 years the conventional wisdom was that short-term interest rates could be used 
to change the whole curve and thus affect economic agents’ decisions. Recent work shows 
that  this  is  not  the  case  and  that  the  impact  of  short-term  rates  on  real  variables  is 
substantially different.  
For  this  reason,  a  lengthy  discussion  is  taking  place  about  the  most  adequate  theoretical 
models,  which  is  of  course  very  healthy,  since  it  humbles  us  all.  Anyway,  regardless  of 
objectives  and  tools,  autonomous  central  banks  devoted  to  monetary  policy  design  and 
implementation have been of the essence for macroeconomic stability in Latin America and 
emerging countries as a whole.  
For Argentina, the assessment of the monetary and financial regime should take into account 
some distinctive factors. The decades of macroeconomic instability and recurrent crises have 
not been harmless in terms of welfare. Although Latin American countries have shown lower 
growth rates and higher macroeconomic volatility than other regions, the case of Argentina is 
on  a  different  scale.  Considering  the  past  30  years,  average  growth  in  Latin  America  was 
less  than  half  of  Asia’s,  with  volatility  nearly  doubling  Asian  levels.  In  that  period  of  time, 
average  growth  in  Argentina  was  three  times  lower  than  in  the  Far  East,  while  volatility 
turned out to be eight times higher.  
This  caused  huge  economic  and  social  losses,  impacting  on  our  development  possibilities 
and leading to changes in citizens’ behavior. In fact, portfolio dollarization, fiscal and financial 
dominance,  and  the  negative  correlation  between  changes  in  bank  savings  and  exchange 
rate fluctuations are some of the distinctive features of this process.  
These factors, which undermined the power of some traditional monetary policy instruments, 
have played a key role in the design of our monetary and financial system. It is essential to 
ensure  “buffers”  that  help,  above  all,  eliminate  the  feeling  of  “the  next  crisis  around  the 
corner.”  Our  strategy  has  enabled  us  to  overcome  each  volatility  episode  in  the  new 
international context (four in the past two years), minimizing the impact on the real economy.  
A  lesson  learned  from  the  crisis  is  that  in  emerging  countries  structurally  characterized  by 
fiscal deficit and current account imbalances, asset prices were hit the hardest. 
The impact has undoubtedly been stronger in the emerging economies with distinct external 
vulnerability  and  higher  financial  fragility,  for  example,  economies  with  high  expenditure, 
currency mismatch, and hard pegs. 
In Latin America – traditionally characterized by highly procyclical policies – this financial and 
external soundness has nevertheless allowed for something unprecedented. I mean we have 
had room for manouver to mitigate the effects of the crisis, which for the first time was not 
centered around the emerging world. 
Fiscal responsibility in most of our countries has ceased to be discussed in terms of the left 
or right – it has simply been accepted as common sense. The windows of opportunity have 
been  taken  advantage  of  to  reduce  the  external  debt,  minimize  currency  mismatches  and 
reduce the excessive concentration of banking system’s credit risk in the public sector.  
Special mention should be made of the building of liquidity networks both in foreign and local 
currency.  This  has  been  a  common  pattern  among  Asian  and  Latin  American  emerging 
countries  and,  in  my  opinion,  has  been  well  institutionalized  since  it  raises  confidence  for 
domestic  economies.  Today,  even  after  the  worst  of  the  crisis  is  over,  there  is  still  no 
international lender of last resort. Consequently, there is no adequate substitute either for a 
foreign reserve accumulation policy at the national level.  
This is also the case with construction and development through the prudential regulation of 
banking  systems  with  high  liquidity  and  solvency  buffers  to  cushion  shocks  instead  of 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2009
amplifying  them.  It  is  still  the  responsibility  of  each  country  to  develop  their  own 
countercyclical  policy  so  as  to  overcome  periods  of  limited  financial  market  access, 
preventing domestic variables from being significantly affected. 
Thanks to these policies, the monetary and financial system in Latin America as well as in 
Argentina,  despite  facing  a  series  of  turbulences,  has  managed  to  operate  within  the 
guidelines set.  
There  have  been  no  bank  closures,  the  institutions  have  kept  their  robust  liquidity  and 
solvency levels, savers have been able to make the portfolio decisions they have deemed fit, 
credit has kept growing – though at a slower pace. For the first time in several decades, after 
patiently  working  for  five  years,  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina  has  become  a  true  stability 
anchor,  providing  three  public  goods  unprecedented  in  the  country:  monetary  stability, 
financial stability and foreign exchange predictability.  
As regards the institutional impact on growth, the literature does seem to have risen to the 
occasion. The neo-institutionalist school has come to prominence in the past few decades 
with the spread of its explanatory power.  
From the very beginning, its founders have sought to answer a fundamental question – why 
do some nations achieve self-sustained growth, while others remain economically stagnant? 
Neo-institutionalism highlights the role of the historical background. Unlike the neoclassical 
school, it focuses on a dynamic vision.  
In my opinion, when we talk about economic institutions, the concept of pyramid comes in 
very handy, and what better place than the Mayan and Aztec land to make a reference to it. 
Societies build their institutional arrangements in stages, one after the other, one over the 
other, each on top of the previous one. 
To keep progressing with this pyramidal arrangement at the regional level, it is essential to 
develop financial markets in domestic currency.  
In  this  sense,  there  are  several  important  factors,  both  at  the  macroeconomic  and 
microeconomic  levels.  The  microeconomic  factors  include  an  increasing  dedollarization  of 
the economy and reduced vulnerabilities related to potential sudden stops in capital flows.  
This is particularly important since currency mismatches have been the basis of the major 
financial  crises  among  emerging  economies.  A  marked  reliance  on  borrowing  in  strong 
currencies  makes  countries  more  vulnerable  to  domestic  currency  depreciation  (which  is 
strongly  tightening).  Furthermore,  the  development  of  finance  markets  in  local  currency  is 
usually associated with improved liability management facilitating risk management.  
Among the  microeconomic factors, it is key to develop a  yield curve in local currency that 
reflects the opportunity cost of funds for different terms, leading to more efficient resource 
allocation. In addition, less reliance on external (generally short-term) capital flows allows for 
a tighter control over monetary policy.  
In spite of this decade’s achievements, major progress remains to be made, which is most 
remarkable  in  our  region  –  above  all,  with  respect  to  the  issuance  terms  (so  that  the  shift 
from “hard currencies” to “domestic currencies” does not entail changing the currency risk for 
the rate risk) and an increased share of fixed-rate nominal issues.  
While the latter’s share has grown in all emerging regions, it is still low in Latin America (less 
than a quarter of the total debt, with a predominance of variable-rate instruments and, to a 
lesser extent, indexed debt). Additionally, liquidity in secondary debt markets, while growing 
in the past few years, remains limited and uneven.  
International financial institutions (IFIS) can also play an even more important role to achieve 
this  aim.  One  way  is  for  IFIS  themselves  to  issue  in  emerging  country  currencies.  In  this 
sense,  they  often  work  as  a  catalyst  agent,  leading  the  start-up  in  local  currency  both  in 
BIS Review 133/2009 
 3
domestic and international markets. Certain issues by IFIS have been true pioneers in some 
countries, paving the way for other issuers and attracting foreign investors.  
Just  as  institutions  determine  economic  performance,  we  should  not  overlook  the  reverse 
causality – economic growth and human capital anticipate institutional improvements, just as 
institutional quality increases along with national wealth. China is the most telling example of 
this.  
The challenge facing us, economic policymakers, lies in designing institutions that allow us to 
continue putting these principles into practice. In such institution building process, we should 
not forget that there is no one-to-one correspondence between the roles of good institutions 
and the form they take. Implementing the reforms mentioned does not entail blindly following 
certain  templates  to  be  applied  under  all  circumstances.  There  are  several  ways  to 
implement  adequate  policies  to  further  development  and  institutional  stability.  The  pace  of 
institutional reform  implementation  –  both  at  the  micro  and  macro  levels  –  cannot  be  kept 
separate from the specificities and the economic and social environment of each country.  
The depth, quality and implementation pace of institutional reforms are at least as relevant as 
their  sustainability  in  time.  Otherwise,  all  efforts  will  be  vain.  The  reforms  need  to  be 
consistent  and  socially  sustainable.  They  cannot  be  imposed  by  force  or  imported  from 
foreign countries, but should be inherent to the society in question. They should be the result 
of collective decisions made by groups with different powers and preferences.  
Even if this collective decision making process takes time, the fact that reforms are carried 
through  out  of  “conviction”  rather  than  “necessity”  increases  their  chance  at  success  and 
sustainability in time.  
It seems that the world now understands policy recipes vary from one country to the other in 
this  complex  scenario.  And  this  is  of  course  welcome,  especially  for  emerging  countries, 
where we also need to catch up with economic development, address social tensions and, 
more importantly, build lasting and useful institutions at once for the whole of society.  
The  two-fold  challenge  facing  the  region,  then,  is  not  sequential  but  synchronic  –  growing 
and building institutions simultaneously, since they are mutually determined and reinforced, 
while  ensuring  the  due  consistency  and  consensus  in  the  building  process  to  avoid  a 
pendular reaction. To that end, rather than shock policies, gradualism and the ability to adjust 
that  we  have  demonstrated  in  the  past  few  years  have  provided  more  fertile  ground  for 
progress in terms of meeting our peoples’ demands.  
4 
 BIS Review 133/2009
