Christian Noyer: Global stability, the future of capital markets and 
Islamic finance in France 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Euromoney Seminars, 
Islamic Paris Conference, Paris, 29 September 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure for me to address such a distinguished audience today. 
While  conventional  economies  are  still  suffering  from  a  deep  crisis  and  some  of  our 
traditional  economic  thought  is  being  challenged,  this  meeting  is  a  great  opportunity  to 
discuss  how  alternative  finance,  and  especially  Islamic  finance,  can  contribute  to  the 
economic recovery.  
In  the  past  two  years,  the  French  authorities,  in  active  cooperation  with  the  industry,  in 
particular  via  Paris-Europlace,  have  introduced  substantial  reforms  to  make  it  possible  to 
allow Shariah’ compliant finance into France. As Governor of the Banque de France, which is 
in charge of the licensing of French banks, I would like to specifically highlight ongoing work 
aimed at licensing Islamic banks in a secure framework. I will come back to this point later… 
To focus on the matter I was invited to speak about, I would like to address several issues:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
first, the links between the current overhaul of financial regulation and Islamic finance;  
second, the role Islamic finance could play in France;  
the third, the relationship between Islamic finance and financial stability; 
Finally, I would like to mention the conditions Islamic banks need to meet to ensure 
that  their  establishment  in  France  is  consistent  with  the  smooth  functioning  of  the 
banking system. 
 The current crisis has illustrated the rapid contagion effect fostered by financial globalisation. 
However, it is important to emphasise that financial globalisation is not in itself the cause of 
the  crisis,  which  has  rather  revealed  failures  in  financial  regulation.  Indeed,  the  crisis  has 
highlighted the need to better assess and prevent risks in the financial system as a whole, in 
addition to simply monitoring the risks of each individual institution. It has also shown that 
some features of the regulatory regime have had an amplifying effect on the economic cycle 
instead of mitigating it.  
That  is  why  the  G20  has  launched  an  ambitious  agenda  to  reform  financial  regulation, 
covering four main areas: the strengthening of prudential standards, the redefinition of the 
scope  of  regulation,  the  revision  of  accounting  standards  and  the  strengthening  of  risk 
management. We will see later that these areas find a strong echo in Islamic finance, which 
has  also  to  deal  with  issues  linked  to  lack  of  transparency,  of  a  level  playing  field  and 
harmonised regulation. Thus, the overhaul of regulation in conventional finance should be an 
opportunity  for  Islamic  finance  to  tackle  these  issues,  and  to  better  integrate  into  financial 
globalisation.  
In France, in particular, Islamic finance has a role to play, which could be beneficial both to 
Islamic investors and to the French economy. 
Indeed, the French economy offers major and diversified investment opportunities for Islamic 
investors in the financing of a wide network of often innovative firms and projects, or in real 
estate. These sovereign funds, corporates or wealthy individuals should have the opportunity 
to  invest,  either  directly  in  individual  assets  or  projects,  or  indirectly  through  funds  or 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 1
collective vehicles. It is up to banks to offer to these investors the type of Shariah compliant 
products and investment or financing tools they might wish to have.  
Let  me  make  a  brief  point  on  sovereign  wealth  funds  (SWFs)  and  their  link  with  Islamic 
finance. SWFs have attracted much attention recently but the oldest ones were set up back 
in  the  1970s.  Their  expansion  accelerated  about  a  decade  ago,  when  many  emerging 
countries started to accumulate sizeable foreign exchange reserves, due to high oil and gas 
prices and to the conjunction of macroeconomic factors and foreign exchange policies. With 
assets  managed  by  SWFs  estimated  at  3,000  billion  dollars,  this  category  of  investors 
represents twice the value of assets managed by hedge funds.1 It is estimated that they will 
continue to grow in the future, to reach from 12,000 to 15,000 billion dollars, depending on 
estimates, in 2015. Consequently, they play and will continue to play an increasing role in the 
global financial system. 
As SWFs have long-term and diversified investment strategies and are not subject to sudden 
fund withdrawals by customers, they are usually considered to have a stabilising effect on 
the  global  financial  system,  despite  their  lack  of  transparency.  Consequently,  developed 
countries have an interest in attracting their investments. During the crisis, the behaviour of 
SWFs  has  differed  according  to  the  country  of  origin,  but  in  general,  it  appears  that  their 
tendency to invest more than before in domestic and regionally close markets during the first 
stage of the crisis has come to an end, and that they have now resumed investing principally 
in  OECD  economies.2  This  is  particularly  true  for  Gulf  sovereign  funds,  where  diversified 
domestic investment opportunities are scarcer than for Asian sovereign funds, for example. 
In the first quarter of this year, Europe was by far the leading destination for Middle-Eastern 
and  North  African  SWF  investment.3  Muslim  countries,  in  particular  oil-exporting  ones, 
represent as much as 51% of total sovereign wealth funds’ assets. While these funds do not 
invest only in Islamic finance products, being able to offer a large range of the latter would 
nevertheless represent a significant comparative advantage for the attractiveness of France.  
Another  possible  development  of  Islamic  finance  comes  from  the  retail  sector,  through 
investment  of  French  residents  of  Muslim  origin  in  banking  or  saving  products  which  are 
Shariah compliant and distributed by local Islamic banks. It is difficult to assess the potential 
demand  for  Islamic  retail  banking  products  in  France.  Nevertheless,  the  potential  target 
population  in  France,  which  is  estimated  at  approximately  4  million  Muslims,  seems 
promising: this population is 2 or 3 times bigger than in Great Britain, where Islamic finance 
has been growing for several years. Moreover, according to a survey,4 more than half of the 
respondents  expressed  their  interest  in  Islamic  financial  products  to  finance  their  homes, 
cars and businesses.   
Let me now address the question of the relationship between Islamic finance and financial 
stability, which is not an obvious one. 
In the current context of economic crisis, some experts argue that the very nature of Islamic 
finance is an effective shield against excessive exposure, providing a much higher degree of 
security to the economy. 
I doubt there is a definitive answer to the question as to whether Islamic finance in general 
and Islamic banking in particular, is, by nature, conducive or not to financial stability. Without 
claiming to be exhaustive on such an ambitious subject, particularly in front of an audience of 
                                                 
1   Source: La finance islamique : une solution à la crise ? (2009), E. Jouini and O. Pastré, Economica. 
2   Monitor  Group  and  Fondazione  Eni  Enrico  Mattei  (August  2009),  Analysis  of  Sovereign  Wealth  Fund 
Transactions During Q1 2009. 
3   Monitor Group and Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei (August 2009). 
4   An IFOP survey, disclosed at the end of 2008, on the basis of interviews with 530 people of Muslim origin from 
various backgrounds, considered a representative sample of the French Muslim community. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2009
distinguished Islamic finance specialists, it seems to me nevertheless useful to briefly recall 
the following points: 
• 
The fundamental principles of Islamic finance can be seen in different ways as far 
as financial stability is concerned.  
As you well know, Islamic finance prohibits the payment and receipt of interest at a fixed or 
predetermined  rate.  Instead,  profit-and-loss  sharing  arrangements,  purchase  and  resale  of 
goods and services, and the provision of services for fees are the basis of Islamic finance 
contracts.  Islamic  finance  is  therefore  systematically  backed  by  real  assets.  Moreover,  it 
prohibits speculation and the financing of production or trade in specific sectors. 
On  the  one  hand,  these  principles  can  be  considered  to  provide  stability  for  the  financial 
system.  Indeed,  in  Islamic  finance,  unbacked  expansion  of  credit  is  precluded,  and  banks 
cannot  initiate  or  accentuate  a  speculative  process.  Credit  is  based  on  real  savings  and 
savings can only earn a return if directly invested in creating activities. Finance and the real 
economy are closely linked. In the Islamic system, banks can neither carry highly leveraged 
exposures  nor  acquire  risky  financial  structured  products.  By  the  way,  even  if  the  Islamic 
nature of their finance is not the only explanation, we can note that Islamic finance countries, 
compared  with  those  of  conventional  finance,  have  been  relatively  less  impacted  by  the 
crisis. 
But on the other hand, Islamic banks pose risks to the financial system that in many regards 
differ  from  those  posed  by  conventional  banks,  with  respect,  for  example,  to  liquidity, 
operational and legal risks.  
Indeed, Islamic banks face specific obstacles in liquidity management, as the prohibition of 
interest has led to the underdevelopment of funding sources.  
Moreover,  operational  risk  and  legal  uncertainty  can  be  amplified  by  the  lack  of  product 
standardization and the lack of harmonization of Islamic standards, with for example possible 
differences between Shariah scholars' interpretations, accounting standards, and so on. 
In the same way, prohibition from financing specific sectors limits the kind of eligible assets 
for investment, which contributes to increasing the risk of concentration in potentially cyclical 
sectors such as real estate. This is what happened in certain Gulf countries. 
• 
As  the  analysis  of  the  principles  of  Islamic  finance  does  not  settle  the  issue  of  the 
relationship  between 
to  be 
supplemented by an empirical analysis. 
financial  stability, 
finance  and 
it  needs 
Islamic 
In  fact,  there  is  relatively  little  empirical  analysis  regarding  the  role  of  Islamic  banks  in 
financial  stability.  Nevertheless,  a  working  paper  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  was 
published at the beginning of 2008.5
The  findings  of  this  paper  are  to  be  viewed  as  preliminary.  Nevertheless,  it  has  the 
advantage of being, as far as I know, the first and, up to now, only cross-country empirical 
analysis of Islamic banks’ impact on financial stability. 
Even if the situation may in principle differ from country to country and even from bank to 
bank, the paper finds that:  
- 
- 
- 
(i) small Islamic banks tend to be financially stronger than small commercial banks, 
(ii) large commercial banks tend to be financially stronger than large Islamic banks,  
(iii) small Islamic banks tend to be financially stronger than large Islamic banks.  
                                                 
5   “Islamic  Banks  and  Financial  Stability:  An  Empirical  Analysis”  Prepared  by  Martin  Čihák  and  Heiko  Hesse 
(January  2008).  The  analysis  is  based  on  evidence  covering  77  Islamic  and  397  comparable  commercial 
banks in 18 banking systems with a substantial presence of Islamic banking, over the 1993-2004 period. 
BIS Review 118/2009 
 3
One of the plausible explanations given by the paper is that it is significantly more complex 
for Islamic banks to adjust their credit risk monitoring system as they become bigger. Given 
their  limitations  in  standardisation in  credit  risk  management,  monitoring  the  various  profit-
loss-arrangements  rapidly  becomes  much  more  complex  as  the  scale  of  the  banking 
operation grows. 
These  findings  are  based  on  evidence  drawn  from  banking  systems  with  a  substantial 
presence  of  Islamic  banking.  Therefore,  they  are  not  strictly  transposable  to  France. 
Nevertheless, precisely because France is a conventional environment, I would like now to 
conclude my speech with some remarks on conditions Islamic banks need to meet to ensure 
that  their  establishment  in  France  offers  sufficient  safety  for  their  customers  and  is 
compatible with the smooth functioning of the French banking system. 
This  is  primarily  in  Islamic  banks’  own  interest  and  is  also  in  the  interest  of  the  banking 
system!  
Regarding  licensing,  the  Credit  Institutions  and  Investment  Firms  Committee  (Comité  des 
Etablissements de Crédit et des Entreprises d’Investissement – CECEI) will assess the same 
criteria as for any conventional bank: financial resources and suitability of the shareholders; 
integrity,  qualifications  and  suitable  experience  of  managers;  level  of  own  funds;  business 
plan; capacity of the bank to achieve its development objectives and so on. Indeed, there is 
no specific criteria or requirement for Islamic banks in the French licensing framework. 
But beyond these standard licensing criteria, banking authorities need to ensure that Islamic 
banks  will  interact  with  their  conventional  environment  in  France  as  soundly  as  possible. 
Therefore, some key issues need to be tackled before licensing an Islamic bank, regarding 
especially: 
- 
- 
their governance, with for example the role of the Shariah’ Board, 
the legal classification of profit-sharing investment accounts and its consequences in 
terms of coverage by the French deposit guarantee scheme, 
and liquidity management and access to the Eurosystem funding, especially the issue 
of assets eligible as collateral.  
 Let  me  stop  here.  I  would  like  to  thank  you  very  much,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  for  your 
attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2009
