Glenn Stevens: The road to prosperity 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  2009 
Economic  and  Social  Outlook  Conference  Dinner,  The  Melbourne  Institute  and  The 
Australian, Melbourne, 5 November 2009. 
 When  I  spoke  in  April  about  “The  Road  to  Recovery”,  the  issue  was  how  to  get  onto  that 
road.1  It  was  clear  then  that  the  global  financial  system  had  been  stabilised  by  the 
extraordinary  interventions  of  policy-makers  during  the  December  quarter  last  year.  The 
system  was,  very  gradually,  mending.  But  it  was  also  clear  that  the  major  countries  had 
experienced  a  very  sharp  contraction  in  demand  in  the  December  and  March  quarters.  It 
wasn’t yet clear, at that time, whether that slump had been arrested – though we now know 
that it was bottoming out. Reputable observers were talking about the worst global recession 
since the 1930s. For some of the individual major countries at least, there seemed to be a 
good deal of evidence for such a view (and there still does). 
It  was  widely  anticipated  that  the  Australian  economy  would  be  affected  by  these 
developments. Even if one was optimistic about the Australian economy in a relative sense, it 
seemed pretty unlikely that we could escape a significant impact from such an international 
downturn.  To  say  that  we  would  outperform  other  countries,  while  accurate,  didn’t 
necessarily  reassure  people  a  great  deal,  because  things  in  a  number  of  those  countries 
seemed to be so bad. 
As it turns out, in April we were pretty much at the nadir of sentiment about the Australian 
economy.  Six  or  seven  months  later,  even  most  of  the  optimists  are  a  little  surprised,  I 
suspect, at the economy’s performance. 
So the title of this conference is particularly apt. But the issue before us now is not, in fact, 
how to get onto the road to recovery: we are already on it. The question, rather, is how to 
make sure that the road to recovery will connect to the road to prosperity. 
To make that connection, I suggest that we need to do two things. First, we need to draw the 
right  lessons  from  our  experience  of  the  past  couple  of  years.  There  are  no  doubt  many 
lessons that might be mentioned. I will list just a few that I think are important. Second, we 
need to apply those lessons in the right way to the challenges that are likely to confront us 
over the years ahead. I will offer a few observations about some of those. 
Lessons from the crisis 
The  first  lesson  is  that  the  business  cycle  still  exists  and  that  financial  behaviour  matters, 
sometimes a lot, to how that cycle unfolds. We need to have a broad definition of the term 
“business cycle” in mind. There is more than just the cycle in the “real” economy of GDP, 
employment,  consumer  price  inflation  and  so  on.  These  remain  important,  but  it  is  just  as 
important to recognise the cycles in risk-taking behaviour and finance. Failing to do that is 
precisely what has got some countries into trouble this time. 
For some years we heard talk of the “great moderation”, a reference to a period of unusually 
low macroeconomic volatility for the major industrial countries from the mid 1980s until the 
mid 2000s. During this period, the United States had a couple of recessions – in 1990 and 
2001 – but they were shallow ones compared with those in the mid 1970s or early 1980s. 
                                                 
1   Available at http://www.rba.gov.au/Speeches/2009/sp_gov_210409.html. 
BIS Review 137/2009 
 1
Inflation in most countries was low and pretty stable. So were interest rates. Australia shared 
in this experience from about the mid 1990s onwards, with an unusually long expansion. 
Compared  with  the  instability  of  the  1970s  and  early  1980s,  this  was  a  remarkably  good 
period  for  macroeconomic  performance.  It  was  also  very  positive,  for  quite  some  time,  for 
investment returns. 
But the problem with this apparently benign environment was that it made things seem just a 
little  too  easy.  As  the  period  of  stability  grew  longer,  so  compensation  for  risk  tended  to 
diminish as investors continued their “search for yield”. In the end that search explored some 
fairly  remote  territory,  including  complex  structured  products,  exotic  derivatives  and  so  on. 
Key sectors of important economies accumulated a considerable degree of leverage along 
the way – in households, or financial institutions or both. 
In other words, as the macroeconomic environment seemed less risky, people changed their 
behaviour. The macroeconomic stability provided scope, it seems, for some financial trends 
to run further than they might otherwise have done, and further than they really should have 
done.  Ultimately,  this  re-introduced  risk  through  another  channel:  the  financial  structure  of 
economies changed in a way that was more likely to amplify certain types of shock once they 
occurred. 
The great moderation has ended for many of the world’s most advanced economies. They 
have become re-acquainted with the business cycle, in its most unstable and unpredictable 
form, where financial shocks and real economic activity become highly, or even dangerously, 
connected, through balance sheets. 
It’s an old lesson, but worth re-stating. No country has managed to eliminate the business 
cycle. No country ever will, because the cycle is driven by human psychology, which finds 
expression in financial behaviour as well as “real” behaviour. We are seemingly just made – 
“hardwired”, as some would put it – in a way that makes us prone to bouts of optimism and 
pessimism. Occasionally, we are prone to periods of myopic disregard for risk followed, in 
short order, by an almost complete unwillingness to accept risk. 
We  could  search  for  perfect  policies  that  will  eliminate,  or  completely  offset,  these 
tendencies, but that search would most likely be frustrating, and ultimately, I fear, fruitless. 
Realistically,  what  we  need  are  policy  frameworks  that  recognise  the  cycle  –  in  its 
inevitability, yet unforecastability – and help us cope with it. They will do that, in large part, by 
limiting the build-up of excesses in the good times. 
Australia’s  policy  frameworks  have  withstood  the  test  pretty  well  during  this  period. 
Nonetheless,  they  will  need  ongoing  investment  if  they  are  to  continue  to  work  well  in  the 
future. And even the best policy frameworks will not make the cycle go away. 
We need a parallel development in the general public discussion of economic and financial 
cycles.  We  might  start  with  a  more  balanced  discourse  about  recessions.  We  are  still 
debating whether or not the events of late last year and early this year should be labelled a 
recession. The fact that we are still debating says something about the episode’s severity. 
Perhaps we should just let the students of business cycles decide what label to apply and 
focus on the broader issue. If it was a recession, it was the eighth one since World War II. It 
certainly will not be the last one. Recessions are cyclical events that occur periodically, but 
not with sufficient regularity to be forecastable as to timing. They will occur in the future. If 
one’s business or personal or policy strategy depends heavily on there not being a cyclical 
downturn,  it  is  a  risky  one.  The  road  to  prosperity  is  not  a  road  without  cyclical  ups  and 
downs. 
But the second lesson we ought to draw from recent experience is that while downturns will 
inevitably  occur,  we  are  not  helpless  to  do  anything  about  their  severity.  We  can  make  a 
difference.  When  a  downturn  came  this  time  to  Australia,  there  were  certainly  casualties. 
Risky business strategies (in most  cases related to financial structure) were exposed, and 
those involved sustained losses of income, wealth and reputation. Other firms and individuals 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2009
the  most  part, 
suffered much more difficult circumstances too. But on the best reading of all the available 
information,  this  appears  to  have  been  one  of  the  mildest  downturns  we  have  had. 
Furthermore,  it  is  likely  that  recovery  is  already  under  way.  That’s  the  next  lesson:  when 
downturns come, we can recover. 
Now the relative resilience of the Australian economy in this cycle warrants some discussion. 
Unless we are prepared to accept it has all been an incredible coincidence, we have to ask 
why things turned out that way. 
It wasn’t just that China returned quickly to growth. That certainly was important in sustaining 
export  volumes,  and  in  re-establishing  confidence  in  the  outlook  for  the  resources  sector, 
which  did  wobble  for  a  few  months.  But  China’s  importance  may  be  greater  for  future 
outcomes than recent past ones. Equally important recently were other factors, including the 
relative  strength  of  the  financial  sector,  the  economy’s  flexibility  and  the  willingness  and 
scope to change macroeconomic policy. 
Those things were not accidents. Financial resilience resulted from sensible management by 
financial  institutions  themselves,  and  careful  regulation  on  the  part  of  the  prudential 
supervisor.  For 
fairly 
conservatively  managed  in  respect  of  balance sheets  – largely  because  enough  corporate 
managers and directors today remember a time when that was not so. Moreover, businesses 
took  a  far-sighted  view  about  employment  decisions.  Given  the  preceding  difficulties  in 
securing labour, they found ways of keeping people on payrolls, even if on reduced hours. 
They  clearly  had  not  only  the  good  sense,  but  also  the  requisite  degree  of  institutional 
flexibility, to do that, which must say something about the progress that has been made in 
labour market arrangements over the past couple of decades. 
And  finally,  long-term  investments  in  prudent  fiscal  and  monetary  frameworks  paid  off.  A 
whole  generation  of  policy-makers  painstakingly  worked  to  build  credibility  by  taking 
decisions with a long-run perspective. The return was in the form of a capacity to respond 
credibly  to  the  downturn  before  it  gathered  much  pace.  The  lesson  here,  then,  is  that  all 
those investments were worthwhile. 
So I think this episode offers us an opportunity to re-visit our national script about recessions 
and  recoveries,  financial  behaviour  and  policy  frameworks.  Recessions  will  occur,  as  they 
always have. Financial behaviour matters greatly and can, if we are not careful, contribute to 
instability. In our thinking about the future, we all need to remember that. But if we do, and 
act  with  due  prudence  during  the  upswings,  recessions  need  not  be  bad  ones  and,  when 
they come, we can recover. Signposts to that effect ought to be erected along the road to 
prosperity. 
the  non-financial  corporate  sector  was  also 
Applying the lessons 
The task before us now is to manage a new expansion. Of course, we are still in that period 
when  we  cannot  be  absolutely  certain  that  the  expansion  will  gain  full  momentum.  Every 
upswing starts with that uncertainty. The conduct of macroeconomic policies in the near term 
must grapple with that uncertainty, as it always must do. 
Even so, it is not too early to think about issues of a medium-term nature. The key question 
is: having had a fairly shallow downturn, how do we make the upswing long and stable, and 
relatively free of serious imbalances? 
At least part of the answer is that we will need to re-invest in the same policy discipline, and 
the same careful private-sector management, that paid dividends in the recent episode. That 
means  keeping  tested  frameworks  in  place,  amended  as  necessary  in  the  light  of 
experience.  It  means  unwinding  temporary  measures  as  appropriate.  It  means  keeping  a 
focus  on  flexibility.  And  perhaps  most  of  all,  it  means  resisting  the  temptation  to  assume 
prosperity is easily achieved, or easily managed. 
BIS Review 137/2009 
 3
In that spirit, let me offer three observations. 
First,  we  start  this  upswing  with  less  spare  capacity  than  some  previous  ones.  After  a  big 
recession, it usually takes some years for well-above-trend growth in demand to use up the 
spare capacity created by the recession. This time that process will not take as long. Most 
measures of capacity utilisation, unemployment and underemployment are much more like 
what we saw after the slowdown in 2001, than what we saw after the recession in the early 
1990s. 
This is not a problem. In fact, it is good. It is a goal of macroeconomic policy to try to keep 
the economy not too far from full employment. And some spare capacity does exist, and will 
do so for a little while, which is why we think underlying inflation will probably come down a 
little more in the period ahead. But it does underline the importance of adding to supply, not 
just to demand, over the medium term, and of maximising the productivity of the factors of 
production that we have, if we are to have the sort of growth that genuinely brings prosperity. 
Second, and following on the theme of potential supply, others have noted that the rate of 
population  growth  at  present  is  the  highest  since  the  1960s.  On  one  hand,  this  may  help 
alleviate capacity constraints, insofar as certain types of labour are concerned. On the other 
hand, immigrants need to house themselves and need access to various goods and services 
as  well.  That  is,  they  add  to  demand  as  well  as  to  supply.  It  follows  that  the  demand  for 
additional dwellings, among other things, is likely to remain strong. Corresponding effects will 
flow on to urban infrastructure requirements and so on. So the question of whether enough is 
being done to make the supply side of the housing sector more responsive to these demands 
will remain on the agenda. 
Adequate financial resources will of course also be needed. In that regard, the current issue 
is not the cost of borrowing for end buyers, which remains low, but the availability and terms 
of  credit  for  developers.  Perceptions  by  lenders  of  the  riskiness  of  development  in  some 
cases  are  probably  overdone  just  at  the  moment,  given  the  strength  of  the  underlying 
fundamentals on the demand side for accommodation. That will probably not be a permanent 
problem  though;  the  more  persistent  difficulties  look  like  they  may  be  in  the  areas  of  land 
supply, zoning and approval. 
Third,  the  likely  build-up  in  resources  sector  investment  over  the  years  ahead  carries 
significant implications for the medium-term performance and structure of the economy. Even 
if a number of the proposed projects do not go ahead, the ratio of mining investment to GDP 
for  Australia,  which  is  already  very  high,  will  probably  go  higher  still  over  the  next  several 
years. A sizeable share of the physical input will be sourced from abroad (through imported 
equipment)  but  the  domestic  spend  will  still  be  significant.  So,  other  things  equal,  the 
investments will be expansionary for the economy. 
The financial capital to fund this build-up will mostly come from abroad. That is to say, absent 
some offsetting changes elsewhere, Australia’s current account deficit could be considerably 
larger for some years than the 4 to 5 per cent of GDP we have seen on average for the past 
generation, which itself was a good deal bigger than seen in the generation before that. Now 
of course the current account position we have had turns out, contrary to what most would 
have  expected  25  years  ago,  to  have  been  manageable  and  sustainable.  A  temporarily 
larger one would probably be so as well, provided it involved a relatively modest amount of 
currency mismatch, and a rise in investment as opposed to a reduction in saving – and that 
seems to be the likely shape of things. 
In fact a temporarily sizeable current account deficit, if characterised by equity-type capital 
inflow,  may  well  be  optimal,  because  it  would  mean  that  a  good  deal  of  the  risk  of  the 
projects  was  being  shared  with  foreign  investors,  and  that  makes  sense.  Why  would 
Australians alone take on all the risk of these massive projects? It is probably more sensible 
to  share  the  risks  with  global  capital  markets  and  global  companies.  But  these  trends  will 
take  some  explaining,  not  least  to  foreign  and  international  organisations,  many  of  which 
have a more traditional view of current account positions. 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2009
Our explanation to our own citizens will also be important, and not just about capital flows. 
Over time, if the resources sector is to grow as a share of the economy, as seems likely, 
other areas will by definition shrink. This does not necessarily mean that they will shrink in 
absolute terms, particularly given the population is growing quickly, but certainly their growth 
prospects would be weaker than in an alternative state of the world in which the resources 
sector was to remain at its historical size. It follows that adjustment challenges will arise, with 
industrial  and  geographical  implications.  The  “two-speed  economy”  debate  of  a  few  years 
ago  was  really  only  a preview  of  what  we  could  see if  the  resources  sector  build-up  goes 
ahead. 
A  further  implication  is  that  the  economy’s  trade  patterns  could  end  up  becoming  less 
diversified  than  they  have  been  in  recent  years.  Such  concentration  would  not  be 
unprecedented  and  may  well  be  worth  accepting  if  the  returns  from  doing  so  were  high 
enough, as it appears they might be. But we might also think about how to manage the risks 
associated  with  any  concentration.  The  emergence  of  China  and  India  is  a  benefit  to 
Australia, but we stand to have a heightened exposure to anything going seriously wrong in 
those countries. How then to manage an income flow that is higher on average, over a long 
period, but potentially more volatile? The answer to that question is beyond my brief today 
but presumably involves thinking about the extent and form of saving by the community. 
Conclusion 
As we look forward to a new expansion, Australia has many advantages. 
The financial sector remains in pretty good shape. The Government does not own, and has 
not had to give direct support to, any financial institution. Australia, therefore, will be relatively 
free  of  the  difficult  governance  and  exit  strategy  challenges  that  such  support  is  raising  in 
some countries. 
Public finances remain in good shape, with a medium-term path for the budget back towards 
balance, and without the large debt burdens that will inevitably narrow the options available 
to governments in other countries. Sensible policy frameworks – both macroeconomic and 
microeconomic – remain in place, and they have worked. The financial regulatory system is 
strong and tested. 
We remain open for trade and investment, with an exposure to Asia, which still has the most 
dynamic growth potential in the world over the next several decades. These advantages are 
already paying dividends. Properly exploited, they will pay many more. 
But there is no such thing as effortless, or riskless, prosperity. There is still a business cycle, 
and  we  do  well  to  remember  that  even  if  we  have  been  spared  the  worst  of  the  recent 
downturn. We will need to continue investing in all the things that helped us get through the 
recent episode. And we will need to accept and manage various changes that will probably 
confront us over the years ahead. 
The road to prosperity will have some bumps, twists and turns. But it is the road to the right 
destination. 
BIS Review 137/2009 
 5
