Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance and financial stability 
Opening remarks by Mrs Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
BNM  High Level Conference on Financial Stability, Bank Negara Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, 
24 November 2009. 
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to Bank Negara Malaysia Conference on Financial 
Stability that is being held in conjunction with 15th IFSB Council Meeting and the 3rd IFSB 
Public Lecture on Financial Policy and Stability. This conference takes place at a time when 
there has been intense discussion by the international community on the necessary financial 
reforms at both the national and international level so that we will avoid such global crisis of 
such a scale in the future. This conference today provide us with an opportunity to reflect on 
the  new  challenges  that  are  emerging  from  this  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  and 
discuss  Islamic  finance  and  the  need  to  ensure  not  only  its  resilience  but  how  it  might 
contribute to global financial stability.  
Indeed, Islamic finance has a potential role in contributing not only to global financial stability 
but also towards a more balanced global growth. While Islamic finance by its very nature and 
its  direct  link  to  economic  activity  contributes  to  this  process,  the  recognition  of  the  new 
financial challenges ahead require further steps to be taken to strengthen its resilience and 
robustness.  
In  recent  months,  there  have  been  increasing  evidence  of  strong  gains,  a  rebound  in  the 
financial markets with renewed interest in emerging market, active capitalization by banks, 
and the reopening of wholesale funding markets. While the Malaysian financial system has 
fared  relatively  well  throughout  this  global  crisis  and  remaining  financially  sound,  well 
capitalised and able to withstand the current challenging global financial environment, there 
are however, many lessons that we can learn from the current international financial crisis to 
ensure the sustainability of this resilience.  
The development of Islamic finance in Malaysia that operates in parallel with conventional 
finance  for  almost  three  decades  now  has  demonstrated  its  sustainability  as  a  form  of 
financial  intermediation.  Today,  the  Islamic  banking  system  has  emerged  as  a  vibrant 
financial  system  with  Islamic  banking  assets  currently  accounting  for  18.8%  of  the  total 
banking assets of the Malaysian financial system. The product range has now expanded into 
an extensive range of innovative instruments while in the Islamic capital market, the sukuk 
market  has  surpassed  the  conventional  market  in  terms  of  market  share.  An  important 
aspect  that  has  contributed  to  financial  stability  in  the  overall  financial  system  is  the 
conscious  policy  to  develop  a  more  diversified  financial  system  that  allows  for  the 
diversification of risks.  
Potential of Islamic finance in contributing to global financial stability 
This current global financial crisis has prompted a search for an enduring solution to ensure 
the  stability  of  financial  systems.  The  challenge  before  us  is  to  build  a  new  financial 
architecture  that  would  allow  for  the  more  efficient  functioning  of  not  only  financial 
intermediation  within  national  economies  but  also  across  borders.  Islamic  finance,  with  its 
emphasis on a strong linkage to productive economic activity, its inbuilt check and balances 
and  its  high  level  of  disclosure  and  transparency  offers  this.  Indeed,  inherent  in  Islamic 
finance is the explicit elements that address several of the issues that have surfaced in the 
conventional  financial  system  during  the  current  crisis.  At  the  centre  of  this  recent  global 
financial crisis was the breakdown in governance that led to indiscriminate lending, excessive 
risk-taking and overzealous financial innovation. This is avoided in Islamic finance with the 
requirement  that  Islamic  financial  transactions  must  have  an  underlying  economic  activity 
BIS Review 152/2009 
 1
and that the process of innovation and formulation of Islamic financial products and services 
must be done carefully and in accordance with Shariah. The crisis has provided an important 
lesson that the development of new financial instruments embraces this process while being 
able to effectively compete in the global arena.  
Strengthening the Islamic financial system  
As  Islamic  finance  becomes  an  integral  part  of  the  global  financial  system,  it  has  become 
increasingly exposed to the systemic implications of external developments. There is the risk 
of the contagion effects arising from financial and economic disruptions that emanated from 
the  conventional  markets.  The  correction  of  asset  prices  and  the  economic  contraction 
following  this  international  global  financial  crisis  has  been  on  an  unprecedented  scale. 
Islamic  finance  is  therefore  confronted  with  the  risks  associated  with  these  second  round 
effects that need to be managed.  
This  recent  financial  market  turmoil  in  the  advance  economies  also  demonstrated  the 
consequences of liquidity constraints. This has underscored the importance of a strong and 
well  developed  liquidity  management  infrastructure.  An  important  aspect  that  needs  to  be 
urgently  addressed  in  the  Islamic  financial  industry  is  the  need  to  enhance  the  ability  of 
Islamic  financial  institutions  to  manage  liquidity.  This  requires  the  development  of  Shariah 
compliant financial instruments that facilitate this and a well internationally functioning market 
infrastructure  to  facilitate  cross  border  management  of  liquidity,  so  that  liquidity  risks  are 
effectively  managed.  Malaysia  has,  for  more  than  a  decade  now,  an  efficient  functioning 
Islamic money market which has accorded greater monetary flexibility in the Islamic financial 
system. While the market is in domestic currency, it has drawn wider participation from the 
international financial community. As part of the global collaborative efforts to enhance the 
efficiency  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  in  managing  liquidity  at  both  national  and  across 
borders,  a  Liquidity  Management  Task  Force  was  established  by  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board (IFSB) and the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) early this year to develop a 
liquidity management framework.  
Integral to the efforts in the development of Islamic finance, is also the strengthening of the 
regulatory and supervisory framework. The IFSB which was established in 2002 has been 
instrumental in developing and issuing global prudential standards and guiding principles for 
the  industry.  The  IFSB  has  also  contributed  to  the  harmonisation  in  the  development  of 
Islamic  finance  across  different  jurisdictions.  Apart  from  the  implementation  of  these 
prudential standards, there is also a need to ensure the supervisory and legal infrastructure 
remains  relevant  to  the  rapidly  changing  Islamic  financial  landscape.  In  Malaysia,  these 
efforts  are  also  supported  by  a  comprehensive  financial  safety  net  that  includes  a  deposit 
insurance  scheme  and  a  resolution  mechanism,  so  that  not  only  are  depositors  protected, 
but it also allows for prompt, effective and least cost resolution of the financial system that 
can facilitate recapitalization of Islamic financial institutions as well as institute programme to 
remove troubled assets from the books of financial institutions.  
Greater collective effort by international community to strengthen global financial 
stability  
In the reform of the international financial architecture, the G20 has launched an ambitious 
agenda  to  reform  financial  regulations,  which  include  key  main  areas  namely,  (1)  the 
strengthening  of  international  frameworks  for  prudential  regulation,  (2)  the  review  of  the 
scope of regulation, (3) the revision of accounting standards; and (4) more effective oversight 
of the credit rating agencies as well as strengthening risk management.1 These areas should 
                                                 
1   Declaration on Strengthening the Financial System by Leaders of the G20, London 2 April 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2009
also  be  looked  at  in  Islamic  finance,  which  has  also  to  deal  with  additional  issues  of 
harmonised regulation.  
The G20 has agreed to establish a new global Financial Stability Board, with a wider group of 
developed and emerging countries as part of the new international financial architecture. It 
will  be  responsible 
for  coordinating  banking  regulation,  developing  regulatory  and 
supervisory  standards,  preparing  early  warning  reports  and  exchanging  information  with 
supervisors. It is important that this forum gives due recognition to Islamic finance given its 
increasing  importance  in  the  international  financial  system  and  its  potential  role  in 
contributing  to  global  financial  stability.  In  the  Islamic  financial  industry,  the  IFSB  is  at  the 
forefront of international efforts to increase regulatory cooperation, and encourage common 
rules and enhanced monitoring of international financial risks. The IFSB and the IDB has an 
important role in building cross-border consensus and collaboration on the strategic direction 
for  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  for  better  alignment  to  the  objectives  of  financial 
stability.  
As Islamic finance continues to become an integral part of the global financial system, there 
is  scope  for  the  current  framework  of  cooperation  to  be  strengthened  and  broadened  to 
address the new challenges that have emerged.  
Islamic finance has been inclusive in its development, not only at the national level but also 
across  jurisdictions.  At  the  national  level  the  Islamic  financial  system  provides  the  full 
spectrum of financial services from the large multinational corporations to micro-enterprises 
and  to  households.  At  the  international  level,  the  development  and  expansion  of  Islamic 
finance  become  important  in  strengthening  financial  and  thus  economic  linkages  between 
emerging economies. It has allowed emerging economies to participate in its development 
thus  increasing  the  potential  to  contribute  to  the  rebalancing  of  global  growth  as  financial 
flows not only provides support to domestic demand but also to greater trade and investment 
flows across borders.  
Concluding remarks  
In  this  challenging  international  financial  environment,  Islamic  finance  has  continued  to 
demonstrate its evolution and strong growth. Islamic finance in its advancing journey today is 
presented  with  an  opportunity  to  increase  the  financial  linkages  with  the  broader  financial 
system thereby facilitate a more efficient allocation of capital across borders. Indeed, Islamic 
finance as an integral part of the international financial system has the potential to contribute 
to global financial stability and to enhance the prospects for global growth. 
BIS Review 152/2009 
 3
