Glenn Stevens: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
Senate Economics References Committee, Sydney, 28 September 2009. 
 Thank you Mr Chairman. I have just a few opening remarks. 
Economic  conditions in  Australia  were  generally  quite  subdued  in  the  second  half  of  2008 
and  the  first  part  of  2009.  Output  was  sluggish,  hours  worked  in  the  economy  declined, 
unemployment rose and inflation started to abate. 
By  the  standards  of  past  recessions,  however,  this  was  a  mild  downturn.  Although  the 
evidence is as yet incomplete, this episode has been much less serious than those in the mid 
1970s, the early 1980s and the early 1990s. It also has been very mild indeed in comparison 
with  recent  outcomes  in  many  other  countries,  where  deep  recessions  have  been 
experienced. For the G7 group of advanced countries, for example, a cumulative contraction 
in real GDP of nearly 5 per cent was experienced over the four quarters to June this year. 
The Australian economy recorded a small net expansion in GDP over the same interval. 
So I think it is reasonable to conclude, against the benchmarks of historical and international 
experience, that Australia has done quite well on this occasion. 
Why was that so? 
The key factors have been articulated before, but it may help to frame our discussion here 
today if I recount them. 
First,  our  financial  system  was  in  better  shape  to  begin  with,  being  relatively  free  of  the 
serious  problems  the  Americans,  British  and  Europeans  have  encountered.  Lenders  have 
some problem loans, as always occurs during a downturn, but these are manageable. The 
banking system has continued to earn a positive return on its capital, unlike those in some 
key countries. The system has been affected by the spillovers from the global crisis, through 
tighter borrowing conditions in international markets, higher spreads and so on. But these too 
have been manageable and various policy responses have helped the system to cope. The 
Reserve Bank was prepared to expand its balance sheet to assist in maintaining liquidity and 
the government guarantees were important in shoring up confidence and maintaining access 
to wholesale funding. 
Second, some key trading partners for Australia have proven to be relatively resilient through 
this episode. The Chinese economy did slow sharply in the latter part of 2008, but quickly 
resumed very strong growth. China will easily achieve her 8 per cent growth target this year, 
led  by  domestic  demand.  Many  of  our  other  Asian  trading  partners  have  also  returned  to 
growth recently. 
Ongoing strength in demand for resources has kept Australian exports expanding. Australia’s 
terms  of  trade,  even  though  well  off  their  peak,  remain  high  by  historical  standards. 
Confidence about the future for the resources sector is building quite strongly. 
Finally, Australia had ample scope for macroeconomic policy action to support demand as 
global  economic  conditions  rapidly  deteriorated,  and 
that  scope  was  used.  The 
Commonwealth  budget  was  in  surplus  and  there  was  no  debt,  which  meant  expansionary 
fiscal  policy  measures  could  be  afforded.  In  addition,  monetary  policy  could  be  eased 
significantly,  without  taking  interest  rates  to  zero  or  engaging  in  the  highly  unconventional 
policies that have been necessary in some other countries. 
BIS Review 117/2009 
 1
I  have  maintained  throughout  that  Australia’s  medium-term  prospects  remained  good  and 
that  we  should  not  lose  confidence.  More  people  seem  to  be  taking  that  same  view. 
Measures of business and household confidence have shown a very substantial pick-up from 
the low points reached earlier this year. Share prices have risen by almost half. House prices 
have  risen  rather  than  fallen,  though  commercial  property  prices  have  fallen.  People  are 
realising that, though things have been tough, the worst has not occurred and the future is 
looking brighter. Earlier plans for drastic cuts to capital spending look like they are being re-
considered.  Economic  growth  forecasts  are  being  revised  up.  A  straightforward  reading  of 
the economic outcomes would suggest that the various policy measures have been effective 
in supporting demand. 
In due course, both fiscal and monetary support will need to be unwound as private demand 
increases. In the case of the fiscal measures, this was built into their design. The peak effect 
of these measures on the rate of growth of demand has probably already passed. The extent 
of support will tend to tail off further over the next year. In the case of monetary policy, the 
Bank has already signalled that interest rates can be expected, at some point, to move off 
their current unusually low levels, as recovery proceeds. 
These  adjustments  back  towards  more  normal  settings  for  both  types  of  macroeconomic 
policy are what should be expected during the recovery phase of a business cycle. Our most 
recently released set of forecasts assumes they occur. Such an outcome would mean that 
fiscal and monetary policy would be acting broadly consistently, as they did when they were 
moved in the expansionary direction when the economy was slowing. 
In both cases a degree of policy discipline will be needed. Policy frameworks will be valuable 
in enforcing that discipline. On the fiscal side, the forward estimates provide an indication of 
the  restraint  needed  to  move  the  budget  back  towards  balance  and  eventual  surplus  over 
time, as required by the Government’s medium-term fiscal commitment. 
On the monetary side, the inflation targeting framework the Reserve Bank has been following 
for  a  decade  and  a  half  will  guide  adjustments  to  interest  rates.  These  will  be  timely  and 
ahead  of  a  build-up  of  imbalances  that  would  occur  if  interest  rates  were  kept  low  for  too 
long. 
These  frameworks  will,  in  other  words,  prompt  the  needed  adjustments.  It  was  the 
preparedness to make those adjustments in the past, guided by these very frameworks, that 
contained the build-up of imbalances in the upswing and which in turn earned us the scope 
to take bold measures to support demand when a recession loomed. A continuation of that 
approach into the future will serve us well. 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2009
