Glenn Stevens: Developments in financial regulations 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the  Annual 
Dinner of the Australian Business Economists, Sydney, 8 December 2009. 
 The financial crisis that engulfed global capital markets and brought a number of important 
international  banks  close  to  the  brink  last  year  has  been  followed  by  a  good  deal  of  soul 
searching  among  the  regulatory  community.  In  several  countries,  though  not  in  Australia, 
regulatory structures and/or practices have been seen as inadequate. Work is proceeding to 
try to establish better arrangements so as to prevent the next crisis, or, more realistically, at 
least make it less costly – all the while seeking to avoid doing things that make it harder to 
recover from this one.  
I propose to offer today some information and some observations about these developments 
and the associated issues. I won’t go into the causes of the crisis per se; these have been 
covered  at  length  before.  The  material  offered  is  set  in  a  global  context,  rather  than  an 
Australia-specific  one.  Just  to  be  clear,  if  in  the  following  paragraphs  I  am  saying 
something about Australia, I will make that explicit.  
Lessons from the crisis 
What  conclusions  have  governments  and  regulators  around  the  world  drawn  from  this 
episode?  
There are many. But the most important ones can be organised under five relevant headings.  
First, capital: there was not enough. In the case of global banks’ trading books, a lot of risk 
accumulated and was not well measured. Capital held against complex structured products 
in  particular  was  seriously  insufficient.  A  good  deal  of  risk  was  also  supposed  to  be  “off 
balance  sheet”,  but  returned  very  quickly  to  major  institutions  once  liquidity  dried  up. 
Moreover,  some  instruments  were  considered  to  be  “capital”  but  could  not  really  absorb 
losses, at least while a bank remained operating.  
Second, liquidity: not enough attention had been paid to the risk that, in the event of some 
market shock, funding liquidity could become much more difficult. Comfortable assumptions 
that markets for some instruments would remain liquid proved to be unfounded.  
Third,  the  so-called  “shadow  banking  system”:  there  were  systemically  important  activities 
going on outside the “regulatory perimeter”. This included the activities of investment banks, 
hedge funds, finance companies, money market mutual funds and institutions that often had 
close ties to banks, such as special purpose vehicles (SPVs), structured investment vehicles 
(SIVs) and conduits. These entities were typically less closely supervised or unregulated, but 
in  some  cases  their  risk-taking  behaviour  and  subsequent  travails  had  systemically 
significant impacts on the core financial system.  
Fourth,  cross-border  arrangements:  globally  active  banks  and  other  entities  operated 
apparently seamlessly across national borders and legal jurisdictions. But the structures to 
allow  that  were  actually  quite  complex,  and  legal,  supervisory  and  crisis-management 
arrangements remained nationally based. So when it came time to manage the process of 
deleveraging and winding up of some institutions, the degree of complexity was increased by 
the cross-border nature of the issues.  
Finally, pro-cyclicality: the episode demonstrated – again – that the financial system imparts 
its own dynamic that reinforces the natural cyclical tendency in an economy. In good times, 
lenders and investors tend to be confident and act with less caution. Standards decline and 
banks  come  under  pressure  either  to  use  “surplus”  capital  or  return  it  to  shareholders. 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 1
Backward-looking risk metrics present risk as low just when it is reaching dangerous levels 
and very high when everyone has already become much more risk averse. This all serves to 
fuel the boom and bust.  
Many  commentators  have  argued  that  accounting  standards  contributed  to  pro-cyclicality. 
Fair-value  accounting  and  buoyant  markets  make  for  strong  valuations  that  can  boost 
recorded profit, but problems emerge when banks have to mark-to-market securities whose 
markets have effectively ceased to function. The incurred-loss basis for provisions – where 
an  event  has  to  occur  before  a  provision  can  be  made  –  promotes  transparency  in  one 
sense.  But  it  arguably  inhibits  the build-up  of buffers  in  the  good  times  to  cushion  against 
future losses, and prompts more provisioning during the turmoil, further harming profitability 
and confidence.  
Other  incentives  have  also  been  seen  as  adding  to  cyclical  behaviour.  Remuneration 
packages  for  some  financial  institutions’  executives  and  employees  appear  to  have  been 
structured in a way that may have encouraged traders and managers to take excessive risks 
in activities that appeared profitable in the short term but led to large losses later on.  
People  have  also  pointed  to  the  role  of  earlier  regulatory  changes,  credit  ratings,  the 
complexity of instruments and weaknesses in market infrastructure, not to mention the long 
period of low global interest rates, the “global imbalances” and so on as all playing a role. I 
don’t want to underplay those factors, but the five above are the big themes on which I want 
to focus today.  
What is being done? 
Much  has  already  been  done,  or  is  underway,  to  respond  to  these  weaknesses  by  the 
various standard-setters, the Financial Stability Board and within the G20 process. Many of 
the responses can be organised under the same five headings.  
First among them is capital regulation. Now it is worth pointing out, before going on, that it is 
something of a stretch to suggest, as some commentators have, that the so-called Basel II 
framework was to blame for the crisis. In fact the build-up to the crisis occurred under the old 
Basel I capital rules: most global banks did not even implement Basel II until after the crisis 
had begun. US banks are still not using it. Basel II is not perfect but it addresses some of the 
shortcomings  of  Basel  I  that  were  identified  by  the  financial  crisis.  It  allows,  for  example, 
greater  differentiation  between  different  types  of  risk,  introduces  capital  charges  for  off-
balance sheet exposures to structured investment vehicles and conduits, and creates more 
neutral  incentives  between  holding  assets  on  balance  sheet  and  securitising  them.  Had 
Basel  II  been  in  place,  it  might  not  have  prevented  the  crisis  but  it  would  probably  have 
helped matters.  
Nonetheless, Basel II can be improved in the light of experience during the crisis. The Basel 
Committee on Bank Supervision is in the process of implementing numerous changes, which 
essentially require more capital and higher-quality capital. It has already finalised changes to 
risk  weights  on  certain  exposures  related  to  securitisation,  and  issued  new  supervisory 
guidance on compensation, governance, risk management and concentrations of risk.1 It has 
changed rules around disclosure and valuation practices, which will come into effect at the 
end  of  next  year.  The  Committee  is  currently  rethinking  the  amount  of  high-quality  capital 
banks  should  hold,  specifying  what  instruments  should  be  included  in  that  definition,  and 
developing a non-risk-weighted simple leverage ratio as a supplement to the risk-weighted 
capital adequacy measures. The Committee intends to finalise this latter set of new capital 
                                                 
1   Specifically  these  relate  to:  securitisation  exposures  in  the  trading  book;  sponsorship  of  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles;  re-securitisation  exposures;  and  pipeline  and  warehousing  risks  with  regard  to  securitisation 
exposures. 
2 
 163/2009
rules by the end of this year and calibrate them in 2010 with a detailed “quantitative impact 
assessment” to gauge their effects.  
Second,  efforts  to  bolster  liquidity  management  are  underway,  with  the  Basel  Committee 
planning to introduce a new global standard for funding liquidity soon. This is likely to require 
financial institutions to focus on adequate funding liquidity over longer time horizons, as well 
as  resilience  to  more  demanding  stress  scenarios.  In  line  with  this,  APRA  has  recently 
released  for  consultation  proposals  to  enhance  liquidity  risk  management  by  authorised 
deposit-taking institutions in Australia.  
Third,  the  regulatory  perimeter  is  being  extended.  Some  of  the  relatively  less  supervised 
institutions  that  were  problematic  prior  to  the  crisis  no  longer  exist  –  for  example,  US 
investment banks failed, or were converted into, or assumed by, regulated banks. But other 
institutions  whose  actions  could  on  occasion  be  of  systemic  importance,  such  as  hedge 
funds, are being subjected to more oversight.  
Fourth,  attempts  are  being  made  to  help  the  cross-border  issues  with  the  creation  of 
supervisory “colleges” for large institutions. These are designed to promote better sharing of 
information across countries. Agencies on the Financial Stability Board are also working on 
protocols for cross-border crisis management.  
Regarding  pro-cyclicality,  proposals  are  being  developed  for  the  use  of  capital  regulations 
that  would  require  banks  to  increase  capital  in  the  good  times  that  can  then  be  run  down 
during  a  crisis.  The  proposals  involve  introducing  target  counter-cyclical  capital  buffers, 
above the re-designed minimum capital requirements. The Basel Committee is also working 
to promote the use of more forward-looking provisioning policies based on expected losses, 
rather than current arrangements that base provisions on losses already incurred.  
Accounting  standard-setters  are  continuing  their  work  on  international  convergence  and 
clarity  in  regulation.  They  have  issued  guidance  emphasising  the  need  for  judgement  in 
valuing  mark-to-market  assets  when  markets  for  those  assets  are  inactive,  are  working  to 
simplify the valuation rules for financial instruments, and are seeking to close loopholes that 
generated incentives for off-balance sheet activities.  
Some observations 
All  of  this  is  worthwhile  work.  It  forms  part  of  a  comprehensive  set  of  responses  to  the 
conclusions drawn from the crisis. Implementing it presents a very demanding schedule for 
regulators. I want to offer a few observations about what we might realistically expect over 
time. These are not criticisms, but rather nuances that are, in my view, worth noting.  
The  first  is  that  the  right  balance  needs  to  be  struck  between  more  regulation  and  more 
effective  enforcement  of  existing  regulation.  There  is  no  doubt  that  regulation  can  be 
improved  after  an  event  like  this.  Yet  some  jurisdictions  ended  up  with  very  serious 
problems,  while  others  did  not,  even  though  they  were  all,  more  or  less,  operating  on  the 
same  internationally  agreed  framework  for  bank  supervision.  Why  that  was  so  remains  a 
question of interest.  
Secondly, on the assumption that most of these regulatory changes go ahead, one effect will 
presumably  be  to  make  the  process  of  financial  intermediation  more  costly.  The  intention, 
after all, is that lenders will operate with more capital against the risks they are taking. But 
capital is not free; shareholders have to be induced to supply it, and it will have to be paid for. 
High-quality  liquid  assets  typically  carry  lower  yields  too,  so  mandating  higher  liquidity  will 
have some (modest) cost as well. Admittedly it can be argued that shareholders of financial 
institutions  will  have  a  less  risky  investment  and  so  should  be  prepared  to  accept  lower 
returns. But customers of financial institutions – depositors and borrowers – will also pay via 
higher spreads between what lenders pay for funds and what they charge for loans. That is, 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 3
they will pay more ex ante to use a safer financial system, as opposed to taxpayers having to 
pay large costs ex post to re-capitalise a riskier system that runs into trouble.  
Now of course protecting the interests of taxpayers is very important, and there is no doubt 
that  certain  types  of  behaviour  need  to  be  backed  with  much  more  capital,  if  not  severely 
curtailed  or  even  stopped  altogether.  It  is  appropriate  that  pricing  play  a  role  in  achieving 
that.  
We  should  try  to  ensure,  however,  that  the  cost  is  no  more  than  necessary.  The  most 
egregious  behaviour  was  mainly  that  of  30  to  40  large,  globally  active  banks.  They  have 
imposed very large costs on their own banking systems, economies and taxpayers, and on 
the global economy. But there are thousands of other banks in the world whose risk appetite 
did  not  get  out  of  control,  that  have  remained  solvent,  and  that  have  not  needed  public 
capital  injections.  So  it  will  be  sensible  to  ensure,  as  far  as  we  can,  that  the  proposed 
measures act effectively to constrain the worst excesses of the former without unnecessarily 
shackling the latter.  
I am personally not persuaded of the intellectual basis of the simple overall leverage ratio. It 
goes against the whole thrust of the idea that capital should be allocated against economic 
risk – after all, the Basel risk weights are a sophisticated leverage ratio already. I have not 
seen persuasive evidence that the banks of countries that had a leverage ratio in place have 
systematically outperformed those that did not.  
Nonetheless,  it  had  already  been  agreed,  before  Australian  officials  joined  the  Basel 
Committee,  that  such  a  device  would  be  introduced  as  a  “back-stop”  to  prevent  extreme 
leverage in instances where the Basel rules, for some reason, may not. Provided that it is 
suitably calibrated, the leverage ratio will probably not do any great harm. That is, however, a 
very important provision. Were it to be calibrated in a way that unnecessarily constrains the 
common or garden variety commercial bank, it could be unduly costly. So the calibration is 
important and in this regard it is critical that adequate time be allowed for the completion of 
the technical work in assessing the quantitative impact of this measure. That will take at least 
another year.  
As far as the proposed counter-cyclical capital buffers are concerned, this is an appealing 
idea,  based  on  the  notion  that  it  is  precisely  at  the  moment  when  capital  appears  to  be 
abundant,  profits  high  and  the  economy  booming  that  true  risk  is  approaching  its  peak. 
Requiring more capital to be put aside at that time, which can then support balance sheets 
after the cycle turns, sounds very desirable.  
But we should not think it will be easy to achieve. The proposals appear to involve balancing 
a degree of mechanical linkage to particular variables – such as credit – with an appropriate 
degree  of  short-term  flexibility.  Those  familiar  with  the  old  debates  about  rules  versus 
discretion in monetary policy might notice an echo here. Based on experience in monetary 
policy, I am sceptical about the durability of hard rules, but all too familiar with how difficult it 
can be to deliver genuinely counter-cyclical policy. There is no reason to think it will really be 
easier when using prudential tools for “macro-prudential” purposes. That is not to say that we 
can’t  devise  a  framework  combining  certain  rule-like  behaviour  with  a  sensible  degree  of 
discretion,  but  it  might  take  a  while.  In  the  case  of  monetary  policy,  it  took  a  couple  of 
decades or more.2 
If one is inclined to place a good deal of importance on quality supervisory judgement – as I 
think we have to – as much may be achieved by adjustments to accounting arrangements for 
                                                 
2   We ended up with a form of constrained discretion: a reasonably clear medium-term objective combined with 
short-term operational flexibility, and independence of the decision maker from the day-to-day political process 
(with accountability to legislatures). The counterpart framework for counter-cyclical capital management will, if 
it is to be successful, require similar elements, including the independence of the relevant decision-maker – 
from both the political process and the markets and institutions affected by the decisions. 
4 
 163/2009
provisions as by a complex set of variable capital ratios. What is needed is to allow banks 
more  easily  to  make  more  forward-looking  provisions  when  either  they  or  the  supervisor 
thinks they should. This is an important area of work for regulators.  
One should also be realistic that while using balance sheet regulation as a macro-prudential 
tool  may  have  attractions,  it  is  no  panacea.  Of  course  there  may  be  occasions  when  the 
setting of monetary policy is about right for most of the economy but there is a desire to calm 
down some over-exuberant borrowing behaviour in a particular sector. In such cases, some 
kind of temporary regulatory measure may well be useful. But as those with any recollection 
of  Australian  experience  of  the  1960s  and  1970s  will  know,  if  the  fundamental  problem  is 
actually  that  financial  conditions  are  just  too  easy  –  that  is,  interest  rates  are  too  low  – 
balance sheet regulation won’t ultimately constrain credit growth. Over time, private markets 
will find a way of doing the business outside of the regulated sector. Then the authorities face 
the question of whether or not to expand the scope of regulation to more sectors – just as we 
did in the 1970s. A possible outcome is that, the harder we regulate a set of institutions as a 
result of the last crisis, the more likely it becomes that the next crisis occurs in the hitherto 
unregulated part, perhaps even among institutions that do not yet exist. If the conditions are 
such that people want to take risk and gear up, they will find a way.  
Of  course,  that  is  acceptable  provided  the  relevant  private  parties  can  be  allowed  to  fail 
without bringing down the core part of the system. Caveat emptor can apply outside of the 
regulated net if there are few spillovers. But if risk-taking activity goes on long enough, then 
sufficient  leverage  may  well  accumulate  somewhere  to  make  the  ensuing  deleveraging 
generally disruptive, placing policy-makers once again in a very awkward situation.  
the 
term  “big”  might  mean  a 
large  balance  sheet,  or  refer 
Too big to fail 
And  that  brings  us  to  the  most  difficult  of  all  the  issues,  namely  that  of  the  too-big-to-fail 
institution.  Here 
to 
interconnectedness or complexity. Or all three of the above. In some countries, the debate 
on this issue is now quite active. One potential response is a tax on size: much higher capital 
requirements for “systemic” institutions so as to lower greatly the probability of a failure of a 
really large firm, either by making large firms much less risky, or giving them an incentive to 
no longer be large. Another approach would simply be much more intensive – and intrusive – 
supervision  of  such  entities.  Either  of  these  measures  could  be  complemented  by  the 
requirement that a large firm compile a “living will”, in which it writes its own break-up/wind-
down plan ahead of time – in the process, hopefully, highlighting those bits of complexity that 
ought  to  be  removed  while  it  is  still  alive.  Before  regulators  even  got  to  any  of  those 
possibilities, they would have to grapple with the practical difficulties of setting the threshold 
as to what constitutes “systemic”. Expect furious lobbying by the finance sector on that.  
Nor  is  this  issue  just  domestic  in  nature.  It  goes  to  the  heart  of  what  it  means  to  have  a 
globalised financial system. In the absence of clearly articulated rules about burden sharing, 
a potential failure of one of these institutions is further complicated because the frameworks 
for global governance and crisis resolution have not kept up with the process of globalisation 
itself. It is very hard for them to do so. Even in a region such as Europe where there has 
been  six  decades  of  continuous  effort  in  building  collective  structures,  the  resolution  of 
problems at entities like Fortis has, by all accounts, been very difficult.  
One response to that would be to unwind the globalisation of the financial institutions and go 
back to having local banks just doing local business. That seems absurdly costly, though – in 
general, capital flows have been a tremendous force for higher living standards over the long 
run. It would surely be a retrograde step to shut them off. A less radical response would be 
subsidiarisation – where foreign banks have a presence in the form of locally capitalised and 
governed  structures,  in  which  local  authorities  could  intervene  in  the  event  of  a  shock  in 
another country affecting the viability of the parent. That still entails some costs in terms of 
efficiency, albeit ones that countries might now be prepared to tolerate. To succeed in this 
BIS Review 163/2009 
 5
approach, a country would need to have the capability and resources to ensure the viability 
of a local subsidiary of a failed major global institution, taking control of it if necessary. This 
would  be  at  a  time  of  tremendous  damage  to  the  relevant  global  brand.  For  many  small 
countries this might be a big ask.  
In the crisis itself, the too-big-to-fail issue presented simply as an imperative for a number of 
governments to prevent failures. But as the crisis recedes, and the global financial system is 
gradually  nursed  back to  health, it is  this  issue  that  is  going  to  leave  the  biggest  lingering 
challenge.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  will  be  directing  particular  attention  to  it  over  the 
coming year. It is not likely to be amenable to simple solutions, or easy ones. In the mean 
time, enormous moral hazard, perhaps greater than ever before, exists in the global financial 
system as a result of the actions – albeit essential ones in the circumstances – of 2008.  
Conclusion 
A  year  ago,  I  wished  this  audience  a  much  less  interesting  2009.  That  wish  was  partly 
fulfilled in that 2009 was less “interesting” than 2008, though still not quite boring enough in 
my view.  
As 2009 draws to a close, things in the global financial system look much less worrying than 
they did a year ago. With the sense of immediate crisis much reduced, regulators can devote 
more  focus  to  the  job  of  designing  and  implementing  changes  to  regulatory  frameworks  – 
work that is better done outside a period of crisis anyway.  
Realistically, the task is to reconfigure regulatory frameworks to lower the probability, and the 
cost, of future crises while assisting recovery from the recent one. That is every bit as difficult 
a challenge as getting through the immediate crisis itself. It will require very careful judgment 
to strike the right balance between costs and benefits of revised regulatory structures and 
practices, and due regard to the possibility of unintended consequences. It will also take a 
great deal of determination on the part of regulators to enforce arrangements adequately in 
future booms. And there is little doubt such booms will occur because, ultimately, the cycle of 
greed and fear itself cannot be regulated away. To assume that unrealistic optimism will not 
again,  at  some  point,  overwhelm 
instincts  of 
investors,  bankers, 
commentators and others would be a triumph of hope over experience.  
But it can’t be beyond us to achieve some worthwhile reforms in this area and 2010 is a year 
in which we can hope to make some progress.  
I wish all of you a Merry Christmas and a prosperous and stable new year.  
the  more  sober 
6 
 163/2009
