Bandid Nijathaworn: Addressing potential interactions and feedback 
loops within the financial system – lessons learned and what can 
regulators do  
Speech by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Financial 
Stability Institute and Monetary Authority of Singapore Policy Forum “Banking and Banking 
Regulation: A New Era”, Singapore, 12-13 October 2009. 
 First, let me thank the Financial Stability Institute and the Monetary Authority of Singapore for 
the invitation. All the issues we are discussing here today are both timely and important. 
My presentation this afternoon will focus exclusively on the interactions and the feedbacks 
within the financial system as a key aspect of macroprudential framework. But before I do 
that  let  me  say  at  the  outset  that  I  am  not  surprised  by  the  resurgence  of  interest  on 
macroprudential  surveillance,  which  is  now  seen  as  an  important  supervisory  tool.  We,  in 
Asia,  have  learned  this  well  during  the  Asian  financial  crisis  in  the  late  1990’s.  Then,  the 
crisis demonstrated clearly the importance of the feedbacks between the financial sector and 
the real economy, especially the impact that fragility in the banking sector can have on the 
real  economy.  And  in  the  context  of  macroprudential  analysis,  the  Asian  experience 
highlighted the importance of the time-dimension of systemic risk i.e, procyclicality linked to 
the credit and business cycles. 
The  current  global  crisis,  however,  exposes  another  important  dimension  of  systemic  risk 
where  interactions  within  the  financial  system,  as  opposed  to  interactions  between  the 
financial system and the macroeconomy, have played a critical role in amplifying the losses. 
As  we  know,  back  in  2007,  losses  associated  with  the  subprime  mortgage  market  were 
initially  estimated  to  be  in  the  order  of  US$  50  billion.  Thereafter,  the  dynamic  of  the 
interactions within the financial system, driven by risk management practices of banks, the 
response to the funding liquidity constraint by market participants, and heightened concern 
about counterparty risk, resulted in a protracted period of market distress, the drying up of 
liquidity,  and  set  the  stage  for  a  spiral  of  losses.  As  it  turns  out,  writedowns  and  losses 
worldwide have grown enormously. And to an appreciable extent, this amplification of losses 
is related partly to the interactions and the feedbacks within the financial system. 
Therefore,  compared  to  the  “time-dimension”  of  risk  associated  with  procyclicality  through 
which credit risk is a major propagation channel, the current crisis shows that the dynamic of 
the  interactions  within  the  financial  system  can  also  be  very  damaging,  particularly  in  the 
financial system that is large and complex. In the current crisis, the forces at work were the 
positive  feedback  loops  and  the  interactions  amongst  them.  The  interactions  operated 
through  the  propagation  channels  of  joint  exposures  to  common  risk  drivers  and  network 
linkages between the financial institutions. 
In  general,  the  feedbacks  within  the  financial  system  can  be  both  positive  (i.e.  self-
reinforcing) or negative (i.e. dampening). Typically, what we would like to have is a balance 
between the two so that the system will have its own stabilizing mechanism when the shocks 
hit. But in this crisis, apparently the positive feedbacks had been overwhelming. Let me cite a 
few examples of the positive feedback loops that were in play. 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 1
 The  first,  example  A,  is  the  originate-to-distribute  model,  which  was  prominent  at  the 
formative period of the crisis. Here, we see that with the housing sector booming, investment 
funds were eager to seek entries into the credit business, despite the fact that they had no 
expertise in evaluating credit risks of mortgage loans, or the complex risk exposures when 
mortgage  loans  were  packaged,  first  into  CDO,  then  into  commercial  papers  backed  by 
CDO, and so on. So, with a ready market for securitsation or structured products, banks, who 
were assured that credit risks would be transferred off their balance sheets, enlarged their 
lending  activities.  This  is  a  classic  moral  hazard  problem  that  helped  fuel  the  already 
booming housing market. 
Example  B  is  a  positive  feedback  loop  linked  to  the  stress  on  the  SIV.  Once  subprime 
mortgages  began  to  default,  investors  in  the  junior  tranches  of  cash  CDO  started  losing 
money.  What  happened  was  that  not  only  the  ex  post  rate  of  defaults  increased,  but  the 
senior tranches were also hit by a rise in ex ante default correlation, causing losses in the 
senior cash CDO tranches. As a result, the whole class of asset backed commercial papers 
(ABCP) suddenly appeared risky to investors. Next, as the special investment vehicles (SIV), 
which  essentially  were  virtual  bank  that  financed  mortgage/long-term  lending  by  issuing 
ABCP,  could  no  longer  fund  themselves  as  no  new  ABCP  could  be  sold,  the  banks,  who 
were the SIV sponsors, had to come to rescue for the fear that the reputation risk could harm 
their  access  to  the  interbank  market.  The  rescue,  as  we  know,  led  to  large  balance-sheet 
losses. 
Example C is the loss spiral linked to mark-to-market accounting and asset fire sales. In this 
feedback  loop,  we  describe  what  has  been  termed  a  loss  spiral,  whereby  some  financial 
institutions,  on  suffering  marked-to-market  losses  to  their  asset  portfolios,  were  forced  to 
conduct  “fire  sales”  of  assets.  Maybe  the  fire  sales  were  necessiated  by  an  increasingly 
difficult funding environment, or by the need to comply with internal risk management limits 
and/or  capital  ratios,  or  because  the  original  positions  were  so  highly  geared  that  a  small 
percentage of loss triggered large asset sales merely to keep the leverage ratio constant. 
 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2009
   Whatever the main reason, the fire sales affected everybody. Other financial institutions with 
the same or highly correlated assets suddenly found themselves facing heavy losses from 
wholesale declines in asset values. They, in turn, for the same reasons, had to conduct their 
own “fire sales”, further depressing asset prices. 
Lastly, example D is the case of a positive feedback loop linked to liquidity. In this loop, we 
describe  what  has  been  termed  a  liquidity  spiral,  where  an  initially  liquid  bank’s  concern 
about the solvency of its counterparty (or solvencies of its counterparty’s counterparties) or 
perhaps  concern  that  itself  may  run  into  funding  difficulty  in  the  future,  decided  to  forgo 
interbank interests and began to hoard liquidity. When enough institutions embarked on the 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 3
same  actions,  a  general  freeze  in  liquidity  ensued,  leading  to  “unnecessary”  defaults  that 
further exacerbated doubts in the system. 
 
 These examples of positive feedback loops were some of the interactions that took place in 
the amplification stage of the crisis, as market participants responded to specific problems 
and  general  distress.  But  while  the  feedbacks  were  important  in  themselves  in  setting  off 
deleveraging  and  losses,  it  was  also  the  interactions  between  these  feedbacks  that 
contributed hugely to intensifying the problem and multiplied the losses into a larger systemic 
problem.  What  we  saw  was  the  rapidly  worsening  crisis  that  spread  beyond  financial 
institutions into money and capital markets. On this aspect of loss intensification, a number of 
studies  have  pointed  to  joint  exposures  to  common  risk  drivers  and  network  linkages 
between  financial  institutions  to  be  the  two  key  propagation  channels.  Let  me  elaborate 
further on this point. 
First, propagation channel in the form of joint exposures to common risk drivers means that 
different financial institutions are becoming not so different. In other words, their investment 
strategies and methods for minimising regulatory capital were beginning to copy one another. 
So  it  is  no  surprise  that  a  risk  factor  which  adversely  affects  one  institution  would 
simultaneously hurt another. With fair value accounting, everyone has to mark their positions 
to  the  same  volatile  market.  A  number  of  institutional  investors  also abide  not  to hold  any 
assets  below  a  certain  credit  rating,  hence  a  hard  cut-off.  So  when  borderline  assets  get 
downgrade,  all  these  institutional  players  have  to  liquidate  their  positions,  all  at  the  same 
time. Meanwhile, as VaR methodologies and risk management tools employed by different 
banks become increasingly converge, the results of the analysis also tend to converge. The 
main  point  is  that  when  a  risk  factor  moves  adversely,  these  similarly  exposed  institutions 
incur  the  same  direction  of  losses,  whence  their  largely  identical  response  actions  further 
distress the market, thereby completing the feedback circuit. 
The  second  propagation  channel  in  the  form  of  network  linkages  between  institutions 
presupposes  that  there  exists  prior  bilateral  relationships  between  financial  institutions.  A 
good example is in the clearing, payment, and settlement activities where the bilateral link is 
simply the amount that must be cleared, paid, or settled. But with real-time gross settlement, 
4 
 BIS Review 130/2009
the  originate-to-distribute  model.  Second,  on  market 
the vulnerability in this area featured very little in this crisis. Instead, in this crisis, the direct 
interbank  liquidity/funding  lines  proved  to  be  the  most  critical  network  of  bilateral 
relationships. When one bank becomes illiquid, this triggers cascading illiquidity to all other 
banks that are direct counterparties, or counterparties to the counterparties. And also what 
new in this crisis is the implicit linkage through reputation risk as noted earlier, that is, banks 
became  obligated  to  rescue  failing  SIVs  even  when  there  were  no  explicit  contractual 
obligations to do so. 
Against  this  background,  what  then  can  regulators  do  to  address  the  interactions  and  the 
feedback  problems.  This  is  not  going  to  be  an  easy  task,  but  let  me  try  to  frame  the 
discussion into a context. 
First, it is clear that systemic risk is endogenous. Risk is first encouraged by procyclicality 
and once the tipping point is reached, the interactions within the system takes over, turning 
financial  fragility  into  systemic  risk.  From  the  current  crisis,  it  is  clear  that  the  scope  and 
intensity of systemic risk are related closely to three factors: (1) the collective behaviour of 
market  participants  that  contributes  to  the  positive  feedback  loops;  (2)  the  underlying 
structure  of  markets  and  market  practices  which  dictate  the  manner  through  which  the 
interactions  of  feedbacks  are  propagated  throughout  the  financial  system;  and  (3)  the 
authorities’ own responses. Therefore, to address the problem, we need to focus our efforts 
on all of the three areas. 
First, on the collective behaviour of market participants, the key objective must be to tame or 
dampen the positive feedbacks through right incentives and better regulation. For example, 
regulation to disallow capital reduction for credit risk transfer off-balance sheet could have 
discouraged 
infrastructure  and 
practices,  establishing  central  counterparty  especially  for  OTC  transactions  could  have 
helped improve market infrastructure and lessen the risk of liquidity hoarding. And third, pre-
approved  liquidity  facilities  by  central  bank,  subject  to  certain  prudential  arrangements,  for 
example,  a  satisfactory  stress-test  result,  could  also  have  helped  central  bank  to  inject 
liquidity  more  effectively  and  faster  without  creating  a  stigma  issue  to  the  requesting 
institution. 
And lastly, given all that has been said, how do we put all these together into a framework for 
policy.  My  tentative  view  is  that,  to  be  effective,  a  financial  stability  orientation  policy  has 
many crucial elements, with macroprudential being one of the components. To this end, an 
effective  framework  should  include  at  least  four  policy  pillars.  The  first  is  monetary  policy, 
with  a  willingness  for  monetary  policy  to  lean  against  the  wind  when  the  price  stability 
objective of monetary policy is not compromised but there is a concern on financial stability. 
Second is a strong supervisory framework with vigilant implementation. By “strong”, I mean 
adopting a strengthened risk-based framework for microprudential supervision with a vigilant 
implementation. This crisis, to me, is more a crisis of supervision than crisis of regulation. 
And  third  is  the  macroprudential  oversight  of  which  the  key  components  should  include  a 
good  process  of  macroprudential  surveillance,  an  effective  coordination  between  different 
supervisory  agencies  so  that  timely  actions  can  be  taken,  and  calibration  of  additional 
macroprudential  overlays  as  needed,  which  can  either  take  the  form  of  measures 
implemented  at  an  industry-wide  level  aimed  at  taming  the  credit  cycle,  or  specific  capital 
and liquidity buffers for selected systemically important institutions.  
And finally the fourth pillar is market development and central bank’s response to improve 
market  efficiency,  transparency,  as  well  as  the  ability  of  central  bank  to  response 
comprehensively to the emerging situations, especially liquidity provision and the supportive 
legal framework. These four pillars, in my view, are the key minimums for implementing an 
effective financial-stability orientation policy.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 130/2009 
 5
