Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Exit strategies – the international dimension  
Intervention  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Euro50  Group  Meeting  “Is  there  still  a  paradigm  for  monetary  policy 
today?”, Paris, 20 November 2009. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to  discuss  a  very  topical  issue  –  exit 
strategies. It is so topical, in fact, that nearly everything that needed to be said has been said 
over the last few weeks. Several of my colleagues have recently spoken publicly on both the 
strategic and technical aspects of this matter.1 I myself discussed the issue at a conference 
in Rome, on 11 September.2  
After  all  these  comments,  it’s  tempting  to  say  that  only  the  implementation  remains  to  be 
done – but that, in fact, may be a bit more difficult than the talk, as in most cases. To be 
precise  though,  the  tricky  part  is  perhaps  not  so  much  implementing  the  exit  itself  as 
managing the expectations about how the exit strategy will unfold. Given that the exit will be 
gradual  and  will  involve  two  dimensions,  i.e.  the  non-standard  measures  implemented  by 
central  banks  and  the  level  of  interest  rate,  there  is  a  risk  that  market  participants  might 
interpret a decision about one part of the exit as paving the way for the rest. Markets may 
then overreact to a specific decision, attributing to it an excessive signalling content. The fear 
of an overreaction may in turn prompt central banks to delay a specific decision which needs 
to  be  taken  at  a  specific  time.  Communication  is  thus  essential  to  prepare  markets  and 
explain the rationale for each decision.  
We are still facing a lot of uncertainty about the underlying conditions, both in the real and 
financial  sectors.  So,  we  cannot  lay  down  a  well-defined  exit  path  at  the  current  juncture, 
either  in  respect  of  contents  or  timing.  No  pre-commitment  can  be  made  to  any  particular 
sequence. But it is appropriate to spell out in public all the parameters that the policy-makers 
will be confronted with in making their choices. I guess that ECB watchers are quite used to 
this kind of communication, for it has served us well in other circumstances. 
Today, I’d like to examine one part of the debate about the exit strategy which has so far 
attracted less attention – the international dimension. In doing so, I’ll concentrate on the exit 
from  the  exceptional  degree  of  monetary  and  fiscal  accommodation,  rather  than  from  the 
non-standard measures implemented in particular by central banks. 
The  world’s  leading  economies  have  recently  been  called  upon  to  cooperate  in,  or  even 
coordinate, the design and implementation of their exit strategies. In particular, at the recent 
G20 meetings in St. Andrews, the IMF defined seven principles for the exit strategy, the last 
one  being  about  international  policy  spillovers  and  cross-border  collaboration.  It  reads  as 
follows: 
“Making exit policies credible and consistent, together with communication and consideration 
of spillovers, will improve outcomes for all countries. Coordination does not necessarily imply 
synchronization, but lack of policy coordination could create adverse spillovers.” 
And moreover: 
“spillovers from differences in monetary policy conditions could pose significant challenges. 
Interest  rate  differentials  are  already  generating  capital  flows  into  economies  with  higher 
                                                 
1   See, for instance, Jean-Claude Trichet, “The ECB’s exit strategy”, Frankfurt, 4 September 2009; José Manuel 
González-Páramo, “Non-standard monetary policy: five questions about the exit”, London, 6 November 2009; 
Jürgen Stark, “Monetary policy before, during and after the crisis”, Tübingen, 9 November 2009. 
2   “An  ocean  apart?  Comparing  transatlantic  responses  to  the  financial  crisis”,  Rome,  Banca  d’Italia,  10-11 
September 2009. 
BIS Review 150/2009 
 1
yields. Such inflows complicate monetary policy management, requiring difficult choices for 
authorities”. 
Indeed, not all countries are at the same stage of the cycle – some are already well on the 
way to recovery, while others are at a very early stage, experiencing more fragile growth. Let 
me  consider,  for  simplicity’s  sake,  three  main  areas  or  countries:  Emerging  Asia,  Latin 
America and the US respectively. You could include other countries and regions, such as the 
euro  area,  for  instance,  but  it  would  only  complicate  matters  and  not  add  much  to  the 
analysis. 
In  respect  of  returning  to  economic  growth,  Emerging  Asia  and  Latin  America  seem  to  be 
ahead of the US, whose growth is still fragile. So, logic would suggest that Emerging Asia 
exits first from the extraordinary post-crisis measures, then Latin America and finally the US. 
This “optimal” sequence would mean that Emerging Asia tightens its policies as the economy 
gets  back  on  track,  thus  avoiding  domestic  overheating  and  financial  instability.  The  exit 
would be accompanied by an appreciation of Asian currencies, and that in turn would favour 
a  rebalancing  of  growth  towards  domestic  demand,  thereby  avoiding  a  large  build-up  of 
foreign exchange reserves and excess domestic liquidity. It would also entail a progressive 
reduction of liquidity flows to the US, which were probably useful as the crisis escalated but 
are  becoming  less  so  as  financial  markets  stabilise  in  the  US.  Latin  American  countries 
would  be  the  next  to  exit,  as  their  economies  recover  gradually,  thanks  also  to  exports  to 
Emerging Asia and to stronger domestic demand. In Latin America too, some appreciation of 
the  exchange  rates  would  be  expected  to  accompany  the  recovery  and  stem  excessive 
capital inflows. The US and other advanced countries would exit last, as their economies are 
proving to be the slowest to recover. This would be the ideal sequence.  
Unfortunately, the reality appears to be quite different. Emerging Asian economies have not 
yet exited and do not seem to be in the mood to exit first, despite the stronger pace of their 
recovery,  at  least  compared  with  that  of  the  US.  They  continue  to  maintain  strongly 
accommodative monetary policies and steadily accumulate foreign exchange reserves. In all 
Emerging Asia, except Malaysia, foreign reserves are now higher than before the Lehman 
collapse (see attached table). As a result of these interventions, the strong domestic demand 
for credit is being met, fuelling potential financial market instability in these countries. Just to 
give an example, the year-on-year growth rate of domestic credit has reached 32% in China. 
The delayed exit in Emerging Asia is affecting other countries. In particular, the interventions 
in the foreign exchange markets to prevent Emerging Asian currencies from appreciating are 
shifting  capital  flows  towards  other  regions,  such  as  Latin  America,  and  pushing  up  the 
exchange  rates  of  currencies  there,  in  a  disproportionate  manner.  This  may  in  turn  cause 
Latin American countries to adopt measures to counter capital inflows and also to intervene 
in the foreign exchange markets and accumulate reserves, thereby further delaying the exit. 
Emerging Asia’s delayed exit – and possibly that of Latin America too – has also undesirable 
effects  in  the  US.  Preventing  the  Emerging  Asian  and  Latin  American  currencies  from 
appreciating,  in  parallel  with  the  recovery,  reduces  the  export  competitiveness  of  those 
countries which are recovering more slowly, like the US, and thus further delays their exit. 
Delaying  the  exit  with  an  undervalued  currency  results  in  a  beggar-thy-neighbour  policy, 
which  might  lead  to  trade  distortions.  Furthermore,  the  reinvestment  of  foreign  exchange 
reserves  accumulated  in  Emerging  Asia  contributes  to  flush  the  US  financial  markets  with 
liquidity, making the exit more complicated, once it gets under way. 
To sum up, an untimely exit by the countries that are ahead in the cyclical upturn creates 
distortions  and  encourages  other  countries  to  delay  their  exit,  thus  further  adding  to  the 
imbalances and making the exit more difficult for everybody.  
Why is this happening? There might be three reasons. 
The  first  reason  is  philosophical.  And  I  would  formulate  it  as  a  question:  why  should 
Emerging  Asian  countries  abide  by  principles  different  from  those  which  some  advanced 
economies and international institutions are advocating? I have in mind in particular the first 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2009
principle established by the IMF in the G20 exit strategy document I mentioned previously. I 
quote it: 
“The timing of exit from stimulus should depend on the state of the economy and the financial 
system, and should err on the side of further supporting demand and financial repair.” 
In other words, why should Emerging Asian countries exit in a timely way when international 
institutions,  and  some  advanced  economies,  are  generally  advising  to  “err  on  the  side  of 
being late”? 
In my view, the “err on the side of being late” paradigm is potentially as dangerous as the“ 
productivity growth” paradigm of the late 1990s and the “fear of deflation” paradigm of the 
early 2000s, which led some advanced economies to implement policy stimuli for too long, 
sowing the seeds of the subsequent crisis.  
Not enough effort has been put into assessing all the risks of the too-early and too-late errors 
that policy-makers can make in implementing the exit strategy. Analysts are often inclined to 
believe that the costs of exiting too early are pretty obvious, while those of exiting too late are 
unclear  and  can  be  attenuated  over  time.  As  a  result,  the  costs  of  a  premature  exit  are 
regarded  as  being  much  higher  than  those  of  a  tardy  exit.  This  leads  to  the  asymmetric 
recommendation of erring on the side of being late. 
The  historical  examples  chosen  to  illustrate  the  two  risks  tend  to  be  analysed  in  a  rather 
simplistic way, in particular concerning a premature exit, which is generally deemed to be the 
most  dramatic.  In  fact,  it  is  not  so  easy  to  find  cases  of  too  early  exits.  For  instance,  the 
monetary and fiscal policy tightening which took place in Japan in 1997 has been considered 
by some as a case of premature exit, responsible for the Japanese recession of 1998-99. 
However, careful analysis suggests that that recession was mainly due to the effects of the 
delayed  restructuring  of  the  banking  sector  and  to  the  collateral  effects  of  the  1997  Asian 
crisis.3  
The consequences of a late exit strategy have not been sufficiently examined. A delayed exit 
aims at increasing the incentives to lend at (low) fixed rates. But the more the exit is delayed, 
the  greater  the  adjustment  will  have  to  be  when  interest  rates  are  ultimately  increased,  in 
order to catch up. And the greater the interest rate adjustment, the larger the capital loss to 
fixed income asset holders. In other words, a delayed exit postpones the pain but in the end 
the  pain  is  greater.  Delaying  the  pain  may  be  sensible  if  the  economy  is  expected  to  get 
stronger  and  thus  become  more  resistant  to  it.  But  experience  shows  that  policy-makers 
have  an  incentive  to  delay  the  pain  to  such  an  extent  that  most  often  they  will  end  up 
inflicting it when the patient starts suffering again. Indeed, experience shows that most often 
interest  rates  increases  tend  to  be  delayed  and  thus  have  to  be  continued  even  after  the 
economy peaks.4 To put it in other words, late exits seem to be the rule, and possibly also 
the  cause  of  the  crises  that  follow.  This  is  how  Friedman  and  Schwartz  characterise  the 
monetary history of the United States, and I suspect that their theory applies well also to the 
most recent cycles. 
To bring this point to an end, if we want better timed monetary policies across the world, also 
in emerging markets, we might need to revisit some of the analytical principles and empirical 
evidence that are currently being proposed. 
The second reason why Emerging economies might tend to exit late is tactical.  
                                                 
3   D. Leigh, “Monetary Policy and the Lost Decade”, lessons from Japan, IMF Working Paper WP/09/232, 2009. 
4   See, for instance, M. Friedman and A.J. Schwartz, 1963, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960, 
Princeton University Press for the National  Bureau of Economic Research, Section  7.7, pp. 407-419 (“Why 
was monetary policy so inept?”); A. Levin and J. B. Taylor, “Falling Behind the Curve: A Positive Analysis of 
Stop-Start  Monetary  Policies  and  the  Great  Inflation,”  in  M.  D.  Bordo  and  A.  Orphanides  (eds.),  The  Great 
Inflation, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming. 
BIS Review 150/2009 
 3
If emerging  market economies, like the ones in Asia and Latin America, exited in  a timely 
way,  rather  than  err  on  the  side  of  being  late,  what  risks  would  they  incur  if  advanced 
economies  did  instead  err  on  the  side  of  being  late?  The  issue  is  relevant  for  emerging 
markets because over the last few months they have provided the financing needed to match 
the huge increase in debt issued by advanced economies, in particular by the public sector. 
In  the  short  term,  such  funding  has  provided  favourable  financing  conditions  in  advanced 
economies, particularly in the US, and thus facilitated the issuance of public debt. However, if 
the issuance of public debt continues over time, while the flow of financing by Emerging Asia 
and Latin America is progressively reduced (as part of the exit strategy), there will be a risk 
of  a  fall  in  the  relative  value  of  these  assets.  This  would  cause  a  reverse  beggar-thy-
neighbour  policy,  similar  to  the  one  which  has  in  the  past  enabled  the  reserve  currency 
country to finance its deficit by borrowing at a lower cost than the rest of the world. The risk 
of such a policy making a comeback is a source of concern for the other countries. Without a 
credible  commitment  to  a  timely  exit  from  the  expansionary  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  in 
advanced  economies,  in  particular  in  the  US,  aimed  at  reducing  the  net  supply  of 
government bonds, Emerging Asian and Latin American economies might be reluctant to exit 
in a timely way, as they would suffer a significant loss in the value of their stocks of foreign 
reserves.  
To sum up the argument, emerging economies may have an incentive to exit in a timely way 
from their expansionary policies if they can be certain that advanced economies, starting with 
the US, will do the same when their domestic conditions allow it.  
The  third  reason  why  Asian  economies  might  choose  to  exit  late,  rather  than  early,  is 
prudential.  
The measures that they adopted to counter the crisis, a crisis which originated – as they see 
it – in advanced economies, proved to be effective. Before exiting these measures, including 
ending the re-pegging of exchange rates and the big build-up of foreign exchange reserves, 
they  might  want  to  be  reassured  that  everything  is  being  done  in  advanced  economies  to 
ensure that the worst of the crisis is indeed over and that no further problems are likely to 
arise  once  they  have  exited.  A  relapse  in  advanced  economies’  financial  markets,  in 
particular, would make any exit premature, even by emerging economies. 
This  crisis  has  shown  how  contagious  the  failure  of  systemic  financial  institutions  can  be. 
Concrete  progress  in  reforming  the  financial  system  is  thus  key  to  reducing  the  risk  of 
returning  to  the  pre-crisis  problems.  The  question  to  ask  advanced  economies  is:  can  the 
measures taken in the last few months minimise the risk of a relapse?  
Substantive work has been done in recent months; it has been witnessed by the emerging 
markets  which  now  belong  to  fora  such  as  the  G20  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board. 
However, progress at high level is one thing. The hard work of implementation – the devil in 
the details – is another. Experience has shown that internationally agreed standards, such as 
Basel II, are not always uniformly implemented in all the signatory countries. Furthermore, 
pressure from the financial industry to minimise regulatory changes in advanced economies 
is  mounting  by  the  day.  That  pressure  is  fuelled  by  the  renewed  profitability  of  market 
participants,  who  are  benefiting  from  the  very  favourable  financing  conditions.  If  I  may 
develop  that  now  famous  music-and-dancing  metaphor  used  by  a  banker  just  before  the 
crisis,  financial  markets  are  now  giving  the  impression  that  the  music  is  back  on  and  that 
many  dancers  are  up  on  their  feet  again.  What’s  more,  regulators  and  supervisors  do  not 
seem to have found a way yet to slow the music down.  
Seen  from  a  distance  by  net  creditors  and  users  of  the  advanced  world’s  financial 
infrastructure,  a  lack  of  progress  in  implementing  the  agreed  agenda  is  an  incentive  to 
continue with a strategy of self-insurance, and thus to delay the exit.  
Let  me  conclude.  An  optimal  exit  strategy  from  the  extraordinary  monetary,  fiscal  and 
financial  policies  implemented  by  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies  has  several 
elements. It has to be timed properly, in all countries. This is difficult: not all countries are in 
the  same  cyclical  position,  so  some  should  exit  earlier  than  others.  However,  those  who 
4 
 BIS Review 150/2009
should exit earlier can do so if they are confident that those who are supposed to exit later 
will do so in the same timely fashion. Furthermore, they want to be sure that the worst of the 
crisis is over and that concrete actions are being taken to overhaul the financial system. To 
make  such  commitments  credible  and  to  build  up  that  confidence,  we  need  a  stronger 
system  of  international  cooperation  than  the  current  one,  with  the  major  countries 
undertaking  to  bear  in  mind  the  external  implications  of  their  actions.  Without  a  stronger 
multilateral system we might end up repeating the mistakes of the past, with one difference. 
The impact on each of us will be greater. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 BIS Review 150/2009 
 5
