Njuguna Ndung’u: Money transfer services 
Address  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  official 
launch of M-PESA International Money Transfer Service, Nairobi, 13 October 2009. 
 Members of the Board of Safaricom Limited, 
Chief Executive Officer of Safaricom Limited – Mr. Michael Joseph, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  indeed  my  pleasure  to  be  with  you  this  afternoon  on  this  auspicious  occasion  of  the 
launch of Safaricom’s mobile based international money transfer service. 
This service builds up on the very successful and world renowned domestic money transfer 
service – M-PESA – an extremely important tool for financial inclusion. This service has 
earned  our  nation  much  praise  and  continues  to  attract  the  attention  of  payments  system 
experts the world over. 
I  congratulate  the  Board,  Management  and  Staff  of  Safaricom  limited  for  the  evident 
commitment they have shown to the needs of the Kenyan market. M-PESA and other similar 
services offered by other service providers are a revolutionary concept not only in the market 
place  of  ideas,  but  also  in  the  practicalities  of  technological  platforms  provided  by 
advancement  of  technology.  It  started  four  years  ago,  at  a  time  when  the  market  was 
yearning for practical ideas to facilitate access to financial services to a large section of the 
un-banked population. Four years down the line, virtually everyone on the Safaricom platform 
has  an  M-PESA  Account.  The  service  is  used  to  transfer  Ksh  1.35  billion  per  day,  a 
tremendous success by any measure. The launch of the international leg of the M-PESA 
money transfer service is therefore a natural progression in the value chain. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, mobile phone based financial services offer a convenience that is 
not available in any other consumer channel. In developing countries like Kenya, the mobile 
handset provides the unbanked segment of the population the potential to access all types of 
financial  services;  transactional  and  informational.  In  addition,  it  is  the  preferred  channel 
because it has so far ensured security, convenience and is cost effective, while the business 
is  conducted  in  a  non  threatening  environment.  The  growing  number  of  the  un-banked 
population  needs  a  convenient,  safe  and  affordable  means  in  which  to  access  financial 
services.  At  the  same  time,  the  growth  of  micro  banking,  insurance  services,  and  mutual 
funds  require  low  cost  delivery  channels  to  effectively  serve  their  markets.  The  “mobile 
phone opportunity” is the answer. 
The  mobile  experience  also  offers  remarkable  opportunities  for  frontier  research  on  the 
interaction between society and technology, and how these interactions shape culture and 
the economy. Millions of people have been brought out of obscurity, because their cell phone 
gadgets have the ability to facilitate instant access not only to financial services, but also to 
the rest of the marketplace. It has also redefined space and time; information and funds can 
move from London to Lodwar in a fraction of time. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, regarding the service being launched today, I would like to report 
that  the  Central  Bank  has  been  evaluating  and  reviewing  this  service  since  2007  when 
Safaricom first requested to pilot an International mobile based money transfer service in 
partnership  with  its  U.K.  partners,  specifically  the  Western  Union,  Provident,  and  other 
partners. The Central Bank evaluated it against the backdrop of its payments systems and 
forex market oversight objectives. In particular, the Central Bank’s concerns lay in safety, 
soundness, and efficiency aspects of the pilot to ensure it met not only our own criteria but 
also  internationally  accepted  standards  for  international  remittances.  The  Central  Bank 
studied  the  system’s  reliability  and  governance,  system  audit  trail,  consumer  protection, 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 1
settlement risk, KYC requirements, service level agreements, dispute resolution procedures, 
remitting model, and business continuity plans among other evaluation criteria. 
I am glad to report that the above criteria, were fully met, and the Central Bank would like to 
assure the public that the product being launched today is not only technologically sound and 
secure, but has a legal framework under the Central Bank of Kenya Act. This being a cross 
border remittances  service  involving  the  movement  of  foreign  currency,  the  PERMIT  has 
been  issued  under  Section  33  A  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  Act  which  empowers  the 
Central  Bank  to  grant  specific  permission  to  any  person  to  transact  foreign  exchange 
business subject to conditions the Central Bank may impose. Under the permission, Forex 
remittance  inflows  will  be  sold  to  authorized  dealers  (banks),  while  the  domestic  currency 
equivalent will be passed on to the final beneficiaries. Once the remitted funds are reflected 
on the recipients’ local M-PESA accounts, they may utilize the funds in the normal manner. 
This  service  will  enable  inbound  international person  to  person  transfers  by  the  Kenyan 
Diaspora  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  regularly  remit  money  to  Kenya  faster,  reliably  and 
possibly cheaper in the long run. It is hoped that this service will encourage members of 
the Kenyan Diaspora who would normally prefer informal remittances channels to migrate 
to the use of this reliable, albeit convenient platform to send money home. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in view of the important role of the remittances in our economy, an 
overriding  policy  objective  for  the  Central  Bank  is  to  lower  costs  through  competition 
facilitated  by  the  entry  of  international  money  transfer  services  providers.  This  will 
enhance service delivery and enable users of such services obtain competitive remittances 
rates  at  substantially  reduced  unit  costs.  In  this  regard,  Central  Bank  has  issued  and 
continues  to  issue  PERMITS  to  all  applicants  seeking  to  enter  the  International  Money 
transfer services market under the legal framework spelt out in the CBK Act Section 33 A, 
subject  to  meeting  the  set  conditions.  The  Safaricom  Mobile  Based  International  Money 
Transfer service has been granted with a permit pursuant to this policy objective. 
At  this  juncture,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  while  the  Central  Bank  welcomes  innovative 
products,  it  evaluates  all  such  products  to  ensure  safety  and  efficiency  concerns  are 
adequately  addressed.  The  Central  Bank  has  the  necessary  capacity  to  properly  evaluate 
and  appraise  technology  driven  financial  services  to  ensure  they  meet  international 
standards. Services that involve partnerships with commercial banks have to adhere to the 
existing  prudential  and  statutory  banking  sector  requirements.  We  will  work  closely  with 
commercial  banks  and  other  service  providers  to  increase  awareness  and  enlarge  the 
frontier of services. 
The Central Bank is also cognizant of the fact that international remittances platforms could 
be used as money laundering channels. Part of our evaluation therefore involves subjecting 
applicants to a through scrutiny of their AML Compliances programmes not only in Kenya, 
but also in the sending jurisdictions. In this regard Record keeping and “KYC” requirements 
must be adhered to as part of the approval conditionality. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the subject of migrant worker remittances and their socio economic 
significance  both  for  the  sending  and  receiving  countries  has  become  a  popular  topic  for 
governments,  payment  systems  experts  and  other  public  policy  makers.  International 
remittances  bring  with  them  substantial  welfare  gains  to  the  receiving  countries  and  have 
huge developmental potential. The World Bank estimates that recorded remittances by some 
200  million  migrants  from  developing  countries  reached  US$  283  billion  in  2008,  up  from 
US$  265  billion  in  2007,  while  unrecorded  flows  through  informal  channels  could  even  be 
higher.  As  a  share  of  GDP,  remittances  constitute  about  2%  of  GDP.  These  numbers  are 
almost equivalent to the foreign direct investment (FDI) flows, and may in fact outstrip official 
development  aid  (ODA)  to  the  entire  developing  world.  For  Kenya,  Diaspora  remits  an 
average  of  US$  50  billion  each  month  through  the  formal  channels  such  us  commercial 
banks and authorized international money transfer entities. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2009
Against this backdrop, the Government has initiated a process to develop a policy framework 
for mainstreaming the Kenya Diaspora community in the development agenda. The role of 
the Central Bank of Kenya under this initiative is to: 
• 
• 
• 
Collect data on remittance flows through formal channels 
Analyze the cost of remitting funds 
Monitor  the  use  of  modern  technology  in  money  transfer  and  its  effects  in 
remittances and data collection 
Disseminate information on remittances to stakeholders for policy formulation 
• 
• 
Develop legal and regulatory frameworks for regulating money remittances services. 
In addition and together with stakeholders, Central Bank will continue to develop remittance 
platforms and recipient projects like Diaspora bonds. 
In  this  regard,  Central  Bank  continues  to  collect,  collate  and  publish  data  on  inward 
remittances on  the  CBK  website.  The  data  is  an  important source  of  information  for  users 
and  we  continue  to  engage  with  banks  and  other  remittance  service  providers  on ways  to 
improve our data capturing methodology. Regarding costs, our view is that the entry of many 
service providers will enhance efficiency for the benefit of the remitters. Informal remittances 
however remain a challenge and part of the reasons we support mobile based platforms is 
that  it  will  encourage  a  migration  to  formal  channels,  if  costs  and  safety  are  major 
considerations. 
Finally, the Central Bank will strive to provide an enabling legal and regulatory framework to 
encourage  innovations  by  all  payment  service  providers  to  enhance  access  to  payment 
services  and  to  modernize  the  national  payment  systems.  We  continue  to  work  with  other 
players  to  put  in  place  an  enabling  legal  and  regulatory  environment  to  catalyze  mobile 
banking. Specific initiatives in this regard include: 
• 
The National Payments System Bill that will strengthen the oversight mandate of the 
Central Bank over the payments, clearing and settlement system. We anticipate that 
this will be tabled and thereafter speedily enacted by Parliament. 
The Proceeds of Crime and Anti Money Laundering Bill, 2009 that will strengthen 
the  anti-money  laundering  legal  and  regulatory  framework.  The  bill  underwent  the 
first  and  second  reading  and  we  hope  that  when  parliament  resumes,  it  will  be 
passed and enacted. 
Amendment of the Banking Act to enable banks use non bank agents to extend their 
outreach.  Such  agents  could  leverage  on  mobile  technologies  to  cost  effectively 
provide services on behalf of the banks. 
  With these remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now my pleasant duty to officially launch the 
M-PESA  INTERNATIONAL  MONEY  TRANSFER  SERVICE,  one  more  product  that  will 
improve the landscape of money transfer and financial services beyond our borders. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 3
