Jean-Claude Trichet: Today’s financial institutions and tomorrow’s 
monetary order 
Keynote speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
19th  Frankfurt  European  Banking  Congress:  “After  the  Crisis”,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  20 
November 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is always a pleasure to join you at the annual Frankfurt European Banking Congress.  
I noted that the organisers have chosen as title: “After the crisis”. 
I understand that the mood in the financial system is one of relief. 
But as of today, it is too early to declare the crisis over. 
Recent  financial  developments  have  been  more  benign,  it  is  true.  However  a  significant 
volume  of  official  support  underlies  these  developments.  Nobody  knows  this  better  than 
financial institutions and markets themselves. 
The total amount of outstanding ECB refinancing is around 60% larger than it was before the 
financial market turmoil. This reflects also the need for the ECB to “intermediate” parts of the 
money market. 
Euro area governments for their part have committed 26% of GDP to supporting the financial 
sector.  This  assistance  has  come  in  the  form  of  guarantees,  capital  injections  and  asset 
support. 
The  magnitude  of  support  is  without  precedent,  and  all  participants  in  financial  markets 
should be conscious of that. It has been extended on behalf of the general public, and for the 
benefit of the overall economy. 
Banks are an important part of the economy. The support has been given for their role in the 
economy, not for the banks by themselves. 
We also have to understand the concern of our democracies as regards compensation and 
bonuses. Principles have been agreed upon at the level of the international community. They 
were  worked  out  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  approved  by  the  G20.  Let  us  apply 
rigorously  those  principles,  under  the  control  of  the  banking  supervisory  authorities.  The 
wrong incentives to embark in absurd risks and dangerous short-term ventures have to be 
eliminated. 
Challenges  to  guard  against  excesses  are  as  old  as  mankind.  I  quote  Frankfurt’s  most 
famous son: 
“Die Hauptsache ist, daß man lerne, sich selbst zu beherrschen. Wollte ich mich ungehindert 
gehen  lassen,  so  läge  es  wohl  in  mir,  mich  selbst  und  meine  Umgebung  zugrunde  zu 
richten.” 
One could translate this as follows. “The most important issue is to learn self-restraint. If I 
wanted to lavishly let myself go, I could well destroy myself and my environment.”  
Goethe made this remark in 1830. I am sure he would have repeated it today.  
Three points appear essential regarding the banking sector. 
First, banks need to strengthen their balance sheets. They need to become self-reliant and 
be able to stand on their own two feet. 
 The authorities can – and have – provided considerable temporary support, but in a market 
economy we cannot manage the financial sector or provide exceptional support indefinitely. 
Banks must rebuild their capital base. There are many ways to do so. The improved capital 
markets offer opportunities to raise funds including equity. Profits earned should be used – 
as priority – to build capital and reserves, rather than to be paid out as dividends or undue 
compensation. 
Second, banks should lend, because the magnitude of public support has been provided for 
this  purpose,  and  the  strengthened  balance  sheets  will  allow  them  to  lend.  Banks  should 
strive  to  maintain  their  supply  of  loans.  Most  recently,  in  the  third  quarter  of  this  year,  the 
annual growth of loans to non-financial corporations continued to decline, while the annual 
growth of loans to households remained broadly unchanged. 
This pattern of loan dynamics is broadly in line with past regularities around business cycle 
turning points. But the latest ECB bank lending survey suggests that, while the peak in the 
tightening  of  banks'  credit  standards  is  behind  us,  credit  standards  remain  considerably 
tighter than prior to the turmoil. It will be particularly important that banks intensify their efforts 
to expand their supply of loans once loan demand picks up in the recovery. 
Third,  compensation  and  bonuses must  remain  contained.  Otherwise,  we  would  take  risks 
that Goethe already described. 
When  necessary,  banks  should  take  advantage  of  the  available  government  support  to 
achieve these goals. 
From this perspective, I will interpret the conference theme – “After the crisis” – as an appeal 
to look forward and draw lessons for the future from our experience of the past two years. 
 I  would  like  to  outline  now  what  measures  we,  as  the  central  bank  of  the  world’s  second-
largest  economy,  have  taken  in  the  crisis,  and  how  and  why  we  have  designed  these 
measures.  
To illustrate, I would like to draw on a medical analogy, identifying three lessons for how we 
should collectively care for the health of the financial system going forward. 
First, once a patient falls seriously ill, emergency medication is required. Strong and invasive 
painkillers may have to be administered. Contagion must be avoided. 
Similarly,  a  global  financial  crisis  of  first  magnitude  requires  prompt  and  decisive  policy 
action, possibly of an unprecedented nature. 
When  this  crisis  began,  the  European  Central  Bank  was  in  the  vanguard  of  the  policy 
response,  taking  early  and  bold  action  to  address  financial  turmoil.  During  the  crisis,  our 
exceptional measures – the ECB’s “enhanced credit support” – served to prevent a systemic 
liquidity crisis, enabled banks to continue functioning and helped to restore confidence. 
Second, medical experience tells us that, over time, the continued administration of strong 
painkillers  can  be  harmful.  They  can  create  dependence  –  r  even  addiction  –  or  the 
recipients. Such medicine cannot be a permanent solution. It would eventually create new 
problems. 
By analogy, the exceptional support provided by central banks to the private sector must not 
degenerate  into  long-term  dependence  of  the  private  sector  on  such  support.  For  that 
reason,  the  current  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  will  have  to  be  progressively 
phased out. Enhanced credit support is not for eternity. Financial institutions must prepare 
themselves  for  an  eventual  withdrawal,  which,  as  I  have  said  on  behalf  of  the  Governing 
Council, will be timely and gradual. 
Third, looking forward, we know that “prevention is better than cure”. “Preventive medicine” 
reduces the risk of future recurrence of the illness. 
Recent  experience  has  offered  important  insights  into  how  public  policies  and  private 
incentives can be improved so as to reduce the chances of recurrence. Through preventive 
medicine, we must develop a fitter and healthier financial system. 
So let me describe in more detail: how we have administered the “central bank medicine” to 
the  financial  system;  how  we  envisage  continuing  the  treatment  going  forward;  and  what 
lessons we are drawing for the future design of a preventive framework. 
Emergency medicine: crisis management and “enhanced credit support” 
It  is  natural  to  start  with  the  “emergency  treatment”  that  we  have  provided  to  the  financial 
system throughout the financial crisis. 
The  alertness  of  the  ECB  was  reflected  in  its  actions  from  the  very  moment  that  financial 
tension first emerged. In August 2007 the ECB was the first central bank to respond, acting 
within  hours.  In  the  ensuing  months,  we  changed  the  timing  and  maturity  of  our  liquidity 
provision,  so  as  to  support  the  functioning  of  the  money  market.  In  addition,  we  offered 
foreign currency liquidity to our counterparties. 
The  intensification  of  the  crisis  in  mid-September  2008  brought  soaring  credit  spreads, 
dramatic  declines  in  trading  and  a  spike  in  volatility.  In  short,  the  global  financial  system 
came close to seizing up. 
Central  banks  stepped into  the  breach,  addressing  this  unprecedented  market  failure.  The 
ECB was in the vanguard, acting to contain these tensions through both standard and non-
standard policy measures 
In  full  consistency  with  our  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability,  the  Governing  Council 
reduced the ECB’s key interest rates rapidly. The current very low level of interest rates is 
unprecedented  throughout  the  euro  area.  Together  with  our  credible  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations, these policy actions have resulted in a considerable easing of nominal and real 
monetary conditions in the euro area. 
Moreover,  we  have  gone  beyond  standard  interest  rate  cuts  by  adopting  several  “non-
standard” monetary policy measures. 
As I have described in the past, collectively these measures embody our policy of “enhanced 
credit  support”:  fixed-rate  full  allotment;  expansion  of  collateral;  lengthening  maturities  of 
operations; liquidity  provision  in  foreign  currencies;  and  financial  market  support through  a 
measured but significant covered bonds purchase programme.  
This policy has been designed to support the flow of credit over and above what could be 
achieved through interest rate cuts alone.  
Avoiding dependence and addiction: exit strategies 
Emergency  treatment  and  strong  medicines  are  sometimes  necessary.  But,  if  their  use  is 
prolonged, they can lead to dependence and even addiction. Eventually, the administration 
of painkillers must be stopped if patients are to get back on their own two feet. 
This brings me to the exit from our non-standard monetary policy measures. The rationale for 
exit from these measures is the inverse of the rationale for their implementation. We have 
introduced  exceptional  measures  under  exceptional  circumstances.  These  measures  will 
have to be unwound when the situation normalises and the rationale for the measures fades 
away. 
The cornerstone of our exit strategy is its link to our primary objective of price stability. Our 
actions throughout the crisis have been taken resolutely with this primary objective in mind. 
Thus,  any  non-standard  measure  whose  continuation  would  pose  a  threat  to  the 
achievement of price stability must be undone promptly and unequivocally. 
As I said on behalf of the Governing Council, looking ahead, not all our liquidity measures will 
be  needed  to  the  same  extent  as  in  the  past.  Accordingly,  we  will  make  sure  that  the 
extraordinary liquidity measures taken are phased out in a timely and gradual fashion and 
that  the  liquidity  provided  is  absorbed  in  order  to  counter  effectively  any  threat  to  price 
stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  By  so  doing,  we  will  continue  to  ensure  a  firm 
anchoring  of  medium-term  inflation  expectations.  Such  anchoring  is  indispensable  to 
supporting sustainable growth and employment and contributing to financial stability. 
The financial system and individual institutions within it must act now to ensure that a future 
removal of central bank support can be managed without painful “withdrawal symptoms”.  
Preventive care: lessons from the crisis 
The  overriding  objective  of  someone  recovering  from  a  severe  illness  is  not  to  suffer  a 
relapse.  Unfortunately,  there  is  no  way  of  guaranteeing  the  avoidance  of  illness.  But 
“preventive medicine” is crucial in reducing the risk of recurrence. 
We  have  to  develop  a  new  preventive  framework  to  minimise  the  risk  of  recurrence.  This 
framework will have both monetary policy and regulatory dimensions. 
“Leaning against the wind” in monetary policy 
Recent  experience  has  reopened  the  debate  about  whether  central  banks  should  use 
interest rates to “lean against the wind” of asset price surges. 
Prior to the crisis, conventional wisdom was sceptical about such an approach for three main 
reasons: asset price misalignments or “bubbles” were seen as difficult to identify in real time; 
it  was  doubted  that  interest  rate  increases  of  a  plausible  magnitude  could  contain  surging 
asset  prices  once  these  have  achieved  a  momentum  of  their  own;  and  third,  it  has  been 
argued  that  any  damage  to  the  economy  stemming  from  an  asset  price  correction  can  be 
contained by prompt and aggressive monetary policy easing. 
With these considerations in mind, a “wait-and-see” approach was seen as preferable when 
addressing asset price surges. 
Having spoken on these issues in the past, I do not wish to enter into a detailed discussion of 
these arguments today. I only want to emphasise that recent experience has demonstrated 
the limitations of a wait-and-see approach. Unprecedented policy action in response to the 
financial crisis could not prevent a sharp fall in economic activity, with all the consequences 
for the labour market, public finances and the society as a whole. 
Moreover, a wait-and-see approach risks creating moral hazard. What is required is a more 
symmetric approach: one that leans against the emergence of asset price booms as well as 
dealing  with  the  consequences  of  asset  price  busts.  By  encouraging  more  responsible 
behaviour on the part of investors, such an approach should make such cycles of boom-bust 
less likely. 
But substantial practical questions remain. Clearly, central banks should not target, nor react 
mechanically to, asset prices. Judgement is necessary in addressing asset price dynamics 
within an overall framework geared to price stability. 
At  the  ECB,  our  monetary  policy  strategy  –  with  its  medium-term  orientation  and focus  on 
monetary and credit developments – offers such a framework. It ensures that we consider 
the implications for price developments at longer horizons of financial imbalances and asset 
price misalignments, which may cumulate slowly.  
Therefore, while vindication is a strong word, we feel encouraged as regards our monetary 
policy strategy, whose underlying analysis we continuously deepen.  
to  provide  early  warnings  and 
Concluding remarks 
Let me mention that a number of institutional reforms to the supervisory framework within the 
European  Union  are  currently  being  finalised.  We  welcome  the  new  macro-prudential 
aspects  of  this  framework.  They  will  take  concrete  form  in  the  creation  of  the  European 
Systemic Risk Board. The ECB and the EU national central banks stand ready to provide the 
risk board with their full support. 
The  Systemic  Risk  Board  will  endeavour 
issue 
recommendations  that  will  help  to  prevent  a  renewed  build-up  of  excessive  risk  in  the 
financial  system  as  a  whole.  Such  warnings  would  have  been  useful  in  the  past:  they 
represent a crucial part of the preventive framework for the future. 
While financial liberalisation, deregulation and innovation all have the potential to make our 
economies more productive and more resilient, the financial sector must not forget that it is to 
serve the real economy, not the other way around.  
This, above all, requires a change in mentality within the financial industry itself. 
Specifically, the financial industry has to increase transparency, strengthen its management 
of  liquidity  and  risk,  and  make  its  business  models  more  robust.  As  I  mentioned,  while 
maintaining  the  flow  of  finance  to  the  real  economy,  financial  institutions  must  continue  to 
strengthen their balance sheets, by improving their capital and funding positions. 
The  future  will  no  doubt  bring  further  challenges.  As  concerns  the  authorities,  we  will 
continue to be alert and vigilant, as in the past. And our 330 million fellow citizens in the euro 
area will surely not tolerate a relapse into excessive risk-taking at the taxpayer’s expense. 
Therefore, the financial sector has to secure its future in a responsible and sustainable way.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
