Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Ensuring efficient & eco-friendly ASEAN mints  
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the 14th Technical Meeting of Mints in ASEAN (TEMAN), 
Manila, 23 November 2009. 
 Distinguished  members  and  participants  to  the  14th  Technical  Meeting  of  Mints  in  the 
ASEAN, special guests, good morning!  
On  behalf  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  and  our  Security  Plant  Complex,  it  is  with 
pleasure that I welcome all of you to the Philippines for the 14 TEMAN Conference. As you 
may have noticed, the conference theme we adopted is SPCwhich stands for “Strengthening 
Partnership and Cooperation.”  
I understand that in Indonesia, the abbreviated word TEMAN means friends. What better way 
to move forward with friends therefore than to strengthen partnership and cooperation.  
The Organizing Committee envisions the conference to be a catalyst for new and dynamic 
ideas, for critical thinking, and for open discussions on issues affecting the minting industry. 
Among others, we want to create more value for our products, to facilitate advancements and 
enhancements in our systems, and to contribute ultimately in the broader and lofty task of 
building up our respective nations. 
Indeed, TEMAN plays a vital role in empowering its member Mints to provide quality products 
and services to their people.  
Given  the  global  financial  crisis  that  had  triggered  a  global  economic  slowdown,  TEMAN 
must  take  appropriate  steps  to  work  out  a  common  agenda  that  will  promote  process  and 
cost  efficiencies,  while  addressing  urgent  issues  such  as  the  need  to  adopt  more 
environment-friendly processes. 
Ladies and gentlemen. The world has realized that there is no progress to speak of if this is 
made  at  the  expense  of  the  environment;  because  in  the  end,  it  is  a  step  backward  not 
forward if the environment suffers as a result of our operations.  
We  have  seen  how  industrialization  made  for  the  benefit  of  human  beings  has  been 
generating toxins and pollutants which now threaten the very same human beings. 
The  challenge  for  TEMAN  therefore  is  to  align  itself  with  the  goals  of  the  Association  of 
Southeast  Asian  Nations  which  is  committed  to  continue  sustainable  development  or  the 
pursuit of a green and eco-friendly economy.  
Afterall, the 10 TEMAN members have one thing in common: we are all members of ASEAN. 
That  goes  for  Brunei  Darussalam,  Cambodia,  Indonesia,  Lao  PDR,  Malaysia,  Union  of 
Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand, Socialist Republic of Vietnam, and the Philippines.  
I hope therefore that clean and green topics will be very much a part of your discussions. In 
words and in deeds, let us help take on the case for a cleaner and better environment in our 
respective mints, in our homes, and in our communities.  
Our own Security Plant Complex has already taken meaningful steps in this direction. I hope 
that this TEMAN conference will give it more new ideas to implement as an eco-friendly mint. 
I am counting on it.  
Finally, I wish to congratulate the members of the 14th TEMAN Organizing Committee – my 
colleagues at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas – for all their efforts in ensuring the success of 
this conference. Please stand up so we can acknowledge you with a round of applause!  
BIS Review 150/2009 
 1
To our foreign guests, I advise you to find time to explore and know more about our country, 
our culture, and our people. You will find that this is a great place which is worth coming back 
for.  
Once again, I wish you all a successful and fruitful conference! 
Thank you all and Mabuhay! 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2009
