Marion Williams: Governance and regulation of the financial sector – 
post meltdown: what has changed?  
Remarks  by  Dr  Marion  Williams  Governor  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  at  the  Seminar  on 
“Governance and Regulation of the Financial Sector – Post Meltdown: What Has Changed?”, 
Bridgetown, 14 October 2009. 
 Senator  The  Hon.  Darcy  Boyce,  Distinguished  speakers,  Members  of  the  Board  of  The 
Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  Deputy  Governors,  Members  of  Management  and  Staff  of  the 
Bank, Managers of Financial Institutions, Specially Invited Guests, Distinguished Ladies and 
Gentlemen: 
Welcome  to  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados  and  to  today’s  Seminar  on  Governance  and 
Regulation of the Financial Sector – Post Meltdown: What has changed? I extend a special 
welcome  to  our  overseas  speakers  Mr.  Geoffrey  Bell,  Ms.  Jane  Darista,  Mr.  Amar 
Battacharya and Mr. Osbourne Nurse. We thank you most sincerely for taking time out from 
your busy schedule to be here. The high level of attendance this morning suggests a keen 
interest in international and regional developments and their impact on the financial sector. 
Our  distinguished  speakers  will  be  discussing  several  critical  issues  as  the  world  tries  to 
chart a way forward for the financial sector. I will offer some preliminary remarks about the 
areas which I expect that we will cover. 
Attitudes and perspectives 
The global financial crisis and its bank failures, collapses, scandals etc. cannot be undone. 
Whatever  its  genesis  –  developed  and  developing  countries,  offshore  or  onshore  financial 
centres, we all need to change attitudes, perspectives and strategies in order to ensure that 
institutions all across the globe are strengthened and that we restore consumer confidence 
and trust, globally, in financial systems.  
The  interconnectedness  of  financial  systems  is  such  that  the  failure  of  an  individual 
systemically important financial institution can reverberate globally. The dramatic changes in 
the global financial landscape over the past year have been historical in their proportions. In 
a period of such tremendous changes it will be necessary to take stock of where we are and 
to  question  how  the  financial  sector  is  being  governed,  regulated  and  supervised.  Without 
doubt there will be changes in global rules as we have already seen and in global cross–
border movement of funds, ownership structures and similar types of arrangements. 
Research and discussion is needed on important subject areas that will be discussed today.  
Basic questions 
Even basic  questions about who should have  responsibility for regulation and whether the 
lender  of  last  resort  function  should  be  separated  from  the  regulatory  function  are  now 
becoming  important  issues  on  the  table.  In  the  UK  it  now  has  political  dimensions.  The 
breath  of  responsibilities  of  the  regulator  are  now  also  being  revamped,  particularly  in  the 
US, as is the question of how much should be left to the market and how much should be 
directly regulated. The age of deregulation may well be about to witness some fundamental 
changes and reversals. 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 1
Governance 
Good governance aids regulation. Regulators are therefore calling on institutions to institute 
voluntary governance practices to deal, for example, with excessive risk taking, rather than 
opt for a system of imposed over-regulation. Adequate oversight by Boards is important, as 
is adherence to codes of ethics.  
Importance of collaboration 
What has become very clear, and we have seen it even in the Caribbean, is that there is now 
significantly  more  emphasis  being  placed  on  collaboration  among  regulators,  and  on 
reducing  regulatory  arbitrage  –  that  is,  the  ability  of  entities  to  cherry  pick  where  they  do 
business,  so  avoiding  the  stricter  type  regulatory  domiciles,  because  of  differences  in 
regulation. This is particularly important in single economic zones like the Caribbean, and on 
a larger scale, the EU. 
Derivative trading 
While the Caribbean has not been too heavily involved in derivative trading, the regulation of 
derivatives has attracted a lot of attention, since many of the problems in the credit markets 
were attributable to the ability of financial firms to originate poor credits and redistribute them 
to others, thus leaving the burden of poor credits which they had originated on the books of 
others. It is important that solutions are found to this issue.  
Branch/subsidiary operations 
The branch subsidiary responsibility and where it lies has also surfaced in many jurisdictions. 
Because  an  entity  is  setup  by  way  of  subsidiary  rather  than  a  branch  does  that  give  the 
parent  an  escape  route?  Or  should  the  parent  shoulder  its  responsibility  even  though  the 
entity is set up as a subsidiary? 
Adequacy of capital 
Another issue of importance is the question of the adequacy of capital. This has become an 
important  matter  in  the  post  meltdown  period.  Many  jurisdictions  have  taken  steps  to 
increase  capital  adequacy.  Even  before  the  global  crisis  Barbados  had  taken  such  steps. 
However, the adequacy of capital is being increasingly critical. Will capital ever be a fail-safe 
requirement? If it were, capital levels would have to be so high as to stymie the development 
of financial institutions. What therefore is the balance which has to be struck? And what are 
the  accompanying  requirements  which  must  support  capital  requirements?  These  are 
important areas to be considered. 
Too big to fail 
We have seen, even here in the Caribbean that there is such a thing as “too big to fail”, or 
rather, “too big to be allowed to fail”. There is currently a debate as to whether large financial 
entities should have a progressive scale of capital requirements, which require bigger entities 
to hold more capital pro-rata. The other concern being debated is whether financial entities 
should be allowed to become too large.  
2 
 BIS Review 134/2009
Transparency, accountability and trust 
Another  important  factor  observed  during  the  meltdown  was  that  the  more  sophisticated 
securitization became, the more opaque the instrument, so that is was often not possible to 
tell what the risks of the instruments were and who was bearing that risk. So much so that 
entities then bought back some part of the securities they had distributed without realizing it. 
A way needs to be found to track the risks in these securitized instruments. 
Processes and practices 
The  micro  prudential  approach  to  supervision  has  emphasized  protection  of  the  small 
depositor  and  reducing  the  likelihood  of  failure  of  an  individual  institution.  In  the  past,  this 
might have been sufficient to bring comfort to many consumers. However, by re-focusing on 
the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  we  reduce  the  risk  of  concurrent  failures  of  systemically 
important institutions. Such a change is necessary to enable us to withstand and rally against 
future  shocks  and  developing  a  framework  for  macro-prudential  regulation  will  be  an 
important step. This is another important area of focus on the post meltdown period to which 
attention must be paid.  
Emphasis  on  the  risk  behavior  of  both  bank  and  non-bank  financial  institutions,  and  the 
counter-cyclical  approach  of  building  buffers  in  good  times  is  another  needed  change. 
Indeed, the pro-cyclicality of the system has been frequently criticized.  
Another area of interest is the scope of regulation. Given the propensity of risk to migrate 
from  regulated  to  less  regulated  sectors,  requires  that  corrective  approaches  be  equally 
considered in both the bank and non-bank sectors. This wider regulatory coverage already 
exists in Barbados in respect of non-banks but steps are in train to strengthen oversight of 
other  entities  which  will  fall  under  the  New  Financial  Services  Commission.  On  a  global 
scale, the form which increased regulation will take is still being developed. I am sure that we 
will get some early indications from our speakers on how this is likely to develop. 
What the global crisis has taught us is that there is need to take the time out from managing 
complex  technical  issues  to  ensure  that  there  are  crisis  management  plans  that  can  be 
activated when financial stability is under threat. I am pleased to say that, in the Caribbean 
case, this project is well underway and is being piloted by the Caribbean Group of Banking 
Supervisors.  
Additionally,  communication  can 
fostering  a  better 
understanding  of  the  financial  markets  and  thus  engender  increased  participation.  On  this 
point, I am pleased to say that the Central Bank of Barbados recently launched a National 
Financial Education Programme in August 2009, which will enhance the financial capability 
of  Barbadians  and  so  lend  to  renewed  participation  in  financial  markets.  We  would  like  to 
believe that if consumers in the US were more savvy the sub-prime crisis might have been 
avoided.  The  important  question  is,  to  what  extent  can  financial  literacy  prevent  these 
problems for the consumer? 
instill  confidence  and 
trust  by 
Infrastructure 
Efforts  to  find  the  optimum  regulatory  architecture  are  varied  in  form  and  pace.  As  we 
rebound  from  the  crisis  and  crystallize  the  lessons  arising,  it  is  important  to  proceed  at  a 
pace that is steady and appropriate to the environment. Reform of the supervisory framework 
is being paced addressed by several global and sub-regional groups. I am sure that we will 
learn about the new European Risk Council and European System of Financial Supervision, 
as well as the debate on whether to expand the powers of the Federal Reserve. Barbados 
has  accepted  that  change  is  needed  in  the  regulatory  architecture  and  the  new  Financial 
Services Commission is targeted for establishment in mid 2010. 
BIS Review 134/2009 
 3
As we move to effect change, care must be taken to take stock of the status of the economic 
crisis.  We  must  be  mindful  that  the  combined  impact  of  new  requirements,  such  as  the 
introduction of anti-cyclical regulation (e.g. capital and liquidity buffers), should be timed such 
that  the  core  business  of  financial  institutions  (for  example  lending)  can  continue. 
Fortunately, in the Barbados case there were significant liquidity buffers, but generally, policy 
makers  in  instituting  new  requirements  may  need  to  set  longer-term  strategies  rather  than 
attempt overnight correction.  
The pre-lunch sessions speak to a range of interesting subjects. These include perspectives 
on the economic activity in industrial countries, interest rates, prices, commodity prices and 
exchange  rates;  changes  in  the  global  economic  architecture;  the  approach  of  industrial 
countries  and  organizations  to  international  business  and  offshore  financial  centers;  and 
multilateral  surveillance.  We  will  also  hear  of  issues  surrounding  rebuilding  transparency, 
accountability and trust; the ongoing refashioning of the regulatory landscape; and regulation 
outside the box will surely stimulate further discussion. Lastly, what needs to be done with 
respect, inter alia, to Basel Il; macro prudential regulation; International Financial Reporting 
Standards;  mechanisms 
to  address  global  market  stability;  and  governance  of 
remuneration/compensation  schemes,  securitization,  and  off-balance  sheet  operations  are 
issues which require further debate. 
The post-lunch session is especially interesting as it brings a regional perspective to the fore. 
The  wealth  of  experience  of  the  panelists  will  ably  highlight  the  challenges  and  changes 
needed to address matters relating to the CSME and the pace of harmonization of economic 
and financial sector policies and regulation; cross-border banking, financial conglomerates, 
financial  holding  companies  –  implications  for  regulation  and  consolidated  supervision; 
deposit  insurance  Schemes;  and  cross-border  crisis  management  and  crisis  resolution  for 
systemically important financial firms. 
My final point is that sometimes it takes a crisis to spur action and the search for voice and 
participation  for  developing  countries  has  improved  tremendously  since  the  crisis  with  the 
establishment of G20. This is the first step and we look forward to others. 
In closing, let me thank those who have gone to much effort to be here and I look forward to 
the presentations. 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2009
