Caleb M Fundanga: Zambia’s Financial Sector Development Plan 
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the 
Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  (FSDP)  Phase  II  Consultative  Meeting,  Lusaka, 
20 October 2009. 
  The Honourable Minister of Finance and National Planning; 
The FSDP Steering Committee Chairman & Secretary to the Treasury; 
Co-operating partners; 
Chief  Executive  Officers  and  Representatives  from  Banks  and  Non  Bank  Financial 
Institutions; 
Distinguished Invited Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
• 
• 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure,  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  to  welcome  you  all  to  the 
Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) Phase II Stakeholders’ Consultative Meeting.  
Honourable  Minister,  this  very  important  forum  is  a  demonstration  of  the  recognition,  by 
Government and various stakeholders, of the strategic importance of the financial sector to 
the country’s development and poverty reduction efforts.  
Distinguished invited guests, there are a number of strategies currently being implemented 
by both the private and public sectors to make the financial sector more inclusive, thereby 
increasing the benefits for the average citizen to participate in the formal economy. 
The Financial Sector Development Plan is one such Government initiative. The FSDP was 
aimed at realising the vision of a financial system that is sound, stable and market-based and 
one that supports efficient resource mobilisation necessary for economic diversification and 
sustainable growth.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  various  countries  have  established  specific  programmes  to 
strengthen  their  financial  sectors.  In  the  United  Kingdom  for  instance,  there  is  a  Financial 
Inclusion  Taskforce  which  is  an  independent  body  appointed  to  advise  Her  Majesty’s 
Treasury and to monitor and evaluate progress on its financial inclusion as well as oversee a 
120 Million Pounds Financial inclusion Fund.  
A platform for collaboration between local governments and the financial institutions in the 
UK has been established in order to ensure that everyone has access to financial services 
and that such inclusion corresponds with the needs of local economic development.  
In  other  parts  of  Europe,  the  offer  of  basic  banking  accounts  typically  lies  at  the  heart  of 
many  countries'  efforts  to  increase  financial  inclusion  and  they  are  a  common  feature  of 
economic policy in Europe. 
In Asia, this matter has also been dealt with in various ways. In India, the Reserve Bank of 
India  issued  guidelines  (in  2006)  by  which  banks  are  encouraged  to  enhance  the  level  of 
financial  inclusion  in  their  areas  of  operation  in  a  time-bound  manner.  In  Malaysia,  a 
Financial Sector Blueprint (2001-2010) has been used to guide interventions in the financial 
sector. 
However, financial inclusion is not an end in itself. Having a bank account, or an insurance 
coverage,  does  not  mean  an  enhancement  in  the  economic  position  or  well  being  of  a 
person. But it acts as a facilitator. 
In Zambia, following the launch in 2004 of the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP), a 
lot  of  work  has  been  undertaken  in  addressing  the  weaknesses  in  the  Zambian  financial 
sector, including the level of financial access.  
BIS Review 131/2009 
 1
Some ground-breaking market studies that have helped characterise both the demand and 
supply side issues peculiar to the Zambian financial sector have been undertaken.  
Most of you will be aware of the 2005 FinScope study findings which showed that only 33% 
of  Zambia’s  adult  population  had  access  to  any  formal  or  informal  financial  service  or 
product.  
Arising  from  this,  Government  in  collaboration  with  cooperating  partners  developed  a 
performance assessment framework, under which a target of at least 50% by end-2009 has 
been  set  for  the  level  of  financial  access.  The  findings  of  the  on-going  follow  up  Survey, 
whose results are due to be finalized by the end of this year, will give us an indication of the 
direction and level of access today. 
Honourable Minister, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, before the end of FSDP Phase I, 
which  ran  from  July  2004  to  June  2009,  it  became  quite  apparent  that  a  number  of 
challenges  and  recommendations  would  arise  which  would  not  be  possible  to  implement 
within the initial five year period approved by Cabinet in 2004.  
In  addition,  there  were  new  developments,  coupled  with  key  recommendations  from  the 
second  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programme  (FSAP)  of  2008,  which  required  to  be 
incorporated into the FSDP.  
Therefore, the second phase is envisaged to deal with longer-term issues pertaining to the 
overall strengthening of the legal framework for the financial system. It is for this reason that 
we are gathered here today as stakeholders to share information on the progress to date and 
to adopt a strategic implementation framework for the work that remains to be done. 
Distinguished Guests, the tremendous support of the various stakeholders to the agenda of 
the FSDP cannot go unnoticed. The technical and financial support provided by a number of 
our development partners, including the Swedish Government, the World Bank, IMF, DFID, 
the United States Treasury and FIRST Initiative have gone a long way in slowly but surely 
making this vision a reality. The Bank of Zambia and the Government are, therefore, most 
indebted to our cooperating partners for helping us build capacity in our financial sector.  
Honourable Minister, the support of stakeholders from financial and other institutions on the 
various  working  groups  has  also  been  instrumental  in  facilitating  the  implementation  of 
various FSDP activities. Further, the coordinating role of the FSDP Secretariat, anchored by 
the Bank of Zambia, has been key to the implementation of the FSDP.  
For this reason, we at the Bank of Zambia hope that the same level of technical, financial, 
material  and  morale  support  will  be  accorded  to  Phase  II  of  the  programme  by  all 
stakeholders.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  recognising  the  critical  role  played  by  various  stakeholders 
represented here, the work of the FSDP has, by design, taken a consultative approach in the 
identification  of  priority  areas,  formulation  of  strategies  and  the  design  of  implementation 
frameworks. It is for this reason that the Bank of Zambia has all the confidence that today’s 
consultative meeting will help advance the agenda for the second phase of the FSDP. 
This forum therefore, brings together the FSDP secretariat, development partners and key 
stakeholders to discuss the Phase II document and render support, financial and otherwise, 
to  the  process  as  well  as  facilitate  consensus  building  for  the  extension  of  the  FSDP  to 
December 2012. 
During this meeting, the FSDP Secretariat will update stakeholders on the progress to-date 
as well as outstanding issues and new developments since 2004. The FSDP Secretariat is 
further expected to highlight some of the key recommendations that were made in the recent 
Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programme  (FSAP)  and  highlight  proposals  made  by  the 
working groups.  
2 
 BIS Review 131/2009
Furthermore, representatives of Government and cooperating partners will also be at liberty 
to provide their comments on the programme’s achievements and the policy direction going 
forward. 
Finally, it is our view at the Bank of Zambia that the FSDP provides a unique opportunity to 
enhance contribution of our financial sector to economic growth & poverty reduction as well 
as deepening and modernising our financial system. However, the ability to move forward will 
depend on our collective support to achieve the Vision of the FSDP.  
It is therefore our expectation that this meeting will facilitate consensus among stakeholders 
on the way forward and update cooperating partners on the need for their continued support 
of the programme through direct financial support or technical assistance. 
Chairperson, it is now my pleasure to invite the Secretary to the Treasury who is also the 
Chairman of the FSDP Steering Committee to give us a few remarks before we call upon the 
Guest of Honour, to give us his keynote address and to officially open this forum. 
BIS Review 131/2009 
 3
