Masaaki Shirakawa: The Central Bank from the viewpoint of "law and 
economics" 
Lecture by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Faculty of Law, 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 21 October 2009. 
 Introduction 
I. 
I am happy to be speaking to you from this podium at the law faculty today. I feel that I have 
made  something  of  a  long  detour  in  life  before  reaching  this  classroom.  I  entered  the 
University of Tokyo in 1968 to advance to the faculty of law, but my interests led me instead 
to  the  faculty  of  economics,  so  I  never  stepped  inside  a  law  faculty  classroom  during  my 
undergraduate days. So I am now filled with an inexpressible feeling as I stand here finally 
after 40 years. 
Nevertheless, I have felt a sense of familiarity with the world of law for a long time. While you 
might imagine that work at the Bank of Japan frequently employs knowledge of economics, 
there are also many tasks that require knowledge of law or the so-called legal mind. During 
some 34 years of service at the Bank before I assumed my current position, I carried out a 
variety of responsibilities related to monetary policy, research and studies, financial markets 
and the payment and settlement system, and the disposal of failed financial institutions. In 
those days, I keenly felt the importance of having knowledge not only of economics but also 
of law. Today, therefore, I will talk about the role of a central bank from the viewpoint of "law 
and economics." 
First, I will briefly explain the mission and role of the Bank. The Bank of Japan is the nation's 
only central bank. If I were to express the mission of a central bank in one sentence, it would 
be "to issue money, or currency, and to ensure that people can use it with confidence." The 
money most close to you is likely to be banknotes, namely "Bank of Japan notes," and the 
Bank of Japan is the organization that issues those banknotes (Chart 1). The face values of 
"Bank  of  Japan  notes"  significantly  exceed  their  production  costs.1  Nevertheless,  nobody 
worries about whether a 10,000 yen banknote in your wallet will turn into a mere sheet of 
paper, or that it might not be accepted by the stores. While banknotes are the most typical 
form of money, what is greater in terms of value is what you deposit at banks, namely, bank 
deposits  (Chart  1).  Deposits  are  based  on  a  private  law  contract  between  depositors  and 
banks.  You  need  not  worry  that  those  deposits  will  not  return  to  you  as  stipulated  in  the 
contract or that they will become valueless. "Money" such as cash and deposits is vital for 
economic  activity.  Economic  activity  cannot  proceed  stably  if  people  worry  that  currency 
might  not  be  accepted  or  become  valueless.  To  ensure  that  people  can  use  money  with 
confidence, thereby contributing to economic growth; this is the most fundamental mission of 
a central bank. 
Experience of the global financial crisis 
II. 
Let me explain the work of a central bank more specifically. Here, I will take up the global 
financial and economic crisis after the failure of Lehman Brothers in September of last year. 
                                                 
1   See  Annual  Review  2009  (for  fiscal  2008)  (available  on  the  web  site  of  the  Bank  of  Japan).  The  reports, 
speeches and other materials published by the Bank and hereafter referred to are available on its web site 
(unless expressly stated to be available on the web site of the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies of 
the Bank). 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 1
large  amount  of 
the  securitized  products  also 
From  the  autumn  of  last  year2,  global  economic  activity  plummeted  and  global  trade  also 
contracted rapidly (Chart 2). This situation was the first such experience in 70 years. Quite 
recently,  economic  activity  has  been  picking  up,  although  the  current  level  of  economic 
activity is still significantly lower than that of last year. 
What circumstances were behind this? Up to the mid-2000s, the global economy had been 
enjoying a long period of benign economic conditions of high growth, low inflation rates, and 
low interest rates. As a result, people became bullish about the future, and willingly took risks 
and invested in various sectors such as real estate. This was the so-called bubble. What is 
happening  now  is  the  unwinding  of  the  "excesses,"  namely,  the  bursting  process  of  the 
"bubble." 
In  the  United  States,  housing  prices  peaked  in  the  second  quarter  of  2006  after  rising 
steadily for a long period. Then, people who took out mortgages on the prospects for rising 
house prices became unable to repay their mortgages. Banks did not hold all the mortgages 
on their balance sheets, but aggregated them in pools so that new securities could be issued 
by  the  pools  and  sold  to  other  financial  institutions  and  investors.  These  were  called 
"securitized products" (Chart 3). Because of issuance in several tranches according to the 
order of interest received from a pool of loans or principal repayments, the senior tranche in 
the  securitized  products  obtained  high  ratings.  However,  as  house  prices  plunged  and  a 
larger-than-expected  number  of  mortgages  turned  delinquent,  the  prices  of  securitized 
products including highly rated ones dropped significantly. Thus, financial institutions holding 
a 
these 
circumstances,  leading  financial  institutions  faced  a  management  crisis  and  Lehman 
Brothers filed for insolvency in September 2008.  
Financial institutions mutually make various transactions, and thus many debts and credits 
are mingled together. Since financial institutions other than Lehman Brothers incurred losses, 
albeit  to  different  degrees,  they  began  to  worry  that  their  trading  counterparts  might  go 
bankrupt.  In  such  a  situation,  financial  institutions  became  reluctant  to  lend  to  or  borrow 
money from each other in the market. In addition, even when financial institutions lent to their 
counterparties, they charged high interest rates on the loans (Chart 4).  
As  a  result,  financial  institutions  started  to  worry  that  they  might  not  be  able  to  borrow 
required funds in the market, and became cautious about lending to firms and individuals. 
For  example,  commercial  paper  (CP)  that  firms  issue  to  raise  short-term  funds  faced  a 
decline in the amount issued and a rise in the issue rate since financial institutions stopped 
buying  the CP  (Chart  5).  Among  the  buyers  of  the  CP  were  mutual  funds  such  as  money 
market  funds  (MMFs)  that  invested  in  various  products  including  securitized  products.  In 
preparation for investors' withdrawal, the mutual funds held back investments in the CP. That 
was also a blow to the CP market. The securitized products, which were the epicenter of the 
current crisis, had no buyer in the sagging market and, as a result of the limited room for risk 
taking on the part of financial institutions, the products faced a significant decline in trading 
volume and extremely high issue rates (Chart 6).  
To  put  this  phenomenon  more  concisely,  it  was  a  "collapse  of  confidence."  Financial 
transactions are based on confidence. Even a simple sales contract entails various kinds of 
risks.  First,  there  is  credit  risk  as  to  whether  a  trading  counterparty  has  sound  financial 
conditions and is immune from default. Second, there is liquidity risk as to whether a buyer 
can secure funds necessary for payment. Third, there is payment and settlement risk as to 
whether products or payments are delivered as stipulated in the contract, namely, whether 
payment and settlement are smoothly carried out without the risk of not receiving money or 
incurred  huge 
losses. 
In 
                                                 
2   As for the cause of the current global financial crisis, see "Way Out of Economic and Financial Crisis: Lessons 
and  Policy  Actions,"  a  speech  given  by  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Japan 
Society in New York on Thursday, April 23, 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2009
products. If these risks are deemed significant then one cannot make a contract, out of fear. 
In  particular,  since  financial  transactions  are  large  in  amount  and  complex  in  contents, 
financial transactions will not be carried out in the usual manner if financial institutions are 
extremely sensitive to the risks. If financial transactions cease, funds necessary for economic 
activity will not be distributed and economic activity will stagnate further.  
As such, in the current global financial and economic crisis, confidence, which is the most 
important  element  in  finance,  collapsed  during  the  process  of  the  unwinding  of  the 
"excesses." Consequently, the flow of funds stopped and the economy deteriorated further, 
aggravating the crisis.  
Measures taken by the Bank of Japan 
III. 
Since  financial  institutions  are  globally  linked  through  various  transactions  and  economies 
are also globalized through trade and investments, the crisis that started in the United States 
spread quickly around the world. Although Japanese financial institutions did not hold many 
securitized  products,  Japan's  economy  was  affected  significantly  because  of  the  global 
economic and financial mutual relationship. In facing this global crisis, the Bank has taken a 
number of measures. I will now explain the four particularly important ones.3  
Reductions in the policy interest rate 
First, there was a reduction in the interbank interest rate to a low level of 0.1 percent. With a 
view  to  achieving  stable  economic  activity  and  prices  from  a  longer-term  perspective,  a 
central bank raises or reduces the short-term interest rate based on the future assessment. 
This is what is referred to as monetary policy in the orthodox definition of textbooks.4 This 
time, in response to the global economic slowdown, central banks around the world reduced 
short-term interest rates to a level expressed as the "zero interest rate" (Chart 7). 
Provision of ample liquidity 
Second, the Bank provided ample liquidity in order to ensure stability in financial markets and 
financial  systems.  As  mentioned  earlier,  when  mutual  confidence  in  financial  institutions 
declines  and  concern  arises  that  funding  in  financial  markets  might  be  impaired,  this 
constrains financial institutions from lending to firms and individuals. In such a situation, the 
Bank provided the market with ample liquidity to preempt such concern.  
It is no surprise that central banks provide funds in their home currency in a crisis. This time, 
however, central banks of not only the United States but also other countries coordinated to 
arrange for a framework of U.S. dollar-funds provision. Specifically, the Bank of Japan and 
other European central banks made swap arrangements, received the supply of dollars from 
the central bank of the United States, the Federal Reserve, and supplied them to financial 
institutions in their own countries (Chart 8). This made dollar funding of financial institutions 
in each country easier. 
                                                 
3   For the policy  measures adopted by the Bank during the current financial crisis, see "The Bank of Japan's 
Policy  Measures  in  the  Current  Financial  Crisis",  and  regarding  the  policy  measures  adopted  by  the  major 
central  banks,  see  "Konji  Kin'yu  Kiki  ni  okeru  Shuyo  Chuo  Ginko  no  Seisaku  Un'ei  ni  tsuite  (Major  Central 
Banks' Policy Operations in the Current Financial Crisis)", published by the Monetary Affairs Department of 
the Bank (July 2009, available only in Japanese). 
4   There are, however, a variety of issues regarding how to define monetary policy. In this regard, see "Opening 
Speech by Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at 2008 International Conference 'Frontiers in 
Monetary Theory and Policy' hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, in 
Tokyo on May 28, 2008". 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 3
Both the Bank of Japan and all other central banks require collateral when providing liquidity. 
In  the  case  of  the  Bank,  Japanese  government  bonds,  bills,  and  bonds  normally  are 
accepted as eligible collateral (Chart 9). In the current phase, the Bank made it possible to 
provide the yen or the dollars against foreign government bonds as eligible collateral. This 
framework  is  called  cross-border  collateral  arrangement.  Other  central  banks  have 
introduced or have been trying to introduce a similar framework. Since internationally active 
financial  institutions  diversify  assets  located  around  the  world  denominated  in  various 
currencies,  the  adoption  of  such  a  framework  by  central  banks  enables  the  financial 
institutions to borrow funds from central banks by using effectively assets located in various 
countries. 
Support to malfunctioning capital markets 
While the second measure I have just explained is a measure to indirectly support financial 
institutions' lending to firms by providing financial institutions with ample liquidity, the Bank 
has also implemented more direct measures, given that this time firms were unable to raise 
funds in the capital market. One of these measures was the outright purchases of CP. The 
Bank  has  been  providing  financial  institutions  with  loans  against  CP  as  collateral,  or 
purchasing  CP  from  financial  institutions  on  the  condition  of  selling  back  in  the  future.  In 
these cases, the risk of incurring losses when a firm issuing the CP goes bankrupt, namely, 
credit risk, is primarily assumed by financial institutions. If the Bank purchases CP without 
the condition of selling back, however, the Bank bears the credit risk (Chart 10).  
It  is  a  principle  that  under  normal  circumstances  a  central  bank  provides  liquidity  to  the 
financial  market  as  a  whole,  and  private  financial  institutions  and  investors  that  know  a 
borrowers'  conditions  well  will  carry  out  individual  fund  allocation.  In  this  regard,  it  is  an 
exceptional step, as in the current crisis, for central banks to themselves directly bear credit 
risk for individual private firms and provide liquidity. When the functioning of financial markets 
declined  markedly,  leading  to  tightening  in  most  areas  of  corporate  finance,  the  Bank 
decided  to  implement  outright  purchases  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds  as  temporary 
measures. The Bank judged that these measures would be necessary to fulfill the mission of 
the central bank, that is, to distribute funds necessary for economic activity to every corner of 
the economy by maintaining stability in the economy, prices, and the financial system.  
Risk reduction measures in the payment and settlement system 
As the fourth measure, I will explain that, in coping with a financial crisis, it is important to 
always prepare for a crisis with down-to-earth efforts to establish systems. As an example, I 
will discuss the foreign exchange payment system such as yen-dollar transactions. From the 
autumn  of  last  year,  it  became  extremely  difficult  to  raise  funds  in  the  U.S.  dollar  funds 
market due to the collapse of confidence. The difficulty in dollar funding was a particularly 
grave problem for foreign financial institutions that did not have dollar deposits in Japan, in 
other  words,  that  lacked  a  relatively  stable  funding  source.  What  was  used  in  these 
circumstances  was  a  "swap  transaction,"  which  exchanges  the  yen  and  the  euro  for  the 
dollar for a certain period of time (Chart 11). Since this was dollar funding using the yen and 
the  euro  as  collateral,  or  vice  versa,  it  was  relatively  safer  than  uncollateralized  funds 
transactions.  The  swap  market  accounts  for  almost  half  of  the  entire  foreign  exchange 
market, and is a large market with a trading volume of 1.7 trillion U.S. dollars per day in the 
world.  
There is a time-zone difference between the delivery of the yen, which is made in Japan, and 
the  delivery  of  the  dollars,  which  is  made  in  the  United  States.  Suppose  that  a  financial 
institution delivers the yen first to a counterpart financial institution and receives the dollars 
later;  this  financial  institution  faces  the  risk  of  not  receiving  dollars  in  the  event  the 
counterpart  financial  institution  goes  bankrupt  before  the  New  York  market  opens.  While 
such time-lag risk is not recognized in normal times, it becomes critical in a crisis. To prepare 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2009
for  such  a  situation,  central  banks  had  long  been  encouraging  private  financial  institutions 
around  the  world  to  establish  a  simultaneous  settlement  method  among  major  currencies 
including the yen and the dollar; it is called payment versus payment (PVP). As a result, the 
Continuous  Linked  Settlement  (CLS)  system  was  established  in  2002,  with  financial 
contributions  from  private  financial  institutions  around  the  world  (Chart  12).  If  the  current 
global  financial  crisis  had  taken  place  in  the  absence  of  such  a  system  as  CLS,  foreign 
currency  funding  by  financial  institutions  might  have  faced  more  difficulties  and  the  crisis 
might have worsened further.  
The role of the Central Bank 
IV. 
I have so far been explaining the role of a central bank by using the example of the current 
global financial and economic crisis and central banks' responses. Here, I will explain in a 
more  general  way  the  central  bank's  role  to  "ensure  that  people  can  use  money  with 
confidence," which I mentioned at the outset.5  
As a lecture in the faculty of law should do, I will start with an article of law. In the Bank of 
Japan Act, there is an article that stipulates, "The banknotes issued by the Bank of Japan 
(hereinafter referred to as “Bank of Japan notes”) as prescribed in the preceding paragraph 
shall be legal tender and hence shall be used for payment without limits" (Article 46, Section 
2)  (Chart  13).  Because  of  this  stipulation,  transfer  of  a  banknote  will  be  "the  performance 
actually consistent with the purpose of the obligation" that you have learned in the class on 
civil law. If a borrower tenders the Bank's banknote as a tender of performance, the creditor 
must accept it. In this regard, this article is quite important. 
Even with such an article, Bank of Japan notes might not be used in the actual transactions. 
Under the principle of the freedom of contract, an individual is free to either make or forgo a 
contract. If a seller does not want to sell the product in exchange for the Bank of Japan note, 
the sales contract will not go through to start with, and thus the Bank of Japan note will not 
be used for transactions. While such a case might not occur in major countries, many of you 
might have an experience in which a seller does not sell the product in the home currency or 
asks to use dollars for the purchase. In these cases, while the home currency might be legal 
tender, it might be a currency that people cannot receive with a sense of security, because of 
various  factors.  For  example,  there  might  be  too  many  counterfeit  notes  to  engender 
confidence, there might be high inflation and a risk that the value of banknotes will decline 
tomorrow, or the country might be experiencing a financial crisis and people cannot deposit 
their money with a sense of security. 
The mission of a central bank is to avert these things. Put more specifically, a central bank's 
mission is to achieve "stability of the value of money." In detail, first, a central bank's most 
intrinsic task is to issue banknotes and faithfully manage them so that counterfeits or dirty 
banknotes do not circulate. The second task is to stabilize prices. Since fluctuations in prices 
will  make  rational  economic  calculation  difficult  and  impair  the  efficiency  of  resource 
allocation, they will hamper economic growth and, to start with, threaten social stability. The 
third task is to maintain financial system stability. Bank runs and the absence of trade in the 
financial markets occur when financial system stability is eroded, and its grave effects are 
what  I  explained  earlier.  A  central  bank's  mission  is  to  ensure  that  money  necessary  for 
economic activity can be circulated to every corner of the world through the tasks I have just 
described.  In  a  nutshell,  the  mission  is  to  "ensure  that  people  can  use  money  with 
confidence," namely, to achieve "stability of the value of money." While it goes without saying 
that  this  state  cannot  be  achieved  solely  by  a  central  bank,  and  the  regulatory  and 
                                                 
5   For the operations of the Bank, see "Functions and Operations of the Bank of Japan," edited by the Institute 
for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan. 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 5
supervisory authorities as well as private financial institutions also play important roles, the 
role played by the central bank is extremely important. 
While you may have read about this in a textbook or have some prior knowledge about this 
mission  of  a  central  bank,  let  me  emphasize  two  things  for  thorough  and  accurate 
understanding of the mission of a central bank.  
First  is  the  importance  of  credibility  in  a  central  bank.  A  central  bank's  ability  to  control 
interest  rates  and  to  supply  ample  funds  derives  from  the  fact  that  nobody  will  refuse 
acceptance of money issued by the central bank, namely, banknotes and the central bank's 
current  account  deposits.  Through  experience,  modern  nations  have  recognized  the 
importance  of  credibility,  established  an  organization  that  crystallizes  this  credibility,  and 
entrusted  the  issue  of  money  to  that  organization.  In  other  words,  even  if  an  organization 
called a central bank has been established, a central bank will not be able to control money 
properly if its credibility is insufficient, and thus the central bank itself must strive to win such 
confidence.  
Second, when a central bank tries to pursue its public purpose of the stability of money, it will 
do  so  not  by  law  or  administrative  order  but  through  transactions  in  the  market.  Earlier  I 
explained the Bank's measures taken in response to the global financial and economic crisis, 
and all these measures were not forced by law and administrative order but were carried out 
in the form of market transactions. Be it control over interest rates or provision of funds, they 
were  conducted  mainly  by  purchasing  government  bonds  from  the  market  or  lending  to 
financial  institutions.  As  for  CP,  the  Bank  purchases  it  from  financial  institutions  by 
conducting  auctions.  Because  of  this,  a  central  bank  is  called  the  "bank  of  banks"  or  the 
entity "in the market."  
The role of Law 
V. 
How and in what form are law and the legal mind useful for the Bank to carry on its mission? 
I will discuss three points. 
Democracy and central bank independence: issues from the viewpoint of public law 
The first point is from the viewpoint of public law: the issue of "democracy and central bank 
independence." "Independence" means "to decide on one's own with a decision that is not 
reversed  by  others"  (Chart  14).  Now,  why  is  a  central  bank  granted  independence  in  a 
democracy? In general, monetary policy affects economic activity and prices after a time-lag. 
Against such a backdrop, if monetary policy is conducted, based only on judgments about 
short-term  economic  and  financial  conditions,  it  will  likely  lead  to  a  situation  in  which 
economic stability is impaired, as experienced during the previous inflations and the bubble. 
One  major  cause  of  the  current  global  credit bubble  was  the  prolonged  low  interest  rates. 
When the problem started to grow in 2003 through 2004, the focus of many policy authorities 
and economists in the United States and Europe was on neither inflation nor the bubble but 
rather how to stave off global deflation. While people are weak in that they are likely to be 
influenced by short-term interests, they are also equipped with wisdom that allows them to 
establish  a  system  in  advance  to  avoid  a  situation  that  is  undesirable  from  a  medium-  to 
long-term perspective. This is the conception of central bank independence, which entrusts 
the conduct of monetary policy to an organization that makes judgments based on expertise 
from  a  medium-  to  long-term  perspective.6  Of  course,  there  is  no  all-encompassing 
                                                 
6   For the legal issues on central bank independence, see "Kohotekikanten kara mita Nippon Ginko no Gyomu 
no  Hotekiseikaku  to  Un'ei  no  arikata  (Legal  Characteristics  and  Operation  of  the  Business  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan  from  the  Viewpoint  of  Public  Law)"  (September  2009,  contained  in  Kin'yu  Kenkyu  [Monetary  and 
Economic Studies], Vol. 18, No. 5) and "Kohotekikanten kara mita Nippon Ginko no Soshiki no Hotekiseikaku 
to Un'ei no arikata (Legal Characteristics and Operation of the Organization of the Bank of Japan from the 
6 
 BIS Review 151/2009
in  stabilizing 
independence. The objectives of a central bank are clearly stipulated in the central bank act, 
and the governor and other central bank executives are appointed according to democratic 
procedure. Moreover, it is required by law to disclose the policy decision process of a central 
bank (Chart 14).7  
In the current crisis, central banks around the world including the Bank of Japan have acted 
extremely vigorously, including taking extraordinary measures in rapid sequence. A series of 
measures  have  been  substantially  effective 
the  crisis.  The  prompt 
implementation of these measures in response to the changes in financial market conditions 
was only made possible because each central bank expeditiously decided policies according 
to  its  own  judgment  and  the  temporary  measures  could  be  terminated  when  they  became 
unnecessary.  
The  independence  of  a  central  bank  is  rarely  questioned  when  it  conducts  policy  using 
orthodox measures and operations. However, when a central bank had to take extraordinary 
measures  in  the  current  crisis,  it  was  quite  difficult  for  the  central  bank  to  decide  what 
measures to take and to what extent based on what rationale. 
Taking  the  outright  purchase  of  CP,  for  example,  the  point  of  contention  was  whether  a 
central bank should go beyond the territory of liquidity provision to the financial markets as a 
whole and bear credit risk for individual firms. If the CP-issuing firm goes bankrupt, the Bank 
of Japan will incur losses, which results in a burden on taxpayers. A question naturally arises 
whether such a measure should be carried out as a fiscal policy measure by the Diet and the 
government  in  line  with  the  decision-making  process  in  a  democracy.  We  had  repeated 
serious discussions on that point. As explained earlier, as for the right or wrong of carrying 
out the measures, we decided that the extraordinary measures would be necessary to fulfill 
the mission of a central bank under an extraordinary situation of extreme malfunctioning of 
the  capital  market.  On  this  basis,  we  paid  due  attention  to  the  system  design  so  as  to 
minimize the side effects (Chart 15). For example, in purchasing the CP, we set conditions 
so  that  the  incentives  of  financial  institutions  to  sell  CP  to  the  Bank  would  decline  as  the 
functioning of the market recovered. Moreover, we limited the purchases to the CP issued by 
firms whose ratings were above a certain threshold. Credit risk was of course not zero, but 
we judged that it was necessary to be borne in order to achieve the purpose and effects of 
the policy. 
While it is important that a central bank respond flexibly according to economic and financial 
conditions in light of the objectives stipulated in law, it becomes quite difficult for a central 
bank to draw a clear line between what it "should do" and "should not do," given that it is 
granted  the  capability  of  issuing  currency  unlimitedly.  This  is  important  as  an  issue  of 
decision making in a democracy. Our task is to fulfill our mission by utilizing the resource of 
"confidence" as effectively as possible, while being cognizant of the mission of a central bank 
and  the  position  of  a  central  bank  in  a  democracy,  and  thus  it  is  associated  with  difficult 
judgments.8 
                                                                                                                                                      
Viewpoint of Public Law)" (September 2000, contained in Kin'yu Kenkyu [Monetary and Economic Studies], 
Vol. 19, No. 3). Both are the reports by the study group on central banks from the viewpoint of public law and 
published on the web site of the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies of the Bank (available only in 
Japanese). 
7   For the governance of the Bank, see "Kohotekikanten kara mita Nippon Ginko no Soshiki no Hotekiseikaku to 
Un'ei no arikata" (supra Footnote 6). 
8   For  the  basic  ideas  of  the  Bank  in  these  regards,  see  "Outright  Purchases  of  Corporate  Financing 
Instruments" (Bank of Japan, January 2009). 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 7
Innovation in central banking business: issues from the viewpoint of private law 
From  a  slightly  different  angle,  I  will  talk  about  the  second  legal  point  at  issue.  I  have 
mentioned  that  a  central  bank  achieves  its  public  objective  of  currency  stability  through 
transactions in the market. In doing so, the services provided by the central bank must be 
attractive. Therefore, the central bank has been trying various measures in accordance with 
the changes in the economic and financial environment, and I will explain the role law has 
been playing in that respect, mainly focusing on private law. 
Earlier I explained the introduction of a scheme to provide funds against foreign government 
bonds  as  eligible  collateral  –  a  cross-border  collateral  arrangement.  In  order  to  put  the 
scheme into practice, there were numerous legal issues to be cleared. First, a question of 
private  international  law:  which  country's  law  would  be  applied  in  creating  the  security 
interest  over  foreign  government  bonds  physically  located  in  foreign  countries.  Second,  a 
question of the legal framework for collateral in foreign countries: how to create the security 
interest  and  how  to  exercise  the  security  interest  in  case  of  default.  Third,  a  question  of 
international financial business practices: what kind of contract should be concluded with a 
counterparty. While it is a difficult job to examine each country's legal system and hammer 
out responses, it is nevertheless worth challenging and it is fascinating. 
I  just  mentioned  "foreign  government  bonds  physically  located  in  foreign  countries",  but  in 
fact government bonds of Japan and other major countries are dematerialized and transfers 
and pledges of these bonds are made by making entries into securities accounts. In the Bank 
of Japan's cross-border collateral arrangement, with the transfer of a country's government 
bond to a securities account held with the country's central bank, the security interest will be 
created  based  on  the  country's  law.  While  details  vary  by  country,  such  a  scheme  has 
enabled  financial  institutions  to  efficiently  use  securities,  wherever  they  are  physically 
located, as collateral to borrow necessary funds from various central banks around the world. 
Such innovations are necessary not only in the area of legal knowledge but also in the areas 
of the payment and settlement system and computer system. The Bank runs a system called 
the Bank of Japan Financial Network System (BOJ-NET), and transactions between financial 
institutions  are  settled  in  that  system.  When  the  BOJ-NET  is  used  to  settle  the  sale  and 
purchase  of  securities,  there  is  a  scheme  to  simultaneously  carry  out  the  delivery  of  the 
securities and payment of funds; it is called delivery versus payment (DVP). Through DVP, 
default risk associated with the time difference between delivery of securities and funds can 
be mitigated. Building on the idea of DVP, extending the operating time of the BOJ-NET and, 
for example, creating a time zone that overlaps with the operating time of other central banks' 
system  would  facilitate  simultaneous  settlement  between  the  yen  and  the  U.S.  dollar  and 
make it possible to meet other various settlement needs. Recognizing these possibilities, the 
Bank has started to consider building a new system.  
As  such,  to  make  the  flow  of  funds  efficient  and  safe  by  improving  the  fund  provisioning 
framework  and  payment  system  is  an  important  job  for  a  central  bank.  By  way  of  these 
innovations, the central bank has always been striving to make its services more usable and 
attractive.  Such  efforts  to  improve  services  are  essential  for  maintaining  confidence  in  a 
central bank. From the viewpoint of a central bank, the progress in globalization means that 
central banks are entering competition in terms of providing high-quality services. 
Financial system stability and international legal issues 
Lastly I will take up as the legal point at issue the role that law is playing in financial system 
stability,  especially  in  an  international  aspect.  Safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system is not the same as preventing individual financial institutions from going bankrupt. In 
the  market  economy,  the  principle  is  that  financial  institutions,  like  other  firms,  will  also 
undergo selection if they fail in their management. If there is an overly high sense of security 
that the government and the central bank will bail out financial institutions even if they fail in 
their  management,  financial  institutions'  self-discipline  will  be  lost  and  they  will  pursue 
8 
 BIS Review 151/2009
excessive risks, thereby destabilizing the financial system. This is the so-called moral hazard 
problem. What is important, even if individual financial institutions go bankrupt, is to minimize 
the effects on other financial institutions and maintain the stability of the financial system as a 
whole.  
Let me take up again the case of Lehman Brothers as an example (Chart 16). In order to 
smoothly  pursue  the  insolvency  proceeding  of  an  internationally  active  financial  institution 
like  Lehman  Brothers,  it  is  essential  to  have  coordination  between  central  banks  and  the 
supervisory authorities. To begin with, if insolvency during operating hours, namely "intraday 
insolvency," occurs amid the existence of a time difference, the effects will be grave. In order 
to avoid this, it becomes necessary to set a proper timing for insolvency. In addition, so as 
not to complicate the relationship of debts and claims due to new transactions, a business 
suspension order might become necessary. In the case of Lehman Brothers, in response to 
the U.S. headquarters' filing for Chapter 11 on September 15, 2008, the Financial Services 
Agency issued a partial business suspension order to its Japan affiliate. September 15 was a 
national  holiday  in  Japan.  On  the  ensuing  first  business  day,  September  16,  Lehman 
Brothers'  Japan  affiliate  applied  to  the  Tokyo  District  Court  for  the  civil  rehabilitation 
procedure, and the court decided on the start of the procedure on September 19. The Bank 
of Japan implemented measures as a central bank to secure financial system stability. Since 
the  Bank  was  also  a  creditor  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the  Bank  needed  to  carry  out  the 
measures by gaining the understanding of the court. Moreover, on the settlement front, one-
sided default risk was mitigated through the yen-dollar PVP by the CLS and securities DVP 
by  the  BOJ-NET.  Furthermore,  settlement  proceedings  and  loss-share  rules  in  case  of 
insolvency were agreed in advance among market participants, and these functioned well. 
Because of these various responses, payment and settlement of domestic transactions were 
conducted  generally  smoothly  in  Japan.  While  it  might  sound  unusual,  it  is  of  critical 
importance that bankruptcy be conducted skillfully without causing any trouble to the financial 
system as a whole. 
In  the  current  financial  crisis,  Lehman  Brothers  filed  for  insolvency,  while  many  financial 
institutions  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  were  nationalized  or  received  public  capital 
infusion.  In  response  to  this  situation,  the  reflection  emerged  that  a  framework  for  orderly 
disposal  of  a  financial  institution  with  a  significant  impact  on  the  financial  system  was 
insufficient.9  Since  the  framework  for  disposal  was  insufficient,  a  case  occurred  such  as 
Lehman Brothers – which could not be disposed of while maintaining important operations 
and  which was  forced to  liquidate –  or,  adversely,  cases  occurred  in which  the  authorities 
judged part of financial institutions as "too big to fail," and eventually many taxpayers had to 
bear  the  burden.  If  the  institutions  that  should  fail  do  not  go  bankrupt,  moral  hazard  will 
intensify  and  the  vitality  of  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  will  be  eroded  from  a 
longer-term  perspective.  The  ability  to  dispose  of  failed  financial  institutions  in  an  orderly 
fashion  is  quite  a  critical  factor  in  strengthening  the  financial  system.  In  particular,  with 
respect  to  internationally  active  financial  institutions  that  are  likely  to  be  subject  to  the 
problem of "too big to fail," difficult legal issues, such as insolvency laws of various countries 
and  the  legal  theory  of  adjustment  among  these  laws,  need  to  be  cleared.  In  this  regard, 
active  debate  has  begun  among  central  banks  and  the  supervisory  authorities  around  the 
world.10  
                                                 
9  
In the case of Japan, to manage the increasing failures of financial institutions after the collapse of the bubble 
economy, laws prepared in and  after the  late 1990s enabled  orderly disposal  of failed financial institutions. 
See  "Heisei  Kin'yu  Kiki  eno  Taio  –  Yokinhoken  wa  ika  ni  Kino  shitaka  (Responses  to  the  Heisei  Financial 
Crisis – How Deposit Insurance Functioned)," edited and authored by the Deposit Insurance Corporation of 
Japan, November 2007 (available only in Japanese). 
10   For  discussions  regarding  the  resolution  process  of  failed  internationally  active  financial  institutions,  see 
"Report and Recommendations of the Cross-border Bank Resolution Group," a consultation paper published 
by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (September 2009). 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 9
Professional life at the Central Bank 
VI. 
Thus far, I have explained the role and tasks of a central bank from the viewpoint of "law and 
economics".  However,  I  feel  that  such  an  explanation  may  not  be  sufficient  to  convey  a 
sense of the actual role of a central bank and the essential factors in achieving financial and 
economic stability. Judging from my own experience of my student days, perhaps the most 
difficult part to understand might relate to the meaning of "working." Therefore, to wrap up 
this lecture, I will discuss five aspects of what "working" means in the case of a central bank.  
Raison d'être of public service 
First,  there  is  the  significance  of  public  business.  As  I  have  repeatedly  mentioned  in  this 
lecture,  the  mission  of  a  central  bank  is  to  stabilize  the  value  of  money.  When  you  think 
about it, a central bank is an extremely complex entity. On one hand, it values the market 
mechanism very highly. On the other hand, as the experience of the current financial crisis 
shows, it sometimes intervenes in the market in order to prevent the collapse of the financial 
system.  Conversely,  it  also  put  the  brakes  on  the  excess  of  the  market  and  financial  and 
economic  activities.  While  these  actions  are  sometimes  unpopular,  there  must  be  some 
organization that plays this type of public role in order to achieve sustainable growth in the 
economy. 
Importance of broad knowledge 
Second is the importance of broad knowledge. At the beginning of this lecture, I talked about 
my  personal  experience.  After  36  years  of  experience  at  the  central  bank,  if  I  am  asked, 
"Which is important, knowledge of law or that of economics?" I will come to a very common-
sense  conclusion:  in  the  work  of  a  central  bank,  knowledge  of  economics,  of  law,  and  of 
broader  areas  is  all  necessary.  I  believe  that  the  best  part  of  economics  is  that  it  always 
strictly analyzes human behavior from a viewpoint of incentives. Without such analysis, we 
cannot conduct monetary policy and system design with respect to financial regulation and 
supervision.  However,  at  the  same  time,  if  "policy  discussion"  based  on  such  economic 
analysis  is  not  taking  due  account  of  the  supporting  rules  or  contracts,  things  will  not 
practically work. In this regard, legal knowledge is quite important.11  
Importance of business operations 
Third  is  the  importance  of  business  operations.  When  the  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  is 
taken up in the newspapers or on television, in many cases the focus is its "policy," such as 
raising or reducing interest rates. However, a consideration of monetary policy requires much 
more than examination of the target level for the interest rates. The interest rates are induced 
through  banking  operations  including  the  sale  and  purchase  of  bonds  and  bills  as  well  as 
lending to financial institutions. These operations entail consideration of various factors such 
as  from  whom  and  under  what  conditions  the  Bank  will  purchase,  how  much  liquidity  the 
Bank  will  provide  and  for  how  long,  and  what  kind  of  scheme  should  be  prepared  for 
settlement.  When  discussing  policies,  therefore,  understanding  of  business  operations  is 
indispensable. In particular, as was the case in the current crisis, when it becomes necessary 
to respond in ways that differ from those in normal times, it becomes important to take due 
consideration of business operations. The difference such a consideration would make in the 
effects and risks associated with policies are just as I have explained. 
                                                 
11   Based  on  these  understandings,  the  central  banks  of  the  major  countries  are  encouraging  and  supporting 
examination  by  legal  experts,  including  legal  scholars  and  practicing  lawyers,  of  legal  issues  related  to 
financial  transactions.  The  Bank  serves  as  the  secretariat  of  the  Financial  Law  Board  (FLB),  a  Japanese 
organization  that  examines  such  legal  issues.  For  information  on  the  purpose,  activities,  and  other  details 
concerning the FLB, see its web site. 
10 
 BIS Review 151/2009
At  the  same  time,  we  should  also  recognize  that  discussing  policy  without  a  proper 
perspective  does  nothing  but  harm.  The  real  world  is  not  so  simple  that  gathering  all 
information from the field, namely micro information, will lead to an understanding of the total, 
and policy cannot be judged from the viewpoint of practical operations alone. To understand 
the  complex  reality,  support  provided  by  theory  is  required,  and  a  macro  approach  to  the 
core of the issue taking account of historical experiences is also indispensable. 
Significance of working in an organization 
Fourth is the significance of working in an organization. When a central bank conducts policy, 
much  work  in  collaboration  is  required.  To  begin  with,  the  assessment  of  the  economic 
situation,  which  is  the  presumption  of  policy  formulation,  is  backed  up  by  micro  economic 
research and information from the financial front, as well as macro statistics and economic 
theory.  In  addition,  in  formulating  a  policy  based  on  the  assessment  of  the  situation,  a 
viewpoint  on  how  to  implement  through  banking  operations  is  indispensable.  During  the 
process,  many  people  who  have  various  kinds  of  expertise  and  experience  in  economics, 
finance, law, and information technology are involved. In addition, they build up a policy by 
understanding their colleagues' jobs and by cooperating with each other. While the decision-
making body of the Bank of Japan is the Policy Board, consisting of nine members including 
myself, policy cannot be made by the nine members alone. It is essential to have the wisdom 
and experience of the many staffers who support the Policy Board members. The experience 
and wisdom of a single person are limited. Cooperation between many people with different 
skills,  expertise,  and  experience  helps  achieve  the  goal,  and  the  give  and  take  during  the 
process of cooperation will lead to solutions of future problems. These things are what make 
the existence of an organization significant. 
Working  in  an  organization  thus  shows  the  importance  of  "institutional  memory".  While 
institutional  memory  is  accumulated  in  any  type  of  organization,  it  becomes  particularly 
important  in  the  case  of  a  central  bank,  since  the  central  bank's  objective  is  to  ensure 
economic and financial stability from a longer-term perspective.  
In  this  regard,  what  I  always  feel  when  I  take  part  in  international  conferences  and  visit 
central banks overseas is that central bankers all have something in common. It appears as 
if  a  central  bank's  DNA  –  which  means  "considering  based  on  a  medium-  to  long-term 
perspective," "placing great importance on the market," "examining in terms of money market 
operations and business operations," and "maintaining the culture to formulate policy as an 
organization"  –  is  shared  among  central  bankers.  In  the  current  global  financial  crisis,  the 
existence of this common DNA enabled central banks to cope in tandem with the crisis by 
means of close cooperation.  
Importance of a flexible approach to cope with changes 
Fifth is the importance of a flexible approach to cope with changes. Economic and financial 
conditions keep evolving, and a central bank faces new challenges every day. To cope with 
the new challenge, inputs from various areas are indispensable. For example, in the past, a 
run on a bank suggested depositors with their deposit books queuing up in front of a bank. In 
the current financial crisis, however, a run totally different from the past took place; it might 
be  termed  a  "market-type  run."  In  the  early  part  of  this  lecture,  I  explained  that  mutual 
confidence between financial institutions collapsed and financial institutions became hesitant 
to make transactions in the markets. This happened not only in uncollateralized markets but 
also in collateralized transactions. One example was a repo transaction. The repo market is 
where participants temporarily sell or lend bonds such as government bonds to receive funds 
in exchange (Chart 17). For securities firms that buy and hold a large amount of government 
bonds,  the  repo  transaction  has  been  an  important  measure  for  funding.  Since  the  repo 
transaction is an exchange between securities such as government bonds and funds, it is a 
collateralized transaction. In such a transaction, since the value of collateral changes as the 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 11
price of bond changes, there are accordingly periodic exchanges of funds. For example, if 
the  price  of  a  bond  declines substantially,  additional  collateral  equivalent  to  the  amount  of 
price changes must be financed somewhere and handed to a counterparty. In normal times, 
this amount can be financed by cash on hand or borrowing from financial institutions, but in 
times when confidence has collapsed, it might not be financed. In such a case, some might 
sell government bonds they have on hand and try to obtain funds. If such activity increases, 
bond  prices  will  decline  further  and  the  additional  cost  of  repo  transactions  will  increase. 
According  to  such  drastic  changes  in  financial  and  economic  conditions,  a  central  bank 
continually must devise approaches using flexible thinking. Thus, while some might associate 
a central bank with an old-fashioned image, it is full of innovation.  
Concluding remarks 
VII. 
Looking  back  on  when  I  joined  the  Bank  of  Japan  40  years  ago,  I  virtually  knew  nothing 
about the tasks at the Bank. Since then, I have experienced the excitements and difficulties 
in the professional life of an organization like the Bank, with its public objectives. I have seen 
a long list of major events since joining the Bank: floating of the yen, oil shocks, the bubble, 
the bursting of the bubble and the ensuing financial system turmoil, and the current global 
financial crisis. At all times, what remains unchanged is that the ultimate mission of a central 
bank is to safeguard the stability of the value of money and the confidence in the currency. 
The  current  global  financial  crisis  is  something  that  almost  all  the  policy  authorities  and 
economists "knew" from a historical standpoint, but never imagined that they would actually 
experience. In response to such a situation, central banks including the Bank of Japan have 
hammered out various innovative measures. As I look back on the 40 years since I started to 
work at the Bank, and look out at you as you attend this lecture, I cannot help wondering 
what  will  happen  during  the  coming  40  years.  A  new  type  of  crisis  is  quite  imaginable. 
Preventing  the  outbreak  of  such  a  crisis,  or  –  if  such  a  crisis  unfortunately  occurs  – 
minimizing the effects to achieve economic stability is a challenging task, and students like 
yourselves  who  are  going  out  into  society  cannot  remain  completely  immune  from  such 
challenges,  regardless  of  your  areas  of  work  in  public  organizations,  private  firms,  or  as 
academics. 
All  of  you  have  been  studying  law  and  might  be  hoping  to  utilize  law  to  contribute  to  the 
world.  There  are  many  jobs  such  as  the  legal  profession  and  legal  departments  where 
knowledge of the law can be utilized. While all of those jobs are no doubt important, it would 
be more than I can dream of if you also recognize the challenging and unique workplace that 
is a central bank. I would be delighted if my lecture today has made you feel closer to the 
presence of the central bank. Thank you. 
12 
 BIS Review 151/2009
  BIS Review 151/2009 
   13
  14 
   BIS Review 151/2009
  BIS Review 151/2009 
   15
  16 
   BIS Review 151/2009
  BIS Review 151/2009 
   17
   18 
 BIS Review 151/2009
  BIS Review 151/2009 
   19
  20 
   BIS Review 151/2009
 BIS Review 151/2009 
   21
