Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The way forward with monetary, fiscal and 
macroprudential policies 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Conference  “Europe  after  the  crisis:  resuming  the  long-term 
perspective”,  organised  by  the  Confederation  of  Swedish  Enterprise  and  the  Centre  for 
Global Studies, Stockholm, 11 December 2009. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for your invitation to speak here today.  
In  my  short  intervention,  I  will  focus  on  the  question  how  post-crisis  monetary,  fiscal  and 
macroprudential policies in Europe should look like. Rapid and determined policy action have 
avoided that things turned worse at the peak of the crisis, but now that the worst seems to be 
behind us, it is time to look further ahead. Notably, we need to reverse what should only be 
temporary, and implement what needs to be changed structurally, so as to reduce chances 
of such a crisis from occurring again.  
Monetary policy 
Let me start with monetary policy. After the crisis had intensified significantly, a bit more than 
one  year  ago,  the  ECB  responded  swiftly  and  vigorously.  In  particular,  it  lowered  its  main 
interest rates substantially by 325 basis points between October 2008 and May 2009. The 
current rate of 1% is the lowest since monetary union started in 1999. 
In addition, we have taken a number of non-standard liquidity and credit support measures to 
mitigate  the  adverse  impact  of  dysfunctional  money  markets  on  the  liquidity  situation  of 
solvent banks in the euro area and thereby avoid the emergence of a systemic liquidity crisis. 
To this end, for instance, we provided banks with unlimited liquidity against an expanded list 
of collateral, while prolonging the maturity of our refinancing operations up to 1 year.  
From the very beginning, we have made clear that our enhanced credit support measures 
would be temporary in nature and remain in place only as long as needed. Now, taking into 
account the ongoing improvements in financial market conditions, we arrived at a situation 
where in fact not all our liquidity measures are needed to  the same extent as in the past. 
Therefore,  we  announced  last  week  some  initial  steps  to  gradually  phasing  out  some  of 
these measures. 
At  the  same  time,  we  continue  to  provide  liquidity  support  to  the  euro  area  banks  for  an 
extended period of time at favourable conditions, as – despite the start of the phasing out – 
the impact of previously taken measures reach well into the next year. 
While we are still in a period of high uncertainty, and we should not exclude setbacks on the 
road back to sustainable growth rates and stable financial market conditions, we also need to 
prepare ourselves for “normal” times. In this respect, in particular with a view to the recent 
experience, we need to ask ourselves whether the way monetary policy is conducted needs 
to be changed.  
On  that,  let  me  first  say  that  the  primary  objective  of  the  ECB  is  and  remains  to  maintain 
price stability over the medium term, and we have continued succeeding in that when looking 
at  measures  of  inflation  expectations  which  are  well  anchored  in  line  with  price  stability. 
Secondly, in our comprehensive assessment of economic and monetary developments we 
already  take  into  account  a  wide  set  of  indicators,  including  for  example  also  asset  prices 
and credit developments. Thus, there is no need for changing our monetary policy framework 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 1
in a fundamental way. Nonetheless, the crisis has shown that a more detailed and refined 
analysis of financial market indicators is important for both, financial stability and monetary 
policy  objectives.  Here  we  need  to  further  invest  and  become  more  wary  of  how  financial 
market risks can effect the macroeconomic environment.  
Fiscal policies 
As regards fiscal policies, I am concerned about the projected strong increase of government 
deficit and debt levels in euro area countries. According to the European Commission, the 
deficit  ratio  in  the  euro  area  would  reach  around  7%  of  GDP  in  2010  compared  to  2%  in 
2008; government debt as a ratio to GDP is expected to increase to 84% compared to 69% 
in 2008. 13 out of 16 euro area Member states are now facing an excessive deficit procedure 
due to budget deficits above the 3% of GDP deficit criterion of the Maastricht Treaty.  
Certainly, the fiscal measures to stabilise the financial sector and the wider economy have 
helped to limit the adverse effects of the economic and financial crisis. However, it is now 
time to prepare ambitious and well-defined fiscal exit strategies. Otherwise, government debt 
in the euro area is set to quickly rise to levels above 100% of GDP, which might severely 
undermine the public’s trust in the sustainability of public finances. Moreover, unsustainable 
debt developments would, in the medium to long-term, put upward pressure on interest rates.  
At the European level, the fiscal consolidation process should be guided by the rules of the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  First,  this  implies  to  set  realistic  but  also  sufficiently  ambitious 
deadlines  to  correct  excessive  deficits  in  euro  area  countries.  The  ECOFIN  Council  has 
adopted recommendations for country-specific deadlines and fiscal adjustment requirements 
this month. Second, national governments need to specify their fiscal consolidation strategy 
and  underpin  it  by  well-specified  measures.  Given  the  projected  strong  increase  in  public 
spending  ratios  in  euro  area  countries,  governments  should  focus  on  expenditure-based 
fiscal consolidation. In the past, this has also proven to me more effective than tax increases 
to achieve successful fiscal consolidation.  
Macroprudential policies 
A formidable challenge for the central banking community in the period ahead is to respond 
in the best possible way to calls to enhance macro-prudential oversight. In the EU, a decision 
has been taken to establish a European Systemic Risk Board. This body will be responsible 
for  carrying  systemic  risk  surveillance  and  assessment  at  an  EU-wide  level  and,  where 
considered necessary, to translate these assessments into risk warnings and possibly policy 
recommendations.  
The financial crisis has illustrated that a very large gap exists between, on the one hand, the 
risk surveillance and assessment tasks and, on the other, the advice on risk mitigation and 
possible  policy  follow-ups.  The  establishment  of  the  ESRB  along  with  its  sister  body,  the 
European  System  of  Financial  Supervision,  which  will  work  in  close  co-operation,  should 
represent a significant step in this direction. 
In  the  new  setting,  macro-prudential  policy  instruments  should  aim  at  influencing  variables 
such  as  maturity  mismatches,  excessive  credit  growth,  leverage,  or  the  risk  appetite  of 
market participants.  
The  types  of  policy  tools  that  might  be  activated  to  address  systemic  risks  may  include 
counter  cyclical  capital  buffers,  enhanced  liquidity  requirements,  forward-looking  loan-loss 
provisioning,  leverage  ratios,  haircut  and  collateral  requirements  in  secured  lending,  or 
setting  maximum  loan-to-value  ratios  on  mortgages.  In  this  sense,  the  use  of  these  policy 
tools should take account of both macro-financial and contagion aspects, and most likely will 
require  a  continuous  interaction  between  the  ESRB  and  the  relevant  supervisory  and 
regulatory authorities.  
2 
 BIS Review 166/2009
Progress  has  been  made  in  laying  out  a  framework  for  systemic  risk  surveillance  and 
assessment. The ESRB – or, for that matter, any other body responsible macro-prudential 
oversight – will aim at reducing systemic risk. The establishment of the ESRB but also the 
new EU supervisory architecture mean that vulnerabilities and potential sources of risk for 
the financial system will be detected in a timelier manner. This will foster better awareness of 
these risks and their potential implications.  
Regulation will make the system more resilient. In fact, to the extent that we can narrow the 
policy gap between systemic risk assessments and their translation into risk mitigating policy 
actions, this will ultimately enhance the financial system’s resilience to adverse disturbances. 
In this sense the political support for these reforms is absolutely essential.  
Conclusion  
Let me conclude. Monetary and fiscal policies, through vigorous and swift action at the peak 
of the financial crisis, have avoided a free fall in economic activity and a further drying up of 
financial  markets.  As  we  gradually  seem  to  be  leaving  the  extraordinary  circumstances 
behind us, monetary and fiscal policies must return to their normal mode of operation.  
Will that normal mode look different from the one before the crisis? 
As  for  monetary  policy,  you  can  be  assured  that  the  ECB  will  monitor  all  developments 
carefully  and  continue  to  gradually  phase-out  at  the  appropriate  time  its  enhanced  credit 
support  measures,  without  hampering  the  functioning  of  financial  markets.  Let  me  also 
assure you that maintaining price stability remains our primary objective. At the same time, 
let me also emphasize that central banks must become more wary of financial market risks 
and their macroeconomic implications to the overall benefit of achieving the monetary policy 
objective. 
As regards fiscal policies, consolidation efforts need to be implemented timely and credibly, 
and as in the past with a particular focus on the expenditure side.  
As 
the 
interconnectedness that characterizes the financial system. This has reaffirmed the need to 
strengthen macroprudential policies, i.e. the focus on the systemic nature of risks and their 
mitigation to reduce the chances on such a crisis from happening again need.  
Finally,  let  us  not  forget  the  importance  of  self  set  standards  and  rules  by  the  financial 
markets  themselves.  Importantly,  the  financial  industry  must  be  aware  of  their  own 
responsibility and need to draw the right lessons from the crisis for future practises.  
Thank you for your attention. 
recent  crisis  has  strikingly 
to  macroprudential  policies, 
illustrated 
the 
 BIS Review 166/2009 
 3
 4 
   BIS Review 166/2009
 5
BIS Review 166/2009 
 