Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with De Tijd and L’Echo 
Interview by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, with De Tijd 
and L'Echo, Belgium, conducted by Messrs Wouter Vervenne, Wouter VanDriessche, Marc 
Lambrechts,  Luc  Charlier  and  Serge  Quoidbach  on  4  December  2009  and  published  on 
10 December 2009. 
 Is the euro area now definitely out of recession? If so, will the expected recovery be 
sufficiently strong to create jobs? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: The second quarter of this year saw the end of the period of free fall in 
terms of growth. This very difficult period lasted two full quarters following the intensification 
of  the  crisis  in  mid-September  2008  (editor’s  note:  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers). 
As of the third quarter of 2009 we have been experiencing positive growth again. This will be 
the  case  in  the  fourth  quarter,  too.  According  to  the  projections  of  the  Eurosystem  staff, 
average  growth  next  year  should  also  be  positive,  albeit  still  modest.  And  with  a  level  of 
uncertainty – and I should like to stress this point – that remains very high. This is related to 
a number of factors, primarily international. 
As  regards  employment,  taking  into  account  the  “lags”  usually  observed  after  periods  of 
recession, we could see an increase in unemployment even with growth rates returning to 
positive territory. We must therefore act with determination to strengthen confidence. Indeed, 
it was confidence that was so dramatically lacking following the events of September 2008. 
All of our actions today within the Governing Council of the ECB are aimed at strengthening 
the confidence of households and firms in the medium term. 
Were you aware that this confidence would be so difficult to re establish? 
In a cycle such as this, the decline is often much steeper than the recovery, which is slower. 
Hence the importance, for us, of: (i) assuring our fellow citizens that we are able to ensure 
price stability and thereby defend their purchasing power; and (ii) convincing firms that the 
financial environment will continue to incorporate a low level of inflation in the years to come, 
which will be reflected in medium and long-term market interest rates. 
Last  Thursday  the  ECB  announced  the  progressive  phasing-out  of  its  extraordinary 
measures. Does this mean that market conditions are now completely back to normal? 
Moreover, analysts view the details announced for the 12-month refinancing operation 
as a signal regarding interest rates. 
We always said that our non-standard measures – i.e. the measures adopted in order to take 
account  of  the  highly  irregular  situation  in  the  markets  –  would  unwind  naturally  as  the 
situation  improved.  The  measures  announced  last  Thursday  reflect  the  improvement 
observed in the markets. 
On the question of signals regarding rates, I want to be extremely clear. The intention of the 
Governing  Council  was  to  give  no  signals  at  all  on  interest  rates.  We  consider  that  the 
current level of interest rates is appropriate. It was therefore appropriate to index the rate on 
the 12-month operation. We considered that this was the best way of confirming that we had 
no intention of giving signals on interest rates today. I believe that the market has understood 
this message well. 
Is  the  banking  sector  in  sufficiently  good  health,  in  your  view?  Is  the  worst  now 
behind us? 
In this respect, too, we have experienced a dramatic period. I should first like to stress the 
fact that Europe as a whole – governments, national parliaments, European institutions, etc. 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 1
– has overcome unprecedented challenges since the Second World War. We have managed 
to  avoid  the  kind  of  dramatic  events  experienced  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic.  In  an 
intense period of stress, the European apparatus, which is extremely complex, has proved 
resilient. This is very rarely acknowledged. And yet, it must be said that the European ship 
has succeeded in weathering the storm. This was in no way self-evident. 
Saying that, we must not allow ourselves to become complacent. We still have much to do in 
order  to  strengthen  the  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions  –  and  commercial  banks  in 
particular.  We  encourage  them  to  act  with  determination  in  strengthening  their  balance 
sheets.  Those  institutions  can  turn  to  the  market.  But  they  can  also  retain  their  profits  as 
reserves instead of distributing them. I believe, moreover, that a very high degree of caution 
should be demonstrated with regard to remuneration and the awarding of bonuses – both for 
ethical reasons, to avoid excessive risk-taking, and for reasons related to the need for banks 
to have sound finances. 
All  of  the  considerable  steps  taken  by  central  banks  and  governments  –  and  thus  by 
taxpayers  –  have  had  one  single  objective:  to  allow  banks  to  continue  to  perform  their 
function,  which  is  to  finance  the  real  economy.  The  banks  have  to  live  up  to  their 
responsibilities. 
Paradoxically, haven’t some banks, such as BNP Paribas, become too big as a result 
of this crisis? Does that not pose a new threat? 
The question of knowing whether or not certain institutions in Europe and in other parts of the 
world  are  so  large  or  so  interconnected  that  they  represent  additional  systemic  risks is  an 
important  question  which  is  being  considered  at  the  international  level.  There  are  various 
ideas  on  this  subject.  But  nobody  can  deny  that  if  a  financial  institution  finds  itself  in  a 
situation where it poses high risks to the whole of the system, and here it is not necessarily a 
question of size, it is appropriate to take measures to limit these risks.  
We also have to act in such a way that the financial system as a whole is less fragile. We are 
working towards this, in line with the guidance of the G20. From this point of view, I am quite 
reassured to see that there is a global consensus, including among the emerging economies 
such  as  China  or  India.  It  is  a  matter  of  increasing  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system 
without calling into question the market economy. We all want the market economy, which 
produces wealth, to be much less fragile and less subject to the formation and subsequent 
bursting of bubbles. So this consensus is reassuring. But we have to succeed also. We all 
have an obligation to obtain results. I do not think that taxpayers would again accept to take 
the major risks that they have now taken to rescue the system. 
Isn’t  it  risky  to  announce  already  a  gradual  withdrawal  of  the  exceptional  liquidity 
measures? 
The  Governing  Council  –  made  up  of  twenty-two  members  including  myself  and  Guy 
Quaden, Governor of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique – must 
at  all  times  carefully  assess  the  risks  of  the  situation.  There  are  risks  associated  with 
unwinding too quickly the non-standard measures that we have taken, and there are risks 
involved with unwinding them too slowly. I could say the same thing about monetary policy 
itself or about fiscal policy. In any event, you have to very carefully assess all of the risks that 
you  are  taking  without  having  an  a  priori  bias  in  one  direction  or  another.  Experience  has 
shown  us  how  dangerous  it  can  be  to  focus  on  short-term  concerns  to  the  detriment  of 
economic stability and prosperity in the medium to long term. This is why central banks are 
independent.  In  this  regard,  at  the  beginning  of  2004,  in  the  same  week,  three  Heads  of 
State or Government asked the ECB to lower its interest rates: the German Chancellor, the 
President of the French Republic and the Italian Prime Minister. The Governing Council of 
the  ECB  refused  to  do  this,  clarifying  that  it  was  not  warranted  to  reduce  further  interest 
rates, which were at the level of 2%, without putting at risk price stability in the medium term. 
Similarly, ten out of the twelve euro area governments publicly criticised our interest rate rise 
at  the  end  of  2005.  Today,  there  is  no  longer  anybody  suggesting  that  we  were  wrong  in 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2009
taking  the  decisions  that  we  took.  This  shows  how  strong  the  tendency  around  us  is  to 
concentrate on the short term. At last Thursday’s Governing Council meeting, we confirmed 
that the level of interest rates was appropriate, and we took measures to initiate gradually our 
strategy to exit from the crisis, while continuing to provide liquidity support to the euro area 
banking system for a prolonged period. We will continue to be very vigilant and to carefully 
assess risks of all kinds without having an a priori bias. One should never lose sight of the 
medium and long-term objectives and concerns.  
Weren’t you expecting the banks to support the economy more? 
Everything that we have done, and are continuing to do, to facilitate the refinancing of banks, 
we are of course doing so that the banks can perform in the best possible way their function 
of  financing  the  real  economy.  Our  message  to  them  is  very  clear:  there  must  not  be  any 
significant financing difficulties resulting from the supply of credit by financial institutions. This 
said,  the  demand  for  credit  is  sluggish  at  the  moment,  which  is  always  the  case  after  a 
serious  recession.  Overall,  we  are  seeing  a  decline  in  the  outstanding  amount  of  loans  to 
non-financial corporations, owing in particular to decreasing credit demand from firms. With 
regard  to  households,  outstanding  credit  has  once  again  risen  during  the  most  recent 
months.  
Aren’t you concerned to see that, on the one hand, the banks are hurrying back to the 
markets, once again fuelling what some people consider to be financial bubbles, and, 
on the other hand, are being strongly urged to lend more? 
One should beware of making overly simplistic judgements. The sector that we are looking at 
is not homogenous. Some market players seem to have completely forgotten that only a few 
months  ago,  the  entire  financial  system  was  in  the  process  of  collapsing,  and  it  was  the 
speed and scope of the decisions of central banks, as well as governments and parliaments, 
which allowed us to avoid a catastrophe. These players are fortunately in the minority. The 
financial  system  as  a  whole  understands  that  it  is  essential  to  do  everything  possible  to 
increase the robustness of the global financial system. 
Are you pleased with the agreement among finance ministers on strengthening bank, 
insurance and market supervision at the supranational level? Some say that too much 
power still rests at the national level. 
I would like to pay tribute to the Swedish Presidency for its remarkably active, clear and very 
professional  handling  of  this  extremely  difficult  issue.  Achieving  a  consensus  among  the 
governments of 27 countries on subjects as complex as the European Systemic Risk Board, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  three  European  micro-prudential  supervisory  authorities,  on  the 
other hand, is a successful outcome for the Swedish Presidency, acting on the basis of the 
relevant  proposals  by  the  European  Commission.  As  is  well-known,  the  proposed  solution 
was not necessarily the best in the eyes of all the parties involved. It is not precisely what we 
ourselves suggested initially. However, it has the advantage of representing a consensus of 
the governments themselves. The European Parliament will now consider this matter and I 
have every confidence in the efficacy of its efforts.  
Will you indeed be the President of the Systemic Risk Board, as has been suggested? 
As  you  know,  the  President  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  will  be  elected  by  the 
members of the Board once it has been set up. The question is a little premature. 
In the United States, there is a great deal of debate concerning the Federal Reserve 
Act. There is talk of ending the Federal Reserve System’s supervision of large banks. 
Are you concerned by this? 
Well before the eruption of the crisis in 2008 the Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank  said  that  it  was  important  to  establish  a  close  link  between  the  central  bank  and 
prudential banking supervision. I think that the events of the past two years have confirmed 
the accuracy of this position. Generally speaking, I note that there is a fairly widely held belief 
in  Europe  and  worldwide  that  it  is  better  to  have  quite  a  close  association  between  the 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 3
central  bank  and  prudential  supervision.  I  have  found  this  to  be  particularly  evident  in 
Belgium – and this shows the confidence placed in the Nationale Bank van België/Banque 
National de Belgique and its governor – but also in a great many other countries.  
I  would  be  amazed  if  the  current  debate  in  the  United  States  were  to  lead  to  a  Federal 
Reserve System that no longer had a close link with micro-prudential supervision, since this 
does not appear to me to be the lesson that should be drawn from the crisis at all. I would 
add that the ECB has very close and confident relations with the Federal Reserve System.  
The IMF has warned that there are still many toxic assets on banks’ balance sheets. Is 
this a problem that will re-emerge at some point? 
I  think  that  there  are  two  issues.  First,  there  is  the  question  of  the  toxic  assets  that  were 
revealed  when  the  crisis  erupted  –  the  “sub-prime  mortgages”  in  particular  –  and  that  still 
remain  on  balance  sheets.  This  is  a  serious  issue,  although  it  is  not  perhaps  the  most 
important question facing us today. Second, there is the problem of the provisions that must 
be  set  up  for  loans  granted  by  banks  to  their  customers  which  are  not  repaid  when  due, 
owing to the crisis. I am confident that the European commercial banks will be equal to the 
new challenge thanks to their profits and also thanks to the reserves and provisions that they 
have already accumulated. But this is one of the reasons why we urge them to take every 
opportunity to strengthen their balance sheets, because the period ahead will also be very 
difficult.  
For some financial assets, such as gold, we are seeing a return to risk-taking on the 
part of investors. Is this a parameter that the ECB takes into account in its strategy? 
I will not make any specific comments regarding gold.  
Generally  speaking,  one  of  the  fundamental  lessons  of  the  crisis  is  that  when  we 
underestimate financial risks and focus only on the short term, we set the stage for a future 
catastrophe.  The  new  principles  for  bank  remuneration,  which  the  international  community 
have agreed within the framework of the Financial Stability Board, were established precisely 
in order to ensure that there is no incentive for operators and traders in particular to favour 
the  most  risky  attitudes  and  decisions,  leading  to  illusory  profits  in  the  short  term  at  the 
expense of the long-term interests of the financial enterprises concerned and the stability of 
the financial system as a whole. 
We know how much banks’ balance sheets have been affected by the provisions for 
bad debts linked to toxic assets. Since the market for these structured products is still 
in difficulty, should the banks fear further write-downs on structured products? 
That is a good question, but I do not believe that this is the most important problem facing 
European commercial banks today. 
With regard to toxic assets, it should be borne in mind that the accounting rules play a major 
role in how they are entered on balance sheets. The rules differ on each side of the Atlantic. 
The  question  of  harmonising  the  accounting  rules  in  Europe  and  the  United  States  is  an 
important one that must also be addressed from the perspective of a fully harmonised global 
market for financial services.  
The Dubai crisis has caused large disparities in terms of country risk in the euro area. 
Greece  and  Ireland  are  currently  facing  long-term  rates  which  are  markedly  higher 
than in countries with European core investors. Are you concerned about the situation 
in these countries? 
The  Dubai  crisis  is  an  illustration  of  the  extent  to  which  the  global  financial  markets  are 
nervous because you only need one crisis, relatively modest, to cause them to worry again. 
This makes me all the more convinced that we must continue to work together to increase 
the robustness and resilience of the international financial system. Those who believe that 
such  efforts  are  futile  and  that  we  have  returned  to  a  scenario  whereby  it  is  “business  as 
usual” are seriously mistaken.  
4 
 BIS Review 164/2009
That said, I am pleased about the decisions taken by the governments in the context of the 
ECOFIN  Council  with  regard  to  the  proposal  by  the  European  Commission  to  remedy  the 
situation  regarding  their  public  finances.  It  is  essential  that  European  governments  fully 
restore confidence in their ability to manage their public finances in a sound and sustainable 
manner  in  the  long  term.  This  confidence  is  a  very  important  factor  in  the  recovery.  As 
regards  Greece,  which  you  mentioned,  I  shall  simply  reiterate  what  I  said  before  the 
European  Parliament:  “Given  the  severity  of  the  situation,  I  am  confident  that  the  Greek 
government will take the necessary and courageous measures in the near future.” 
The euro has remained relatively robust against the US dollar despite the fact that the 
US authorities say they are in favour of a strong dollar. Are you  happy with the US 
behaviour on the currency markets? 
As regard the euro, and particularly with regard to the relationship with the US dollar, I repeat 
what I said at the press conference following the last meeting of the Governing Council of the 
European Central Bank. I think it is very important that the US authorities, the Secretary of 
the  Treasury,  as  well  as  the  chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  have  made  it  clear  that  a 
strong dollar is in the interest of the United States. A strong dollar vis-à-vis the large floating 
currencies is also in the interest of the stability and prosperity of the global economy. 
Finally,  what  has  helped  you  the  most  in  managing  the  crisis?  What  has  been  your 
goal? 
I believe that above all, for the ECB and the entire Eurosystem, it has been our team spirit. 
The Governing Council, the Executive Board, the ECB staff and all the national central banks 
have  proven  their  solidarity  and  unity  under  exceptionally  difficult  circumstances.  It  is 
because of this that we have been able, since the beginning of the period of financial turmoil, 
to make a prognosis which has turned out to be right and to take the appropriate decisions 
for the challenges we have faced. We took those decisions very quickly because we had to, 
without ever losing our course: that is to say price stability in the medium term, which is our 
primary  goal.  I  believe  that  it  is  the  ability  of  the  Governing  Council  to  strictly  maintain  its 
medium  and  long-term  price  stability  strategy,  whilst  taking  quick  and,  where  necessary, 
unconventional  decisions,  which  best  summarises  our  management  of  the  crisis.  But  we 
cannot  afford  to  be  complacent.  We  are  still  in  a  difficult  situation  which  means  we  must 
always  be  on  our  guard.  I  have  been  in  such  situations  myself  many  times,  and  it  is  very 
important to strictly maintain a long-term strategy at the same time as managing a crisis. For 
example, in my country in 1992 and 1993, as Secretary of the Treasury and Governor of the 
Banque  de  France,  I  had  to  pursue  a  long-term  strategy  of  competitive  disinflation  at  the 
same time as being faced with monetary crises in the European exchange rate mechanism. 
Also, as President of the Club de Paris in the 80’s and early 90’s, we pursued a strategy of 
long-term debt whilst managing financial crises in the sovereign countries of Latin America 
and Africa, in particular. At the moment, my colleagues and I believe that one of the most 
important goals is to be an anchor of stability and confidence for our 330 million citizens in 
what is an extremely difficult period. 
BIS Review 164/2009 
 5
