Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Recent developments in the Spanish 
economy 
Testimony  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the 
Senate Budgetary Committee, Madrid, 23 November 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
I appear before this Committee as part of the parliamentary discussion of the State Budget 
for 2010, at a time when the deep international financial and economic crisis is giving way to 
a recovery, albeit one that is expected to be slow and not free from uncertainty. Following the 
successive downward revisions to growth projections during the summer of 2007, the outlook 
has begun to improve in recent months. Indeed, many countries are posting positive growth 
rates for the third quarter of 2009. 
Yet we must acknowledge that this improvement is largely the outcome of the extraordinary 
large-scale measures  adopted  globally  to  boost  demand  and  support  the  financial  system. 
We still do not know whether the incipient world recovery is sufficiently self-sustaining for the 
exceptional stimuli to begin to be withdrawn without the risk of economic activity falling again.  
In the case of the Spanish economy, the situation is more complex. While there has been a 
similar  or  even  lesser  decline  in  output  than  in  other  developed  countries.  However,  the 
effects  in  terms  of  employment  and  public  finances  have  been  sharper.  Hence  the  role 
economic  policies  must  play  to  consolidate  the  recovery  is  essential.  We  are  thus  at  a 
crossroads where it is vital to make the right diagnosis and select the right economic policy 
tools.  
As my appearance is part of the parliamentary discussion of the Budget, I shall be analysing 
the  Spanish  fiscal  policy  situation.  Allow  me,  however,  to  refer  also  to  other  policies  I 
consider essential to resume the path of budgetary stability and to emerge from this crisis in 
the  best  possible  condition.  First,  though,  I  would  like  to  briefly  assess  the  international 
setting  and  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  which,  as  is  well  known,  determines 
monetary policy.  
Projections from various international institutions (such as the IMF and, more recently, the 
European Commission and the OECD) suggest we will resume positive growth rates in most 
countries in 2010 and 2011. But they constantly stress that these estimates are shrouded in 
greater-than-usual  uncertainty,  since  the  take-off  of  productive  activity  needs  a  sound 
financial  basis,  which  in  turn  requires  that  the  normal  functioning  of  intermediaries  and 
financial markets be fully restored.  
In these circumstances, one of the main difficulties governments and central banks face is to 
identify the right time to disengage the extraordinary measures adopted in the financial, fiscal 
and  monetary  fields.  A  premature  withdrawal  might  undermine  the  progress  made,  while 
maintaining  an  expansionary  policy  over  an  excessive  period  might  give  rise  to  further 
imbalances that are difficult to reverse and have negative consequences for growth. For the 
time  being,  what  is  needed  is  to  move  forward  in  the  design  of  stimulus-withdrawal 
strategies, so these may be applied when the right time comes. 
The  euro  area  has  also  shown  some  improvement  recently,  with  positive  growth  rates  in 
some countries as early as in the second quarter. The latest figures suggest that economic 
activity may be expected to show positive growth rates across the area in the third quarter. 
That  said,  the  upcoming  recovery  will  be  slow,  meaning  that  quite  some  time  will  elapse 
before pre-crisis output levels are restored.  
BIS Review 151/2009 
 1
Public finances have worsened considerably in the euro area owing both to the operation of 
the  automatic  stabilisers,  which  have  responded  to  the  cyclical  downturn,  and  to  the 
discretionary  measures  adopted  to  boost  demand  and  the  action  taken  to  support  the 
financial system. The financial crisis and the decline in activity have severely affected some 
European credit institutions, which have come to depend largely on public-sector support and 
which are immersed in a process of adjustment that may have repercussions for their ability 
to effectively channel funds in the future.  
On the inflation front, we have continued to witness year-on-year declines in consumer prices 
in the euro area, due above all to notably lower oil prices than a year ago. Most forecasts 
suggest  positive  inflation  rates  will  resume  in  the  area  in  the  coming  months,  as  the 
comparison effects with the levels reached by commodity prices twelve months back cease 
to  apply.  Yet  the  considerable  slack  in  productive  capacity  and  the  sluggish  recovery  in 
demand  and  activity  across  Europe  suggest  that  inflation  rates,  while  positive,  will  hold  at 
moderate levels in the near future, with no risk of deflation discernible for the moment.  
Given  the  incipient  pick-up  in  activity  and  the  continuation  of  very  modest  levels  of  both 
actual and expected inflation, the official interest rate for the euro area, at 1% since last May, 
is at the appropriate level. Switching our focus to the Spanish economy, the decline in output 
in 2009 is not going to be sharper than in other countries, but the contrast with the growth 
rates  of  the  ten  previous  years  is  more  patent.  The  fact  is,  as  I  have  explained  on  other 
occasions,  the  Spanish  recession  shares  features  with  other  countries,  but  has  its  own 
hallmarks, such as the real estate adjustment and the behaviour of the labour market. The 
powerful external contractionary forces generated by the international crisis compounded the 
internal adjustment on which the Spanish economy had embarked, exacerbating the decline 
in domestic spending and employment.  
The latest figures indicate that, as in the euro area and the rest of the world, the sharpest 
phase  of  contraction  in  the  Spanish  economy  is  now  behind  us.  According  to  the  data 
released some days back by the INE, activity slipped once more in the third quarter, unlike in 
other developed countries, although it did so at a quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.3%. This rate 
was  more  moderate  than  in  the  first  two  quarters,  when  the  decline  was  1.6%  and  1.1%, 
respectively. The fall-off in activity, which stood at 4% compared with the same period a year 
earlier,  was  the  result  of  the  marked  weakness  of  national  demand,  particularly  private 
spending. Only the public components of domestic demand retained positive growth rates, 
due  partly  to  the  inertial  component  of  certain  expenditure  items  (such  as  purchases  of 
goods and services) and partly to measures adopted to mitigate the decline in demand, such 
as  the  State  Fund  for  Local  Investment.  And,  as  has  been  the  case  since  the  opening 
quarters of 2008, the strong contractionary effect on activity exerted by the fall in domestic 
spending was lessened by the positive contribution of the external sector, largely due to the 
notable decline in imports.  
The  strong  contraction  in  demand  in  recent  quarters  is  helping  correct  some  of  the 
imbalances that had built up in the Spanish economy during the boom period. These include 
the excesses in the real estate sector, high private-sector debt, the external deficit and the 
inflation differential. However, the adjustment is operating through a considerable decline in 
activity and the marked destruction of the general business and employment fabric, which is 
giving rise to a sharp increase in unemployment.  
The previous strong concentration of resources in the real estate market is diminishing most 
rapidly,  with  an  acute  decline  in  housing  starts.  Yet  although  the  decline  in  residential 
demand has been very abrupt, lower interest rates and the fall in house prices have placed 
affordability  indicators  at  more  moderate  levels,  which  is  helping  to  stabilise  real  estate 
purchases in recent months.  
In the case of lending to the private sector, we have witnessed increasingly negligible and 
even negative growth rates, and this pattern will probably prevail over the coming quarters. 
These developments in lending have a most significant cyclical component, accentuated by 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2009
the  tension  on  international  financial  markets.  After  the  strong  increase  in  household  and 
corporate  debt  ratios  in  the  previous  upturn,  it  was  inevitable  these  ratios  would  fall  to 
improve the financial position of households and firms, and to assist in the resumption of a 
sustainable  path  of  spending.  The  strong  adjustment  in  spending  is  also  bringing  about  a 
sharp reduction in the external deficit which, after posting a figure close to 10% of GDP in 
2007, may be below 5% of GDP in 2009. The adjustment is based, above all, on the decline 
in  imports  and  on  lower  commodities  prices;  accordingly,  for  this  correction  to  firm  when 
demand  picks  up,  a  more  substantial  contribution  by  exports  will  be  needed  and,  in  this 
connection,  our  export  base  and  the  productivity  of  our  companies  must  continue  to  be 
strengthened.  
In terms of inflation, we are also seeing a significant correction, as there has been a negative 
inflation  differential  with  the  euro  area  for  almost  a  year.  In  particular,  there  have  been 
substantial  declines  in  industrial  goods  prices  over  the  past  year,  while  services  prices, 
traditionally  prone  to  very  high  rates  of  increase,  have  eased  substantially  and  have  even 
been growing at a lower rate than in the euro area in recent months. Admittedly, this negative 
inflation  differential  is  very  closely  linked  to  the  weakness  of  demand  in  Spain.  But  it  is  a 
promising sign of the competitiveness on which the pick-up in activity should be based, so it 
is important that this price moderation should be preserved in the near future.  
As I said earlier, there are two adverse consequences of the way in which these imbalances 
are being corrected: the excessive toll imposed on employment by the crisis, owing to the 
poor functioning endemic in our labour market, and the deterioration of public finances.  
Job  destruction  began  with  great  virulence  in  construction  and  subsequently  spread  to 
manufacturing industry and market services. It was centred above all on temporary contracts, 
given the prevailing duality in the labour market. In recent months employment has continued 
to  fall,  although  the  State  Fund  for  Local  Investment  has  slackened  the  effect.  The 
unemployment rate skyrocketed from 8% in 2007 to almost 18% in the third quarter this year, 
when it stabilised due partly to the strong slowdown in the growth rate of the labour force. 
This  slower  labour  force  growth  was  the  consequence  of  part  of  the  population  being 
discouraged  by  poor  employment  prospects  and  of  the  return  of  some  immigrants  to  their 
countries of origin.  
As in other countries, the outlook for the Spanish economy remains uncertain, although this 
has abated somewhat recently in light of the brighter figures for the world economy. It is likely 
that the recovery in the Spanish economy will lag that in the euro area to some extent. This is 
due above all to the marked weakness of investment, not only in the case of housing, but 
also  in  that  of  business  investment,  given  the  very  low  levels  of  capacity  utilisation.  While 
public investment will continue to account for a high proportion of GDP in 2010, this figure 
will be lower than in 2009.  
The  outlook  for  private  consumption  is  more  uncertain.  The  main  determinants  of 
consumption will not be favourable, given the foreseeable behaviour of employment and the 
difficulty  of  reversing  the  high  unemployment  rate.  Yet  as  the  decline  in  households’ 
consumption  has  been  much  more  drastic  than  that  of  their  incomes,  the  saving  rate  is 
climbing to very high and indeed unprecedented levels. Hence, if the factors of uncertainty 
were to abate, consumption might contribute more significantly to the recovery. 
Given  these  constraints,  the  main  support  factor  of  activity  in  2010  has  to  be  the  external 
sector.  This  will  be  assisted  by  the  earlier  recovery  of  our  main  trading  partners  and  the 
relatively favourable course that Spanish exports are following.  
Foreseeably, a phase of gradual growth will begin over the course of the coming year, based 
on a continuing positive contribution of external demand and on a progressive pass-through 
of  the  improvement  in  the  world  economy  to  business  investment  and  employment.  On 
average, however, 2010 might still see a moderate decline in activity, the result above all of 
the carry-over effects of the negative rates in 2009. The growth path in 2010 might also be 
affected  by  the  VAT  rise  announced  for  next  July,  since  this  measure  might  bring  forward 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 3
some spending decisions to the second quarter, raising demand and activity in this period 
but  reducing  them  in  the  second  half  of  the  year.  This  slow  path  of  recovery  in  activity 
broadly matches the government's macroeconomic forecasts on which the State Budget for 
2010 is based.  
The  setting  I  have  described  highlights  the  significant  challenges  the  Spanish  economy 
faces. For the recovery to materialise and firm, the Spanish economy must first check and 
then  absorb  unemployment,  restore  health  to  business  and  household  finances,  rebuild 
confidence in the economy's productive capacity and reduce the large budget deficit. 
To achieve these goals, I reiterate that it is vital to adopt an ambitious agenda of reforms. 
The economic policies pursued since the start of the crisis have focused on countering in the 
short run a very adverse economic and financial situation, and there is broad consensus that 
the efforts made have contributed positively to this end. However, now the foundations for a 
potential turnaround are discernible, the structural problems of the Spanish economy must 
be addressed to avoid the risk of a scenario of protracted economic sluggishness. 
Regarding monetary policy, the cuts in official rates by the ECB are helping alleviate financial 
pressure  in  the  private  sector.  And  this  is  a  factor  which,  given  the  prevalence  of  floating 
interest rates in Spain, will continue to alleviate the burden on households and firms over the 
coming quarters. 
Fiscal policy has also contributed to softening the downturn in activity by means of a highly 
significant budgetary effort that has been greater than that in other developed countries. The 
cost, though, has been a very swift and sharp rise in the budget deficit which, on the latest 
official government figures, might rise to around 10% of GDP this year.  
Irrespective of how long the cyclical change takes to exert positive effects on the budgetary 
situation, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that much of the deficit generated over 
the past two years has a significant structural component; and the recovery, therefore, will 
not  correct  this  component.  Indeed,  despite  the  fact  that  in  the  coming  years  revenue  will 
foreseeably increase owing to the reversal of the temporary effects of some of the activity-
supporting  measures  adopted  in  recent  years,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the 
exceptionally high revenue obtained during the real estate boom will not recur. At the same 
time, in connection with public spending, primary spending has held at a high growth rate in 
recent years, attaining levels that cannot be sustained for much longer and which, therefore, 
it will be necessary to reduce.  
In turn, the deterioration in the budgetary position is taking the form of a rapid increase in 
public debt and, therefore, too, in the amount of resources needed to meet the payment of 
the interest burden. 
It  should  also  be  stressed,  as  various  recent  past  episodes  in  some  developed  countries 
show us, that the dynamics of rising debt can prove difficult to reverse. All the more so when 
some factors that helped towards its reduction in the past, such as lower interest rates and 
the high growth of nominal GDP, can no longer be counted on. 
The  need  to  reverse  the  high  structural  deficits  and  to  prevent  the  risks  linked  to  debt 
dynamics  from  materialising  thus  evidences  the  fact  that  there  is  no  more  room  for 
expansionary  budgetary  policy.  Given  the  fiscal  imbalance  that  has  built  up,  it  will  be 
essential  to  devise  a  transparent  and  credible  budgetary  consolidation  strategy  for  the 
medium  term  that  will  require  the  adoption  of  ambitious  measures,  especially  on  the 
expenditure front. 
In a setting in which the recovery is still uncertain, the necessary fiscal adjustment should be 
designed in  such  a  way  as  to  minimise  the  potential  adverse  effects  on  economic  growth. 
That  attributes  great  importance  to  the  composition  of  the  adjustment  and,  from  our  own 
experience, measures based on public spending cuts, especially non-productive spending on 
consumption  and  investment,  may  be  most  fruitful  in  this  respect.  Nonetheless,  given  the 
scale  of  the  imbalance  it  seems  clear  that  certain  features  of  the  tax  structure  will  also 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2009
inevitably have to be revised. Selecting tax measures is never easy, and less so when the 
tax  base  is  being  considerably  eroded.  Accordingly,  the  tax  instruments  that  cause  least 
distortion and help reduce fraud should be chosen, so that long-term growth prospects are 
not compromised. And in this respect, indirect taxes, in addition to offering higher tax-raising 
potential, are more neutral from the economic efficiency standpoint.  
In any event, one of the main risks of fiscal consolidation strategies entailing tax increases is 
that  the  increases  in  revenue  may  end  up  being  used  to  finance  new  spending  demands. 
Consequently, a strict application of the budget is especially necessary to ensure that new 
revenue is used in full to reduce the budget deficit.  
The government has reiterated on several occasions its commitment to budgetary stability, 
and its intention to resume deficit levels compatible with a balanced budget in the horizon 
defined by the European authorities in the application of the Stability and Growth Pact rules, 
which has recently been extended to 2013. The State Budget for 2010 is a first step within 
this general consolidation strategy.  
But we should be mindful of the fact that we are at the start of a long process in which the 
credibility of the policies adopted plays a fundamental role. To ensure that the medium-term 
budgetary objectives are realistic, economic policymakers must convey to economic agents 
their resolve to exert rigorous control over the deviations in revenue and spending that may 
occur. 
In this connection, and given the high degree of decentralisation of the Spanish State, it is 
vital that the regional and local governments should be committed to controlling and reducing 
the deficit through compliance with the principles laid down in the law on budgetary stability. 
It  is  particularly  important  that  the  regional  government  budgets  that  are  approved  in  the 
coming months should accept the fiscal consolidation strategy as a key objective, that they 
adopt far-reaching structural reforms on public spending and that they ensure their budget 
outturns are rigorously in compliance with this objective. 
Finally, in light of the huge amount accounted for by the public spending component linked to 
the  deterioration  of  employment,  it  should  be  stressed  that  the  viability  of  any  budgetary 
consolidation strategy for the Spanish economy will depend on this strategy adopting a job-
generating  growth  pattern  that,  as  occurs  in  other  countries,  provides  for  a  significant 
reduction in unemployment. To this end, the main instruments available to national economic 
authorities are  supply-side  and  structural  reform  policies  geared  to  promoting  job  creation, 
smoothing  the  switchover  to  new  productive  activities  and  increasing  the  economy's 
efficiency  and  productivity.  The  future  of  the  Spanish  economy  hinges  greatly  on  these 
policies, not only in the long run but also in the more immediate term.  
The priority of these reforms should be to generate a rapid and deep-seated change in the 
prevailing labour market trends. That requires altering a good number of the institutions that 
currently  regulate  this  market.  In  particular,  innovative  hiring  arrangements  are  needed  to 
facilitate job creation and to overcome the marked segmentation currently in place which has 
adverse consequences for employee training, job stability and for efficiency and equality in 
the economy. In turn, collective bargaining should be reformed so that internal organisation 
and labour costs are better tailored to the specific situation of each company and to cyclical 
developments,  but  also  so  as  to  equip  firms  with  the  flexibility  they  need  to  increase 
productivity.  
But  there  are  other  measures  we  should  not  rule  out,  even  though  their  effects  may  take 
longer  to  materialise.  This  is  the  case,  firstly,  with  education.  Undoubtedly,  improving 
education is the most important issue pending for economic growth in Spain. True, we have 
made  progress  in  some  areas;  but  it  is  no  less  true  that  there  are  incipient  signs  that  the 
increase in the level of educational attainment of the workforce observed in the second half 
of  the  20th  century  is  slowing.  The  reform  of  the  education  system,  moreover,  would 
complement  that  of  the  labour  market.  This  is  because  the  current  labour  market  set-up 
discourages  people  from  spending  longer  in  education  since  it  fails  to  differentiate 
BIS Review 151/2009 
 5
appropriately  between  skill  levels,  leaving  the  young  facing  temporary  contracts  or 
unemployment, with the adverse effects I have already mentioned.  
It  is  also  essential  to  move  to  boost  the  knowledge  economy  so  that  it  may  contribute  to 
strengthening technological capital and to bridging the gap afflicting the Spanish economy in 
this field. This should be done in parallel with pertinent measures to further the liberalisation 
of  goods  and  services  markets,  the  current  regulation  of  which  involves  in  some  cases  a 
diminished level of competition. One key area for progress along these lines is liberalisation 
in the services sector, as it encompasses some of the most dynamic activities and some of 
those  with most  job-creating  capacity.  Likewise  needed  is  further  headway  in  liberalisation 
and competition in the network industries, so that the conditions in which inputs are supplied 
to other productive activities allow Spanish companies to compete on an equal footing with 
our  trading  partners.  And  let  us  not  forget  the  housing  market.  Further  improvements  to 
rental  regulations  are  needed  to  make  this  option  more  flexible  and  profitable,  so  that  the 
purchase of housing for investment purposes is encouraged, thus helping reduce the supply 
overhang, and broadening the possibilities of meeting the population's demand for residential 
services.  
Finally, I must reiterate that the soundness of the financial system is essential for ensuring 
the  financing  flows  needed  to  restore  economic  dynamism.  While  the  Spanish  financial 
system  has  shown  notable  resilience  to  the  direct  and  indirect  effects  of  the  international 
financial crisis, the intensity of the adjustment the Spanish economy is undergoing against a 
background of protracted financial tension adds further factors of pressure in terms of asset 
impairment, an increase in bad debts and a narrowing of bank margins. Faced with these risk 
factors,  not  all  banks  are  equally  prepared,  whereby  the  availability  of  appropriate 
mechanisms, such as those offered by the FROB (the Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of 
Banks),  will  help  banks  face  the  restructuring  necessary  with  the  best  results  for  the 
functioning  of  the  economy  and  the  least  cost  to  taxpayers.  However,  I  must  say  that,  if 
reforms  are  not  adopted  promptly,  high  unemployment  might  be  prolonged,  which  would 
contribute to increasing financial institutions' difficulties and would prevent the soundness of 
the financial system from acting, as it has to date, as an essential pillar of economic growth 
in Spain.  
Allow me to conclude by stressing that the Spanish economy is at a decisive crossroads. If 
far-reaching reforms are not promptly adopted, we face the prospect of slow recovery with 
high  levels  of  unemployment  and  public  spending.  Conversely,  if  the  right  –  although  not 
easy – decisions are promptly taken, we will be able to resume a path of high growth based 
on a more productive and sustainable pattern. To achieve this it is vital to apply medium-term 
stability strategies and ambitious structural reforms, which should be well co-ordinated and 
credible. In devising these reforms the broadest possible consensus would be desirable, as 
that would increase their soundness and effectiveness. But clearly conveying to society that 
the  seriousness  of  the  situation  requires  far-reaching  reforms  will  be  of  paramount 
importance. We would thus be taking a decisive step in leaving this crisis behind us, and the 
foundations would be laid so that Spain may take up a new phase of vigorous growth and 
high job creation  
6 
 BIS Review 151/2009
