Ewart S Williams: Financial literacy in Barbados 
Remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the National Financial Literacy Programme Booklet Launch, Port-of-Spain, 27 October 2009. 
 On January 30, 2010 the National Financial Literacy Programme will be officially three years 
old. There is no doubt that we have come a long way over 36 short months. 
We  had  a  tentative  beginning  because  financial  literacy  in  the  Caribbean  was  largely 
uncharted  territory.  However,  if  it  is  true  that  imitation  is  the  greatest  form  of  flattery,  we 
should indeed be delighted since our lead has now been adopted throughout the region. 
Sometime last week Jamaica launched a nationwide financial literacy programme. 
Also,  and  very  significantly,  the  IMF,  through  its  regional  training  agency  (CARTAC)  has 
begun to market financial literacy throughout the region. 
Particularly, following the recent global financial crisis, it is being increasingly acknowledged 
that financial literacy can play a critical role in economic management both in advanced and 
in developing countries. 
Teaching  people  how  to  save,  spend,  invest,  borrow  and  manage  their  finances  wisely, 
improves an individual financial well-being and quality of life. Financially secure families are 
better able to contribute to the economic and social development of their communities. 
In  the  three  years  of  its  existence  our  National  Financial  Literacy  Programme  has  made 
impressive strides. 
Our schools’ programme has led the way. As at the end of the 2009 school year our primary 
schools programme had been conducted in 485 schools reaching 29,600 students. 
Judging from the responses of the children as well as their parents and the principals, the 
programme has shown instant benefits. 
Parents  of  kids  who  participated  in  the  programme  indicated  in  a  questionnaire  that  their 
children were more mindful of how they spent their allowance but also of the manner in which 
the household budget was utilized. 
Our secondary schools programme is now to be incorporated into the schools’ curriculum, 
thanks  to  the  support  of  the  Ministry  of  Education.  We  are  particularly  grateful  to  the  one 
hundred and twenty-three (123) teachers who gave up two weeks of their summer vacation 
to attend training sessions organized by the Central Bank. 
From  the  inception  of  the  programme,  the  push  for  linking  financial  literacy  and  small 
business development came from the office of Finance and Enterprise Development, in the 
Tobago House of Assembly which had an active small business development programme. 
Further, impetus to the linkage was provided by the rapid increase in small business activity 
throughout  the  country  and  the  obvious  gaps  in  basic  business  information  available  to 
aspiring small business entrepreneurs. 
In February 2008, through the auspices of the Commonwealth Secretariat, the Central Bank 
secured  the  services  of  an  expert  to  prepare  a  basic  “how-to”  handbook  for  the  small 
business sector. The expert’s work was reviewed by the major stakeholders in the sector and 
the result is the series of three pamphlets, entitled “Living the Entrepreneurial Dream”, which 
we launch today. 
The first item of this series, “Start-up and operational issues for small and micro enterprises”, 
addresses  issues  of  relevance  to  new  entrepreneurs.  It  includes  a  segment  aimed  at 
assisting persons in identifying whether they are really ready to start a business. It also deals 
BIS Review 153/2009 
 1
with the critical aspects of business planning and cautions the aspiring entrepreneur of some 
of the risks and challenges involved in managing a business. 
The  second  booklet  in  the  series,  “Record  keeping  –  how  to  keep  financial  records  for 
your  business”  underscores  to  small  and  micro  entrepreneurs,  the  critical  importance  of 
keeping proper financial records. 
Through the use of illustrations, templates and examples, the booklet provides the users with 
information  that  can  assist  them  in  maintaining  proper  cash-flow  records,  separating  their 
personal  from  their  business  finances  and  continually  monitoring  the  performance  of  the 
business. 
The  third  booklet  of  the  series,  “Financial  services  –  where  to  find  assistance  for  your 
business” is a directory of the available agencies and organizations through which small and 
micro-entrepreneurs  can  obtain  financial  and  other  assistance  such  as  training  and 
mentorship. This particular booklet is important, since many persons who want to enter into 
business or who are already in business are not aware of the wide-ranging opportunities that 
are available to them. 
These  booklets  are  not  the  end  of  the  road,  however.  In  collaboration  with  NEDCO,  the 
Chamber of Commerce, YTEPP, etc. we shall be training a number of potential trainers to 
disseminate our SME material to their SME clients or persons who are planning on owning 
their  own  business.  To  this  end  we  are  completing  an  “Instructors  Manual”  and  “Trainees 
Workbook” both of which will be published and utilized in a series of SME Train-the-Trainer 
sessions. 
I am pleased to note, ladies and gentlemen, that the Bank’s interest and work on financial 
education  for  small  business  have  been  actively  supported  by  the  Inter-American 
Development Bank, through its Multi-Lateral Investment Fund (MIF) and by the Trinidad and 
Tobago Chamber of Commerce. 
We  also  launch  today,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  an  insurance  publication  entitled 
“Protecting Your Shelter: Understanding Property Insurance”. 
This second insurance-related publication (the initial publication in this series was entitled In 
the  Driver’s  Seat  focusing  on  auto  insurance)  is  a  collaborative  effort  of  the  National 
Financial  Literacy  Programme  and  the  Office  of  the  Financial  Services  Ombudsman.  This 
second  booklet  should  inform  homeowners  of  the  importance  of  having  adequate property 
insurance. 
All the publications under the National Financial Literacy Programme, whether dealing with 
business education, insurance, banking or whatever, have one thing in common and that is 
that  they  are  meant  to  help  people,  in  their  various  capacities,  make  more  informed 
economic decisions and, in so doing, enhance their “personal welfare”. When the consumer 
is  better  informed,  he  benefits,  economic  efficiency  is  increased  and  economic  policy 
implementation is made that much easier. 
That’s what financial education is about, ladies and gentlemen – to facilitate better economic 
decision-making and greater individual well-being. 
The Central Bank is overwhelmed by the enormous possibilities that this National Financial 
Literacy Programme offers and invites the population to actively support and make optimum 
use of this most important initiative. 
Thank you for participating in the launch of these four important booklets today. 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2009
