  Harun R Khan: IT governance and IT strategy – Board’s eye view 
Valedictory address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the seminar on IT Governance for Directors of Banks at the Institute for Development and 
Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad, 28 July 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Shirish C. Murmu and Kumar Rajesh Ranjan is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Dr.  A.  Ramasastri,  Director,  Institute  for  Development  and  Research  in  Banking 
Technology  (IDRBT),  Prof.  Sivakumaran,  co-ordinator  of  the  programme,  participating 
Directors from banks, faculty of IDRBT, ladies and gentlemen. I am glad to be in the midst of 
this distinguished gathering to take part in the valedictory session on the programme on ‘IT 
Governance for Directors of Banks’. I thank IDRBT for arranging this topical seminar, which I 
believe,  will  greatly  contribute  to  improved  IT  governance  in  banks  under  the  guidance  of 
their Board members. 
2. 
I am sure the experts who have addressed and interacted over the last one and a 
half  day  have  shared  their  thoughts  on  the  changes  that  banking  in  India  and  globally  is 
undergoing and the challenges lying ahead. The basic underlying theme that runs through 
this changing landscape is the ever increasing reliance on technology to cater to the needs 
of faster, accurate, and efficient banking operations, both in volume and value terms, across 
the  entire  spectrum  from  routine  backend  operations  to  the  data  intensive  computing  for 
regulatory  compliance  to  sophisticated  front  end  multimedia  interface  with  the  customers. 
Before I come to the central theme of the just concluded seminar, let me begin with a brief 
outline of the adoption of IT by the banks in India. 
Banking sector and the information technology 
3. 
As is known to the participants while the foreign banks operating in India led the way 
in IT adoption in the beginning, the new generation private sector banks aggressively started 
pursuing technology-based service offering in a big way in the Indian banking sector in the 
90s. Indeed, early adoption of technology by the new private sector banks leapfrogged them 
in customer acquisition and business expansion while protecting their margin. For the public 
sector banks and, also to certain extent, the old generation private sector banks the transition 
was,  however,  not  easy  mainly  due  to  legacy  issues.  The  technology  adoption  by  these 
banks was largely driven by regulatory roadmap, recommendations of various committees, 
such  as  Rangarajan,  Saraf  and  Vasudevan  Committees  and  also  the  instructions  of  the 
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), rather than as a proactive strategy to further business 
interests. The poor communication infrastructure and the staff issues of the era also did not 
help  the  cause  either.  Increasing  competition  from  the  tech  savvy  new  generation  private 
sector  banks,  rapid  innovations  in  the  ICT  sector,  particularly  internet  as  well  as  nudgings 
from the Reserve Bank, however, enabled these banks to catch up with the leaders in the 
banking sector as far as IT adoption in banks was concerned. Establishment of IDRBT by 
RBI in March 1996 can be considered as a major milestone in this regard and the IDRBT has 
been playing a significant role in adoption of technology in the Indian banking sector since 
then. 
4. 
In the recent times, almost all the business activities in the banking industry have 
undergone  rapid  changes  due  to  various  factors  with  IT  being  the  most  significant.  The 
banking  products,  services,  processes,  delivery  channels,  etc,  have  largely  moved  from 
physical to electronic. So we have come to a stage in banking, where IT is an enabler, one of 
the most important business drivers and also a crucial component of the business process 
itself. In a way a large part of the ‘Internal Transformation’ of banking organizations could be 
attributed to IT adoption. Further, as all the stake holders for banks, including the regulators, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  are  adopting  more  and  more  technology  platforms,  banking  sector  has  got  an  ideal  IT 
ecosystem to flourish,  so  to say.  Resultantly,  now  we  are  in  a  situation  when  not  only  the 
digital assets constitute a significant portion of a bank’s assets in comparison to the physical 
assets, its share is also growing day by day. 
Corporate governance and IT governance 
5. 
Before I dwell upon the core issues of IT governance and IT strategy, let me briefly 
highlight the importance of corporate governance in the banks and recent developments in 
this  area.  Participants  may  recall  that,  in  the  recent  past,  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the 
Government have taken a number of steps to strengthen corporate governance, particularly 
in  the  public  sector  banks,  as  recommended  by  the  Committee  on  Governance  of  Banks 
(Chairman Shri P. J. Nayak) (Nayak Committee). Very recently, in May 2015, Reserve Bank 
has done way with calendar of review for banks’ boards and instead advised boards to focus 
on seven critical themes suggested by the committee, namely, business strategy, financial 
reports  and  their  integrity,  risk,  compliance,  customer  protection,  financial  inclusion  and 
human resources. If one looks in to these seven areas, one would notice that IT plays a very 
significant  role  for  achieving  strategic  goals  in  all  these  areas  of  focus.  Therefore,  IT 
governance  and  IT  strategy  by  themselves  also  need  to  be  a  major  responsibility  of  the 
board. Unfortunately while the concept of corporate governance is well appreciated for long, 
the IT Governance has started getting the rightful attention by banks only recently. 
Why and what of IT governance 
6. 
In one way IT governance can be defined as the decision rights and accountability 
framework for encouraging desirable behavior in the use of IT1. The IT governance provides 
a framework for  ensuring that the  information  technology  decisions  take  into  consideration 
the  business  goals  and  objectives  of  an  organization.  As  is  the  case  with  corporate 
governance which aids an organization to ensure that major decisions are in alignment with 
the  organizational  vision,  mission  and  strategy,  IT  governance  ensures  that  IT-related  key 
decisions match the organization-wide objectives over a long term horizon. 
The IT governance exists within corporations to guide IT initiatives and ensure that 
7. 
the performance of IT meets the corporate objectives. A well placed IT policy and structured 
IT  governance  set-up  along  with  corporate  managers  combine  to  ensure  that  IT  is 
synchronized  with  the  business  and  delivers  value  to  the  firm.  In  the  IT  governance 
framework, issues and strategic importance of IT need to be clearly understood so that the 
organization can implement its strategies effectively to face the growing market competition 
on  a  sustained  basis.  A  bank’s  vision  for  IT  governance  must  incorporate  ideas  and 
information  about  the  way  it  executes  its  business  strategy.  It  is  about  how  one 
operationalises the strategy and subsequently capitalizes on market opportunity. It is only at 
the  lower  levels  of  framework  that  the  IT  governance  is  about  decision  rights,  compliance 
with regulations, setting standards, etc. And while I do not intend to minimize the importance 
of these operational elements in the IT governance, I do feel that if a bank’s IT governance is 
primarily  about  being  compliant  and  secondarily  about  business  execution,  then  banks’ 
business  is  not  likely  to  benefit  strategically  from  the  IT.  One  would  then  miss  out  on  the 
larger opportunity that IT governance offers. 
                                                
1  Weill, P. & Ross, J. W., 2004, IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decision Rights for Superior 
Results”, Harvard Business School Press, Boston. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Board driven IT strategy 
8. 
IT strategy being a part of corporate strategy, should be driven by the board. All the 
aspects  of  technology  management,  namely,  cost,  human  capital,  hardware  and  software, 
vendors  and  service  providers,  risk  management  including  disaster  recovery  should  be 
factored in the IT strategy of the bank. The Chief Information Officer (CIO) in a bank needs to 
work in close coordination with business, finance and legal departments as well as with other 
user groups within the bank. 
While  a  bank’s  IT  strategy  can  be  a  codified  document,  it  must  have  enough 
9. 
flexibility 
to  accommodate  emerging  circumstances,  business  priorities,  budgetary 
constraints, regulatory requirements, skill sets, etc. Banks should look at technology adoption 
as a core business driver rather than a compliance requirement. Better IT adoption can not 
only be leveraged to achieve balance sheet growth but also to protect margins and provide 
seamless customer service across different geographies. If one can summarise what could 
be  the  key  elements  of  an  effective  IT  strategy,  then  it  may  comprise  seven  C’s: 
Codification (of IT policies and practices with flexibility built into it), Control ( over systems 
and processes), Continuity (of services and facilities), Confidence (about the robustness of 
the system), Convenience (to the customers and the staff), Cost (implying optimisation of 
investments  made  and  Confidentiality  (meaning  protection  of  customer  information  and 
organizational data safety). 
ICT and financial inclusion 
10. 
It is well understood that ICT could provide a major opportunity in reaching out to 
hitherto  financially  excluded  segment  of  customers,  thereby  tapping  the  enormous 
opportunities at the Bottom of the Pyramid (BOP) by bridging the urban-rural digital divide. 
As we, from the Reserve Bank, have always been emphasizing, the moot point is how can 
banks leverage technology to offer hitherto excluded customers products which are simple, 
safe, low-cost and easy to use. With the ubiquitous presence of mobile phones, the potential 
for mobile banking as a delivery channel for financial services is a huge opportunity in India. 
Banks  may  have  to  strive  to  deepen  mobile  banking  penetration  to  existing  (including 
PMJDY)  and  new  customers.  Putting  into  practice  the  policy  pronouncements  on  JAM  
(Jan-Dhan  accounts,  Aadhar  identity  numbers  and  Mobile  phone  availability)  has  to  be  a 
major  focus  area  of  banks,  if  the  large  number  of  accounts  opened  under  PMJDY  has  to 
become  operational  and  remunerative.  Entry  of  a  sizable  number  of  new-generation 
customers to the banking fold is a great opportunity in this regard. While new customers can 
ab initio be on boarded to mobile banking, efforts may be made to bring a certain minimum 
percentage of existing customers to the fold of mobile payments. Banks may run customer 
education  and  awareness  campaigns  focused  on  mobile  banking  including  its  security 
aspects.  The  rural  branches  in  a  sense  have  to  become  learning  centers  for  ICT  based 
banking. Here the role of staff, particularly the frontline staff, of the banks and the field staff of 
the  Business  Correspondents/agents  is  very  critical  in  handholding  the  new  generation 
customers as they transit from assisted mode to self service mode of digital banking. This 
would also require partnering with merchants for acceptance of mobile payments. The key to 
cheap  and  universal  payments  and  remittances  will  be  if  we  can  find  a  safe  way  to  allow 
funds to be freely transferred between bank accounts and mobile wallets as well as cashed 
out of mobile wallets through a wide spread network of business correspondents. Leveraging 
technology  for  remittance  assumes  criticality  when  a  new  set  of  players  in  the  form  of 
Payment Banks will emerge sooner than later. 
IT Infrastructure and governance: supervisory perspectives 
11. 
As the regulator and supervisor of banks, let me focus a bit on our perspectives on 
the IT infrastructure and governance. As key areas of focus, I would like to list a few of the 
unfinished agenda items which banks need to pursue more vigorously: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  c. 
b. 
a. 
d. 
Quality of returns generated by the Core Banking Solution (CBS) of the banks is not 
up to the mark in many cases and it is not able to provide the data in customised 
formats as required by the regulator / supervisor. Banks have to examine the need 
for making their CBS systems capable of meeting, inter alia, not only all their internal 
MIS  requirements  but  also  of  generating  regulatory/supervisory  returns  on  a  real 
time basis. 
System driven identification of NPAs has not been found robust enough in certain 
banks. Though banks are taking remedial actions in such cases, it does not alleviate 
the supervisory discomfort with this kind of situation. 
Automated  Data  Flow  (ADF)  application  is  yet  to  get  fully  implemented  in  all  the 
banks.  In  absence  of  full  ADF  implementation,  MIS  reports  are  open  for  manual 
intervention and operational errors apart from delay in submission. The system also 
needs  to  address  the  integration  issues  of  the  legacy  data  in  the centralised  data 
server  for  a  robust  MIS.  To  test  the  accuracy  of  returns  generated  through  ADF 
system  around  3000  unique  data  elements  covered  in  the  returns  already  under 
XBRL  process,  Reserve  Bank  will  forward  to  banks  for  generation  of  values  for 
these elements from their ADF system. As is well known, XBRL system adopted by 
the Reserve Bank in 2008 is already benefitting the banks as well as the Reserve 
Bank as an online single point data submission/dissemination platform following the 
international  standards.  So  far  97  out  of  total  267  returns  have  been  taken  up  in 
XBRL system. Banks have to gear up to meet the requirements in this regard as fast 
as possible. 
Recently released guidelines of Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 
on corporate governance principles for banks highlights the board members having 
knowledge, inter alia, relating to role of information technology in risk governance. 
The  guidelines  also  prescribe  that  the  degree  of  sophistication  of  a  bank’s  risk 
management  infrastructure  –  including,  in  particular,  a  sufficiently  robust  data 
infrastructure,  data  architecture  and  information technology  infrastructure  –  should 
keep pace with developments such as balance sheet and revenue growth. Realising 
that  banks’  information  technology  and  data  architectures  were  inadequate  to 
support  the  broad  management  of  financial  risks  during  the  global  financial  crisis 
that began in 2007, BCBS released the “Principles for effective risk data aggregation 
and risk reporting” in 2013. The Principles, inter alia, highlight that improving banks’ 
risk  data  aggregation  capabilities  would  lead  to  improvements  in  terms  of 
strengthening the capability and the status of the risk function to make judgments 
and  in  turn  to  gain  in  efficiency,  reduced  probability  of  losses  and  enhanced 
strategic  decision-making,  and  ultimately  increased  profitability.  Banks  in  India, 
therefore,  have  to  strengthen  the  IT  systems  for  creating  a  robust  compliance 
infrastructure  to  meet  the  international  and  national  regulatory  best  practices. 
Boards of banks, especially of the Public Sector Banks, will have a critical role to 
play in this regard. 
12. 
Banks should also enable an adequately skilled people  in the Audit Committee to 
manage  the  complexity  of  the  IS  Audit  oversight.  A  designated  member  of  the  Audit 
Committee needs to possess the relevant knowledge of information systems, IS controls and 
audit issues. The designated member should also have relevant competencies to understand 
the ultimate impact of deficiencies identified in IT internal control framework by the IS Audit 
function. The Board or its Audit Committee members could seek training to fill any gaps in 
the  knowledge  related  to  IT  risks  and  controls.  Where  needed  in  the  interregnum  period 
services of an outside expert may be taken as a special invitee. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  that  an 
information  system  needs 
Information security and cyber threats 
13. 
Banks face a difficult challenge in the area of security management. With a growing 
population of internal and external users accessing an increasing number of applications, the 
need has grown exponentially for banks to always deploy the latest security tools that can 
help them secure their digital assets, prevent data theft and ensure better compliance with 
regulations. In addition, security management is ever changing. The security measures must 
be highly responsive, quickly deployable and adaptable to new threats and emerging risks. 
Moreover, it should be capable of satisfying a new generation of customers who want more 
personal and customized experiences that match their lifestyles. In other words, convenience 
of the customer has to be balanced with the confidence in the robustness of the system. 
14. 
Human  factor  continues  to  be  the  single  most  important  security  management 
challenge, which also needs to be addressed effectively. The core mitigant in this regard is 
imparting  customer  education  and  creating  awareness.  In  recent  times,  SMAC  (Social, 
Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) is the concept which is driving innovation worldwide, making the 
security  even  bigger  challenge.  Besides,  other  related  developments  like  virtualisation,  big 
data,  mobile  and  working  from  home  as  well  as  globalisation  of  markets  and  other 
demographic  changes  with  their  concomitant  security  implications  have  all  added  to  the 
significance of IT security. In this age, banks cannot afford to leave IT security to chance and 
assume that its vulnerability  will not be known to outsiders, the so called “security through 
obscurity”. While banks should be conscious of the external threat, the internal threats from 
within the organization should also be given due attention. 
Any model of IT security implemented by banks must be able to respond to the three 
15. 
to  maintain.  These  are 
known  core  attributes 
Confidentiality,  Integrity  and  Availability  (CIA).  While  it  is  essential  that  the  digital 
data/information are not made available or disclosed to un-authorised individuals or entities, 
it is also required to be ensured that the accuracy and completeness of the digital assets are 
maintained.  At  the  same  time  the  data/information  should  be  accessible  and  usable  upon 
demand by every authorised person or entity. 
16. 
The incidents of cyber frauds, inter alia, could bring disrepute to the technology led 
banking services delivery channels. In the recent past, the volume of electronic based retail 
payments as a percent of total non-cash retail payments has been going up steadily, from 
47%  to  55%  and  further  to  65%  during  the  years  2011–12,  2012–13  and  2013–14, 
respectively.  The  increasingly  high  volumes  of  banking  transactions  being  routed  through 
internet banking, mobile banking, usage of debit/credit cards, etc. by both sophisticated and 
technologically  uninitiated  customers  forces  banks  to  lay  due  emphasis  on  automated 
system for frauds detection based on advanced algorithms, rather than excessive reliance on 
manual  process.  Besides,  customer  education,  particularly,  of  the  large  number  of  first 
generation  customers  is  the  responsibility  that  banks  must  take  upon  themselves  and 
educate these customers, for example, about does and don’ts of online and mobile banking. 
17. 
A  truly  effective  security  management  will  require  the  layering  of  a  number  of 
solutions that focus on people, process, technology and risk. The management of each layer 
will  need  to  be  based  on  its  context  among  the  diverse  capabilities  and  limitations  of  the 
others. When all the layers are combined, it creates a powerful tool that can offer banks a 
much more successful way to manage their security challenges than any single stand-alone 
solution. Given that sharing the cyber attack experience among banks and drawing lessons 
is very critical, it is important that banks are proactively engaged with Indian Banks – Center 
for Analysis of Risks and Threats (IB-CART) of the IDRBT for incident sharing and benefiting 
from each others’ experience. At the end, an effective interplay of seven S’s viz. Strategy (in 
terms of long term objectives), Surveillance (as there is no substitute for eternal vigilance), 
Sharing (of  experience  without  which  individual  cyber  breaches  will  snowball  into  system-
wide epidemic), Sensitisation (of cyber risks as a serious issue from the top to the bottom of 
the  organization),  Simulation  (by  way  of  scenario  building  for  possible  situations  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
vulnerabilities), Safeguarding (of customers’ interest and organization’s reputation) and Skill 
(technical, legal and operational skill upgradation and orientation of the staff) should form the 
bedrock of a robust IT security system. 
Operational issues in IT infrastructure 
18. 
Coming to the IT infrastructure and operational aspects of IT implementation, banks 
were  beset  with  numerous  issues  as  enumerated  in  the  Working  Group  on  “Information 
security,  electronic  banking,  technology  risk  management  and  tackling  cyber  frauds” 
(Chairman Shri G. Gopalakrishna). As this has been discussed in the seminar, I would like to 
list only a few points, which need more attention by banks: 
a. 
for  assessing 
future  capability,  and 
The  requirements  of  trained  resources  with  requisite  skill  sets  for  the  IT  function 
need  to  be  understood  and  assessed  appropriately  by  every  bank.  A  periodic 
assessment  of  the  training  requirements  for  human  resources  should  be  made  to 
ensure that sufficient, competent and capable human resources are available. In this 
regard,  acquisition  and  retention  of  IT  trained  human  resources  with  attractive 
service conditions has been and will remain a challenge for banks, particularly the 
Public Sector Banks. 
Justification  of  IT  investment  on  Return  on  Investment  (ROI)  parameter  could 
require  implementation  of  an  IT  balanced  scorecard  to  measure  IT  performance 
along  different  dimensions,  such  as,  financial  aspects,  customer  satisfaction, 
process  effectiveness, 
IT  management 
performance. 
The  board  and  senior  management  are  ultimately  responsible  for  outsourced 
operations  and  for  managing  risks  inherent  in  such  outsourcing  relationships. 
Responsibilities  for  due  diligence,  oversight  and  management  of  outsourcing  and 
accountability for all outsourcing decisions continue to rest with the bank, board and 
senior  management.  For  example,  banks  must  have  a  system  of  ensuring  the 
integrity of the currency loaded by outsourced agencies in their ATMs and should 
own full responsibility in this regard. 
The IT Act, 2000 as amended in 2008, also exposes a bank, as an intermediary, to 
various  criminal  and  civil  liabilities  for  breach  in  data  security.  For  example,  the 
newly  inserted  Section  43A  of  the  Act,  states  that  a  firm  possessing,  dealing  or 
handling any sensitive personal data or information in a computer resource which it 
owns, controls or operates, is negligent in implementing and maintaining reasonable 
security  practices  and  procedures  and  thereby  causes  wrongful  loss  or  wrongful 
gain  to  any  person,  such  a  firm  shall  be  liable  to  pay  damages  by  way  of 
compensation  to  the  person  so  affected.  Banks  should,  therefore,  give  utmost 
priority  to  data  protection  in  the  IT  security  framework  and  develop  a  dynamic 
liability management framework. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Way forward – things of future 
19. 
Before  I  conclude,  let  me  briefly  dwell  upon  my  take  on  the  future  of  technology 
based  banking,  in  particular  ICT  backed  payment  system  instruments  which  are  all  set  to 
occupy  the  retail  financial  space  in  a  big  way.  Take  for  example  e-commerce  business  in 
India which is on a higher growth trajectory. Though initially it started with Cash-on-Delivery 
(CoD), net-banking, credit and debit card modes of payment, later on with the introduction of 
e-wallet/mobile  wallet  as  an  alternate  mode  of  payment,  the  business  has  got  the  desired 
impetus.  CoD  involved  a  cost  for  the  e-tailers  whereas  consumers  /buyers  were  probably 
having  lack  of  trust  in  online  transaction  using  net-banking,  credit/debit  card  details. 
Therefore, the wallet has emerged as a safe and secure mode of payment. Such wallets are 
vying  for  the  space  which  was  earlier  occupied  by  debit  cards.  Reserve  Bank  has  been 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  authorizing  banks/non-banks  for  issuing  e-wallets/mobile  wallets  which  is  being  used 
extensively  for  bill  payment,  recharge  apart  from  e-commerce  transaction.  In  fact,  we  are 
already at the stage, when the e-commerce has encroached in to the banking territory. The 
day is not far off when the banks would be viewed more as technology companies offering 
banking products and services. While this will be a new challenge for the sector, I see this as 
opportunity for banks to find new growth driver. 
Prime Minister’s Digital India initiative 
20. 
The recently launched Prime Minister Digital India initiative aims at integrating the 
government  and  related  departments  and  the  public  with  the  objective  of  making  public 
services available to citizens electronically by reducing paperwork. The Digital India initiative 
aims  at  creation  of  nationwide  digital  infrastructure  (broadband  /  high  speed  internet), 
delivery of government services digitally and also increasing digital literacy. This initiative, in 
my  view,  will  bring  in  enormous  opportunity  for  banks  to  innovate  and  expand  services  to 
vast  majority  of  rural  population  though  electronic  deliverables.  As  discussed  in  the  last 
year’s  banking  conclave  (Gyan  Sangam)  in  Pune,  the  top  30  processes  in  a  public  sector 
bank  account  for  around  50%  of  costs  in  back  office  and  over  80%  of  customer  facing 
activities.  If  banks  can  take  steps  to  digitise  the  top  30  processes  quickly  to  improve 
customer experience and cut costs then they can reap huge efficiency and profitability gains. 
This would involve: a) defining the revised workflow, b) redefining technology where needed 
to  transform  the  processes,  and  c)  driving  change  management  across  the  bank  to  adopt 
new processes. 
Big Data 
21. 
As the participants would be aware, Big Data (BD) is a broad term for data sets so 
large or complex that traditional data processing applications are inadequate to handle such 
data.  An  example  of  big  data  might  be  petabytes  (1,024  terabytes)  or  exabytes 
(1,024 petabytes) of data consisting of billions to trillions of records of millions of customers. 
With the amount of data generated today, one would not be surprised that very soon all of us 
have  to  deal  with  BD  in  day-to-day  operations. In  the  scenario,  the  new  challenges  would 
include  data  capture,  data  curation,  search,  sharing,  storage,  transfer,  information  privacy, 
analysis  of  data,  etc.  While  BD  throws  up  these  challenges,  the  use  of  BD  analytics  in  a 
meaningful  way  would  offer  a  significant  competitive  advantage.  Implementation  of 
appropriate  BD  analytics  by  banks  is  going  to  be  the  key  in  achieving  greater  customer 
centricity and for acquiring a deeper understanding of customer needs given the proliferation 
of customers’ external data, such as, social media activities and online behavior. Rather than 
being dazzled by the volume of data, banks should be in a position to convert it into 3 I’s of 
Insights, Innovations and Income. 
Business analytics 
22. 
As we anticipate challenges of BD, there would be emerging technology and skill to 
deal with the BD in a meaningful way. Business analytics (BA) is one such field which can be 
used  by  banks  to  further  their  business  interest  in  the  increased  IT  environment.  BA  in 
general  refers  to  the  skills,  technologies,  practices  for  continuous  iterative  exploration  and 
investigation  of  past  business  performance  to  gain  insight  and  drive  business  planning. 
Business  analytics  can  hold  the  key  to  better  performance,  informed  decisions,  actionable 
insights  and  trusted  information.  By  bringing  together  all  relevant  information  in  an 
organization, banks can answer fundamental questions, such as what is happening? why is it 
happening? what is likely to happen in the future? and how should we plan for that future? 
Data and analytics provide very big opportunities for banks. At some level, actually, one can 
think of it as a way to transform the institution, much the same way in the 1980s and 1990s 
and early 2000s when IT systems transformed the banks in their business processes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Internet of Things (IoT) 
23. 
We are already in the era of ever increasing Internet of Things (IoT). IoT describes a 
world where just about anything can be connected to communicate in an intelligent fashion. 
One study says world today has 15 billion connected devices and in the next five years the 
number may go up to 50 billion. In other words, with the IoT, the physical world is becoming 
one big global information system. For banks the IoT will deliver an unprecedented level of 
data and data-driven customer insight. This will allow banks to provide their customers a truly 
bespoke  experience  with  insights,  advice,  and  offers  that  reflect  the  day-to-day  events  in 
customers’  lives.  The  IoT  is the key factor  that will  enable  a  bank  to fully  transform  into  a 
bank of things. Of course, as I had mentioned earlier, this increases cyber risk manifold as 
attackers can spread viruses and malware from myriad remote devices, thus turning IoT to 
what as someone has described as “gateway to hackers’ paradise”. As Marc Goodman has 
very aptly put it: when everything is connected everyone is vulnerable2. 
24. 
At  the  end,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  major  challenge  that  awaits 
banks in the near future. Three years ago Brett King authored a book that focussed on how 
banking  is going to  be undertaken  without  involving  the  banks3. The message  was  that to 
make banking relevant in the fast changing technology and ICT based payment ecosystem, 
banks have to realise that technology is a great enabler and its powers need to be harnessed 
in every sphere of modern day banking without losing focus on safety and security. As I had 
mentioned earlier, in near future banks will, whether through conviction or compulsion, have 
to transform into technology companies. While leveraging the ubiquitous power of technology 
the focus has to be on what I can call five P’s. They are Products (in terms of offerings), 
Processes (that ensure efficiency of operations), People (both customers and staff that take 
to  technology  engagement  with  maximum  ease  without  losing  sight  of  security  needs), 
Productivity  (by  enhancing  margins)  and  Prudence  (by  building  more  robust  risk 
management system and regulatory compliance culture). For this, appropriate IT governance 
and  IT  strategy  driven  by  Boards  of  the  banks  is  of  paramount  importance.  I  am  sure, 
Directors  are fully  geared  to  accept  the  challenges  of  harnessing  the  power  of  IT for their 
banks and this one and half day’s seminar has been a great catalyst in this pursuit. 
Thank you very much for patient listening ! 
                                                
2  Marc  Goodman,  2015,  Future  Crimes:  A  journey  to  the  dark  side  of  technology  –  and  how  to  survive  it, 
Doubleday. 
3  Brett King, 2012, Banks 3.0- Why Banking is No Longer Somewhere You Go, But Something You Do, Wiley. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
