  Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business 
leaders, Osaka, 28 September 2015. 
 Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with a distinguished 
gathering of business leaders in Kansai. I would like to take this opportunity to express my 
sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the Bank of Japan’s branches in Osaka, Kobe, 
and Kyoto. 
Looking  at  the  recent  economic  developments,  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies, 
particularly China, has led to the sluggishness in Japan’s exports and production. Financial 
markets globally were volatile against the background of the decline in Chinese stock prices. 
Meanwhile, on the price front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index 
(CPI, all items less fresh food) is about 0 percent, due mainly to the effects of the substantial 
decline  in  crude  oil  prices  from  2014.  Thus,  somewhat  stagnant  developments  have  been 
noticeable  since  summer,  but  as  I  will  explain,  the  fundamentals  of  Japan’s  economy  are 
sound  and  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  has  been  improving  steadily.  Quantitative  and 
qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE),  which  the  Bank  introduced  in  April  2013,  has  been 
exerting its intended effects toward overcoming deflation. 
Today,  before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  would  like  to  explain  the  Bank’s  view  on  the 
current  situation  of  and  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices,  as  well  as  its  monetary 
policy. 
I. 
Economic activity in Japan and abroad 
Current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
Let me start by discussing the current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economic activity. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately with a virtuous cycle from income to 
spending  operating  in  both  the  corporate  and  household  sectors,  although  exports  and 
production are affected by the slowdown  in emerging economies. That is, in the corporate 
sector,  profits  have  marked  a  record  high  and  firms’  fixed  investment  stance  has  been 
positive. In the household sector, wages have been growing – as seen in the rise in base pay 
for two  consecutive  years  in  a  situation  where  the  unemployment rate has  declined  to  the 
level  that  can  be  regarded  as  almost  corresponding  to  “full  employment”  –  and  private 
consumption has been resilient. 
The  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  the  April-June  quarter  of  2015  was  minus  0.3  percent  on  a 
quarter-on-quarter  basis,  registering  a  negative  figure  for  the  first  time  in  three  quarters 
(Chart 1). This is due to weak exports affected mainly by the recent slowdown in emerging 
economies and to somewhat sluggish private consumption reflective of bad weather. Exports 
are likely to remain more or less flat for the time being, due to the effects of the slowdown in 
emerging economies. After that, however, they are likely to increase moderately as emerging 
economies move out of their deceleration phase. 
On  this  basis,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue  recovering  moderately,  as  the 
virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  will  continue  to  operate  in  both  the  corporate  and 
household sectors. Now, I would like to touch on two points of note when observing Japan’s 
economic activity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Robust domestic private demand 
First, domestic private demand has continued to be robust. 
In the corporate sector, Japanese firms have been improving their profitability considerably in 
the face of various adversities that have occurred since the global financial crisis. In addition, 
with the correction of the excessive appreciation of the yen and with the decline in crude oil 
prices since summer 2014, Japanese firms have been making record profits, exceeding the 
peak registered before the global financial crisis (Chart 2). Looking ahead, corporate profits 
are expected to remain at their high levels. 
Under  this  favorable  earnings  environment,  firms’  fixed  investment  stance  is  positive. 
Leading  indicators  such  as  machinery  orders  and  construction  starts  also  suggest  an 
increase  in  business  fixed  investment.  Firms’  positive  fixed  investment  stance  could  be 
confirmed by various survey results. According to the June Tankan (Short-Term Economic 
Survey of Enterprises in Japan), the business fixed investment plans of large manufacturing 
firms  for  fiscal  2015  marked  their  highest  level  for  this  time  of  the  year  since  fiscal  2004, 
reflecting  in  part  an  increase  in  domestic  investment  as  it  appears that the  yen  is  likely  to 
remain weak, and those of small firms marked roughly the same level as the average since 
fiscal  2000,  suggesting  robustness.  What  is  worth  noting  is  that,  as  the  excessive 
appreciation  of  the  yen  is  corrected,  Japanese  firms  –  which  had  been  prioritizing  foreign 
investment – seem to be increasing their domestic investment. This is a big change. On the 
back  of  a  marked  improving  trend  in  corporate profits  and the  effects  of monetary  easing, 
business fixed investment is projected to continue increasing moderately. 
Turning to the household sector, labor market conditions are tight as firms have maintained 
their positive stance in hiring. The unemployment rate, which was above 4 percent before the 
introduction of QQE, has declined and recently registered 3.3 percent, a low level last seen 
in 1997, accompanying increases in both the labor force participation rate and the number of 
employees  (Chart  3).  Given  that  there  is  always  a  mismatch  to  some  extent  between  job 
openings and job applicants in the labor market, the unemployment rate cannot go down to 
0 percent. Estimating based on the past relation between job openings and job applicants in 
Japan,  the  recent  unemployment  rate  of  3.0–3.5  percent  could  be  regarded  as  almost 
corresponding  to  “full  employment.”  As  labor  market  conditions  are  tight,  nominal  wages 
have  been  increasing  moderately,  albeit  with  some  fluctuations.  In  the  annual  labor-
management  wage  negotiations  this  spring,  many  firms  increased  wages,  including  base 
pay, which was raised to a larger extent than last year (Chart 4). This development has even 
spread  to  small  firms.  Since  the  number  of  employees  has  been  increasing  and  nominal 
wages per employee have risen, overall employee income has been increasing moderately. 
In  terms  of  household  spending,  private  consumption  is  somewhat  sluggish  recently, 
reflecting  bad  weather  in  the  April-June  quarter.  Nevertheless,  as  the  employment  and 
income situation has continued with its steady improvement and consumer sentiment is on 
an  improving  trend,  private  consumption  seems  to  have  remained  resilient  on  the  whole. 
Looking ahead, with no consumption tax hikes this fiscal year – unlike last fiscal year – and 
crude oil prices declining on an annual basis, wage increases are expected to exceed price 
increases and thereby real wages are expected to rise. In this situation, private consumption 
is  expected  to  be  more  resilient.  Housing  investment,  the  other  component  of  household 
spending,  having  declined  following  the  front-loaded  increase  prior  to  the  consumption  tax 
hike,  has  picked  up  evidently  since  the  turn  of  the  year  against  the  backdrop  of  steady 
improvement in the employment and income situation. The pick-up is likely to continue going 
forward. 
Exports and overseas economies 
Second, I would like to touch on exports and overseas economies. Exports had increased for 
three quarters  in  a  row  since  the  July-September  quarter  of  2014,  but have  recently  been 
more or less flat, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies (Chart 5). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  They are expected to remain more or less flat for the time being, but after that, they are likely 
to increase moderately, supported by the correction of the appreciation of the yen to date as 
emerging economies move out of their deceleration phase. 
Looking  closely  at  the  developments  in  overseas  economies  by  region,  the  U.S.  economy 
has continued to recover, underpinned by household spending. In the January-March quarter 
of  2015,  economic  growth  decelerated  significantly  due  to  transitory  factors  such  as  the 
effects of the severe winter weather and the strikes at West Coast ports, but a clear rebound 
was  observed  in  the  April-June  quarter,  with  high  growth.  Against  the  backdrop  of  the 
continued favorable employment and income situation, the growth momentum seems to be 
solid. The Federal Reserve’s tightening coming into sight also suggests improvement of the 
U.S. economy. The European economy saw continued growth of nine consecutive quarters 
and  has  continued  to  recover  moderately.  As  the  financial  assistance  to  Greece  is  being 
implemented,  global  financial  markets’  view  on  the  situation  has  become  positive.  Going 
forward, as the effects of the depreciation of the euro and monetary easing permeate, the 
European economy will likely continue to recover moderately. 
While the advanced economies are growing steadily, the emerging economies are slowing. 
First, as for China, the recent substantial decline in stock prices has had a significant impact 
on global financial markets. This could be regarded as a correction of the excessive level in 
stock  prices  that  had  more  than  doubled  during  about  the  half-year  prior  to  the  decline. 
Nevertheless, the real economy has also seen somewhat of a slowdown recently. With the 
increase  in  income  levels,  the  Chinese  economy  is  experiencing  a  phase  of  a  shift  in  its 
economic  structure  from  one  centered  on  manufacturers  to  one  centered  on  the  services 
sector,  leading  to  a  change  from  high  growth  to  medium  growth.  The  recent  slowdown  is 
considered to be the adjustments of excess investment in manufacturers in this phase. The 
fact that investment in regional economies has been weak as political, economic, and social 
structural  reform  is  carried  out  seems  to  be  another  reason  for  the  slowdown.  Under  this 
situation,  the  Chinese  authorities  have  been  providing  a  series  of  economic  stimulus 
measures both on the fiscal and monetary fronts. With relatively large room for conducting 
policy  measures  both  on  the  fiscal  and  monetary  fronts,  the  Chinese  economy  is  likely  to 
follow  a  generally  stable  growth  path,  albeit  at  a  somewhat  reduced  pace.  Emerging 
economies other than China are also showing sluggishness, reflecting the spillover effects of 
adjustments in China and global weakness in IT-related demand. This sluggishness is likely 
to continue for some time, but as the positive effects of the growth in advanced economies 
spread, economic growth in those emerging economies is expected to gradually accelerate, 
with domestic demand picking up, supported by economic stimulus measures. 
As a main scenario, overseas economies, particularly advanced economies, are expected to 
continue  to  grow  moderately,  and  emerging  economies  are  likely  to  move  out  of  the 
deceleration phase. On that basis, although Japan’s exports are expected to remain more or 
less flat for the time being, they are likely to increase moderately thereafter. Needless to say, 
due  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  risk  factors  including  developments  in  the  emerging 
economies and in the global financial markets. 
Japan’s price developments 
II. 
I will next talk about Japan’s price developments. 
The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) increased from minus 
0.5 percent just before the introduction of QQE to 1.5 percent in April 2014, excluding the 
direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.  However,  as  somewhat  weak  developments  in 
private consumption continued after the consumption tax hike and crude oil prices declined 
substantially  from  summer  last  year,  annual  CPI  inflation  declined  and  has  been  about 
0 percent since the turn of the year (Chart 6). 
The  absence  of  an  acceleration  in  headline  CPI  inflation  can  be  attributed  to  the  negative 
contribution  of  energy  prices.  Because  of  this  negative  effect,  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  increase in the CPI has been pushed down by about 1 percentage point in recent months. 
Needless  to  say,  unless  crude  oil  prices  continue  to  decline,  the  negative  contribution  of 
energy prices to the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI eventually will dissipate. Simple 
arithmetic shows that the negative contribution of energy prices falling off alone will push up 
the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI by about 1 percentage point compared with the 
current level. 
In addition, although the effects of the decline in energy prices have made it hard to discern, 
the underlying trend in inflation has steadily improved. For example, the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  and  energy  has  been  positive  for 
23 consecutive months since October 2013, and has increased to 1.1 percent according to 
the  latest  figure  in  August.  Behind  such  steady  improvement  in  the  underlying  trend  in 
inflation is that firms’ and households’ views on prices have changed. 
The changes in firms’ and households’ views on prices have been revealed in their wage- 
and price-setting behavior. To begin with, in the spring wage negotiations between workers 
and management last year, base pay was increased for the first time in two decades. In this 
year’s negotiations, base pay was raised for the second year in a row, and at many firms the 
increases were larger than last year (Chart 4). Base pay increases were achieved at more 
firms than last year and became widespread across industries and firms of different size. As 
for  price  setting,  an  increasing  number  of  firms  seem  to  be  able  to  pass  increased  costs, 
including the rise in input prices and personnel expenses, on to sales prices. In addition, it 
seems that households have started to accept such sales price increases on the back of an 
increase or prospects for an increase in their wages. There is a variety of evidence that firms’ 
price-hiking  behavior  has  become  widespread  and  sustained  since  the  start  of  this  fiscal 
year. For example, looking at the items that make up the CPI (all items less fresh food), the 
share of items for which prices rose minus the share of items for which prices fell has risen 
markedly since the beginning of this fiscal year and recently has reached the highest level 
since  2000  (Chart  7).  In  addition,  price  indices  compiled  by  the  University  of  Tokyo  and 
Hitotsubashi  University  by  aggregating  the  prices  of  food  and  daily  necessities  also  show 
clear price increases since April this year on a year-on-year basis, and the increases seem to 
be accelerating. Many firms attempted to raise their sales prices at the beginning of last fiscal 
year, but this coincided with the consumption tax hike, which was followed by a decline in 
demand. Firms therefore were forced to quickly take price rises back. The price changes this 
year present a clear contrast with those last year. The simultaneous occurrence of base pay 
increases  and  price  hikes  should  be  regarded  as  evidence  that  a  positive  feedback  loop 
between the increases in employment and wages and the moderate rise in inflation is now in 
place. 
Given these developments, although annual CPI inflation is likely to be about 0 percent for 
the  time  being,  with  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  steadily  rising  and  the  negative 
contribution  of  the  crude  oil  price  decline  dissipating,  annual  CPI  inflation  will  accelerate 
toward  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  The  timing  of  reaching  around  2  percent  is 
projected to be around the first half of fiscal 2016, but it should be noted that the timing could 
be either earlier or later than the projection, depending on developments in crude oil prices. 
Monetary policy going forward 
III. 
The Bank has been pursuing QQE, aiming to achieve a state in which the 2 percent inflation 
rate  is  maintained  in  a  stable  manner.  The  observed  inflation  rate  could  move,  reflecting 
various  temporary  factors;  thus,  in  order  to  achieve  2  percent  in  a  stable  manner,  the 
underlying trend in inflation is important. As I described earlier, the trend has been improving 
steadily.  However,  the  positive  feedback  loop  between  the  increases  in  employment  and 
wages and the rise in inflation should gain further momentum in order to achieve the price 
stability target of 2 percent. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as 
long  as  it  is  necessary for  maintaining that target  in  a  stable  manner.  It  will  examine  both 
upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices.  The  Bank  maintains  its  policy 
stance that, when there are changes in trend inflation due to manifestation of risk factors, it 
will make adjustments without hesitation if judged as necessary to achieve the price stability 
target at the earliest possible time. 
Concluding remarks 
Lastly, I would like to touch on the point that I believe is most important to ensuring that a 
virtuous cycle of the Japanese economy will continue to work. Now firms are enjoying record 
profits and the labor market is in a full-employment condition. In light of the mechanism of the 
economy, this naturally would lead to decent economic growth and to moderate increases in 
wages and prices, a view that I also share. At the same time, it is also true that the pace of 
increase in fixed investment and wages is lackluster in light of record profits. This is perhaps 
because deflation has been protracted in Japan and it takes time to change the deflationary 
mindset of firms and households. With this in mind, the Bank will continue to strongly commit 
itself to overcoming deflation and to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. As I have 
explained  on  several  occasions,  in  a  situation  where  the  2  percent target  is  achieved  in  a 
stable  manner,  the  current  low  interest  rate  environment  would  not  last  and  the  labor 
shortage would be more acute. Those who act early to move forward to secure opportunities 
in the future by utilizing profits currently at hand will be rewarded, and I am sure some of you 
have already started to act. The mechanism of the economy will surely prevail, and the Bank 
will definitely and decisively play its role. I will conclude my remarks by making this promise. 
Thank you. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
     6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
   8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
