  Luis M Linde: Economic recovery in Spain 
Opening remarks by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the XXII Meeting of 
the Financial Sector, organised by ABC, Deloitte and Sociedad de Tasación, Madrid, 8 April 
2015. 
 Let  me  first  thank  Bieito  Rubido,  the  Editor  of  ABC,  Yolanda  Gómez,  the  Deputy  Editor,  Fernando  Ruiz,  the 
Chairman  of  Deloitte  and  Juan  Fernández-Aceytuno,  the  General  Manager  of  Sociedad  de  Tasación,  for  their 
invitation to the opening of this Encuentro del Sector Financiero forum. 
In my address I shall briefly set out the situation of and outlook for the Spanish economy in 
the European setting; I shall review monetary policy developments in the euro area; and I 
shall  conclude  with  some  thoughts  on  the  connection  between  political  tensions  and  the 
functioning of the Monetary Union which, today, as a legacy of the crisis dating back to 2007, 
are evident and significant. 
The Spanish economy 
I  shall  begin  with  the  situation  of  the  Spanish  economy.  Recent  figures  confirm  the 
momentum  and  strength  of  our  economic  recovery,  against  a  background  in  which  the 
correction  of  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  the  improvement  in  the  external 
environment continue. 
The policies deployed at home and in Europe are underpinning this sound performance. But 
there are other factors contributing to the recovery: the fall in oil prices, which is translating 
into a boost to household incomes and into a reduction in firms’ production costs; the very 
significant depreciation of the euro; and the favourable economic activity figures of some of 
our trading partners within the Monetary Union. 
Turning to prices, the annual rate of inflation has been negative in the first three months of 
2015, running at –1.3%, –1.1% and –0.7%, respectively, although the non-energy CPI and 
the  core  inflation  index  have  been  more  stable,  posting  positive  figures.  In  particular,  in 
March, on preliminary figures, the annual rate – though still negative – is estimated to have 
stood  at  –0.7%,  an  increase  of  0.4  pp  on  February,  which  largely  stemmed  from  the 
correction in oil prices. 
Following  several  quarters  of  sluggish  growth,  a  recovery  is  discernible  in  the  euro  area. 
Most member countries are posting positive GDP growth rates, although there are significant 
differences. Among the major economies, the pace of economic activity is highest in Spain 
and Germany. 
In 2014, euro area GDP grew by 0.9%, compared with a decline of 0.4% in 2013. Driving this 
recovery has been the increase in private consumption, in a setting of improved household 
confidence and income. Other favourable factors have been the contribution of exports and 
gross fixed capital formation, the latter due to the pick-up in construction. 
The data available on the Spanish economy suggest that, during the first quarter of 2015, the 
expansionary  trajectory  observed  in  2014  has  stepped  up.  GDP  is  estimated  to  have 
increased by 0.8% in quarter-on-quarter terms, which would place the year-on-year rate of 
change for the first quarter at 2.5%, a higher level than expected. 
The  recovery  in  the  Spanish  economy  this  year  and  in  2016  will  be  underpinned  by  the 
strength of private domestic demand and by stronger exports. Moreover, the decline in the 
tax  burden, following  the  reform  that  came  into  force  in  January,  and  the  monetary  policy 
measures  recently  adopted  by  the  ECB  –  including  most  notably  the  asset  purchase 
programmes – will also support growth. The projections published by the Banco de España 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
in its Economic Bulletin two weeks ago point to GDP growth of 2.8% this year, followed by 
similar growth in 2016, at a rate of 2.7%. 
As  to  the  labour  market,  the  projections  of  the  Banco  de  España  are  for  growth  in 
employment of 2.7% this year and 2.6% in 2016. The increase in employment will enable the 
unemployment rate to continue shrinking at an even greater pace than in 2014, to stand at 
around 20% of the labour force in the fourth quarter of 2016. These projections, which do not 
appear to be overly optimistic given the figures – published on Monday – for the decline in 
unemployment and the rise in Social Security registrations in March, highlight the need to 
continue pursuing policies geared to boosting competitiveness, investment and exports, the 
only foundations suitable for sustainable job creation. 
Price  developments  in  2015  and  2016  will  be  greatly  influenced  by  oil  prices.  Consumer 
prices  might fall  by  0.2%  on  average  in  2015, and  rise  by  slightly  more  than  1%  in  2016. 
Stripping out the energy component, consumer prices are expected to rise modestly, in line 
with the scenario of growing household expenditure, the lessening of surplus capacity in the 
economy and the depreciation of the euro. The risk of deflation appears to have been clearly 
averted in the Monetary Union and, consequently, in Spain. 
Recent monetary policy conduct 
Let me turn now to recent monetary policy conduct. 
Monetary policy in the euro area has been progressively adapted to medium- and long-term 
inflation expectations, in a setting marked by the weakness of economic growth in the area. 
The armoury of instruments used by the ECB includes conventional or standard measures – 
such  as  interest  rate  movements  and  the  provision  of  liquidity  in  its  ordinary  refinancing 
operations – together with non-standard or extraordinary measures, among which the setting 
of negative interest rates on the discount facility, and long-term liquidity-provision and asset-
purchase programmes. 
The need to keep the deflationary risk at bay, i.e. to keep inflation expectations anchored in 
the proximity of the ECB’s objectives, has been pivotal in determining the successive steps 
to be taken in terms of monetary easing. 
In June 2014, the ECB cut its official interest rates, setting the main refinancing operations 
rate at 0.15%. Also, for the first time, it set the interest rate on the deposit facility in negative 
territory, at –0.10%. 
In addition, it announced new long-term refinancing operations maturing in September 2018, 
with  the  specific  aim  of  boosting  lending.  It  is  worth  noting  that  these  operations  combine 
credit-enhancing  elements,  as  they  link  the  granting  of  liquidity  to  bank  lending,  with 
quantitative easing, through the expected increase in the Eurosystem balance sheet. 
In September 2014, the ECB adopted new measures. First, it made a fresh cut to interest 
rates, whereby the MRO rate stood at 0.05%, its technical minimum, and the deposit facility 
rate became even more negative, reaching –0.20%. 
Furthermore, the ECB initiated asset purchase programmes. In the fourth quarter of 2014, 
the ECB launched its third covered bond purchase programme and, subsequently, its ABS 
purchase  programme.  By  end-March,  covered  bond  purchases  had  reached  almost 
€63 billion, with slightly over €7 billion of these being made by the Banco de España. As to 
ABS purchases, these stood at €4.6 billion at end-March, indicating that this was evidently a 
less significant component of the programme. 
In January 2015, the ECB decided to add a third programme, called the “Expanded Asset 
Purchase Programme”. This involves government bond purchases and marks the launch of 
quantitative easing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Adding government securities and paper issued by supranational European institutions to the 
asset purchase programme was a very important step in the monetary easing and economic 
stimulus policy: the programme will run to September 2016 at least, with a monthly target of 
€60  billion  for  the  three  programmes  as  a  whole,  although  government  bonds  will  be  the 
main component of the purchases and of the increase in the Eurosystem balance sheet. 
The programme is expected to give a significant monetary boost to the economy, keeping 
inflation in the medium term below, but close to, 2%. The monetary stimulus transmission 
mechanisms include both the easing of financing conditions for households and firms and, 
indirectly, the depreciation of the euro. 
Purchases of public securities will be allocated as follows: 88% to euro area sovereign and 
national  government  agency  securities,  and  12% 
institutions  and 
international agencies resident in the euro area. 
Of  the  88%  of  national  government  securities,  8  pp  will  be  acquired  by  the  ECB  and  the 
remaining  80%  by  national  central  banks,  according  to  their  capital  key  in  the  ECB,  with 
some special rules for national central banks whose government debt markets are so small 
that these targets cannot be met. 
Purchases under the public securities purchase programme commenced on 9 March and, to 
31 March, had reached over €47 billion, of which more than €5.4 billion related to purchases 
of Spanish public debt by the Banco de España and the ECB itself. 
With this expanded asset purchase programme in train, monetary policy may be said to have 
exhausted its room for manoeuvre. It should be added that the programme is already yielding 
its  first  fruit  in  terms  of  wholesale  funding  market  prices  and,  more  importantly,  signs  of 
easier financing conditions for households and firms. 
to  supranational 
The politics of the Monetary Union 
I would like to conclude with some thoughts on the political environment in the euro area and 
its relationship to the economic recovery and the improvement in employment throughout the 
area. 
The crisis that commenced in 2007, which is still not completely over, has obviously exacted 
a high cost in terms of political support for what Monetary Union means. 
The  Monetary  Union,  whose  ultimate  justification  lies  in  the  advantages  it  brings  for 
economic  growth  and  welfare,  entails  a  common  monetary  policy  and,  as  a  corollary, 
relinquishing  the  possibility  of  using  devaluation  of  the  exchange  rate  as  a  national 
instrument to correct monetary and fiscal imbalances, and also the possibility of central bank 
financing of budget deficits (known as “monetary financing”). In this situation, there is no way 
of correcting imbalances other than by means of an “internal devaluation”, i.e. through the 
adjustment  of  domestic  prices  and  costs  relative  to  external  ones,  and  by  curbing 
government spending and revenue shortfalls, in real terms. 
This is what the Spanish economy has, with great effort, been achieving since 2012. In the 
truly  difficult  circumstances  of  2012,  Spain  avoided  a  bail-out  that  would  have  been  very 
painful in many ways, and certainly from an economic and social standpoint. Spain never lost 
its access to the capital markets. Admittedly at very high interest rates, and with very large 
risk  premiums,  our  Treasury  was  always  able  to  fund  itself  on  the  markets,  because  the 
markets, while mindful of the risks involved, very quickly appreciated (I am referring to the 
summer of 2012) the seriousness and decisiveness of the corrective action being taken. 
Spain reacted as a responsible and loyal European Union and Monetary Union member. It 
did  not  attempt  to  shift  the  blame  onto  anyone  else,  even  though  the  euro  crisis,  which 
affected  us  very  directly,  obviously  did  not  arise  exclusively,  or  originally,  in  the  Spanish 
economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
To call the correction of unsustainable imbalances (like the balance of payments deficits of 
2007 and 2008, of around 10% of GDP, and the budget deficits, which ranged from 9% to 
11%  between  2009  and  2012)  austerity,  is  not  really  a  very  good  description  of  reality. 
Changing direction when on a path towards impossible and unsustainable situations is not 
“austerity”  but  common  sense  and,  in  a  very  real  sense,  patriotism.  Inevitably,  correcting 
major imbalances comes at a very high cost in terms of employment and welfare, and that is 
the lesson that we can draw from the Great Expansion that ended in 2008 with the bursting 
of the real-estate bubble. 
Imbalances  have  to  be  corrected,  although  obviously  not  anyhow  or  at  any  speed.  It  has 
been argued, with a striking image, that if you are on the twenty-fifth floor of a building and 
wish to descend to street level, it is better to use the lift or the stairs than to jump out of the 
window, even though that would definitely be the fastest way down. The reforms that have 
been approved in Spain – in particular the adjustment of public spending and revenues, bank 
restructuring and labour market reform – have been rigorous, but also prudent, and this has 
also contributed to the recovery. That is certainly the opinion of our European partners and of 
the markets. 
The  European  Monetary  Union  originated  more  than  twenty  years  ago  in  the  Maastricht 
Treaty, and became a reality in the markets more than fifteen years back. In those days, the 
idea of a Monetary union was capable of mobilising extensive political support, but with time, 
and the crisis, this has been somewhat eroded. 
The  Monetary  Union  alters  economic  policy  priorities  and  their  relative  importance  and 
changes the way in which economic pressures are relieved. It is an economic construct, but 
also a political one, and cannot survive without political support. 
If the Monetary Union – now bolstered by the Banking Union – is to remain one of the great 
landmarks  on  the  road  to  European  union,  the  support  for  it  needs  to  be  renewed  and 
strengthened.  And  this  naturally  cannot  be  achieved  by  monetary  policy,  or  even,  I  would 
say, by economic policy, alone. Governments must press ahead with the reforms needed to 
make the economies of the European Monetary Union more flexible and productive, thereby 
spurring innovation and investment. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
