  Øystein Olsen: Integrating financial stability and monetary policy 
analysis 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Systemic Risk Centre, London School of Economics, London, 27 April 2015. 
 Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Norges Bank’s website. 
Thank you for the opportunity to talk to you here at the Systemic Risk Centre this evening. 
The Centre is bringing forward research and applied knowledge in a subject that has now 
become a key issue in central banking. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  2008–09  financial  crisis,  central  banks  and  academia  have  put 
systemic  risk  and  the  interlinkages  between  monetary  and  financial  stability  high  on  the 
agenda. The crisis showed that keeping inflation low and stable was not sufficient to prevent 
imbalances  in  the  financial  system.  It  also  showed  that,  left  alone,  the  financial  system  is 
prone to excessive risk-taking. And we were reminded of how costly a financial crisis can be. 
Another lesson, more specific to central banks, is that there are synergies to be gained from 
closer integration of financial stability and monetary policy analysis. 
A  clearer  macroprudential  dimension  has  now  been  incorporated  into  banking  regulation. 
Examples of this new orientation are the introduction of a systemic risk buffer and a time-
varying  countercyclical  capital  buffer  for  banks.  The  new  macroprudential  toolkit  is  being 
accompanied  by  higher  permanent  capital  requirements  and  new  regulations  on  banks’ 
capital  structure.  The  aim  is  to  make  the  financial  sector  more  resilient  to  shocks  and  to 
prevent or mitigate the build-up of systemic risk. 
As the new regulatory regime has been introduced, another dimension has been added to 
the  discussion. The question  being  asked  is  the  following:  do  reformed banking  regulation 
and  the  new  macroprudential  instruments  relieve  monetary  policy  of  any  responsibility  for 
financial stability? 
A  good  starting  point  for  the  discussion  is  Tinbergen’s  basic  principles,  which  state  that  a 
wider set of policy instruments makes it possible to achieve a wider set of objectives and that 
each  instrument  should  be  assigned  to  the  objective  it  can  achieve  most  effectively.1  The 
comparative advantage of monetary policy is to control inflation and smooth fluctuations in 
output and employment. The first line of defence against shocks in the financial system is, on 
the other hand, regulation and monitoring of financial institutions. Macroprudential policy is 
part of this defence. 
We  should  also  bear  in  mind  that  experience  of  the  new  regulatory  regime  and  the 
macroprudential toolkit is still limited. It is too early to assess the effectiveness of the new 
instruments. On the other hand, we do know that interest rates affect house prices and debt. 
This suggests that monetary policy should take into account the risk of financial imbalances. 
Chart: Unemployment, inflation, house prices and household debt ratio in Norway, the UK, 
the US and the euro area 
Norges Bank has in periods kept the interest rate somewhat higher than implied by medium-
term inflation and output gap considerations. In other words, we have been “leaning against 
                                                
1  Tinbergen, J. (1952): On the theory of economic policy, North-Holland Publishing Company, 2nd edition. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  wind”.  Norway  is  a  large  exporter  of  petroleum,  and  our  economy  has  benefitted  from 
15 years of high oil prices. Unemployment has been low and consumer price inflation close 
to the 2.5 percent inflation target. At the same time, house prices have been rising sharply, 
and household debt is at a historically high level. Hence, our monetary policy trade-offs have 
in recent years differed from those of our trading partners. 
Before  I  return  to  the  interlinkages  between  financial  stability  and  monetary  policy,  let  me 
describe some elements of macroprudential policy in Norway. 
Banking regulation has recently been reformed in Norway in accordance with Basel III and 
directives issued by the European Union. Capital requirements have been increased and the 
countercyclical capital buffer has been introduced. Norges Bank is responsible for conducting 
analyses and providing advice on the level of the countercyclical capital buffer for banks. The 
responsibility for the final decision on the buffer level lies with the Ministry of Finance. The 
current  decision  requires  Norwegian  banks  to  hold  a  countercyclical  capital  buffer  as  from 
July this year. The banks have also increased their capital levels over the past few years. As 
a result, the financial system in Norway is now more resilient to shocks. 
An accountable and credible macroprudential policy must be based on an understanding of 
how  systemic  risk  arises.  The  academic  research  on  macroprudential  policy  issues  is 
growing, but is still at an early stage. Some conclusions seem, however, to be robust. Many 
studies single out rapid credit growth in particular as a symptom of rising systemic risk. This 
is in line with the recommendations from the Basel Committee and the EU, which state that 
decisions on the countercyclical capital buffer should be based on the credit gap. 
Chart: Basis for advice on the countercyclical capital buffer: key indicators 
In preparing its advice on the buffer decision, Norges Bank adds three other variables as key 
indicators. The three variables are, as shown in the chart: house prices, commercial property 
prices and banks’ wholesale funding ratio. 
Together, the four indicators contain a considerable amount of information about how cyclical 
systemic risk evolves. 
Chart: Early warning models for financial crises 
A  number  of  studies  have  indicated  that  credit  growth,  real  estate  prices  and  banks’ 
wholesale funding ratio show a systematic pattern ahead of financial crises. At Norges Bank, 
we have examined data from 16 OECD countries to see whether such a systematic pattern 
exists.2 We have developed empirical models for estimating the probability of a crisis. The 
model-based predictions can be interpreted as the probability that the economy is in a pre-
crisis period. The chart shows estimated crisis probabilities for the US, Spain, Norway and 
the UK. The band reflects various combinations of explanatory variables and trend estimation 
methods.3 The dataset covers the period from 1970 to 2013, with a total of 27 events defined 
as crises, of which 11 are associated with the financial turmoil in 2008–2009. 
As you can see from the chart, the estimated probability of a crisis increased markedly in the 
years  ahead  of  the  financial  crisis  in  2008–2009,  although  the  UK  is  the  exception  in  that 
context.  Crisis  probabilities  also  increased  in  the  US  ahead  of  the  US  Savings  and  Loan 
crisis,  in the  UK  ahead of the  UK’s  small-bank crisis  and  in  Norway  ahead  of  the  banking 
crisis in the late 1980s and early 1990s. All these episodes featured rapid growth in credit 
and rising real estate prices. 
                                                
2  See Anundsen, A.K., F. Hansen, K. Gerdrup and K. Kragh-Sørensen (2014): «Bubbles and crises: The role of 
house prices and credit», Norges Bank Working Papers 14/2014. 
3  The indicators are incorporated in growth form or as deviations from estimated long-term trends. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The empirical results support our choice of key indicators of financial imbalances. Household 
and  corporate  credit,  house  prices  and  banks’  wholesale  funding  ratio  are  statistically 
significant in the models and clearly influence the estimated probability of a crisis. The results 
also indicate that a low equity ratio in the banking sector can be an early warning of future 
instability. 
While  indicators  and  empirical  models  can  provide  support  in  the  assessment  of  financial 
imbalances, they can of course only go so far. Their ability to produce a precise estimate of 
systemic  risk  is  limited.  No  two  financial  crises  are  alike,  and  the  financial  system  is 
constantly evolving. In addition, the assessment of systemic risk must include an analysis of 
the  consequence  of  a  crisis.  Assessments  of  systemic risk  are therefore  always  based  on 
judgement. 
The  primary  aim  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  is  to  make  banks  more  robust.  The 
buffer may  to  some extent  also  dampen the  build-up  of financial  imbalances.  However,  its 
impact  on  markets  will  depend  on  how  banks  increase  capital  ratios.  Roughly  speaking, 
banks  have  two  options  at  their  disposal:  they  can  1)  increase  equity  capital  or  2)  reduce 
risk-weighted assets. 
Chart: Increased capital requirements in Norway 
Over the past few years, in order to meet the new requirements, the six largest Norwegian 
banks  taken  together  have  almost  doubled  their  capital  adequacy  ratio,  measured  by 
Common Equity Tier 1 capital. This is primarily the result of a significant increase in capital.4 
Retained earnings contributed the most, and banks widened their lending spreads in 2013. 
Equity issues have been of minor importance. 
The  second  option  I  mentioned  involves  improving  capital ratios  by  reducing  risk-weighted 
assets.  Rather  than  slowing  lending,  Norwegian  banks  have  reduced  their  risk-weighted 
assets through lower risk weights and changes in the composition of their lending portfolios. 
Lending  has  increased  more  in  the  residential  mortgage  market,  which  features  lower  risk 
weights than in the corporate lending market. 
Norwegian banks’ adjustment strategies remind us that macroprudential policy can influence 
economic  activity  through  various  channels,  and  thus  have  an  effect  on  price  stability,  the 
main objective of monetary policy. Macroprudential policy could also have an impact on the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  For  instance,  if  new  regulations  reduce 
households’ ability to borrow against home equity, the credit channel of monetary policy is 
likely to become weaker. 
Monetary  policy,  for  its  part,  can  be  one  of  several  factors  contributing  to  a  build-up  of 
financial  imbalances.  We  have  learned  again  that  long  periods  of  low  interest  rates  can 
increase the risk that debt and asset prices will reach unsustainable levels. And, as we have 
witnessed,  low  interest  rates  tend  to  prompt  financial  market  participants  to  intensify  their 
search for yields from high-risk assets. 
Hence,  even  though  the  objectives  and  the  instruments  are  different,  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential policy cannot be viewed as separate. 
Indeed, monetary and macroprudential policy instruments can work in the same direction. If 
the economy is booming, with rising inflation prospects and the risk of a build-up of financial 
imbalances, a simultaneous tightening of both monetary policy and a macroprudential tool – 
the countercyclical capital buffer – can underpin the objectives of both policies. Likewise, a 
                                                
4  Winje,  H.  and  L.T.  Turtveit  (2014):  “Norwegian  banks’  adjustment  to  higher  capital  requirements”,  Norges 
Bank Staff Memo 14/2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  pronounced economic downturn with increased bank losses can be addressed by lowering 
both the key policy rate and the capital buffer. 
In other situations, it may be appropriate to reduce the key policy rate while at the same time 
raising  the  level  of  the  capital  buffer.  If,  for  instance,  there  are  prospects  that  inflation  will 
become too low at the same time as debt and house prices are rising rapidly, the key policy 
rate  will  be  reduced,  in  line  with  its  primary  task  of  maintaining  a  nominal  anchor  for  the 
economy. Unwarranted negative effects on financial stability of lower interest rates could in 
this case be counteracted by raising the level of the countercyclical buffer. 
Macroprudential policy and stricter banking regulation help to reduce systemic risk, but we 
cannot act on the assumption that tighter regulation alone will suffice to prevent future crises. 
Monetary policy, on the other hand, has well-documented effects on house prices and debt. 
Thus,  monetary  policy  deliberations  at  Norges  Bank give  weight  to mitigating the  risk  of  a 
build-up of financial imbalances. By taking financial stability considerations into account, we 
seek better, more stable outcomes for inflation and output in the longer run. 
A simple analytical framework can serve to illustrate this point. 
Chart: Framework 
Consider a central bank with a flexible inflation targeting regime. This means that the central 
bank gives weight to fluctuations in output as well as to inflation. The expected future paths 
for inflation and output are included in the loss function. 
Let us now include a variable that captures the transmission of financial market instability to 
the  wider  economy.  In  this  stylised  model,  the  variable,  called  zt,  enters  the  aggregate 
demand function. 
To simplify, we assume that there are only two states with respect to financial stability: either 
normal times with well-functioning financial markets or a situation of financial market stress 
(cf. the α parameter). If instability in financial markets emerges (i.e. α equals 1), the impact 
on the real economy will depend on the level of the financial imbalances. 
Within this framework, the risk of financial instability is endogenous, and monetary policy can 
influence  this  risk.  A  higher  risk  of  instability  can  depress  expected  growth  and  inflation. 
When the central bank assesses the future path of inflation and output, it therefore has an 
incentive to dampen the build-up of financial imbalances. In this way, the central bank can 
contribute to a smoother expected path for inflation, output and employment over time. 
Let us now introduce an economic situation that is not unlike the one experienced in Norway 
in recent years: interest rates abroad decline and there are prospects that they will remain 
low for a long period. This results in a widening of the differential between interest rates at 
home and abroad, leading to an exchange rate appreciation. This in turn could lead to lower 
inflation and economic activity. The central bank’s response is to lower the policy rate. 
Chart: Financial stress does not arise 
As a starting point for our model exercise, let us first assume that neither the central bank nor 
other economic agents recognise that financial stress could arise. The blue lines in the panel 
show the path for the policy rate, the output gap, inflation and the financial imbalances in this 
case. Capacity utilisation increases and inflation returns to target. However, the low interest 
rate level leads to an increase in the financial imbalances. 
Let  us  return  to  the  extended  model,  and  assume  that  the  central  bank  recognises  that 
financial stress could arise further out and takes into account the possible impact of financial 
imbalances on inflation and output. This scenario is represented by the red lines. The policy 
rate  is  still  reduced,  but  to  a  lesser  extent.  In  this  scenario,  it  takes  longer  for  inflation  to 
move up to target. The policy stance also results in a somewhat weaker increase in activity. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  At  the  same  time,  the  slightly  higher  policy  rate  contributes  to  mitigating  the  build-up  of 
financial imbalances. So far, we have assumed that financial stress has not occurred. Hence, 
we have not reaped the benefits of the “leaning against the wind” strategy. 
Now, let us see what occurs if financial stress does arise further out. 
Chart: Financial stress arises 
The  red  lines  in  the  panel  again  show  a  scenario  where  the  central  bank  does  take  into 
account the possible effect of monetary policy on financial stress. When financial turbulence 
occurs, the economic setback is less pronounced and less prolonged than if the central bank 
had not taken this risk into account in monetary policy, as illustrated by the blue lines. The 
benefit  gained  from  keeping  the  interest  rate  somewhat  higher  in  the  short  term  is  in  this 
case a more stable path for inflation and output over time. 
This  framework  is  highly  stylised.  In  the  actual  implementation  of  monetary  policy  we  are 
faced with a number of difficulties. First, developments in debt and house prices depend on a 
number of factors in addition to the interest rate. Second, both the costs and the benefits of 
leaning  against  the  wind  are  uncertain. What  we  do  know,  however,  is  that  the  economic 
consequences of a financial crisis are so serious that an insurance premium is worth paying. 
Let  me  now  return  to  the  Norwegian  economy  and  to  the  trade-offs  in  recent  interest  rate 
setting in Norway. 
As I said earlier, the key policy rate in Norway has in recent years been kept slightly higher 
than implied by medium-term outlook for inflation and output, in order to mitigate the risk of a 
build-up of financial imbalances. 
However,  through  last  autumn,  oil  prices  fell  sharply  and  the  growth  outlook  for  the 
Norwegian  economy  weakened.  Against  this  background,  Norges  Bank  cut  the  key  policy 
rate by 0.25 percentage point to 1.25 percent in December last year. Weight was given to 
countering the risk of a pronounced downturn in the Norwegian economy. Financial stability 
considerations were not taken off the table, but a new risk had entered the scene. 
Through the following winter months, developments in the Norwegian economy were broadly 
in line with expectations. The effects of the fall in oil prices on the real economy had been 
relatively small. Inflation remained close to 2.5 percent and unemployment was stable. At the 
same time, house prices continued to rise rapidly. Therefore, balancing of the different kinds 
of risks – the risk of a pronounced downturn in the economy versus the risk of a build-up of 
financial  imbalances  –  shifted  slightly  from  December.  An  overall  assessment  led  Norges 
Bank to keep the key policy rate unchanged at 1.25 percent at the monetary policy meeting 
in  March.  However,  we  also  communicated  an  intention  to  lower  the  key  policy  rate  if 
developments in the economy ahead proved to be broadly as projected. 
At the same time, Norges Bank advised the Ministry of Finance to keep the countercyclical 
buffer unchanged at 1 percent. Norges Bank added, however, that if house prices continued 
to rise rapidly and credit growth increased, it would be appropriate to advise the Ministry to 
raise the level of the countercyclical capital buffer effective from summer 2016. 
In  my  introduction,  I  posed  a  question:  do  reformed  banking  regulation  and  the  new 
macroprudential  instruments  relieve  monetary  policy  of  any  responsibility  for  financial 
stability? 
So let me conclude. 
While  increased  capital  requirements  and  macroprudential  policy  can  strengthen  banks’ 
solidity  and  mitigate  the  build-up  of  imbalances,  we  cannot  proceed  under  the  assumption 
that  new  regulations  alone  will  eliminate  the  risk  of  financial  instability.  A  robust  monetary 
policy  should  therefore  take  into  account  the  risk  of  a  build-up  of  financial  imbalances. 
Monetary policy could then contribute to more stable economic developments over time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  must  not  be  overburdened.  Banking  regulation  and 
supervision must be the first line of defence against shocks to the financial system. When 
assessing the monetary policy trade-offs, central banks must pursue the primary objective of 
monetary policy – low and stable inflation. 
  6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     7 
   8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
