  Glenn Stevens: Observations on the financial system 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Financial Review Banking & Wealth Summit, Sydney, 28 April 2015. 
I thank Elliott James for assistance in compiling these remarks. 
 Good morning and thank you to the Australian Financial Review for inviting me to speak here 
today. Your conference comes at an opportune time, since there are plenty of things to talk 
about. 
Global financial markets are still in the grip of a pervasive search for yield. 
Major  regulatory  reform  proposals  are  still  being  designed  and  implemented  at  the  global 
level. 
Meanwhile, technological change is continuing to offer new opportunities for businesses to 
serve customers and disrupting established ways of doing things. 
And, not least, the Financial System Inquiry released its Final Report late last year. 
You have a very extensive list of speakers over the next two days who will no doubt cover all 
this  territory  and  more.  So  my  remarks  will  be  fairly  general  only.  Ahead  of  next  week’s 
meeting of the Reserve Bank Board, I have no comments to offer today on monetary policy. 
Perhaps I might begin with a few remarks about the Financial System Inquiry. 
The  Reserve  Bank  welcomes  the  Inquiry’s  Report.  The  Inquiry  had  a  distinguished 
committee,  a  capable  secretariat,  and  an  effective  and  robust  process  of  discussion  and 
engagement.  The  Bank  found  its  own  engagement  with  the  Committee  very  constructive. 
The Report is comprehensive and shows the Inquiry grappling with the big issues of our time. 
I hope the Chairman will not mind me saying that all Inquiries are, inevitably, shaped to some 
extent by the circumstances they face. 
The  Campbell  Inquiry  came  at  a  time  when  the  weight  of  informed  opinion  had  already 
shifted quite a way towards favouring deregulation. After a long period of experience with a 
highly  regulated  system,  the  limitations  were,  by  the mid  1970s,  increasingly  apparent.  So 
the push was towards a financial system where market forces dictated more of the terms of 
engagement.  That  deregulatory  mindset  helped  prepare  the  ground  for  two  of  the  most 
significant  –  and  beneficial  –  changes  our  financial  system  has  seen  in  modern  times. 
Floating  the  exchange  rate  was  one  of  them.  The  other  was  removing  constraints  on 
competition in the banking system. 
By  the  time  the  Wallis  Inquiry  came  around  in  the  mid  1990s  the  financial  system  had 
undergone  significant  change.  There  had  been an  influx  of  new  banks. There  had  been  a 
sharp run-up in credit, a boom in asset prices, a bust and a painful recession in the early 
1990s. The importance of capital and supervision had been reinforced. But by the mid 1990s, 
developments in technology and the anticipated growth of capital markets loomed large and 
shaped  the  environment  for  that  Inquiry.  The  importance  of  payments  systems  was  much 
more on the radar screen. 
As  you  know,  the  Wallis  recommendations  transformed  the  regulatory  architecture.  APRA 
(Australian  Prudential  Regulation  Authority)  was  created  and  took  charge  of  bank 
supervision,  a  function  previously  performed  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  a  new  Payments 
System Board was created in the Bank with a mandate for efficiency and competition in the 
payments  system  as  well  as  controlling  risk  and  contributing  to  financial  stability.  ASIC 
(Australian  Securities  and  Investments  Commission)  was  given  a  stronger  consumer 
protection mandate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  That  regulatory  architecture  continues  today.  There  is  no  serious  discussion  about  major 
change  to  it.  Indeed,  as  has  been  noted  before,  the  regulatory  set-up  and  the  Australian 
financial system more generally came through the most severe international financial crisis 
since the Great Depression very well. Not unscathed, not without some missteps or liquidity 
pressures  and  not  without  some  credit  losses.  And  not  without  some  important  supportive 
policy actions. But overall, we can certainly hold our heads up when the crisis narrative is 
told. 
At the same time, there are critical learnings for Australia from the experiences of those who 
had a worse time of it than us through the past seven years. We survived the crisis pretty 
well, but how do we avoid that leading to complacency? What do we have to do to protect 
against a future crisis? How should we respond to the wave of changes to global regulatory 
standards? 
Meanwhile, the technological frontier continues to move ahead quickly, even if in ways that 
Wallis  could  not  foresee.  And  Australia’s  privately  funded  retirement  income  system  – 
growing at the time of Wallis but by now amounting to about 100 per cent of GDP – could not 
be omitted from any comprehensive review of the system. 
This, then, was the backdrop when the Murray Committee set to work. 
The Inquiry has eschewed wholesale changes in favour of more incremental ones. I do not 
intend to offer a point by point response to all the recommendations. Let me touch on just a 
few themes. 
The first is enhancing the banking system’s resilience. There are a few issues here, the most 
contentious  of  which  is  whether  banks’  capital  ratios,  which  have  already  risen  since  the 
crisis, should be a little higher still. The Inquiry concluded that they should. 
There has been a lot of debate about just where current capital ratios for Australian banks 
stand  in  the  international  rankings.  The  reason  there  is  so  much  debate  is  because  such 
comparisons  are  difficult  to  make.  There  seems  little  doubt,  though,  that  most  supervisory 
authorities (and for that matter most banks) around the world have, since the crisis, revised 
their  thinking  on  how  much  capital  is  needed  and  none  of  those  revisions  has  been 
downward.  So  wherever  we  stood  at  a  point  in time, just to  hold  that  place  requires more 
capital.  And  it’s  likely  to  be  demanded  by  the  market.  There’s  generally  not  much  doubt 
about which way the world is moving. 
Of course, capital is not costless. If capital requirements become too onerous then the higher 
cost of borrowing could impinge on economic growth. But more capital brings the benefit of a 
more resilient system, one less prone to crisis and one more able to recover if a crisis does 
occur. Crises are infrequent, but very expensive. So there is a cost-benefit calculation to be 
done,  or  a  trade-off  to  be  struck  –  higher-cost  intermediation,  perhaps  slightly  reduced 
average economic growth in normal times, in return for the reduced probability, and impact, 
of  deep  downturns  associated  with  financial  crises.  The  Inquiry,  weighing  the  costs  and 
benefits, concluded that the benefits of moving further in the direction of resilience outweigh 
the rather small estimated costs. 
The  second  set  of  issues  surround  “too-big-to-fail”  institutions  and  their  resolution.  The 
Inquiry is to be commended for grappling with this. These issues are complex and even after 
substantial regulatory reform at the global level, there is still key work in progress. The stated 
aim of all that work is to get to a situation where, with the right tools and preparation, it would 
be possible to resolve a failing bank (or non-bank) of systemic importance, without disrupting 
the provision of its critical functions and without balance sheet support from the public sector. 
This is explicitly for globally systemic entities, but the Inquiry has, sensibly enough, seen the 
parallel issue for domestically systemic ones as worthy of discussion. 
Ending ‘too-big-to-fail’ is an ambitious and demanding objective. To achieve it, not only must 
systemic institutions hold higher equity capital buffers, but more tools to absorb losses are 
needed in the event the equity is depleted. Typically envisaged is a “bail-in” of some kind, in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  which  a  wider  group  of  creditors  would  effectively  become  equity  holders,  and  who  would 
share in the losses sustained by a failing entity. For this to work, there needs to be a market 
for  the  relevant  securities  that  is  genuinely  independent  of  the  deposit-taking  sector  –  we 
can’t  have  banks  hold  one  another’s  bail-in  debt.  In  a  resolution,  a  host  of  operational 
complexities  would  also  have  to  be  sorted  out.  A  resolution  needs  the  support  of  foreign 
regulators if it is to be recognised across borders. It needs temporary stays on derivatives 
contracts so that counterparties don’t scramble for collateral at the onset of resolution. And it 
needs to be structured and governed well enough to withstand potential legal challenges and 
sustain market confidence. 
A proposal for “total loss-absorbing capacity”, or TLAC, was announced at the G20 Summit 
in  Brisbane  last  year.  Consultations  and  impact  assessments  are  under  way,  and  an 
international  standard  on  loss-absorbing  capacity  will  be  agreed  by  the  G20  Summit  in 
Antalya  later  this  year;  guidance  on  core  policies  to  support  cross-border  recognition  of 
resolution actions should be finalised shortly after. 
It  is  fair  to  say  that  in  its  main  submission  to  the  Inquiry,  the  Reserve  Bank  counselled 
caution  as  far  as  “bail-in”  and  so  on  is  concerned. We  would  still  do  so.  The  Inquiry  also 
favours a cautious approach. Again, though, the world seems to be moving in this general 
direction.  It  isn’t  really  going  to  be  credible  or  prudent  for  Australia,  with  some  large 
institutions that everyone can see are locally systemic, not to keep working on improvements 
to resolution arrangements. 
The third set of recommendations from the Inquiry I want to touch on are those related to the 
payments  system. The  Inquiry  generally  supported  the  steps  the  Payments  System  Board 
(PSB) has taken since its creation after Wallis, but raised a few areas where the Board could 
consider consulting on possible further steps. As it happens, these dovetail well with issues 
that the PSB has been considering for some time. The Reserve Bank has since announced a 
review  of  card  payments  regulation  and  released  an  Issues  Paper  in  early  March.  Among 
other things, it contemplates the potential for changes to the regulation of card surcharges 
and interchange fees. 
Surcharging tends to be a “hot button” issue with consumers and generated a large number 
of  (largely  identical)  submissions  to  the  Financial  System  Inquiry.  But  virtually  all  of  the 
public’s concern is directed at a couple of industries where surcharges appear to be well in 
excess  of  acceptance  costs,  at  least  for  some  transactions.  The  Bank  considers  that  its 
decision to allow surcharging of card payments in 2002 has been a valuable reform. It allows 
merchants to signal to consumers that there are differences in the cost of payment methods 
used at the checkout. By helping to hold down the cost of payments to merchants, the right 
to surcharge can help to hold down the prices of goods and services more generally. 
The Bank made some incremental changes to the regulation of surcharging in 2013, but to 
date these have had a relatively limited effect on the cases of surcharging that most concern 
consumers. Our current review will consider ways we can retain the considerable benefits of 
allowing  merchants  to  surcharge,  while  addressing  concerns  about  excessive  surcharges. 
One  element  of  this  might  be,  as  the  Financial  System  Inquiry  suggests,  to  prevent 
surcharges  for  some  payment  methods,  such  as  debit  cards,  if  they  were  sufficiently  low 
cost. This would mean that in most cases consumers would have better access to a payment 
method that is not surcharged, even when transacting online. Other options being considered 
are  ways  to  make  the  permissible  surcharge  clearer,  whether  through  establishing  a  fixed 
maximum or by establishing a more readily observable measure of acceptance costs. 
The  capping  of  card  interchange  fees  is  also  now  a  longstanding  policy  and,  we  think,  a 
beneficial one. Nonetheless, it is important to ensure that it continues to meet its objectives. 
Caps were put in place in 2003 based on concerns that interchange fees in mature payment 
systems  can  distort  payment  choices  and,  perversely,  be  driven  higher  by  competition 
between  payment  schemes.  As  suggested  by  the  Inquiry,  the  Bank’s  review  will  consider 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  whether the levels of the current caps remain appropriate. We know, for example, that lower 
caps have now been set in some other jurisdictions. 
But  there  are  other  elements  of  the  current  regime  that  also  warrant  consideration.  For 
instance,  while  average  interchange  fees  meet  the  regulated  caps,  the  dispersion  of 
interchange  rates  around  the  average  has  increased  significantly  over  time.  The  practical 
effect of this is that there can be a difference of up to 180 basis points in the cost of the same 
card presented at different merchants. This problem is aggravated by the fact that merchants 
often have no way of determining which are the high-cost cards. 
Although  the  wide  range  of  interchange  fees  is  not  unique  to  Australia,  we  would  want  to 
ensure so far as possible that the regulatory framework does not contribute to this trend or to 
declining transparency of individual card costs to merchants. The Bank’s review will consider 
a range of options, including “hard” caps on interchange fees and hybrid solutions, along with 
setting  more  frequent  compliance  points  for  caps.  Options  for  improving  the  ability  of 
merchants to respond to differing card costs will also be considered. 
While considering interchange fees, it is also appropriate to consider the circumstances of 
card systems that directly compete with the interchange-regulated schemes. This means, in 
particular,  bank-issued  cards  that  do  not  technically  carry  an  interchange  fee,  but 
nonetheless are supported by payments to the issuer funded by merchant fees. 
More  broadly,  all  the  elements  I  have  mentioned  –  interchange  fees,  transparency  and 
surcharging  –  are  interrelated,  which  means  that  there  are  potentially  multiple  paths  to 
achieving similar outcomes. I encourage those with an interest to engage with the Bank in 
the review process in the period ahead. 
Turning away from the Financial System Inquiry to other matters, let me mention two. 
I said at the beginning that the “search for yield” continues. There is a line of discussion that 
tackles  this  issue  from  a  cyclical  point  of  view,  thinking  about  how  the  balance  sheet 
measures taken by the major central banks are affecting markets, the extent and nature of 
cross-border spillovers, what happens when the US Federal Reserve starts to tighten policy 
at some point and so on. I’ve spoken about such things elsewhere and have nothing to add 
today. 
There  is  another  conversation,  however,  that  tends  to  take  place  at  a  lower  volume,  but 
which  definitely  needs  to  be  had.  That  conversation  is  about  what  all  this  means  for  the 
retirement  income  system  over  the  longer  run.  The  key  question  is:  how  will  an  adequate 
flow of income be generated for the retired community in the future, in a world in which long-
term  nominal  returns  on  low-risk  assets  are  so  low?  This  is  a  global  question.  Just  about 
everywhere in the world the price of buying a given annual flow of future income has gone up 
a lot. Those seeking to make that purchase now – that is, those on the brink of leaving the 
workforce – are in a much worse position than those who made it a decade ago. They have 
to accept a lot more risk to generate the expected flow of future income they want. 
The  problem  must  be  acute  in  Europe,  where  sovereign  yields  in  some  countries  are 
negative  for  significant  durations.  But  it  is  also  potentially  a  non-trivial  issue  in  our  own 
country. In a conference about wealth, this might be a worthy topic of discussion. 
And  the  final  issue  is  misconduct.  This  has  loomed  larger  for  longer  in  many  jurisdictions 
than  we  would  have  thought  likely  a  few  years  ago.  Investigations  and  prosecutions  for 
alleged  past  misconduct  are  ongoing.  It  seems  our  own  country  has  not  been  entirely 
immune from some of this. Without in any way wanting to pass judgement on any particular 
case, root causes seem to include distorted incentives coupled with an erosion of a culture 
that placed great store on acting in a trustworthy way. 
Finance depends on trust. In fact, in the end, it can depend on little else. Where trust has 
been damaged, repair has to be made. Both industry and the official community are working 
hard to try to clarify expected standards of behaviour. Various codes of practice are being 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
developed,  calculation  methodologies  are  being  refined,  and  so  on.1  In  some  cases 
regulation  is  being  contemplated.  Initiatives  like  the  Banking  and  Finance  Oath  also  can 
make a very worthwhile contribution, if enough people are prepared to sign up and exhibit 
the promised behaviour.2 
In the end, though, you can’t legislate for culture or character. Culture has to be nurtured, 
which  is  not  a  costless  exercise.  Character  has  to  be  developed  and  exemplified  in 
behaviour. For all of us in the financial services and official sectors, this is a never-ending 
task. 
With those few remarks, I wish you a successful conference. 
Thank you. 
                                                
1  See, for example, http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/09/r_140930/ and Codes of Best Market Practice 
and Shared Global Principles. 
2  See http://www.thebfo.org/home. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
