  Henry Ohlsson: The inflation target – a benchmark for price-setting and 
wage formation 
Speech by Mr Henry Ohlsson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a conference, 
organised by Facken inom industrin, Bålsta, 16 April 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to begin by thanking you for the invitation to take part in this conference. It’s a 
great  pleasure  to  be  here.  Many  faces  are  familiar  after  my  18  years  on  the  Economic 
Council  of  Swedish  Industry,  while  others  are  new.  My  own  role  is  also  new,  the  post  of 
deputy  governor  of  the  Riksbank  is  an  honour  and  carries  great  responsibility,  but  is  also 
very interesting. It feels particularly appropriate to be holding my first speech in the role of 
Deputy Governor of the Riksbank in a context closely linked to wage formation. My subject 
today  is  why  the  inflation  target  is  so  important  for  smoothly-functioning  price-setting  and 
wage formation. 
The  Swedish  labour  market  is  about  to  enter  into  large-scale  wage  bargaining  rounds. 
Several hundred collective wage agreements will expire in the first part of 2016. As always, 
the outcome of future wage bargaining rounds is important for the parties directly concerned. 
This  essentially  concerns  both  companies’  competitiveness  and  employees’  purchasing 
power. Thus, the significance of the agreements extends across the entire economy. 
In the traditional Swedish model, different agents have clear roles. The social partners are 
responsible  for  wage  formation  through  their  negotiations.  In  recent  decades,  the  sectors 
exposed to international competition have led the way and set the standard, as it were, for 
the  rest  of  the  labour  market.  I  firmly  believe  that  the  outcome  of  this  system  has  been 
positive. The Industrial Agreement has played an important role. In other words, the inflation 
target and the Industrial Agreement have worked well together. 
The inflation target contributes to smoothly-functioning price-setting and wage 
formation 
The  role  of  the  Riksbank  is  and  always  has  been  to  be  responsible  for  monetary  policy. 
Monetary policy is conducted with the aim of ensuring that the annual rate of inflation is 2 per 
cent. 
It  is  important  to  have  a  benchmark  for  expectations  in  the  economy  and  thereby  lay  the 
foundations for efficient price-setting and wage formation. Its purpose is to enable economic 
agents to plan long-term, for instance, with regard to wage negotiations. In other words, the 
inflation  target  makes  it  easier  for  households  and  companies  to  make  good  economic 
decisions. It creates the conditions for good economic development with long-term economic 
growth. 
The benchmark of an inflation target of 2 per cent was established in 1993. Prior to that, a 
fixed exchange rate acted as the anchor for wage formation and price-setting. At that time, 
inflation in Sweden was linked to that in competitor countries. However, increases in wages 
and prices in Sweden became too high, at the same time as real purchasing power hardly 
increased at all. These were the problems that a new inflation-targeting policy would remedy. 
But why choose a target of 2 per cent? The reason why the inflation target in most countries 
has been set at 2 per cent or close to this is more the result of chance and circumstances 
than  science. When  an  inflation  target  was  introduced  in  Sweden,  the  Riksbank  assessed 
that  underlying  inflation  was  at  that  time  2  per  cent.  Several  other  industrial  nations  had 
already chosen 2 per cent. The aim in Sweden then became to keep inflation at around this 
level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Most central banks probably considered, quite simply, that an inflation rate of 2 per cent was 
a reasonable level to strive for – sufficiently low for people not to worry about when making 
financial decisions, but not too low. 
There are three important reasons why the target is higher than zero. 
• 
The first  concerns  statistical  measures  of  inflation  being  assumed to  overestimate 
actual  price  increases.  This  is  partly  because  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  price 
increases due to better quality from price increases per se. If one has an inflation 
target of zero, and the inflation rate measured is zero in accordance with the target, 
there  is  thus  a  risk  that  inflation  will  actually  be  below  zero  because  the  quality 
improvements have been underestimated and thus the prices have fallen in relation 
to the level of the quality. 
A second reason is that the changes in relative prices and wages that are necessary 
for the economy to develop can occur more easily if there is a low, positive inflation 
rate  than  if  there  is  no  inflation.  In  other  words,  some  inflation  can  function  as  a 
lubricant in the economy. 
A  third  reason,  and  the  one  that  has  perhaps  received  most  attention  in  recent 
years,  is  that  if  an  inflation  target  is  set  too  low,  it  will  leave  insufficient  scope  to 
stimulate the economy by cutting interest rates in a deep recession. 
  Important that the inflation target remains in place 
But the most important thing is to choose a certain level for the inflation target and then build 
up confidence in this level. Such confidence can hardly be created if the inflation target is 
constantly  being  adapted  to  actual  inflation.  Many  economic  agents  now  assume  that 
inflation will be around 2 per cent in the coming period. It is important that we can rely on this 
being the case. 
This does not mean that the Riksbank can ensure that inflation will always be 2 per cent. It is 
not possible to formulate monetary policy with such precision. Inflation will deviate from the 
2 per  cent  level  during  certain  periods.  One  reason  is  that  unforeseen  events  will  always 
occur,  another  is  that  it  takes  time  before  changes  in  monetary  policy  have  a  full  impact. 
However, the Riksbank’s ambition is to formulate monetary policy so that inflation returns to 
the target level in a few years’ time. 
But why in a few years’ time? Why not the next quarter? The reason is that the Riksbank also 
strives  to  stabilise  production  and  employment  around  long-run  sustainable  levels. 
Sometimes an overly rapid return to the inflation target could lead to excessive fluctuations in 
production  and  employment. The  Riksbank then  tries  to  bring  inflation back  on target  at  a 
somewhat slower pace so production and employment develop in a stable manner. It is also 
possible that inflation will approach the target for reasons that risk slowing down production 
and  employment.  One  example  of  this  is  when  substantial  wage  increases  lie  behind  an 
inflation rate that is below target beginning to rise. 
The inflation target and Industrial Agreement have contributed to higher real wages 
So  what  significance  has  the  inflation  target  had?  Let  me  start  by  reviewing  what  has 
happened to the rate of inflation. 
Figure 1 shows how high inflation in Sweden has been from 1970 until today. Inflation here is 
measured in terms of the annual percentage change in the consumer price index (CPI).1 The 
average annual rate of inflation during the period 1971–1992 was 8.4 per cent. The inflation 
                                                
1   Statistics Sweden has adjusted the methods for calculating the consumer price index, for instance in 2005. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  target has led to a severe slowdown in the rate of inflation. If we look at the period from 1993 
up to the end of 2014, the average rate of inflation was 1.5 per cent. The figure also shows 
that the variations from year to year have declined since the inflation target was introduced. 
A related question here is how high inflation has been since the Industrial Agreement was 
drawn up in 1997. The answer is that the average annual rate of inflation has been 1.2 per 
cent  since  then.  Figure  2  shows  the  average  value  for  annual  inflation over  six  three-year 
periods since 1997. These three-year periods roughly follow the agreement periods.2 
Actual inflation has been close to the target for three of the agreement periods. During the 
other three periods, inflation has been much lower. After two periods of being close to the 
inflation target, average price levels have not increased during the most recent agreement 
period. 
How  have  wages  developed  since  the  inflation  target  was  introduced?  During  the  period 
1970–1992, when there was neither an inflation target nor an Industrial Agreement, nominal 
wages in the whole of the Swedish economy increased by on average 8.9 per cent a year. 
This is shown in Figure 3. But as inflation was so high, the increase in real purchasing power 
was very limited. Real wages actually increased by an average of only 0.7 per cent a year. 
During the period 1997 to 2014, nominal wages in the Swedish economy as a whole have 
increased by an average of 3.3 per cent per year (see Figure 3). And as inflation has been 
low, real wages have increased by 2.1 per cent a year. Let me summarise: the period with an 
inflation target and the Industrial Agreement have meant lower nominal wage increases, but 
at the same time higher real wage increases as inflation was much lower than before.  
Have the  wage increases varied substantially between the three-year periods since 1997? 
Figure  4  shows  how  nominal  and  real  wages  have  increased  during  the  six  three-year 
periods since 1997.3 Nominal wages have increased at their lowest by an average of 2.8 per 
cent a year. This is the case during the two most recent three-year periods, that is, the time 
since the financial crisis in 2008-2009. The three-year period 2001-2003 is the one with the 
highest nominal wage increases; 4 per cent a year on average. Looking at real wages, on the 
other  hand,  recent  years  have  seen  the  highest  increases  since  1998-2000,  the  first 
agreement period following the signing of the Industrial Agreement.  
If we summarise, there is no doubt that the years with a combination of inflation target and 
Industrial Agreement have led to much higher real wage increases than the previous years 
without an inflation target or the Industrial Agreement. 
Where are we now? 
That is what has happened so far, but where are we now? I think there are three important 
things  so  study  when  looking  at  the  current  situation  and  which  have  significance  for  the 
smooth functioning of price-setting and wage formation. The first concerns the low inflation 
rate,  the  second  the  significance  of  inflation  expectations  and  the  third  the  expansionary 
monetary policy. 
Inflation below target – several reasons for this 
Let’s start with inflation: Why is it so low now and therefore also far below the target? What 
are the reasons for this? 
                                                
2   The Figure shows the period 2010–2012 as a whole, although there were several wage bargaining rounds 
during this period. 
3   For natural reasons, there are no wage data available for 2015 yet. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  On an overall level, one can say that the low inflation is explained by the weak international 
demand in recent years and the weak domestic activity. This development reflects the fact 
that the recovery following the financial crisis has been unexpectedly sluggish – perhaps less 
so in Sweden than in many other countries. 
The  low  inflation  is  not  just  a  Swedish  phenomenon.  It  has  also  fallen  or  developed 
surprisingly  weakly  in  many  other  countries  in  recent  years,  and  other  central  banks  have 
also found it difficult to attain their inflation targets. 
In  Sweden,  companies  appear  to  have  found  it  unusually  difficult  to  pass  on  their  cost 
increases  to  prices.  There  are  also  signs  that  inflation  may  have  been  held  back  by 
increased competition and uncertainty over the development of the economy. Furthermore, 
electricity prices have been unexpectedly weak over the past year. In addition, the oil price 
fell heavily during the second half of 2014. 
The Swedish krona also strengthened during the period 2010–2013. This meant that import 
prices measured in Swedish krona fell, and thus also Swedish consumer prices. However, 
during 2014 the krona weakened, which instead led to higher prices. 
Finally, there is a technical factor that is important for inflation as measured in terms of the 
consumer price index, CPI. When the Riksbank cuts the repo rate to bring up inflation, the 
immediate  effect  is the opposite.  Households’ mortgage  interest  expenditure,  and thus the 
CPI,  then fall. There  is  an  alternative  measure of  inflation,  the  CPIF,  which  is  based  on  a 
constant interest rate and therefore not affected by the Riksbank’s repo rate cuts. Many often 
follow the CPIF instead of the CPI, particularly during periods when the repo rate changes a 
lot. 
Inflation expectations indicate confidence in the inflation target 
It is important that the inflation target is credible. And it becomes credible when the economic 
agents expect inflation to return to the target following deviations. It is primarily the long-term 
inflation expectations that indicate confidence in the inflation target. 
Central  economic  agents  are  regularly  asked  how  high  they  expect  inflation  to  be  in  the 
coming  years.  Figure  5  shows  how  inflation  expectations  two  and  five  years  ahead  have 
developed  since  2010.  Initially,  expectations  five  years  ahead  were  actually  above  the 
inflation target of 2 per cent. However, during 2014 there was a change, when the five-year 
expectations  fell  below  the  level  of  2  per  cent.  The  most  recent  surveys  show  that 
expectations five years ahead are now at around 1.9 per cent a year. 
Inflation expectations two years ahead have been below those five years ahead ever since 
2012.  The  most  recent  surveys  show  that  expectations  two  years  ahead  are  now  at  
1.3–1.4 per cent a year. Together with measurements five years ahead, the picture is that 
the credibility of the inflation target on the whole has increased thus far this year. 
Expansionary monetary policy to stimulate inflation 
The  Riksbank’s  aim  is  to  bring  the  rate  of  inflation  back  towards  the  target  of  2  per  cent. 
Monetary policy is therefore very expansionary today in the sense that the Riksbank’s policy 
rate, the repo rate, has been cut in several stages and is currently at –0.25 per cent. The 
repo  rate  is  expected  to  remain  at  this  level  at  least  until  the  second  half  of  2016. 
Furthermore, the Riksbank decided in February and March this year to purchase government 
bonds  to  a  value  of  SEK  40  billion.  The  repo-rate  cuts  and  bond  purchases  contribute  to 
pushing down market rates. Figure 6 shows how the repo rate has developed since 2010. 
The purpose of cutting the repo rate and buying bonds is thus to bring up inflation. Lower 
interest rates contribute to increasing demand in the economy. It becomes more attractive for 
households to consume and for companies to invest. Higher demand also makes it possible 
for companies to raise their prices. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The expansionary monetary policy has had an effect. There are signs that inflation has now 
bottomed  out  and  is  on  the  way  up.  Food  prices  began  to  rise  faster  in  2014.  Prices  of 
services also began to rise faster last year. 
On  Tuesday  the  inflation  figures  for  the  month  of  March  were  published.  Over  the  past 
twelve-month  period,  consumer  prices  have  increased  by  0.2  per  cent.  When  adjusted  for 
interest-rate  cuts  the  increase  is  0.9  per  cent.  If,  moreover,  we  disregard  the  effects  of 
energy prices, the rate of inflation is 1.3 per cent. 
Yesterday  the  most  recent  survey  of  inflation  expectations  was  published.  Expectations  of 
inflation two years ahead are now at an annual rate of 1.3 per cent. If we instead look at the 
longer term, five years ahead, yesterday’s figure was 1.9 per cent. 
There are thus several signs that the expansionary policy is showing results and that inflation 
has begun to rise. Inflation expectations have also begun to rise. But inflation is still a rather 
long  way  below  the  target.  There  are  also  threats  to  the  upturn  in  inflation.  The  krona 
strengthened at the end of February and the beginning of March. This risked stopping the 
upturn.  That  was  why  the  Riksbank  decided  in  March  to  cut  the  repo  rate  further  and  to 
extend the purchases of government bonds to supplement the decisions made in February. 
The Riksbank is still prepared to do more to ensure that inflation rises towards the target if 
this is necessary. 
The exchange rate is floating – and highly volatile 
In  other  words,  the  exchange  rate  has  considerable  significance  for  inflation  trends.  The 
Swedish  krona  has  floated  since  1992.  There  are  several  factors  that  affect  a  floating 
exchange  rate.  Differences  in  rates  of  inflation  in  Sweden  and  abroad  and  differences  in 
interest rates between Sweden and the rest of the world are two such factors. Net trade in 
goods and services is another. Differences in economic growth and monetary policy are also 
significant. It is very difficult to predict how the exchange rate will develop. One reason for 
this is that different factors have different significance at different points in time. 
Figure 7 shows how the value of the Swedish krona has developed in relation to an index of 
international  currencies,  the  KIX.  The  greater  the  significance  a  foreign  currency  has  for 
Swedish foreign trade, the larger the weight it is given in the index. The curves in the figure 
can be interpreted as showing what the foreign currency costs in Swedish krona. When the 
krona weakens, the foreign currency costs more and the curve rises. The KIX index is the 
exchange rate the Riksbank considers most important. 
The  Swedish  krona  showed  an  appreciation  trend  from  2010  until  the  first  part  of  2013. 
However,  there  were  substantial  variations.  From  the  beginning  of  2014,  the  trend  has 
turned, and the krona has weakened. But during this period, too, there have been substantial 
fluctuations in the short term. 
International developments important – even with a floating exchange rate 
During my years on the Economic Council of Swedish Industry, I have sometimes gained the 
impression that some analysts have considered that the floating exchange rate means that 
one can disregard developments in costs and wages in competitor countries when assessing 
the  competitiveness  of  Swedish  companies.  But  this  is  wrong.  The  development  of  the 
exchange  rate,  as  shown  in  Figure  7,  has  been  affected  by  a  number  of  factors,  where 
competitiveness is only one factor and moreover not always an important one. 
Competitiveness  is  affected  by  differences  in  payroll  expense  and  increases  in  payroll 
expense in Sweden and other countries. It is also affected by differences in productivity and 
increases in productivity. A rapid increase in productivity in Sweden is therefore particularly 
beneficial if it is higher than the increase in productivity abroad. Finally, it is important to see 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  how  prices  develop  in  the  markets  where  Swedish  companies  exposed  to  international 
competition sell their goods and services. 
Wages  in  Sweden  have  increased  by  on  average  2.7  per  cent  a  year  since  2010.  This  is 
shown in Table 1. The increase is in line with that in Germany, but higher than the increase 
in the euro area as a whole. It is also higher than the aggregate for OECD countries. At the 
same time, productivity in Sweden has not increased as quickly as in other countries. 
The  development  of  unit  labour  costs  reflects  the  difference  between  wage  increases  and 
growth in productivity. Unit labour costs, measured in the respective currencies, are shown in 
the column on the far right of the table. Sweden is here on the same level as Germany, but 
higher than the euro area as a whole and also higher than the OECD aggregate. 
Inflation towards the target – in an orderly manner 
Let  me  round  off.  One main  purpose  of  my  speech  is  to  show  how  important  the  inflation 
target  has  been  as  a  benchmark  for  price-setting  and  wage  formation  in  Sweden.  It  is  an 
important task for the Riksbank to create confidence in the inflation target. This is why we are 
worried  over  the  current  low  inflation  rate.  The  Riksbank  wishes  to  safeguard  the  inflation 
target. We can do this by formulating monetary policy so that the current low inflation rate 
rises towards the target. During the spring we have therefore cut the policy rate further on 
two occasions and moreover decided to buy government bonds. We are prepared to do more 
than  this  if  it  proves  necessary.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  that  the  journey  back 
towards the inflation target is a smooth one and does not pose any threat to production and 
employment. 
We  are  now  on  the  verge  of  very  extensive  wage  bargaining  rounds.  Several  hundred 
collective wage agreements will expire in the first part of 2016. It is the social partners who 
will negotiate and sign new collective agreements. What the Riksbank can do is to inspire 
confidence  in  the  inflation  target,  which  can  in  turn  provide  a  starting  point  for  the 
negotiations.  The  inflation  target  and  the  Industrial  Agreement  have  worked  well  together 
since 1997. They can continue to do so. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
      12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
