  Takahide Kiuchi: Recent developments in economic activity, prices and 
monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Takahide  Kiuchi,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Gunma, 5 March 2015. 
 I.  
Developments in economic activity and prices 
Current situation of and outlook for economic activity at home and abroad 
A.  
I would like to start my speech with a look at developments in economic activity and prices. 
Japan’s economy has continued its moderate recovery trend. The first preliminary estimate 
of the real GDP growth rate for the October-December quarter of 2014 – which was released 
in  February  2015  –  was  2.2  percent  on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  and  thus 
turned  positive  for  the  first  time  in  three  quarters.  Industrial  production  also  has  turned 
positive in the October-December quarter on a quarter-on-quarter basis for the first time in 
three quarters, and recently recovered to the level of the peak prior to the consumption tax 
hike in April 2014. With regard to the outlook, industrial production is expected to increase 
moderately, reflecting the developments in demand both at home and abroad on which I will 
elaborate shortly, and the economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery trend. 
Looking at domestic demand, private consumption as a whole has remained resilient with the 
employment and income situation improving steadily, although recovery in some areas has 
been  sluggish.  As  for  durable  consumer  goods,  which  had  exhibited  a  notable  decline  in 
demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike, the number of 
new passenger-car registrations almost bottomed out in the July-September quarter of 2014, 
and  since  then  has  shown  some  signs  of  picking  up,  albeit  with  large  fluctuations  in  the 
number  of  small  cars  with  engine  sizes  of  660cc  or  less.  Sales  of  household  electrical 
appliances in real terms have tended to pick up at a moderate pace, as they have registered 
a quarter-on-quarter increase for two consecutive quarters since the July-September quarter. 
As  for  the  employment  and  income  situation,  which  underpins  private  consumption,  labor 
market  conditions  have  continued  to  improve  steadily  and  employee  income  has  risen 
moderately. Looking at recent developments, the unemployment rate has declined to around 
3.5 percent and the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has been above 1.0. Scheduled 
cash earnings on a year-on-year basis have been on a positive trend as well, mainly due to 
the effects of the rise in base pay in spring 2014, and such earnings as a whole have been 
picking  up.  As  for  the  outlook,  employee  income  is  expected  to  continue  increasing 
moderately,  in  line  with  the  recovery  in  economic  activity  and  business  performance. 
Underpinned by this employment and income situation, private consumption is expected to 
remain resilient. 
Business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend. The aggregate supply 
of  capital  goods  on  a  basis  excluding  transport  equipment  –  a  coincident  indicator  of 
machinery  investment  –  has  been  on  a  moderate  uptrend,  with  the  fluctuations  smoothed 
out;  it  was  temporarily  flat  in  the  July-September  quarter  of  2014,  but  rose  again  in  the 
October-December  quarter.  Machinery  orders  on  a  basis  excluding  orders  for  ships  and 
those from electric power companies – a leading indicator of machinery investment – have 
been increasing since the July-September quarter, and business fixed investment plans are 
generally favorable as well. Taking these factors into account, business fixed investment is 
projected to continue a moderate increasing trend as corporate profits follow their improving 
trend. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Regarding  the  environment  surrounding  exports,  overseas  economies  –  mainly  advanced 
economies  –  have  been  recovering,  albeit  with  a  lackluster  performance  still  seen  in  part. 
Looking at movements by major region, the U.S. economy has continued to recover, led by 
domestic demand, since the firmness in the household sector has been feeding through to 
the corporate sector, together with the effects of monetary easing and the decline in crude oil 
prices. Momentum for the recovery in the European economy has remained weak, although 
a  further  slowdown  has  been  staved  off.  As  for  the  Chinese  economy,  stable  growth  has 
continued  as  a  trend;  however,  growth  momentum  has  recently  slowed  with  downward 
pressure  from  excessive  capital  stock  in  the  manufacturing  sector  and  adjustments  in  the 
real  estate  market.  Apart  from  China,  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  as  a 
whole have continued to lose pace. 
In this situation, Japan’s exports have been picking up. Real exports, after turning positive in 
the  July-September  quarter  of  2014  on  a  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  have  risen  for  two 
consecutive quarters. As for the outlook, exports are expected to increase moderately (1) as 
overseas  economies  are  likely  to  continue  recovering  moderately,  led  mainly  by  advanced 
economies – the United States in particular – although there are risks such as the outcome 
of  European  debt  problem,  including  the  situation  in  Greece,  and  (2)  on  the  back  of  the 
enhancement of competitiveness and somewhat of a shift back from overseas production to 
domestic production due to the yen’s depreciation. 
Turning to price developments, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index 
(CPI, all items less fresh food, and the same hereafter) has been slowing, mainly reflecting 
the significant decline in crude oil prices since autumn 2014. The rate of increase for January 
2015 – the latest figure available – was 0.2 percent. With regard to the outlook, the rate of 
increase is likely to slow for the time being, reflecting the decline in energy prices. 
Outlook through fiscal 2016 
B.  
So far, I have illustrated recent developments in economic activity and prices. Let me now 
turn to the Bank’s interim assessment of the October 2014 Outlook for Economic Activity and 
Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), which was made in January 2015. In this assessment, 
the Bank revised the forecasts for economic activity and prices through fiscal 2016. 
According to the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts, the real GDP growth rate is 
projected to be minus 0.5 percent for fiscal 2014, which is lower than the forecast presented 
in  the  October  2014  Outlook  Report.  However,  the  rate  is  projected  to  be  2.1  percent  for 
fiscal 2015 and 1.6 percent for fiscal 2016, which is higher in both cases than the forecasts 
presented in October, and the economy is likely to grow at a pace clearly above its potential. 
This upward revision reflects the significant decline in crude oil prices and the effects of the 
government’s  economic  measures.  With  regard  to  the  CPI,  the  outlook  for  the  underlying 
trend  is  unchanged  from  the  October  forecasts,  but  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  will 
likely be lower toward fiscal 2015, due to the significant decline in crude oil prices. The rate 
of increase for fiscal 2016 will likely be more or less unchanged from the October forecast. 
This  is  because  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  projected  to  accelerate 
gradually as the effects of the decline in crude oil prices dissipate on a year-on-year basis, 
on the assumption that Dubai crude oil prices will rise moderately from 55 U.S. dollars per 
barrel. 
II.  
Major points to be considered with regard to the outlook for economic activity 
and prices 
Although  I  share  the  view  that  the  economy  will  continue  recovering  moderately,  I  hold  a 
more  cautious  view  on  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  compared  with  the 
forecasts in the baseline scenario in the Outlook Report that I just mentioned. Let me share 
some of my considerations regarding the outlook with you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Growth potential of Japan’s economy 
A. 
Now let us look at the potential growth rate of Japan’s economy, which represents – from the 
supply  side  –  the  pace  of  growth  that  is  consistent  with  the  economy’s  growth  potential. 
According to the Bank’s estimates, the rate has recently been in the range of 0 to around 
0.5 percent,  and  thus  remains  at  a  low  level.  The  potential  growth  rate  is  unlikely  to  rise 
markedly in the short term, considering, for example, that the pace of firms’ accumulation of 
capital  stock  remains  moderate,  although  business  fixed  investment  has  turned  to  an 
increasing trend. On the other hand, the Bank’s estimates of the output gap in Japan have 
generally  been  at  the  neutral  level  of  around  zero  recently.  The  output  gap  is  also  at  a 
favorable level on an international comparison using the estimates made by the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Labor market conditions remain very 
tight. Of course, such estimates are subject to a considerable margin of error. However, if, 
under  these  circumstances,  the  economy  continues  to  grow  at  a  pace  well  above  the 
potential  growth  rate,  supply-side  constraints  such  as  labor  shortages  will  become  more 
pronounced.  In  my  view,  stable  economic  and  price  conditions  are  most  likely  to  be 
maintained, as Japan’s economy will probably continue growing moderately at a pace that 
does not diverge considerably from the potential growth rate. 
The decline in crude oil prices and the global economy 
B. 
The decline in crude oil prices facilitates income transfers from oil-producing countries to oil-
consuming countries. The net effect of the decline will likely tend to be positive in terms of 
the global economy as a whole due to the difference in price elasticity of demand between 
these  countries.  Nevertheless,  financial  markets  often  shift  to  a  “risk-off”  mode.  This  is 
probably  because  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  is  associated  with  signs  of  oil-producing 
countries’  currency  depreciation  and  of  the  heightening  in  their  economic  and  fiscal  risks. 
Another reason seems to be that market participants are still uncertain about the extent of 
positive effects stemming from the crude oil price decline. 
In measuring the extent of these effects, the degree to which the decline in crude oil prices 
will  benefit  the  U.S.  economy  warrants  attention.  In  this  regard, the  decline  in  such  prices 
might not push up private consumption by as much as anticipated due to structural changes 
in  the  United  States  such  as  an  increase  in  energy  efficiency.  The  fall  in  crude  oil  prices 
could also lead to a reduction in fixed investment in the oil-related industries and to a decline 
in U.S. exports because of weaker-than-expected overseas economic growth, including that 
of oil-producing countries. Besides, it should be noted that the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) revised downward its latest forecast for global growth from the previous forecast. The 
downward  revision  is  mainly  attributable  to  investment  weakness  caused  by  diminished 
expectations  about  medium-term  growth  in  many  advanced  and  emerging  economies, 
despite  the  expectation  for  positive  effects  of  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices.  Taking  these 
factors into account, I am personally paying closer attention to downside risks to overseas 
economies, developments in which are a key determinant of Japan’s exports. 
Private consumption 
C.  
Relatively  weak  developments  have  been  observed  in  indicators  of  consumer  sentiment 
since  summer  2014,  although  these  indicators  have  recently  shown  some  signs  of 
improvement. Behind this, there seems to be concern over a decline in real wages caused by 
the divergence between the rate of increase in prices and that in wages. In this regard, in a 
situation where the inflation rate has recently shown a declining trend, if increases in wages, 
including  those  in  base  pay,  are  realized  this  coming  spring,  as  happened  last  spring,  the 
divergence  between  the  two  rates  will  narrow  or  dissipate;  this  in  turn  will  exert  positive 
effects on consumer sentiment, and hence on private consumption. However, even if major 
firms raise  their  base  pay  to  a  reasonable  degree,  the  rate  of  increase  in  scheduled  cash 
earnings within the overall economy could diverge from that in the base pay of these firms. 
Here  are  some  of the  reasons.  First,  developments  in  wage  increases  by  small  firms  also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  determine  the  course  of  wages  in  Japan.  Second,  many  non-regular  employees  are  not 
eligible  for  base  pay  increases.  And  third,  the  uptrend  in  the  proportion  of  non-regular 
employees, for whom wage levels are relatively low, has in part exerted downward pressure 
on the average wage level. On this basis, despite a continuing trend of improvement in labor 
market conditions, the pace of improvement in real income will likely remain moderate and 
private consumption will probably continue to increase at a moderate pace that is consistent 
with the pace of increase in real income. 
Outlook for prices 
D.  
Regarding  the  outlook  for  prices,  in  the  October  2014  Outlook  Report,  I  formulated  a 
proposal to change the expression that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is likely 
to reach around 2 percent in or around fiscal 2015. Since then, I have maintained a more 
cautious view than the forecast in the Bank’s baseline scenario. 
Considering  the  relationship  between  the  price  outlook  and  the  output  gap  in  light  of  the 
Phillips  curve,  in  order  for  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  to  reach  around 
2 percent,  it  is  necessary  that  the  rate  respond  relatively  clearly  to  an  improvement  in  the 
output gap – that is, the steepening of the slope – and that the Phillips curve shift upward, 
reflecting a rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
It  should  be  noted  that  the  negative  output  gap  has  narrowed  significantly  since  the 
introduction  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  in  April  2013  and  has 
generally stayed at the neutral level for the past nearly one year, and the depreciation of the 
yen  has  progressed  over  this  period.  However,  the  pace  of  increase  in  prices  remains 
moderate,  even  in  terms  of  the  CPI  for  all  items  less  food  and  energy,  which  is  not 
susceptible to the decline in crude oil prices. Assuming this situation continues, even if the 
effects of the decline in crude oil prices dissipate and the output gap improves further, the 
pace of increase in prices is likely to remain moderate. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III.  
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, 2014, the Bank decided to expand QQE. 
Specifically, the Bank decided to (1) accelerate the annual pace of increase in the monetary 
base  from  about  60–70  trillion  yen  to  about  80  trillion  yen,  (2)  increase  its  Japanese 
government bond (JGB) purchases so that the amount outstanding of its holdings would be 
increased from an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen to about 80 trillion yen, and (3) triple 
the annual paces of increase in the amounts outstanding of its holdings of exchange-traded 
funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). 
Some Policy Board members held an opposing view regarding the expansion of QQE, but its 
implementation  ultimately  was  decided  by  a  majority  vote.  I  cast  a  dissenting  vote  on  that 
decision because I considered that the positive  effects that could be brought about by the 
expansion would not be worth the accompanying costs and side effects, in a situation where 
QQE  had  already  exerted  a  reasonable  effect  and,  judging  from  the  growth  potential  of 
Japan’s  economy,  economic  and  price  conditions  had  generally  regained  stability.  I  have 
continued to cast a dissenting vote at the subsequent Monetary Policy Meetings, considering 
that it was appropriate for the Bank to change the guidelines for money market operations 
and asset purchases back to those employed before the expansion of QQE. The idea behind 
this  is  closely  related  to  the  proposal  I  have  been  submitting  at  each  meeting  since  the 
introduction of QQE – that is, (1) not to restrict the time frame for achieving the 2 percent 
price stability target to about two years, but to aim to achieve it in the medium to long term 
and (2) to designate QQE as an intensive measure with a time frame of about two years, and 
thereafter to review the monetary easing measures in a flexible manner. Next, I will express 
my personal views on some points of discussion regarding the conduct of monetary policy, 
as well as the background to my proposal. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Price stability target 
A.  
The  Bank’s  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  aims  to  maintain  the  inflation  rate  of  around 
2 percent  in  a  stable  manner.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  it  is  necessary  that  firms’  and 
households’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations – on which basis they carry out their 
economic  activities  –  be  stable  at  about  2  percent.  However,  there  is  still  a  substantial 
divergence from that level. 
In my view, medium- to long-term inflation expectations in Japan are mainly determined by 
supply-side factors such as the potential growth rate. Therefore, to achieve the price stability 
target of 2 percent, it is necessary that a wide range of economic entities make effective use 
of  the  benign  economic  and  financial  environment  brought  about  by  QQE  and  make 
continuous efforts to strengthen the economy’s growth potential. I hold the view that, even if 
such efforts proceed smoothly, it will require considerable time for the target to be achieved. 
This is why I have continued to propose at Monetary Policy Meetings not to restrict the time 
frame  for  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  to  about  two  years,  but  to  aim  to 
achieve it in the medium to long term. 
It is important that monetary policy consistently provide indirect support for these efforts to 
strengthen 
financial 
conditions. As I mentioned earlier, the output gap has been around zero recently, due in part 
to the effects of monetary policy – which has a function of working on the demand side of the 
economy – while the potential growth rate remains at a low level. In this situation, if monetary 
easing  is  strengthened  excessively  to  push  prices  higher  in  the  short  term  than  levels 
justified by the economy’s growth potential, this could in turn impair the stability in economic 
activity, and hence in prices. In order to ensure both the sound development of the national 
economy and credibility in the conduct of monetary policy, I consider it desirable to make the 
time  frame  for  achieving  the  price  stability  target  flexible,  thereby  achieving  prolonged 
economic  recovery,  albeit  moderate,  while  at  the  same  time  providing  support  from  the 
financial side for steady progress in efforts to increase the productivity growth rate and the 
potential growth rate. 
Meanwhile, the growth potential of the economy will likely increase as efforts to strengthen 
the  foundations  for  economic  growth  make  progress,  and  so  will  the  price  level  that  is 
sustainable  and  consistent  with  the  growth  potential.  It  should  be  noted  that,  in  the  short 
term,  however,  prices  might  face  downward  pressure,  for  example,  when  those  in  certain 
industries decline due to deregulation, which represents one such effort. This is one of the 
reasons why I consider that the conduct of monetary policy with a price stability target has to 
be flexible. 
the  economy’s  growth  potential  by  maintaining  accommodative 
Expansion of QQE 
B. 
When the Bank introduced QQE in April 2013, I supported the concrete measures of QQE, 
judging  that  the  scale  was  one  in  which  the  associated  positive  effects  would  just  about 
outweigh  the  side  effects  when  confined  to  a  certain  time  period.  Since  the  time  of 
introduction,  however,  I  have  considered  that,  if  such  large-scale  monetary  easing  policy 
were to be protracted or such policy strengthened, the associated side effects would instead 
outweigh the positive effects, and this would heighten the risk of undermining economic and 
price stability in the long run. Therefore, in considering the expansion of QQE, I judged that 
the accompanying positive effects would not be worth the costs and side effects. 
With regard to possible positive effects of the expansion of QQE, even if additional measures 
further lower interest rates, room for a further decline in real interest rates – which generates 
policy effects – is considered to be small, as nominal interest rates are already at historically 
low  levels  and  inflation  expectations  are  less  likely  to  rise  not  only  in  Japan  but  also 
worldwide.  It  also  should  be  noted  that,  although  QQE  could  probably  elicit  reasonable 
effects  through  people’s  expectations  at  the  time  of  introduction,  additional  measures  are 
likely to only have limited effects through this channel compared with when it was introduced. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  On the other hand, in terms of the costs and side effects of the expansion, a possible further 
impairment of market functioning and possible effects of a further decline in interest rates on 
financial institutions’ profits and on their intermediation function warrant particular attention. 
For  example,  if  liquidity  in  the  JGB  market  were  to  decline  drastically,  the  market  would 
become  less  resilient  against  negative  shocks  and  thereby  become  unstable  more  easily, 
such  that  volatility  would  increase.  In  addition,  the  Bank  has  raised  the  pace  at  which  it 
purchases JGBs so that their amount outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 
80 trillion yen, implying that it is purchasing a large proportion of the JGBs issued on a flow 
basis.  Therefore,  there  is  concern  about  a  higher  potential  risk  that  such  a  move  will  be 
perceived  as  effectively  financing  fiscal  deficits.  I  also  believe  that  even  greater  attention 
should be given to a risk that the mechanism of maintaining fiscal discipline through interest 
rates will be impaired, reflecting overly heightened expectations that the stability in the JGB 
market will be ensured by the Bank’s JGB purchases. When the credit ratings of JGBs were 
downgraded in December 2014, the JGB market showed no notable reaction, but should this 
suggest  an  impairment  of  market  functioning  –  which  is  supposed  to  reflect  the  fiscal 
condition – then the situation requires attention. Considering that the JGB market serves as 
the basis for a range of price formation in financial and asset markets, it is necessary to be 
fully vigilant against the risk of a buildup of various types of financial imbalances in a situation 
where  the  Bank’s  presence  becomes  overwhelming  in  the  JGB  market  and  interest  rates 
remain at very low levels. 
It  also  should  be  noted  that,  if  interest  rates  decline  further,  this  could  add  to  difficulty  for 
institutional investors that place priority on gaining stable interest income in finding favorable 
investment opportunities and discourage them from selling their JGB holdings. I consider that 
the feasibility of continuing JGB purchases into the future warrants attention, even though it 
seems technically possible to continue such purchases for some time. 
Achieving fiscal consolidation and maintaining financial system stability 
C.  
To  ensure  the  smooth  conduct  of  QQE,  efforts  to  achieve  fiscal  consolidation  are  crucial. 
The Bank’s large-scale JGB purchases are solely conducted for the purpose of achieving the 
price  stability  target.  However,  if  the  credibility  of  fiscal  management  were  to  wane  and 
QQE to become widely perceived in financial markets as financing fiscal deficits, this could 
entail  a  risk  that  the  effects  of QQE  will  be  constrained  by a  rise  in  interest  rates  brought 
about  by  an  increase  in  risk  premiums. Particular  attention  therefore  should  be  given  to 
this as a potential risk, because fiscal conditions are severe in Japan compared with other 
countries.  Fiscal  consolidation  is  also  extremely  important  with  regard  to  achieving  the 
smooth normalization of monetary policy in the future. 
Judging whether QQE will succeed or not in the end depends on whether monetary policy 
can  follow  a  smooth  path  toward  normalization  while  maintaining  a  stable  economic  and 
price  environment.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  not  only  securing  the  credibility  of  fiscal 
management  that  I  mentioned  earlier  but  also  ensuring  financial  system  stability  is  highly 
significant.  In the future, when the time comes for the Bank to seek to normalize  monetary 
policy  with  a  view  to  ensuring  price  stability,  it  should  avoid  falling  into  a  situation 
where  it  is  forced  to  shift  its  policy  priority  from  ensuring  price  stability  to stabilizing 
the  financial  system  by  maintaining  stability  of  interest  rates,  with  a  view  to  ensuring 
stability  of  the  financial  system  –  one  of  the  Bank’s  missions  along  with  that  of  achieving 
price  stability.  The  Bank  is  therefore  required  to  conduct  monetary  policy  with  utmost 
deliberation  so  that  financial  institutions’  profit  base  would  not  be  impaired  for  a 
protracted  period,  or  that  their  resilience  to  the  risk  of  a  rise  in  interest  rates  would  not 
decline noticeably. 
In  order  to  properly  monitor  economic  and  price  developments  as  well  as  the  financial 
system in a well-balanced manner, I consider it necessary for the Bank to continue its policy 
conduct  flexibly,  giving  greater  consideration  to  its  policy  framework  of  “two  perspectives.” 
Specifically, the first perspective is examining, as regards economic activity and prices over 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the next two years or so, whether the outlook deemed most likely by the Bank is reasonable 
judging from the growth potential of Japan’s economy at each point in time. In this regard, 
the  inflation  rate  that  the  Bank  should  aim  at  achieving  through  monetary  policy  over 
roughly the next two years is expected to climb gradually, as the economy’s growth  potential 
rises  along  with  the  progress  in  structural  reforms. That  rate  could  possibly reach  around 
2 percent  eventually;  however,  I  consider  it  important  to  conduct  monetary  policy  taking 
into account that the appropriate level at this point is still lower than 2 percent.  The  second 
perspective  involves  examining,  over  a  longer  term,  various  risks  that  are  most  relevant 
to  the  conduct  of  monetary policy aimed  at  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth  under 
price  stability.  In  doing  so, 
to  not  focus  too  much  on  short-term 
developments in economic activity and prices but to pay close attention to an emergence of 
financial  imbalances  and  thereby  aim  to  achieve  economic  and  price  stability  in  the  long 
run. 
is  important 
it 
Making effective use of a wide range of policy tools 
D.  
It  is  my  understanding  that  an  unconventional  policy  such  as  the  asset  purchase  policy 
implemented under QQE can be regarded as an exceptional and somewhat temporary tool 
to  generate  upward  momentum  in  economic  activity  and  prices  and  affect  the  direction  of 
such momentum under the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. The Bank’s current 
asset  purchase  policy,  which  continuously  increases  the  amount  outstanding  of  its  asset 
holdings, has the effect, by its nature, that as long as the Bank continues with the purchases, 
accommodative  financial  conditions  will  be  strengthened  in  a  cumulative  manner  as  the 
amount outstanding of its asset holdings increases. Compared with other policy tools, it will 
likely  take  considerable  time  for  monetary  policy  to  be  normalized  with  the  unwinding  of 
QQE.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  implement QQE  in  a  forward-looking  manner  while  fully 
taking into consideration the manifestation of its medium- to long-term effects. On the other 
hand, a conventional interest rate policy can be regarded as a usual, fine-tuning tool that is 
used  when  it  is  time  to  encourage  economic  activity  and  prices  to  reach  desirable  levels, 
instead of temporarily generating strong momentum for economic activity and prices. 
My assessment of the current situation is as follows: QQE has already exerted a reasonable 
effect. In addition to this, in a situation where prices – which had long been on a declining 
trend  –  have  started  to  increase  against  the  background  of  improvement  in  economic 
conditions, and the underlying trend in prices has been unchanged thereafter, policy effects 
generated by maintaining virtually zero interest rates are being added to the effects of QQE. 
Furthermore,  with  a  view  to  encouraging  firms  and  households  to  make  full  use  of  the 
accommodative  financial  conditions,  the  Bank  established  the  Loan  Support  Program  and 
has  been  providing  long-term funds  at  a  low  interest rate.  At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting 
held  on  January  19  and  20,  2015,  the  Bank  made  the  following  decisions  regarding  the 
program, which was due to expire shortly: (1) extending it by one year; (2) introducing a new 
framework for enabling financial institutions that do not have a current account at the Bank to 
use the program through their central organizations; and (3) with regard to the main rules for 
the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth 
under the program, increasing the maximum amount of funds that the Bank can provide to 
each financial institution from 1 trillion yen to 2 trillion yen, and also increasing the maximum 
amount outstanding of its fund-provisioning as a whole from 7 trillion yen to 10 trillion yen. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  whether  QQE  will  succeed  or  not  in  the  end  depends  on  whether 
monetary  policy  can  follow  a  smooth  path  toward  normalization  while  maintaining  a  stable 
economic  and  price  environment.  To  this  end,  I  personally  consider  it  important  for  the 
13 Bank to continue to provide consistent support from the financial side to achieve desirable 
economic  and  price  conditions  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  while  simultaneously  making 
effective  use  of  a  range  of  policy  tools  based  on  its  assessment  of  economic  and  price 
developments  from  its  policy  framework  of  “two  perspectives.”  In  this  regard,  taking  into 
consideration the nature of QQE that I mentioned earlier, I think that it will be necessary at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  some point to examine the option of gradually starting to shift the focus of monetary policy 
conduct from the asset purchase policy to other policy tools. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
