  Fadilj Bajrami: ECB regional cooperation programme with central banks 
in the Western Balkans 
Address  by  Mr  Fadilj  Bajrami,  Vice  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, on the occasion of the third Programme Steering Committee Meeting of the ECB 
Regional  Cooperation  Programme  with  central  banks  in  the  Western  Balkans,  Pristina, 
27 March 2015. 
 Dear Governor Hamza, 
Dear Deputy Governor Gjoni, 
Dear Mr. Fehlker, 
Dear Mr. Chlad, 
Representatives from central banks, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  glad  to  be  here,  in  Pristina,  with  you  today,  on  the  occasion  of  the  third  and  final 
meeting of the Steering Committee, to officially mark the successful completion of the joint 
cooperation programme between the ECB and the national central banks of the Eurosystem, 
on the one hand, and the central banks of the Western Balkans, on the other. 
The inclusion of the three central banks in this programme, which aims to strengthen their 
institutional capacity and align their operations with the central banking standards of the EU, 
is of enormous importance for the region, given the role of central banks in the EU accession 
process. 
Namely, this regional approach of the ECB allows raising the level of compliance with the EU 
standards and policies, but also creates an opportunity to advance the cooperation between 
the central banks in the region and the central banks of the EU. Therefore, I believe that the 
cooperation will continue in the same spirit and will further advance through other forms of 
cooperation in various central banking areas. 
Concerning  the  NBRM,  it  is  my  pleasure  to  emphasize  that  with  the  ECB  colleagues,  we 
have jointly established the current progress of implementation of the recommendations from 
the Needs Assessment of the NBRM, and defined the follow-up steps. 
On  this  occasion,  let  me  point  out  that  the  NBRM  will  remain  committed  to  the 
implementation of the recommendations provided in the report, bearing in mind that many of 
them have already been incorporated in the NBRM Strategic Plan. Hence, the further support 
of  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  in  terms  of  experience  and  knowledge  is  of  immense 
importance,  as  well  as  the  assistance  of  our  strategic  partners,  with  whom  we  hope  to 
continue working together on the implementation of the recommendations. 
Eventually,  allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  ECB  and  other  central  banks  of  the 
Eurosystem  involved  in  the  programme,  as  well  as  the  hosts,  hoping  to  have  future 
opportunities to meet at similar event. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
