  Jens Weidmann: Of credit and capital – what is needed for an efficient 
and resilient financial system? 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the IIF (Institute of 
International Finance) Europe Summit, Frankfurt am Main, 25 June 2015. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak here before you today. 
The former Italian President Sandro Pertini is quoted as joking that speeches were always 
harmful.  “Before  lunch  they  spoil  people’s  appetite,  and  after  lunch  they  spoil  people’s 
digestion.”  With  this  in  mind,  I’ll  try  to  be  brief  so  that  the  immediate  effect  of  my  speech 
should – hopefully – be limited. 
But lunch is actually an excellent cue, for it calls to mind one of the fundamental principles of 
economics: “There ain’t no such thing as a free lunch.” Interestingly, though, the phrase was 
coined not by an economist, but by the American science fiction writer Robert A Heinlein. 
Although it may have come from the pen of a science fiction author, this adage has proven to 
be far more  durable  than  many  theories  put forward  by  economists.  And  the fact  that  you 
now have to sit through my speech would strongly suggest that Robert Heinlein might have 
been onto something here. 
That  something  is  a  pretty  fundamental  insight:  that  each  and  every  economic  decision 
involves a trade-off that needs to be factored into that decision. As such, economic decision-
making is about weighing benefits and costs, about striking a delicate balance. 
Take central banks, for instance. The task of monetary policy is to find the interest rate that 
neither chokes off the economy nor causes it to overheat. Only in balance will inflation be low 
and stable – and this is usually a central bank’s mandate. Economist Knut Wicksell termed 
this rate the “natural rate of interest”. 
And  striking  the  right  balance  is  the  core  challenge  with  regard  to  another  central  bank 
function  as  well  –  its  role  as  lender  of  last resort.  Overly  restrictive  provision  of  liquidity  in 
times of financial turmoil might fail to quell the upheaval – possibly causing a conflagration. 
But providing too much liquidity for too long might end up causing problems as well. If non-
viable  banks  are  kept  on  life  support  with  central  bank  money,  they  will  go  on  to  make 
evergreen  loans  to  non-viable  companies  –  a  situation  which  heightens  the  risk  of  future 
problems  in  the  banking  system.  And  if  the  liquidity  is  channelled  towards  sovereigns  that 
find  it  otherwise  hard  to  access the  markets,  we  run  the  risk  of  blurring the  lines  between 
monetary and fiscal policy. 
Greece  is  a  case  in  point  here.  The  emergency  liquidity  assistance  (ELA)  –  which  was 
originally conceived as a temporary source of liquidity for financially sound banks in return for 
good  collateral  –  has  been  provided  for  a  protracted  period  of  time  and  has  become  the 
banks’  only  source  of  funding.  This  casts  doubt  on  their  financial  solidity.  The  latter  is 
especially undermined by Greek policy decisions that have sparked capital flight and large-
scale cash withdrawals. 
Banks receiving ELA should be urged to do their utmost to improve their liquidity situation 
and be prevented from worsening it further by rolling over illiquid T-bills of their sovereign. 
Against this background, it should be clear to all the parties to the current negotiations that 
the  Eurosystem  must  not  provide  bridge  financing  to  Greece  even  in  anticipation  of  later 
disbursements. When banks without access to the markets buy debt of a sovereign which is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  likewise locked out of the market, taking recourse to ELA raises serious monetary financing 
concerns. 
Respecting  the  core  principles  upon  which  our  monetary  union  is  built  is  not  a  matter  of 
dogmatic German stubbornness, but a key policy condition for long-term economic prosperity 
in the euro area and for maintaining popular support for the historic project which European 
integration no doubt is. 
Besides the balance that monetary policymakers themselves have to strike, there is another 
state of balance they count on to maintain price stability – a well-balanced financial system. 
Credit and capital: Competition or complementarity? 
2.  
Let  us  have  a  closer  look  into  the relationship  between  bank-based financing  and market-
based financing. Does one detract from the other, or can one deliver benefits where the other 
one  comes  up  short?  To  put  it  succinctly:  Are  credit  and  capital  competitive  or 
complementary? 
The debate on the superiority of bank-based or market-based financial systems is decades, if 
not centuries old.1  
One notable development that sparked this debate was the differences in growth between 
Germany and the UK in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Some argued that 
it was the pre-eminence of banks and their close relationship with their clients that facilitated 
the  rapid  growth  of  Germany’s  manufacturing  industry.  Others  pointed  out  that  while 
manufacturing growth in Germany was faster, overall growth rates were broadly the same. 
Similar arguments are being made today. In general, proponents of the bank-based system 
argue  that  banks  are  better  suited  to  dealing  with  information  asymmetries,  as  their  long-
standing  ties  with  their  clients  allow  them  to  glean  information  about  firms  and  managers. 
This information leads to more efficient capital allocation and better corporate governance. 
The long-standing ties of banks to their clients deliver a quality of information exclusively to 
the bank. Naturally, it is inclined to keep this information to itself. In contrast, financing via 
capital  markets  quickly  disseminates  information  on  firms,  as  Joseph  Stiglitz2  pointed  out. 
This may, however, stunt incentives for the individual investor to acquire private information 
on the soundness of creditors. 
Proponents  of  market-based  systems  make  the  opposite  claim:  large  and  liquid  financial 
markets strengthen rather than weaken incentives to gather information about a firm, as the 
information can be used on a grander scale.3  
And rather than banks’ using their private information on firms to channel resources to those 
which are most productive, they might use the information to shield their existing clients from 
competition.4  
At  first  sight,  the  two  views  seem  irreconcilable.  On  closer  inspection,  though,  the 
contradictions begin to disappear – regardless if one takes the perspective of the individual 
firm or a broader macroeconomic view. 
                                                
1   Levine, R. (2002): “Bank-Based or Market-Based Financial Systems: Which is Better?”, Journal of Financial 
Intermediation 11 (4), pp. 398–428. 
2   Stiglitz,  J.  E.  (1985).  Credit  markets  and  the  control  of  capital.  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  17, 
pp. 133–52. 
3   Homstrom,  B.  and  Tirole,  J.  (1993).  Market  liquidity  and  performance  monitoring,  Journal  of  Political 
Economy,101, pp. 678–709. 
4   Rajan,  Raghuram  G.  (1992).  Insiders  and  outsiders:  The  choice  between  informed  and  arms  length  debt, 
Journal of Finance 47, pp. 1367–1400. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Whether a bank credit, a bond or an equity issue is preferable from the perspective of the 
individual firm depends to a large extent on what stage the firm is at in its economic life cycle. 
Or put simply: If it is an innovative start-up, it might benefit from the expertise of a venture 
capital fund. If it is a small firm with long-standing ties to its bank, chances are that a bank 
credit is best. But if it is a large, developed firm, a bond issue might be the route to take. 
So from the perspective of the individual firm, the answer to the question “credit or capital” is 
“it  all  depends”.  But  maybe  the  answer  is  more  clear-cut  when  taking  a  systemic 
perspective? 
Well, there are some indications that market-based systems might be more procyclical than 
bank-based systems.5 The more pronounced asset price booms and busts in market-based 
systems might be the explanation for that. But we know from the extensive literature on the 
financial accelerator effect that procyclicality besets bank-based systems as well. 
And  while  research  conducted  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  has  shown  that 
bank-based systems are more effective in smoothing the impact of “normal” business cycle 
fluctuations, market-based systems allow for a speedier recovery after financial crises.6 That 
the US economy made up lost ground more quickly than Europe after the Great Recession, 
even though the crisis originated in the US, is a case in point. 
Therefore,  the  answer  to  the  question  is  not  an  “either/or”.  From  a  macroeconomic 
perspective,  credit  and  capital  are  complementary.  Little  would  be  gained  by  simply 
substituting  one  leg  for  another.  We  need  to  supplement  Europe’s  financial  system,  not 
supplant it. 
This does not mean that the European financial system of the future will look exactly like the 
American  one,  for  instance.  The  structure  of  the  financial  system  reflects  the  corporate 
structure of an economy – and in an economy with a comparatively high share of small firms, 
like the European one, one would expect a prevalence of bank-based financing. 
Another  question  is  whether  the  large  proportion  of  very  small  firms  in  Europe  is  optimal. 
Research  strongly  suggests  that  the  answer  is  no:  Larger  firms  are,  on  average,  more 
productive and are better placed to compete in export markets.7  
Unfortunately,  the  growth  of  small,  innovative  enterprises  is  hindered  in  some  European 
countries by a plethora of red tape that kicks in when firms reach a certain size. 
In  France,  for  instance,  many  regulations  become  binding  when  a  firm  reaches  a  size  of 
50 employees. 
Other size-contingent regulations exist in other countries such as Portugal or Italy, where the 
threshold  is  15  employees.  What  these  regulations  all  have  in  common  is  that  they  deter 
firms from expanding. Therefore, they are a drag on growth. 
Structural reforms  that remove  these  barriers  are  urgently  needed.  But  they  will  only  have 
their full effect if firms can find a suitable form of financing as well. And this is why we need to 
remove the impediments to a fully integrated European capital market. 
                                                
5   Leroy,  A  (2014),  “Credit  Procyclicality  and  Financial  Structure 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2568112 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2568112. 
in 
the  EU”.  Available  at  SSRN: 
6   Gambacorta,  L.,  Yang,  J.,  Tsatsaronis,  K.  (2014):  “Financial  Structure  and  Growth”,  BIS  Quarterly  Review, 
March 2014, pp. 21–35. 
7   Garicano, L. ,Lelarge, C. and Van Reenen, J. (2013), “Firm Size Distortions and the Productivity Distribution: 
Evidence from France”, CEPR Discussion Paper 9495. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Capital markets union 
3.  
These  impediments  still  abound,  and  some  of  them  are  addressed  by  the  European 
Commission’s proposals for the design of a European capital markets union: the market for 
high-quality  securitisation  is  one  example.  Other  areas  for  early  action  include  private 
placements, crowd-funding or the harmonisation of prospectuses. 
Eliminating these impediments would be a step forward towards a more prosperous Europe, 
which is why the Commission’s initiative deserves our support. 
With  a  view  to  the  longer  run,  however,  we  will  probably  need  to  go  further.  Harmonising 
insolvency laws across Europe, for instance, would improve the integration of capital markets 
as well – and of venture capital markets in particular. 
Tax deductibility of interest 
3.1  
In addition to the existing impediments, the development of equity markets in general suffers 
from what the Economist has recently called “the great distortion at the heart of the world’s 
economy”:  the  preferential  tax  treatment  of  debt  vis-à-vis  equity.  While  interest  is  tax-
deductible,  equity  is  not.  Removing  this  bias  in  taxation  would  encourage  companies  to 
strengthen their equity base. 
And this is not only important for the development of equity markets, but spills over to the 
other  side  of  the  financial  system,  i.e.  banks.  A  study8  by  IMF  economists  suggests  that 
abolishing the preferential tax treatment of debt would raise average unweighted bank equity 
by 2.2 to 4.2 percentage points – implying no less than a doubling of the leverage ratio. 
Even though the authors caution that the effect is likely to be lower for the biggest banks, 
these numbers are sizeable by any measure, especially considering that the proposed Basel 
III leverage ratio is 3%. 
Doing away with the preferential tax treatment of debt could therefore provide a major boost 
to financial stability. 
Improved risk-sharing 
3.2  
But  in  Europe,  in  particular,  the  benefits  of  stronger  equity  markets  extend  even  further. It 
might be the single most important step we can take towards bringing Europe closer to an 
optimal currency area. 
Economists  like  Robert  Mundell  and  Peter  Kenen  have  highlighted  the  importance  of 
effective risk-sharing arrangements for the functioning of a monetary union. In public debates 
the  most  frequent  (and  most  contested)  proposal  is  to  strengthen  fiscal  risk-sharing 
arrangements. But this debate runs the risk of missing the bigger picture. 
In the United States, for example, studies9 show that fiscal policy cushions only 10% to 20% 
of  economic  shocks,  so  that  a  local  income  shock  does  not  translate  into  a  drop  in 
consumption to the same extent. 
Integrated capital markets play a far larger role – especially integrated equity markets, which 
smooth  out  around  40%  of  the  cyclical  fluctuations  among  the  US  federal  states.  Another 
share of around 25% is cushioned via the credit markets. Altogether, around 80% of a given 
                                                
8   de Mooij, Ruud A. and Keen, M. and Orihara, M., Taxation, Bank Leverage, and Financial Crises (February 
2013). IMF Working Paper No. 13/48. 
9   Asdrubali  P;  Sørensen,  B.  E.;  Yosha,  O.  (1996),  “Channels  of  Interstate  Risk  Sharing:  US  1963–1990”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4), pp. 1081–1110. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  economic shock in the US is absorbed before it can affect consumption. Studies for Canada 
yield similar results.10  
In Europe, the picture looks different. Here, it is mainly credit markets that cushion economic 
shocks – and they are not very effective in doing so. Altogether, only around 40% of a given 
shock is absorbed before it can affect consumption.11 
Increasing the share of capital markets and integrating them across borders would therefore 
help improve risk sharing in Europe and also protect monetary policy by containing economic 
divergence. 
The recently published “Five Presidents” report on the future of the euro area underlines the 
importance of capital markets with regard to strengthening risk-sharing arrangements, too. 
The report also proposes establishing a fiscal risk-sharing mechanism in the longer run. But 
extending  common  liability  would  have  to  be  balanced  by  a  commensurate  shift  towards 
European control; otherwise, the incentives for fiscal prudence will get out of kilter. Here, the 
sequence  is  of  the  essence:  Shifting  fiscal  control  and  intervention  rights  to  the  European 
level must come first; after that, the mutualisation of liability may follow. 
But let’s be frank here – the Greek drama has eroded public and political support for further 
transfers  of  national  sovereignty  to  the  European  level  as  it  has  raised  doubts  over  some 
parties’ determination to assume their responsibility for preserving European monetary union 
as a stability union that is firmly grounded on a set of commonly agreed rules. So it’s crucial 
for further solidarity to be linked to a strong conditionality and for agreements to be adhered 
to. This holds true not only because the root causes of the Greek problems will otherwise 
never be fixed, but also for the stability of monetary union itself. 
By the same token, a European deposit insurance system seems feasible only if the policy 
areas that influence the health of banks are European responsibilities. Otherwise, it will open 
the door to a situation in which the burden of bad national policy choices can be shifted to all 
Europeans creating severe moral hazard problems. 
The sovereign-banking nexus 
4.  
Ladies and gentlemen, strengthening capital markets will bring about tangible benefits only if 
we reduce barriers to their functioning, not if we introduce new distortions to shift activity from 
banks to markets. 
By  the  same  token,  the  regulation  of  banks  will  produce  lasting  success  with  regard  to 
fostering  financial  stability  only  if  we  harness  the  disciplining  forces  of  the  market.  Implicit 
subsidies  and  bail-out  expectations  have  to  be  a  thing  of  the  past.  As  Bank  of  England 
Governor  Mark  Carney  has  put  it:  “To  make  the  system  fairer,  the  days  when  banks 
privatised gains but socialised losses must end.” Eventually, this means tackling the overly 
tight embrace of banks and sovereigns, as this compounds the issue of systemic relevance. 
The Basel III liquidity and capital requirements as well as the recently introduced resolution 
regimes  are  major  steps  towards  cutting  off  the  channel  of  contagion  from  banks  to 
sovereigns. 
In Europe, the banking union that includes the SSM and the SRM goes a long way towards 
making it more likely that stumbling banks will not be rescued at the taxpayer’s expense. 
                                                
10   Balli,  F.  S.;  Kalemli-Ozcan,  S.;  Sørensen,  B.  E.  (2012),  Risk  Sharing  Through  Capital  Gains.  In:  Canadian 
Journal of Economics, Vol 45(2), pp. 472–492 
11   Afonso, A.; Furceri, D. (2007), Business Cycle Synchronization and Insurance Mechanisms in the EU. ECB 
Working Paper No 844, December 2007 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In  Germany,  the  government  has  presented  draft  legislation  specifically  designed  to  boost 
German banks’ bail-inable debt and steps in this direction are welcome. 
But if we want to sever the link between banks and sovereigns for good, we need to stop 
contagion  from  sovereigns  to  banks  as  well.  And  this  means  ending  the  preferential 
regulatory treatment of sovereign debt. 
In the past, the call to end the preferential treatment of sovereign debt was dealt with in the 
same way as some people see taking out the garbage. We all know it has to be done some 
time,  but  for  now,  let’s  pretend  the  chore  doesn’t  exist.  Unfortunately,  at  least  in  the  euro 
area, things have started to get smelly. 
In  contrast  to  other  jurisdictions,  the  Eurosystem  is,  for  good  reason,  forbidden  to  act  as 
lender of last resort for governments. The risk profile of euro-area sovereign debt is therefore 
different  –  and  Greece  illustrates  that.  Acknowledging  this  fact  with  regard  to  regulation 
would make the monetary union more stable, as sovereign restructuring would cease to be a 
systemic event. 
To achieve this aim, sovereign debt needs to be backed by capital, and exposure to a single 
sovereign must be capped just as is the case for any private debtor. 
I welcome the fact that the regulatory treatment of sovereign debt was acknowledged as a 
major  topic  by  the  G7  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  at  our  meeting  in 
Dresden and that it is now being discussed by the Basel Committee. While it is sensible to 
conduct this review in a “careful and holistic manner”, this should not be allowed to lead to 
procrastination. 
Banker’s code of conduct 
5.  
Adequate  regulation  is  crucial  if  we  are  to  strengthen  the  leg  on  which  Europe’s  financial 
system has hitherto rested. But not everything can be dealt with by regulation. It is a bank’s 
culture that lays the ground for misdemeanour. And the influence of regulation on a bank’s 
culture is indirect and limited at best. 
Out of enlightened self-interest, banks should take the initiative and do everything possible to 
establish a culture in which responsibility is rewarded and recklessness rejected. A banker’s 
code of conduct, for instance, might be helpful in this respect. Introducing a voluntary self-
commitment  might  overcome  banks’  qualms  about  embracing  cultural  change  within  their 
respective institutions. 
Still,  Mark  Carney  is  also  right  in  saying:  “This  is  a  major  opportunity  for  the  industry  to 
establish  common  standards  of  market  practice.  But  if firms  and  their  staff fail  to take this 
opportunity, more restrictive regulation is inevitable.” 
Conclusion 
6.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
The crisis has shown that Europe’s one-legged bank-based financial system could do with 
another fully developed leg – market-based finance. 
Doing  away  with  the  impediments  that  hamper  the  full  integration  of  European  capital 
markets is key not only to diversifying sources of funding in a crisis, but also to strengthening 
the risk-sharing arrangements a monetary union requires. 
By the same token, the regulatory gaps that still amount to implicit subsidies for banks must 
be  removed  once  and  all  without  allowing  the  emergence  of  unregulated  systemic  entities 
elsewhere. 
Banks provide important services to society, and many banks do not deserve the reputation 
the  banking  industry  has  gained  during  the  crisis.  However,  unless  banking  becomes  an 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  industry that is more similar to others with regard to market entrance, exit, and power, further 
regulatory steps are necessary, especially in terms of resolving the “too big to fail” issue. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
