  Glenn Stevens: “Reform” and economic growth 
Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the National 
Reform Summit, hosted by The Australian and The Australian Financial Review, Sydney, 26 
August 2015. 
 Thank you for the invitation to take part in this very important discussion. It is pleasing to see 
so  many  influential  people  coming  together  for  a  discussion  about  the  country’s  economic 
future. 
In a sense, I am really an observer here, because the things you need to grapple with today 
are mostly outside my remit. Australia’s monetary system is still – I trust – well supported by 
all the key stakeholders here. It has helped to deliver good outcomes. Our financial sector is 
robust  and  stable.  But  a  stable  monetary  standard  and  a  strong  financial  system,  while 
necessary conditions for prosperity, are not sufficient ones. More is needed – and that’s why 
you are here. 
Your topic is “reform” in the broad. It’s a term that will be used frequently over the next few 
hours. 
What does it mean? 
Often  it  is  presented  through  the  lens  of  allocative  efficiency,  otherwise  known  as 
productivity.  And  this  is  very  important.  Ideally,  production  and  demand  each  face  and 
respond to, without distortion or impediment, underlying relative costs. Those relative costs 
are  given  by  the  state  of  human  and  physical  capital,  technology,  natural  resource 
endowments and so on. 
Generally, economists think optimal allocative efficiency is achieved by removing barriers to 
competition  in  markets  –  be  they  tariffs,  subsidies,  protectionist  devices,  unnecessary 
regulation – and allowing relative prices to allocate productive resources. For most products, 
competitive  markets  will  deliver  the  greatest  choice  at  the  lowest  price  to  informed 
consumers. 
Granted,  there  are  various  exceptions  to  the  generalisation  above.  Where  markets  are 
“natural  monopolies”  or  externalities  exist,  for  example,  regulation  is  called  for.  Good 
outcomes won’t occur if consumers are not well informed. And so on. 
Nonetheless, I would venture that the biggest gains to prosperity over the past 25 years have 
come from more competition. (Aside, that is, from gains from the terms of trade, about which 
we  can  do  nothing  and  which  usually  don’t  keep  coming).  Competition  lowers  prices  and 
costs. It promotes the drive to do better, which spurs innovation. 
Minimising  distortions  due  to  the  tax  system  also  has  a  role  in  enhancing  allocative 
efficiency. 
These things remain important. You should talk about them today. The “to do list” remains 
substantial. 
In arguing the case for reform, though, the way the discussion is framed matters. 
I  would  like  to  suggest  that  “reform”  is  a  term  which  excites  the  intellectual  elites  and  the 
various interest groups (including those who feel they have something to lose from reform) 
but doesn’t do much to excite the general public. And getting buy-in from them is ultimately 
critical. To be sure, they have to be led. But they have to be convinced too. 
I submit that the general public is much more likely to grasp, intuitively, a conversation about 
growth. Growth in jobs, in incomes, in their standard of living, wealth and prosperity. Better 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  allocative  efficiency,  if  we  could  secure  it,  would  doubtless  add  to  growth.  That  growth  is 
worth having. 
But  the  story  is  also  about  how  to  secure  more  dynamic  effects:  increasing  the  resources 
available to be deployed in economic activities of various kinds; fostering conditions under 
which  innovation  and  genuine  risk-taking flourish.  In  that  regard,  how  to  minimise  adverse 
effects  on  work  effort,  enterprise,  capital  accumulation  and  innovation,  due  to  tax  or  other 
factors, would be a worthwhile question – accepting, as a condition, that there is an amount 
of revenue the government must raise to fund the provision of services only the government 
can supply. Minimising those adverse effects means a larger economy; more income; more 
revenue and so on. 
In parallel, there is no avoiding the need to have the right labour market arrangements. The 
question is how to have suitable rules that offer basic fairness, but with minimum adverse 
effects on enterprise, employment, and the scope for free agents to come together in ways 
that mutually suit them – and that grow the economy. Whether we have that balance right is 
a question you might address. 
Growth is important. And for a while now, there has not been quite enough growth. There 
has  been  growth,  and  more  than  in  many  countries.  But,  recent  labour  market  outcomes 
notwithstanding,  not  as  much  as  we  ought  to  be  capable  of.  Growth  rates  have  mostly 
started with a “2” for a while now – despite the lowest interest rates in our lifetimes, banks 
able and willing to lend and measures of consumer and business confidence generally about 
average (notwithstanding what we keep reading in the media). This may be simply a feature 
of  the  post-financial  crisis  world  –  the  need  for  balance  sheet  repair.  It  may  be  about 
changing demographics. It may be that potential growth is a bit lower than we used to think – 
though I don’t think we can know whether that is so at present. 
But  whatever  the  factors  at  work,  we  are  unavoidably  and  inexorably  being  led  to  the 
question: how do we get more growth? The fiscal policy debate, usually framed as “when will 
we get back to surplus?” is actually about: how do we get more growth? Other discussions, 
so often framed as about “fairness” – that is income distribution – might be better framed as: 
how  do  we  grow  the  pie?  That  isn’t  because  distribution  doesn’t  matter.  It’s  because 
distributional issues surely get easier with growth but much, much harder in its absence. 
Reasonable  people  get  this.  They  also  know,  intuitively,  that  the  kind  of  growth  we  want 
won’t  be  delivered  just  by  central  bank  adjustments  to  interest  rates  or  short-term  fiscal 
initiatives that bring forward demand from next year, only to have to give it back then. They 
are  looking  for  more  sustainable  sources  of  growth.  They  want  to  see  more  genuine 
dynamism in the economy and to feel more confidence about their own future income. 
So  in  your  deliberations  today,  a  key  question worth  asking  is:  how  do  we  generate more 
growth? Not temporary, flash-in-the-pan growth, but sustainable growth. How do we craft a 
credible, confidence-enhancing, narrative about growth? 
That’s  actually  what  “reform”  is  about:  making  things  work  better  for  higher  income  and 
wellbeing. If there are some things of substance that you could agree on, it would be a step 
forward. 
Present  here  in  the  room  you  have  the  intellectual  resources,  the  stakeholders,  the 
leadership and the communication capabilities. In short, you have the ingredients. 
Over to you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
