  Grant Spencer: Action needed to reduce housing imbalances 
Speech by Mr Grant Spencer, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the 
Chamber of Commerce, Rotorua, 15 April 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
The housing market is a key driver of economic and financial developments in New Zealand. 
It  is  watched  closely  by  the  Reserve  Bank  as  a  barometer  of  domestic  demand  and  an 
indicator of financial stability. 
Over the past 12–18 months, Reserve Bank policy has helped to moderate pressures in the 
housing market. Increases in the OCR totalling 1 percent between March and July 2014 were 
intended  to  reduce  the  degree  of  monetary  policy  stimulus  to  domestic  demand  while  the 
loan-to-value ratio restrictions (LVRs), introduced in October 2013, were aimed at reducing 
risk  in  the  financial  system.  These  policies  were  mutually  supportive  of  each  other  and 
slowed  the  rate  of  growth  of  house  prices  during  the  first  half  of  2014,  despite  strong  net 
inward migration and the ongoing shortage of housing. 
Since late 2014, housing market imbalances have become more accentuated, particularly in 
Auckland where the supply shortage is greatest. This is of concern to the Reserve Bank as it 
poses a threat to financial and economic stability. House prices as multiples of income and 
rents are already near record levels and further increases will accentuate the risk of a sharp 
price correction once demand and supply come in to closer balance. 
Today  I  will  discuss  these  housing  market  imbalances:  their  causes  and  the  risks  they 
present. I will also touch on policies that could assist in reducing the current imbalances. But 
first, let’s recap housing market developments over the past year. 
Housing pressures moderated in 2014 
2. 
House price inflation nationwide accelerated from mid-2012 and peaked in the third quarter 
of  2013,  supported  by  rapid  growth  in  high-LVR  lending  by  the  banks  and  record  low 
mortgage  interest  rates.  The  Reserve  Bank  became  concerned  that  strong  house  price 
inflation  and  rapid  growth  in  high-risk  lending  was  increasing  the  risk  of  a  sharp  housing 
market  correction  at  the  same  time  that  bank  balance  sheets  were  becoming  more 
vulnerable.  In  response,  the  Reserve  Bank  imposed  a  limit  on  high-LVR  lending  effective 
from 1 October 2013. These restrictions, the subsequent tightening of monetary policy and 
election uncertainty helped to slow housing demand and ease house price inflation through 
to September 2014. 
House sales slowed markedly in the immediate aftermath of LVR restrictions, with all regions 
trending  down  except  Christchurch.  The  slowing  was  evident  for  all  buyer  types,  although 
there were shifts in the composition of sales. There was generally a larger fall in sales to first-
home  buyers  and  existing  owner  occupiers.  Sales  to  investors  remained  relatively  stable 
while  “new  to  market”  and  “returning  to market”  sales  increased  –  reflecting  purchases  by 
new migrants and returning New Zealanders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Figure 2.1: Monthly house sales by buyer type 
Source: Corelogic NZ, REINZ, RBNZ estimates. 
 House  price  inflation  slowed  from  an  annual  rate  of  9.3  percent  in  September  2013  to 
4.9 percent  in  September  2014.  The  slowing  in  house  price  inflation  was  most  evident  in 
Auckland,  with  a  more  muted  effect  elsewhere.  Reserve  Bank  research  suggests  that, 
nationally, house price inflation would have been 3–5 percent higher without the LVR policy. 
Figure 2.2: Annual house price inflation  
(three-month moving average) 
Source: REINZ, RBNZ estimates. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Actual and anticipated increases in the OCR from March to July 2014 increased the cost of 
mortgage  credit  and  contributed  to  a  slowing  in  mortgage  commitments  from  $4.5b  per 
month at their peak to $4.2b in September 2014.1 The share of lending at high LVRs fell from 
over 30 percent in mid-2013, to a low point of 3.6 percent in March 2014. 
From late 2014, however, there has been a pick-up in new mortgage lending with around half 
of  new  mortgage  commitments  at  LVRs  between  70–80  percent.  The  increase  in  new 
lending has not led to significant growth in bank balance sheets, due to many households 
taking advantage of low interest rates to accelerate their repayment of principal. 
Figure 2.4: New housing loan approvals, new commitments  
and credit growth 
Source: RBNZ. 
 New housing market pressures emerging 
3. 
Since  September,  coincident  with  the  upturn  in  new  mortgage  lending,  housing  market 
turnover has increased sharply (figure 3.1). Some of this reflects the normal spring pick-up, 
and possibly a bounce back from pre-election uncertainty. Nonetheless, the data point to a 
strong resurgence in housing demand, particularly in Auckland. 
                                                
1  Seasonally adjusted, and measured on a three-month moving average basis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Figure 3.1: Monthly house sales 
(Seasonally adjusted) 
  Source: REINZ, RBNZ estimates. 
New listings onto the market have not kept pace with the increase in house sales, causing 
inventory levels to decline from already low levels and adding to house price pressures. This 
is true for most regions, but is most pronounced in Auckland where current inventory would 
be  exhausted  in  only  12  weeks  at  the  current  level  of  sales.  Consistent  with  this,  annual 
house price inflation in Auckland has been increasing, reaching nearly 17 percent in March. 
House price inflation has remained more moderate elsewhere, although price levels remain 
stretched in most regions. 
What has caused this resurgence in the housing market? The answer is not straightforward. 
Several demand and supply factors are at play. 
Population growth over the past year has contributed to increased demand for housing. Net 
permanent and long-term (PLT) migration inflows reached a record rate of over 55,000 in the 
year to February 2015– boosting the population by over 1 percent. While strong growth in 
migrant  arrivals  has  pushed  up  the  net  immigration  numbers,  there  has  also  been  a 
significant slowdown in the number of New Zealanders leaving the country, currently at its 
lowest level for over a decade. 
It  is  estimated  that  over  half  of  the  net  migrant  inflow  have  settled  in  Auckland.  This  is 
providing a major boost to Auckland’s population, which grew by nearly 34,000 people in the 
year to June 2014 (figure 3.2). Although consent issuance of new dwellings in Auckland has 
continued to increase, reaching 7,700 in the year to February 2015, this has been insufficient 
to match the surge in population, let alone cut into Auckland’s housing shortage. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 3.2: Auckland annual net population change 
(rolling quarterly totals) 
  Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
People-per-dwelling is a useful metric for looking at the physical balance between housing 
supply  and  demand.  Over  time,  people-per-dwelling  should  slowly  trend  down  as  the 
population ages, families shrink and people become wealthier. This means that the number 
of dwellings required will tend to increase at a faster rate than the population. If residential 
building  is  insufficient  to  keep  up  with  population  growth,  then  the  number  of  people-per-
dwelling will trend up rather than down. 
In Auckland, people-per-dwelling has been increasing since 2008 while it has continued to 
trend down elsewhere in New Zealand (figure 3.3). The sharp rise in people-per-dwelling in 
Auckland  in  2014  highlights  that  home  building  remains  well  below  the  level  required  to 
accommodate  the  rising  population. We  estimate  the  shortage  of  houses  in  Auckland  has 
increased over the past year to between 15,000 and 20,000 houses.2  
                                                
2  This is based on an assumed trend of 2.9 people-per-dwelling. If the assumed trend for people-per-dwelling in 
Auckland was downward sloping, as we have seen in the rest of New Zealand, then the estimated shortfall of 
houses would be larger. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Figure 3.3 People per dwelling 
  Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
An increase in investor demand in Auckland can be inferred from various indicators: we have 
seen  a  continued  decline  in  the  rate  of  home  ownership,  which  reached  a  record  low  of 
61.5 percent  in  2013;  there  has  been  an  increase  in  the  share  of  house  sales  going  to 
investors  since  October  2013  –  from  33.8  percent  in  September  2013  to  37.4  percent  in 
February 2015; and rental inflation has remained considerably below house price inflation. 
Average  rental  yields  in  Auckland  have  fallen  from  4.6  percent  in  2010  to  3.7  percent  in 
2014.  Residential  investors  have  continued  to  expand  their  interest  in  housing  as  rental 
returns have declined. This points to an excess demand for home ownership over and above 
the simple excess demand for accommodation. 
New housing supply in Auckland is falling short of expectations 
4. 
Turning  to  the  other  side  of  the  equation,  it  is  clear  that  housing  supply  constraints  are 
persisting. National residential construction activity has been increasing steadily for the past 
few years and, in constant prices, is now in line with the previous peak of 2004. Much of the 
increase  has  been  due  to  earthquake  repairs  and  rebuilds  in  Canterbury,  which  are  now 
beginning to ease the accommodation shortage that has existed since the earthquakes. We 
have  seen  a  substantial  easing  in  Christchurch  rental  inflation  over  the  past  year.  About 
10,000  rebuilds  or  major  repairs  are  yet  to  be  completed3  and  residential  building  in 
Canterbury is expected to remain around its current high levels for the next couple of years. 
After  that,  however,  we  are  likely  to  see  a  gradual  tailing  off  of  residential  construction  in 
Canterbury. 
                                                
3  Based on data from the Insurance Council of New Zealand. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 4.1: Annual new dwelling consent issuance by region 
  Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
Auckland’s outlook is very different. Residential construction will need to continue at a high 
pace  for  many  years.  At  current  rates  of  building,  it  appears  the  shortage  of  housing  is 
getting worse, not better. Auckland Council estimate that over 10,000 new homes each year 
will be needed to satisfy future population growth.4 In essence, it could take many years to 
work off the current housing shortage. 
The  Auckland  Accord  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction,  and  improves  the  outlook  for  further 
growth  in  housing  supply.  However,  while  the  target  for  the  first  year  (9,000  dwelling  and 
section consents) was comfortably met, targets are more challenging in the next two years. 
The  target  for  the  final  year  to  September  2016  is  an  ambitious  17,000  new  dwelling  and 
section consents.5  
To  help  facilitate  faster  growth  in  home  building,  80  Special  Housing  Areas  (SHAs)  have 
been established. These include brownfield and greenfield areas with an estimated capacity 
for  43,000  dwellings  over  a  period  of  10  years.  So  far,  SHAs  have  yielded few  completed 
dwellings or “shovel-ready” sections. However, 11,000 new dwelling or section consents in 
SHAs are expected by September 2016. 
While the Accord is helping, significant factors continue to hold back new housing supply in 
Auckland.  These  include  a  limited  supply  of  land  for  housing,  a  restrictive  urban  planning 
regime,  public  concerns  over  densification,  uncertainty  around 
infrastructure 
development,  and  a  fragmented  and  inefficient  residential  building  industry.  These  factors 
were  discussed  in  the  Productivity  Commission’s  2012  inquiry  into  housing  affordability. 
Although many of the constraints apply nationally, they are more binding in Auckland due to 
the stronger pressures from population growth. 
An  improved  supply  of useable  land  is  essential.  The  land  component of  housing  costs  in 
New Zealand has grown considerably over the past 20 years with land now accounting for 
more than 60 percent of the total cost of a new dwelling in Auckland, and around 50 percent 
future 
                                                
4  Auckland Council (2013). 
5  The split between the dwelling and section consents is expected to be around 10,000 new dwelling consents 
and 7,000 new section consents. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
in  the  rest  of  the  country.6  The  Auckland  Plan  establishes  a  Rural  Urban  Boundary  that 
provides  scope  for  urban  growth  outside  of  the  old  Municipal  Urban  Limit.  However,  land 
blocks with disparate ownership and speculative investment in “land-banking” continue to tie 
up large areas of buildable land. 
Urban planning rules are complex and often restrictive. Planning must take account of the 
Resource  Management  Act,  Local  Government  Act  and  Land  Transport  Act.  Planning 
requirements can add significantly to the cost of a new dwelling and/or restrict the volume of 
new  supply.  A  recent  study7  estimates  the  cost  of  planning  regulatory  requirements  to  be 
between  $32,500  and  $60,000  per  dwelling  in  a  subdivision  and  between  $65,000  and 
$110,000 for an apartment. 
The  relatively  high  cost  impost  for  apartments  is  due  to  a  raft  of  height,  area  and  other 
planning  restrictions  that  appear  to  have  contributed  to  the  relatively  low  number  of 
apartment  consents  in Auckland  over recent  years  (fig.4.2).  Auckland  also  has  a  relatively 
low  proportion  of  apartments  compared  to  Sydney:  25  percent  versus  39  percent  of  total 
dwellings. While apartment construction has picked up recently, the evidence suggests that 
more  active  encouragement  of  apartment  development  could  be  an  effective  means  of 
easing the housing supply constraint in Auckland. 
Figure 4.2: Annual consent issuance in Auckland 
Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
 Providing the infrastructure for new developments is a slow and complex process, in part due 
to  multiple  service  providers  with  often  conflicting  incentives  and  funding  arrangements.8 
Better  collaboration  and  incentives  across  infrastructure  providers  is  required  for  more 
efficient infrastructure planning and a better delivery of services. 
                                                
6  Productivity Commission (2014). 
7  Grimes and Mitchell (2015). 
8 
In Auckland for example, the Auckland City Council, Watercare, Vector, NZTA and developers themselves are 
all involved in the provision of basic infrastructure. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Overall  delays  and  uncertainties  throughout  the  development  process  can  have  significant 
implications for the total cost of development and ultimately whether proposed developments 
proceed. The planning approval process to convert designated SHA land to “shovel-ready” 
sections requires multiple approvals9 and is estimated by the Council to typically take over 
two  years  to  complete  in  greenfield  situations.  For  existing  residential  zoned  (brownfield) 
areas, the time to achieve all approvals for multi-unit dwellings is in excess of a year.10  
Further,  capacity  constraints  in  the  construction  sector could  constrain further  increases  in 
housing  construction  in  Auckland  over  the  next  couple  of  years.  The  needed  pick-up  in 
Auckland housing supply comes on top of the significant ongoing demands of the Canterbury 
rebuild,  which  are  not  expected  to  ease  for  at  least  two  years.  Also,  employment  in  the 
construction sector now accounts for 6 percent of the working age population, similar to that 
seen  in  the  mid-2000s  property  boom.  Over  the  past  year,  vacancies  in  the  construction 
industry  have  increased  and  construction firms have  been  finding  it  increasingly  difficult  to 
find skilled labour. Construction cost inflation in Auckland increased to 7 percent in the year 
to December 2014 (figure 4.3), highlighting the increasing resource pressure. 
Figure 4.3: Annual construction cost inflation by region 
Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
 Housing pressures are a threat to stability 
5. 
Rising  house  price  inflation,  particularly  in  Auckland,  represents  a  risk  to  financial  and 
economic stability. Irrespective of the mix of demand and supply-based factors, the longer 
excess  demand  persists,  the  further  prices  will  depart  from  their  underlying  fundamental 
determinants and the greater the potential for a disruptive correction. New Zealand’s house 
prices, when compared to incomes or rents, are high on an international basis and very high 
when compared to New Zealand’s historic trend. Figure 5.1 shows that New Zealand’s house 
price-to-income ratio in 2013 was 30 percent above its historical average. Only Norway had a 
higher historical deviation. 
                                                
9 
Including  resource  consent  for  a  development  master  plan,  applications  for  plan  variations,  engineering 
approvals  for  civil  works  and  associated  resource  consents,  survey  plan  approvals,  and  the  approval  of 
individual land titles. 
10  Auckland Council (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Figure 5.1: International house price-to-income ratios 
(Deviation from historical average, 2013) 
Source: OECD 
 Auckland house prices are particularly stretched, having increased by three times since the 
start of 2002. This stretch is emphasised by the recent Demographia affordability survey that 
shows  Auckland  to  be  the  ninth  least  affordable  city  out  of  86  major  metropolitan  areas 
(population over 1 million)11. In September 2014, the median Auckland house sale price was 
8.2  times  the  median  household  income,  compared  to  a  survey  median  ratio  of  3.8. 
Nationally, New Zealand’s median house price-to-income ratio is about 5.0. 
New Zealand is one of the few advanced economies that has not had a major house price 
correction in the past 45 years. During this period, most of the advanced economies have 
had  at  least  one  significant  house  price  correction  that  has  created  difficult  challenges  for 
financial and economic stability. Several countries saw 20 percent plus house price declines 
in the GFC, including the US, Ireland, Spain, Greece and the Netherlands. 
A  correction  in  house  prices  in  New  Zealand  could  be  prompted  by  a  range  of  potential 
shocks to the economy or financial system. Global interest rates are at record low levels and 
large mortgages have been “affordable” at these rates. As global interest rates return to more 
normal levels, many mortgage borrowers could come under pressure as they are required to 
refinance  at  higher  rates.  Alternatively,  a  downturn  in  the  global  economy  and  financial 
markets could lead to a drop in national income and rising unemployment, at the same time 
as foreign creditors are requiring an increase in the interest rate premium charged to New 
Zealand borrowers. In such circumstances, we could see the cost of credit rising at the same 
time that incomes and employment were under pressure. Such stresses would be expected 
to cause housing demand to ease. If this occurred when new supply was coming through in 
volume,  then  prices  would  begin  to  fall.  A  withdrawal  of  speculative  interest  in  residential 
property or decline in migration inflows would accentuate any such fall. 
                                                
11  11th Annual Demographia International Housing Affordability Survey, Jan 2015. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  With  60  percent  of  its  lending  in  residential  mortgages,  the  New  Zealand  banking  system 
could  be  put  under  severe  pressure  in  such  scenarios.  The  resulting  contraction  in  credit 
would  amplify  the  impact  of  an  adverse  external  shock  to  the  domestic  economy  and 
financial system, making it more difficult to avoid a severe downturn. 
6.  What can policy do? 
Given the large physical shortage of housing in Auckland, and the prospect that population 
growth  will  outstrip  new  supply  for  some  time  yet,  a  primary  issue  to  address  is  the  slow 
supply response in Auckland. While progress has been made expanding the supply of land 
available  for  residential  development  and  improving  the  resource  consent  process  via  the 
Auckland  Accord,  considerable  scope  exists  to  streamline  the  multiple  approval  processes 
required  to  complete  a  residential  development.  This  could  include:  introducing  greater 
flexibility  and  efficiency  into  urban  planning  processes;  a requirement for  transparent  cost-
benefit  analyses  of  urban  planning  regulations;  and  a  more  integrated  approach  to  the 
planning and funding of infrastructure development. 
The  Government’s  review  of  the  Resource  Management  Act  (RMA)  has  the  potential  to 
substantially improve the planning and resource consenting processes. Also, the Productivity 
Commission  is  currently  exploring  ways  to  improve  the  policies,  strategies  and  processes 
that  underpin  New  Zealand’s  housing  development  capacity,  including  the  provision  and 
funding of infrastructure.12  
Other  measures  to  facilitate  residential  development  might  include  a  review  of  taxes  and 
other incentives affecting land banking. Measures to increase productivity in the construction 
sector would also help facilitate larger-scale and more affordable housing development. 
While the housing supply constraint must be the main policy priority, it is clear that, under 
any  scenario,  it  will  take  a  number  of  years  to  eliminate  the  housing  shortage.  In  the 
meantime, it is important that population-based demand pressures are not exacerbated by 
expanding  investor  and  credit-based  demand  that  simply  amplifies  the  price  effects  of  the 
physical shortage. Increases in house prices above their already high levels are unlikely to 
bring forth further supply; rather they make houses even less affordable and add to financial 
system risk. 
An  important  policy  question  on  the  demand  side  is  whether  measures  could  be  taken  to 
stem the high net inflow of migrants. However, there are real risks in trying to manage the 
migration  cycle.  Any  measures  taken  will  have  long  lags  and  therefore  run  the  risk  of 
reducing  inflows  just  when  the  cycle  is  already  turning  down.  Further,  any  such  measures 
can  only  operate  on  gross  inflows  of  non-residents.  Policy  cannot  influence  the  volume  of 
gross outflows or returning New Zealanders. 
The tax treatment of housing is a major factor with potential to influence the demand/supply 
imbalance  in  the  housing  market.  As  reflected  in  our  submission  to  the  Productivity 
Commission’s  inquiry  on  housing  affordability,  housing  is  the  most  tax-preferred  form  of 
investment, particularly when it is highly leveraged. Investors are often setting the marginal 
market  prices  that  are  then  applied  to  the  full  housing  stock  within  a  regional  market. 
Indicators point to an increasing presence of investors in the Auckland market and this trend 
is  no  doubt  being  reinforced  by  the  expectation  of  high  rates  of  return  based  on  untaxed 
capital  gains.  While  there  are  difficult  issues  and  trade-offs  to  consider  in  this  area,  the 
Reserve Bank would like to see fresh consideration of possible policy measures to address 
the tax-preferred status of housing, especially investor related housing. 
                                                
12  The inquiry is also looking into ways to improve governance, transparency and accountability of the planning 
system, and the involvement and engagement with the community. A draft report is due in June 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Mortgage credit growth is facilitating the renewed expansion in housing demand. While net 
growth  in  mortgage  credit  remains  moderate,  the  flow  of  new  mortgage  lending  has 
increased  sharply  since  October  2014.  Banks  are  competing  aggressively  by  reducing 
margins on fixed mortgages and new mortgage commitments are growing at a 20 percent 
annual rate. We estimate that at least half of this new credit is going to the Auckland market. 
The  Bank  considers  using  macro-prudential  policy  in  the  housing  area  on  two  potential 
grounds: 
1) 
to  counter  new  credit-based  demand  and  price  pressures  that  are  increasing 
financial system risks; and/or 
to increase the resilience of the banking system to a potential housing downturn. 
2) 
The existing LVR restrictions on mortgage lending helped to moderate the market for a year 
and they continue to constrain risk in the banks’ balance sheets. With the current overheated 
housing market in Auckland, it would not make sense to remove these restrictions in the near 
term.  To  do  so  would  invite  a  further  surge  in  credit-based  demand  for  housing.  When 
conditions warrant, however, it will be appropriate to ease or modify the incidence of the LVR 
policy. 
The Bank is currently consulting on a new asset class for residential investment mortgages 
that  will  attract  a  higher  risk  weighting  than  owner-occupier  mortgages.  This  is  consistent 
with the international evidence showing larger loan losses for investor loans than for loans to 
owner  occupiers  during  periods  of  housing  market  stress.  A  new  asset  class  will  see  a 
greater  consistency  of  treatment for  investor  mortgages  across  the  banks  and  ensure  that 
investor  loans  have  capital  backing  consistent  with  their  higher  risk.  A  well-defined  asset 
class  would  also  facilitate  the  introduction  of  macro-prudential  policy  and  the  Bank  is 
currently reviewing some options. 
Of  course  the  Reserve  Bank’s  most  powerful  policy  tool  is  the  OCR.  However,  while  the 
pressures  in  the  housing  market  would  suggest  a  tightening  of  interest  rates,  the  primary 
objective of monetary policy, CPI inflation, is projected to remain below its target range for 
some  time.  Thus  it  would  be  inappropriate  for  monetary  policy  to  lend  assistance  to  the 
Bank’s financial stability objective at this time. 
This  presents  something  of  a  policy  conundrum,  resulting  from  the  current  very  unusual 
international environment. Persistently low global inflation and recent declines in commodity 
prices  are  acting  to soften  CPI  inflation  in  New  Zealand.  At  the  same  time, the  low  global 
inflation  is  causing  central  banks  around the  world  to  hold  interest  rates  at  historically  low 
levels and, in the case of Europe and Japan, to adopt large quantitative easing programmes. 
The  easy  monetary  policies  are  in  turn  contributing  to  upward  pressure  on  global  asset 
prices, including real estate, and increasing risks to financial stability. 
Conclusion 
7. 
After  moderating  in  the  period  following  the  introduction  of  the  LVR  restrictions,  housing 
market  pressures  re-emerged  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2014.  The  market  imbalance  is 
considerably greater in Auckland than in other parts of the country, with house price inflation 
now at 17 percent per annum and median price-to-income multiples over 7. The increasing 
degree of stretch in prices means that an eventual market correction is increasingly likely to 
be disruptive to financial stability and the economy. 
The  causes  of the  housing market  imbalance  are  primarily  linked  to  the  rapidly  expanding 
migrant  population  and  a  relatively  slow  housing  supply  response.  The  latter  has  been  a 
longer-term issue and is due to a complex range of factors including: a scarcity of suitable 
land; restrictive planning regulations; a lack of coordination in infrastructure planning; and a 
fragmented  and  inefficient  building  industry.  There  have  also  been  bottlenecks  in  the 
construction  sector  with  both  Christchurch  and  Auckland  competing  for  resources.  An 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  acceleration in new credit commitments since September has facilitated the growth of house 
sales and prices over this period. 
Supply-side policy solutions are unlikely to yield quick results. The proposed RMA reforms 
could significantly improve the planning process but could take years to be felt in new supply. 
Greenfield developments will inherently be slow to deliver new stock. A release of resources 
from the Christchurch rebuild is likely to be a couple of years away. The best prospect for 
substantially increasing the supply of dwellings over the next one to two years appears to be 
in  apartment  development.  The  Government  and  the  Auckland  Council  might  therefore 
consider  focussing  their  efforts  on  streamlining  the  approvals  process  and  increasing  the 
designated areas for high-density residential development. 
On the demand side, we consider that greater attention needs to be given to issues relating 
to  the  tax  treatment  of  investor  housing.  There  are  practical  difficulties  in  using  migration 
policies  to  influence  the  housing  cycle.  Monetary  policy,  which  in  past  cycles  has  been 
supportive  of  financial  stability  objectives,  cannot  be  used  currently  to  dampen  housing 
demand.  This  cycle  is  unusual  in  that  CPI  inflation  is  staying  very  low  –  requiring  interest 
rates  to  also  stay  low  –  even  though  rising  asset  prices  are  raising  financial  stability 
concerns. 
Macro-prudential  policy  is  a  potential  instrument  to  help  restrain  credit-based  demand 
pressures  and/or  improve  the  resilience  of  bank  balance  sheets  in  the  face  of  a  potential 
housing downturn. The LVR restrictions had a significant moderating effect in 2014 and are 
still  acting  to  improve  the  resilience  of  bank  balance  sheets.  They  will  be  removed  or 
modified  as  market  conditions  allow.  Other  macro-prudential  options  are  being  assessed, 
including in relation to investor lending. However, such tools are not a panacea –their impact 
is inevitably smaller than the main drivers of the current housing market imbalance. 
References 
Auckland Council (2013) ‘Shaping a business friendly city. The Proposed Auckland Unitary 
Plan’ December 2013. 
Auckland  Council  (2014)  ‘Housing  Delivery  Cycle’  prepared  by  the  Housing  Project  Office, 
December 2014. 
Grimes,  A  and  I  Mitchell  (2015)  ‘Impacts  of  Planning  Rules,  Regulations,  Uncertainty  and 
Delay  on  Residential  Property  Development’  Motu  Working  Paper  15–02,  Motu  Economic 
and Public Policy Research, Wellington. 
Ministry  of  Business,  Innovation  and  Employment  (2014)  ‘Auckland  Housing  Accord, 
Monitoring Report #4’ 
http://www.mbie.govt.nz/what-we-do/housing/pdf-document-library/Auckland-Housing-
Accord-Monitoring-report-4.pdf, accessed 19 January 2015. 
Ministry  of  Business,  Innovation  and  Employment  (2015)  ‘Auckland  Housing  Accord, 
Monitoring Report #5’ 
http://www.mbie.govt.nz/what-we-do/housing/pdf-document-library/auckland-housing-accord-
monitoring-report-5.pdf, accessed 10 March 2015. 
Productivity Commission (2012), ‘The housing affordability inquiry’ New Zealand Productivity 
Commission Final Report, March 2012. 
Productivity  Commission  (2014),  ‘Using  land  for  housing’  New  Zealand  Productivity 
Commission Issues paper, November 2014. 
Watson,  E  (2013)  ‘A  closer  look  at  some  of  the  supply  and  demand  factors  influencing 
residential property markets’ Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, 2013/11. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
