  Peter Praet: Lifting potential growth in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Welt-Währungskonferenz, Berlin, 23 April 2015. 
I would like to thank John Hutchinson for his contributions to this speech. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here today and to have an opportunity to address this gathering. 
As  you  know,  over  the  last  two  years  the  ECB  has  taken  a  series  of  monetary  policy 
measures to ensure that we meet our price stability mandate. In my remarks today I would 
like to look back on those measures and the effects they have had, but to do so in a broader 
context – that is, by looking at overall growth trends within the euro area and how monetary 
policy fits within them. 
The main point I would like to make is that the euro area needs a combination of policies for 
the  cyclical  recovery  we  are  seeing  to  become  a  lasting  one:  accommodative  monetary 
policy and determined structural reforms need to go hand-in-hand. 
Potential growth and monetary policy 
The euro area economy seems now to be turning the corner. Both the hard and soft data 
suggest that the activity is gathering momentum and looks set to strengthen over the course 
of this year. Consistent with this, all the major forecasting institutions have revised up their 
expectations  for  GDP  growth  in  2015  and  the  years  ahead.  We  are  therefore  seeing  the 
beginnings of a cyclical recovery. But it is not yet a structural one. 
What I mean by this is that, though the business cycle is improving, the notable decline in 
euro  area’s  potential  growth  rate  has  not  been  addressed,  which  can  be  imagined  as  the 
“speed limit” of the economy – the rate at which it can grow while maintaining stable inflation. 
International  institutions currently  estimate  the  potential growth rate  to  be  below  1%  in  the 
euro area, compared with above 2% in the United States.1 
This fall in potential growth is not a new phenomenon. Potential growth in the euro area has 
been declining since the late 1990s, driven mostly by a prolonged slowdown in total factor 
productivity growth, a trend decline in hours worked and the labour participation rate growing 
more  hesitantly.  Before  the  crisis,  however,  it  seems  that  this  deceleration  went  largely 
unnoticed. And this has in fact contributed both to the type of crisis we have experienced and 
the situation of weak potential growth that we face now. 
In several countries expectations of future income became detached from these underlying 
trends in potential growth in the pre-crisis period, leading the public and private sectors in 
different  countries  to  accumulate  excessive  debt.  This  in  turn  left  parts  of  the  euro  area 
facing not a normal business cycle, but what is known as a “balance sheet recession”, where 
the recovery is hampered by the need for governments, households and firms to deleverage. 
And so this also creates financial fragmentation. 
The  difficulty  of  managing  this  special  type  of  crisis,  coupled  with  what  were  in  hindsight 
some  errors  in  policy  sequencing, then  noticeably  exacerbated  the fall  in  potential  growth. 
                                                
1  European  Commission, Winter  2015  projections;  IMF,  April  2015 WEO;  OECD,  November  2014  Economic 
Outlook. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  their  skills  and  become  unemployable.  As 
Both the level and growth rate of potential fell steeply after 2008 and have barely recovered 
since. 
This is due to, first, a deep and protracted decline in investment – nearly 20% from peak to 
trough – which has caused the capital stock to grow more slowly and increased its average 
age.  Seen  in  historical  perspective,  this  deceleration  since  2008  has  been  substantially 
stronger  than  in  previous  recessions.  Of  particular  concern  is  the  growth  rate  of  the 
machinery  and  equipment  stock,  the  most  productive  component,  which  has  slowed  the 
most. 
Second,  long  spells  of  crisis-related  unemployment  have  resulted  in  so-called  “hysteresis 
effects” in the labour market – that is, where workers are unemployed for so long that they 
lose 
result,  structural  unemployment 
(unemployment caused by a mismatch between jobs and skills) has risen in the euro area as 
whole,  increasing from just  under  9%  in  2008  to  almost  10%  in  20142, and  much more  in 
some stressed countries. 
Low potential growth matters for several reasons. It creates a vicious circle where firms and 
households hold back consumption and investment due to diminished expectations, which in 
turn lowers potential growth further. It makes it harder for the economy as a whole to grow 
out of debt. And, if sustained, it implies a permanent loss in productive capacity – and hence 
in  jobs  –  which  has  social  consequences. Indeed,  if  potential  growth  in  the  euro  area  had 
carried on rising at the same rate as in 2007, potential output would currently be more than 
4% higher. 
But low potential growth also has important implications for monetary policy. Let me highlight 
two that are particularly significant. 
First, to ensure medium-term price stability, monetary policy aims to limit how much actual 
growth diverges from potential growth. In the textbook representation it is assumed that the 
monetary policy stance is calibrated to close the gap between activity and potential, the so-
called “output gap”. Therefore, if potential changes, the output gap can change as well, and 
the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy  has  to  be  adjusted.  But  exactly  how  falling 
potential growth affects monetary policy is not straightforward. 
At first sight, one would think that it would make achieving price stability easier as, for a given 
level of output, the output gap that monetary policy has to close is smaller and inflation would 
return to the central bank’s objective more quickly. Yet this would be a Pyrrhic victory, as it 
implies that the central bank would have to reign in its accommodative policy while there are 
still  very  high  levels  of  structural  unemployment.  And  in  any  event,  the  reality  is  more 
complex. 
As  I  already  intimated,  if  potential  growth  falls,  expectations  of  incomes  and  profits  fall  as 
well, and firms and households are likely to consume and invest less today. Such a feedback 
from  potential  growth  to  current  growth  would  in  fact  have  the  opposite  effect  –  it  would 
prevent the output gap from closing – and create downward pressure on inflation. In other 
words, falling potential would not make the task of monetary policy easier, but harder. 
Second,  to  steer  output  back  towards  potential,  monetary  policy  aims  to  bring  its  policy 
interest rates as close as possible to what is known as the “equilibrium” interest rate – that is, 
the interest rate where resources are fully employed in the economy and inflation is stable. 
A  lower  rate  of  potential  growth  can  however  reduce  the  equilibrium  interest  rate,  as  for 
example lower growth in either productivity or labour supply reduces demand for investment. 
And  this  can  in  turn  create  constraints for monetary  policy,  since  in  order  to  “shadow”  the 
equilibrium  rate  the  central  bank  may  have  to  reduce  its  policy  rates  to  zero  or  lower. 
                                                
2  Average of IMF, Commission and OECD estimates. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Moreover, it may have keep rates at those levels more often in the future when the economy 
slumps and inflation deviates from its objective. 
It  is  difficult  to  quantify  exactly  these  relationships  as  they  involve  unobservable  concepts 
such  as  the  output  gap  and  the  equilibrium  interest  rate,  which  are  often  very  difficult  to 
estimate in real-time and subject to revisions. But the outcomes we can observe suggest that 
falling potential growth has been accompanied by a widening not a closing output gap, with 
inflation  following  a  prolonged  downward  drift,  falling  by  around  3.6  percentage  points 
between December 2011 and January 2015. 
And – consistent with a lower equilibrium rate – monetary policy has found itself constrained: 
interest rates have had to go down to very low levels in order to bring inflation in line with our 
aim of below but close to 2% over the medium-term. 
Clearly,  both  supply  and  demand  policies  have  a  role  to  play  in  addressing  this  situation. 
Supply policies to raise potential growth; and demand policies, including monetary policy, to 
close  the  output gap.  But  while  both  are  necessary,  monetary  policy  cannot  wait  for  other 
policies to do their job. Regardless of the causes of low inflation – including the possible role 
of falling potential – monetary policy has to respond to the risks to the inflation outlook and 
meet its price stability mandate. 
The ECB’s monetary policy response 
So how have we responded to those disinflationary risks? 
First of all, it is important to understand the initial conditions we faced when inflation began 
that downward drift. The debt overhang in the public sector meant the ability of fiscal policy to 
support  demand  was  constrained.  Nominal  interest  rates  were  by  that  point  already  low, 
limiting the scope for conventional monetary policy. And there was significant heterogeneity 
in financial conditions within the euro area, caused by the fragmentation I already described, 
which affected the transmission of monetary policy across countries. 
We therefore used fully the remaining margin for nominal rate cuts, which meant cutting our 
main  refinancing  rate  from  125  basis  points  in  December  2011  to  5  basis  points  in 
September 2014. But faced with the possibility that the equilibrium interest rate might have 
fallen below that level, we have also taken steps to increase the traction of our low rates over 
the path of the economy. In particular, we have introduced two measures to strengthen the 
link between our short-term interest rates and longer-term rates, which as you know are the 
rates that matter most for the real economy. 
First, we have provided forward guidance on our future policy, which has helped lower long-
term rates by reducing uncertainty about the expected path of short-term rates. Second, we 
have introduced a negative interest rate on our deposit facility – the rate that banks pay when 
they  deposit  money  at  the  ECB  –  which  has  led  to  a  further  flattening  of  the  yield  curve 
through its effect on expectations.3 
Together, these policies have helped reduce market rates to very low levels and extend that 
impact out along the yield curve to longer borrowing maturities, where they have most effect 
on consumption and – in particular – investment. 
I  put  this  stress  on  investment  because,  in  our  current  circumstances,  it  is  particularly 
important  for  monetary  policy.  Investment  increases  demand  today,  which  helps  close  the 
output gap and restore price stability. And it increases supply tomorrow, thus raising potential 
growth and allowing the equilibrium interest rate to rise. Remember also that the investment 
shortfall during the crisis is at the core of the recent deterioration of our potential growth rate. 
                                                
3  For a fuller explanation of this point see speech by Peter Praet on “Price stability: a sinking will-o’-the-wisp?”, 
Washington, 16 April 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  What ultimately matters for investment, however, is not market interest rates but the cost of 
capital –how much long-term interest rates feed through into in firms’ and households’ cost of 
borrowing. And this is where heterogeneity matters. As late as the middle of last year viable 
firms  were  still  struggling  to  access  finance  in  parts  of  the  euro  area.  The  percentage  of 
financially  constrained  but  viable  SMEs4  is  estimated  to  have  varied  from  around  1%  in 
Germany and Austria to a quarter of the SME population in Spain and as much as a third in 
Portugal.5 
In  this  context,  between  June  and  September  last  year  we  launched  our  credit  easing 
package  with  the  aim  to  remove  these  transmission  blockages.  It  consisted  of,  first,  our 
targeted long-term refinancing operations, which provide cheap long-term funding to banks 
on the condition that they expand loans to the real economy. And second, our purchases of 
asset-backed  securities  and  covered  bonds,  which  have  a  relatively  tight  link  with  credit 
extension to the private sector. 
At the same time, these measures were launched as the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment 
of  bank  balance  sheets  was  reaching  its  completion,  which  had  led  to  banks  frontloading 
their deleveraging and strengthening their balance sheets by over €200 billion in advance of 
the  outcome.  The  new  monetary  policy  impulse  coming  from  these  measures  therefore 
arrived just as banks were in a stronger position to transmit it. 
However, as the credit easing package was being rolled out in the second half of last year, 
the inflation situation materially worsened in the euro area. And while the main driver was the 
sharp drop in global oil prices around that time, there were strong indications that this might 
not be a solely transitory development. 
Our analysis showed that the persistence of low inflation across a range of statistical metrics 
was  very  high.  Inflation  expectations  had  become  more  sensitive  to  that  low  inflation  and 
were declining at all horizons. And measures of core inflation – without food and energy – 
had  become  less  sticky,  implying  a  higher  risk  that  the  oil  price  fall  would  feed  into  lower 
wages  (so-called  “second  round  effects”),  and  so  would  not  just  bounce  back  when  that 
effect faded away. 
This posed a risk to our mandate, and also the credit easing we were aiming to engineer. 
Remember that if second round effects set in and people start to expect lower inflation in the 
future, then real interest rates rise – that is, interest rates adjusted for inflation. And if this 
happens, then any easing of nominal credit conditions is effectively neutralised as the real 
cost of finance increases. 
In fact, by January 2015 expected real rates had started rising – increasing by almost half a 
percentage point in the previous few months alone. The cost of deflation protection had also 
gone up by 185 basis points between 2 December 2014 and 9 January 2015, showing that 
investors saw a material risk that inflation could fall further and real interest rates could rise 
more. 
In  this  situation,  it  was  absolutely  essential  that  we  re-anchored  inflation  expectations  and 
warded off this potential tightening. And as we could no longer cut our main interest rates, we 
resorted  to  asset  purchases  to  achieve  this.  What  was  crucial  for  us  was  to  send  a  very 
strong signal that we would not allow price stability to be jeopardised. The only asset class 
that  we  could  purchase  in  large  enough  volume  to  have  that  effect  was  public  sector 
securities. 
The data so far suggests that this signal came at the right time and, as a result, our credit 
easing package is indeed having positive results. 
                                                
4  Defined as those with positive turnover in the last six months seeking a bank loan. 
5  See speech by Mario Draghi, “Monetary policy in prolonged period of low inflation”, Sintra, 26 May 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Since  we  announced  our  purchase  programme  in  January,  real  interest  rates  have  fallen 
along the yield curve, driven by both a flattening of the term structure of interest rates and, 
crucially,  by  a  reversal  in  the  decline  of  inflation  expectations.  Market-based  measures  of 
inflation  expectations  have  increased  at  all  horizons,  and  as  they  rise  back  to  levels 
consistent with medium-term price stability real interest rates should further decrease. 
Bank lending data have also been steadily improving. The cost of borrowing for euro area 
firms  has  fallen  by  around  45  basis  points  since  the  summer  of  last  year,  with  rates 
converging  across  euro area  countries.  Our  most  recent  Bank  Lending Survey  shows  that 
euro area banks are continuing to ease credit conditions.6 Importantly, this is mainly being 
driven by an improved pass through from banks’ cost of funding to their lending rates in a 
context of higher competition for customers – which was exactly the reaction that our credit 
measures aimed to provoke. 
At the same time, confidence in the recovery is improving considerably. The latest European 
Commission economic sentiment indicator improved notably in March and was driven by a 
pick-up in both consumer and business confidence. This improvement was also echoed in 
the  latest  data  in  Germany,  with  consumer  confidence  rebounding  strongly  in  March  and 
business confidence indicators continuing to expand. 
All in all, this is creating a propitious environment for firms to undertake new investment. The 
more  the  real  cost  of  capital  falls,  the  greater  the  number  of  investment  projects  that  will 
break even. And the more the recovery picks up, the greater the confidence firms will have to 
take such risky decisions. 
This also applies to firms in this country. Although private investment is now strengthening, it 
has been consistently below expectations in recent years, and recent increases are mainly 
due to the construction sector. All the conditions are now in place to take advantage of the 
current environment and for business investment to grow more intensely. 
A  stronger  recovery  here  driven  by  rising  investment  would  not  only  benefit  Germany,  but 
also  have  positive  spillovers  to  the  rest  of  the  euro  area,  then  feeding  back  into  German 
exports. According to ECB staff estimates, a 1% permanent increase in German real GDP 
would  lead  to  an  increase  of  around  0.3%  in  real  GDP  in  France  and  Italy  and  a  0.2% 
increase in Spain.7 
And ultimately, it is only once we have stronger euro area recovery with higher investment 
that potential growth will start to recover, which will in turn create the conditions for a rising 
equilibrium interest rate and a return to more normal levels of interest rates. 
Lifting potential growth 
Taking these improvements into account, the ECB is currently projecting the output gap to 
close and inflation to return close to 2% around 2017. This is expected to be driven by a rise 
in actual growth towards potential, rather than the other way around. Yet this does not make 
the  challenge  of  raising  potential  growth  any  less  important  –  even  on  this  improved 
trajectory  the  output  gap  will  still  close  with  high  levels  of  structural  unemployment,  which 
would not be socially acceptable. 
Monetary  policy  can  play  a  role  in  supporting  potential  growth  through  the  investment 
channel  I  have  already  described.  Moreover,  if  it  is  true  that  weak  demand  has  reduced 
potential growth through hysteresis effects in the labour market, it could also be true that an 
acceleration  in  demand  will  support  potential  through  the  same  mechanism  working 
                                                
6  ECB Bank Lending Survey, April 2015. 
7 
“Competitiveness and external imbalances within the euro area”, GVAR Handbook Structure and Applications 
of a Macro Model of the Global Economy for Policy Analysis, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  symmetrically – for example, as the labour market tightens firms may start hiring discouraged 
workers and retraining them. 
Over the longer-term, however, monetary policy cannot increase growth. The growth rate of 
the economy is ultimately driven by factors such as the efficiency with which resources are 
allocated, the strength of incentives to innovate and invest, the ease of doing business, and 
the  quality  of  public  institutions  –  in  other  words,  by  the  supply-side.  And  making 
improvements in all of these areas comes down chiefly to structural policies. 
Importantly,  our  monetary  policy  is  creating  a  unique  window  of  opportunity  to  enact  such 
reforms. When demand is weak structural reforms can result in higher short-term adjustment 
costs, as for example people losing their jobs take longer to find new ones. Financial frictions 
can  also  reduce  the  short-term  confidence  effects  of  reforms,  as  people  cannot  rely  on 
consumption  smoothing  through  credit  to  manage  labour  market  risks.  These  effects  can 
make introducing reforms harder. 
With our expansionary monetary policy, however, we are supporting strengthening demand 
and better access to credit, and thus limiting the potential downsides of reforms in the short 
run.  For  this  reason,  there  is  every  reason  for  national  authorities  to  push  ahead  with 
structural reforms today. 
There are many channels through which structural reforms can raise potential. For example, 
in some countries active labour market policies aimed at retraining vulnerable groups such 
as the low skilled, the long-term unemployed and the inactive can play a key role in getting 
people back to work – which is particularly important given the drag that ageing societies will 
create  on  labour  supply.  Another  example  is  product  market  reforms  that  enhance 
competition  in  protected  sectors,  which  can  drive  productivity  gains  by  encouraging  new 
innovative firms to enter the market and existing ones to improve their internal efficiency – a 
finding recently confirmed by the IMF.8 
Making  use  of  all  these  channels  is  necessary  to  lift  growth  potential.  What  is  particularly 
important for the euro area today, however, is that we focus our efforts on reforms with the 
greatest  short-term  impact  on  demand  and  the  lowest  potential  for  disinflationary  effects. 
Here  there  are  two  areas  that  I  see  as  especially  crucial,  not  least  as  they  would  directly 
complement  our  monetary  policy  by  putting  firms  in  a  better  position  to  exploit  our  low 
interest rates and invest in productive projects. 
The first  area  is  policies  that  help  reduce the  private  debt  overhang,  which  still  persists  in 
parts of the euro area. This weighs on both the recovery in credit supply – through a high 
stock of non-performing loans (NPLs) – and on higher credit demand, through constraining 
new investment. 
The completion of the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment has created the preconditions to 
address this problem, since many banks have now acknowledged NPLs and raised capital, 
putting them in a stronger position to begin restructuring loans to distressed borrowers. But 
the right structural conditions are also critical to make private debt workouts successful, such 
raising the efficiency of insolvency regimes, out-of-court restructuring frameworks and judicial 
systems.9 For example, to resolve insolvency in Italy takes 1.8 years, compared with just 0.4 
years in Ireland.10 
The second key area is policies that boost productivity growth. 
                                                
8 
9  For more information on this point see speech by Peter Praet, “Repairing the bank lending channel: the next 
IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2015, Box 3.5. 
steps”, London, 17 November 2014. 
10  Doing Business 2014: Understanding Regulations for Small and Medium-Size Enterprises, World Bank. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  From 2000–14 total factor productivity has grown by just 1.4% in the euro area, while in the 
US it has risen by 10.7%. Were productivity growth in the euro area to remain at such low 
levels, the set of profitable investment projects, even with very low long-run real rates, would 
not expand significantly. In other words, raising productivity would make our monetary policy 
commensurately more powerful. 
Broadly  speaking,  total  factor  productivity  can  be  raised  either  by  firms  innovating  and 
adopting new technology, or by reallocating resources within and across sectors towards the 
most  productive  firms.  Often  these  are  seen  as  separate  issues,  the  first  linked  to  human 
capital and R&D and only responding to public policy with long lags (e.g. through education); 
the second linked to product and labour market conditions and more directly responsive to 
government  initiatives.  But  in  fact  product  and  labour  market  reforms  can  lift  productivity 
through both channels. 
For  example,  structural  reforms  that  remove  thresholds  on  firm  growth  –  such  as  the 
regulations that kick-in in France when a firm exceeds 50 employees – can aid reallocation 
by  accelerating  the  “up  or  out”  process  of  firm  turnover.  But  they  can  also  improve 
technology  adoption,  because  firm  smallness  and  lack  of  ICT  diffusion  tend  to  be  related. 
Italy, for example, has some of the lowest integration of digital technology in Europe, and an 
important explanation for this is the predominance of micro and small firms in the economy.11 
Recent firm-level analysis by the Eurosystem suggests there is significant scope for policies 
aimed at encouraging firm growth and at improving reallocation to lift productivity, as within 
individual  euro  area  countries  there  are  a  few  highly  productive  firms  and  many  with  low 
productivity. And some recent evidence shows that – following the reforms undertaken during 
crisis  in  vulnerable  countries  –  credit  and  labour  are  now  being  reallocated  towards  more 
productive uses.12 
Progress  in  terms  of  technology  diffusion  will  however  likely  take  more  time  and  further 
reforms to become visible, as it tends to require – on the government side – labour market 
reforms that allow firms to reorganise internally and optimise that technology, and – on the 
firm  side  –  parallel  investment  in  intangible  capital  such  as  management  systems  and 
organisational processes. 
So I think we can view the euro area’s weak productivity performance in recent times as also 
an  opportunity.  Since  many  member  states  are  far  from  the  frontier  of  best  practice,  the 
potential magnitude of productivity gains is greater. To give an illustration of what is possible, 
simulations by researchers at the OECD suggest that a broad package of labour, product, 
tax and pension reforms would raise GDP per capita by about 11% after ten years for the 
average EU country under relatively quick reform implementation. The equivalent for the US 
is under 5%.13 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
What I have aimed to show today is that a lasting exit from the crisis requires a combination 
of  policies.  It  requires  monetary  policy  to  do  its  job  of  delivering  price  stability;  but  it  also 
requires structural policies to tackle decisively the euro area’s weak growth potential. 
                                                
11  Around 90% of the firm population in Italy are firms with under 10 employees. 
12  Bartelsman,  E.,  F.  di  Mauro  and  E.  Dorrucci  (2015),“Eurozone  rebalancing:  Are  we  on  the  right  track  for 
growth? Insights from the CompNet micro-based data”, www.voxeu.org. 
13  Bouis, R and R Duval (2011), “Raising the Potential Growth after the Crisis: A Quantitative Assessment of the 
Potential  Gains  from  Various  Structural  Reforms  in  the  OECD  Area  and  Beyond”,  OECD  Economics 
Department Working Paper No. 835. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Raising  growth  potential  is  necessary  for  its  own  sake  –  to  bring  down  structural 
unemployment  and  increase  welfare.  But  is  also  helps  monetary  policy  by  supporting 
demand today, and by making it less likely that we run up against zero interest rates again in 
the future. 
The incoming data suggest that the ECB’s measures are now gaining traction. The recovery 
is firming, and inflation expectations seem to be moving towards values more consistent with 
our aim. But it is only through actions by other stakeholders – governments, social partners 
and firms – that this cyclical improvement can be made permanent. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
