  Yves Mersch: Translating a shared vision into a winning story 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the T2S Launch Celebration, Milan, 2 July 2015. 
 We  chose  to  call  this  T2S  launch  celebration  “Translating  a  shared  vision  into  a  winning 
story”. Listening to the speakers for the past two hours I believe the name was just right. We 
have  heard  how  the  T2S  Community  transformed  the  shared  vision  of  an  integrated 
securities settlement landscape into a winning story, culminating in the launch of T2S on 22 
June. 
Stimulating  views  have  been  shared  tonight  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the  speakers  for 
presenting their perspectives on the capital markets union. It is evident that T2S, post-trade 
harmonisation  and  the  CSD  Regulation  are  among  the  elements  that  will  be  pushing  this 
agenda forward. 
Looking around the room I am happy to see so many familiar faces. Faces of people who 
have been part of the project since the idea of T2S was born in 2006. The journey over the 
past nine years has been an inspiring one. There have been some bumps in the road, some 
twists and turns, but with the launch of T2S we have achieved a monumental milestone. We 
made the vision of a single securities settlement platform for Europe a reality. 
I want to thank you all for your support, trust and commitment, which has enabled us to reach 
this  first  step  towards  an  integrated,  more  efficient,  and  harmonised  post-trade  market  in 
Europe. In particular, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the national communities, 
namely  the  national  central  banks,  the  securities  depositories  and  their  clients,  for  their 
involvement and cooperation. Moreover, I would like to thank the 4CB (composed of Banque 
de France, Deutsche Bundesbank, Banca d’Italia and Banco de España) for developing and 
now also running the T2S platform. Let me also acknowledge the hard work and dedication 
of the people at the ECB who coordinated the implementation of the project. In particular, I 
thank Jean-Michel Godeffroy, who steered the T2S ship through sometimes stormy waters 
for many years, and Marc Bayle, who brought the ship to a safe harbour on 22 June 2015. 
And  a  special  thanks  to  Ms  Tumpel-Gugerell,  who  was  the  ECB  board  member  in  charge 
during the project’s inception. 
A popular saying is that “Two heads are better than one”. From the very beginning T2S has 
managed to unite the efforts of both the private and the public sector. T2S was not initiated 
by the market, but owing to its post-trade harmonisation agenda it has evolved into a market-
driven initiative which is supported by the public sector. 
In many ways it has been a unique project. 
First  of  all,  no  one  was  forced  to  join  the  T2S  Community.  Many  securities  depositories 
chose to participate because they saw great potential in T2S in terms of cutting settlement 
costs, fostering competition and generating new business opportunities. But overall, T2S had 
the potential to bring about a more integrated financial market and thus to benefit all. 
Second,  the  governance  structure  of  the  project  is  special  as  national  central  banks, 
securities depositories and market participants formed a partnership with one objective – to 
launch  T2S  successfully.  It  is  this  unique  collaborative  effort,  mentioned  by  some  of  you 
tonight, that has ensured the success of the T2S project, a project of such size and scale that 
it has changed the industry completely. 
Finally,  the  project  is  unparalleled  in  that  it  has  led  the  industry  to  impose  new  rules  and 
procedures  on  itself.  And  let’s  be  honest:  this  does  not  happen  often.  That  is  why  many 
believe that the post-trade harmonisation agenda is the greatest benefit of T2S. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The launch of T2S is a great achievement. With T2S we have a big story, and I am confident 
that the story of its development will continue to be a winning one. Of course, there are many 
types of stories – some rooted in fantasy, some in fiction, and some in reality. The T2S story 
is a reality, and to symbolise this, a 3D printer is installed in the corridor that you will pass 
through several times tonight. I invite you to keep an eye on it and see how the T2S logo will 
materialise. Just like the T2S project will materialise over the next two years as the remaining 
17 markets migrate to the platform. 
The  migration  of  the  four  securities  depositories  from  Greece,  Malta,  Romania  and 
Switzerland to the T2S platform on 22 June was just the beginning. The Italian market will 
join on 31 August, followed by three more waves of CSDs in March and September 2016 and 
February 2017. At that time 21 national markets  will unite in a single market for securities 
settlement, with enhanced liquidity and collateral management. To ensure the rollout of T2S 
progresses  smoothly  we  continue  to  support  the  preparations  of  all  the  securities 
depositories yet to migrate, as well as the efforts of the national markets to comply with the 
harmonisation standards. 
Once  full  migration  is  complete,  T2S  has  the  potential  to  become  the  single  gateway 
between  the  European  financial  market  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  It  will  offer  great 
opportunities  for  both  European  and  international  investors  and  issuers.  National  issuance 
will become European issuance, as shown nicely by the jaunty securities characters in the 
video we saw earlier. 
T2S will lower settlement costs and expand horizons for all entities in the post-trade market, 
regardless  of  their  size  or  country  of  origin.  Thanks  to  T2S,  all  markets  and  entities,  both 
small  and  large,  will  have  equal  access  to  an  innovative  technical  platform  as  well  as  an 
integrated European market. 
For  many  people,  Europe  means  the  euro.  But  T2S  will  not  only  settle  in  euro.  T2S  was 
designed  as  a  multi-currency  system.  The  Danish  krone  will  be  available  for  settlement  in 
T2S  as  of  2018.  Some  of  the  other  non-euro-area  central  banks  have  also  expressed  an 
interest in joining at a later stage, as soon as their markets are ready. I am confident that, 
following the successful launch, more markets and currencies will be interested in joining the 
platform, paving the way for T2S to embrace the diversity of Europe and become a truly pan-
European platform. 
Like the speakers in the panel discussion who shared their vision for the post-trade industry 
ten years from now, we should think about what happens next. The capital markets union, 
once  established,  will  be  a  great  step  forward.  But  is  more  needed  in  the  market 
infrastructure  arena  in  order  to  progress  on  the  journey  towards  an  integrated  financial 
market  in  Europe?  One  helping  hand  will  be  the  synergy  between  TARGET2  on  the  cash 
side and T2S on the securities side, which certainly brings new opportunities. The objective 
should  be  to  better  meet  the  demands  of  the  market  and  increase  efficiency.  Our  journey 
continues. 
What I am sure of is that the story of T2S is successful because of each and every one of 
you. To celebrate this great achievement, I would like to invite you for a drink in the beautiful 
garden outside. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
