  Benoît Coeuré: Interview in Les Echos 
Interview with Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  in  Les  Echos,  conducted  by  Mr  Nicolas  Barré,  Ms  Catherine  Chatignoux,  Mr  Jean-
Philippe Lacour, Mr Etienne Lefebvre, Mr Guillaume Maujean, Mr Dominique Seux and Mr 
François Vidal, and published on 29 June 2015. 
 Is Greece’s exit from the euro area now the most probable hypothesis? 
Greece exiting the euro area, which used to be theoretical, can unfortunately no longer be 
ruled  out.  It’s  the  result  of  the  Greek  government  choosing  to  end  discussions  with  its 
creditors  and  resorting to  a  referendum,  causing the  Eurogroup  not to prolong the  second 
adjustment programme. 
The ECB, like the other European authorities, wishes Greece to stay in the euro area. That’s 
the substance of the proposal made last week by the Commission, the IMF and the ECB in 
the form of a programme of reforms and a financing offer that is much more favourable than 
anything proposed in the past. Europe has never abandoned Greece. 
In what way were these proposals more favourable? 
They gave Greece the time and the freedom to reform its economy, for example its labour 
market,  while  envisaging  a  demanding  budgetary  path,  but  taking  account  of  the 
deteriorating economic climate. The primary surplus requested was reduced to 1% of GDP in 
2015, compared with 3% previously. We were also proposing larger cuts in military spending 
to create room for manœuvre elsewhere. 
So does the responsibility for breaking off talks lie entirely with Greece? 
The decision to interrupt discussions was taken by the Greek authorities. That also surprised 
us, for we were coming to the end of some quite focused and fruitful exchanges. 
You are talking about proposals in the past tense. Does the ECB consider that the 
question to be put to the Greeks in the referendum is already null and void, since the 
assistance arrangement will no longer be relevant from the evening of 30 June? 
The  programme  will  indeed  formally  expire  on  Tuesday  evening.  Having  said  that,  if  the 
response is “yes” I have no doubt that the euro area authorities will find the means, one way 
or another, to honour the commitments that have been made. The question is a political one. 
It’s the Greeks who hold the answer to that question. 
And if the Greeks say “no”… 
That would be to refuse the offer made by the other 18 members of the euro area. It would 
then be very difficult to revive the political dialogue. The Eurogroup clearly considered that 
the proposals of the three institutions had reached the limits of what was acceptable. 
Alexis Tsipras feels that Europe has not lived up to its commitments on debt 
restructuring… 
The debt question was indeed a priority for the Greek government. But since 20 February the 
Eurogroup ministers have said that this discussion would only come in a second phase and 
that  it  was  necessary  first  of  all  to  decide  on  a  credible  reform  programme.  Greece  has 
chosen to break off talks before the second part of the sequence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Doesn’t that debt have to be restructured to make the Greek economy viable? 
First  of  all,  it  has  been adjusted  three times  since  2012.  Adding  up the  exchange  and  the 
buyback of private debt, coupled with the revision of the maturity and the interest rates on 
European loans, that represents more than 100% of GDP in terms of debt reduction that has 
been approved. The Greek debt burden represents 4% of GDP, less than in Italy or in Spain. 
The  question  is  not  therefore  to  know  if  restructuring  the  debt  is  necessary  but  whether 
restructuring it a fourth time would help Greece. The most important thing for the future of 
Greece is for it to return to growth. To achieve that, it’s necessary to remove the rigidities of 
the  Greek  economy,  the  tariff  barriers  and  vested  interests,  all  of  which  impede  economic 
activity and  weigh down on the purchasing power of employees, of whom much has been 
asked. The Greek executive has never made these questions the focal point of the talks and 
that has been a real disappointment from a government which everyone expected to be very 
committed to combating vested interests. 
What about the funds earmarked under the second plan to support the Greek banks? 
That  money,  €10.9  billion,  disappears  with  the  stopping  of  the  programme,  on  Tuesday 
evening, as does all assistance for Greece which was still available but conditional on the 
implementation of the programme. 
The ECB has maintained its emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) to the banks. Did 
the question of its withdrawal come up last weekend? 
The ECB acts within its regulatory framework. We can offer emergency liquidity assistance to 
the banks provided that they are solvent, the collateral submitted is of good quality, and that 
the  ELA  doesn’t  interfere  with  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy.  Until  Sunday  these  conditions 
were met. It was found at the same time that the creditworthiness of the Greek government 
was seriously degraded, particularly after the Eurogroup’s decision to withdraw the safety net 
granted  to  Greece.  That  led  to  us  not  authorising  new  drawdowns  from  the  central  bank, 
while maintaining the current level of liquidity. I regard this as a measured decision as it does 
not create an irreversible situation. 
Are you going to continue providing support to the banks until Sunday evening? 
We are going to continue the support until further notice. The situation is being constantly 
monitored by the Governing Council. 
What is the ECB’s exposure to Greece? 
On the one hand, there are the loans extended to Greek banks by the Eurosystem, with a 
total value of more than €116 billion. On the other hand, there is the outstanding debt under 
the  debt  purchase  programme  established  in  2010  (SMP),  which  amounts  to  close  to  €20 
billion. 
Are we looking at a scenario entailing a potential loss of close to €135 billion if Greece 
leaves the euro? 
I do not want to speculate on that. Greece can remain in the euro area. 
What would be the consequences for the euro area of a “no” vote in the referendum, 
which would undoubtedly lead to “Grexit”? 
A distinction must be made between the short and long-term impact. The reaction of global 
financial markets on Monday demonstrated that they were surprised. Up until Friday evening, 
it  was  not  envisaged  that  the  negotiations  would  break  down  and  a  referendum  would  be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  called. The markets have become risk-averse. But their reaction remains relatively calm. This 
shows the extent to which Greece’s current situation is a unique one – it is a special case. 
Other countries in the euro area have experienced great difficulties. They have been through 
adjustment programmes, and come out of them. For these countries, this has been a chapter 
with  a  successful  conclusion.  This  is  the  case  in  Ireland  and  Portugal.  The  Cypriot 
programme is still ongoing and proceeding well, which should allow the ECB soon to begin 
purchasing  Cypriot  securities.  I  do  not  underestimate  the  efforts  these  programmes  have 
required,  or  their  social  costs.  The  citizens  of  these  countries  have  paid  dearly.  But  when 
ambitious reform programmes are adopted and implemented, that is what happens! These 
countries are on the road to recovery. 
The markets have been quite calm so far. But what if the situation worsens? 
Their reaction also shows the resilience of the euro area to external shocks. The safety nets 
that  have  been  put  in  place  in  recent  years  are  playing  their  part.  I’m  referring  to  the 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM), the banking union and the different European Central 
Bank programmes. But we must be vigilant. The ECB clearly stated on Sunday that it was 
monitoring economic and market developments closely. Should risks arise, we are ready to 
use the instruments we have at our disposal – quantitative easing and the OMT programme 
– and we are even ready to use new instruments within our mandate. 
What could these new instruments be? 
The Governing Council of the ECB is monitoring the situation in real time. We have already 
said that we are ready to do more in terms of monetary policy, if necessary. Until now, the 
ECB  has  always  found  answers  to  crises,  within  its  mandate.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the 
European Union has validated the OMT programme that was put in place in 2012 [a bond-
buying programme for countries receiving financial assistance, which has not yet been used, 
ed.].  It  was  the  Court’s  judgment  that  the  ECB  should  be  allowed  broad  discretion  when 
choosing its instruments. 
In the long term, wouldn’t “Grexit” risk putting on record that a country can, in fact, 
leave the euro area, and thus that the euro is not irreversible? 
If  Greece  had  to  leave  the  euro  area,  that  would  risk  casting  doubt  on  the  nature  and 
functioning  of  the  monetary  union.  That  would  create  fragility.  It  would  be  a  tragedy  for 
Greece and, moreover, for its economy. It would be a challenge that Europe would have to 
rise  to  as  quickly  as  possible,  by  substantially  reinforcing  its  institutional  framework.  The 
stability of the euro area depends on a balance between responsibility and solidarity. In order 
to be stronger and more convincing, concrete initiatives are required to reinforce these two 
dimensions. 
What would you say to the Greeks to convince them not to leave? 
It is vital to put Greece back on a growth path, to reach a consensus in order to recreate a 
viable economic model for the country. Total factor productivity in Greece grew at a rate of 
only 1% per year between 1981 and 2014, against 2% per year in the euro area, and that 
happened  despite  the  sizeable  transfers  Greece  has  benefited  from.  To  achieve  this,  the 
Greek economy must remain within the single European market and be able to rely on its 
institutions. What’s more, were Greece to leave, austerity would be far worse. The country 
would no longer benefit from the solidarity of the euro area, which has given it the time to 
make the necessary adjustments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
