  Peter Praet: Remarks at the FIBI Annual Lunch 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Federation of International Banks in Ireland (FIBI), Dublin, 23 September 2015. 
 In recent years the global economy has witnessed a set of economic and financial conditions 
that were considered barely possible  in the years of the “Great Moderation”. Interest rates 
across advanced economies have fallen to very low levels. In the euro area we have even 
seen negative yields out along the yield curve: at one point in April 2015 up to about 36% of 
euro-denominated  government  bonds  were  in  negative  territory.  And  inflation  in  most 
advanced  economies  has  remained  subdued:  in  our  case  it  has  followed  a  prolonged 
downward drift since late 2011 and still remains stubbornly low. 
What I would like to explain in my remarks is how we arrived at this situation, and how we 
can return to a situation that, looking retrospectively, would be considered “more normal”. My 
main  message  is  that  the  euro  area  is  still  going  through  the  correction  phase  of  a 
pronounced financial cycle, and while monetary policy has a vital to role to play in supporting 
demand  through  that  transition,  it  must  be  complemented  by  other  policies  to  achieve  a 
strong and sustained recovery from the crisis. 
The causes of the current situation 
The low growth and low interest rate environment we see in the euro area today is in part a 
secular phenomenon. The growth rate of total factor productivity (TFP) has been slowing in 
the euro area for decades. Population growth has also declined from about 0.7% in the early 
1970s to around 0.3% in recent years. This has been mirrored in the long-term decline of real 
interest rates, as lower TFP and population growth implies lower demand for investment and 
for loanable funds. 
But  secular  trends  do  not  explain  fully  the  current  situation.  Cyclical  forces  also  lead  to 
fluctuations around secular trends, especially  when driven by the financial cycle, and such 
forces are still at play in the euro area today. Demand conditions, while improving, appear 
relatively  weak  for  the  early  stage  of  the  business  cycle.  This  is  largely  explained  by  the 
legacy of the financial crisis. 
Specifically, the euro area is coming out of a “balance sheet recession”, where a build-up of 
excessive debt set the conditions for a sharp downturn, which in turn created the need for 
substantial deleveraging and balance sheet repair, prolonging the length of the slump. The 
fact that financial excesses were associated with significant sectoral resource misallocation, 
especially into construction, further hindered the pace of recovery. 
The duration of the downturn has also itself exacerbated the damage to output. Long-term 
unemployment  has  risen,  with  “hysteresis”  effects  estimated  to  have  reduced  potential 
growth.  This  in  turn  appears  to  have  induced  some  negative  sentiment  about  long-term 
growth:  for  example,  businesses  currently  perceive  themselves  to  have  limited  excess 
capacity,  despite  a  large  estimated  output  gap.  Such  uncertainty  feeds  back  into  weaker 
demand  today  through  expectations  and  confidence  channels.  Investment,  while  gradually 
picking up, still remains well below pre-crisis levels. 
Such  post-debt  crisis  effects  have,  to  some  extent,  been  common  among  advanced 
economies  that  were  strongly  hit  by  the  global  financial  crisis.  Yet  most  observers  would 
agree that the costs have been especially high for the euro area. This is due to a third factor 
particular to the euro area: an incomplete institutional construction, which has made working 
through the aftermath of the financial cycle harder. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Crucially, the euro area lacked a truly integrated banking system that could share risk across 
countries not just in good times, but also in bad times. Without a harmonised, effective and 
predictable  resolution  framework  to  involve  the  private  sector,  and  a  European  public 
backstop to preserve financial stability, the onus fell onto sovereigns to support their national 
banking sectors. And as banks in some of the most vulnerable countries remained heavily 
exposed to their sovereigns, this fed back into systemic banking crises in certain jurisdictions 
via the “diabolical loop” between banks and sovereigns. 
Other  institutional mechanisms that  could  have cushioned  the  shock  also  turned  out to  be 
weak.  Notably,  mechanisms  to  accelerate  balance  sheet  restructuring  while  minimising  its 
fallout  on  the  economy  were  inoperative  due  to  shortcomings  in  the  legal  frameworks  in 
many  countries.  Weak  national  insolvency  regimes  and  slow  judicial  systems  reduced  the 
scope for debt re-absorption through write-offs and resolution of bad loans in the euro area, 
especially compared with other post-crisis experiences. The upshot has been a slower and 
more painful deleveraging. 
To sum up, though secular forces are certainly at play in the euro area, the current situation 
is  also  explained  by  cyclical  factors  linked  to  the  financial  cycle,  which  have  in  turn  been 
exacerbated by institutional failings. A strong and sustained recovery therefore depends on a 
comprehensive  response  that  addresses  each  of  these  policy  challenges.  That  is  now 
underway. 
The response of monetary policy 
On the cyclical side, monetary policy has played, and will continue to play, an important role 
in  responding  to  demand  weakness  and  the  disinflationary  pressures  it  creates.  But  with 
fiscal policy largely unavailable due to fragile public finances, this has required a determined 
monetary  policy  stance.  Implementing  that  stance  has  increasingly  implied  unconventional 
measures as short-term interest rates run into the effective lower bound. We have also had 
to design our policy to address serious disruptions in monetary transmission caused by the 
financial fragmentation of the euro area. 
The unconventional measures we have adopted include, most recently, the Targeted Long-
Term  Refinancing  Operations  and  our  expanded  Asset  Purchase  Programme.  These 
measures  support  demand  through  several  transmission  channels,  but  crucially  they  have 
helped  unclog  the  bank  lending  channel  of  monetary  policy,  thereby  producing  a  virtuous 
circle between credit supply and demand which lends momentum to the recovery. 
In particular, the incentives embedded in the TLTRO have  led banks to compete more for 
credit  to  support  growth,  by  cutting  margins  and  lending  rates.  Lower  rates  have  in  turn 
created  higher  net  demand  for  borrowing,  allowing  banks  to  expand  their  overall  lending 
volumes and keep interest income on a rising path. This has then initiated a gradual easing 
of credit standards, further strengthening competitive pressures. And at the macroeconomic 
level,  this  virtuous  circle  leads  to  an  improvement  in  the  outlook  for  economic  growth  that 
helps to contain non-performing loans. 
Through  meeting  its  mandate  in  this  way,  monetary  policy  has  also  supported  an  orderly 
deleveraging. Accommodative policy reduces interest payment burdens while raising nominal 
growth. 
Yet monetary policy alone cannot solve a debt overhang. That requires a mix of higher real 
growth rates and lower nominal debt. In both areas, the institutional incompleteness of the 
euro  area  has  hindered  the  process  of  balance  sheet  adjustment.  But  in  both,  substantial 
progress  is  now  being  made.  This  is  where  the  efforts  to  tackle  secular  and  institutional 
challenges come in. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The role of other policies 
To  begin  with,  many  countries  have  been  implementing  structural  reforms  to  lift  potential 
output and temper secular drags on growth. Particularly important here are policies that help 
reverse  resource  misallocation  and  thereby  increase  employment  and  TFP.  Such  policies 
include  product  market  reforms  that  strengthen  competitive  pressures  and  encourage  the 
reallocation  of  capital  towards  the  most  productive  firms;  and  labour  market  reforms, 
especially active labour market policies, that help provide workers with the skills they need to 
move  to  more  innovative  sectors.  Successful  examples  of  such  measures  have  been 
introduced in Spain, Ireland and other reforming countries. 
The  process  of  private  sector  debt  workout  is  also  advancing.  The  ECB’s  Comprehensive 
Assessment has accelerated the crucial step of acknowledging and provisioning for NPLs. 
What is now key is that, where necessary, those NPLs are further restructured through more 
efficient insolvency proceedings or removed from banks’ balance sheets altogether. Several 
countries  have  taken  national  initiatives  to  improve  in-  and  out-of-court  restructuring 
frameworks and establish asset management companies for NPLs. This could be supported 
at  the  European  level  by  progressing  with  Capital  Markets  Union,  which  should  induce 
greater legal convergence and deepen markets for distressed debt. 
Supporting the deleveraging process in these ways – by raising real growth and working out 
private debt – would provide further momentum to the recovery, while raising confidence in 
long-term  growth  prospects.  But  importantly,  balance  sheet  repair  also  creates  the  pre-
conditions  to  address  definitively  one  of  the  euro  area’s  key  institutional  weaknesses:  the 
incomplete Banking Union. 
A  great  deal  of  progress  has  been  made  in  this  area  in  recent  years.  With  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism we now have a system of supervision that is less liable to capture or 
forbearance.  The  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  provides  a  harmonised  and 
predictable framework for private sector risk-sharing across the Union. And governments are 
on the way to establishing a European public backstop for the Single Resolution Mechanism. 
But if we are to complete Banking Union – notably in terms the backstop to the SRM and 
establishing  a  common  deposit  guarantee  scheme  –  legacy  assets  need  first  to  be  fully 
addressed. That is why balance sheet repair is pivotal. 
Completing Banking Union also requires removing any remnants of the regulatory framework 
that  implicitly  support  home  bias.  For  example, how  much  national  discretion  is  allowed  in 
implementing  rules;  how fungible  are  liquidity  and  capital  across  borders;  how  regulations, 
such as those on loss-absorbing capital, affect the choice of subsidiaries versus branches – 
all  these  decisions  will  crucially  shape  the  microeconomic  incentives  of  banks  to  become 
European. And the macroeconomic consequences for the Union are significant. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  working  through  the  aftermath  of  a  financial  cycle  requires  a  comprehensive 
response.  Monetary  policy  will  play  its  part  for  as  long  as  needed,  which  means  the  full 
implementation of the asset purchase programme and, if necessary, adjustments to its size, 
composition  and  duration.  And  by  meeting  our  objective,  we  support  growth  and  inflation, 
which in turn creates the conditions for interest rates to “normalise” once more. 
But monetary policy can only do so much. It is for other policymakers to address the secular 
and institutional factors that are preventing a stronger and more sustained recovery. Efforts 
are now well underway. But longer they take, the higher the hurdles that all policymakers will 
ultimately have to climb. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
