  Erdem Başçi: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
press conference for the presentation of the July 2015 Inflation Report, Ankara, 30 July 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Welcome  to  the  briefing  held  to  convey  the  main  messages  of  the Inflation  Report  of  July 
2015. 
The report typically summarizes the economic outlook underlying monetary policy decisions, 
shares  our  evaluations  on  macroeconomic  developments  and  presents  our  medium-term 
inflation forecasts, which were revised in view of the developments in the last quarter, along 
with our monetary policy stance. In addition to the main text, the report includes six boxes 
entailing interesting and up-to-date analyses on various topics. These boxes in the Report 
look into the information content of credit in explaining inflation, scrutinize the taxation in the 
Turkish tobacco products market, analyze the export-inflation relationship in food products, 
examine the use of survey data in short-term GDP forecasts, elaborate on the effect of oil 
prices on exports, and present information on the government spending multiplier. The titles 
of the boxes are shown on the slide. All of these analyses shed light on noteworthy issues in 
the Turkish economy. I strongly recommend that you read these boxes, which will soon be 
published on our website. 
I  would  like  to  commence  my  speech  by  reviewing  the  global  economic  outlook,  given  its 
undeniable influence on our policies. Global financial markets remained volatile in the second 
quarter of 2015, which  was attributed to the continued divergence among global monetary 
policies,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  Federal  Reserve  (Fed)’s  normalization  plans  and 
developments regarding the Greek debt crisis. In this period, the volatility in long-term rates 
reached  quite  high  levels,  especially  across  advanced  economies  (Chart  1),  which  also 
affected  emerging-market  rates.  Thus,  portfolio  flows  to  emerging-markets  weakened 
(Chart 2).  The  global  economic  slowdown  of  2014  continued  into  the  first  quarter  of  2015 
largely  due  to  emerging  economies.  Despite  signs  of  economic  recovery  in  Europe, 
geopolitical tensions continued to restrain Turkey’s external demand. 
The  volatility  across  global  markets  had  implications  for  the  Turkish  economy  as  well, 
causing  fluctuations  in  financial  indicators  amid  domestic  uncertainty.  In  this  period  of 
heightened volatility in long-term interest rates of advanced countries and added interest-rate 
sensitivity in emerging economies, the interest-rate corridor and the tight liquidity policy we 
have been implementing played a major role in shielding the economy against global shocks. 
Moreover,  our  structural  and  cyclical  measures  supporting  FX  liquidity,  core  liabilities  and 
long-term borrowing strengthened the economy’s resilience.  
Monetary policy and financial conditions 
1.  
In view of the uncertainty over global markets and the volatility in food and energy prices, we 
maintained a cautious monetary stance in the second quarter of 2015. In this period, we kept 
interest rates unchanged, but continued with the tight liquidity policy to contain risks to core 
inflation and inflation expectations. To meet the recently growing liquidity need, the weight of 
marginal funding was increased and, as a result, the CBRT average funding rate increased 
(Chart 3). The CBRT average funding rate has been hovering around 8.5 percent since mid-
June (Chart  4). The BIST Interbank overnight rate, on the other hand, remained close to the 
upper bound of the corridor as in the previous reporting period.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Thanks to the cautious monetary stance, the yield curve remained nearly flat. Although the 
yield curve has remained basically unchanged since the publication of the previous Inflation 
Report,  there  was  a  slight  increase  in  the  market  rates  with  more  than  two-year  maturity 
(Chart 5). Thus, the spread between the overnight repo rates at the BIST Interbank Money 
Market and 5-year market rates has narrowed somewhat (Chart 6). I would like to reiterate 
that  we  will  monitor  inflation  expectations,  pricing  behavior  and  other  factors  that  affect 
inflation  closely  and  maintain  the  cautious  monetary  policy  stance  by  keeping  a  flat  yield 
curve until there is a significant improvement in the inflation outlook in the upcoming period.  
The wide interest rate corridor and the tight liquidity policy that we have been implementing 
reduce  the  economy’s  sensitivity  to  global  shocks,  thus  supporting  financial  stability  and 
facilitating  the  attainment  of  the  price  stability  objective.  In  the  post-crisis  period,  the 
unconventional  policies  of  advanced  economies  and  the  ongoing  uncertainties  over  global 
monetary  policies  caused  long-term  interest  rates  in  these  economies  to  fluctuate.  In 
addition, emerging-market rates have become extremely sensitive to global monetary policy 
developments. To contain repercussions on the Turkish economy, we designed a monetary 
policy framework composed of a wide interest rate corridor and an active liquidity policy. The 
CBRT’s wide interest rate corridor and the tight liquidity policy strengthened the resilience of 
the  Turkish  economy  against  global  shocks  and  proved  to  be  effective  in  pursuing  the 
primary objective of price stability. The wide interest rate corridor enables us to raise short-
term rates temporarily above long-term rates when faced with shocks and to keep the yield 
curve  nearly  flat  or  inverted.  Accordingly,  Turkish  lira-denominated  long-term  rates  remain 
more  stable  and  the  economy  becomes  less  sensitive  to  global  long-term  interest  rate 
shocks.  Moreover,  a  flat  or  inverted  yield  curve  constitutes  an  effective  monetary  policy 
stance that supports disinflation. In fact, especially following the strong monetary tightening 
of  early  2014,  we  all  saw  that  the  sensitivity  of  domestic  markets  to  global  interest  rates 
weakened substantially and core inflation indicators have improved significantly (Chart 7). 
In  the  upcoming  period,  following  the  start  of  normalization  of  global  monetary  policies, 
volatility  in  long-term  interest  rates  may  decline  permanently  thanks  to  forward  guidance 
policies. According to this baseline scenario, the need for a wide interest rate corridor in our 
country may diminish over time.  In that case, we may simplify the operational framework of 
the CBRT’s interest rate policy gradually.  
In  addition  to  the  interest  rate  corridor  and  the  tight  liquidity  policy,  we  continue  to  make 
efficient use of the policy tools developed in response to the global financial volatility. These 
measures  we  took  with  regard  to  the financial  system  are  highly  important  in  encouraging 
prudential  borrowing  and  minimizing  macrofinancial  risks  amid  domestic  and  external 
uncertainty. The remuneration of Turkish lira required reserves at different rates depending 
on  core  liabilities  was  effective  as  of  January  2015.    As  of  the  8  May  2015  maintenance 
period,  we  raised  the  remuneration  rate  by  50  basis  points.  Additionally,  the  rise  in  FX 
required  reserves  ratios  to  extend  the  maturity  of  noncore  liabilities  appears  to  have 
contributed  to  the  recent  slowdown  in  the  uptrend  of  the  loan/deposit  ratio  (Chart  8). 
Furthermore,  the  decrease  in  the  share  of  short-term  non-deposit  FX  liabilities  following 
changes in FX required reserves to stimulate long-term borrowing became more pronounced 
in the second quarter (Chart 9).   
As another measure related to the FX liquidity, we have remunerated the USD denominated 
required reserves, reserve options and free reserves held at the CBRT as of 5 May 2015. We 
set and announce the remuneration rate to be applied on a daily basis by taking global and 
local financial market conditions into account. In addition, we reduced the annual commission 
rate of 0.02 basis points that had been applied since 1 February 2015 on euro-denominated 
accounts of banks and financing companies at the CBRT to a yearly 0.005 basis points as of 
1 July 2015, and abolished it as of 27 July 2015 due to the recent developments in the euro 
area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Thanks to the tight monetary policy stance and the macroprudential measures, loan growth 
continues to stay at reasonable levels. Adjusted for exchange rate changes, loans provided 
to the non-financial sector increased modestly by 18.1 percent year-on-year in the second 
quarter of 2015. A comparison of consumer and commercial loans shows that commercial 
loans  continue  to  grow  more  at  a  higher  rate  than  consumer  loans,  partly  due  to  BRSA 
regulations. The annualized growth rate of commercial loans dropped to 15.1 percent at the 
end of the second quarter of 2015, whereas this rate was 21.6 percent for exchange rate-
adjusted  commercial  loans.  Likewise,  comparing  their  growth  trend  to  averages  in  past 
years, commercial loans are close to the average whereas consumer loans are significantly 
below the average (Charts 10 and 11). Due to the moderate economic activity and the recent 
tightening in financial conditions, loan growth is likely to slow somewhat in the forthcoming 
period.  
Macroeconomic developments and main assumptions 
2.  
Now,  I  will  talk  about  the  macroeconomic  outlook  and  our  assumptions  on  which  our 
forecasts  are  based.  First,  I  will  summarize  the  recent  inflation  developments,  and  then 
continue  with  the  domestic  and  foreign  demand  outlook  upon  which  we  based  our 
projections. 
In the second quarter of 2015, annual consumer inflation declined by about 0.4 points from 
end-first quarter to 7.20 percent, nearing the forecasts of the April Inflation Report (Charts 12 
and 13). This improvement in inflation was mainly attributed to  declining food inflation, while 
core  inflation  increased  mostly  due  to  exchange  rate  developments.  In  this  period,  the 
contribution  of  the  food  category  to  annual  inflation  was  down  to  about  2.3  points  amid  a 
correction  in  food  prices.  Yet,  the  depreciation  of  the  Turkish  lira  limited  the  decline  in 
inflation.  
The ongoing cautious monetary policy along with prudent fiscal and macroprudential policies 
are  having  a  favorable  impact  on  inflation,  especially  inflation  excluding  energy  and  food 
(core  inflation  indicators).  However,  the  lagged  effects  of  the  recent  exchange  rate 
developments  delay  the  improvement  in the  inflation  outlook. In fact,  compared  to  the first 
quarter there was a notable deterioration in the underlying core inflation trend in the second 
quarter (Chart 14). This outlook was largely due to exchange rate-driven cost pressures that 
became  stronger  than  that  of  the  previous  period.  The  cautious  monetary  stance  and  the 
moderate course of domestic demand continued to limit the spillover from cost pressures into 
prices. 
As we projected in the April Inflation Report, food prices exhibited a remarkable correction 
amid the climatic conditions that accommodated supply in the second quarter. Annual food 
inflation, which makes up around 25 percent of the consumption basket, fell to 9.28 percent 
in June. Similarly, annual inflation in food and catering services posted a significant decline in 
this  period.  Also  in  this  period,  consumer  inflation  excluding  food  and  catering  services 
increased by 1 point to 5.82 percent in the inter-reporting period due to these cost pressures 
(Chart 15).  
To sum up, food prices pulled inflation down in the second quarter, yet the depreciation in the 
Turkish lira restricted this decline, inhibiting the desired improvement in the inflation outlook. 
Owing to the expected partial recovery in food prices accompanied by the cautious monetary 
policy,  we project the deterioration in the inflation outlook to remain limited and inflation to 
reach the target in the medium term. 
According to the GDP data of the first quarter of 2015, economic activity proved more robust 
compared to the outlook presented in the April Inflation Report, and the GDP rose by 1.3 and 
2.3 percent on a quarterly and annual basis, respectively (Chart 16). An analysis of national 
income components on the production side indicates that all sectors excluding construction 
exhibited  increases  in  the  first  quarter  compared  to  the  previous-quarter  averages.  In  this 
period, agriculture and net tax items regarding the GDP growth stood out, while industry and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  services maintained their mild trend of increase (Chart 17). Seasonally-adjusted data on the 
expenditures  side  reveal  that  final  domestic  demand  increased  owing  to  the  rise  in 
consumption expenditures in the first quarter. Investment expenditures contracted both in the 
public and the private sectors on a quarterly basis.  According to the data on exports and 
imports  of  goods  and  services,  exports  posted  an  increase,  but  imports  declined  on  a 
quarterly basis in the first quarter. Foreign trade data excluding gold indicate that the import 
quantity index posted a steady rise in line with the uptrend in domestic demand in this period, 
while exports declined amid the weak course of external demand.  
Data on the second quarter of 2015 suggest that the economic activity continues to expand 
at  a  moderate  pace.  Industrial  production  rose  by  1.0  percent  in  the  April-May  period 
compared to the previous quarter. Combined with the other indicators for June, we expect 
the  industrial  production  to  record  a  quarterly  increase  in  the  second  quarter.  Sales, 
production, and import indicators regarding domestic demand show that the final domestic 
demand  will  continue  with  an  uptrend  stemming  from  consumption  demand.  Investment 
indicators, on the other hand, signal that the weak outlook will remain in the second quarter. 
The export quantity index excluding gold increased at a modest rate in the April-May period 
following  the  contraction  in  the  first  quarter,  while  imports  excluding  gold  maintained  their 
uptrend  suggesting  that  the  contribution  of  external  demand  to  economic  growth  may  be 
limited in the second quarter (Chart 18). 
The recovery in economic activity is projected to continue in the upcoming period, yet risks to 
growth  exist.  Downside  risks  regarding  external  demand  persist  due  to  geopolitical 
developments and troubles in Europe. Moreover, domestic uncertainties, the weak course of 
the confidence indices, and volatility in financial markets driven by global monetary policies 
may limit the contribution of final private demand to growth. Despite the existence of these 
factors keeping the downside risks alive, the robust employment performance following the 
global  crisis  along  with  low  oil  prices  generate  room  for  domestic  demand  and  economic 
policies by improving the current account balance and the inflation outlook. In addition, the 
expected  correction  in  the  agricultural  value  added  emerges  as  a  factor  that  may  support 
growth on the production side. Against this background, we project the second half of 2015 
to witness a sustained moderate growth and demand conditions that support disinflation. In 
line  with  the  favorable  developments  in  the  terms  of  trade  coupled  with  the  slowdown  in 
consumer loans, the recovery trend in the current account balance is anticipated to continue 
in the upcoming period; yet the weak course of external demand may limit this recovery to 
some extent (Chart 19). 
As you all know, food, energy and import prices also play a great role in inflation forecasts. 
Therefore, before moving on to forecasts, I will briefly talk about our assumptions regarding 
these variables. 
In  the  second  quarter  of  2015,  oil  prices  stood  slightly  above  the  path  projected  in  the 
previous  report,  while  USD-denominated 
import  prices  remained  below  projections 
(Chart 20). On an annual basis, we lowered average oil price assumption by 2 percent for 
2015,  and  by  around  6  percent  for  2016.  Accordingly,  we  revised  assumptions  for  annual 
percentage  changes  in  average  import  prices  downwards  by  1.7  points  for  2015  and 
1.4 points  for  2016.  Developments  in  food  prices  show  that  unprocessed  food  prices 
exhibited  a  notable  correction  in  the  second  quarter  of  2015  and  the  contribution  of  food 
prices to inflation witnessed a significant decline. Due to the projections that this correction 
will  continue  and  the  effects  of  measures  taken  by  related  institutions  will  materialize,  we 
revised the food inflation assumption for end-2015 downwards from 9 percent to 8 percent. 
Our  medium-term  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  tax  adjustments  and 
administered prices will not exceed inflation targets and be consistent with automatic pricing 
mechanisms. The medium-term fiscal policy stance is based on the Medium Term Program 
projections  covering  the  2015-2017  period.  Accordingly,  we  assume  that  a  cautious  fiscal 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  stance  will  be  implemented  and  the  primary  expenditures  to  the  GDP  ratio  will  decrease 
gradually. 
Inflation and the monetary policy outlook 
3.  
Now,  I  would  like  to  present  our  inflation  and  output gap forecasts  based  on  the  outlook  I 
have described so far. 
Our  medium-term  forecasts  are  based  on  a  framework  that  a  cautious  monetary  policy 
stance  will  be  maintained  by  keeping  the  yield  curve  flat  until  there  is  a  significant 
improvement in the inflation outlook. Moreover, we envisage that the annual loan growth rate 
will  continue  to  hover  around  the  recent  reasonable  levels  in  2015,  also  thanks  to  the 
macroprudential  measures.  Accordingly,  we  expect  inflation  will  be,  with  70  percent 
probability,  between  6.0  percent  and  7.8  percent  (with  a  mid-point  of  6.9  percent)  at  end-
2015 and between 3.7 percent and 7.3 percent (with a mid-point of 5.5 percent) at end-2016. 
We estimate that inflation will stabilize around 5 percent in the medium term (Chart 21). 
In the second quarter of 2015, exchange rate movements delayed the recovery in the core 
inflation trend, causing the year-end inflation forecast to be raised by 0.5 point. On the other 
hand, the improvement in import and food prices compared to the previous Report reduced 
the year-end inflation forecast by 0.1 point and 0.3 point, respectively. As a result, import and 
food prices are estimated to offset the adverse effects of core inflation figures in the second 
half of the year. Accordingly, we revised the end-2015 inflation forecast, which was set as 
6.8 percent in the April Inflation report, upwards by 0.1 point. We kept the end-2016 inflation 
forecast,  which  was  5.5  percent  in  the  previous  report,  unchanged.  Considering  that  the 
downward revision in the average oil price assumption will pull down the end-2016 inflation 
by around 0.1 point, this effect will be compensated for by the effect coming from the rise in 
inflation forecast for end-2015, so we left the end-2016 inflation forecast intact (Chart 21). 
We are of the opinion that base effects will continue to determine the course of inflation for 
the rest of 2015. Accordingly, we envisage inflation to decline until September, and increase 
slightly  in  September  due  to  base  effects.  Then,  following  a  fluctuating  course,  we  project 
that it will reach 6.9 percent in the year-end. 
In addition to these forecasts, we discuss alternative scenarios on the inflation outlook and 
the global economy in the Risks section of the Inflation Report. You can examine the Report 
for details. 
While concluding my remarks, I would like to thank all my colleagues who contributed to the 
Report,  primarily  those  at  the  Research  and  Monetary  Policy  Department  as  well  as  the 
members  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  and  thank  every  one  of  you  for  your 
participation. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
     8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
        BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
         10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
