  Elvira Nabiullina: The Russian economic situation and Bank of Russia’s 
forecast 
Statement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, in follow-up of Board of 
Directors meeting, Moscow, 11 December 2014. 
 Good afternoon! Today the Bank of Russia Board of Directors has decided to raise the key 
rate to 10.5% per annum. 
In  the  recent  months,  domestic  inflation  accelerated  significantly  and  inflation  expectations 
increased. According  to  our  estimates,  annual  inflation  will  approximate  10%  in  2014.  The 
acceleration  of  inflation  results  from  both  the  impact  of  the  external  trade  restrictions  and 
specific factors in the food market (which will add about 2.3 pp to the total inflation at year-
end), and considerable ruble depreciation (that will contribute 2.6 pp). According to the Bank 
of  Russia  estimates,  the  impact  of  these  factors  will  persist  in  2015  Q1  resulting  in  stable 
increased inflation expectations and spreading inflationary pressure to the markets of goods 
and services not directly related to imports and sanctions. 
Meanwhile,  the  direct  impact  of  ruble  depreciation  is  time-limited  and,  according  to  our 
estimates,  may  be  largely  exhausted  during  the  next  six-month  period.  Tighter  monetary 
policy  of  the  Bank  of  Russia  will  contribute  to  limiting  secondary  effects,  cooling  inflation 
expectations and slowing price growth. 
Should inflation risks aggravate, the Bank of Russia is ready to further raise the key rate in 
order to prevent acceleration of inflation and loss of control over it. Monetary policy easing 
can be considered when inflation and inflation expectations show a stable downward trend. 
Before moving to the forecast our decision is based on I would like to touch upon the current 
situation. 
Russian economic situation 
The recent months saw considerable changes in the global economy, primarily in the global 
commodity market, which have a direct impact on the Russian economy. 
Urals crude price fell by over 40% as against the highest price in June. Some other Russian 
export commodities have also experienced price decrease. Oil price dynamics have become 
one of the main reasons of ruble depreciation. 
Discussions  of  multiple  interconnections  between  the  foreign  exchange  rate  and  oil  prices 
have currently become a popular trend which should not be taken literally. There should be 
understanding  that  it  is  not  the  only  factor  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  They  are  also 
caused by the situation in the Russian and global economy, domestic and foreign financial 
markets, and by the expectations of the economic agents. In particular, the ruble exchange 
rate  was  affected  by  the  restricted  access  of  Russian  companies  and  banks  to  external 
markets raising concerns regarding the upcoming external debt payments. 
However,  the  impact  of  the  external  factors  on  the  economic  situation  should  not  be 
considered unidirectional. External trade restrictions and ruble exchange rate dynamics have 
enhanced  the  competitiveness  of  Russian  exports  and  boosted  import  substitution.  The 
recent months see accelerated annual growth rates of industrial production (almost two-fold 
in  September-October  as  against  1.5%  in  the  first  six  months  of  the  year)  and  improved 
sentiment of manufacturers. Net export contribution to GDP growth increased. 
Nevertheless,  amid  high  uncertainty  this  output  growth  is  not  yet  accompanied  with 
investment  increase.  Consumer  demand  also  weakens  due  to  the  slowdown  in  annual 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  growth of real income of households which has contracted to 0.5%. As a result, procurement 
manager sentiment index in the service sector deteriorates. 
The situation in the labour market remains unchanged, seasonally adjusted unemployment 
rate stayed at 5.2% in October. Broad set of labour market indicators, including the number 
of working hours, number and length of unpaid vacations, and others do not bear evidence of 
considerable  concealed  unemployment.  According  to  our  estimates  the  labour  productivity 
growth slowed down to 0.7% in January-October this year with persistent gap between the 
growth of wages and labour productivity signaling of slow pace of economic restructuring. 
These factors affected GDP dynamics. Our estimate of the GDP growth in 2014 has been 
slightly raised to 0.6%. 
Due  to  the  transition  to  the  floating  exchange  rate,  the  foreign  exchange  market  absorbs 
external  shocks  preserving  relative  stability  of  other  segments  of  the  financial  market.  For 
comparison,  during  the  global  crisis  of  2008,  the  volatility  of  the  money  market  rates 
exceeded  the  current  values  ten-fold.  The  banking  sector  continues  stable  servicing  and 
funding of the economy. During the previous 11 months, loans to non-financial organisations 
grew by 12% and loans to households by 12.7% (adjusted for currency revaluation). 
The financial system gradually adjusts to inflation targeting and floating exchange rate. Time 
lag  of  the  reaction  of  the  banking  sector  to  the  change  of  the  Bank  of  Russia  key  rate 
remains large though, according to our estimates, gradually shrinking. This refers to deposit 
rates  as  well.  As  lags  shrink,  the  effectiveness  of  the  interest  rate  channel  of  the  Bank  of 
Russia monetary transmission mechanism will improve. 
As for the foreign exchange transmission channel, its impact is complicated due to the high 
volatility in the foreign exchange market which resulted, inter alia, from the restricted access 
of Russian banks and companies to external markets. In order to normalise the situation with 
foreign exchange liquidity, the Bank of Russia has introduced reverse transactions to provide 
it. Interest rates on these transactions have been decreased to the level of LIBOR rates plus 
0.5  pp.  The  volume  of  foreign  exchange  liquidity  provision  is  determined  by  the  demand 
estimates  based  on  the  balance  of  payments  forecast.  The  next  one-year  repo  auction  of 
15 December will accept Eurobonds and provide for the possibility of early deal termination 
by borrowers. 
In  the  near  future  the  Bank  of  Russia  also  intends  to  consider  the  introduction  of  foreign 
exchange lending secured by non-marketable assets. Foreign exchange loans, extended by 
banks to companies with stable income in foreign currency, are supposed to be eligible as 
collateral. 
Bank of Russia forecast 
The  current  situation  requires  updating  the  forecasts  and  adjusting  the  policy  to  ensure 
financial and price stability enabling the economy to adjust to the new conditions and start 
developing as quickly as possible. 
The  “Guidelines  for  the  Single  State  Monetary  Policy  in  2015  and  for  2016  and  2017” 
stipulate  that  the  removal  of  sanctions  and  trade  restrictions  results  in  certain  inflation 
decrease  and  moderate  acceleration  of  economic  growth.  We  take  this  possibility  into 
account but base our policy decisions on the forecasts providing for long-term sanctions. 
The  baseline  forecast  the  Bank  of  Russia  currently  applies  in  the  decision-making 
approximates scenario IIIb published in the aforementioned document. 
We expect average oil prices to be $80 per barrel during the next three years. This average 
price results from consensus forecast of the leading analysts. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In the scenario under consideration the current account surplus remains on the acceptable 
level of $56 billion in 2015. In 2016 and 2017, no significant changes in the current account 
balance are expected either. 
The  development  of  import  substitution  will  boost  domestic  production.  The  service  sector 
will  see  similar  trend.  Conditions  for  diversification  of  the  economy  will  be  established. 
Contribution of net exports to GDP will be positive. 
According to the Bank of Russia estimates, in these conditions economic growth rates will 
remain close to zero in 2015–2016, however in 2017, when import substitution and increase 
in non-commodity exports become more apparent, we expect GDP to grow up to 1–1.2%. 
Higher  growth  rates  in  the  next  three  years  require  structural  reforms,  primarily  measures 
aimed at real improvement of business climate and higher labour productivity. 
The  inflation  level  is  currently  affected  by  the  actual  ruble  depreciation  and  the  imposed 
import  restrictions  but,  according  to  our  estimates,  these  factors  will  contribute  to  inflation 
increase  only  till  late  2015  Q1,  afterwards,  the  inflation  will  start  declining.  By  late  2015, 
inflation will fall to 8%. Inflation is forecast to slow down to the target of 4% by late 2017. 
These  dynamics  are  largely  connected  with  the  increased  inflation  expectations.  In  this 
regard,  the  Bank  of  Russia  intends  to  conduct  its  monetary  policy  to  prevent  further 
aggravation of inflation and inflation expectations. 
As I have mentioned, under the baseline forecast the current account surplus will amount to 
$56  billion  in  2015  which  is  below  the  possible  capital  outflow  we  estimate  to  reach  up  to 
$120 billion next year. 
Next  year  the  volume  of  external  debt  payments  will  also  approximate  to  $120  billion,  of 
which banking sector debt payments will amount to $42 billion, including interest payments. 
Non-financial  sector  debt  payments  are  estimated  to  be  $77  billion,  including  interest 
payments. 
We have made special calculations based on the reporting data received from banks and the 
survey of 40 largest companies. According to our estimates based on these data, more than 
10% of these payments refer to intergroup transactions. Another 20% can be refunded in the 
international markets. At least 15% can be redeemed through the partial use of cushion of 
liquid  foreign  exchange  assets  accumulated  by  banks  and  state-owned  companies.  The 
remaining 55% of debts subject to redemption which make about $65 billion can be covered 
from the current account balance and reduction of international reserves. 
According  to  our  calculations,  operations  to  close  the  gap  of  the  balance  of  payments  will 
require about $70 billion next year. The Bank of Russia will carry out transactions aimed at 
maintaining stability of the balance of payments, i.e. the financial stability, in the stipulated 
volumes.  We  believe  that  the  international  reserves  are  sufficient  to  carry  out  foreign 
exchange transactions in such volume. Meanwhile, in the next three years, the reserves level 
will be significantly above the generally accepted adequacy indicators. There definitely will be 
no deficit of foreign exchange liquidity given these parameters of the balance of payments 
and the volume of our operations. 
We indent to conduct the aforementioned FX repos, extend foreign currency loans and carry 
out occasional direct FX buy/sell transactions, inter alia, to accumulate and use Government 
reserve funds. 
It  should  be  noted  that  under  this  scenario  the  ruble  should  appreciate  considerably  next 
year due to both the compensation of the currently observed exchange rate overshoot or, in 
other words, excessive depreciation, and the oil price growth stipulated by the scenario. Let 
me remind you that according to the scenario oil price will be $80. 
This is our baseline scenario. At the same time we are aware of the pessimistic sentiments in 
the  market  due  to  the  dynamics  of  oil  contract  quotations  observed  over  the  last  months. 
Therefore, alongside with the baseline forecast, we have worked out an alternative scenario 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  which we consider to be unlikely to develop and which provides for oil price fall to $60 per 
barrel from early 2015 and during the whole three-year period. 
In this case Russian economy will require more profound adjustment to the new conditions in 
2015–2016.  In  this  scenario,  the  current  account  surplus  will  amount  to  approximately 
$40 billion in 2015. It will further increase due to the slight rise of non-oil and gas exports and 
decline of imports. 
Economic growth rates will depend on the pace of import substitution. Slow development of 
import-substituting  production  in  2015–2016  may  result  in  “mild”  recession.  Nevertheless, 
output  and  employment  decrease  will  be  considerably  less  than  in  2008–2009.  In  this 
scenario we expect economic recovery growth to over 5% in 2017. 
Under  this  scenario,  in  2015,  inflation  acceleration  may  be  higher  than  in  the  baseline 
scenario due to the lower ruble appreciation during the year which is also expected due to 
the compensation of the exchange rate overshoot. During the following two years, due to the 
deeper output gap inflation will decrease even faster than stipulated in the baseline scenario 
reaching the target of 4% before late 2017. Meanwhile, the monetary policy will be aimed at 
stabilisation of inflation expectations, prevention of inflation spiral and its gradual decrease 
due to the prospects of economic growth. It is also possible that under this scenario we will 
be able to ease our policy even earlier. 
As the capital outflow during this period will mainly result from external debt payments, in this 
scenario  we  estimate  the  total  capital  outflow  to  be  at  the  same  level  as  in  the  baseline 
scenario. Under this scenario we are ready to allocate about $85 billion for FX transactions in 
order to stabilise the balance of payments that is also acceptable from the foreign exchange 
reserve  adequacy  point  of  view.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  reserve  level  will  be  restored 
following  the  economy  adjustment  to  the  new  conditions  as  we  intend  to  conduct  mainly 
reverse transactions. 
The Bank of Russia will undertake operations in the foreign exchange market based on the 
balance of payments forecast and the estimation of balances of banks and companies taking 
into account the structure, terms and nature of corporate debt. I would like to emphasise that 
we carry out these transactions in order to prevent situations when excessive exchange rate 
volatility and its considerable deviation from fundamental levels create financial stability risks 
and  result  in  higher  depreciation  and  inflation  expectations.  In  particular,  now  that  risks 
arising from the ruble exchange rate dynamics have aggravated, the Bank of Russia came 
up with interventions in the foreign exchange market. 
Of course, we will also consider the impact of operations in the foreign exchange market on 
the  ruble  liquidity  and  ease  the  negative  effect  of  growing  structural  deficit  on  the  credit 
institutions’  balance  sheets.  Besides,  we  are  especially  concerned  about  the  collateral 
adequacy  and  will  take  further  measures  to  decrease  pressure  on  market-traded  bonds 
through providing liquidity against other types of assets. Amid the increased volatility of the 
foreign exchange market, the Bank of Russia will stick to the conservative approach to the 
assessment of banking sector demand for liquidity. Meanwhile, the volume of ruble liquidity 
provision will be sufficient for the banking system to function properly and the money market 
rates to remain within the interest rate corridor bounds. The Bank of Russia will also continue 
to permanently monitor the situation in all the segments of the financial market and is ready 
to  take  the  required  measures  to  ensure  its  stable  functioning.  It  is  crucial  for  normal 
functioning  of  the  economy  and  successful  implementation  of  all  macroeconomic  policy 
measures. 
Currently the Russian economy faces both external and internal challenges. The uncertainty 
over further developments is really high and the sensitivity of the economy and especially the 
financial  markets  to  various  developments  increases,  at  some  point  the  reaction  can  be 
excessive.  In  these  conditions  the  Bank  of  Russia  is  ready  to  be  flexible  and  take 
unconventional  decisions  in  meeting  strategic  objectives  of  ensuring  financial  and  price 
stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
