Charles I Plosser: An appreciation of the Fed’s 12 banks 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  to  the  Union  League  of  Philadelphia,  Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, 17 February 2015. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
   President Plosser highlights the history of the Federal Reserve and why he believes 
our central bank’s unique structure has withstood the test of time. 
He  believes  a  key  strength  of  the  Federal  Reserve  is  the  vibrant  role  the 
12 independent Reserve Banks maintain in operations and policymaking. 
President Plosser defends central bank independence. He discusses the importance 
of  the  central  bank  in  making  monetary  policy  decisions  without  fear  of  direct 
political interference. 
He  explains  that  he  does  not  support  the  “audit  the  Fed”  movement  because  he 
believes it would lead to greater political interference in monetary policy decisions. 
He states this proposal would reduce the independence of the central bank through 
the threat of a political action in real time. 
Introduction 
Thank you, Dr. (Karen) Lawson, for that kind introduction and thanks to the Union League’s 
Public  Affairs  Committee  and  the  Business  Leaders  Forum  for  inviting  me  here  today  for 
what will be my final public speech as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. 
For  more  than  eight  years,  I  have  had  the  honor  of  working  alongside  many  talented 
colleagues  here  in  Philadelphia  and  throughout  the  Federal  Reserve  System  during  an 
extraordinary period in this nation’s economic history. 
I came to Philadelphia in 2006 after more than three decades in academia, where much of 
my  research  and  teaching  centered  on  the  subjects  of  macroeconomics,  monetary  theory, 
and finance. Serving as president of the Philadelphia Fed has given me a rare opportunity to 
combine  three  roles:  first,  to  lead  an  extraordinary  organization,  as  I  did  as  dean  of  the 
Simon School of Business in Rochester; second, to serve as a monetary policymaker, and 
third, to continue a lifelong role as an educator, through speeches like this one today, to help 
people understand the economy, monetary policy, and the role of the Fed. 
It has been a fascinating yet challenging time to serve. As I look back, I had about a year to 
settle  in  before  facing  a  global  financial  crisis,  the  ensuing  recession,  and  more  than  five 
years of a slow, but steady, climb back to normalcy. 
Today, I would like to take a step back from the day-to-day economic picture and give you a 
personal appreciation of America’s decentralized, central bank, made up of 12 independently 
chartered  Federal  Reserve  Banks  and  the  Board  of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.  It  is 
customary  to  mention  that  these  views  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). But it 
won’t be long until such a caveat will no longer be necessary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Historical roots 
It is not unusual to hear questions like, “Why are there 12 Federal Reserve Banks and do we 
really need so many?” “Why are the 12 presidents involved in monetary policy?” “Wouldn’t 
policy  be  more  effective  if  it  was  delivered  without  the  “cacophony”  of  so  many  voices 
expressing different views?” While I understand these perspectives, I think these arguments 
miss the fundamental point driving the Federal Reserve’s governance structure. 
Americans  have  a  long  history  of  suspicion  toward  the  concentration  of  authority.  So,  our 
uniquely American form of a central bank seeks to strike a balance between centralization 
and decentralization, between the public and private sectors, and among Washington, Wall 
Street, and Main Street. This balancing is critical to ensuring accountability and reducing the 
risk that the institution would be captured by private or political interests. 
To understand how it came to be, it is useful to review a little history. Just a few blocks from 
the  Philadelphia  Fed  stand  the  vestiges  of  our  country’s  two  earlier  attempts  at  a  central 
bank, dating back to the early years of our nation when Philadelphia was the major financial 
and political center of the country. 
The first institution was the brainchild of our first Treasury secretary Alexander Hamilton. His 
efforts  led  to  the  creation  of  the  First  Bank  of  the  United  States,  which  was  awarded  a 
20-year charter by Congress in 1791. 
Although  the  First  Bank’s  charter  was  not  renewed,  the  inflation  and  economic  turmoil 
following the War of 1812 convinced Congress to establish the Second Bank of the United 
States. It was also given a 20-year charter and operated from 1816 to 1836. However, its 
charter  was  not  renewed  –  Congress  could  not  override  the  veto  of  President  Andrew 
Jackson, who led the opposition to the central bank. Public distrust of centralized power was 
an important factor in the demise of both banks. Both became entangled in politics, and both 
failed  to  gain  the  public’s  confidence  to  serve  our  vast  and  diverse  country  of  bakers  and 
bankers, farmers and financiers, and manufacturers and merchants. 
It  took  Congress  nearly 80  years  to  try  again  to  establish  a  central  bank.  After the  severe 
bank panic in 1907, Congress began several years of study to come up with a model that 
would work. When Congress finally passed the Federal Reserve Act of 1913, it included a 
unique political compromise. It established a system of semi-independent Federal Reserve 
Banks  around  the  country  with  oversight  provided  by  a  public  Federal  Reserve  Board  in 
Washington, D.C. Many in Washington and on Wall Street favored a more centralized central 
bank, either dominated by bankers or politicians, but Congress passed the law requiring a 
decentralized organization with eight to 12 reserve banks to disperse authority. That tension 
between centralization and decentralization has waxed and waned over the past 100 years 
and continues even today. 
In  the  end,  Congress  and  the  Reserve  Bank  Organizing  Committee  opted  for  12  Districts. 
Their size was based on the number of banks in their Districts and their relative size in the 
economy. Since the organizers wanted the 12 Districts to begin with roughly similar capital 
bases, the Districts in the East, where more capital was concentrated, were geographically 
smaller than the Districts in the West, where capital was more dispersed. 
Congress has debated and changed the governance structure from time to time, including 
the  1927  decision  to  give  the  12  Federal  Reserve  Banks  permanent  charters  rather  than 
20-year charters. Following the Great Depression, the passage of the Banking Acts of 1933 
and  1935  brought  about  the  biggest  changes  in  governance.  The  Banking  Act  of  1935,  in 
particular,  renamed  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  the  Board  of  Governors  and  granted  the 
Washington-based  entity  greater  powers.  It  specified  that  the  Board  of  Governors  should 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have  seven  members  appointed  by  the  U.S.  president  and  confirmed  by  the  Senate.1 
Governors could serve 14-year terms to insulate them from short-term political pressures and 
to encourage a long-term perspective on the economy and the financial system. 
The  12  Federal  Reserve  Banks,  of  course,  were,  and  still  are,  independently  chartered 
institutions. They each have a nine-member board of directors drawn from citizens in their 
respective  Districts  to  represent  a  cross-section  of  banking,  commercial,  and  community 
interests.  Three  directors  represent  the  banking  community.  Six  other  directors,  all 
nonbankers  by  law,  come  from  a  wide  variety  of  backgrounds  and  perspectives.  These 
directors not only fulfill the traditional governance role of overseeing the Bank’s performance 
but also provide valuable insights into economic and financial conditions in the District and 
the nation. One recent change in the directors’ roles came under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street 
Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010: Only the six nonbank directors on each board 
may  vote  to  select  a  Reserve  Bank  president,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Board  of 
Governors. 
Operational advantages 
When the Fed was first established, the U.S. and much of the developed world operated on a 
gold  standard.  The  primary  objective  of  the  new  central  bank  was  to  provide  an  “elastic 
currency” so that banks could meet the cash demands of businesses and consumers. Before 
the Federal Reserve, circulating cash was predominately in the form of private bank notes, 
which could become scarce in times of panic. The Reserve Banks were given the authority to 
issue Federal Reserve Notes that were declared legal tender and so they could meet these 
cash  needs  by  short-term  lending  to  banks  against  collateral.  Thus,  for  the  most  part,  the 
Board  in  Washington  had  little  role  to  play  in  the  primary  responsibilities  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System. 
The Reserve Banks remain the operating arm of the Federal Reserve System. It is the 12 
Banks and not the Board of Governors that distribute currency, act as a bankers’ bank, and 
generally perform the functions of a central bank. This includes serving as the bank for the 
U.S. Treasury. It is the Reserve Banks that have assets and a balance sheet. The earnings 
on these assets fund the operations of the 12 Banks as well as the operations of the Board of 
Governors  to  give  the  Federal  Reserve  System  independence  from  the  Congressional 
appropriations process. In fact, the System turns over any excess earnings above the cost of 
its operations to the U.S. Treasury. 
So,  from  the  beginning,  the  Reserve  Banks  have  played  an  integral  role  in  their  regions’ 
economies. In addition to providing currency and coin services to banks, the Reserve Banks 
handle other basic payment services, such as wire transfers and clearing checks. In fact, if 
you  look  at  the  development  of  payment  systems  in  America,  many  of  the  innovations  in 
electronic  funds  transfer  have  been  led  by  the  12  Federal  Reserve  Banks,  including 
championing the passage of the Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act in 2003, which has 
accelerated  the  migration  from  paper  checks  to  electronic  check  images  and  electronic 
payments.  So,  rather  than  having  45  check-processing  locations  at  its  peak,  the  Federal 
Reserve has just one location today for paper checks and one for electronic payments. 
While  supervisory  and  regulatory  authority  for  many  banks  and  bank  holding  companies 
rests with the Board of Governors by statute, not the Reserve Banks, the Board delegates 
authority to the staff in the 12 Reserve Banks to provide the boots on the ground for effective 
supervision of the covered institutions in their Districts. 
                                                
1  As  of  February  17,  2015,  there  were  five  Governors  serving,  with  one  more  nominee  awaiting  Senate 
confirmation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The Reserve Banks also act as the bank for the U.S. Treasury. They work closely with the 
Treasury  to  develop  payment  processes,  such  as  making  payments  on  the  public  debt, 
distributing payments to Social Security recipients, and so forth. 
The Banks also support community development activities, including research and engaging 
organizations to find effective and impactful development solutions that promote the Federal 
Reserve System’s economic growth objectives in low- and moderate-income communities. 
Setting monetary policy 
Of  course,  most  people  think  of  the  Federal  Reserve  as  being  responsible  for  setting  and 
executing monetary policy. Here, too, the Reserve Banks play an important role. In the early 
decades of operations, the Reserve Banks came to learn that buying and selling assets on 
the open market had an influence on the money supply. In fact, they found that if they didn’t 
coordinate their actions, they could encounter unintended consequences as they may act at 
cross  purposes.  So,  in  1923,  early  leaders,  such  as  Benjamin  Strong  in  New  York  and 
George Norris here in Philadelphia, helped organize a committee to coordinate open market 
operations.  This  eventually  led  Congress  to  formally  create  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee, or FOMC, as the formal body within the Fed responsible for monetary policy. 
Since  the  Banking  Act  of  1935,  the  composition  of  the  FOMC  has  included  the  seven 
Governors in Washington, D.C., the president of the New York Fed, and the presidents of 
four other Reserve Banks, who serve one-year terms as members on a rotating basis. These 
rotations  ensure  that  all  regions  are  represented  in  the  formation  of  monetary  policy.  The 
composition gives the Board of Governors the majority of votes. 
However, whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, 
participate in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee’s assessment of the economy 
and  policy  options.  The  FOMC  has  eight  regularly  scheduled  meetings  each  year  to  set 
monetary policy. It discusses economic conditions and, in normal times, decides the path of 
short-term interest rates to achieve the goals of monetary policy that Congress has set for us 
in the Federal Reserve Act. 
When  preparing  for  the  FOMC  meetings,  participants  rely  on  their  economic  research 
departments to brief them on regional and national economic conditions and provide support 
and insight on appropriate monetary policy. The independent presidents and their research 
departments  also  help  ensure  that  a  wide  variety  of  perspectives  are  brought  to  the  table 
when  we  make  policy.  This  helps  prevent  monetary  policy  from  adopting  a  “groupthink” 
mentality. 
The  separate  teams  of  research  economists  in  the  Reserve  Banks  also  ensure  a  useful 
diversity in academic pursuit. Research teams at the Banks have advanced many economic 
concepts  that  have  been  adopted  by  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  such  as  the  value  of 
inflation  targeting  or  the  latest  use  of  economic  modeling.  This  has  led  to  centers  of 
excellence  in  the  Districts,  such  as  the  Payment  Cards  Center  and  the  Real-Time  Data 
Research Center here in Philadelphia. 
In addition to economic research, the Reserve Bank presidents also gather information from 
their  boards  of  directors  and  advisory  councils  and  through  conversations  with  local  and 
international  business  leaders.  All  this  helps  to  contribute  to  a  rich  and  comprehensive 
mosaic of the national economy. 
Monetary policymaking is conducted by committee by design, and divergent views can and 
often do exist. As we worked our way through the financial crisis and through the recovery, 
we found ourselves in uncharted territory dealing with many economic challenges. So, there 
is  little  wonder  why  there  are  often  differences  of  opinion  around  the  table.  Some 
commentators express the view that dissent causes dissonance and therefore confuses the 
communications. I disagree. I believe that open dialogue and diversity of views lead to better 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
policy decisions and are the primary means by which new ideas are gradually incorporated 
into our monetary policy framework. 
Thus, I believe diversity of thought is a sign of a thoughtful process. I have often quoted the 
famous American journalist Walter Lippmann, who said, “Where all men think alike, no one 
thinks very much.” I think it is healthy for the American public to know that we debate some 
of  the  same  issues  that  those  outside  the  Fed  debate.  Hiding  such  debate  behind  a 
unanimous vote does nothing to promote true transparency. By being open and transparent 
about  these  various  perspectives,  our  decentralized  model  for  the  Federal  Reserve  helps 
strengthen public confidence and preserve its independence. 
Defending central bank independence 
So, why is central bank independence so important? It strikes many people as odd that in a 
democratic  society  we  leave  monetary  policy  decisions  in  the  hands  of  nonelected 
policymakers who can act with independence. I think this view stems from confusion about 
what is really meant by central bank independence. Central bank independence means that 
the  central  bank  can  make  monetary  policy  decisions  without  fear  of  direct  political 
interference. It does not mean – nor should it – that the central bank is not accountable for its 
policies. 
It is important to remember that the Federal Reserve does not select its own goals. Instead, 
Congress  sets  the  goals  it  wants  the  Fed  to  pursue  with  monetary  policy.  Since  1978, 
Congress has mandated that the FOMC “shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and 
credit  aggregates  commensurate  with  the  economy’s  long  run  potential  to  increase 
production,  so  as  to  promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices, 
and moderate long-term interest rates.” 
The  goals  of  monetary  policy  are  rightly  a  subject  of  legitimate  debate.  I  have  frequently 
argued that these goals are too broad, and they risk making the Fed responsible for more 
than it can actually deliver. That, from my perspective, risks undermining the Fed’s credibility 
and invites policymakers to lurch from one goal to the next when it seems convenient, thus 
making it more susceptible to political pressure. As a consequence, I have favored a single 
mandate for the  Fed  – price  stability  –  to  increase  the  clarity  of  the  objective  and  make  it 
easier to hold the Fed accountable. 
Nevertheless,  given  a  mandate,  what  central  bank  independence  means  is  that  Congress 
has  left  the  decisions  of  how  best  to  achieve  this  mandate  to  Fed  policymakers. Why  did 
Congress design the Fed this way? There are two very important reasons. First, monetary 
policy  affects  the  economy  with  sometimes  long  and  variable  lags,  but  elected  politicians, 
and  even  the  public,  often  make  decisions  with  the  next  month,  next  quarter,  or  the  next 
election in mind. Monetary policy actions taken today will often not have their full effect on 
the economy for at least several quarters and perhaps as long as several years. That is why 
monetary  policy  choices  today  must focus  on  the  intermediate  to  long  term  and  anticipate 
what the economy might look like over the next one to three years. Indeed, the mandate itself 
stresses the long run focus of monetary policy. 
Moreover, there can be a conflict between what monetary policy may be able to achieve over 
the short term versus its impact over the long term. For example, in the short term, it might 
seem  expedient  or  even  desirable  to  try  to  spur  economic  growth  and  employment  by 
conducting  excessively  accommodative  monetary  policy.  Yet,  this  could  lead  to  very  bad 
economic outcomes in the long term, including higher inflation, higher interest rates, and an 
eventual  tightening  of  policy  to  control  inflation  that  may  be  detrimental  to  the  economy. 
These outcomes would be inconsistent with the long-term goals set by Congress. Delegating 
the decision-making to an independent central bank that can help focus on long-term policy 
goals is a way of limiting the temptation for short-term gains at the expense of the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  second  important  reason  to  give  monetary  policy  decision-making  to  an  independent 
central bank is to separate the authority of those in government responsible for making the 
decisions to spend and tax from those responsible for printing the money. This lessens the 
temptation for the fiscal authority to use the printing press to fund its public spending, thereby 
substituting a hidden tax of inflation in the future for taxes or spending cuts. 
History is replete with examples of what happens when central banks are not independent or 
become  agents  for  a  nation’s  fiscal  policy.  Just  think  of  the  hyperinflation  in  Germany 
between the World Wars of the last century, or in Italy before the euro, or in the numerous 
financial crises and high inflation rates in Latin American in more recent years, to name just a 
few. The consequences – higher inflation, currency crises, and economic instability – are not 
good. This is why so many countries have structured their central banks with a great deal of 
independence from political interference. 
Despite the strong arguments for political independence, there continue to be proposals that 
would make monetary policy subject to more political interference. In recent years, this effort 
has  manifested  itself  in  the  movement  in  Congress  to  pass  an  “Audit  the  Fed”  bill.  Since 
1978, Congress has specifically exempted monetary policy decisions from such “audits” by 
the Government Accountability Office, or GAO, with good reason. The bill is not really about 
an  audit  in  the  usual  accounting  or  financial  sense  of  the  term,  since  the  Fed’s  financial 
statements  and  indeed  its  operations  in  supervision  and  payment  services  are  already 
subject  to  extensive  outside  audits  by  the  GAO,  the  Board  of  Governors’  Office  of  the 
Inspector General, and an outside public accounting firm. Rather, this proposal to strike that 
exemption for monetary policy is an attempt to reduce the independence of the central bank 
through the threat of a political action in real time. 
For example, under the provisions of the bill, the GAO could be called on to investigate a 
monetary policy decision whenever any member of Congress opposes a decision to change 
interest rates. This possibility would change the dynamics of the FOMC’s internal discussions 
and undermine the Fed’s credibility and its ability to conduct monetary policy in the long-term 
interests of the American public. 
Over the past 30 years, many countries have acted to increase the degree of independence 
of  monetary  policymaking  from  short-term  political  influences.  In  a  democracy,  though, 
independence  must  be  accompanied  by  accountability.  In  recent  years,  the  Fed  has 
increased its transparency. The FOMC issues a statement after every meeting. It publishes 
the  minutes  three  weeks  after  each  meeting.  It  also  reports  the  economic  projections  of 
Committee participants four times a year. These meetings are followed by press conferences 
with the chair of the FOMC. In 2012, the FOMC issued a statement clarifying our longer-run 
goals  and  strategy,  including  an  explicit  2  percent  target  for  inflation.  And  the  economic 
projections  now  include  information  about  the  policy  path  assumptions  of  participants. 
Finally, after five years, verbatim transcripts are available for every FOMC meeting. 
The Reserve Banks’ structure also helps increase transparency by communicating economic 
and monetary policy objectives and actions through educational outreach and speeches such 
as this one, as well as discussions with their boards of directors and other groups. 
I  support  these  ongoing  efforts  to  increase  accountability  and  transparency,  but  I  do  not 
support efforts that would lead to greater political interference in monetary policy decisions. 
Such  efforts  include  the  audit-the-Fed  movement  but  also  those  efforts  that  would  make 
Reserve Bank presidents political appointees. 
I do not believe the Fed is perfect or that it is infallible. As you know, I have been a vocal 
critic at times. But I have also been explicit over the years about steps that could be taken to 
strengthen the Fed as an institution. I have argued for a narrow mandate that is achievable 
so the Fed can be held accountable. I have stressed the importance of transparency and a 
systematic approach to policy that reduces uncertainty and makes policy more predictable. 
These could be helpful in strengthening credibility and the public’s trust in the institution. But 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
steps that undermine the Fed’s independence or make it more susceptible to political control 
and influence in the short run are counterproductive. 
I  also  believe  that  a  key  strength  of  the  institution  is  the  vibrant  role  the  12  independent 
Reserve  Banks  play  in  operations  and  policymaking.  They  are  a  safeguard,  not  a 
straightjacket. Too much power or authority concentrated in Washington or Wall Street could 
make the central bank more susceptible to capture by political or private interests. 
Conclusion 
So, I believe the Federal Reserve System, with 12 Reserve Banks and a central Board of 
Governors,  has  withstood  the  test  of  time,  in  part  because  it  has  checks  and  balances  to 
protect and serve our diverse nation. Americans have a long history of suspicion toward the 
concentration of authority. So, Congress has created a uniquely American form of a central 
bank to find a middle ground between centralization and decentralization, between the public 
and private sectors, and among Washington, Wall Street, and Main Street. 
My  time  as  president  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia  has  deepened  my 
appreciation of our nation’s decentralized central bank. I have great respect for the institution 
and the people who serve here in Philadelphia and around the Federal Reserve System. 
I hope that you – and our nation more broadly – come to appreciate the unique role of the 
12 Federal Reserve Banks as integral parts of our nation’s central bank. Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
