  Jens Weidmann: Economic policy and capital markets – how to promote 
prosperity in Europe 
Opening keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) Global Investment Seminar, 
London, 11 June 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
My speech today will cover a number of topics, starting with the most recent capital market 
developments  before  moving  on  to  monetary  policy  and  economic  policies  that  can  make 
Europe more prosperous. 
Recent capital market developments 
2. 
The recent volatility in the bond markets reminded me of James Carville, an advisor of Bill 
Clinton, who once said: “I used to think if there was reincarnation, I wanted to come back as 
the president or the pope or a .400 baseball hitter, but now I want to come back as the bond 
market. You can intimidate everybody.” 
Bond investors, at least the ones who were wrong-footed, were certainly intimidated by the 
most recent jump in bond yields. 
To understand the underlying decline in bond prices, which was dubbed the “Bund tantrum” 
because German Bunds were at the epicentre of the mini-crash, one has to bear in mind the 
preceding rally, which had been triggered to a large extent by the Eurosystem’s sovereign 
bond purchase programme. 
Expectations of a large-scale QE programme depressed long-term interest rates even before 
the purchases actually  began. However, somewhat surprisingly, interest rates dropped still 
further  to  unprecedented  low  levels  when  the  purchase  programme kicked  off  in  March.  It 
was a development which many attributed to what they saw as the decisive implementation 
of the programme, but it was also linked to the gradual emergence of the consequences of 
some programme details. 
Yields  on  German  Bunds  with  maturities  of  up  to  eight  years  had  fallen  below  zero, 
suggesting that a certain degree of exuberance was in the air. These developments, fuelled 
by economic news on both sides of the Atlantic, drove up the number of bond investors who 
doubted the sustainability of such low yields. 
The German FAZ daily newspaper commented on the shift in sentiment: “Some people who 
just a few weeks ago regarded negative yields as a sign of a serious crisis are now seeing 
rising yields as signalling a serious crisis, too.” 
In my opinion, the most recent rise in yields can be largely explained as a correction of a 
market overshooting – a kind of re-normalisation. 
Liquidity might have been an issue, too. With bond prices falling and many investors caught 
off guard, there appears to have been little appetite for taking long positions in bonds. 
For  what  it’s  worth,  the  current  level  of  bond  market  volatility  is  not  exceptionally  high. 
Indeed,  it  has  been  unusually  low  over  the  past  year.  So  these  market  movements  are  a 
rather welcome development insofar as they help to foster risk awareness. 
What  this  episode  illustrates  most  of  all  is  that  central  banks  currently  have  a  significant 
impact on capital markets, as they have become the dominant market player. Yet they are 
not  fully  in  control  of  long-term  interest  rates,  try  as  they  might  in  striving  to  fulfil  their 
monetary policy mandates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  But  this  episode  also  shows  that  the financial  system  was  able  to  cope with  these market 
movements. 
The ultimate goal of QE is to accelerate inflation in the euro area and to bring the inflation 
rate  into  line  with  our  definition  of  price  stability.  According  to  this  definition,  euro-area 
inflation should be below but close to 2% over the medium term. 
You  don’t  need  me  to  tell  you  that  I  was,  and  I  still  am,  one  of  the  sceptics  regarding 
purchases  of  sovereign  bonds  in  the  euro  area.  Having  outlined  my  arguments  on  many 
occasions, for example at a City of London event in February, I will be brief today. 
In a nutshell, I had my doubts about the need for a large-volume QE programme and, against 
this  backdrop,  I  see  risks  and  unintended  side-effects  that  might  outweigh  the  benefits  in 
terms of an accelerated normalisation of inflation. 
While the current inflation rate is significantly below our target, this was driven mainly by a 
positive supply-side shock caused by lower energy prices. As there were no signs of second-
round effects, the risk of deflation was very low indeed. So, an acceleration of the inflation 
rate was already in the cards, with or without QE – with QE, certainly faster. 
This benefit had to be traded against the risks: Central banks are set to become the euro-
area  member  states’  biggest  creditors.  When  governments  become  accustomed  to  the 
favourable  financing  conditions,  this  could  dampen  their  willingness  to  consolidate  their 
budgets and implement structural reforms. And it could make governments more keen to try 
to prevent the ECB from terminating its ultra-easy monetary policy. 
At  the  end  of  the  day,  this  could  jeopardise  central  bank  independence,  undermining  our 
ability to maintain price stability. 
It  can  be  generally  said  that  monetary  policymakers  are  increasingly  being  called  upon  to 
step in and take action. Let me mention just two items from the wish lists: 
1. 
Keep the Greek financial system afloat by providing emergency liquidity and, thus, 
help prevent the Greek government from defaulting. 
Protect  economies  from  the  negative  outcomes  of  a  supposed  era  of  “secular 
stagnation” by adopting a more activist monetary policy stance. 
2. 
Central banks, and this is not unique to the Eurosystem, run the risk of being overburdened. 
Thus, I think that one of the core issues for monetary policy going forward is finding the right 
definition of the boundaries of monetary policy. 
It is clear that monetary policy can stimulate the economy in the short run. What it cannot do, 
however, is deliver sustainable growth. Metaphorically speaking, if you have a rowing boat 
and  one  of  the  oars  is  broken,  it  is  better  to  try  to  fix  that  oar  than  to  paddle  with  the 
remaining one. 
In other words, successful monetary policy hinges on factors that it cannot fully determine by 
itself.  One  key  factor  is  a  stability-oriented  framework.  Such  a  framework  ensures  sound 
public finances and sustainable economic growth. 
It  is  a  framework  that  fosters  responsible  political  decisions  by  anchoring  the  principle  of 
liability  –  that  is  to  say,  those  who  take  decisions  should  be  accountable  for  their 
consequences. And this is particularly relevant in a monetary union. 
In  this  vein,  it  is  important  not  to  further  undermine  the  no-bail-out  rule  of  the  European 
Treaty.  Solidarity  can  only  be  expected  if  conditionality  is  accepted.  Otherwise,  the  root 
causes of the problems will not be addressed. 
I imagine you can guess that I am talking about the ongoing negotiations with Greece. 
There  is  a  strong  determination  to  help  Greece  improve  its  public  administration,  remove 
barriers to growth and put public finances on a sustainable path. And taxpayers from other 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  euro-area countries have provided substantial funds to support the unavoidable adjustment 
processes. But time is running out, and the risk of insolvency is increasing by the day. 
The contagion effects of such a scenario are certainly better contained than they were in the 
past, though they should not be underestimated. But the main losers in that scenario would 
be Greece and the Greek people. 
What I would like to stress here is that an erosion of the principles of monetary union also 
has consequences for the Eurosystem and the monetary union that no one should downplay. 
Economic developments 
3. 
Recent  growth  figures  for  the  global  economy  have  been  rather  disappointing.  Growth 
dynamics  have  dampened,  not  least  in  major  emerging  economies.  The  US  economy 
contracted in the first quarter of this year due to a brief spell of poor weather. And the UK 
economy has also seen its growth rate shrink. 
The lower oil price is proving to be less of a driving force for the global economy than had 
been anticipated. 
The moderate recovery in the euro area is ongoing, however, and the economy has picked 
up further momentum. The latest Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro 
area see annual real GDP increasing by 1.5% in 2015, 1.9% in 2016 and 2.0% in 2017. 
The German economy has recovered more quickly than expected from the cyclical lull in the 
middle of last year and has returned to a growth path that is underpinned by both domestic 
and foreign demand. 
Domestic economic activity is benefiting from the favourable labour market situation and the 
substantial  increases  in  income.  Although  foreign  trade  is  currently  being  hampered  by 
dampening  global  dynamics,  it  is  simultaneously  being  buoyed  by  the  euro’s  depreciation 
and the strengthening cyclical recovery in the euro area. 
The Bundesbank’s economists expect Germany’s real GDP to grow by 1.7% this year, 1.8% 
in 2016 and 1.5% in 2017. 
A  puzzling  feature  of  the  German  economy  is  the  divergence  of  business  investment  and 
employment,  all  the more  so  given  that financing  conditions  are  extraordinarily  favourable. 
The weak level of business investment might be explained by the high degree of uncertainty 
over external developments, but it might also point to an anticipated future shortage of skilled 
labour. In other words: ageing tones down investment. 
Making Europe more prosperous 
4. 
The wait-and-see stance adopted by many German enterprises is motivated not least by the 
modest economic outlook for the euro area. 
Boosting growth in the euro area, then, needs to be the top priority. This would not only help 
the crisis countries to overcome their very difficult economic situation but also benefit all the 
other member states. 
To get to grips with the crisis, it is crucial for the troubled economies to press ahead with their 
adjustment process. That includes shoring up public finances (in line with the fiscal rules of 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact);  deleveraging  the  private  sector;  implementing  structural 
reforms and boosting price competitiveness. 
This, by the way, also holds true for France. While the second-largest euro-area economy is 
obviously not a crisis country, it has nevertheless seen its competitiveness contract, and its 
public finances are in bad shape. Moreover, France needs to act as a role model for smaller 
economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The German economy is much better positioned in this respect – the public budget is running 
a  surplus,  private  debt  is  acceptable,  labour  market  and  social  reforms  in  the  last  decade 
have contributed to lower unemployment and to reducing the burden on the social security 
systems; plus German enterprises are competitive in global markets. 
So everything is hunky-dory? Not at all. 
Germany’s  economy  may  be  in  good  shape  right  now,  but  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  be 
complacent.  Germany  is  facing  stiff  economic  challenges,  particularly  from  demographic 
change, which is also dragging on productivity growth. 
According to the EU Commission’s latest Ageing Report, Germany’s working-age population 
(people between 15 and 64) will shrink by 28% by the year 2060 compared with a drop of 8% 
in  the  rest  of  the  European  Union.  In  France,  meanwhile,  the  working-age  population  is 
expected to rise by 5%, in the UK by 11%. 
No  wonder,  then,  that  only  two  EU  countries  (crisis-ridden  Greece  and  Portugal)  are 
expected to see lower potential GDP growth between 2013 and 2060. And even in terms of 
per  capita  growth,  Germany  is  mired  in  mediocrity  by  European  standards,  according  to 
OECD projections. 
Yet  I  do  not  want  to  focus  on  Germany.  I  just  wanted  to  make  it  plain  that  mobilising 
additional growth forces is a task facing the whole of Europe. After all, the title of my speech 
is “How to promote prosperity in Europe”. 
Some of you may remember the European Council’s Lisbon Agenda. It was set out in the 
year  2000  and  aimed  “to  make  Europe,  by  2010,  the  most  competitive  and  dynamic 
knowledge-based economy in the world, capable of sustainable economic growth with more 
and better jobs and greater social cohesion”. 
Well, obviously, the European leaders were inspired by the Italian artist Michelangelo, who is 
quoted as saying: “The greatest danger for most of us is not that our aim is too high and we 
miss it, but that it is too low and we reach it.” 
Given  the  apparent  failure  of  this  strategy  and  in  the  face  of  an  unprecedented  crisis,  the 
goals set out in its successor, “Europe 2020”, are somewhat less ambitious: the priorities of 
“Europe 2020” are “smart, sustainable and inclusive growth”. 
However, stronger growth does not come by declaration. Rather, growth-friendly measures 
are  required  –  and  that  particularly  means  measures  that  bolster  functioning  markets. 
Incidentally, growth-friendly measures would also help to mitigate the risk of the UK leaving 
the European Union. 
The benefits of European integration cannot be measured by net contributions to Brussels’ 
budget. The economic value goes far beyond that because Europe is not a zero-sum game 
but  to  the  benefit  of  all  –  provided  that  it  promotes  competitive  market  structures  which 
unleash innovative forces. 
If  Europe  were  really  heading  for  “smart,  sustainable  and  inclusive  growth”,  it  would  gain 
attractiveness – not only but also for the UK. 
But as much as the UK gains from being part of the EU, so, too does the EU benefit from 
having the UK as a member. The EU is stronger today because of the UK’s contribution to it: 
The dynamics of the European economy owe a great deal to Britain’s commitment to open 
and flexible markets – a position which is very much in tune with the Bundesbank’s, I might 
add. 
In  the  remainder  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  share  my  thoughts  on  ways  in  which  the 
European economy could become even more dynamic. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Capital markets union 
4.1 
Financial market fragmentation is certainly a hindrance to growth. Building a capital markets 
union (CMU), which is one of the European Commission’s top priorities, is therefore a step 
forward towards a more prosperous Europe. 
A properly designed and implemented CMU can also deliver greater economic and financial 
stability.  From  the  Bundesbank’s  viewpoint,  CMU  should  in  particular  aim  at  fostering 
European equity markets. 
Corporate  finance  in  Europe  is  still  heavily  reliant  on  debt,  first  and  foremost  bank  loans. 
Taking  GDP  as  a  yardstick,  the  EU  banking  system  is  four  times  larger  than  its  US 
counterpart.  Conversely,  equity  capital  plays  a  minor  role.  While  the  ratio  of  stock  market 
capitalisation to bank credit to the private sector is well below one in all EU countries, in the 
US, the respective figure is about two. 
However, US enterprises not only benefit from having better access to equity capital. Equity 
holdings in the US are also much more widely dispersed than in Europe. 
Research  has found  that  private risk  sharing  through  integrated  capital markets  is  a much 
more  important  shock  absorber than  public  risk  sharing. The  integrated  markets for  equity 
capital in the US cushion around 40% of total cyclical fluctuations between federal states. If a 
negative shock hits an industry or a specific region, then this loss is spread widely beyond 
that region. 
Creditors, on the other hand, are not exposed to losses – except in the case of insolvency. In 
other words: equity is a shock absorber, debt is a shock amplifier. 
That’s  yet  another  reason  why  we  need  to  promote  the  integration  of  equity  markets  in 
Europe, too. This should also include venture capital. 
When  it  comes  to  providing  capital  to  innovative  firms,  the  EU  has  a  lot  of  room  for 
improvement.  In  the  US,  for  instance,  finding  investors  is  not  much  of  a  problem  for 
innovative  companies.  On  average,  an  innovative  US  firm  can  attract  significantly  more 
capital than one in the major European countries. 
Dismantling  national  barriers  and  creating  a  European  venture  capital  market  would  help 
fast-growing, fledgling enterprises to get better access to capital. 
While regulation has been harmonised to some extent, however, many crucial domains for 
venture  capital  funds,  such  as  investor  protection  and  insolvency  law,  remain  fragmented. 
Hence, to exploit all economic advantages of a capital market union would imply more legal 
changes than currently proposed by the EU Commission. 
Barriers to market entry 
4.2 
Another obstacle that particularly stifles growth by business start-ups is red tape. Frequent 
administrative formalities, long approval periods or high fees make starting a business more 
complicated and expensive than it should be. 
Even though an enterprise’s direct costs may appear to be manageable at first glance, the 
economic  cost  of  difficulties  in  entering  the  market  and,  as  a  result,  weaker  competition 
should not be underestimated. 
For example, studies indicate that the differences between the cost of entering the market in 
the  USA  and  in  the  EU,  though  relatively  small,  could  still  account for  10%  to  20%  of  the 
EU’s productivity shortfall. 
The costs of removing red tape are comparatively low and could help strengthen growth. 
This holds true for many European countries – not least for Germany, which ranks 106th in 
the  Global  Competitiveness  Report  of  the  World  Economic  Forum  on  the  question  “How 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  many  procedures  are  required  to  start  a  business?”  –  alongside  countries  like  Ethiopia, 
Zimbabwe, Mozambique and Chad. 
Market integration 
4.3 
Even in the UK, I think, few would doubt that the single market has been a great success 
benefiting  the  entire  EU.  It  has  simplified  trade  in  goods,  intensifying  competition  and 
narrowing margins. Nevertheless, market integration remains incomplete. 
In the area of services, cross-border competition is under-developed. Mark-ups on the cost of 
services are, on average, higher than in the USA. 
One  could  say  that  the European  Commission’s  Services  Directive  has  failed  to  live  up  to 
expectations. In a nutshell, the single market for services is not yet delivering its full potential. 
Thus, completing the single market for services and ensuring the unhindered cross-border 
provision of services promise significant economic benefits. 
As far as advancing digitalisation is concerned, we do not know exactly how the economic 
transformation towards greater digitalisation impacts on growth and taxation. But what we do 
know is that there are currently 28 separate digital markets in the EU. 
However,  it  is  clear  that  the  benefits  of  digitalisation  can  only  be  reaped  if  economies  are 
flexible enough to adjust to changing business conditions. 
In Europe, the markets for digital applications are highly fragmented, especially with respect 
to legal issues such as the protection of privacy, content and copyright. The liability of online 
intermediaries, electronic payments and electronic contracts are also regulated differently. 
Harmonisation in terms of a digital single market (DSM) would certainly contribute to higher 
potential growth. According to a study by the European Parliament, a completed DSM could 
raise the long-run level of EU-28 GDP by 4%. And the European Commission, which recently 
presented its DSM strategy, expects the creation of 3.8 million jobs. 
Harmonising rules and regulations is relevant not just for trade in goods and services within 
the EU. Doing business with trading partners outside the EU is hampered to an even greater 
extent by red tape, the ongoing existence of tariffs and, above all, other trade barriers. 
In many cases, manufacturers have to produce two different versions of the same product to 
meet  the  respective  requirements  of  the  EU  and  US  markets.  This  produces  unnecessary 
costs with little benefit. A transatlantic free trade agreement between the world’s two largest 
economies would therefore further stimulate sustainable growth and job creation. 
Flexible labour markets 
4.4 
The  most  promising  way  to  reap  the  benefits  of  innovation  and  technological  change, 
however,  is  by  implementing  structural  reforms  aimed  at  creating  greater  labour  market 
flexibility. 
Researchers have found that, compared to the US, innovative European firms find it more 
difficult  to  hire  the  staff  they  need.  This  drags  on  allocative  efficiency  and,  ultimately,  on 
productivity, too. 
If we want to mimic US productivity and drive unemployment down to acceptable levels, we 
need to modernise our labour markets. Overly strict employment protection exerts a “lock-in” 
effect: workers do not move easily from one firm to the next. 
That  does  not  mean  establishing  a  “hire  and  fire”  system.  Lower  employment  protection 
should be coupled with adequate financial support in the event of a job loss. 
Scandinavian countries have led the way with their “flexicurity” reforms and, fortunately, an 
increasing number of euro-area countries are following suit. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Good infrastructure 
4.5 
Just like flexible labour markets support growth, so too does good infrastructure. Conversely, 
infrastructure weaknesses can inhibit growth considerably. 
In this regard, it is often claimed that Germany should increase its infrastructure investment. 
Even  in  Germany,  it  is  en  vogue  to  complain  about  ailing  infrastructure.  The  weekly 
magazine Der Spiegel, for example, last year published an issue entitled Der Bröckelstaat – 
“the crumbling state”. 
However, there are neither comparable international data nor any theoretical considerations 
suggesting  that  Germany  is  investing  too  little.  In  2014,  the  ratio  of  gross  fixed  capital 
formation to GDP in Germany was slightly up on the euro-area average and also higher than 
in the UK. 
Moreover, investment does not boost growth prospects per se. In fact, that would be putting 
the cart before the horse. Better prospects for growth, and therefore for profit, are the best 
incentive to invest. 
International  surveys  show  that  Germany  is  considered  to  have  one  of  the  best 
infrastructures  in  the  world.  The  Global  Competitiveness  Report  I  mentioned  earlier  in  my 
speech ranks Germany’s infrastructure in seventh place, just ahead of France, Spain, the UK 
and  the  US.  And  the  World  Bank’s  Logistics  Performance  Index  even  puts  Germany’s 
infrastructure in first place worldwide. 
Having  said  that,  I  would  not  deny  that  there  is  some  room  for  improvement  in  public 
investment, given that net investment has been negative for some time now. 
International comparisons suggest that German public investment is too low. This, however, 
should be taken with a pinch of salt. The ratio of public investment to GDP hinges on the role 
of the state in the economy, which differs widely across Europe. 
Provided  that  public  funds  are  primarily  invested  in  areas  in  which  they  will  pay  off,  this 
improves the economic supply conditions and, in the long term, growth potential. However, it 
would be unnecessary and wrong to fund higher public infrastructure investment through new 
borrowing. Rather, it should be made possible by cutting consumptive expenditures. 
Calls for a deficit-financed economic stimulus in Germany are misplaced. In this regard, what 
former ECB chief economist Otmar Issing wrote in a Financial Times article last October still 
holds true to this day: 
“Imagine  you  are  asked  to  give  advice  to  a  country  on  its  economic  policy.  The  country 
enjoys  near-full  employment;  its  growth  is  above  or  at  least  at  full  potential.  There  is  no 
under-usage  of  resources  –  what  economists  call  an  output  gap  –  and  the  government’s 
budget  is  balanced,  but  the  debt  level  is  far  above  target. To  top  it  all,  monetary  policy  is 
extremely  loose.  This  is  exactly  the  situation  in  Germany.  (…)  Where  is  the  economic 
textbook that argues that such a country should run a deficit to stimulate the economy?” 
Conclusion 
5. 
Let me conclude. 
My objective was to make it plain that monetary policy is the wrong addressee when it comes 
to promoting prosperity in Europe. 
It is still true that maintaining price stability is the best contribution that monetary policy can 
make to achieving sustained economic growth in the long run. 
Since I quoted James Carville earlier on, I would like to close by modifying his most famous 
phrase “It’s the economy, stupid.” into: It’s not monetary policy that provides prosperity. It’s 
forward-looking economic policy that sets the course for sustainable growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Thank you for your attention. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
