Mario Draghi: Introductory statement at the Italian Parliament 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Italian Parliament, Rome, 26 March 2015. 
 It is an honour to be invited here to the Italian Parliament for the first time as President of the 
European Central Bank. 
The economic situation and the short-term outlook for the euro area are currently brighter than 
for several years. Various factors are helping to boost confidence that the weak and uneven 
recovery  experienced  up  to  now  will  gain  strength  and  stability  and  that  inflation  of  a 
sustainable kind will return to the objective specified in the ECB’s mandate: a level below, but 
close to, 2%. 
There are three main factors that support these expectations of a pick-up: the positive effects of 
the  fall  in  energy  prices;  our  expansionary  monetary  policy,  which  has  helped  to  reduce  the 
fragmentation of the financial system and ensure that our low interest rates reach households 
and businesses; and the structural reforms carried out in various euro area countries, albeit at 
different speeds and intensity, which are now starting to have effects. 
It is the second and third points – monetary policy and structural policies – that I would like to 
focus  on  in  my  introductory  remarks  this  afternoon.  Both  policies  support  economic  activity, 
both are essential, although in different ways. 
Monetary policy provides cyclical support to growth, which means that it helps the economy get 
back to its full potential. But it cannot raise that potential because this depends on the structure 
of the economy and, to be precise, on structural reforms. 
Similarly, monetary policy can achieve its price stability objective across the entire euro area, 
but  only  structural  reforms  can  create  real,  lasting  convergence  in  terms  of  productivity  at 
national  level.  And  because  we  need  both  in  a  monetary  union,  we  need  our  institutional 
arrangements in both areas to be equally effective. 
The role of monetary policy in the euro area 
1. 
You will remember that not so long ago, at the end of 2011 and 2012, we were facing a much 
less  favourable  environment  than  today.  The  banks  had  hardly  begun  the  necessary 
deleveraging  after  the  financial  crisis.  We  were  experiencing  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  of 
confidence, which in turn resulted in a severe fragmentation of the euro area financial system 
across national borders. And this was compounded by unfounded fears about the reversibility 
of the euro, which pushed national risk premia even higher. 
In Italy, the yield on 10-year government bonds exceeded 7% at the end of 2011, compared 
with  under  2%  in Germany.  The  spread  between  Italian  and  German  bonds  soared  again  to 
levels  similar  to  those  in  July  2012.  Protection  against  a  hypothetical  default  by  the  Italian 
government was trading in mid-2012 at three to four times higher than it was in mid-2011. 
The level of the public debt of a country influences the state of health of its banks through two 
main channels. 
On the one hand, the budgetary position is seen as the ultimate guarantor of the solvency of a 
bank: if it fails the state budget is seen as the guarantor of last resort. The higher the public 
debt, the more fragile this guarantee, the more the banks have to pay to finance themselves 
and the more capital they need to have. 
On  the  other hand,  banks  hold general  government  debt  securities  in  their  books. When  the 
credibility of the debt of a country is called into question, as happened in 2011 and 2012 for 
various reasons, the securities lose value, the sovereign guarantee is weakened exactly when 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the banks have to post significant losses because of the fall in value of the securities. Credit 
then collapses. It is not the case that low-debt countries have higher credit ratings. 
In  Italy,  the  cost  of  borrowing  for  firms  stood  in  July  2012  at  4.1%,  compared  with  3.1%  on 
average in the euro area, and 2.9% in Germany. The transmission mechanism of the common 
monetary policy was no longer uniform in the individual countries. 
In  reality  these  numbers  underestimate  the  seriousness  of  the  credit  crisis  that  hit  Italy  from 
mid-2011 until a few months ago. 
In this environment, the ability of the ECB to deliver price stability for the euro area as a whole 
was  severely  challenged.  Monetary  policy  had  to  respond  in  a  comprehensive  way, 
commensurate  with  the  multi-dimensional  nature  of  the  risk  and  simultaneously  based  on 
several channels running in parallel. By and large, we have made significant progress. 
First of all, for monetary policy to be effective again across the euro area we needed to remove 
those unwarranted fears about the ‘reversibility’ of the euro. We did this in two ways. With the 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs),  i.e.  the  commitment  to  purchase  government 
securities on the secondary market if situations were to occur in which the credibility of the euro 
was called into question. Together with our other non-standard measures, the OMTs have been 
decisive in reducing financial fragmentation. 
Secondly, and of equal importance, there has been the project of establishing a banking union 
– based on its single mechanisms of supervision, resolution and deposit guarantees. This has 
contributed to boosting confidence in the sustainability of the euro area by demonstrating that 
governments and parliaments were willing to take corrective measures to complete monetary 
union. 
When governments entrusted us with setting up the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), we 
proceeded to execute a comprehensive assessment of the balance sheets of around 120 large 
euro area banks. This prompted many of them to take pre-emptive action to strengthen their 
balance  sheets,  including  via  asset  sales  and  capital  raising.  This  in  turn  resulted  in  a  more 
efficient transmission of monetary policy across the euro area. 
But further monetary policy action was called for. In June we adopted longer-term refinancing 
operations (TLTROs) to maintain bank lending to the economy. 
In September, as we had by then exhausted our margin to reduce interest rates, we moved to 
asset purchases as a means to ease financial conditions and thereby provide further support to 
the  economy.  We  announced  the  programme  for  purchasing  asset-backed  securities  and 
covered bonds. 
And in January, the Governing Council decided on additional stimulus when we announced that 
we would also purchase public sector securities. This provides a key contribution to a full pick-
up  in  economic  activity  and  to  keeping  inflation  from  remaining  too  low  for  too  long.  The 
decision was based on two considerations. 
First,  the  basis  of  the  initial  pick-up  was  still  looking  too  weak  to  ensure  that  inflation  would 
return to a level close to, but below, 2%. 
Second,  the  expansionary  potential  of  the  monetary  policy  interventions  between  June  and 
October was still uncertain, because their effects depend on the decisions of the banks to make 
use of the Eurosystem loans, while the size of the private sector asset purchase programme 
may be fairly limited. The total take-up of loans under the two TLTROs came to €212.4 billion, 
in the lower range of possible forecasts. Thus the stimulus was reinforced and should become 
more predictable and controllable in quantity terms. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
On 9 March we started these purchases of sovereign bonds and we continued to buy ABS and 
covered bonds. All in all, we are counting on making the €60 billion of purchases foreseen for 
March even though we didn’t start until 9 March.1 
At this juncture there are no signs of a scarcity of securities and market liquidity remains ample. 
We intend to pursue these purchases at least until the end of September 2016 and in any case 
until we see an inflation path that is sustainably approaching our objective. 
This assessment will be made by looking at the trends and not at the individual numbers that 
could result from temporary phenomena. 
Early evidence shows that these measures, in combination, have been effective. Bank lending 
rates  to  firms  started  to  decline  in  the  second  half  of  last  year,  and  gradually  showed  less 
dispersion across countries. Lower interest rates in markets are now being transmitted along 
the entire chain of financial intermediation. The contraction of credit seems to be reversing. And 
the lower cost of finance – both of debt and equity – means that investment projects which were 
previously unprofitable become attractive. 
GDP growth projections by ECB staff were raised from December to March, by 0.5 percentage 
point for 2015, and 0.4 percentage point for 2016. Inflation is projected to be zero for the euro 
area as a whole in 2015, largely because of the fall in oil prices, but projections for subsequent 
years have been raised to 1.5% in 2016 and 1.8% in 2017. 
This  underpins  the  optimism  that  monetary  policy  is  contributing  to  deliver  a  more  robust 
cyclical upturn, and that the Governing Council of the ECB will fulfil its mandate. 
From monetary policy to structural policies 
2. 
We know that, by itself, monetary policy cannot create lasting growth of a structural kind. And it 
cannot  create  even  growth  because  it  is  not  the  right  tool  to  correct  divergences  between 
countries that emanate from low growth potential and high structural unemployment. 
At the same time, we cannot expect those divergences to be addressed through means such 
as permanent transfers from economically stronger countries. The euro area was not created to 
be  a  union  with  permanent  creditors  and  debtors.  It  is  an  area  where  each  country,  by 
exploiting its comparative advantages and the opportunities afforded by the Single Market, and 
by converging to the highest standards in terms of competitiveness and income, must be able 
to stand on its own two feet. 
And this is where structural reforms come in. 
They  are  essential  to  raise  potential  growth,  which  provides  the  basis  for  lasting  prosperity. 
They are also essential to make economies more resilient to economic shocks, and help them 
diverge less when a crisis hits. And both these effects are today more important than in the past 
as we face a large stock of outstanding debt and an ageing population. 
Yet,  in  several  euro  area  countries,  potential  growth  has  been  gradually  waning,  even  well 
before the introduction of the euro. In Italy, potential growth declined from an average estimated 
at around 2.5% in the early 1990s, to 1.5% by 1999. The decline continued afterwards, and is 
now estimated by the IMF and other institutions to be close to zero. 
So how can we reverse this trend? 
Raising  potential  growth  is  principally  about  lifting  the  labour  supply  (the  amount  of  hours 
people  work  in  the  economy)  and  productivity  (how  much  people  produce  per  hour  worked). 
                                                
1  See  my  introductory  remarks  at  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  of  the  European  Parliament, 
Brussels, 23 March 2015, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp150323_1.en.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Given our ageing population, however, we can only expect limited gains on the labour side. We 
therefore have to focus our efforts on making our economies more productive. 
For  most  countries  in  Europe,  and for Italy  in  particular,  productivity  growth  rates  have  been 
very modest. Between 2000 and 2013 productivity2 in the euro area grew cumulatively by 9.5%, 
by barely 1.3% in Italy and by 26.1% in the US. Total factor productivity3, which assesses the 
efficiency  of  the  use  of  inputs  to  productive  processes,  has  only  grown  by  1.1%  in  the  euro 
area. In Italy it has fallen by 7.7% and in the US it has risen by 10.5%. 
Productivity  can  be  raised  through  the  emergence  of  new  firms  using  more  efficient 
technologies and by the reallocation of resources among already existing firms. The benefits of 
technological progress often appear over the longer term because the efficient use of a new 
technology  often  takes  a  long  time  to  learn,  while  the  reallocation  of  resources  can  lift 
productivity  over  a  shorter  time  horizon,  given  that  it  implies  a  shifting  of  resources  within 
already active firms. 
If we want to raise productivity quickly, the key factor is reallocation. Firm-level analyses in the 
euro area suggest that there is much scope for improvement here.4 Within individual countries 
there are a few highly productive firms and many which have low productivity. It is essential to 
act so that those high-productivity firms can grow, so that they can benefit from an adequate 
flow of capital them and so that the people have the skills needed to be able to work there. To 
achieve each of those three goals – growth, finance, skills – we need structural changes. 
Structural reforms and reallocation 
3. 
With  reference  to  the  first  objective,  the  “up-or-out”  dynamic  of  young,  expanding  firms  has 
been shown in many studies to be central to productivity growth. To facilitate that process the 
regulatory and legislative environment at the national level needs to be supportive. This is not 
always  the  case  in  the  euro  area.  This  is  why  reforms  to  complete  the  Single  Market  and 
improve the business environment are so important. 
In  some  countries  firms  are  hindered  from  growing  by  regulations  and  by  unfavourable  tax 
treatment that is triggered at certain thresholds. In Italy there is very high concentration of micro 
firms whose productivity is significantly below the average; regulations that encourage them to 
stay small contribute to this. 
The  length  of  judicial  proceedings  for  bankruptcy  crucially  affect  how  quickly  capital  can  be 
released  for  new  investment  projects.  Italy  has  the  slowest  civil  proceedings  in  Europe. 
Judgments of first instance in civil and commercial cases take 1.5 years in Italy, compared with 
eight months in Spain and only six months in Germany.5 Recent studies suggest that halving 
the length of these proceedings would increase the average firm size by 8–12%.6 
Above  all,  it  is  crucial  to  improve  the  environment  for  firms  in  Italy.  It’s  necessary  to  ensure 
clear and predictable rules, effective judicial protection, respect for contracts. The efficiency of 
public  administration,  a  well-functioning  labour  market  and  the  promotion  of  competition  are 
essential.  In  recent  years  various  initiatives  in  these  areas  have  been  taken.  It’s  good  to 
continue along this path. 
                                                
2  Real value added per hour worked, total economy (sources OECD and EU KLEMS). 
3  Total factor productivity, total economy. 
4  CompNet  Task  Force  (2014),  “Micro-based  evidence  of  EU  Competitiveness:  The  CompNet  Database”,  ECB 
Working Paper Series No 1634. 
5  EU 
Justice  Scoreboard  2015,  European  Commission,  2015,  http://ec.europa.eu/justice/effective-
justice/scoreboard/index_en.htm. 
6  Giacomelli, S., and C., Menon (2012), “Firm size and judicial efficiency: evidence from the neighbour’s Court”, 
Banca d’Italia Working Papers, No 898, January 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Ensuring  that  capital  can  flow  to  the  most  productive  firms  also  requires  a  healthy  banking 
sector that can expand credit. This in turn means that any bad loans that have been made in 
the  past  need  to  appear  without  delay  on  the  balance  sheets  of  the  intermediaries  and  that 
steps need to be taken quickly to resolve the problem. That process has already begun with the 
ECB’s comprehensive assessment. The ECB looks favourably on new initiatives to help Italian 
banks reduce the weight of impaired items on their balance sheets; they will free up resources 
and above all be of benefit to firms. 
Finally, perhaps the most important thing is to equip people with the right skills to be able to find 
jobs in the firms of the future.7 Italy, like the rest of the Europe, is engaged in a global economy 
in which technological progress tends to favour skilled over unskilled labour, raising its relative 
productivity and demand. So skills have to evolve everywhere. 
In the euro area today skills and employment are already strongly linked. In 2013 more than 
19% of workers8 with low education levels were unemployed, compared with only 7% of highly 
educated workers. This is why education and training need to be as much a part of the reform 
agenda as cleaning up banks and reducing red tape. 
Improving skills also has another dimension. Reallocating resources creates both winners and 
losers. It can create insecurity in particular for those who might have to change jobs, or more 
generally raise uncertainty about the future. I fully realise that our perspective on these issues 
cannot be based purely on grounds of efficiency; we also have to think about equity. Both are 
necessary. They have to be reconciled. 
Improving  skills  provides  a  way  to  do  this  because,  on  the  one  hand,  it  increases  economic 
efficiency, it creates new job opportunities, and on the other hand it makes the economy more 
equitable by allowing as many people as possible to seize those opportunities. 
Education, training and retraining have to go hand in hand with flexibility. 
The best way to protect citizens today is not to shield them from the risk of losing their job, but 
to ensure they have the knowledge to be able to find a better job more quickly, and this applies 
also to those who have been unemployed for a long time and need retraining programmes. 
In  this  context,  the  monetary  policy  measures  I  have  already  described  reinforce  the  reform 
process. They stimulate overall demand, creating more jobs, more favourable conditions on the 
credit  market  and  the  possibilities  for  reallocating  resources.  In  short,  monetary  policy  and 
structural reforms are complementary. 
Ensuring economic convergence through institutional convergence 
4. 
Despite the importance of structural reforms for economic convergence and monetary policy, 
such reforms remain largely a national responsibility. This adds an element of fragility to our 
union. There is no way to guarantee that countries will take the measures necessary to ensure 
their fitness for monetary union. In my view this has to change. 
Monetary union creates deep integration between its member countries and, as such, a high 
degree of mutual vulnerability. We have therefore always applied the principle that if policies in 
one country can have large effects on others, they have to be governed by common rules or 
institutions. This is why we have the fiscal framework, for example, as a default in one country 
would cause damage to all its partners. And I think it is now clear that the principle should also 
apply to structural policies because a low growth potential creates macroeconomic imbalances 
between the countries. The vulnerability which derives from this affects the other countries of 
the euro area. 
                                                
7  See  my  speech  at  the  inauguration  of  the  New  ECB  Premises,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  18  March  2015, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp150318.en.html. 
8  Working age population from 25–64 years of age. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
If  countries  do  not  have  effective  structural  policies,  and  so  permanently  diverge  in  terms  of 
unemployment  and  growth,  then  questions  start  to  be  asked  about  their  membership  of  the 
Union. And such questions do not affect only them. As we have seen on several occasions over 
the  last  few  years,  they  create  self-fulfilling  fragmentation  with  repercussions  for  the  other 
countries in the Union. 
Hence, what happens within each one is not just a national interest, it is a collective interest. 
Every member of the euro area has a vital interest in ensuring that its partners are continuously 
meeting  the  membership  requirements.  And  this  implies  that  we  need  a  higher  degree  of 
institutional convergence in the structural domain than we have seen so far. 
Up to now, we have employed two different methods of economic governance in the EU. 
In some areas, we have given European institutions executive power. This includes the ECB for 
monetary  policy,  the  SSM  (within  the  ECB)  for  financial  policy,  and  the  Commission  for 
competition  policy.  In  other  areas,  executive  power  has  remained  at  the  national  level,  with 
policies being aligned through rules enforced by the Commission. This is the case for fiscal and 
economic policies. 
There are of course good reasons why those different methods have been applied. But which 
would we say has been most successful? 
I  think  few  would  deny  that  where  European  institutions  have  been  invested  with  executive 
power, they have used it well. Competition policy has been effective with both large companies 
and large countries. Monetary policy has achieved a high degree of policy credibility. And for 
the SSM it is perhaps too early to judge, though I am certain we would not have had such a 
rigorous clean-up of our banking sector without it. 
If  we  look  at  the  rules-based  approach,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  reach  such  a  positive 
conclusion. The fiscal rules have repeatedly been broken and trust between countries has been 
strained.  And  for  economic  policies  rules-based  approaches  –  such  as  the  macroeconomic 
imbalance procedure – have so far not attracted much ownership from national policy-makers. 
So  in  my  view  the  conclusion  from  recent  experience  is  clear:  if  we  agree  that  further 
institutional convergence is needed in the structural domain, then our long-term goal must be to 
move from a rules-based system to one based on stronger European institutions.9 
I must stress however that to make such a step, we first have to respect and follow the rules we 
have now. If we look at monetary policy as an example, we did not begin by creating a new 
institution. This  would  have  been  impossible. We  had  a  series  of  rules-based  systems  –  the 
“snake”, the European Monetary System, the Exchange Rate Mechanism – the experience of 
which  led  us  to  create  the  single  currency  and  the  European  Central  Bank.  These  various 
stages were however essential, because they gradually built trust between countries and led to 
a convergence of views about how best to conduct monetary policy. 
So  there  is  no  question  today  that  the  rules  can  be  ignored  because  institutions  would  be 
better. On the contrary, it is only by following our rules that we can establish the mutual trust on 
which future  institutions can  be  built.  It  is  essential  that the  European  Parliament makes  this 
process its own and imbues it with democratic legitimacy. 
Conclusion 
5. 
The way forward for the euro area that I have described today may seem simple, but it isn’t. It 
requires  vision  and  perseverance.  All  those  involved  have  to  play  their  part  in  a  sustained 
economic recovery. 
                                                
9  See  my 
at  SZ 
speech 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp150316.en.html. 
Finance  Day 
2015, 
Frankfurt 
6 
 am  Main, 
16  March 
2015, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But  I  also  recognise  that,  in  the  process,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  what  economic  policy  is 
about. Economic growth is not an end in itself – its purpose is to empower individuals and to 
raise  the  sum  of  human  happiness.  So  we  have  to  ensure  that  everyone  can  make  a 
contribution – and that efficiency and equity are reconciled and no one is left behind. 
Some believe that the best way to achieve this is to unwind integration – that inequity comes 
from Europe doing too much. Others believe that we should press ahead with more integration 
based on more financial solidarity between nations. They think the source of our problems is 
Europe doing too little. 
But retrenching behind national borders would not solve any of the problems we face today – 
we  would  still  have  to  work  through  our  demographic  challenges,  low  productivity  and  high 
debt. More people would end up unemployed. 
Holding out an unrealistic vision of European integration is not the answer either. We are not a 
Union where some countries permanently pay for others. And to hope for this only distracts us 
from taking our responsibilities and facing our national challenges. 
So the best way to answer the concerns of our citizens is to chart a course ahead that is both 
ambitious and pragmatic; that involves both acting at the national level where necessary and 
integrating at the European level where appropriate. 
The  monetary  policy  stimulus  we  are  providing,  combined  with  the  structural  reforms  and 
institutional changes that governments must engineer, are all part of that course. They would 
go a long way towards creating a more stable Union that produces stronger and more inclusive 
growth. And I trust that this parliament, as it always has, will play a central role in that process. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
