  Erdem Başçi: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
press  conference  for  the  presentation  of  the  April  2015  Inflation  Report,  Istanbul,  30  April 
2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Welcome to the briefing held to convey the main messages of the Inflation Report of April 
2015. 
The report typically summarizes the economic outlook underlying monetary policy decisions, 
shares  our  evaluations  on  macroeconomic  developments  and  presents  our  medium-term 
inflation forecasts, which were revised in view of the developments in the last quarter, along 
with our monetary policy stance. In addition to the main text, the report includes eight boxes 
entailing interesting and up-to-date analyses on various topics. The boxes present the effects 
of the supply chain and fuel prices on fresh fruit and vegetable prices, the cost structure of 
firms and cost-oriented inflationary pressures, and the reflection of parities and energy prices 
on  non-gold  export  and  import  prices.  Moreover,  there  are  studies  elaborating  on  the 
minimum wage and the distribution of wages, the flow dynamics of unemployment in Turkey, 
the export decisions of firms, and Turkey’s convergence experience. Titles of the boxes are 
shown  on  the  slide.  All  of  these  analyses  shed  light  on  noteworthy  issues  in  the  Turkish 
economy. I strongly recommend that you read these boxes, which will soon be published on 
our website. 
I  would  like  to  commence  my  speech  by  reviewing  the  global  economic  outlook,  given  its 
undeniable influence on our policies. The first quarter of 2015 was marked by the ongoing 
turbulence  in  global  financial  markets,  which  was  attributed  to  the  continued  divergence 
among  global  monetary  policies,  the  uncertainties  over  the  normalization  process  and  the 
feeble  economic  activity.  In  this  context,  portfolio  flows  to  emerging  economies  remained 
weak and the volatility of exchange rates increased (Chart 1). Similarly, emerging market risk 
premiums  exhibited  a  fluctuating  pattern  (Chart  2).  In  this  period,  global  economic  activity 
remained weak. Growth rates in emerging economies started to slow down following the fast 
recovery after the global financial crisis, recording the lowest levels in the post-crisis period 
as of 2014. Looking at advanced economies, the US economy continues to perform relatively 
strong, while growth in the EU is still weak despite the limited recovery in economic activity in 
the last quarter of 2014. Leading indicators regarding the first quarter of 2015 signal a limited 
improvement in global economic activity. Moreover, the EU economy, which is crucial for the 
external demand for Turkish exports, has shown signs of recovery. 
Volatility  across  global  markets  had  implications  for  the  Turkish  economy  as  well,  causing 
fluctuations  in  risk  premium  indicators  and  exchange  rates.  We  believe  that  this  period  of 
heightened  global  uncertainty  poses  several  opportunities  and  challenges  for  the  Turkish 
economy.  Falling  commodity  prices  help  to  improve  inflation  and  the  external  balance  by 
affecting  input  costs  positively.  Additionally,  the  increase  in  disposable  income  driven  by 
declining energy prices is likely to support growth. Low levels of long-term interest rates are 
also  contributing  positively  to  the  economy. In an  environment  of  low  global  interest  rates, 
extending the maturities of external debt and supporting prudential borrowing will strengthen 
financial  stability.  However,  the  weak  global  economy  weighs  on  growth  by  restraining 
exports.  Moreover,  the  high  volatility  in  the  euro/dollar  parity  caused  by  the  divergence 
among  monetary  policies  may  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the  export  outlook  owing  to 
Turkey’s external demand composition. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Our  annual  growth  saw  some  deceleration  in  2014.  On  the  production  side,  the  supply-
related  contraction  in  the  agricultural  value-added  was  a  factor  in  this  slowdown.  On  the 
expenditure side, net exports were the main contributor to growth. Thus, the current account 
balance improved substantially in 2014. Data released for the first quarter of 2015 point to a 
loss of pace in economic activity driven by both domestic and external demand. We expect 
economic  activity  to  display  a  moderate  and  gradual  recovery  following  the  sluggish  first 
quarter. 
The positive effects of our cautious monetary policy stance and macroprudential measures 
helped  core  inflation  indicators  improve  further  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year.  High  food 
inflation, however, was the key factor delaying the decline in consumer inflation. The inflation 
outlook has somewhat deteriorated due to cost pressures, yet we believe that disinflation will 
resume due to the cautious monetary policy stance and a likely correction in food prices. 
Monetary policy and financial conditions 
1.  
In the first quarter of 2015, the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT) implemented 
measured cuts in interest rates and maintained its cautious monetary stance by employing a 
tight liquidity policy (Chart 3). In view of the improved core inflation indicators, we lowered the 
one-week  repo  auction  rate  from  8.25  percent  to  7.75  percent  in  January  and  later  to 
7.5 percent  in  February.  Moreover,  we  lowered  overnight  borrowing  and  lending  rates  by 
50 basis points each in February. We kept rate cuts modest in January and February due to 
the  ongoing  global  uncertainty,  volatile  energy  prices,  rising  domestic  food  prices  and  the 
relatively  high  levels  of  inflation  expectations.  The  CBRT  average  funding  rate  has  been 
slightly above 7.5 percent due to the recent liquidity policy implementation. 
We  stated  that  uncertainty  in  global  markets  and  elevated  food  prices  necessitated 
implementing  a  cautious  monetary  stance.  Thus,  we  emphasized  that  we  would  closely 
monitor  inflation  expectations,  pricing  behavior  and  other  factors  that  affect  inflation  and 
maintain the cautious monetary policy stance until there is a significant improvement in the 
inflation outlook. Given this outline, we kept our tight monetary stance (Chart 5). Thus, the 
yield curve has remained nearly flat (Chart 6). 
As  you  all  know  by  now,  we  have  taken  several  measures  regarding  foreign  exchange 
liquidity due to the recently heightened volatility in exchange rates. Starting from 27 February 
2015, we set the amount of foreign exchange selling auctions more flexibly. On 10 April, we 
announced that on days when deemed necessary the FX selling auction amount might be 
increased by up to USD 30 million above the pre-announced minimum amount. Additionally, 
on 10 March 2015, in order to meet the temporary foreign exchange liquidity needs of the 
banking  sector  and  to  reduce  the  TL-denominated  intermediation  costs,  we  made  some 
technical adjustments to different tranches of the reserve option coefficients. Again, to this 
end, we raised the remuneration rate for the required reserves maintained in Turkish lira by 
50 basis points at the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting in April, effective as of the 
8 May 2015 maintenance period. 
Moreover, in order to lessen macro financial risks and to support prudential borrowing, we 
raised the required reserve ratios applied to non-core FX short-term liabilities of banks and 
financing companies to encourage banks to extend the maturities of external borrowing. In 
addition, in view of global interest rate developments, we reduced the rates applied to banks’ 
one-week  maturity  FX  borrowings  from  the  CBRT  on  9  March  and  22  April  2015. 
Accordingly, we lowered the one-week FX deposit interest rate, which  was 7.5 percent for 
USD and 6.5 percent for EUR before early March, to 4 percent for USD and 2 percent for 
EUR as of 24 April. 
As you can see on the slide, thanks to our tight monetary policy stance and macroprudential 
measures, the loans provided to the nonfinancial sector continued on a moderate course in 
the  first  quarter  of  2015.  Adjusted  for  exchange  rate  changes,  loans  provided  to  the 
nonfinancial  sector  increased  by  17.6  percent  year-on-year  and  by  16  percent  based  on 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  annualized 13-week moving averages that cover the first quarter of 2015. Although annual 
loan growth may increase slightly in the short term, due to the weak base from the past year, 
we  expect  no  acceleration  for  the  underlying  trend  and  loans  will  keep  growing  at  a 
reasonable pace given the modest course of financial conditions. A comparison of consumer 
and  commercial  loans  shows  that  commercial  loans  continue  to  grow  more  rapidly  than 
consumer  loans.  The  annualized  growth  rate  of  commercial  loans  moved  closer  to  the 
2007-2014  average  towards  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  2015,  whereas  the  annualized 
growth  rate  of  consumer  loans  remained  below  the  2007–2014  average  (Charts  7  and  8). 
The macroprudential policies in recent years have helped to bring the credit expansion rate 
to  sustainable  levels  and  to  direct  the  loan  composition  towards  encouraging  production 
rather  than  consumption.  In  this  sense,  we  see  that  the  faster  growth  rate  of  commercial 
loans contributes to both the rebalancing process and to financial stability. 
Macroeconomic developments and main assumptions 
2.  
Now,  I  will  talk  about  the  macroeconomic  outlook  and  our  assumptions  on  which  our 
forecasts  are  based.  First,  I  will  summarize  the  recent  inflation  developments,  and  then 
continue with the domestic and foreign demand outlook. 
In the first quarter of 2015, annual consumer inflation declined by about 0.6 points from end-
2014  to  7.61  percent,  overshooting  the forecasts  of  the  January  Inflation  Report  (Charts  9 
and 10). In this period, core inflation saw a major improvement but the elevated food inflation 
curbed the fall in annual inflation. Food prices continued to follow an unfavorable course in 
the  first  quarter  and  remained  the  highest  contributor  to  annual  inflation  with  3.47  points. 
After pulling inflation down notably in the fourth quarter of 2014, oil prices started to rise in 
February,  and  consequently  the  positive  impact  of  the  energy  on  inflation  has  been 
restrained. 
The ongoing cautious monetary policy along with prudent fiscal and macroprudential policies 
are  having  a  favorable  impact  on  inflation,  especially  inflation  excluding  energy  and  food 
(core inflation indicators). Accordingly, in the first quarter the underlying trend of core inflation 
indicators  registered  a  significant  quarter-on-quarter  improvement  (Chart  11).  Due  to 
developments in food and oil prices and in TL-denominated import prices in the first quarter, 
inflationary cost pressures gained some strength compared to the previous period. Yet, our 
cautious  monetary  policy  stance  and  the  moderate  course  of  domestic  demand  have 
contributed to restrain these pressures. High food prices continued to pass through to prices 
of catering services, bringing the annual food and catering services inflation that accounts for 
about  30  percent  of  the  consumption  basket  up  to  14  percent  as  of  March. In  this  period, 
consumer  inflation  excluding  food  and  catering  services  declined  further  to  4.82  percent 
(Chart 12). 
To  sum  up,  despite  the  notable  improvement  in  core  inflation  indicators  during  the  first 
quarter,  rising  food  prices  put  a  restraint  on  disinflation.  In  this  period,  oil  prices  and  TL-
denominated import prices led to cost pressures on inflation. With accommodative weather 
conditions and possible policy measures, food inflation may have ample room to decline. We 
expect the measures that the Food Committee (the Food and Agricultural Products Markets 
Monitoring and Evaluation Committee, founded in December 2014) might suggest will drive 
food inflation down. Thus, with our ongoing cautious monetary stance and with an outlook of 
food inflation receding to the average of previous years, consumer inflation is likely to slow 
further in the second half of the year. Yet, food prices continue to constitute an upward risk 
on the inflation outlook. 
Now, I would like to give a brief account of developments in economic activity and the short-
term  outlook  on  which  the  inflation  forecasts  are  based.  According  to  the  Gross  Domestic 
Product (GDP) data for the last quarter of 2014, economic activity was largely consistent with 
the outlook presented in the January Inflation Report. In the last quarter, the GDP rose by 
2.6 percent  and  0.7  percent  on  an  annual  and  quarterly  basis,  respectively.  Real  growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  stood at 2.9 percent in 2014 (Chart 13). An analysis of national income components on the 
production  side  indicates  that  the  contraction  in  agricultural  value-added  led  by  adverse 
weather  conditions  lowered  the growth rate  of  2014.  Data  on the  expenditures  side  reveal 
that  in  the  last  quarter,  final  domestic  demand  rose  owing  to  the  increase  in  private 
consumption  demand  as  it  did  in  the  previous  quarter  (Chart  14).  Across  the  year,  net 
exports stood out as the leading contributor to growth among the expenditure items. 
Data  regarding  the  first  quarter  of  2015  suggest  a  weak  outlook  in  economic  activity. 
Industrial production remained unchanged in the January-February period compared to the 
last quarter of 2014. Among March indicators, the Business Tendency Survey (BTS) and the 
PMI  data  also  signal  that  the  weak  production  outlook  may  continue.  External  demand 
remains  weak  due  to  slowing  global  economy  and  geopolitical  tensions.  Accordingly,  we 
expect that economic activity will follow a sluggish course in the first quarter of 2015 and then 
settle into a gradual track of moderate recovery. Downside risks regarding external demand 
persist due to geopolitical developments, while the signals for recovery in Europe suggest a 
favorable outlook for exports. On the production side, growth may be boosted by agriculture 
provided that accommodative climatic conditions increase agricultural added value alongside 
the base effect caused by the decline in 2014. 
We estimate that the rebalancing in the current account that started in 2011 will continue in 
2015.  The  low  levels  in  the  international  energy  prices  cause  a  notable  decline  in  energy 
imports and support the foreign trade balance (Chart 15). Moreover, our cautious monetary 
policy stance and the macroprudential measures bring loan growth rates to plausible levels 
and  improve  the  loan  composition  in  favor  of  commercial  loans,  thus  contributing  to  the 
rebalancing  of  the  current  account  deficit.  Accordingly,  we  see  that  the  export/import 
coverage ratio has been improving significantly (Chart 16). 
As you all know, food, energy and import prices also play a great role in inflation forecasts. 
Therefore, before moving on to forecasts, I will briefly talk about our assumptions regarding 
these variables. 
In the first quarter of 2015, oil and import prices remained above our projections, while import 
prices  in  USD  stood  below  the  path  projected  in  the  previous  Inflation  Report  (Chart  17). 
Accordingly, we revised our assumption for average oil price upwards by 9 percent for 2015, 
and 5 percent for 2016. Considering the possibility of a correction in food prices, especially 
one  that  may  stem  from  unprocessed  food,  we  left  the  end-2015  food  inflation  forecast 
unchanged at 9 percent. 
Our  medium-term  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  tax  adjustments  and 
administered prices are consistent with inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms. 
The  medium-term  fiscal  policy  stance  is  based  on  the  Medium  Term  Program  projections 
covering the 2015–2017 period. Accordingly, we assume that a cautious fiscal stance will be 
implemented and the primary expenditures to the GDP ratio will decrease gradually. 
Inflation and the monetary policy outlook 
3.  
Now,  I  would  like  to  present  our  inflation  and  output gap forecasts  based  on  the  outlook  I 
have described so far. 
Our  medium-term  forecasts  are  based  on  a  framework  that  a  cautious  monetary  policy 
stance  will  be  maintained  by  keeping  the  yield  curve  flat  until  there  is  a  significant 
improvement in the inflation outlook. Moreover, we envisage that the annual loan growth rate 
will  continue  to  hover  around  the  recent  reasonable  levels  in  2015,  also  thanks  to  the 
macroprudential  measures.  Accordingly,  we  expect  inflation  will  be,  with  70  percent 
probability, between 5.6 percent and 8 percent (with a mid-point of 6.8 percent) at end-2015 
and between 3.7 percent and 7.3 percent (with a mid-point of 5.5 percent) at end-2016. We 
estimate that inflation will stabilize around 5 percent in the medium term (Chart 18). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In sum, we revised our end-2015 inflation forecast, which was presented as 5.5 percent in 
the January Inflation Report, upwards by 1.3 points (Chart 18). This revision was led by the 
higher-than-projected  oil  prices  compared  to  the  figures  in  the  January  Inflation  Report 
besides the import prices in TL. Accordingly, we estimate that the revision in oil prices and 
the  movements  in  import  prices  in TL  will  push  the  year-end  inflation forecast  upwards  by 
0.4 and 1 point, respectively. The downward revision in economic activity and the output gap, 
on the other hand, lowered the end-2015 inflation forecast by 0.1 point. Moreover, we revised 
the end-2016 inflation forecast, which was set as 5 percent in the previous report, upwards to 
5.5 percent. We attribute 0.3 point of this revision to the lagged effects of the developments 
in TL-deominated import prices and 0.2 point to the upward revision in oil prices for 2016. 
In addition to these forecasts, we discuss alternative scenarios on the inflation outlook and 
the global economy in the Risks section of the Inflation Report. You can examine the Report 
for details. 
While concluding my remarks, I would like to thank all my colleagues who contributed to the 
Report,  primarily  those  at  the  Research  and  Monetary  Policy  Department  as  well  as  the 
members  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  and  thank  every  one  of  you  for  your 
participation. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   6 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     7 
   8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
