Fritz Zurbrügg: After the minimum exchange rate – new monetary policy 
challenges 
Speech by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Money Market Event, Zurich, 26 March 2015. 
 The  speaker  would  like  to  thank  Dirk  Faltin  for  his  valuable  support  in  preparing  this  speech.  He  also  thanks 
Marco Huwiler and Peter Kuster for helpful comments. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
A warm welcome to our traditional Money Market Event in Zurich. We are delighted that so 
many of you accepted our invitation to attend. A year ago at this gathering, I spoke to you 
about  the  Swiss  National  Bank’s  (SNB)  investment  policy.  At  the  time,  I  touched  only 
peripherally on monetary policy and the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro. It will 
come as no surprise to you that this year I have decided to devote my talk exclusively to 
monetary policy. 
On 15 January of this year, the SNB discontinued the minimum exchange rate to the euro. 
This step attracted a good deal of attention around the globe and triggered dramatic price 
movements on the financial markets for a short time. It has significant implications for large 
sections  of  Switzerland’s  economy.  For  the  SNB,  too,  the  decision  to  discontinue  the 
minimum exchange rate was a momentous one. 
I  would  like  to  take this  opportunity  to  explain  our  rationale for  discontinuing  the minimum 
exchange  rate  in  more  detail.  In  doing  so,  I  shall  also  outline  the  consequences  of  this 
decision for the economic outlook and price developments in Switzerland. Let me start by 
reminding you of the circumstances surrounding the introduction of the minimum exchange 
rate in September 2011. After my presentation, my colleague Dewet Moser will brief us on 
this latest chapter in monetary policy implementation. 
From financial crisis to minimum exchange rate 
The  international  financial  crisis  started  almost  eight  years  ago.  In  August  2007,  extreme 
tensions became evident on the money market. Central banks in the advanced economies 
countered  these  developments  by  lowering  key  interest  rates  and  expanded  the  liquidity 
supply to the interbank markets. As the banking crisis increasingly broadened into a wider 
financial  and  economic  crisis,  demand  for  safe  investments  –  and  hence  also  for  Swiss 
francs  –  increased  rapidly.  From  the  end  of  the  year,  the  franc  came  under  substantial 
upward pressure (cf. chart 1). Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in autumn 2008, 
central  banks  quickly  reduced  short-term  interest  rates  to  unprecedented  lows.  At  the 
beginning of 2009, the SNB lowered the target range for the three-month Libor to between 
0% and 0.75%. The one-week repo rate, which is used to steer the Libor, had already been 
close  to  zero  since  the  end  of  2008.  Conventional  monetary  policy  –  that  is  to  say,  the 
steering of the economy via short-term interest rates – had thus come up against its limits. 
However, fears that monetary policy had run out of options were unfounded. Central banks in 
the advanced economies increasingly began to resort to unconventional instruments. At the 
SNB, these included long-term repos, purchases of Swiss franc-denominated bonds issued 
by domestic, private-sector borrowers and interventions in the foreign exchange market. It is 
worth noting that the SNB had intervened only very rarely in the foreign exchange markets 
between  the  early  1980s  and  2009.  And  on  the  occasions  when  it  had,  the  SNB’s 
interventions had typically been small-scale and had been coordinated with the Group of Ten 
central banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This changed in March 2009, when, having reduced the short-term interest rate to near zero, 
the SNB began purchasing foreign exchange in an effort to counter upward pressure on the 
Swiss  franc  and  prevent  an  undesirable  tightening  of  monetary  conditions.  The  first 
escalation  in  the  euro  area  debt  crisis  in  the  spring  of  2010  required  the  SNB  to  make 
extensive foreign currency purchases; these were provisionally halted in June 2010 once the 
economic recovery had gained a foothold. 
In the first half of 2011, the situation in the euro area took another turn for the worse. Other 
euro  area  countries  were  being  dragged  into  the  crisis.  The  global  economic  outlook 
deteriorated  and  uncertainty  on  the  financial  markets  was  compounded  by  the  US  budget 
dispute. Upward pressure on the Swiss franc was immense at this time. In August 2011, the 
real  export-weighted  Swiss  franc  exchange  rate  was  40%  above  its  long-term  average 
(cf. chart 2). 
In  August  2011,  in  an  attempt  to  counter  the  exceptionally  strong  Swiss  franc,  the  SNB 
narrowed the target range for the Libor to between 0.0% and 0.25%, aiming to keep it as 
close to zero as possible. It also took steps to expand banks’ sight deposits significantly.1 
These measures were successful up to a point, however in the light of ongoing uncertainty 
on the financial markets and more bad news from the euro area, upward pressure on the 
Swiss  franc  remained  high  and  became  more  intense  still  at  the  beginning  of  September 
2011.  The  SNB  therefore  decided  to  provide  the  foreign  exchange  market  with  clear 
guidance  in  the  form  of  a  minimum  exchange  rate  for  the  franc  against  the  euro.  On 
6 September 2011, it announced that it would no longer tolerate a EUR/CHF exchange rate 
below CHF 1.20. 
This exceptional measure enabled the SNB to take a stand against an acute threat to the 
Swiss economy and to counter the risk of a deflationary trend emanating from the massive 
overvaluation  of  the  Swiss  franc.  The  minimum  exchange  rate  was  introduced  as  a 
temporary, emergency measure in a time of extreme turbulence. The franc remained high in 
the  period  that  followed,  yet  deflation  risk  was  held  in  check.  Moreover,  the  minimum 
exchange  rate  bought  Swiss  companies  –  especially  exporters  and  industries  facing 
competition  from  imports  –  some  time  in  which  to  plan  their  next  steps  in  a  very  difficult 
operating environment. 
Discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate 
The minimum exchange rate has undoubtedly served Switzerland well during an exceptional 
period. However, the old adage popular among economists – “there’s no such thing as a free 
lunch” – holds true for monetary policy as well. The SNB Governing Board was well aware 
that  the  introduction  of  a  minimum  exchange  rate  would  entail  certain  risks  –  and  we 
consistently  alluded  to  these.  That  the  SNB  would  have  to  make  large  foreign  currency 
purchases and expand its currency reserves in order to enforce the minimum exchange rate 
was  thus  to  be  expected.  The  SNB  must  be  willing  to  bear  these  risks  if  doing  so  is 
necessary  for  the  fulfilment  of  its  legal  mandate,  and  if  these  risks  are  justified  given  the 
chances of success. 
We  enforced  the  minimum  exchange  rate  consistently  for  more  than  three  years 
(6 September 2011 to 15 January 2015). At the peak of the euro crisis in 2012, the SNB had 
to purchase CHF 188 billion of foreign currency. Adding this to purchases from prior years 
reveals  that  the  SNB’s  currency  reserves  rose  from  CHF  50.5  billion  in  2007  to 
                                                
1  
In  August  2011,  the  SNB  announced  that  it  would  very  significantly  increase  the  supply  of  liquidity  to  the 
Swiss franc  money  market  by  expanding  banks’  sight  deposits  at  the  SNB  from  CHF  30  billion  to 
CHF 80 billion within a few days. Shortly afterwards, the SNB decided once again to increase banks’ sight 
deposits substantially, to CHF 120 billion; this step was followed by a further – final – increase, this time to 
CHF 200 billion. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
CHF 432.2 billion  at  the  end  of  2012  (cf.  chart  3),  proving  beyond  doubt  that  the  SNB  is 
willing to accept balance sheet risks in order to enforce its monetary policy. Last year, the 
SNB’s shareholders, the Confederation and the cantons all learned that these risks can have 
real consequences. For the year 2013, for the first time in its history, the SNB was unable to 
pay any dividends or distribute any profit, as the fall in the gold price and exchange rate-
related losses had led to a very negative annual result. As you might expect, this decision 
was  not  greeted  with  rapturous  applause.  However,  the  critical  point  here  is  that  the 
principles  of  the  SNB’s  profit  distribution  agreement  were  not  called  into  question.  People 
generally recognised and accepted the fact that a larger balance sheet goes hand in hand 
with higher potential loss. 
Despite having successfully enforced the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro for 
several years, in January 2015 the SNB concluded that the measure had become untenable 
and was therefore no longer justified from a monetary policy point of view. What led to this 
far-reaching reassessment? Let us briefly re-wind to 2014. While in the US expectations of 
an interest rate rise were mounting, there were signs of further monetary policy easing in the 
euro area from mid-year onwards. The euro subsequently weakened significantly against the 
US  dollar.  This  in  turn  affected  the  EUR/CHF  rate,  which  had  already  been  close  to  the 
minimum exchange rate for some time. As a result, the Swiss franc largely followed the euro 
downwards. Nevertheless, at the mid-December monetary policy assessment, we were still 
convinced that the minimum exchange rate was the right instrument for ensuring appropriate 
monetary  conditions.  Shortly  thereafter,  however,  the  euro  depreciation  gathered  pace 
sharply, and pressure on the franc increased dramatically. It became clear that a minimum 
exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro was no longer tenable. Only sustained currency market 
interventions  of  rapidly  increasing  magnitude  would  have  allowed  the  SNB  to  uphold  the 
policy. 
Faced  with  these  fundamental  changes  in  international  conditions,  we  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  minimum  exchange  rate  could  only  have  been  maintained  through  an 
uncontrollable  expansion  of  the  balance  sheet,  potentially  even  to  a  level  several  times 
higher than Swiss GDP. The risks associated with such a balance sheet expansion would 
have been out of all proportion to the benefits for the economy. An uncontrollable expansion 
of  the  balance  sheet  would  have  severely  impaired  the  SNB’s  ability  to  conduct monetary 
policy in the future and jeopardised the fulfilment of its mandate in the long term. On the one 
hand, the future use of currency interventions would have been severely constrained. On the 
other  hand,  reabsorbing  this  huge  volume  of  liquidity  once  monetary  policy  began  to 
normalise would have been very difficult and extremely costly. 
Communication and timing of the discontinuation 
The discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate took the financial markets by surprise and 
the price reactions on the foreign exchange and equity markets were correspondingly strong. 
In an age when transparency and openness in monetary policy matters are riding high, the 
decision to exit the minimum exchange rate policy so abruptly bewildered many observers. 
However,  transparency  is  not  an  end  in  itself;  it  is  part  of  monetary  policy.  Traditionally, 
monetary policy has been steered via short-term interest rates. These then feed through to 
exchange rates and long-term interest rates, thereby influencing – albeit with a time lag – the 
demand  for  goods  and  services  and,  ultimately,  wages  and  prices  in  the  economy.  By 
communicating its intentions transparently and credibly, the SNB can influence expectations 
(e.g. on the financial markets), thereby rendering its monetary policy more effective. 
Fundamentally,  we  are  keen  to  avoid  surprising  the  economy  and  triggering  major  price 
movements on the financial markets with our monetary policy measures. In the context of 
conventional interest rate policy, it is thus advantageous to keep the gap between financial 
market  participants’  expectations  and  the  SNB’s  actual  interest  rate  adjustments  within 
reasonable  limits.  Normally,  therefore,  there  is  no  contradiction  between  the  notion  of 
transparent communication and our monetary policy intentions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
But  there  are  exceptions,  and  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  –  a 
measure that was directly linked to the foreign exchange market – is one such exception. An 
announcement,  or  even  the  slightest  hint  of  an  imminent  decision  to  dispense  with  the 
minimum  exchange  rate,  would  have  triggered  massive  speculation  against  the  SNB.  We 
would then have been forced to, as it  was, subsidise this speculation via foreign currency 
purchases. 
Incidentally,  these  same  arguments  also  explain  why  a  gradual  exit  from  the  minimum 
exchange  rate  or  a  “gentle”  transition  to  a  policy  involving  some  other  form  of  explicit 
exchange  rate  linkage  (e.g.  pegging  the  Swiss  franc  to  a  basket  of  currencies)  was 
impractical. Such a policy would likewise have opened the floodgates to speculators. There 
was  thus  no  reasonable  alternative  to  exiting  the  minimum  exchange  rate  suddenly  and 
completely. 
We discussed when would be the best time to communicate the decision. Our choice of the 
morning of 15 January was designed to allow market participants to start from a level playing 
field  when  adapting  to  this  undoubtedly  challenging  new  situation.  By  discontinuing  the 
minimum exchange rate on a weekday when market participation was high, we minimised 
the  risk  of  some  banks  and  their  customers  being  put  at  a  disadvantage,  or  of  individual 
participants  gaining  an  advantage.  At  such  a  time,  it  would  be  possible  for  established 
market access channels, via electronic trading platforms or phone links to the trading desks 
of the main currency trading firms, to be widely used – although there were some bottlenecks 
immediately  after  the  announcement.  By  contrast,  if  we  had  announced  the  move  at  the 
weekend, for instance, this would have caused uncertainty about the trading conditions when 
the  foreign  exchange  market  opened  on  Sunday  evening  (Swiss  time).  Australia,  which 
normally accounts for only around 1% of daily turnover in Swiss franc forex operations, would 
have been overwhelmed by the volume of trades during its business hours. You can easily 
imagine that the turbulence on the Australian market would have been far greater than that 
observed  on  the morning  of  15 January,  with  contagion  potentially  spreading  to  the  entire 
financial market. We wanted to avoid this. 
Monetary policy after the minimum exchange rate 
So  what  will  the  minimum  exchange  rate  discontinuation  mean  for  monetary  policy  in 
Switzerland? First, let me emphasise that the exit from the minimum exchange rate does not 
mean that we will simply be a passive observer of the foreign exchange market in future. The 
SNB will continue to take account of the exchange rate situation in formulating its monetary 
policy and will intervene in the foreign exchange market as necessary in order to influence 
monetary conditions. 
Nonetheless, the end of the minimum exchange rate does mean that interest rate steering 
will once again take on a more prominent role. In December last year, the SNB decided for 
the  first  time  to  charge  negative  interest  (–0.25%)  on  banks’  and  other  financial  market 
participants’ sight deposits at the SNB. On 15 January – concurrently with the discontinuation 
of the minimum exchange rate – we lowered the interest rate again, this time to –0.75%. This 
marked interest rate reduction was intended to cushion the blow of Swiss franc appreciation 
and to counter a tightening of monetary conditions, by making it significantly more expensive 
to hold Swiss francs compared to other currencies. 
Negative interest rates have stimulated a lively public debate. This is hardly surprising given 
that, in this form, such an instrument is something of a novelty that only a few central banks 
have  deployed.2  Apart  from  the  SNB,  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  Sweden’s  Riksbank 
                                                
2   Switzerland has seen negative interest rates before: in the 1970s, negative interest was briefly charged in the 
form of commission on foreign funds held at commercial banks. In contrast to that period, today’s negative 
interest rate affects all sight deposits held at the SNB by banks and other financial market participants. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  the  European  Central  Bank  have  made  use  of  negative  interest  rates  to  date. 
Experience with this instrument is thus relatively limited. 
Today,  two  months  after  negative  interest  rates  were  introduced,  we  can  see  that  the 
measure is working and having the desired effect on the  money and capital markets. The 
three-month Libor has been in negative territory since the announcement, dropping to a low 
of –0.96%; it is currently roughly  in the middle of the target range (cf. chart 4). Long-term 
interest  rates  have  also  fallen,  and  the  exchange  rate  too  has  now  pulled  back  from  the 
extreme values observed immediately following the discontinuation announcement. In trade-
weighted terms, the Swiss franc is still at least 10% higher than it was at the beginning of the 
year. Overall, the Swiss franc is significantly overvalued and should weaken with time. 
When  discussing  the  structure  of  the  instrument,  our  deliberations focused  on  the  interest 
rate level, but also in particular on the exemption thresholds above which negative interest 
was  to  be  charged.  We  ultimately  concluded  that  these  thresholds  should  be  calculated 
according to the minimum reserves banks are legally obliged to hold. This is a method that is 
both firmly anchored in law and for which clear rules exist. 
As  a  result,  banks  with  large  Swiss  franc  holdings  at  the  SNB  relative  to  the  size  of  their 
balance sheets bear a heavier burden than banks with lower sight deposit balances. The fact 
that  the  banks  face  differing  burdens  has  been  criticised  in  certain  quarters.  Some  have 
argued, for instance, that negative interest rates are distorting competition. This is certainly 
not our intention. Negative interest is a monetary policy measure that – like any other form of 
interest rate change – affects different industries and companies in different ways. Negative 
interest  is  intended  to  make  it  less  attractive  to  hold  large  amounts  of  liquidity  in  Swiss 
francs.  It  is  thus  logical  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective  that  banks  which  hold  large 
quantities of Swiss franc liquidity relative to the size of their balance sheets should shoulder 
a heavier burden. 
As already mentioned, the introduction of negative interest rates on sight deposits at the SNB 
has also caused longer-term interest rates to fall. And yet,  we have been living through a 
period of exceptionally low interest rates for around six years already, with even long-term 
investments bearing virtually no interest. The Swiss are a nation of savers and many people 
are concerned about low interest rates. I understand this, however we should not forget that 
what really counts for savers is not the nominal but the real (i.e. inflation-adjusted) interest 
rate. For some time now, inflation has been very low and now it is even negative. If inflation 
is negative, the real interest rate is higher than the nominal interest rate. As chart 5 shows, 
there have often been periods in the past when real interest rates were even lower than they 
are today. 
During this challenging phase for the Swiss economy, it is important that the negative interest 
rate be allowed to take effect and help to bring about a weakening of the Swiss franc. Efforts 
to circumvent negative interest rates by obtaining exemptions or shifting to cash are not in 
the interests of Switzerland as a whole in the current climate. Interest rate and exchange rate 
developments  in  recent  weeks  suggest  that  our  monetary  policy  measures  are  gradually 
gaining traction. 
Economic outlook 
By  introducing  the  minimum  exchange  rate, the  SNB  moderated  the  risks  and  adjustment 
costs  to  which  the  Swiss  economy  was  exposed  and  bought  it  some  time  to  adjust  to  a 
stronger  franc.  We  are  aware  that  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  will 
mean that Switzerland has some difficult times ahead. The higher Swiss franc exchange rate 
–  and  especially  the  speed  of  Swiss  franc  appreciation  since  the  discontinuation  of  the 
minimum  exchange  rate  –  is  particularly  challenging  for  exporters  and  industries  facing 
competition from imports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In 2014, the Swiss economy recorded year-on-year growth of 2%. This increase was slightly 
above long-term potential growth and reflects the robust state of our economy. The exit from 
the  minimum  exchange  rate  has  led  to  a  deterioration  of  economic  conditions.  We  thus 
expect a much more modest expansion of real economic output this year of just under 1%. A 
noticeable  weakening  in  the  economy may  be  expected,  particularly  in  the first  half  of the 
year. In the short term, significant underutilisation of production capacity may be expected 
and unemployment is likely to increase moderately. 
There is of course a particularly high degree of uncertainty attached to such forecasts. For 
one  thing,  they  will  depend  on  how  the  Swiss  franc  exchange  rate  evolves  in  the  coming 
months.  For  another,  it  is  not  certain  how  international  conditions  will  develop.  The  US 
economy is more robust today than it was in 2011. The latest GDP figures for the euro area 
are  once  again  more  reassuring,  although  the  situation  remains  difficult.  In  addition,  the 
substantial fall in oil prices has had an easing effect. Despite all this, the risks – notably the 
debt dispute between Greece and the rest of the euro area, as well as the crisis in Ukraine – 
are not inconsiderable. 
In  the  long  term,  I  am  confident  that  our  economy  will  be  able  to  cope  with  Swiss  franc 
appreciation. The currency has been strong in the past, and has a tendency to appreciate. 
While a strong currency is an expression of a sound economy, it also presents companies 
with major challenges, as an appreciating franc means higher prices for foreign customers 
buying  from  Swiss  firms.  In  order  to  remain  competitive,  this  disadvantage  has  to  be 
continuously  offset  by  adaptability,  quality  and  innovation.  Various  competitiveness  and 
innovation indicators suggest that Swiss companies have been very successful on this score 
in the past; the country regularly ranks among the leaders in these categories (cf. chart 6). 
These findings inspire optimism, however it is important to remember two things. First, we 
are dealing with averages here. When it comes to managing the new currency landscape, 
the options available to individual industries and companies will vary greatly; and so, in turn, 
will  the  impact  of  Swiss  franc  strength.3  Second,  the  extent  of  recent  Swiss  franc 
appreciation  presents  Switzerland’s  economy  with  exceptional  challenges  which  should 
certainly not be underestimated. But one thing is clear: entrepreneurial thinking is remains 
important. We  have  the  utmost  respect  for  this  entrepreneurialism  and  for  the  employees 
who are being called upon to support these adjustments. 
Inflation outlook 
Let me now turn to the inflation outlook. The SNB’s mandate is to ensure price stability in the 
medium term, while taking due account of economic developments. We remain committed to 
maintaining price stability and the decision to exit the minimum exchange rate has not altered 
our mandate in any way. 
Last  year,  the  inflation  rate  –  as  measured  by  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  –  hovered 
around  zero.  This  year,  inflation  will  decline  well  into  negative  territory.  This  is  first  and 
foremost  due  to  two  factors:  Swiss  franc  appreciation  since  the  discontinuation  of  the 
minimum exchange rate and the sharp fall in oil prices. Last year, oil prices fell by some 40% 
in Swiss francs. According to an economist’s rule of thumb, this should translate to a decline 
in CPI inflation of almost 1 percentage point. The low inflation we are witnessing is thus in 
large part attributable to the collapse in oil prices. The important thing to remember here is 
that the  effects  of  both the  Swiss  franc  appreciation  and  the  oil  price  drop  are  temporary. 
They will not jeopardise price stability. 
                                                
3   Cf.  Bäuerle,  G.  and  E.  Steiner  (2013):  “How  do  individual  sectors  respond  to  macroeconomic  shocks?  A 
structural dynamic factor approach applied to Swiss data”, SNB Working Papers No. 9, 2013, or Drechsel, D. 
et  al.  (2015):  “How  are  firms  affected  by  exchange  rate  shocks?  Evidence  from  survey  based  impulse 
responses”, KOF Working Papers No. 371, January 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We have revised our forecast downwards for the current year, from –0.1% to –1.1%. Inflation 
is  expected  to  reach  its  low  point  in  the  third  quarter  of  2015,  at  –1.2%.  We  anticipate 
inflation of –0.5% for 2016. As you can see from chart 7, inflation will move back into positive 
territory only at the start of 2017. These forecasts assume that the three-month Libor remains 
at –0.75% over the entire forecast horizon, and that the Swiss franc weakens. 
Our forecasts show that the period of negative inflation is temporary. The SNB’s monetary 
policy strategy provides for positive inflation rates of below 2% in the medium term. So as 
long as the inflation rate returns to this range in the medium term, price stability will not be 
threatened. The important thing is that medium-term inflation expectations remain within a 
range that is compatible with price stability. While these inflation expectations have declined 
substantially, they are still in positive territory. This is confirmed in regular surveys by third-
party  providers,  as  well  as  in  conversations  between  the  SNB’s  delegates  for  regional 
economic relations and company representatives from all sectors of the economy. Sustained 
negative  inflation,  or  even  a  deflationary  spiral  –  a  negative  feedback  loop  involving  an 
economic downtrend and falling price levels – is thus not expected. 
Closing remarks 
In  conclusion,  let  me  reiterate  that  the  minimum  exchange  rate  was  introduced  as  an 
exceptional  and  temporary  measure  during  a  period  of  unprecedented  turmoil  for  the 
financial  markets  and  the  global  economy.  It  served  Switzerland  well  for  more  than  three 
years, partially correcting the massive overvaluation of the Swiss franc. Last year, monetary 
policy in the euro area and Switzerland increasingly began to diverge. This was reflected in a 
very sharp depreciation of the euro against the US dollar. A minimum exchange rate of CHF 
1.20  per  euro  was  thus  no  longer  sustainable.  The  high  and  rising  volumes  of  currency 
intervention that would have been necessary to maintain the minimum exchange rate would 
have resulted in an uncontrollable expansion of the SNB’s balance sheet. In the long term, 
this would have severely restricted its room for manoeuvre in monetary policy matters, and in 
turn its ability to fulfil its mandate. 
Given prevailing international conditions, the negative interest rate – and our willingness to 
intervene on the foreign exchange market as necessary – give us the tools to ensure price 
stability  in  the  medium  term.  Seen  from  the  current  perspective,  too,  there  is  no  threat  to 
price  stability  in  the  medium  and  long  term.  The  impact  of  the  appreciation  on  consumer 
prices  is  temporary,  although  it  may  linger  for  some  time.  As  regards  economic 
developments, we are aware that the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate means 
that there are difficult times ahead for Switzerland. 
We have every confidence that Switzerland’s economy and its economic agents will rise to 
the  challenge  and  adjust  to  the  strong  Swiss  franc.  The  last  few  years  have  provided  an 
impressive illustration of just how exceptionally adaptable this country’s entrepreneurs are. 
The Swiss franc is significantly overvalued and while it is expected to weaken over time, until 
it  does,  this  substantial  –  and  above  all  abrupt  –  appreciation  of the  currency  will  present 
considerable challenges. I repeat: My colleagues on the Governing Board and I have great 
respect for the business community whose task it will be to make these difficult adjustments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
