  Haruhiko Kuroda: How unconventional monetary policy stimulates 
demand – theory and practice 
Remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, for the Panel Discussion at 
the Bank for International Settlements Annual General Meeting, Basel, 28 June 2015. 
 It is a great honor to be able to participate in this panel discussion today. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  its  Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing  (QQE)  in 
April 2013. One tentative conclusion that can be drawn from the experience of a little over 
two years is that central banks can overcome the zero lower bound, as long as the policy 
maker  commits  decisively  to  fulfilling  its  mandate with  well-designed  unconventional  policy 
measures.  To  give  you  some  idea  of  the  outcomes  since  the  beginning  of  the  QQE,  the 
unemployment  rate  has  fallen  0.8  percentage  point,  and  CPI  inflation  has  risen  about  1 
percentage  point.  Other  major  central  banks  have  also  been  successful  in  stimulating 
demand through their own unconventional policies. 
It  has  become  a  common  understanding  among  the  central  bank  community  that 
unconventional monetary policy, despite some lingering skepticism from the academic front, 
has actually proven to be effective. This is best characterized by a famous quote from the 
former Fed Chair, Ben Bernanke: “The problem with QE is it works in practice but it doesn’t 
work in theory.” In that case, the question remaining about unconventional monetary policy is 
not whether it  works, but why  it  works. The rest of my remarks will focus primarily on this 
issue from both theoretical and practical perspectives. 
First, let me start with term premiums. Whether central banks’ large-scale asset purchases 
succeed  in  reducing  term  premiums  hinges  upon  whether  the  preferred  habitat  hypothesis 
holds.1  Some  influential  academics  deny  this  effect,  claiming  that  “open-market  operations 
should  be  largely  ineffective  to  the  extent  that  they  fail  to  change  expectations  regarding 
future policy.”2 This argument is presumably what was in Mr. Bernanke’s mind when he said 
that QE didn’t work in theory. 
Among central bankers, however, it is becoming increasingly accepted that term premiums 
can  actually  be  reduced  by  large-scale  purchases  of  long-term  bonds  through  changes  to 
their demand-supply conditions.3 Experience has further convinced us that the fall in long-
term  interest  rates  in  turn  affects  the  price  of  other  financial  assets  such  as  equities  and 
private  credits  through  portfolio  rebalancing,  as  predicted  by  James  Tobin’s  General 
Equilibrium  theory.4  Economists  have  recently  started  to  embed  this  preferred  habitat 
mechanism in their macro-economic models so as to explicitly incorporate this transmission 
channel of QE.5 
                                                
1  Franco  Modigliani  and  Richard  Sutch,  “Innovations  in  Interest  Rate  Policy,”  American  Economic  Review, 
Vol. 56, pp. 178–197, 1966. 
2  Gauti Eggertsson and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, pp. 139–235, 2003.  
3  There  are  a  number  of  empirical  studies  that  attempt  to  decompose  long-term  government  yields  into  the 
expected path of short-term interest rate and premium components.  For Japanese government bonds, see 
Kei  Imakubo  and  Jouchi  Nakajima,  “Estimating  Inflation  Risk  Premia  from  Nominal  and  Real  Yield  Curves 
Using a Shadow-Rate Model,” Bank of Japan Working Paper, No. 15-E-1, 2015.  
4  James Tobin, “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 
Vol. 1, pp. 15–29, 1969. 
5  Han Chen, Vasco Cúrdia, and Andrea Ferrero, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Large-Scale Asset Purchase 
Programmes,” The Economic Journal, Vol. 122, pp. F289-F315, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Second, forward guidance, which is another element of unconventional monetary policy, is 
generally  supported  both  in  theory  and  in  practice.  In  theory,  forward  guidance  could  pin 
down the future expected path of policy rates by clarifying the central bank’s policy reaction 
function  and  thereby  reducing  the  volatility  of  financial  markets.  In  fact,  forward  guidance, 
together with a strong commitment to policy objectives, has been used effectively in various 
policy settings across jurisdictions. 
Third,  let  me  discuss  the  “quantitative”  aspect  of  quantitative  easing.  Does  the  size  of  the 
central  bank’s  balance  sheet  matter  in  itself  and,  if  so,  why?  Some  theoretical  economists 
argue that QE is effective from the viewpoint of monetary financing of the government budget. 
However, this is the opposite case of Ben Bernanke’s quote: it works well in theory but cannot 
be  applied  in  practice.  Monetary  finance  is  widely  understood  to  run  the  risk  of  eroding  the 
credibility  of  the  central  bank  and  thereby  potentially  increasing  risk  premiums  rather  than 
reducing them. Furthermore, recent experience in the United States and the United Kingdom 
has  demonstrated  that  an  unconventional  monetary  policy  works  even  in  the  midst  of 
substantial  fiscal  consolidation.  In  the  case  of  Japan,  the  joint  statement  of  January  2013 
clearly  stated  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  would  pursue  a  2  percent  inflation  target  while  the 
government committed to ensuring long-term sustainability of the public debt. Thus, from the 
beginning  there  was  no  intention  at  all  that  QQE  would  work  through  facilitating  fiscal 
expansion. 
While monetary finance is not on our agenda, the size of central bank balance sheets is, in 
my view, important for a different reason. Since inflation is widely perceived to be ultimately a 
monetary phenomenon, the creation of a massive quantity of money would be a strong signal 
of  a  central  bank’s  commitment  to  fighting  deflation.  It  is  in  this  context  that  an 
unprecedented expansion of the monetary base plays an essential role in our QQE. 
Fourth  and  lastly,  I  will  discuss  what  I  believe  is  a  very  critical  transmission  channel  of 
unconventional monetary policy: the expectation channel. This overlaps with the signaling effect 
associated with the “quantity” that I just mentioned.6 One possible problem is that the theoretical 
foundations  seem  not  to  be  well  established.  Standard  theories  simply  assume  that  rational 
expectations automatically hold, while they tend to be silent on exactly what it would take to 
change  the  way  firms  and  households  formulate  their  expectations.  I  am  quite  confident, 
however, that a strong commitment to policy objectives, clear and consistent communication, 
and decisive action to fulfill the commitment would collectively be powerful enough to have a 
significant  impact  on  inflation  expectations,  and  therefore  on  the  behavior  of  private  entities. 
This expectation channel is crucial for Japan in particular, where the deflationary mindset, so 
firmly embedded for such a long period, needs to be dispelled completely. 
Before I conclude, I would like to quote the words of Walter Heller, economic adviser under 
Presidents Kennedy and Johnson: “An economist is a man who, when he finds something 
works in practice, wonders if it works in theory.” If this adage is true, I suppose we can look 
forward  to  a  much  deeper  theoretical  understanding  of  the  secrets  of  unconventional 
monetary  policies  in  the  coming  years.  At  the  same  time,  practitioners  in  central  banks 
cannot afford to be complacent. Speaking of the Bank of Japan, for example, inflation is still 
well below our target, although this is partly due to the temporary influence of low oil prices. 
While  our  projection  is  that  inflation  will  be  in  the  neighborhood  of  2  percent  most  likely 
around  the  April-September  period  of  2016,  the  risks  to  that  scenario  cannot  be  ignored, 
particularly when the global economy is full of uncertainty, including over geopolitical factors. 
That  being  said,  our  commitment  to  achieving  the  2  percent  inflation  target  will  never  be 
compromised. With our unwavering determination, I am confident we can achieve that goal. 
Thank you. 
                                                
6  See,  for  instance,  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  “What  We  Know  and  What  We  Do  Not  Know  about  Inflation 
Expectations,” (Speech at the Economic Club of Minnesota), April 19, 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
