  Grant Spencer: Investors adding to Auckland housing market risk policy 
Speech by Mr Grant Spencer, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to The 
Northern Club, Auckland, 24 August 2015. 
 Accompanying figures can be found at the end of the speech. 
I  am  told  that  the  Auckland  housing  market  continues  to  be  the  hot  topic  of  dinner 
conversation in Auckland. Auckland house prices have gone up by 24 percent over the past 
year. For prospective buyers, and especially first home buyers, this is not good news. Getting 
on  the  housing  ladder  has  become  a  lot  harder.  Existing  home  owners  on  the  other  hand 
have  seen  their  equity  rise  by  24  percent  of  the  house  value.  For  the  Reserve  Bank,  we 
added this to the “What keeps you awake at night?” category some time ago. There are good 
reasons to think that the Auckland market poses an increasing threat to financial stability. 
Today  I  want  to  tell  you  why  we  are  concerned.  A  natural  place  to  start  is  to  ask  what 
demand  factors  are  driving  Auckland  house  prices,  and  then  to  think  about  the  supply 
response to those pressures. I will provide some new information on the composition of sales 
and,  after  describing  the  landscape,  I  will  explain  why  we  are  concerned  from  a  financial 
stability perspective. When something keeps you awake at night, it is good to do something 
about it. I will discuss the multi-faceted initiatives needed to address this problem, and the 
role that the Reserve Bank is playing. I will finish by updating you on where we are at with 
the  investor  LVR  restrictions  that  we  announced  in  May,  including  the  recent  public 
consultation on the policy and how the new policy will be implemented. 
Strong demand is driving up prices 
The main underlying cause of the housing shortage in Auckland is the continuing record net 
inflow  of  migrants,  against  a  background  of  very  low  residential  construction  activity  over 
many years. As seen in figure 1, the outflow of Kiwis has slowed over the past three years at 
the  same  time  as  the  inflow  of  foreigners  and  returning  Kiwis  has  accelerated.  This  has 
reflected the strength of the New Zealand economy as well as weakness in Australia and the 
broader global economy. While Auckland accounts for a third of the New Zealand economy, 
about half of the net inflow is coming in to Auckland. 
In  the  year  to  June  2015,  almost  50,000  permanent  and  long-term  migrants  arrived  in 
Auckland, including New Zealand citizens returning from abroad. If these new residents have 
similar rates of home ownership and household sizes to existing residents, we estimate they 
could account for around one-third of the 30,000 Auckland house sales in the past year1. 
Interest rates are also an important factor influencing the demand for and pricing of housing, 
particularly  long-term  rates.  Interest  rates  determine  the  cost  of  mortgage  credit  and 
therefore the amount of debt that can be sustained on any given level of household income. 
Figure 2 shows how low interest rates since the GFC have facilitated a significant increase in 
debt to income (DTI) ratios. 
Interest rates also drive the discount rate used (implicitly or explicitly) by house purchasers in 
valuing the future stream of housing services. As seen in many countries around the world, 
low global interest rates post GFC have contributed to strong asset price growth, particularly 
in financial assets and in housing markets. This influence on house prices in New Zealand is 
reflected in the downward trend in rental yields (figure 3). While the sharper yield decline in 
                                                
1   This  estimate  is  based  on  the  assumption  of  around  3  people  per  dwelling  and  a  home  ownership  rate  of 
around 60 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Auckland points to additional factors at play in the Auckland market, interest rates have been 
a key driver of demand, particularly investor demand. 
It  is  useful  to  distinguish  investor  demand  from  owner  occupier  demand.  While  increased 
occupier demand, say due to population growth, adds to any underlying physical shortage of 
housing, higher investor demand affects the composition of rentals versus owner occupiers. 
However, investor demand can contribute significantly to house price pressures. If investors 
wish to expand their housing portfolios at a greater rate than the growth in demand for rental 
accommodation,  this  can  push  up  prices  even  though  the  underlying  housing  shortage 
remains unchanged. Investor demand has become a growing factor in the Auckland market 
over  the  past  year,  and  this  has  exacerbated  price  pressures  arising  from  the  underlying 
physical shortage. 
Evidence  of  an  increasing  investor  presence  in  the  Auckland  market  is  clear.  Based  on 
CoreLogic  data,  investors  accounted  for  41  percent  of  all  Auckland  market  sales  in  June 
2015, up 8 percentage points since late 2013. While some of this growth was at the expense 
of first-home buyers in early 2014, the more recent increase from late 2014 has been at the 
expense of “movers”. A similar pattern is seen in net investor purchases2 (figure 4), which 
has also increased significantly, suggesting further declines in the Auckland home ownership 
rate. 
Consistent  with  the  increased  share  of  investor  sales,  there  has  been  a  disproportionate 
expansion  in  mortgage  credit  to  residential  investors.  The  dollar  value  of  new  mortgage 
lending for all borrowers grew by 28 percent nationally, in the year to June 2015, reflecting 
increased house sales as well as higher average prices. Over the same period, new lending 
to  investors  increased  nationally  at  a  much  greater  rate  of  40  percent.  While  some  new 
lending  represents  “churn”  as  borrowers  refinance  existing  loans  and/or  switch  between 
banks, the sharp lift in new investor lending is consistent with greater investor participation in 
the housing market. 
What do we know about these residential investors who have been expanding their presence 
in Auckland over the past year? First, their rising market share has primarily been driven by 
increasing purchases by small investors, with two to four properties, as opposed to investors 
with larger property portfolios. We have also seen a reduction in the share of investor cash 
sales in Auckland from over 25 percent in late 2013 to around 20 percent currently. This sort 
of  profile  –  i.e.  smaller  investors  who  are  reliant  on  credit  –  suggests  that  the  new  LVR 
restrictions on Auckland residential investors are likely to have an impact on overall demand. 
This is particularly so when we consider that over half of investor lending is currently being 
written at high LVRs – that is LVRs of over 70 percent. 
Much has been said recently regarding the contribution of foreign investor purchases to price 
pressures in Auckland. Given that we do not have data on purchases by non-residents, it is 
not possible to make an accurate assessment of the extent to which such flows are adding to 
price  pressures  and  also  financing  new  housing  construction.  The  role  of  non-resident 
investors in the Auckland market will become more apparent once the new requirements for 
purchasers to provide tax numbers are introduced in October. 
The supply response 
Currently, new dwellings are being built at a rate of around 8,300 per annum in Auckland. 
With roughly half of New Zealand’s net migration going to Auckland, this rate of construction 
may not be sufficient to prevent the existing shortage from rising beyond its current level of 
                                                
2   Net investor purchases are total purchases by investors less total sales by investors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
around  15  to  20  thousand  dwellings.3  An  increased  rate  of  construction  is  needed.  One 
positive  change  is  that  resources  are  increasingly  being  freed  up  in  Canterbury  as  the 
residential  rebuild  tapers  off.  This  should  facilitate  an  increase  in  Auckland  house  building 
over the next couple of years. Our current forecasts, which are consistent with the Accord 
being  met,  suggest  an  annual  construction  rate  of  8,700  in  2015,  increasing  to  11,000  by 
2017. 
High-rise  apartment  construction  and  other  high-density  options  will  be  a  crucial  part  of 
increasing  construction  and  reducing  the  supply  shortage.  The  need  for  increased 
densification has been recognised by the Auckland Council in recently proposed changes to 
the unitary plan, which will be finalised in mid-2016. It is also encouraging that the share of 
apartment  consents  in  Auckland  is  rising,  and  is  expected  to  increase  further  with  several 
apartment  projects  currently  in  the  planning  stages.  However,  at  18  percent  in  the  year to 
June, the apartment share of consents remains well below levels seen in the mid-2000s and 
significantly below what we see in other major centres. For example, apartments represent 
39 percent  of  the  total  stock  of  dwellings  in  Sydney,  compared  to  only  25  percent  in 
Auckland. 
Supply-side  constraints  remain  a  hindrance  to  faster  rates  of  building.  The  key  issues 
remain: a limited supply of land ready for building; restrictive planning processes, and a lack 
of  coordinated  planning  in  infrastructure  development.  Since  the  Housing  Accords  and 
Special Housing Areas Act 2013, there have been some encouraging developments, such as 
the  proposed  relaxation  of  density  rules  and  initiatives  to  develop  Crown  land.  However, 
more needs to be done and Special Housing Area building activity has remained very slow to 
date, with around 800 dwellings consented and 860 sections created in the 86 SHAs. 
The recent draft report by the Productivity Commission points to some far-reaching changes 
needed  to  create  a  more  responsive  supply  side.  The  Reserve  Bank  supports  the  draft 
findings  of  the  inquiry  and  believes  that  the  recommendations  should  be  considered 
carefully.  Recommendations  that  have  the  potential  to  improve  the  responsiveness  of 
housing  supply  include  the  promotion  of  less  restrictive  planning  rules  and  streamlined 
planning processes. For example, reviewing and relaxing rules in district plans, clarifying the 
RMA  to  include  land  use for  housing  as  a  priority,  and  ongoing  RMA  reform to  streamline 
plan  development.  The  Bank  also  supports  measures  that  encourage  the  timely  and 
coordinated  provision  of  infrastructure  to  support  new  housing  developments,  and  policies 
that reduce incentives for land banking. 
Why are accelerating Auckland house prices a concern for stability? 
House price inflation slowed significantly following the implementation of restrictions on high 
loan-to-value  ratio  (LVR)  lending  in  October  2013.  More  recently,  average  national  house 
price  inflation  has  picked  up,  due  almost  entirely  to  significant  renewed  pressures  in  the 
Auckland  market.  The  latest  REINZ  figures  for  July  show  Auckland  house  prices  up 
25 percent over the past year, compared to 3 percent for the rest of the country (figure 5). As 
a summary measure of excess demand, this points to the Auckland housing shortage getting 
worse, not better. In addition, the volume of house sales is picking up in other areas such as 
Waikato, Bay of Plenty and Northland, and this could translate into growing price pressures 
in those markets. 
Looking  at  key  house  price  ratios  suggests  an  increasing  degree  of  stretch  in  Auckland 
prices  relative  to  sustainable  levels.  House  price-to-income  ratios  have  increased  from 
around  6  to  almost  9  in  Auckland  since  2012,  a  level  seen  in  some  of  the  world’s  most 
expensive cities – cities such as London, San Francisco and Sydney. For the rest of New 
                                                
3   These  estimates  are  broadly  in  line  with  estimates  produced  by  the  Auckland  Council  and  Productivity 
Commission. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Zealand, the average price-to-income ratio is about half Auckland’s level (figure 6). Similarly, 
rental  yields  have  fallen  materially  in  Auckland, and  are  currently  at  historic  lows  of  below 
3 percent. While low interest rates explain much of this downward trend, rental yields in the 
rest of New Zealand have remained well above Auckland yields (figure 3). 
Auckland  is  increasingly  being  seen  as  a  regional  (Asia-Pacific)  centre,  and  this  no  doubt 
accounts  for  a  part  of  the  stretch  in  price-to-income  ratios.  However,  good  long-run 
fundamentals do not make Auckland immune to a correction. 
International  evidence  shows  that  the  further  house  price-to-income  ratios  deviate  from 
historical  norms,  the  greater  the  potential  for  a  sharp  and  damaging  correction.4  In 
Auckland’s case such a correction could be triggered by a range of domestic and external 
factors. The demand for housing would be reduced by a slowdown in the economy, which 
could result, for example, from continued weakness in export prices; or a drop off in the net 
inflow of migrants. Externally, if the current slowdown in China persists or accelerates then 
the flow of funds from that source could diminish. Or we could see an increase in the risk 
premium in New Zealand interest rates – either due to a global financial shock or due to a 
perceived increase in New Zealand specific risk. Indeed recently we saw an indication of this 
with  Standard  and  Poor’s  reducing  the  stand-alone  rating  of  the  New  Zealand  banking 
system, citing heightened risk in Auckland housing as their primary concern.5  
Interest rates internationally are at historic lows and well below rates seen in recent decades 
prior to the GFC. This reflects modest global growth, extraordinary monetary accommodation 
and weak inflationary pressures. It is not realistic to expect such low rates to remain the norm 
in the medium term, and the US Federal Reserve is likely to be raising rates in the coming 
months. Future interest rate increases, either because of a stronger domestic economy and 
higher  CPI  inflation,  or  because  international  long-term  rates  are  higher,  could  have  a 
marked impact on credit-based demand. New Zealand has high levels of household debt. On 
average,  household  debt  is  running  at  around  155  percent  of  household  income  and 
30 percent  of  new  borrowers  are  taking  on  mortgages  at  greater  than  6  times  income.  At 
these  ratios,  it  would  not  take  much  of  an  increase  in  interest  rates  to  substantially  erode 
mortgage affordability. 
All of these factors could reduce housing demand and take pressure off house prices. The 
greater the investor component of demand, the greater the scope for the reduced demand to 
be  amplified  through  weaker  house  prices  as  investors  exit  the  market.  Further,  if  at  the 
same  time  an  increased  volume  of  new  houses  and  apartments  was  starting  to  come  on 
stream, then an excess supply situation could develop, causing prices to come back more 
sharply.  We  have  seen  this  happen  in  regional  housing  markets  in  New  Zealand.  For 
example, house prices in Thames-Coromandel and Queenstown-Lakes saw relatively large 
falls in the wake of the 2008/09 recession, after experiencing relatively strong building activity 
during  the  2000s.  In  other  countries,  excess  housing  supply  has  seriously  exacerbated 
housing  market  downturns  –  as  seen  in  Spain  and  Ireland  during  the  GFC.  If  such  a 
correction  happened  in  the  Auckland  market,  it  would  pose  a  significant  threat  to financial 
stability, something the Reserve Bank is mandated to preserve. 
                                                
4   For  example,  following  rapid  increases  to  well  above  historical  norms,  Finland,  Norway,  and  Sweden  all 
experienced  falls  in  house  price-to-income  ratios  in  excess  of  30  percent  in  the  late  1980s/early  1990s. 
Housing markets that were most over-valued prior to the global financial crisis on the basis of house price-to-
income ratios also typically experienced larger than average house price falls. 
5   While the stand-alone ratings of the 4 largest New Zealand banks were lowered, their full issuer ratings were 
unaffected due to ratings uplifts from assumed parental support. Issuer ratings were lowered on seven non-
bank institutions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  What can we do about it? 
In light of the financial stability risks inherent in the booming Auckland housing market – and 
the many contributing factors – the Reserve Bank has continued to promote a broad-based 
policy response, including both demand and supply-side policies. 
On  the  demand  side,  we  regard  tax  policy  as  an  essential  part  of  the  solution,  given  the 
historical tax advantaged status of investor housing and the significant role being played by 
investors in the current Auckland market. The low level of Auckland rental yields (figure 3) 
suggests that expectations of capital gains and/or tax relief have been an important factor in 
investors’ purchase decisions. We fully support measures announced as part of the Budget 
to  reduce  the  tax-advantaged  status  of  investor  housing.  The  establishment  of  a  two-year 
bright-line  test  for  assessing  trading  gains  from  investment  properties  will  bolster  the 
effectiveness  of  the  existing  tax  in  this  area.  The  requirement  to  provide  tax  identification 
details,  and  a  proposed  withholding  tax  on  house  sales  by  non-residents,  will  also  aid 
enforceability. 
I  have  talked  about  the  important  role  of  interest  rates  in  the  demand  for  and  pricing  of 
housing.  Should  the  Bank  therefore  be  using  monetary  policy  to  moderate  the  Auckland 
housing  market?  Our  view,  and  that  of  the  major  central  banks  is:  not  if  this  requires 
monetary policy to deviate from its primary goal of achieving stability in the general level of 
prices. The Reserve Bank Act and the Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) state that monetary 
policy shall have regard to the efficiency and soundness of the financial system. However, in 
the  current  situation,  with  underlying  inflation  below  target,  falling  export  prices  and 
weakening growth, it would not be appropriate to raise interest rates to dampen the Auckland 
housing  market.  Right  now,  that  would  push  up  the  exchange  rate,  dampen  growth  and 
inflation and cause more problems than it solves. 
We  should  also  keep  in  mind  that  the  long-term  trend  in  real  interest  rates  is  ultimately 
determined by economic behaviour, such as saving and investment preferences, not central 
banks.  This  trend  has  clearly  been  downwards  in  recent  years,  both  in  New  Zealand  and 
globally. The current nexus of low CPI inflation, low interest rates and strong asset prices is 
reflective  of  the  global  economic  environment.  Many  other  countries  are  facing  the  same 
issues in housing markets and are looking to policies other than monetary policy, such as 
macro-prudential policy, to address the consequent risks around financial stability. 
Macro-prudential policy 
Macro-prudential policy is about using bank regulatory tools to address systemic risks that 
have the potential to damage the financial system, as well as having serious consequences 
for the domestic economy. A macro-prudential overlay will usually be applied on a temporary 
basis, for example during an upward asset price cycle, and be applied to all banks. The main 
aim  of  such  policies  is  to  help  bolster  the  balance  sheets  of  the  banks so  they  can  better 
withstand the impact of a potential credit or liquidity shock and continue to extend credit in 
support of economic activity. Macro-prudential policies can also help to reduce the strength 
of the financial cycle by slowing credit growth, e.g. by restricting the amount of credit being 
extended to the booming sector. 
We  will  always  be  subject  to  economic  and  financial  cycles.  That  is  the  historical  reality. 
However, we can and should avoid the severe financial cycles that can cause major damage 
to the real economy – as we have seen internationally in the aftermath of the GFC. Our aim 
therefore is to reduce the amplifying effects seen in severe financial contractions by ensuring 
we  have  a  very  resilient  banking  system  and  also  by  directly  moderating  the  credit  cycle 
itself. Our on-going prudential requirements, together with macro-prudential overlays, aim to 
achieve that. 
There is a point to clarify here around the stress testing that the Reserve Bank conducts on 
the  banking  system  as part  of  our  prudential  oversight function.  Sometimes  commentators 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  incorrectly interpret the aim of macro-prudential policy as preventing bank insolvency. From a 
macro-prudential perspective, we may wish to bolster bank balance sheets beyond the point 
of avoiding insolvency. Stress tests help to inform our assessment of the adequacy of capital 
and liquidity buffers held by the banks. However, they are only one of the tools contributing to 
that  assessment.  In  a  downturn,  banks  will  typically  become  risk  averse  and  start  to  slow 
credit  expansion  in  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of  breaching  capital  and  liquidity  ratios.  In  a 
severe  downturn,  faced  with  a  rise  in  impaired  loans  and  provisions,  banks  may  start  to 
contract credit which can quickly exacerbate the economic downturn. In this way, a financial 
downturn  can  have  severe  consequences  for  macro-financial  stability  well  before  the 
solvency of banks becomes threatened. 
In  2014,  the  four  largest  New  Zealand  banks  completed  a  stress  testing  exercise  that 
featured  a  40  percent  decline  in  house  prices  in  conjunction  with  a  severe  recession  and 
rising  unemployment.  While  this  test  suggested  that  banks  would  maintain  capital  ratios 
above minimum requirements, banks reported that they would need to cut credit exposures 
by around 10 percent (the equivalent of around $30 billion) in order to restore capital buffers. 
Deleveraging of that nature would accentuate macroeconomic weakness, leading to greater 
declines in asset markets and larger loan losses for the banks. Such second round effects 
are not reflected in the stress test results. A key goal of macro-prudential policy is to ensure 
that the banking system has sufficient resilience to avoid such contractionary behaviour in a 
downturn. 
The macro-prudential policy approach we have adopted has been centred on Loan to Value 
Ratios  (LVRs).  In  October  2013,  the  Bank  introduced  a  requirement  that  no  more  than 
10 percent of any bank’s new mortgage lending could be at LVRs over 80 percent. At the 
time,  over  30  percent  of  new  mortgages  were  being  written  at  LVRs  over  80  percent. 
Restricting the extent of high LVR lending has seen average LVRs in bank mortgage books 
gradually decline, with the proportion of high LVR mortgage loans on bank balance sheets 
falling from 21 percent to 14 percent. This has made bank balance sheets more resilient to a 
potential housing downturn (figure 7). At the same time, the reduction in high LVR lending 
helped to dampen credit growth and house price inflation over the following year. 
Subsequently,  from  around  September  2014,  the  Auckland  market  started  to  accelerate 
while house prices in the rest of the country continued to moderate. As mentioned earlier, we 
have  identified  credit-financed  investor  activity  as  an  important  contributor  to the  Auckland 
resurgence. 
This raises concerns from a systemic risk perspective. Evidence from severe housing market 
downturns internationally show that loans to investors default more frequently at any given 
LVR during periods of market stress. Partly this is likely to reflect the fact that investors tend 
to take on more debt relative to income, so have less ability to absorb income shocks. The 
Reserve Bank has recently started collecting data on the debt to income (DTI) ratios of new 
borrowers (figure 8). Provisional data suggests that a much greater share of investors have 
high DTIs and that investor DTIs have been growing over the past year. 
International evidence also suggests that investors play a strong role in amplifying property 
cycles.  Investor  participation  tends  to  rise  towards  the  peak  of  the  property  cycle  and 
investors are more likely to sell properties when prices start to fall. Thus, property cycles are 
accentuated when there is a large investor presence in the market. 
Our  view  is  that  banks  need  additional  balance  sheet  buffers  against  residential  investor 
lending, and that particular caution is required on investor lending in Auckland. The new LVR 
policy that we announced in May will require mortgages on Auckland6 investment properties 
to have LVRs of 70 percent or less. The aim of the policy is to strengthen the resilience of 
                                                
6   Auckland is defined as the area of the Super City, extending from Rodney to Franklin. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  banks against an Auckland housing downturn, and to moderate the cyclical role of the large 
residential  investor  segment  of  the  market.  While  the  speed  limit  on  owner-occupied 
properties in Auckland will stay at 10 percent, the speed limit on high LVR mortgages outside 
Auckland  will  be  relaxed  from  10  percent  to  15  percent.  That  easing  reflects  the  low  and 
steady  rates  of  house  price  inflation  in  most  other  parts  of  the  country,  and  our  stated 
intention  to  begin  removing  LVR restrictions  when  they  are  no  longer  warranted.  In  recent 
months, there have been some signs of housing demand spilling out of Auckland, with house 
price  growth  starting  to  increase  in  Hamilton  and  Tauranga.  If  this  strength  persists,  full 
removal of LVR restrictions outside of Auckland could be delayed. The Bank will continue to 
monitor housing market developments and modify its macro-prudential policies accordingly. 
of 
on 
the 
are 
final 
now 
policy 
available 
Implementing the new measures 
The  Reserve  Bank  undertook  a  public  consultation  on  the  proposed  changes  to  LVR 
restrictions in June. As a result of the feedback received, some changes are being made to 
facilitate the implementation of the policy, but the substance of the policy remains intact. The 
details 
the  Bank’s  website. 
www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation_and_supervision/banks/consultations/Response-to-
submissions-21-august.pdf. 
We  announced  our  proposals  for  changes  to  the  LVR  policy  in  the  MayFinancial  Stability 
Report and began public consultation on 3 June. In response to the feedback received, we 
are making three main changes. First, a number of banks indicated they would not be able to 
formally meet the new restrictions by 1 October, given the need to make system changes. In 
response,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  delaying  implementation  of  the  policy  by  one  month  to 
1 November  and  providing  all  banks  with  an  initial  six  month  measurement  period  for 
meeting the restrictions. In making this change we are encouraged by the banks reporting 
that they are already curtailing lending to high-LVR Auckland investors ahead of the formal 
commencement of the policy. 
Second, banks noted that the proposed 2 percent speed limit for high LVR investor lending 
was  insufficient  to  accommodate  special  circumstances  such  as  extra  lending  required  to 
provide  assistance  to  borrowers  in  hardship.  In  response  we  are  adopting  a  higher  speed 
limit of 5 percent on high LVR investor lending. This will provide banks with more scope to 
manage  the  existing  pipeline  of  pre-approved  lending.  Based  on  our  experience  with  the 
existing LVR speed limit, it is expected that the actual flow of high LVR lending to Auckland 
investors will settle well below 5 percent as banks adopt a buffer to ensure compliance. 
Third,  in  light  of  feedback  from  the  consultation,  we  have  decided  to  introduce  a  new 
exemption category for lending for significant remedial construction work, such as for houses 
with weather tightness issues or requiring seismic strengthening. It would be undesirable to 
prevent  banks  from  providing  this  lending,  from  both  a  financial  stability  and  a  broader 
efficiency  perspective.  To  date,  high  LVR  lending  for  such  remedial  work  has  counted 
against the existing speed limit. 
In conjunction with the new LVR restrictions, and consistent with Basel guidelines, the banks 
will be required to establish a new asset class for all loans to residential property investors. 
Loans in this asset class will attract a higher risk weighting than owner occupied mortgages, 
requiring  banks  to  hold  more  capital  against  them.  For  banks  following  the  standardised 
approach  to  capital  adequacy,  the  average  risk  weight  for  investor  loans  will  increase  by 
about  6  percentage  points.  For  the  larger  banks,  that  will  be  developing  new  internal  risk 
models, our expectation is that average risk weights on investor mortgages will increase by a 
similar amount. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Conclusion 
The resurgence in Auckland house prices over the past year has made the Reserve Bank 
increasingly concerned about the risks to financial stability. It is certainly on our “what keeps 
us awake at night” list. 
Auckland prices have risen a further 24 percent over the past year, stretching the price-to-
income  ratio  for  the  region  to  9.  This  is  double  the  ratio  for  the  rest  of  New  Zealand  and 
places  Auckland  among  the  world’s  most  expensive  cities.  New  housing  supply  has  been 
growing but nowhere near fast enough to make a dent in the existing housing shortage. In 
the  meantime,  net  migration  is  at  record  levels  and  investors  continue  to  expand  their 
influence in the Auckland market. 
The  increasing  investor  presence,  now  accounting  for  41  percent  of  Auckland  house 
purchases, has been supported by rapid growth in new lending, with half of the new credit at 
LVR’s of over 70 percent. This trend is increasing the risk inherent in the Auckland market. 
The  increasing  investor  presence  is  likely  to  amplify  the  housing  cycle  and  worsen  the 
potential damage from a downturn, both to the financial system and the broader economy. 
We recognise that low interest rates are contributing to housing demand pressures and this 
is  a  factor  we  take  into  consideration  when  setting  monetary  policy.  However,  the  current 
weakness  in  export  prices,  economic  activity  and  CPI  inflation  means  that  interest  rate 
increases are likely to be off the table for some time. 
Tax policy is also an important driver and we welcome the changes announced in the 2015 
Budget, including the two year bright-line test, the proposed non-resident withholding tax and 
the requirement for tax numbers to be provided for investor house purchases. 
Macro  prudential  policy  can  help  to moderate the  risks to  the financial  sector  and  broader 
economy  associated  with  Auckland’s  housing market.  Modifications  to  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
LVR  policy,  announced  in  May,  are  targeted  specifically  at  Auckland  residential  investors. 
The speed limit has been eased for the rest of the country where housing markets are not 
subject to the same pressures. 
Our expectation is that investor LVRs will reduce financial system risk arising from this sector 
and  assist  in  moderating  the  Auckland  housing  market  cycle.  However,  macro-prudential 
policy  is  one  of  many  factors  aimed  at  reducing  the  imbalances  in  the  Auckland  housing 
market. Much more rapid progress in producing new housing is needed in order to get on top 
of this issue. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
      12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
