  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine economy going forward 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of the  Philippines),  at the  Membership  Meeting  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Manila, 
Makati City, 8 January 2015. 
 On behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I wish all of you a successful, meaningful and 
prosperous New Year! 
Now,  what  are  the  chances  these  wishes  will  come  true?  Well,  it  depends  largely  on  the 
choices you will make as professionals, businessmen, as family men and as members of the 
community living up to the Rotary Club of Manila’s brand of public service. 
From the point of view of the Bangko Sentral, what do we see? As your speaker in January 
last year, I described 2014 as a year to be marked with “continuing growth amidst recurrent 
risks and uncertainty.” Ladies and gentlemen, all these came to pass. 
In retrospect 
In retrospect, we faced national and global difficulties – we had typhoons, uneven growth in 
the world economy, political unrest in the Middle East and Russia, and market uncertainties 
from divergent moves in the global markets. 
But because we have done our homework and continued to implement our reform agenda, 
the Philippine economy stayed the course and continued to grow above trend. 
In  particular,  for  the  first  three  quarters  of  2014  the  economy  grew  by  5.8  percent,  in  an 
environment  of  low  and  stable  price  movements.  Full  year  inflation  averaged  4.1  percent, 
marking  2014  the  6th  consecutive  year  that  inflation  was  within  the  target  range  of  the 
Government. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  was  achieved  because  we  were  vigilant  and  took  timely 
calibrated responses to unfolding events. In mid-2014, for instance, inflation edged higher on 
market  talk  of  possibly  tighter  monetary  conditions  in  the  US.  At  the  same  time,  inflation 
expectations began to rise while real and financial assets continued to climb. 
To forestall a situation where our inflation target could be breached and to prevent potential 
asset bubbles, the BSP implemented a series of pre-emptive, calibrated monetary measures 
to  tighten  monetary  conditions.  Among  others,  we  raised  reserve  requirements,  our  policy 
rate  and  also  our  SDA  rate.  We  did  these  in  steps  to  help  guide  the  market’s  inflation 
expectations and to help the market better appreciate the risks inherent in the shifts in the 
monetary  policy  stances  of  major  central  banks,  especially  the  US  Fed. We  also  carefully 
communicated our policy intent to the market. 
At  the  same time,  international  oil  prices  started  to  drop.  Subsequently,  inflation started  to 
moderate and fall to the middle of the target range of 3–5 per cent inflation. We are pleased 
about this outcome. Inflation management is a crucial function of the BSP as it provides the 
stability that our economy and its stakeholders need. 
Even as uncertainties in global markets led to some capital flow reversals and depreciation 
pressures  on  the  peso,  we  were  able  to  maintain  a  strong  external  liquidity  position.  The 
current  account  sustained  its  surplus  because  remittances,  receipts  from  the  tourism  and 
BPO industries remained strong. 
As  a  result,  our  gross  international  reserves  settled  at  a  robust  $79.8  billion  in  December 
2014, providing us buffers from possible external shocks. The reserves are enough to cover 
10.2  months’  worth  of  imports  of  goods  and  payments  of  services  and  income;  it  is  also 
equivalent to 8.4 times the country’s short-term external debt based on original maturity and 
six times based on residual maturity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Our  strong  external  position  continues  to  be  a  source  of  confidence  for  our  creditors  and 
investors. 
Another source of strength for the Philippine economy is our sound, stable and liquid banking 
system as public confidence has kept deposits growing to record-high levels. Among others, 
this has sustained double-digit growth rates in lending, particularly to the productive sectors 
of the economy. 
Overall,  our  banks  have  strong  balance  sheets,  solid  asset  growth,  low  NPL  ratios  and 
above-standard  Capital  Adequacy  Ratios  as  a  result  of  good  governance  practices  and 
adherence to international best practice in risk management. 
Thus, our banking sector continues to be highly rated by third party assessors. In particular, 
the  Philippines  received  the  only  positive  outlook  among  69  jurisdictions  assessed  by 
Moody’s, a major international credit rating agency. 
Indeed, our banks are fully engaged with us in our efforts to help ensure that our system is 
sound, that its operations are aligned with international standards, and that its reach covers 
more of the previously unbanked or unserved areas. 
In 2014, we endorsed Republic Act 10641 that allows the full entry of Foreign Banks in the 
Philippines  and  prepared  the  IRR  for  its  implementation.  With  the  approval  of  the  IRR, 
additional foreign banks can now apply to operate in the Philippines either as a branch or as 
a wholly-owned subsidiary. 
There are clear economic benefits for us from this new law: first, foreign banks can serve as 
vehicles for foreign direct investments into the Philippines; transfer of technology is second; 
and  enhancement  of  human  resource  skills  is  third.  All  these  will  strengthen  our  banking 
system at a time when we are gearing up for the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework. 
The  IRR  of  this  law  reflects  enhancements  in  the  entry  criteria  for  foreign  banks  –  in 
particular, the new law focuses on the demonstrated expertise of a potential entrant as an 
established,  reputable  and  financially  sound  bank.  In  addition,  foreign  banks  interested  to 
enter  the  Philippines  are  required  to  be  widely-owned  and  publicly-listed  in  their  home 
country. 
In evaluating the entry applications of foreign banks, the Monetary Board shall also consider 
strategic  relationships  and  reciprocity  rights.  This  should  reassure  some  sectors  who  fear 
that  this  law  opens  the  floodgates  to foreign  entry.  Indeed,  there  are  requirements foreign 
banks have to meet and standards they have to hurdle. 
I  am  also  pleased  to  share  that  our  regulations  and  programs  enabled  us  to  gain  more 
ground in our goal to develop an inclusive financial system. In this connection, we continued 
to widen the reach of our financial learning program. We have also started the groundwork 
for a formal National Financial Inclusion Strategy that will pull together the efforts of various 
government agencies for a holistic approach to inclusive growth. 
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, against a backdrop of solid growth, stable prices and a 
strong  banking  system,  the  Philippine  economy  is  entering  2015  well-placed  to  face 
challenges from both domestic and external sources and move on to sustain growth amidst 
new challenges. 
Independent credit rating agencies affirm this. In October 2014, Moody’s joined Standard and 
Poor’s in rating the Philippines one notch above the minimum investment-grade credit rating. 
In raising the rating, Moody’s cited the government’s ongoing efforts to reduce debt, improve 
fiscal management, and minimize vulnerability to external developments. 
Risks moving forward in 2015 
Moving forward, what do we see in 2015? What I can tell you with certainty is that 2015 will 
be a year of challenges and opportunities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  therefore  anticipated 
Externally,  we  see  global  growth  continuing  to  be  uneven  –  strong  in  some  countries  and 
fragile  in  other  economies.  As  a  consequence,  monetary  policies  across  the  globe  will 
continue to diverge as their economies move into opposite directions. 
We see, on one hand, the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England taking steps toward 
monetary  policy  normalization,  as  growth  in  their  jurisdictions  gain  traction.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  are  weighed  down  by  their 
struggling  economies  and 
their 
unconventional monetary policies or stimulus measures. China is in the same boat, as it is 
anticipated  to  go  through  a  process  of  reforms  in  its  financial  sector,  to  prop  its  slowing 
economy. 
To  us,  having  protracted  uneven  global  growth  is  a  cause  for  concern  as  this  could  have 
significant  implications  for  our  own  growth  dynamics  and  impact  trade  and  the  service 
industry. 
At the same time, policy divergence among advanced economies would also have an impact 
on  our  own  domestic  financial  markets.  Should  the  US  economy  continue  to  strengthen, 
yields  on  US  dollar  assets  could  also  continue  to  rise.  The  growing  difference  in  policy 
stances among major economies could result in polar destinations of capital flows and in the 
process…heighten volatilities in our own financial markets – including the peso, equity prices 
and yields on bonds. 
to  continue  or  accelerate 
BSP’s policy thrusts 
Given  this  scenario,  we  at  the  BSP,  will  continue  to  be  watchful  and  ready  to  deploy 
appropriate policy actions in a timely manner to minimize potential adverse impact of volatile 
capital flow movements. 
In the meantime, our earlier decisions to act preemptively to address potential risks to price 
and financial stability have given the BSP sufficient policy space to consider measures that 
may be required by emerging monetary conditions. 
Ladies and gentlemen. What I have given you so far is the big picture. 
At this point, I wish to share the process we go through in operationalizing our policies. This 
should reassure you that the BSP does NOT rely on a crystal ball nor does it craft policy in a 
vacuum. 
We  coordinate  with  various  government  agencies.  For  instance,  the  BSP  is  a  resource 
agency of the Development and Budget Coordination Committee (DBCC). With the inputs of 
the  DBCC  members  and  the  BSP,  the  DBCC  formulates growth  projections  and  approves 
inflation targets for the country. 
The  BSP then  incorporates the growth  targets  into  our  own  inflation forecasts,  and  makes 
appropriate  adjustments  to  our  policy  rates  to  ensure  that  inflation  would  be  within  the 
approved target over the policy horizon. For 2015, the DBCC is projecting that the economy 
would grow 7–8 percent within an inflation target range of 2 to 4 percent. 
The way we see it, the risks to inflation in 2015 are broadly balanced. Higher utility rates and 
LRT fares will be counterbalanced by lower international oil prices, which fell to around $50 
per barrel this week, the lowest since 2009. For 2015, therefore, we expect inflation would be 
well-within the target range. This should provide the BSP the flexibility to keep policy rates at 
low and stable levels in support of economic growth. 
On the exchange rate, another metric the BSP is always asked about, I can tell you that our 
policy  remains  the  same.  This  means  we  will  allow  the  exchange  rate  to  be  essentially 
determined by market forces. 
As I mentioned earlier, we expect some volatility in the market in the near-term because of 
the growing consensus for a strong US dollar. But as in previous episodes of volatility and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  portfolio  outflows,  there  will  be  core  investors  who  will  remain  invested  in  the  Philippines 
because of our positive growth prospects and sound fundamentals. 
During these periods of volatility, you can expect the BSP to maintain a presence in the forex 
market to keep the movements aligned with fundamentals and with those of our peers in the 
region. 
Aside from working on monetary stability, the BSP will continue its banking reform agenda 
appropriate to our own operating environment. These reforms will impact on the way banks 
do business with you, but these are calibrated to enhance the protection of bank clients and 
to ensure the stability of the financial and the economic system as a whole. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen of the Rotary Club of Manila, whatever the Philippines has achieved in 
the  past  years  is  a  result  of  close  coordination  between  the  public  sector  and  the  private 
sector. 
As the monetary policymaker, the BSP will continue to promote an enabling environment for 
business  and  develop  a  more  inclusive  financial  system  that  supports  sustained  and 
inclusive growth. 
You will be happy to know therefore that from 2009 to 2013, the Philippines was consistently 
ranked as the best in the world in terms of the regulatory environment for microfinance. 
In 2014, the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) named the Philippines as the top country in 
East  and  South  Asia  and  the  third  in  the  world,  with  the  most  conducive  environment  for 
financial inclusion. 
But  beyond  these  recognitions,  what  we  value  is  the  impact  of  our  gains  in  improving  the 
lives of millions of Filipinos through financial inclusion, and particularly through microfinance. 
Nevertheless, we are mindful that there are so many more that we need to reach out to. 
This  is  where  successful  professionals  such  as  yourselves  and  organizations  such  as  the 
Rotary Club of Manila can help make a difference. 
The actual use of financial resources to create jobs and generate production for our country’s 
economic growth are in your hands. 
We at the BSP also look forward to working with you on financial inclusion programs that will 
attract  more  Filipinos  to  be  part  of  the  financial  mainstream  where  money  would  be  more 
widely  available  at  prevailing  commercial  rates.  Rates  that  are  significantly  lower  than  the 
1,000% a year rate in the informal sector. 
Imagine the beneficial impact this can bring to millions of our microentrepreneurs. 
Let us therefore continue to work together to keep the Philippine economy growing and make 
lives better for Filipinos. 
This is very much in keeping with the Rotary Club’s two mottos: “Service Above Self” and 
“He Profits Most… Who Serves Best.” 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Manila,  together,  may  we  have  a  successful, 
meaningful and prosperous New Year! 
Thank you for your attention. 
Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
