  
 
Thomas  Jordan:  Swiss  National  Bank’s  monetary  policy  decision  and 
assessment of the economic situation 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 18 June 
2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to the Swiss National Bank’s (SNB) news conference. 
As usual, I shall begin by outlining the Governing Board’s monetary policy decision and our 
assessment  of  the  economic  situation.  This  will  be  followed  by  Jean-Pierre  Danthine’s 
presentation  of  our  annual  Financial  Stability  Report  and  Fritz  Zurbrügg’s  comments  on 
financial market developments. After that, we will be happy to take your questions. 
Monetary policy decision 
Let me begin with our monetary policy decision. 
The  SNB  has  decided  to  leave  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  unchanged  at 
between  –1.25%  and  –0.25%  and  interest  on  sight  deposits  at  the  SNB  is  to  remain  at  –
0.75%. Negative interest rates in Switzerland make holding investments in Swiss francs less 
attractive  and  will  help  to  weaken  the  Swiss  franc  over  time.  Overall,  the  Swiss  franc  is 
significantly overvalued. In formulating our monetary policy, we take account of the exchange 
rate  situation  and  its  impact  on  inflation  and  economic  developments.  We  will  therefore 
remain active in the foreign exchange market, as necessary, in order to influence monetary 
conditions. 
Our new conditional inflation forecast does not differ greatly from the one we presented in 
March.  Inflation  will  reach  its  low  point  in  the  third  quarter  of  2015,  at  –1.2%.  For  the 
subsequent period, the new inflation forecast is slightly higher than in March due to the rise 
in oil prices. The short and medium-term forecast is up slightly, by 0.1 percentage points to 
–1.0% for 2015 and to –0.4% for 2016. The forecast continues to indicate that inflation will 
move  back  into  positive  territory  at  the  beginning  of  2017;  there  will  be  a  slight  slowdown 
in  the  rate  of  increase  as  the  year  progresses.  The  inflation  forecast  for  2017  is  down  by 
0.1 percentage points, to 0.3%. The conditional forecast assumes that the three-month Libor 
will remain at –0.75% over the entire forecast horizon, and that the Swiss franc will weaken. 
Global economic outlook 
As our inflation forecast is heavily influenced by economic developments abroad, let me now 
present our assessment of the global economy. 
Global  economic  growth  was  weaker  than  expected  in  the  first  quarter  of  2015,  and  this 
development  had  a  detrimental  impact  on  world  trade.  In  the  US,  GDP  declined  slightly, 
partly due to special factors. Moreover, the strong US dollar weighed on exports. In the euro 
area, however, the economy continued to pick up, supported by persistent euro weakness 
and improved lending conditions. In contrast to the previous quarter, all of the large member 
states  contributed  to  growth.  Italy  reported  GDP  growth  for  the  first  time  since  entering  a 
multi-year  recession.  In  Japan,  too,  the  economy  gained  momentum.  In  the  emerging 
economies, performance remained uneven, while growth continued to cool in China. 
The global economy is expected to gather pace again, reinforced by expansionary monetary 
policy around the world and ongoing low oil prices. For instance, after a disappointing first 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  quarter,  the  two  large  economies,  the  US  and  China,  are  starting  to  show  signs  of 
improvement. 
Nonetheless, uncertainty about the future development of the global economy remains high. 
Various  risks  – first  and  foremost  the  difficult financial  situation  in  Greece  and  geopolitical 
tensions – could jeopardise the recovery. 
Swiss economic outlook 
According to initial estimates, Switzerland’s real GDP declined slightly in the first quarter. As 
expected, goods exports suffered from the strong Swiss franc appreciation, but also from a 
downturn  in  global  trade.  Domestic  demand,  by  contrast,  developed  robustly.  Having  said 
this, the situation varies considerably from one industry to another. Profit margins are under 
significant pressure in several sectors, and this is forcing companies to take steps to reduce 
production  costs  and  raise  efficiency.  Against  this  backdrop,  unemployment  has  increased 
slightly on a seasonally adjusted basis. 
Over the coming months, the global economic recovery is likely to lead to a gradual upturn in 
demand  for  Swiss  products;  this  will  cushion  the  impact  of  the  exchange  rate  shock 
somewhat. As the global economy gathers momentum, we expect Switzerland to return to 
positive growth in the second half of the year. The SNB continues to anticipate growth of just 
under 1% for 2015 as a whole. 
Monetary and financial conditions 
Allow me to move on now to monetary and financial conditions. 
Since  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  inflation  has  moved  well  into 
negative  territory.  This  is  chiefly  attributable  to  imported  goods  prices,  which  in  May  were 
down  roughly  5%  year-on-year,  mainly  due  to  the  fall  in  oil  prices.  Domestic  inflation, 
meanwhile,  remains  in  positive  territory.  Our  inflation  forecast  shows  that  the  period  of 
negative inflation will be temporary; it is part of an adjustment process following the sharp 
appreciation of the Swiss franc. The SNB does not currently expect a sustained price decline 
or, indeed, a deflationary spiral with the associated harmful effects on economic activity and 
employment. 
Available surveys on inflation expectations of households and companies present a similar 
picture. Short-term inflation expectations have stabilised, albeit at a very low level. Long-term 
inflation  expectations  have  remained  virtually  unchanged  over  the  last  half-year.1  They 
remain within a range that is consistent with the SNB’s definition of price stability. 
Low inflation rates translate to low nominal interest rates. On the money market, short-term 
interest rates are close to the interest on sight deposits at the SNB of –0.75%; interest rates 
in  Switzerland  are  thus  lower  than  in  most  other  countries.  However,  due  to  negative 
inflation, Switzerland’s real interest rates, which ultimately determine investment returns, are 
higher than its nominal rates. Moreover, they are also higher than real interest rates in other 
countries, such as the US, Germany and the UK. My colleague, Fritz Zurbrügg, will provide 
further details on interest rate developments on the money and capital markets. 
Despite the low interest rates, mortgage growth has continued to weaken slightly in recent 
months. Notwithstanding this, imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets remain 
high. My colleague, Jean-Pierre Danthine, will discuss this in greater depth in his remarks. 
                                                
1 In October 2014, Consensus Economics projected inflation expectations of 1.4% for the period 2020–2024; in 
April 2015, it put these at 1.5% for the period 2021–2025. Long-term inflation expectations are only surveyed 
on a half-yearly basis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In light of the uncertainty regarding the future of Greece, the Swiss franc continues to serve 
as a safe haven currency. In trade-weighted terms, the Swiss franc is still approximately 12% 
higher  than  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  year.  Over  time,  negative  interest  rates  on  the 
Swiss money and capital markets should help to correct the overvaluation of the Swiss franc. 
The  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates  abroad  has  also  led  to  a  widening  of  the  interest  rate 
differential with these countries of late. As conditions continue to normalise on international 
financial  markets,  investments  in  other  currencies  should  become  more  attractive;  this,  in 
turn, is likely to help ease the overvaluation of the Swiss franc. The slowdown we are now 
observing  in  the  economy  also  suggests  that  the  Swiss  franc  is  very  unlikely  to  remain 
persistently high. 
Monetary policy outlook 
I shall now move on to our monetary policy. 
Since  15  January,  we  have  repeatedly  and  thoroughly  explained  our  reasons  for 
discontinuing the minimum exchange rate and introducing negative interest on sight deposits 
at  the  SNB.  Upholding  the  minimum  exchange  rate  was  no  longer  sustainable  given  the 
changes  taking  place  in  the  international  arena  and  the  sharply  diverging  monetary  policy 
stances of the world’s major currency blocks. 
In formulating our monetary policy, we are confronted with an exceptionally complex situation 
on international financial markets. What is more, the global economy is still grappling with the 
after-effects  of  the  financial  and  economic  crisis,  not  least  in  the  form  of  high  levels  of 
uncertainty.  These  are  the  realities  that  the  SNB  –  and  the  Swiss  economy  –  are  facing. 
Turning a blind eye is not an option. 
In this environment, we were aware that the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate 
would cause Switzerland’s economy to slow. While the data from the first quarter confirm that 
this  slowing  process  is  now  underway,  the  country’s  economic  development  since  15 
January has been broadly in line with our expectations. 
Our monetary policy is geared towards this challenging set of circumstances and is currently 
guided by our  willingness to take an active role  in the foreign exchange market and apply 
negative interest rates. This two-pronged approach is designed to weaken the Swiss franc. 
The SNB’s interventions in the foreign exchange market, which feed more liquidity into the 
banking  system,  reinforce  the  effect  of  both  of  these  measures.  We  intend  to  retain  the 
current interest rate level for now and will monitor its effects closely. 
With  respect  to  setting  interest  rates  and  supplying  the  money  market  with  liquidity,  the 
SNB’s monetary policy decisions have been very bold by international standards. All things 
considered, the Swiss franc nevertheless remains significantly overvalued. Were Switzerland 
not to have negative interest rates, and hence have a narrower interest rate differential with 
other countries, demand for Swiss francs would be even greater and our currency would be 
even stronger today. 
We  are  aware  that  the  current  exchange  rate  situation  is  extremely  difficult  for  exporters, 
tourism  and  industries  that  are  particularly  exposed  to  competition  from  abroad. While  we 
recognise the scale of the challenges facing the affected companies, it is worth remembering 
that in the current climate there is, regrettably, no easy solution that would absorb all external 
disruptions. We must accept these challenging economic conditions for the time being. That 
said, we are convinced that, under the circumstances, the SNB’s current choice of monetary 
policy will best serve Switzerland’s overall interests in the long term. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. It is now my pleasure to give the floor to 
Jean-Pierre Danthine, who will present our Financial Stability Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
