  Sabine Lautenschläger: How can prudential regulation foster growth? 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
at the Frankfurt Finance Summit, Frankfurt am Main, 16 March 2015. 
 Supervisors  can  contribute  to  sustainable  economic  growth  by  ensuring  that  supervised 
entities  are  resilient  to  plausible  shocks,  properly  managed,  adequately  capitalised  and 
subject  to  an  efficient  risk  management  and  the  right  incentives.  The  European  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  takes  a  medium  to  long-term  perspective  on  this,  resisting  those 
who argue for short-term relief. The SSM ensures that banks can deliver in their tasks in all 
phases of the economic cycle and thus are able to provide the economy with the financial 
services that corporations, smaller firms and citizens need. 
 It is my pleasure to open this dinner with a question that may seem quite straightforward, but 
whose answer is far from intuitive, especially from the perspective of a supervisor: “How can 
prudential regulation foster growth?” 
I must admit that when I first saw the topic of this short speech I was tempted to turn this into 
a brainstorming session. I am sure that many of you have innovative ideas on how to foster 
growth  by  means  of  prudential  regulation  and  supervisory  action.  Some  might  suggest 
restraint on the side of regulators and supervisors as a way of fostering growth – and they 
may  be  right  regarding  some  of  the  many  topics  that  were  regulated  over  the  last  seven 
years. But if you now expect me to provide comfort with a regulatory break or even promise 
supervisory leniency, I am afraid you are in for a disappointment. 
The financial crisis has shown that there is little more damaging for sustainable growth than a 
malfunctioning  banking  sector.  That  is  why  –  after  a  long  period  of  deregulation  – 
governments  around  the  world  decided  to  strengthen  regulation  and  supervision.  The 
ultimate  objective  of  these  reforms  has  been  the  same  since  the  1930s:  regulators  and 
supervisors have to ensure that the banking sector is resilient and provides the economy and 
society at large with its key services, even under severe stress. 
As  a  supervisor,  our  most  valuable  contribution  to  economic  growth  is  to  do  our  job  –  by 
implementing  regulation  consistently,  by  closely  monitoring  supervised  institutions  in  a 
forward-looking,  risk-based  and  proportionate  way  and  by  taking  timely  and  determined 
action when needed. The SSM has the responsibility and privilege to go a step further. By 
harmonising  supervisory  practices,  we  will  contribute  to  a  level-playing  field  which  will 
eventually also foster growth. 
To  be  more  concrete,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  two  important  issues  with 
implications for growth which both also reflect the unique features of the SSM. 
The first one is the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP), which gives us the 
instrument to tailor supervisory requirements beyond the minimum capital requirements set 
by the Basel Accord. We take into account the banks specific business risks, but also include 
governance and internal controls. 
The  second  one  is  the  harmonisation  of  supervisory  practices  to  the  highest  standards, 
through  the  consistent  and  rigorous  exercise  of  options  and  discretions  formally  left  to 
national supervisors. 
Both topics, SREP and options and discretions, relate, among other things, to “more capital 
with  higher  quality”.  Let  me  first  respond  to  concerns  about  some  of  our  SREP  decisions. 
Some critics argue that setting capital requirements above the regulatory minimum hampers 
the  economic  recovery  in  Europe.  You  will  not  be  surprised  that  I  do  not  share  these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  concerns. On the contrary, I am of the firm view that the time for muddling through is over. 
Generally  setting  capital  requirements  at  the  minimum  might  have  an  effect  on  short-term 
growth  (though  this  is  highly  questionable),  but  it  would  come  at  the  expense  of  more 
problems in the future if the bank concerned has a specific need for capital. I think we can all 
agree that we need banks that are able to permanently fulfil their role in good times as well 
as bad. That is why  we have to start working towards that now by using the SREP to set 
capital requirements as appropriate for the individual banks’ risk profile and governance. 
I  appear  to  be  in  good  company  with  this  view:  there  seems  to  be  a  consensus  in  the 
academic literature that an increase in regulatory capital requirements has a positive impact 
on lending to the real economy in the long term, while loan reduction can occur in the short 
term. For a start, the vast majority of banks have capital buffers above the thresholds implied 
by the SREP decisions, which in those cases means that an increase in capital requirements 
would actually have little or no effect on the banks’ credit supply. In the event of an actual 
deleveraging by a bank as a result of a SREP decision, lending activities would often not be 
hit as it would be logical for the bank to first reduce its non-core business. And even if there 
were a reduction in credit supply by specific banks, this could only have a consequence on 
the  real  economy  if  no  off-set  happened  elsewhere  in  the  financial  system.  Finally,  there 
would need to be an assumption that no relief in the banks’ funding costs would occur as a 
result of the improvement of the capital ratio imposed by the SREP decisions. Therefore, I 
would call for caution when making a direct link between SREP decisions and consequences 
on the real economy. 
But the SREP is not only about capital, it is much more. The overall efficiency in operations 
and in credit allocation, as well as the stability and resilience of the banking sector do not 
depend solely on the level and quality of capital. Capital should actually be a bank’s last line 
of defence, and the supervisory approach we believe in implies that we are not engaged in a 
simple box-ticking exercise, whereby internal processes and conduct features can be ignored 
as long as a bank holds enough capital. On the contrary, we have decided to use the SREP 
exercise  to  perform  an  acute  forward-looking  review  and  challenge  top  managers  in  all 
aspects of the banks’ operations. This goes beyond the assessment of traditional risks. The 
SREP  allows  supervisors  to  draw  conclusions  on  the  banks’  internal  governance,  risk 
management practices, incentive systems, effective data aggregation, as well as the general 
risk appetite of the institution and how it matches its business model. This can result in the 
supervisor potentially requiring the bank to hold additional capital, but this outcome is only 
one of the supervisory tools available. 
As  the  European  banking  system  faces  a  challenging  mix  of  low  growth,  high  volumes  of 
non-performing  loans,  a  low  interest  rate  environment  and  intense  competition,  the 
comprehensive  SREP  process  is  of  paramount  importance.  Banks  might  embark  on 
dangerous business strategies or reduce costs by reducing staff for risk management. Only 
by taking a holistic view of the bank can the supervisor counter the build-up of risks on all 
levels  and  weaknesses  in  governance  and  internal  controls  with  adequate  capital 
surcharges. 
Being  able  to  apply  these  principles  and  actions  in  a  single  and  consistent  manner  for  all 
SREP  decisions  is  a  major  benefit  of  the  SSM,  both  for  supervisors  and  for  banks 
themselves, which are treated on an equal footing based on the single methodology applied 
across the board. 
This approach, consisting in identifying best practices and then harmonising the performance 
of supervision accordingly, is also reflected in the work we are currently undertaking at the 
SSM on regulatory options and national discretions. 
Up  until  now,  Member  States  in  the  euro  area,  banks  and  supervisors  have  to  work  with 
more than 150 different options and national discretions in the single rulebook. These options 
and  national  discretions  are  often  a  legacy  resulting  from  different  market  structures  and 
legal  environments.  Many  of  them  have  material  effects  on  the  level  of  prudence  of  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  framework  and  on  the  comparability  of  capital  ratios;  they  also  add  an  additional  layer  of 
complexity as well as a source of regulatory arbitrage, of risk to the financial sector and of 
competitive disadvantage for banks established in Member States that have chosen the most 
virtuous standard. 
Let me take one example related to the transitional arrangements in the definition of capital. 
The various phase-in arrangements of the CRR capital definitions within the SSM account for 
an  overall  €126  billion  gain  compared  to  the  “fully-fledged”  definition.  This  amount  is 
unequally shared across national banking systems as clearly shown in  the comprehensive 
assessment report published last year. 
It is up to the SSM to use its power for exercising options and national discretion wisely. We 
aim  to  improve  the  comparability  of  capital  ratios.  In  the  medium  to  long  run,  this  will 
permanently increase the resilience and service capacity of banks. 
It is up to the SSM to use its power for exercising options and national discretion wisely. We 
aim  to  improve  the  comparability  of  capital  ratios  and  create  transparency  by  providing 
reliable information to citizens and market participants. In the medium to long run, this will 
permanently increase the resilience and service capacity of banks. 
Of  course,  harmonisation  cannot  be  a  goal  in  its  own  right.  Exactly  the  same  is  true  for 
national specificities: if national specificities contribute to a more stable banking system, the 
SSM will be eager to preserve or even promote them. But if national characteristics are only 
the reflection of unquestioned traditions and regulatory capture, they should be eradicated. 
As with the SREP decisions, we expect positive outcomes in terms of prudence, consistency 
and  stability  of  the  framework  to  outweigh  by  far  the  adjustment  costs  that  each  national 
banking system will face by converging to the high standards. 
Let me conclude, as dinner is awaiting us. 
While  banking  is  a  complex  business,  and  as  such  it  cannot  be  naively  regulated  or 
supervised, there is of course always room for improvement. Therefore, you will be pleased 
to hear that simplicity and comparability of prudential standards have become a top priority 
for the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, and that regulators are now giving greater 
attention  to  formerly  disregarded  parts  of  EBA  standards  called  “impact  assessments”.  As 
member of the Basel Committee, I very much welcome this development. 
That  being  said,  I  am  convinced  that  supervisors  can  contribute  to  sustainable  growth  by 
ensuring  that  supervised  entities  are  resilient  to  plausible  shocks,  properly  managed, 
adequately capitalised and subject to an efficient risk management and the right incentives. 
We as the SSM take a medium to long-term perspective on this, while resisting those who 
argue for short-term relief. Our role, in short, is to ensure that banks can deliver in their tasks 
in  all  phases  of  the  economic  cycle  and  thus  are  able  to  provide  the  economy  with  the 
financial services that corporations, smaller firms and citizens need. Achieving this ambitious 
objective will certainly contribute to the economic growth that Europe is craving for. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
