  
 
Glenn  Stevens:  Economic  conditions  and  prospects  –  creating  the 
upside 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Economic 
Society of Australia Luncheon, Brisbane, 10 June 2015. 
I thank Elliott James for research assistance. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak in Brisbane once again. 
The last time I spoke with this group, in July 2013, the economy was estimated to be growing 
at about 2½ per cent.1 Underlying inflation was 2¼–2½ per cent, consistent with the target of 
2–3 per cent. 
Two years on, the economy is growing at just shy of 2½ per cent and underlying inflation is 
around 2¼–2½ per cent, consistent with the target. 
In  some  respects,  then,  it  might  seem  that  not  much  has  changed.  In  fact  a  number  of 
important  developments  have  occurred  during  that  period,  some  as  anticipated  and  some 
not.  Overall,  the  fact  that  not  much  has  changed  is  disappointing:  the  economy  has  not 
picked up speed as we had hoped. 
In this talk, I will make some observations about the global and domestic economies, and try 
to give some sense of what we have learned in the past couple of years. 
The global economy 
Two  years  ago,  we  judged  Australia’s  trading  partner  group  to  be  growing  at  about  its 
average pace of around 4 per cent. It was expected that during 2014 and 2015 growth in this 
group  would  pick  up  a bit, to  a pace  a  little  above  average. In fact, growth  for  our trading 
partners has remained at about 4 per cent and is expected to stay there over the next couple 
of years. 
To be sure, 4 per cent growth is faster than growth for the world economy as a whole, which 
is more like 3¼ per cent. It has been to Australia’s advantage that we have a high exposure, 
for an advanced country, to the faster-growing Asian region. 
As  an  example,  while  the  euro  area  is  a  significant  trading  partner  for  Australia,  we  were 
probably less affected than many countries in 2012 and 2013 when Europe lapsed back into 
recession. Two years ago, I noted that the economy of the euro area was still smaller than it 
was  before  the  financial  crisis.  Regrettably,  that  remains  true  today.  Europe  is  back  on  a 
growth  path  now,  but  it  is  still  a  fairly  modest  one,  and  it  seems  to  require  extraordinary 
settings of monetary policy to achieve even that. 
Growth has recently resumed in Japan after a dip in activity following the enactment of a tax 
increase last year. Japanese growth rates remain pretty modest, though since Japan has a 
declining population, they look better on a per capita basis. The full implementation of the so-
called “third arrow” of structural reform could be expected, if it occurs, to lift growth per head 
further over the long run. 
Growth is proceeding at a reasonable clip in the rest of Asia, though as I noted two years 
ago, in more than a few countries it has not been possible to restore the pre-crisis growth 
rates. And the growth that has been achieved has been accompanied in a number of cases 
                                                
1  With subsequent data revisions the growth rates in mid 2013 look a little lower now. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  by a sizeable increase in debt owed by households, firms or both. How big a vulnerability this 
will  turn  out  to  be  under  different  financial  conditions  and/or  lower  growth  we  cannot  yet 
know. 
While it has been to our advantage to have a lesser exposure to Europe than many other 
countries,  the  flipside  is  a  much  greater  exposure  to  China.  That  means  we  will  be  more 
sensitive to fluctuations in China’s performance than other countries. This is not a new point; 
I said as much about five years ago.2 But it is perhaps more concrete now, given that China’s 
growth has slowed appreciably over the past few years. The moderation in 2014 was more or 
less  as  China’s  policymakers  intended.  The  further  moderation  seen  over  the  past  six 
months  or  so  may  have  been  a  little  more  than  intended.  Chinese  policy  has  been 
responding  to  that  outcome  as  you  would  expect:  interest  rates  are  declining,  and  some 
selected restraints on credit are being eased. 
Stepping  back  from  the  ebb  and  flow  of  short-run  data,  the  big  point  is  that  China’s 
policymakers are attempting two major transitions. One is towards more consumption-driven 
growth,  as  opposed  to  investment  and  export-led  growth.  This  is  necessary  because  a 
continental-sized  economy  such  as  China  cannot  rely  on  the  rest  of  the  world  absorbing 
rapid growth in its output. The second, related transition is towards a more robust financial 
structure, which is necessary because the prevailing structure has too many risky aspects. 
Both these transitions are necessary, but both remain works in progress. How they will play 
out is unavoidably a source of uncertainty. 
What does seem fairly clear is that the pace of growth in demand for commodities like iron 
ore will be lower in future than in the past five years, even as supply continues to increase. 
Thus far much of the additional supply has been Australian ore, though it is apparent that at 
least  some  of  the  future  increase  in  supply  will  be  from  other  countries.  Perhaps  it  is  not 
surprising,  then,  that  Australian  discussion  of  the  Chinese  economy  has  been  through  the 
prism  of  the  iron  ore  price  –  these  days  subject  to  daily  monitoring.  A  few  months  ago,  it 
almost seemed as though the price of iron ore might, in terms of attention given, eclipse that 
other price on which Australians focus with a passion, namely the price of a house. But of 
late house prices seem to have regained their pre-eminent place in our national psyche! 
Turning away from China, it is quite significant that there is a good deal more optimism now 
in the United States. The rate of unemployment has fallen considerably and growth in wages 
has begun to increase. There was a weak March quarter result for growth in output, which 
most observers attribute to temporary factors, though it remains to be seen just how robust 
the return to growth has been since. 
The significance of a healthier US economy is two-fold. One element is that the expectations 
of many business people around the world, including in Australia, still tend to take a cue from 
the tone of US business. The second is that, at some point, US monetary policy will begin to 
adjust  to  improved  conditions.  That  will  be  a  very  gradual  process,  but  at  this  stage, 
indications still seem to be that the US Federal Reserve will begin the process some time this 
year. 
It  is  reasonable  to  hope  that  this  change  in  course  can  be  accomplished  without  serious 
disruption to financial markets, but we cannot be certain of that. Countries receiving cross-
border  capital  flows  have  generally  sought  to  strengthen  their  economic  and  financial 
fundamentals since the “taper tantrum” of mid 2013. The fact that the Fed has signalled as 
clearly as possible the way it thinks about these issues should also help reduce instability. 
On the other hand, “guidance” is no guarantee of smooth sailing. Moreover, we stand today 
at  a  highly  unusual  juncture.  We  see  a  combination  of  remarkably  low  yields  on  financial 
                                                
2  See ‘The Challenge of Prosperity’, Address to the Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) 
Annual Dinner, Melbourne, November 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  assets, compressed risk premia and diverging outlooks for monetary policy across the major 
jurisdictions. It is a complex picture for both market participants and policymakers. 
Recently, we have seen some large and abrupt movements in currencies, commodity prices 
and even sovereign bond rates. While to some extent this is a normalisation after a period of 
unusually  subdued  volatility,  these  movements  may  also  be  signalling  that  a  degree  of 
underlying fragility has built up over the long period of “search for yield”. Such dynamics bear 
watching. 
The Australian economy 
In Australia, recent growth in the economy has not been as strong as we want. Of course, 
what we are witnessing is not an economy heading along the course of a normal economic 
cycle, but a complex and rather lengthy adjustment both to the once-in-a-century cycle in our 
terms of trade and an earlier increase in household leverage. During the late 1990s and early 
2000s, very confident households spent and borrowed more, and saved less, in the process 
extending their balance sheets. That process started to fade in about 2006 and then finished 
more abruptly when the financial crisis hit. But by then the run-up in resources prices was 
imparting a very large stimulus to the economy and allowed for solid growth to continue at a 
time when most other countries were still feeling the aftermath of the financial crisis. 
But now most of the capital spending that was needed to lift the output of the mining sector 
has been completed, at least for the production of iron ore. Some very large LNG projects 
are still underway, but as those projects and others draw to a close, the decline in mining 
investment that is already underway will continue (and perhaps accelerate). 
The latest edition of the Australian National Accounts, released last week, shows the picture. 
The quarterly growth figure was stronger than what had been embodied in our forecasts in 
the  May  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  though  that  comes  after  a  weaker-than-expected 
outcome in the previous quarter. Some of the strength resulted from unusually high export 
shipments  of  resources,  which  were  less  disrupted  by  weather  conditions  in  the  “cyclone 
season” than has often been the case in the past. Indications are that this pace of growth 
wasn’t repeated in the June quarter, when shipments of coal in particular were affected by 
weather disruptions on the east coast. 
Taking  the  results  over  the  past  four  quarters,  growth  was  “below  trend”.  Export  volume 
growth contributed strongly, while domestic final demand increased by a bit under 1 per cent, 
which  is  quite  a  weak  result.  Housing  construction  rose  strongly,  and  consumer  spending 
over the year rose by more than real household income (that is, the saving rate fell). Both 
these results owe a good deal to low interest rates and rising asset values. 
But  other  components  of  demand  were  weak.  Business  investment  fell  substantially,  with 
mining investment falling quickly and, as best we can tell, non-mining capital spending also 
weak. Public final spending didn’t grow at all. Public investment spending fell by 8 per cent 
over the past year. 
Overall,  these  outcomes  are  weaker  than  what,  two  years  ago,  we  expected  would  be 
happening by now. Back then, the two-year-ahead forecast was for annual GDP growth to be 
in a range of 2½ to 4 per cent by mid 2015. The width of that range reflected the normal size 
of  error  margins,  coupled  with  the  inevitable  uncertainty  about  the  timing  of  when  some 
components  of  demand  outside  of  mining  might  strengthen,  and  the  judgement  that  if 
accommodative monetary policy really was held in place for several years (which was a key 
assumption behind those forecasts), activity could at some point start to pick up quite quickly. 
It will be three months before we get the national accounts data for the June quarter, but at 
this point, with three of the four quarters available for the year to June 2015, it would appear 
that the outcome will be either right at the bottom of the range predicted two years ago or, 
more likely, a bit below it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Of  course,  forecasts  are  hardly  more  than  educated  guesswork  and  two-year-ahead 
forecasts are even less reliable. That there are inevitably forecast errors is neither surprising 
nor new, and it is not any more concerning per se now than it always has been. This is far 
from the biggest forecast error I’ve seen over my three decades in this game. 
But it is nonetheless useful to see what we can learn from those errors. 
The following points are prominent: 
• 
The terms of trade, which two years ago were assumed to fall, have in fact fallen 
further  –  they  are  about  12  per  cent  lower  than  the  assumed  path.  That  means 
national income is lower, which means spending power is lower. 
The exchange rate, which at that time was above parity against the US dollar, and 
was  assumed  to  stay  there,  is  now  about  25  per  cent  lower.  It  has  moved  in  the 
same direction as the terms of trade, which is normal. 
The lower exchange rate has helped to produce a contribution to growth from “net 
exports” much greater than earlier forecast, while that from domestic demand has 
been  much  weaker.  The  latter  is  mainly  spread  across  non-mining  business 
investment and weaker government spending, together with softer consumption on 
account  of  lower  incomes.  One  thing  which  is  not  very  different  from  the  forecast 
from two years ago is that mining sector capital spending is falling sharply. 
Because  the  net  effect  of  the  above  factors  is  that  GDP  growth  has  been  on  the 
weaker side of expectations, the unemployment rate is about half a percentage point 
higher than forecast two years ago. Consistent with that, growth in wages is, as you 
would expect, lower than forecast. 
Headline  inflation  is  lower  than  forecast,  largely  because  of  the  recent  fall  in  oil 
prices. Underlying inflation is within the 2–3 per cent range that had been forecast. 
Again, the depreciation of the exchange rate has been a factor here. 
The cash rate is 75 basis points lower than assumed two years ago, as monetary 
policy has used the room provided by contained inflation to try to do more to help 
growth. Lending rates have fallen on average by about 100 basis points over that 
period. This has produced a stronger result for housing construction than forecast 
and will also have contributed to the rise in dwelling prices. 
     In summary, the economy has in several important respects followed a different track from 
the  one  expected  a  couple  of  years  ago.  That  is  partly  because  conditions  in  the  world 
economy were different from what had been expected and partly because several domestic 
factors were different. 
Some in-built responses have been  in evidence. For example the decline in the exchange 
rate, even if not by as much as we might have expected, has had the effect of supporting 
growth  and  keeping  inflation  from  falling  as  much  as  it  might  have  done.  And,  of  course, 
monetary  policy  has  also  responded  to  the  evolving  situation,  consistent  with  the  Reserve 
Bank’s  mandate.  These  responses  have  had  the  effect  of  lessening  the  extent  to  which 
growth and inflation have differed from the outcomes expected two years ago, but haven’t 
managed to eliminate those differences entirely, at least in the case of output growth. 
The  slowing  in  wage  growth  in  response  to  soft  labour  market  conditions  has  also 
undoubtedly helped to hold employment up. In fact wage growth appears to be somewhat 
lower  than  previous  relationships  between  wages  and  unemployment  would  suggest.  This 
may be a sign of increased price flexibility in the labour market and could help to explain why 
employment  recently  has  looked  a  little  higher  relative  to  estimated  GDP  than  might  have 
been expected. These hypotheses can be advanced only tentatively, though, until we have 
more data. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Looking ahead, the most recent forecasts suggest that growth rates will be similar to those 
we have observed recently for a while yet. Residential investment will reach new highs over 
the  period  ahead.  Household  consumption  is  expected  to  record  moderate  growth.  With 
national income growth reduced by a falling terms of trade, this requires a modest decline in 
the saving rate. It doesn’t seem reasonable to expect much more from consumption growth 
than that. 
Resources  sector  investment  has  a  good  deal  further  to  fall  yet  over  the  next  two  years. 
Other areas of investment seem very low and while I would have expected that by now these 
would  have  been  showing  signs  of  strengthening,  the  most  recent  indications  are  for,  if 
anything, a weakening over the year ahead. Public final spending has not been growing and 
fiscal consolidation still has some way to run. Under the current macroeconomic conditions, it 
would seem inappropriate for governments to seek additional restraint here in the near term. 
Inflation is likely to remain low. Growth in labour costs is very low and some of the forces that 
were  pushing  up  certain  administered  prices  have  started  to  reverse.  So  even  if  the 
exchange rate were to fall further, which in my view it needs to, we seem unlikely to have a 
problem with excessive inflation. 
Putting  all  that  together,  as  things  stand,  the  economy  could  do  with  some  more  demand 
growth over the next couple of years. 
Of  course,  these  are forecasts. They  might  be wrong. In fact,  they  will  be  wrong,  in  some 
dimension  or  other.  Our  published  material  goes  to  some  lengths  to  articulate  a  range  of 
“risks”. It is easy to think of “downside” ones in the current mood of determined pessimism. 
But it is not entirely impossible to think of upside ones as well. A further fall in the exchange 
rate,  which  is  not  assumed  in  the  forecasts,  would  add  both  to  growth  and  prices.  If  one 
thinks that such a decline at some point is likely, that constitutes an “upside” risk. Of course, 
the list of countries that would prefer a lower exchange rate is a long one and we can’t all 
have it. 
That  being  so,  we  might  give  some  thought  to  trying  to  create  some  upside  risks  to  the 
growth outlook through policy initiatives. The Reserve Bank will remain attuned to what it can 
do,  consistent  with  the  various  elements  of  its  mandate  –  including  price  stability,  full 
employment and financial stability. We remain open to the possibility of further policy easing, 
if that is, on balance, beneficial for sustainable growth. 
The temptation, of course, is to presume outcomes can be fine-tuned by policy settings and 
that we can simply dial up more or less demand in short order to avoid deviations from some 
ideal path. Reality is inevitably more messy than that and has not always been kind to such 
fine-tuning notions. As it is, some observers think monetary policy has done too little, while 
others  think  it  already  has  done  way  too  much.  I  think  it  has  been  about  right  for  the 
circumstances. 
But  the  bigger  point  is  that  monetary  policy  alone  can’t  deliver  everything  we  need  and 
expecting too much from it can lead, in time, too much bigger problems. Much of the effect of 
monetary policy comes through the spending, borrowing and saving decisions of households. 
There  isn’t  much  cause  from  research,  or  from  current  data,  to  expect  a  direct  impact  on 
business  investment.  But  of  all  the  three  broad  sectors  –  households,  government  and 
corporations – it is households that probably have the least scope to expand their balance 
sheets to drive spending. That’s because they already did that a decade or more ago. Their 
debt burden, while being well serviced and with low arrears rates, is already high. It is for this 
reason that I have previously noted some reservations about how much monetary policy can 
be expected to do to boost growth with lower and lower interest rates. It is not that monetary 
policy is entirely powerless, but its marginal effect may be smaller, and the associated risks 
greater, the  lower  interest  rates go from  already  very  low  levels.  I  think everyone  can  see 
that. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  If  I  am  correct  about  this,  it  really  is  very  important  that  other  policies  coalesce  around  a 
narrative for growth. In this regard, I think the Government is on the right track in not seeking 
to  compensate  for  lower  revenue  growth  by  cutting  spending  further  in  the  short  run.  Of 
course,  some  resolution  of  long-run  budget  trends  is  still  going  to  be  needed  to  sustain 
confidence and that will not be an easy conversation. 
Meanwhile, as often remarked, infrastructure spending has a role to play in sustaining growth 
and  also  in  generating  confidence.  I  am  doubtful  of  our  capacity  to  deploy  this  sort  of 
spending as a short-term countercyclical device. The evidence of history is that it takes too 
long to start and then too long to stop. But it would be confidence-enhancing if there was an 
agreed story about a long-term pipeline of infrastructure projects, surrounded by appropriate 
governance on project selection, risk-sharing between public and private sectors at varying 
stages of production and ownership, and appropriate pricing for use of the finished product. 
The suppliers would feel it was worth their while to improve their offering if projects were not 
just one-offs. The financial sector would be attracted to the opportunities for financing and 
asset  ownership. The real  economy  would  benefit from  the  steady  pipeline  of  construction 
work – as opposed to a boom and bust. It would also benefit from confidence about improved 
efficiency  of  logistics  over  time  resulting  from  the  better  infrastructure.  Amenity  would  be 
improved for millions of ordinary citizens in their daily lives. We could unleash large potential 
benefits  that  at  present  are  not  available  because  of  congestion  in  our  transportation 
networks. 
The impediments to this outcome are not financial. The funding would be available, with long 
term interest rates the lowest we have ever seen or are likely to. (And it is perfectly sensible 
for some public debt to be used to fund infrastructure that will earn a return. That is not the 
same as borrowing to pay pensions or public servants.) The impediments are in our decision-
making  processes  and,  it  seems,  in  our  inability  to  find  political  agreement  on  how  to 
proceed. 
Physical infrastructure is, of course, only part of what we need. The confidence-enhancing 
narrative needs to extend to skills, education, technology, the ability and freedom to respond 
to incentives, the ability to adapt and the willingness to take on risk. It is in these areas too, 
where  there  are  various  initiatives  in  place  or  planned,  but  which  often do  not get  enough 
attention,  that  we  need  to  create  a  positive  dynamic  of  confidence,  innovation  and 
investment. 
That is the upside we need to create. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
