  Salvatore Rossi: Knowledge, innovation and relaunching the economy 
Speech (lectio magistralis) by Mr Salvatore Rossi, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of 
Italy, at the Almo Collegio Borromeo, Pavia, 17 March 2015. 
 I wish to thank the Almo Collegio Borromeo, its Rector and the President of the European 
Pole  of  Excellence  Professor  Dario  Velo  for  doing  me  the  honour  of  inviting  me  to  give  a 
lectio  magistralis  within  these  walls,  imbued  with  history  and  science,  and  before  such  an 
accomplished  audience.  I  also  thank  the  President  of  the  Collegio’s  Board  of  Directors, 
Vitaliano Borromeo, for the very kind words with which he outlined my intellectual interests 
and professional career. 
The title we chose for the lesson brings together three topics – knowledge, innovation, and 
relaunching  the  economy  –  which  constitute  as  many  decisive  challenges  for  our  country: 
decisive for our future and for our role in the world. I have dedicated much thought to these 
topics  over  the  years,  expressing  my  reflections  time  and  again  in  writings  and  public 
addresses.  Today,  I  would  like  to  draw  some  of  the  threads  together,  retracing  and 
connecting up those reflections, and advancing some policy proposals.1 
I will discuss the three topics of the title in reverse order. I begin, inductively, with the need to 
relaunch the Italian economy and set it on a stable path of efficiency, competitiveness, and 
progress.  This,  I  will  explain,  depends  on  the  productive  system’s  ability  to  innovate 
continuously both what and how it produces. I will then work back to the basis of this ability – 
knowledge and competence – and how and where it can be “produced”. 
Relaunching the economy 
The Seven Years’ War – Today, the Italian economy finds itself in the aftermath of a war, as 
it were. Not, fortunately for us, an old-style war with bloodshed and destruction, but one of 
those modern, virtual wars, in which factories, offices and jobs are obliterated with the click of 
a mouse. 
We now produce almost a tenth less than we did seven years ago: in manufacturing, 17 per 
cent less; in construction, more than 30 per cent. It is estimated that manufacturing lost one 
sixth of its productive capacity in this period.2 Net job destruction reached almost one million. 
Last  year,  Italian  firms  invested  overall  a  third  less  than  seven  years  earlier.  As  a  whole, 
households spent 8 per cent less in real terms. Exports have struggled to stay on an even 
keel. 
                                                
1  
I base this process on some of my recent speeches, from which I quote extensively: Artigiani o scienziati? 
Capitale  umano  e  crescita  economica,  address  to  the  International  Symposium  of  University  Professors 
“Giovani,  formazione,  università”,  Rome,  21  June  2012;  Alle  radici  dello  sviluppo:  demografia,  istituzioni, 
politica, 5th Onorato Castellino Lecture, Moncalieri, 29 November 2013; L’innovazione nelle imprese italiane, 
address at the Conference “I giovani e il difficile futuro della ricerca scientifica in Italia: Riflessioni a 50 anni 
dalla nascita della Fondazione Luigi Einaudi onlus”, Turin, 15 October 2014; Building the Future of the Italian 
Economy, address at the ceremony for the opening of the academic year 2014–2015, University of Udine, 
19 January 2015. 
  All the texts are available at www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/interventi-direttorio. 
2   L.  Monteforte  and  G.  Zevi  (2014),  “An  inquiry  on  manufacturing  capacity  in  Italy  after  the  double-dip 
recession”,  Gli  effetti  della  crisis  sul  potenziale  produttivo  e  sulla  spesa  delle  famiglie  in  Italia,  Seminari  e 
convegni,  No.  18,  Banca  d’Italia  (http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/collana-seminari-convegni/2014-
0018/Effetti-crisi-n-18.pdf). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The  global  financial  crisis  of  2007–08,  followed  by  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  of 
2010–11, inflicted far greater damage on Italy’s economy than on those of the other main 
advanced countries. “Why?” we must ask ourselves. 
The first point to make is that the aggregate data hide significant disparities. The differences 
between firms and between households have increased. Italy’s productive system, taken to 
include  both  industry  and  non-financial  market  services,  is  distributed  in  lopsided  fashion 
along  a  line  determined  by  size.3  The  25,000  firms  located  above  the  50-employee  line 
produce almost half the total value added of the sectors considered and use almost half the 
payroll employees: more than 5 million workers out of a total of 11 million. Some 4.3 million 
small firms employ, in addition to around 6 million permanent staff, 4 million self-employed 
workers, the very owners of the businesses. Thus, per capita value added – that is to say, 
productivity  –  is  low  among  small  firms.  Labour  costs  are  also  lower,  but  with  a  much 
narrower gap, so that small firms are generally less competitive than medium-to-large ones. 
As is to be expected, almost all manufactures exports are by medium-to-large firms. 
The  size  aspect  is  also  key  in  shaping  investment  decisions.  Large  or  very  large  firms 
continued to increase their stock of capital during the recession years. Many small firms, on 
the other hand, stopped investing, except in replacement assets for “survival”. Then, in the 
last two years, numerous medium-size exporting firms that are both profitable and liquid have 
also  put  their  investment  plans  on  hold  until  the  global  and  domestic  economic  outlook 
becomes clearer. 
Viewed as a whole, the contraction in consumption in these seven years was atypical with 
respect  to  past  negative  phases  of  the  economic  cycle.  Normally,  one  would  expect 
consumers to try to maintain existing standards of living during a recession despite the drop 
in disposable income, assuming it to be temporary. This time the opposite happened: people 
tightened their belts more than the drop in income warranted. Thus, they assumed that drop 
to be permanent, and indeed that it would continue to worsen, and so they judged it wise to 
increase precautionary savings.4 
Did all Italian households take this line? No, there was a split between them, and this time 
the  dividing  line  was  generational.  Living  standards,  in  terms  of  quantities  consumed  and 
decisions what to consume, fell sharply among the youngest households, and not only those 
whose  head  was  unemployed:  young  payroll  workers  suffered  from  the  widespread 
precariousness of jobs, while the self-employed, especially those at the head of small and 
micro  businesses,  had  to  use  their  own  income  to  solve  the  firm’s  problems.  Instead,  the 
higher income brackets, which include few young households, increased their spending on 
luxury goods.5 
Getting started again and moving forwards – Is the damage done by the Seven Years’ War 
permanent? Well, we have certainly slipped some way down as far as economic conditions 
are concerned and we cannot get back what we have lost. But we can make a new start, 
albeit beginning from a lower position than the one we occupied seven years ago. We might 
even  progress  at  a  faster  pace  than  we  did  before  we  were  overtaken  by  the  double-dip 
recession. 
                                                
3  
In  what  follows  I  quote  data  taken  from  Istat  (2014),  Struttura  e  competitività  del  sistema  delle  imprese 
industriali e dei servizi, anno 2012, Report of 27 November 2014. 
4   M.L. Rodano and C. Rondinelli (2014), “The Italian household consumption: a comparison among recessions”, 
Gli effetti della crisi sul potenziale produttivo e sulla spesa delle famiglie in Italia, Seminari e convegni, No. 18, 
Banca d’Italia (http://bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/collana-seminari-convegni/2014-0018/Effetti-crisis-n-18.pdf). 
5   C. Rondinelli, A. Bassanetti and F. Scoccianti (2014), “On the structure of Italian households” consumption 
patterns during the recent crises’, Gli effetti della crisi sul potenziale produttivo e sulla spesa delle famiglie in 
Italia,  Seminari  e  convegni,  No.  18,  Banca  d’Italia  (http://bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/collana-seminari-
convegni/2014-0018/Effetti-crisis-n-18.pdf). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 rate,  on  both 
favourable  exchange 
 
 
All the premises are there. Prices for energy, on which we depend so heavily, are low again. 
The highly accommodative stance of monetary policy in the euro area has provided our firms 
with  a 
foreign  and  domestic  markets,  and 
unprecedentedly  low  interest  rates.  There  is  an  increasingly  strong  drive  to  reform  the 
country’s economic and social fabric, which has elicited international approval even though it 
has  met  with  internal  division  and  resistance.  In  the  latest  scenarios  prepared  by  several 
forecasters,  including  the  Bank  of  Italy,  output will  grow  modestly  this  year,  and  more  the 
next. 
It is a cautious and uncertain new start, however, and it needs encouragement. Many firms 
that could revive their investment plans hesitate to do so. If they decide in favour, it will lead 
to  an  increase  in  employment,  and  the  renewed  confidence  will  spread  to  households  as 
well. 
Trusting that the recovery will gain strength, we must ask ourselves again why these years of 
crisis  have  been  so  much  harder for  us  than for  the  countries  against  which  we  measure 
ourselves. Our analysis will take us to the root of the structural problem that has beset the 
Italian economy for several decades. 
Between  the  last  two  recessions  –  that  of  1992–93  and  that  of  2008–14  –  something 
fundamental  has  taken  place  around  our  economy:  the  dominant  world  technology  has 
changed, speeding up the pace of market globalization; the euro has been created. 
Most  of  Italy’s  productive  system  was  slow  to  take  up  the  new  information  and 
communication  technologies  as  an  opportunity  to  improve  efficiency,  as  other  national 
systems instead did.6 It failed to grasp immediately that its addiction to devaluations of the 
lira,  with  their  short-term  competitive  gains  but  lasting  inflationary  consequences,  had  to 
become a thing of the past and that competitiveness needed to be structurally reinforced. 
In  reality,  the  productive  system  could  do  neither  because  the  form  and  structure  it  had 
inherited were unsuited, being dominated by small firms, adverse to growth even when faced 
with  a  concrete  opportunity  to  expand  in  size.  That  situation  was  the  legacy  of  a  family-
centric culture and even more so of a political and institutional milieu hostile to a free market 
and entrepreneurship. Italy has the largest productivity gap between small and medium-to-
large firms of all the main European countries. Firms everywhere are born small, but then 
they either die or grow up quickly. In Italy, if they don’t die, they remain forever in the limbo of 
stunted growth. 
Steps must be taken to change this situation because it conflicts with the need for innovative 
capacity, which I will now briefly discuss. 
Innovation 
The distinctive trait of modern times is constant innovation. A century ago, someone could 
easily  spend  an  entire  lifetime  producing  or  trading  the  same  goods  or  services  with 
immutable  characteristics,  for  which  customers’  demand  rose  and  fell  only  with  their 
changing financial situation. Today, no goods or services stay the same except for a very 
short time, after which they must be renewed, in substance or at least in presentation, if they 
are  not  to  disappear  from  the  market.  Consumers  want  to  be  continually  surprised  by 
something  they  didn’t  know  existed.  Producer  goods  too  must  change  in  order  to 
accommodate or power innovation in final consumer goods. 
                                                
6   Banca  d’Italia  (2009),  “Rapporto  sulle  tendenze  del  sistema  produttivo  italiano”  (ed.  M.  Brandolini  and 
M. Bugamelli), Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 45; S. Rossi, ed. (2003), La Nuova 
Economia. I fatti dietro il mito, Il Mulino, Bologna. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The  very  distinction  between  manufacturing  and  services  is  becoming  blurred.  More  and 
more  commonly  a  manufacture  is  just  a  container  for  services,  without  which  it  would  be 
valueless.  It  is  the  services  that  determine  development  in  the  quality  of  the  good. 
Smartphones are the most obvious example. 
Today’s manufactures/services are produced in ways that are themselves new. The digital 
revolution  has  broken  down  vertically  integrated  production  systems  into  single  tasks  – 
logistics, accounting, component production, maintenance, marketing and so on – that can 
be outsourced anywhere in the world. Long supply chains have been formed, or global value 
chains,  under  the  direction  of  a  lead  firm  but  involving  dozens  of  subcontractors,  often 
located  in  emerging  countries  where  low  labour  costs  more  than  offset  the  costs  of 
coordination and transportation.7 World trade has been revolutionized, both in geographical 
extent and in its very nature.8 
Finally,  robotics  is  advancing  by  leaps  and  bounds.  Existing  technologies  still  leave 
enormous untapped potential for innovation in production methods;9 we are on the eve of an 
era of practically total robotization of manufacturing, with far-reaching repercussions for the 
labour market in both the emerging and the advanced countries.10 Save for some niches of 
super high-end craftsmanship, making something “by hand”, which is the origin of the word 
manu-facturing, will come to mean not operating a lathe but handling a mouse or a joystick to 
activate servomechanisms and 3-D printers. And given this trend towards the automation of 
material production, global value chains themselves could shorten and relocate as the cost 
advantage of emerging countries is eroded. 
Yet  counterforces  are  also  at  play.  Manufactures  –  or  “robofactures”  –  will  continue  to  be 
central  to  our  life  as  containers  of  services.  The  conception  and,  at  least  in  part,  the 
production  of  these  services  will  of  course  have  to  be  done  by  flesh-and-blood  workers. 
These workers will have to be specially educated and trained – a point to which I will return 
further on. 
Coming back to the present, Italian firms as a group have much less innovative capacity than 
those of other advanced economies. The split that characterizes the corporate system is also 
apparent in terms of capacity for innovation.11 This term “innovation” must be understood in 
the broad sense. It involves product characteristics and the production process, of course, 
but also marketing practices, corporate organization, and participation in global supply and 
value chains. 
Confining our attention to product and process innovation alone, a survey conducted at the 
very onset of the global crisis found that only 40 per cent of Italian firms were engaged in 
such innovation, far below the 64 per cent reported for German firms.12 And we also know 
that where explicit R&D activity is lacking, the results of innovation are not as good: firms are 
                                                
7   R. Baldwin and J. Lopez-Gonzales (2013), “Supply-Chain Trade: A Portrait of Global Patterns and Several 
Testable  Hypotheses,”  NBER  Working  Papers,  No.  18957;  A.  Accetturo,  A.  Giunta  and  S.  Rossi  (2011), 
“Italian firms between crisis and the new globalization,” Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 
No. 86, Banca d’Italia. 
8   B.  Hoeckman  (2014),  Supply  Chains,  Mega-Regionalism  and  Multilateralism.  A  Road  Map  for  the  WTO, 
CEPR Press. 
9   E. Brynjolfsson and A. McAfee (2014), The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of 
Brilliant Technologies, W.W. Norton & Co. 
10   I. Visco (2014), “Perché i tempi stanno cambiando …”, Lettura del Mulino, Bologna, 18 October. 
11   M. Bugamelli, L. Cannari, F. Lotti and S. Magri (2012), “The innovation gap of Italy’s productive system: roots 
and possible solutions”, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 121, Banca d’Italia; B.H. 
Hall, F. Lotti and J. Mairesse (2013), “Evidence on the impact of R&D and ICT investment on innovation and 
productivity in Italian firms”, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 22(3). 
12   Eurostat (2010), Community Innovation Survey 2008. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
less capable of patenting inventions and industrial designs, registering brands and protecting 
intellectual  property  rights.  The  portion  of  sales  accounted  for  by  innovative  products  is 
smaller, and the chances of producing goods that are new on the market, not just new for the 
firm itself, are lower. 
The  prevalent  model  in  Italy  still  seems  to  be  incremental  innovation,  which  requires  less 
financial and organizational resources than formal R&D activity. Total formal R&D spending 
came to just 1.2 per cent of GDP in Italy in 2013, compared with 2.1 per cent in the EU as a 
whole and 2.9 per cent in Germany. These figures are very familiar and have been widely 
discussed;  equally  well  known  is  the  fact  that  the  gap  depends  not  so  much  on  public 
spending as on business spending, which is undercut by Italian firms’ systematically smaller 
size than their competitors in the other advanced countries. 
This feature of the Italian economy means that R&D investment is highly concentrated. In 
2013 the three biggest spenders accounted for 56 per cent of total private R&D expenditure, 
compared  with  39  per  cent  in  Germany.  And  although  the  per  capita  number  of  Italian 
patents  deposited  with  the  European  patent  office  has  been  rising  steadily  since  the  mid-
1990s,  it  is  still  relatively  low.  Here  again,  firm  size  is  crucial.  The  return  on  formal  R&D 
activity is about the same in Italy as in the other advanced economies.13 Nor does sectoral 
specialization,  despite 
low-tech 
manufactures,  appear  to  count  much;  even  if  we  could  “impose”  Germany’s  sectoral 
composition on the Italian economy, the innovation gap would be narrowed only marginally.14 
Smallness is coupled with an ownership structure and management practices that are often 
loath  to  take  on  the  risks  of  innovation.  Meanwhile,  the  market  in  venture  capital  –  which 
specializes in financing the rapid growth of innovative start-ups – is still poorly developed in 
Italy. 
Above all, what is decisive is the quality of the work force. 
the  economy’s  bias 
traditional, 
relatively 
towards 
Knowledge and the “knowledge factory” 
Self-evidently, better educated working people have a greater capability for innovation and 
adapt  better  to  organizational  changes.  The  correlation  between  the  share  of  university-
trained  staff  in  a  firm  and  its  capacity  for  innovation  is  high.  When  the  share  is  above  a 
certain threshold, the probability of the firm’s investing in R&D is greater. 
If  there  is  little  doubt  about  the  benefits  of  a  more  highly  skilled  work  force,  it  is  not  so 
straightforward  to  determine  precisely  which  skills  are  required.  The  computerization  of 
production  processes  achieved  to  date  has  put  a  premium  on  managerial  and  intellectual 
functions  and  made  it  possible  to  turn  many  repetitive  functions,  including  intermediate 
functions,  over  to  computers.  The  Internet  and  cloud  computing  make  it  unnecessary  for 
people  working  together  on  a  project  to  be  in  the  same  place.  Many  knowledge-related 
activities can now be performed via distance interaction. By unbundling productive functions 
some of them, such as planning and design, can be relocated to the other side of the world.15 
In  many  countries  these  trends  have  led  to  the  rapid  growth  of  the  more  highly  skilled 
professions at the expense of the intermediate. Many of the workers engaged in the latter 
have  been  forced  to  accept  lower-skilled,  lower-paid  jobs,  causing  earnings  to  become 
polarized. 
                                                
13   B.H. Hall, F. Lotti and J. Mairesse (2009), “Innovation and productivity in SMEs: empirical evidence for Italy”, 
Small Business Economics, Vol. 33, No. 1, pp. 13–33. 
14   M. Bugamelli, L. Cannari, F. Lotti and S. Magri (2012), op. cit. 
15   H.R. Varian (2010), “Computer Mediated Transactions,” American Economic Review, Vol. 100, No. 2, Papers 
and  Proceedings,  pp.  1–10;  R.  Baldwin  (2006),  “Globalisation:  the  Great  Unbundling(s)”,  Globalisation 
challenges for Europe, Secretariat of the Economic Council, Finnish Prime Minister’s Office, Helsinki. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
The pervasive impact on all work-related activities of mobile connection to the Internet, which 
is at once an enormous pool of knowledge and a concentrate of the entire world’s calculating 
capacity, requires new skills, such as the ability to gather, select and rapidly analyse data 
drawn  from  the  web.  Since  this  pool  is  also  seriously  polluted,  the  ability  to  instantly 
distinguish correct information from erroneous information presented as if it were correct is 
essential.  Calculation  capacity  must  be  used  sparingly  and  appropriately.  This  requires  a 
powerful  endowment  of  skills  that  need  constantly  updating  to  keep  pace  with  often 
unpredictable changes. 
To  develop  a  country’s  human  capital  it  is  no  longer  enough to furnish  a  large  number of 
students with a baggage of notions to be applied in routine fashion over the course of their 
working  life.  What  educators  call  “competence”  is  indispensable,  namely  the  ability  to 
mobilize personal resources – knowledge, know-how, aptitudes – and outside informational 
resources to respond effectively to new situations.16 
The importance of competence is not new. The economic historian Joel Mokyr holds that a 
key  factor  in  the  British  industrial  revolution  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  precisely  the 
abundance of high-quality professional and craft skills: 
Effective use of knowledge, however, required not only access and incentives to 
create and access new technology, but also the competence to make use of it 
and  to  carry  out  the  “instructions”  contained  in  the  blueprint  of  the  technique. 
Much of the knowledge employed by artisans and engineers was “tacit”, that is, 
not formally written down in the “recipe” used for production, but little tricks and 
know-how based on experience or imitation.17 
On this terrain Italy is not necessarily at a disadvantage. If you talk about the problems and 
prospects  of  our  economy  with  entrepreneurs  and  managers,  they  regularly  bring  up  one 
distinctive characteristic of Italy’s successful companies, large and small alike: the ability to 
adapt their products to the diverse needs of customers, moving away from standard models. 
That is, Italian “flexibility” is often seen as the proper response to German “reliability”. 
The  bedrock  of  artisanal  skills  and  professional  competence  upon  which  the  fortune  of  a 
good part of Italian industry was built naturally favours a mind-set emphasizing competences 
over one tending to the mechanical application of preconceived ideas. Here Italy does not 
seem to suffer from any handicap. So why haven’t we managed to make greater use of this 
innate predisposition of Italian entrepreneurs and workers? 
The fact  is  that  an  abundance  of  skills  is  not  enough.  As  Mokyr  observes  with  respect  to 
Britain,  the  right  combination  of  artisanal  skills  and  scientific  knowledge  is  more  highly 
structured: 
A  purely  artisanal-knowledge  society  will  eventually  revert  to  a  technological 
equilibrium,  in  contrast  to  a  society  where  the  world  of  artisans  is  constantly 
shocked by infusions of new knowledge from outsiders.18 
High-level scientific knowledge is essential to be at the frontier of basic and applied research; 
but a constructive interchange between artisans and scientists must also be developed. 
That is the story of the telescope. It has been told by Ludovico Geymonat as follows: 
We know that lens-shaped glasses had  long been familiar to optical craftsmen 
and used by them to correct sight defects, but until Galileo all the representatives 
                                                
16   I. Visco (2014), Investire in conoscenza, Il Mulino, Bologna. 
17   J. Mokyr (2009), The Enlightened Economy. An Economic History of Britain, 1700–1850, New Haven, Yale 
University Press, p. 107. 
18  Ibid., p. 116. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of high science had always looked down on them with contempt. Galileo had the 
courage  and  the  intelligence  to  make  use  of  these  lenses  for  his  astronomical 
research, artfully combining them to achieve a power of magnification that was 
truly exceptional for the time.19 
The place where scientific knowledge and the set of competences of the most highly skilled 
workers are “produced” is the university20 Italy differs from the most advanced countries by 
the much smaller amount of resources allocated to universities by families and by the public 
sector:21 annual spending per student is less than 20 per cent of per capita GDP, compared 
with  a  European  average  of  nearly  30  per  cent.22  Despite  the  institution  of  the  three-year 
university degree course, we still lack a clear distinction between “light” higher education – 
suitable for the blue and white collar tasks that are at the base of the production apparatus – 
and  education  designed  to  supply  the  economy  with  a  steady  flow  of  specialists  and 
professionals who, in today’s globalized world, can keep up with their peers from INSEAD, 
MIT or London Business School. 
A  vicious  circle  of  supply  and  demand  has  set  in.  The  Italian  universities  do  not  supply 
adequate  human  capital  for  a  modern,  advanced  economy,  while  the  firms  that  should 
demand it are often not equipped to recognize different degrees of quality and put the right 
price on them, often because they are too small. Salary levels, even in individual contracts, 
almost  never  distinguish  between  graduates  from  a  low-ranking  Italian  university  and  a 
Harvard Ph.D. Judging by the standards of American, British and German graduate schools 
or  the  French  grandes  écoles,  it  is  almost  as  if  Italy  had  given  up  the  idea  of  training  its 
professional elite at home and delegated the task to universities abroad. 
The average American university student invests nearly $15,000 a year (at 2011 prices) in 
post-secondary  education.  The  public  sector  adds  another  $8,000,  bringing  the  total  to 
$23,000.  In  Italy,  converting  euros  into  dollars  at  purchasing  power  parity,  the  average 
student  gets  an  investment  of  $6,500,  $2,200  from  his  or  her  family  and  $4,300  from  the 
government. These numbers reflect a radical difference in fundamental social choices. In the 
US, investment in good education is central to the long-term spending decisions of families 
and also of the public sector. Anyone with even a slight familiarity with American lifestyles 
knows the sacrifices and the saving that so many families dedicate to this investment, going 
so  far  as  to  plan  their  children’s  college  admission  from  birth.  So  it  should  come  as  no 
surprise that that society generates such a large part of the world’s innovations in every field 
of knowledge and workaday practice. 
The other substantial difference between these two systems lies in the use that is made of 
public resources. In the United States the share allocated directly to families in the form of 
scholarships  and  student  loans  is  much  larger  than  in  Italy;  indeed,  student  loans,  which 
provide  especially  strong  incentives,  are  practically  unknown  here.  This  form  of  public 
spending leaves it to the student to determine the end beneficiary of the funds through the 
choice  of  university;  it  has  the  advantage  of  spurring  the  competition  for  students  among 
universities.  In  countries  where  diplomas  do  not  have  a  mandated  legal  value,  the  same 
regardless  of  individual  or  institution,  as  they  do  in  Italy,  universities  will  not  compete  by 
offering  easy  courses  and  high  grades  but  by  gaining  the  reputation  for  enabling  their 
graduates  to  succeed  in  the  job  market,  where  a  degree  from  a  better  institution  is  more 
valuable. 
                                                
19   L.  Geymonat  (1973),  Storia  del  pensiero  filosofico  e  scientifico.  Volume  II:  Il  cinquecento  Il  seicento, 
2nd edition, Milan, Garzanti, p. 192. 
20   I. Visco, op. cit. 
21   S. Rossi (2006), La regina e il cavallo: quattro mosse contro il declino, Rome-Bari, Laterza. 
22   OECD (2014), Education at a Glance 2014: OECD Indicators, Paris, OECD Publishing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
Still tougher challenges lie ahead. As Brynjolfsson and McAfee observe, “Computers [have] 
started  diagnosing  diseases,  listening  and  speaking  to  us,  and  writing  high-quality  prose, 
while robots [have] started scurrying around warehouses and driving cars with minimal or no 
guidance”.23  Technical  progress  has  always  left  entire  occupations  behind,  soon  to  be 
replaced  by  others.  This  time  around,  the  process  may  be  extremely  intensive,  and 
governing it may prove complicated. In the United States, as in the main European countries, 
including Italy, one out of every two of today’s jobs risks being automated out of existence 
within a decade or two.24 
For  workers  with  special  skills  or  simply  with  the  right  education  there  has  never  been  a 
better time than the present because they are in a position to use technology to generate 
value.  By  the  same  token, for  workers  with  merely  ordinary  skills  there  has  never  been  a 
worse time than now, because the replicants to replace them are advancing rapidly and there 
will be no “blade runners” to stop them. 
But what is the right education, what do you need to keep from being swept away by the 
digital revolution? Acemoglu and Autor contend that work can be classified by a simple two-
by-two  table:  cognitive/manual,  routine/non-routine.25  Labour  demand  for  all  routine  jobs, 
including cognitive ones, appears to be on a secular downswing. And in our service-based, 
white-collar  societies,  cognitive  but  routine  jobs  are  extremely  numerous;  they  embrace  a 
large part of the middle class, which is accordingly the most seriously threatened. 
the  principal 
long  considered 
Conclusions 
Economists  have  always  sought  to  determine  which  variables  are  decisive  for  long-term 
growth.  Tangible  capital  accumulation  was 
lever  of 
development.  The  focus  shifted  next  to  technical  progress26  and  then,  finally,  to  its 
determinants: namely, the capacity of firms, economies and societies to continue to “learn”;27 
dynamism  and  home-grown  creativity,  the  thrill  of  an  intellectual  and  entrepreneurial 
challenge.28 
How can a country acquire these talents? If aided by history, it will find them embedded in its 
culture  and  traditions.  Otherwise,  purposeful  political  action  is  required  to  stimulate  the 
creativity of inventors and entrepreneurs. 
To foster new entrepreneurs, to convince the existing ones to expand their businesses by 
separating them from their family fortunes, to reward daring and inventiveness, to discourage 
positional  rents  –  this must  be today’s  economic  policy  priority  in  Italy.  It  is  a  complicated 
task, touching on all aspects of community life, first and foremost the education system, but 
also the legal order, competitive conditions, and the efficiency of government. In short, the 
entire regulatory and institutional environment within which businesses live. 
                                                
23   E. Brynjolfsson and A. McAfee (2014), op. cit. 
24   Ibid. 
25   Acemoglu  and  Autor  (2011),  Handbook  of  Labor  Economics,  Vol.  4,  Orley  Ashenfelter  and  David  E.  Card 
(eds), Amsterdam, Elsevier. 
26   Schumpeter (1934) Theory of Economic Development, Transaction Publishers; Solow (1956), “A Contribution 
to the Theory of Economic Growth”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70 (1); Solow (1957), “Technical Change 
and  the  Aggregate  Production  Function”,  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics,  39(3);  Romer  (1990), 
“Endogenous Technological Change”,  Journal  of  Political Economy, 98(5); Grossman and Helpman (1991), 
Innovation  and  Growth  in  the  Global  Economy,  MIT  Press;  Aghion  and  Howitt  (1992),  “A  Model  of  Growth 
Through Creative Destruction”, Econometrica, 60(2). 
27   Stiglitz and Greenwald (2014), Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth, Development, and 
Social Progress, Columbia University Press. 
28   Phelps (2013), Mass Flourishing, Princeton University Press. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Indeed, it is within firms that the knowledge and skills acquired in laboratories and lecture 
halls  are  harnessed  and  transformed  into  a  constant  flow  of  innovation,  and  that  the 
economy is revitalized through the creation of jobs and the generation of demand, income, 
and wellbeing. 
It  is  up  to  politicians  to  perform  the  complex  and  onerous  task  of  unblocking  the  virtuous 
circle of knowledge-innovation-economic recovery by removing futile obstacles, providing the 
right incentives and disincentives to safeguard matters of real public interest, and finally by 
ensuring social equity – whilst never forgetting that without growth all equity is vain. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
