  Kerstin af Jochnick: Current monetary policy and the economic situation 
Speech by Ms Kerstin af Jochnick, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the 
Centre for Business and Policy Studies, Stockholm, 21 August 2015. 
 Accompanying figures can be found at the end of the speech. 
Economic developments in Sweden look positive and the Riksbank’s expansionary monetary 
policy is continuing to support the upturn in inflation. I am pleased to note this as I hold an 
August speech for the fourth year in a row based on the monetary policy decision in July and 
discuss what has happened during the summer. Although I expect most people here follow 
events on stock exchanges and other markets around the world even during the summer, I 
hope  that  a  summary  of  the  most  important  events  may  be  useful  prior  to  assessing  the 
prospects for the autumn. 
One can say that Greece has not entirely unexpectedly been in focus during the summer, 
too. The forecasts in our July Monetary Policy Report were based on the sequence of events 
not preventing a recovery in the euro area. While some work remains to be done before the 
new  3-year  loan  programme  is  formally  in  place,  my  assessment  is  nevertheless  that 
developments so far are in line with the assumptions we made in July. 
Developments  in  global  economic  activity  since  July  also  support  our  assessment that  we 
would see a gradual strengthening of growth and that the weak global growth during the first 
quarter of the year was temporary. 
The Swedish statistics received also support our view that economic activity  in Sweden is 
gradually  improving  and  that  inflation  is  continuing  to  rise.  Unemployment  was  lower  than 
expected  in  June,  while  GDP  growth  was  higher  than  expected  in  the  second  quarter. 
Although  inflation  was  somewhat  lower  than  we  expected  in  June,  it  was  higher  than 
expected in July. 
The low interest rates entail risks that could cause problems in the Swedish economy further 
ahead.  A  high  level  of  indebtedness  among  households  and  rapidly  rising  housing  prices 
could make the Swedish economy vulnerable if there were to be a slowdown in economic 
activity for some reason. The Government should therefore quickly ensure that Sweden has 
a framework for macroprudential policy and that Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial 
Supervisory Authority) has a clear mandate to conduct this policy. 
The assessment and the decision in July 
The global recovery is continuing after a temporary fall at the beginning of the year, 
but some concerns remain 
I would like to begin by looking back at our assessments prior to the decision in July. The 
year began with unusually weak figures for both global production and world trade. This was 
partly because growth slowed down substantially in the United States, the United Kingdom, 
China  and  several  commodity-exporting  countries.  However,  we  assessed  that  this  was 
largely due to temporary factors and that growth would in future be good, see Figure 1. 
There are several factors that point to a favourable development in the global economy going 
forward. One factor is the oil price, which has fallen substantially over the past year. This can 
be expected to have a positive effect on growth in the countries that do not produce oil. For 
instance, it provides scope for increased consumption in these countries, which could favour 
global growth. 
Another  factor  is  that  the  relatively  large  fiscal  policy  restraint  in  the  large  developed 
economies in recent years appears to be over. During 2015 and 2016, the restraints will be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
relatively  small.  Fiscal  policy  will  not  therefore  have  the  same  restrictive  effect  on  GDP 
growth in the years ahead as before. 
A  further  factor  that  affects  developments  in  the  global  economy  is  the  expansionary 
monetary policy around the world. The policy gives continued support to credit granting and 
helps  to  push  up  inflation  expectations,  which  benefits  both  consumption  and  investment. 
This is particularly true of the euro area, where inflation expectations have now started to rise 
and lending has begun to show a more positive trend. Many countries also have an unmet 
need  to  invest,  following  the  financial  crisis,  and  this  can  be  met  as  the  credit  supply 
improves. 
The  assessment  was  thus  that  there  are  several  factors  pointing  towards  a  favourable 
development  in  the  global  economy  going  forward,  but  there  still  remain  some  causes  for 
concern. The funding crisis in Greece has still not been resolved, and the situation in Russia 
and Ukraine is also creating continued uncertainty. 
Rising global inflation in the years ahead 
Internationally, inflation has fallen in recent years and is under the inflation target in many 
countries,  see  Figure  2.  The  falling  oil  price  over  the  past  year  has  contributed  to  this 
downward  trend.  However,  the  effects  of  the  falling  oil  price  on  inflation  are  expected  to 
gradually decline. Unemployment is also falling in many parts of the world and this trend is 
expected to continue in the years ahead. This contributes to a higher rate of wage increase 
and rising demand for goods and services. International inflation can therefore be expected 
to rise in the coming years. 
Recovery in the rest of the world contributing to a broad upturn in Sweden 
Sweden is a small, open economy and therefore dependent on what happens in the rest of 
the world. The weak international demand following the financial crisis has thus led to weak 
development  for  Swedish  exports.  But  a  continued  recovery  abroad  will  benefit  Swedish 
exports and growth going forward. 
Domestic  demand  is  expected  to  continue  growing  relatively  fast,  partly  due  to  relatively 
strong  private  consumption.  The  rising  wealth  level  in  the  household  sector  and  the  low 
interest  rates  create  scope  for  relatively  high  growth  in  consumption.  The  global  recovery 
also  increases  the  need  for  investment  in  the  business  sector  and  contributes  to  stronger 
growth  in  investment.  The  demand  for  housing  remains  strong,  which  helps  maintain  the 
level  of  housing  investment.  All  in  all,  the  increasingly  strong  demand,  both  domestic  and 
international,  means  that  GDP  growth  will  be  higher  than  the  historical  average  over  the 
coming years, see Figure 3. 
Good prospects for inflation in Sweden to continue to rise 
Inflation in Sweden is still low, just like in many other countries, see Figure 4. However, CPIF 
inflation excluding energy has been rising for some time and several different indicators point 
to it continuing to rise. 
The  ever-stronger  global  economy  leads  to  both  higher  international  prices  and  higher 
demand  for  Swedish  goods  and  services.  Domestic  demand  also  becomes  higher  and 
contributes to rising price pressures. The weakening of the Swedish krona over the past year 
has meant that imports of goods and services has become more expensive, which tends to 
increase consumer prices. The weaker exchange rate has not yet had a full impact on prices 
yet,  either.  Import  prices  are  expected  to  rise  further  for  a  time  before  the  contribution  to 
higher inflation from the exchange rate wanes. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A more expansionary monetary policy supports the upturn in inflation 
The Riksbank has implemented strong measures to reduce interest rates in general in the 
Swedish economy and thereby make monetary policy more expansionary. The repo rate has 
been  cut  to  negative  levels.  We  have  also  made  extensive  purchases  of  Swedish 
government bonds. Although it is difficult to distinguish the effects of different measures on 
the economy, our assessment is that the impact of monetary policy is essentially functioning 
as expected. The interest rates charged to households and companies on loans with short 
maturities have fallen more or less in line with the repo rate. Data from the financial markets 
also  imply  that  the  asset  purchases  have  had  the  intended  effect.  Our  intention  with  this 
expansionary monetary policy has been to increase the rate of inflation so it approaches the 
target of 2 per cent. As I mentioned earlier, underlying inflation has also shown an upward 
trend for some time now, at the same time as economic activity has strengthened and the 
situation on the labour market has gradually improved. 
But  although  developments  are  mainly  heading  in  the  right  direction,  there  is  still 
considerable  uncertainty.  Economic  activity  became  stronger  in  the  euro  area,  but  several 
countries were still being held back by high indebtedness and as yet unresolved structural 
problems.  The  course  of  events  in  Greece  also  entails  a  tangible  risk.  If  the  situation 
deteriorates, unease may spread to other countries in the monetary union. Uncertainty over 
how the krona will develop is another risk. The relatively strong fluctuations on the foreign 
exchange  market  are  making  it  difficult  to  assess  how  the  exchange  rate  will  continue  to 
develop. A too strong exchange rate would risk halting the upturn in inflation that has begun. 
Given this, we assessed in July that monetary policy needed to be even more expansionary 
to  ensure  that  inflation  continues  to  rise  towards  the  target  of  2  per  cent.  We  therefore 
decided to cut the repo rate by 0.1 percentage points to –0.35 per cent, see Figure 5. We 
also resolved to extend the purchases of government bonds by a further SEK 45 billion until 
the end of the year, see Figure 6. The purchases decided upon in April are expected to be 
concluded in September, at which point the new purchases will be initiated. At the end of the 
year, the Riksbank is expected to have purchased nominal government bonds for a total of 
SEK 135 billion. This corresponds to around 20 per cent of the outstanding stock of nominal 
government bonds and around 4 per cent of GDP.1 If the ECB continues to buy government 
bonds at the same rate as so far, their purchases at the end of the year will correspond to 
around 7 per cent of the stock and, there too, to 4 per cent of GDP. 
The Riksbank has been portrayed as particularly “strict” in relation to other central banks, as 
we charge a negative interest rate to the banks when they deposit money with us. I would 
like to emphasise that the Riksbank is not endeavouring to be kind or strict. The rate-setting 
with  regard  to  the  banks’  deposits  with  the  Riksbank  is  part  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism  and  a  means  of  further  cutting  interest  rates  in  the  Swedish 
economy so that inflation will continue to rise towards the target. In this way, we contribute to 
price-setting  and  wage-formation  in  society  functioning  better,  which  gives  the  right 
conditions for a good development of the economy. 
It may be worth pointing out that the Riksbank is not in any way unique in this context. Our 
central  bank  colleagues  in,  for  instance,  Switzerland  and  Denmark  have  similar  systems, 
although some details differ. For instance, the Swiss central bank has chosen to limit how 
much  of  the  bank’s  deposits  should  be  subject  to  a  negative  interest  rate  and  part  of  the 
deposits in the Danish central bank is also interest-free. However, the effective interest rate 
the banks in these countries pay is nevertheless in line with what the Swedish banks pay. 
                                                
1  The reason why this is 4 per cent of GDP is that the nominal amount of SEK 135 billion had a market value 
corresponding to SEK 160 billion.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
I  can  also  note  that  the  four  major  Swedish  banks  made  profits  of  almost  SEK  44  billion 
during  the  first  half  of  the  year.  In  the  same  period,  they  have  had  to  pay  around 
SEK 90 million on their deposits with the Riksbank, as a result of the negative interest rates. 
Developments during the summer 
Focus on Greece 
As you know, at the beginning of July the Greek people voted no to the proposed measures 
presented by the country’s creditors in a general referendum. However, shortly thereafter the 
Greek parliament nevertheless decided to make extensive reforms and savings. They have 
thus  been  able  to  reach  an  agreement  of  principle  regarding  a  third  loan  programme  and 
negotiations are currently under way regarding the details of this programme. 
However,  it  will  be  some  time  before  we  can  fully  understand  what  effects  the  summer’s 
discussion on the future of Greece will have on the monetary union and the development of 
the euro area. On the one hand, it was a relief that the euro area succeeded in reaching a 
new agreement with Greece. On the other hand, confidence in the euro area and in Greece 
may have been damaged further, which creates uncertainty and may further delay the growth 
that the area so needs. 
There is still the question of whether Greece will succeed in recovering without needing to 
write off some of its debts. Here, for instance, the IMF has been very clear that such write-
downs are necessary to create reasonable conditions for a recovery. 
So far, the crisis has not led to any major turbulence on the financial markets, or to any other 
significantly negative effects in other countries. This means that developments as a whole 
can be said to be in line with our assessments. 
With regard to the euro area as a whole, optimism among households and companies has 
been  somewhat  subdued  in  recent  months,  probably  as  a  result  of  the  crisis  in  Greece. 
However, the most recent survey in July indicates that optimism among companies is rising 
again,  which  may  be  due  to  the  third  loan  programme  for  Greece  appearing  to  be  within 
reach. GDP growth in the euro area in the second quarter, compared with the same quarter 
last year, was 1.2 per cent according to our forecast. 
US developments still looking good 
We see continued signs of good economic growth in the United States. GDP rose by just 
over  two  per  cent  in  the  second  quarter,  compared  with  the  same  quarter  last  year,  see 
Figure 7, entirely in line with our forecast. Household consumption remains strong. Exports 
also  rose significantly  in  the  second  quarter  despite  the  dollar  appreciating for  a  period  of 
time. The housing market is continuing to recover and this creates an increasing number of 
jobs. Unemployment fell to its lowest level since 2008. 
The US Federal Reserve signalled at the end of July that it still has plans to raise its policy 
rate  this  year.  The  labour  market  is  expected  to  be  able  to  develop  better  than  was 
previously believed an only a “few” further improvements are needed before monetary policy 
may need to be tightened. 
However,  although  most  signs  are  pointing  in  the  right  direction  in  the  US  economy,  the 
recent statistics on wage developments have been at relatively low rates of increase. Over 
the past twelve months, wages have not increased by more than around 2 per cent. Inflation 
is also still at a low level, which reflects earlier downswings in energy prices and falling prices 
on non-energy-related imports. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Relatively calm on the financial markets 
Despite the fears one might have had prior to the summer with regard to developments on 
the financial  markets, there  have  not  on  the  whole  been  any  major fluctuations  in  interest 
rates and exchange rates. The krona weakened roughly as expected in connection with the 
repo-rate decision in early July. Since then it has weakened further, and then strengthened, 
but it is still in line with our forecast, see Figure 8. However, one should not draw any major 
conclusions regarding the krona, given the weak trade in the summer months. 
Nor have there been any major fluctuations on the stock markets in Sweden, the euro area 
(with  the  exception  of  Greece)  and  the  United  States.  The  stock  market  values  are 
approximately  as  they  were  in  the  beginning  of  July,  see  Figure  9.  Stock  market 
developments  in  China,  on  the  other  hand,  have  been  more  dramatic  with  heavy  stock 
market falls since the middle of July. The downturn should nevertheless be regarded in the 
light of equity prices rising by around 100 per cent during the first half of this year. Despite 
the heavy fall, equity prices are still much higher than at the beginning of the year. The fall in 
equity prices is not expected to have any major effects on growth in China. 
The  Chinese  central  bank’s  decision  to  devaluate  its  currency  came  as  a  surprise  to  the 
market.  The  motive  given  for  the  devaluation  was  that  the  yuan  had  strengthened 
substantially  in  recent  years.  However,  another  motive  may  be  that  the  Chinese  regime 
wants to create the conditions for the yuan to eventually become a reserve currency. This is 
bearing  in  mind  that  the  guidelines  for  the  daily  pricing  of  the  currency  were  also  moved 
toward  a  more  market-based  way  of  valuing  the  yuan  in  connection  with  the  devaluation. 
However, there is also a possibility that the devaluation is a sign that the Chinese economy is 
weaker than we previously thought. 
The fall in the oil price may contribute to lower inflation abroad 
The  oil  price  has  fallen  by  around  10  dollars  a  barrel  since  the  beginning  of  July,  see 
Figure 10. It has thus become lower than we had forecast. Forward pricing also indicates a 
lower oil price in the coming years than we had expected. International inflation may thus be 
slightly  lower  than  our  earlier  assessment.  But  the  lower  oil  price  can  also  be  positive  for 
growth  and  demand  in  the  oil-importing  countries,  which  could  counteract  the  direct 
downward effect on inflation. 
Swedish economy is continuing to perform strongly 
According  to  the  preliminary  version  of  the  National  Accounts,  GDP  grew  by  3.0  per  cent 
during the second  quarter compared with the same quarter last year, see Figure 7, which 
was  more  than  both  the  market  and  we  had  expected.  Despite  GDP  growth  being  a  little 
stronger than expected, both consumption and investment were slightly weaker, which was 
counteracted  by  unexpectedly  weak  imports.  The  number  of  hours  worked  developed 
roughly as expected, which means that labour productivity was stronger than we assumed in 
the July Monetary Policy Report. 
During the summer (June and July) unemployment has become lower than we predicted, at 
the  same  time  as  the  labour  force  and  employment  showed  weaker  development  than 
expected. However, the labour market surveys statistics are particularly uncertain during the 
summer months, which makes it difficult to draw any definite conclusions. Further outcomes 
are needed to be able to determine whether the earlier positive development in employment 
and the labour force has really been subdued. 
Our forward-looking indicators regarding demand for labour on the whole point to the labour 
market continuing to improve in the coming period. The number of redundancies is still low 
and  newly-registered  vacancies  at  the  Swedish  employment  service  are  at  a  high  level. 
Employment  plans  in  the  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research’s  Business  Tendency 
Survey  rose  somewhat  in  July,  after  having  fallen  earlier  in  the  year,  and  indicate  rising 
employment in the business sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
The  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research’s  Economic  Tendency  Surveys,  which 
summarise  companies’ and  households’  views  of  the  Swedish  economy,  rose  in  July,  see 
Figure 11. This is the third month in a row that the indicator exceeds the historical average 
and  thus  points  to  a  somewhat  stronger  growth  than  normal  in  the  Swedish  economy. 
Households’ confidence in the economy as a whole slowed down further in July, although the 
view of their own economy is still more positive than normal. 
Inflation expectations according to money market participants in Prospera’s survey 1, 2, and 
5  years  ahead  have  remained  broadly  unchanged  during  the  summer.  Long-run  inflation 
expectations 5 years ahead remain at around 1.8 per cent. 
CPIF  inflation  was  measured  at  0.6  per  cent  in  June  and  at  0.9  per  cent  in  July,  see 
Figure 12.  The  outcome  in  June  was  lower  than  our  forecast.  It  is  difficult  to  point  to  any 
individual component that contributed to the forecasting error – goods prices services prices 
and food prices all increased somewhat slower than expected. The outcome in July, on the 
other  hand,  was  higher  than  our  forecast.  It  was  in  particular  the  volatile  air  travel  and 
package holidays that were higher than anticipated, although food and clothing prices were 
higher than expected. All in all, the outcomes over the summer have been in line with our 
forecasts. 
Low interest rates entail risks 
Increasing debt levels and rising housing prices 
The low interest rates contribute to household debt as a percentage of disposable income 
continuing to increase and to housing prices continuing to rise. This creates risks that can 
threaten future economic developments. If there were to be an economic slowdown for any 
reason, this could be significantly strengthened when indebted households are forced to cut 
back on consumption and other expenditure, particularly if housing prices were also to fall in 
connection  with  this.  It  is  therefore  important  that  household  debts  do  not  continue  to 
increase. Their debts have increased more than their disposable incomes since the middle of 
the 1990s and the debt ratio is now at just over 170 per cent, which is a record-high level, 
see Figure 13. 
As  can  be  seen  in  Figure  14,  housing  prices,  and  especially  prices  of  tenant-owned 
apartments,  have  risen  sharply  in  the  past  ten  years.  Prices  of  tenant-owned  apartments 
have  more  than  doubled  since  2005.  We  can  also  see  that  prices  of  tenant-owned 
apartments have increased substantially in relation to the consumer price index in the past 
ten years, but even in relation to disposable income the increase is significant. 
This  development  indicates  that  there  are  structural  problems  in  the  Swedish  housing 
market. The fact that the rental market functions poorly is a problem. Another problem is that 
too  little  housing  is  being  built.  Figure  15  shows  that  the  population  has  increased  much 
more than the number of completed homes over the past ten years, which is an indication 
that housing construction has been too low. Despite housing investment now increasing, it is 
important  that  structural  problems  on  the  housing  market  are  discussed  so  that  we  can 
obtain greater efficiency on this market in the longer run. Several inquiries have put forward 
proposals regarding what needs to be done, most recently this was done in an annex to the 
Long Term Survey of the Swedish Economy. Not having an efficient housing market is not 
merely a problem for indebtedness, it can also comprise a threat to a healthy development of 
society and it can create conflicts between the generations. 
The  Riksbank  has  long  pointed  out  the  risks  linked  to  the  high  level  of  household 
indebtedness and has previously also weighed in them in the repo-rate decisions to some 
extent,  by  setting  the  rate  somewhat  higher  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case. 
However, the effect these considerations have actually had on monetary policy – the amount 
by which the repo rate has actually been set higher – has been exaggerated substantially. 
There are quite simply limits as to how far the policy rate can be used for this purpose. And 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
let me emphasise that the main focus for monetary policy has always been to bring inflation 
back on target and to attain a good development in the real economy. 
Credibility for the inflation target a binding restriction 
One  condition  for  a  central  bank  to  be  able  to  use  the  policy  rate  to  counteract  financial 
imbalances is that confidence in the inflation target is solidly established and that inflation 
expectations are firmly anchored around the target. This is a very important condition and I 
would claim that it is a binding restriction, that is, if it is not met, the central bank will have no 
scope to take other considerations. 
When the Riksbank gave consideration in its monetary policy decisions to the risks linked to 
indebtedness and housing prices rising too fast a few years ago there were no reasons to 
question  confidence  in  the  inflation  target. It  was firmly  established  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations were just over 2 per cent. 
However, what has happened since then is that the Riksbank and other analysts have on 
several occasions been surprised by inflation being lower than expected and have therefore 
been forced to gradually revise down their inflation forecasts. As the period with an inflation 
rate  undershooting  the  target  has  become  longer,  economic  agents  have  adjusted  their 
inflation expectations downwards. During 2013 and 2014, for instance, the five-year inflation 
expectations  in  Prospera’s  survey  showed  more  or  less  a falling  trend  to just  under  2  per 
cent. The further long-term expectations deviate from the target, and the larger the deviation, 
the greater is the risk that the inflation target will begin to lose its role as benchmark for price-
setting and wage formation. In this way, expectations can have an impact on actual inflation, 
which risks reducing expectations further, and so on, in a self-reinforcing negative process. It 
can be very difficult to get out of this situation. 
This is how the rapid cuts in the repo rate since the middle of 2014, and the purchases of 
government bonds that have recently been a complementary part of monetary policy, should 
be regarded. The Riksbank is the authority that has the explicit responsibility for attaining the 
inflation  target.  Although  we  must  also  act  to  ensure  the  financial  system  is  stable  and 
functions efficiently, through the wording in the Sveriges Riksbank Act on “promoting a safe 
and  efficient  payments  system”,  the  latter  is  a  task  that  we  share  with  the  Government, 
Finansinspektionen and the Swedish National Debt Office. And the first line of defence with 
regard  to  counteracting  the  emergence  of  financial  imbalances  is  macroprudential  policy, 
including the tools for which Finansinspektionen has been given chief responsibility. 
Finansinspektionen’s mandate and tools for macroprudential policy need clarification 
in law 
It  is  therefore  very  unfortunate  that  there  appear  to  be  doubts  with  regard  to  the  legal 
possibility  for  Finansinspektionen  to  use  some  of  the  tools  –  as  in  the  case  of  the 
amortisation  requirement.2  The  decision  to  give  Finansinspektionen  the  responsibility  for 
macroprudential  policy  was  preceded  by  a  fairly  intensive  debate,  where  other  possible 
solutions were also discussed. One can therefore assume that the decision finally reached 
actually  reflects  the  solution  desired  from  a  political  point  of  view.  It  is  then  of  course 
essential that one also ensures that Finansinspektionen is equipped with the most efficient 
tools possible to be able to manage its task in a good way. And if one later discovers that 
there are doubts regarding some parts of the mandate, it is of course important that these 
are remedied without delay. 
                                                
2  Finansinspektionen was intending to introduce an amortisation requirement from 1 August 2015. However, the 
administrative  court  of  appeal  in  Jönköping,  among  other  instances,  questioned  the  legal  authority  of 
Finansinspektionen to decide amortisation requirements. Finansinspektionen decided not to go further with the 
amortisation requirement as the legal position was uncertain and at the same time observed that its mandate 
needed clarification; see press release from Finansinspektionen on 23 April 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
To avoid a future economic downturn from being deeper than normal as a result of the high 
indebtedness, it is therefore essential that the Government quickly ensures that Sweden has 
an  efficient  framework  for  macroprudential  policy  and  that  Finansinspektionen  has  a  clear 
mandate.  It  is  almost  seven  years  since  the  financial  crisis  broke  out.  One  of  the  major 
lessons  learnt  from  the  crisis  is  the  importance  of  an  efficient  macroprudential  policy  that 
enables  early  identification  of  financial  imbalances  and  rapid  implementation  of  necessary 
measures.  There  is  broad  agreement  on  which  imbalances  have  built  up  in  the  Swedish 
economy, but there also appears to be what is known as an inaction bias, which means that 
no  authority  has  taken  adequate  measures.  What  is  needed  here  is  a  system  where 
macroprudential  policy  fulfils  an  important  role  and  can,  in  an  interplay  with  fiscal  and 
monetary policy, counteract the emergence of financial imbalances. 
The  Riksbank’s  assessment  is  that  an  amortisation  requirement  corresponding  to  at  least 
Finansinspektionen’s proposal needs to be introduced as soon as possible. However, further 
measures in addition to this are needed to reduce households’ willingness to take on debt. 
Feasible measures include a reduction in the tax deduction allowed on  interest payments, 
the  introduction  of  a  debt-to-value  limit  and  stricter  requirements  for  the  banks’  credit 
assessments  of  individual  households.  More  structural  measures  are  also  needed  to 
increase the supply of housing and lead to a more efficiently-functioning housing market as I 
have  already  mentioned.  But  such  reforms  can  only  be  introduced  gradually  and  it  will 
therefore take time before they can have any significant effect on household indebtedness. 
Next monetary policy decision presented on 3 September 
To summarise, I consider it is of the utmost importance that the mandate for macroprudential 
policy is clarified and that the application of the different tools does not come to a standstill. 
There  is  currently  widespread  awareness  that  a  long-term  sustainable  solution  requires  a 
holistic approach that involves several policy areas. Nevertheless, there is a risk that more 
comprehensive measures and reforms are perceived as so unwieldy and difficult to manage 
that politicians would rather wait and hope for the best. One possible way forward to ensure 
something happens and to increase our knowledge in this field would therefore be a strategy 
that combines different possible measures on a smaller scale.3 Even a journey of a thousand 
miles begins with just one step, and it is important to take this step. 
With  regard to  the  statistics  received  over  the  summer,  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad,  they 
agree fairly well with the assessments we made in July. Economic developments in Sweden 
still  look  good  and  the  expansionary  monetary  policy  is  supporting  the  upward  trend  in 
inflation. And if it were necessary, there is a high level of preparedness to make monetary 
policy even more expansionary. We are now working on producing an overall assessment of 
the situation in the Swedish economy, and in connection with the publication of the monetary 
policy decision on 3 September, we will present new forecasts. 
                                                
3  See  Per-Anders  Bergendahl,  Monika  Hjeds  Löfmark  and  Hans  Lind  (2015),  “Bostadsmarknaden  och  den 
ekonomiska  utvecklingen”  (The  housing market  and economic  development),  SOU  2015:48,  Appendix  3  to 
Långtidsutredningen (Long-Term Survey of the Swedish Economy), which proposes this strategy with regard 
to reforming the housing market. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    15 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
