  Glenn Stevens: Remarks to the American Chamber of Commerce in 
Australia (AMCHAM) 
Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the American 
Chamber of Commerce in Australia (AMCHAM), Melbourne, 20 March 2015. 
 Thank you for the invitation to join you today. 
In  an  audience  of  business  leaders  exposed  to  the  American  and  Australian  business 
scenes, I might be expected to attempt some comparisons of the two economies. 
So I offer the following snapshot. 
• 
In America, growth has improved over the past year, having been much slower than 
policy makers would have liked for quite a few years, after a very deep recession in 
2008–09. Real GDP per head is 2¾ per cent above its previous peak in December 
2007. 
In Australia the economy is growing, but has been somewhat slower than we would 
have liked for a while. We haven’t had a deep downturn for more than twenty years. 
Real GDP per head is about 5½ per cent higher than in December 2007. 
In America, the unemployment rate peaked at 10 per cent in October 2009 and is 
now at 5½ per cent. The average rate in the new century to date (ie since 2000) is 
6½ per cent. 
In Australia the unemployment rate in October 2009 was about 5½ per cent. It fell, 
then gradually rose again to be 6¼ per cent now. The average in the new century to 
date is 5½ per cent. 
In  America,  inflation  is  low  and  asset  values  have  been  rising.  Interest  rates  are 
extremely low, but the central bank is talking about raising them. 
In  Australia,  inflation  is  low  and  asset  values  have  been  rising.  Interest  rates  are 
very low, and the central bank has talked about lowering them further. 
In America, international competitiveness is declining due to the rising US dollar. 
In  Australia,  international  competitiveness  is  improving,  due  to  the  declining 
Australian dollar. 
In  America,  there  is  political  partisanship  across  a  range  of  issues,  and  budget 
stalemate. 
In  Australia,  there  is  political  partisanship  across  a  range  of  issues  and,  over  the 
past year, budget stalemate. 
        The result? 
American businesses and households seem to be getting more optimistic about the future. 
But  Australian  businesses  and  households  seem  to  be  getting  less  optimistic  about  the 
future. It would be an interesting lunch conversation to talk about how all those facts lead to 
the two differing conclusions about the future. 
Admittedly, the global backdrop in some respects is less supportive to Australia than it had 
been some years ago. Our terms of trade are falling. They have been doing so for about 3½ 
years.  It  had  always  been  understood  that  this  would  occur,  even  if  we  were  not  very 
accurate  in  predicting  its  timing  (we  predicted  it  way  too  early)  or  its  extent:  some  key 
resource prices initially fell a little more slowly, but more recently a good deal more quickly, 
than  either  official  or  private  consensus  forecasts  had  assumed.  Nonetheless,  the  actual 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  event  has  been  getting  much  attention.  The  various  ramifications  –  declining  mining 
investment,  the  effects  on  incomes  and  government  revenues  –  are  the  subject  of  daily 
news. 
In some other respects, not a lot has changed lately. China continues to grow in size and 
importance and to open up. Much was made of China “missing” its 2014 growth target, by 
one tenth of a percentage point. (Let us in Australia hope our target misses are all only of 
that size.) Much was also made of the lower target set for 2015, but this was always going to 
occur, and successive growth objectives are likely to get progressively lower over the years 
ahead. An economy as large as China is unlikely to sustain the sorts of growth rates seen in 
earlier  years.  No  one  grows  at  10  per  cent  forever.  Even  growth  a  bit  below  this  year’s 
objective would still be a considerable impetus to global demand and output. That said, the 
outworking  of  some  of  the  excesses  of  the  earlier  period  of  rapid  growth,  especially  the 
period just after the financial crisis of 2008, remains a work in progress and a source of risk. 
But in other ways, one could argue that the global backdrop has improved. As I have noted, 
the US economy – still the world’s largest and most innovative – has gained momentum over 
the past year, looking through the temporary ups and downs of the data. For all China’s great 
importance to Australia these days, a healthy US economy should not be underestimated as 
a driver of business thinking and as a trend-setter for financial markets. In addition, the fall in 
oil prices, which is mostly the result of more oil being available than used to be the case, is 
mainly a bullish development for the global economy in the short term, problems for producer 
states notwithstanding. It is a bonus for American consumers certainly. 
It is expected that the Federal Reserve will, some time this year, lift the federal funds rate 
accelerator off the floor. If that happens there will no doubt be some disruption, as always, 
and more so as it will be the first Fed tightening for nine years and the ECB will be easing 
policy  at  the  same  time.  So  there  is  likely  to  be  some  turbulence  in  asset  and  foreign 
exchange markets. On the whole, though, I think we should regard the Fed’s likely actions as 
a positive development. Fed policy is still likely to be quite expansionary for some time. The 
punch bowl isn’t being taken away, its contents are just being made a little less potent. 
While  that  is  going  on  our  own  economy  continues  its  adjustment  to  the  end  of  the 
investment  phase  of  the  “mining  boom”.  The  massive  run-up  in  resources  sector  capital 
spending that was a natural response to earlier very high prices is reversing, causing a drag 
on  demand.  So  we  hope  for  other  sources  of  demand  to  speed  up  to  help  make  up  the 
difference. Some of them are, though not as seamlessly as any of us would like. I’ve talked a 
lot about this before so I won’t labour the point. It is a major transition. We can hope to assist 
it, and the Reserve Bank is doing that, and will continue to lend what support it can, within 
the limits of its powers and consistent with its mandate. The decline in the exchange rate is 
assisting the transition (as it assisted in absorbing the earlier phase of the mining boom). But 
we have always said we cannot hope to fine-tune this transition, however much we may wish 
otherwise. 
Looking back at the history of such episodes, of which there have been a few over the past 
century or more, if we come through this terms of trade event with neither a major outbreak 
of inflation in the upswing nor a major crash in the downswing, even if we have a period of 
sub-average  growth  in  the  process,  we  will  have  done  far,  far  better  than  in  any  previous 
event of this kind, let alone one of this magnitude. I still think that is the most likely outcome. 
Even  so,  the  lower  terms  of  trade  mean  that,  all  other  things  equal,  the  path  of  future 
incomes is not as high as it might have looked a few years ago. Even allowing for the fact 
that we all knew, intellectually, that at least part of the boom was not permanent, there is a 
human tendency to project what we see now (good or bad) into the future. Eventually reality 
intrudes  and  we  have  to  re-evaluate.  That  has  happened  countless  times  before  and  will 
again, no doubt. 
It means that attention needs to be given to the things that help our economy work to deliver 
what we need even with a lower terms of trade. These were the sorts of things that made a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  open, competitive markets; 
education and skill building; 
flexibility and adaptability; 
quality public infrastructure; 
strong public institutions, and pragmatic, balanced regulatory arrangements; and 
rewards for entrepreneurial risk-taking 
difference before the mining boom. They are not my field of expertise. I can simply observe 
that things such as: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
are likely to give us the best chance for the kind of prosperity we seek. Public policy will have 
its own contribution in fostering such an environment, but it is businesses (large and small) 
and individuals making their own choices that will ultimately deliver whatever success we are 
capable of. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
