  
 
Daniel Mminele: Global monetary policy normalisation and South African 
financial markets 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Annual Conference of the Bureau for Economic Research, Johannesburg, 12 June 2015. 
 Introduction 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a pleasure to address you at this Annual Conference of the BER, and thank you to the 
BER for inviting me. 
Let me take the opportunity to express our appreciation for the work that the BER has been 
doing over the years: a research house that has built a local and international reputation for 
excellence since its establishment in 1944, making it one of the oldest economic research 
institutes  in  South  Africa.  The  BER  also  contributes  towards  sound  monetary  policy  by 
conducting the quarterly inflation expectations survey on behalf of the South African Reserve 
Bank,  which,  as  you  know,  is  an  important  piece  of  information  for  an  inflation-targeting 
central bank. 
It has been approximately seven years since the global financial crisis began – more or less 
the period which Reinhart and Rogoff1 predicted it would take the global economy to recover 
from  the  crisis  and  set  the  scene  for  monetary  policy  normalisation.  The  global  economic 
environment continues to be characterised by various global headwinds, not least of which is 
the return to “normal”. 
My  remarks  this  morning  will  focus  on  the  period  after  the  global  financial  crisis,  what  it 
means for  South  African  financial  markets,  and  the  resulting  policy  implications.  I  will  also 
briefly  touch  on  how  international  forums  are  dealing  with  the  uncertainty  and  volatility 
created by divergent monetary policy. 
After the global financial crisis, or the GFC 
Reflecting on the post-GFC period, the first thing that comes to mind is the set of spill-over 
effects from almost seven years of extremely loose and accommodative monetary policy in 
advanced  economies.  Monetary  policy  developments  in  advanced  economies  –  and  the 
associated  robust  capital  inflows  to  emerging  markets  chasing  higher  yields  –  supported 
financial market asset prices, lowered borrowing costs, and, for a while, created pressure on 
the  US  dollar  to  depreciate.  However,  policymakers  at  the  time  already  warned  that  this 
unprecedented  monetary  accommodation  was  unchartered  territory  which  created  its  own 
challenges, such as the so-called “currency wars”, and that ultimately the tide would turn and 
potentially have even more severe implications for emerging-market economies. Indeed, the 
turning  point  came  on  22  May  2013,  when  the  then-Chair  of  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee,  Ben  Bernanke,  announced  the  intention  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  to  start 
scaling down its quantitative easing (or QE) bond buying programme. The reaction to these 
remarks became known as the “taper tantrum”, a period marked by the sharp repricing of risk 
and unusually high market volatility. This “taper tantrum” was the likely consequence of an 
unanticipated  turning  point  in  US  monetary  policy  amid  one-sided  market  positioning 
accompanied by very low implied volatility, as expressed in options prices. 
                                                
1  Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff, Recovery from the crisis: evidence from 100 episodes, American 
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The “taper tantrum” is behind us and the US QE programme has since come to an end, but 
vast  uncertainties  have  re-emerged  in  recent  months,  firstly  with  regard  to  the  timing  and 
pace of the Fed’s rate hikes, and secondly because both the European Central Bank and the 
Bank  of  Japan  have  embarked  on  more  aggressive  QE  programmes  of  their  own.  These 
divergent monetary policies by three of the world’s largest central banks, and the resultant 
“complex forces” that the International Monetary Fund refers to in its latest Word Economic 
Outlook2, have already had a significant impact on global financial markets. 
The  uncertainties  over  the  Fed’s  rate-hiking  cycle  are  captured  by  the  divergence  in  the 
views expressed by market participants and the Fed’s policymakers. As of a few days ago, 
market-based  estimates,  as  reflected  by  fed  fund  futures,  are  for  a  25  basis  points  (bps) 
increase in the US policy rate in the fourth quarter of 2015 or at least by December, followed 
by another 75 bps in both 2016 and 2017. It is worth noting that the divergence between the 
estimates  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  and  markets  has  narrowed  in  recent 
months,  reflecting  more  or  less  consensus  for  a  50  bps  hike  by  December  2015  or  early 
2016. The divergence in the following two years, however, is large, at around 75 and 125 bps 
for  2016  and  2017  respectively.  This  reflects  considerable  misalignment  and  a  possible 
underestimation by market participants of the extent and pace of the Fed’s hiking cycle. Such 
misalignments  are  not  surprising  as  the  Fed  has  started  to  extricate  itself  from  explicit 
forward guidance and is moving to communication that indicates greater data dependency in 
policy  decisions  during  an  uneven  economic  recovery.  Just  a  few  days  ago,  in  its  annual 
review of the state of the US economy, the IMF suggested that the Fed wait until 2016 to 
raise interest rates, cautioning that the central bank’s credibility was at stake and that there 
was too much uncertainty to justify a much-anticipated lift-off. 
What should we understand by “monetary policy normalisation”? 
Monetary policy normalisation implies the removal of extraordinary policy measures that had 
been implemented to deal with a particular economic episode. In this sense it refers to a path 
taken to return to a more “normal” monetary policy setting, although no qualification is made 
as  to  what  exactly  constitutes  “normal”  in  the  post-GFC  world.  Furthermore,  it  should  be 
noted that monetary policy normalisation in the aftermath of the GFC will most likely differ 
from previous cycles. 
During rate-hiking cycles, a key concern for global markets is the path of US bond yields, as 
these tend to have knock-on effects on other markets. In this regard I would like to mention 
some factors which could constrain and/or prevent abrupt and unexpected increases in US 
Treasury yields – or, in other words, which could smooth the normalisation path. 
Firstly,  most  central  banks  have  adopted  some  form  of  forward  guidance  as  part  of  their 
normal monetary policy toolkit, and although this may at times have contributed to volatility in 
markets because of the highly uncertain environment in which communication takes place, 
the  aim  remains  for  central  banks  to  be  as  transparent  as  possible  in  terms  of  the  policy 
outlook  and  attendant  risks  so  as  to  avoid  spells  of  excessive  volatility  associated  with 
unanticipated policy adjustments. 
The second important dynamic is that the longer end of the US yield curve is also interrelated 
with the Fed’s balance-sheet dynamics. The Federal Open Market Committee has indicated 
that it will consider the cessation of reinvestments of maturing securities only after it starts 
hiking the policy rate. In the meantime, it will not sell any securities. Until such time as the 
Fed has signalled that it will cease to reinvest bond maturities, the Fed will have no direct 
impact on the net supply of bonds in the market. 
                                                
2  World Economic Outlook, April 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Thirdly, there is debate on how much the “equilibrium” interest rate has declined structurally 
in the US, contributing to the downward pressure on the long end of the yield curve. 
Fourthly, the declining trend in eurozone bond yields has in the past also played a significant 
role  in  driving  US  Treasury  yields  lower.  This  was  evident  during  the  eurozone  crisis  of 
2011/12 and again in 2014 when the European Central Bank stepped up liquidity-provision 
measures  and  ultimately  implemented  QE  earlier  this  year.  As  a  result,  the  10-year  Bund 
traded below 1,0 per cent in late 2014 and even closer to 0 per cent earlier this year. This 
pulled  US  Treasury  yields  lower  as  investors  switched  out  of  low-yielding  eurozone  bonds 
into more attractive yielding US Treasuries. Interestingly, during the past week we have seen 
Bund yields exerting upward pressure on US Treasuries when the Bund yields went above 
1,0 per cent for the first time since September 2014. 
Aside  from  divergent  monetary  policy,  financial  markets  have  in  recent  months  also  been 
affected  by  a  variety  of  uncertainties  in  the  global  environment.  These  include  the  still 
relatively low oil prices, the possibility of Greece exiting the euro area and its likely impact on 
the  latter’s  already-weak  economic  performance,  the  changing  Chinese  growth  model  and 
therefore slower economic growth, and the US dollar appreciation as markets get ready for 
the  Fed’s  lift-off.  Although  markets  have,  to  some  extent,  priced  in  the  lift-off  by  the  Fed, 
there remains considerable uncertainty regarding the timing and extent thereof. 
South African markets and global monetary policy normalisation 
As  financial  markets  and  systems  became  more  integrated  in  recent  years,  the  monetary 
policy  cycles  of  major  economies  also  became  increasingly  important for  emerging-market 
economies. The impact from US monetary policy normalisation could transpire through two 
channels: firstly the real channel (trade), and secondly the financial channel. The real / trade 
channel  implies  that  US  policy  tightening  is  associated  with  an  acceleration  in  economic 
growth, with subsequent spillovers for emerging-market economies. South Africa is unlikely 
to directly benefit to any significant degree from this channel, given that the US portion of our 
exports  is  only  approximately  8  per  cent  compared  to  21  per  cent  for  the  euro  area.  The 
financial  channel  is  much  more  important  for  us,  whereby  US  policy  tightening  triggers  a 
reallocation in financial assets, for example, in South Africa’s case, portfolio outflows with a 
subsequent impact on the various asset classes. 
Let  us  take  the  “taper  tantrum”  as  another  example.  Similar  to  other  emerging-market 
economies, portfolio inflows into South Africa declined in the aftermath of the “taper tantrum”. 
Reserve Bank statistics show that total portfolio inflows reversed from R85 billion in 2012 to 
an outflow of R55,5 billion in 2014, comprising R13,4 billion equity inflows and R68,9 billion 
bond outflows. More recent data from the Central Securities Depository3 reveal that, in the 
first  half  of  2015  to  date,  non-residents  bought  R19,0  billion  worth  of  equities  but  sold 
R1,6 billion  worth  of  bonds,  amounting  to  total  inflows  of  R17,4  billion.  South  Africa’s 
vulnerability to US policy tightening is augmented by our dependence on external financing 
to deal with the current-account deficit. 
It is well known that South African bonds – and those of countries such as Brazil, India, and 
Mexico – have a strong correlation with US Treasuries. This correlation was clearly evident 
during the “taper tantrum” when the 10-year US Treasury yield increased from 1,63 to almost 
3,0 per cent and the South African 10-year benchmark bond increased from 6,58 to almost 
8,0  per  cent  between  May  and  August  2013.  In  2014,  South  African  bond  yields  also 
adjusted  (downwards)  in  line  with  US  Treasuries  despite  various  negative  domestic 
developments,  including  rating  downgrades  and  the  deprecation  of  the  rand,  which  under 
normal conditions would have driven yields higher. As the US policy rate hike was believed 
                                                
3  Strate data. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  to  be  getting  closer,  the  persistent  strength  of  the  US  labour  market,  as  reflected  by  the 
closely watched non-farm payrolls data, drove US Treasury yields significantly higher. Over 
the past four months, 10-year US Treasury yields have increased by approximately 75 bps, 
which is quite large given the current soft US economic backdrop. This was mirrored by a 
140 bps increase in the comparable R186 domestic bond yield. 
The  importance  of  the  US  interest-rate  cycle  for  South  Africa  is  also  apparent  in  terms  of 
funding costs for both the sovereign and domestic corporates. With reference to the former, 
the external funding costs – as reflected by JP Morgan’s Emerging Market Bond Index (or 
EMBI) – the spread for South Africa over US Treasuries has increased to 216 bps due to 
domestic  factors  but  also  in  anticipation  of  US  tightening,  from  170  bps  a  year  ago.  The 
funding costs for domestic banks have, on the other hand, been negatively influenced by a 
further  dynamic  in  the  aftermath  of  the  GFC,  namely  more  stringent  global  financial 
regulations which are being implemented locally. With the upcoming introduction of the Net 
Stable Funding Ratio, the spread to Jibar on 5-year floating-rate NCDs issued by commercial 
banks  increased  significantly  across  all  maturities,  in  some  cases  more  than  double  the 
levels seen around mid-2013, as banks are forced to issue longer-term instruments. 
There  is  a  general  view  that  financial  regulatory  reform  may  have  had  certain  unintended 
consequences,  such  as  limitations  on  banks’  proprietary  trading  reducing  the  ability  of 
Primary  Dealers  to  hold  sizeable  inventories  of  securities,  which  have  contributed  to  less 
liquidity in the markets. This lower level of liquidity introduces new risks that could amplify 
negative spillover effects in stress situations. 
The  foreign-exchange  market,  however,  is  probably  the  market  that  may  suffer  a  more 
pronounced impact from global monetary policy normalisation. This risk was illustrated during 
the  2013  “taper  tantrum”  when  the  rand  –  together  with  the  currencies  of  certain  other 
emerging-market  economies  perceived  at  the  time  to  be  most  vulnerable  (such  as  Brazil, 
India, Indonesia, and Turkey) – depreciated by more than 10 per cent against the US dollar4. 
The period that followed was characterised by increased differentiation between emerging-
market  economies.  As  such,  countries  that  implemented  appropriate  macroeconomic 
policies, with a reasonable reform agenda to improve economic potential, have been more 
resilient. 
The popular narrative tends to focus on the rand-dollar exchange rate. Given the outlook for 
the  normalisation  of  monetary  policy  in  the  US,  the  US  dollar  has  surprised  with  its 
appreciation since mid-2014. The US currency has appreciated by 26 per cent on a trade-
weighted basis5 to reach US$1,05 against the euro, a level that was only expected towards 
the end of 2015 amid actual US tightening6. This was the largest appreciation ever in the run-
up  to  an  interest-rate  tightening  cycle  in  the  US.  The  dollar’s  appreciation  was  triggered 
mainly  by  the  European  Central  Bank  announcing  the  Targeted  Long-term  Refinancing 
Operations7  and  speculating  on  full-scale  QE,  which  implied  increased  monetary  policy 
divergence. 
The outlook for the US dollar will, to a large extent, depend on two fundamental factors: the 
pace of widening interest-rate differentials and the performance of the US economy relative 
to its major trading partners. But there are also other factors which could contribute to future 
                                                
4  May to August 2013. 
5  Mid-2014 to mid-March 2015 (Since then, however, the US dollar has depreciated by about 5 per cent until 
5 June 2015.) 
6  Market analysts’ models were showing that the US dollar performance was consistent with an actual 100 bps 
increase in the US policy rate. 
7  This new form of Long-term Refinancing Operations, amounting to EUR400 billion, was designed to provide 
funding  to  banks  at  10  basis  points  above  the  main  refinancing  rate  for  as  long  as  four  years,  subject  to 
meeting certain loan criteria. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  US  dollar  appreciation,  such  as  safe-haven  buying  due  to  geopolitical  developments  or 
Greece exiting the euro. Historical patterns since the early 1970s show excessive US dollar 
appreciation  during  the  periods  coinciding  with  the  two  aforementioned  fundamental 
variables, such as during 1983–84 and the late 1990s. 
Therefore, actual US policy normalisation could result in further weakness in the rand against 
the dollar, and could also negatively impact on portfolio flows by reducing the willingness of 
fund managers (a large share of them having US dollar liabilities) to hold unhedged positions 
in  South  African  bonds  and  equities.  At  the  same  time,  a  weaker  exchange  rate  would 
probably  raise  implied  rand  volatility,  adding  to  overall  risk  aversion  and  weak  sentiment 
towards  rand-denominated  assets.  Allow  me  to  point  out,  however,  that,  unlike  previous 
episodes  of  rand  depreciation,  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  has  been 
reasonably  stable  since  the  beginning  of  2014,  and,  relative  to  baskets  of  commodity-
exporting or large emerging-market economies, the rand has regained some of the ground it 
had lost in earlier years. 
Nonetheless, exchange-rate developments continue to pose the single biggest risk to South 
Africa’s inflation outlook. Sharp movements in the rand-dollar exchange rate have translated 
into  large  swings  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s  inflation  forecasts.  Between  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee (MPC) meeting at the end of 2014 and its subsequent meeting in March, inflation 
forecasts had changed substantially, initially reflecting a significant improvement as a result 
of  the  decline  in  oil  prices,  then  changing  to  a  less  favourable  outlook  in  March  owing  to 
adverse  exchange-rate  developments.  Such  swings  complicate  the  task  of  monetary 
management. 
For South Africa, the favourable impacts of a weaker currency on the current-account deficit 
have  not  been  forthcoming,  which  is  a  concern  in  the  current  international  environment  of 
volatile capital flows. While there has been some narrowing in the current-account deficit in 
the  fourth  quarter  of  2014,  it  is  unclear  to  what  extent  this  represents  the  beginning  of  a 
sustained  compression  of  the  current  account  after  a  long  period  of  real  exchange-rate 
depreciation.  Furthermore,  a  stronger  US  dollar  tends  to  dampen  commodity  prices,  with 
adverse  implications  for  commodity  producers  like  South  Africa.  Although  a  number  of 
emerging-market economies have been able to reduce their policy rates in response to the 
favourable  impact  from  oil  prices  on  inflation,  this  could  be  thwarted  by  developments  in 
currency markets. This in an environment where economic growth for emerging markets has 
slipped to its slowest pace since 2009 as countries battle to deal with the combined impact of 
a stronger dollar and weaker commodity prices. 
Another frequently discussed challenge is that of foreign-currency corporate borrowing in US 
dollars  and  the  impact  of  the  stronger  dollar  on  debt-servicing  and  refinancing  risks.  For 
South Africa, this does not present a significant risk, given the relatively low foreign liabilities 
of local companies and banks. However, should this have ramifications for other emerging 
markets, the effects could very well spill over to South Africa. It is clear that we cannot afford 
to be complacent, as the risks related to global monetary policy developments remain high 
given the globalised nature of the world economy. This is unchartered territory; the risks are 
tilted to the upside, with significant implications for financial stability. 
On  the  positive  side,  we  should  remember  that  the  beginning  of  the  US  monetary  policy 
tightening cycle will not necessarily be bad for the world, in particular for South Africa and 
other  emerging-market  economies,  as  it  would  indicate  that  the  US  economy  is  in  better 
shape and therefore supports the global recovery. In addition, without QE in the euro area, 
world GDP would be less positive and slow growth more persistent, and while exchange-rate 
impacts  are  not  positive  for  inflation,  they  are  positive  for  emerging-market  economies’ 
growth, while QE is likely to dramatically reduce deflation risks in the euro area. 
Let me turn to the international efforts being made to understand the current paradigm and 
galvanise  global  policymakers  to  work  towards  more  coordination  while  putting  in  place 
regulation aimed at strengthening the financial system against future crises. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Strengthening cooperation among global policymakers 
It  has  become  clear  that,  in  this  increasingly  interconnected  global  economy,  the 
determination of optimal domestic policy in large economies needs to consider the impact on 
other  economies.  For  some,  policy  actions  can  and  do  have  significant  spillovers  and 
spillbacks.  Analysing  these  issues  provides  policymakers  with  a  more  comprehensive  and 
thorough understanding of the challenges we ourselves face but also that others face, and 
helps us to better position domestic policy and communication at a level that is appropriate 
and calibrated to these risks. 
The  G-20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  have  lengthy  discussions  about 
many of these issues. Just last year, we introduced what is called a “Scenario Analysis” into 
discussions,  whereby  international  organisations  calibrate  various  scenarios  informed  by 
recent  developments  and  issues  that  are  of  critical  importance  to  policymakers,  such  as 
developments in monetary policy globally, commodity price developments and so forth. The 
Bank for International Settlements (or the BIS) conducts a great deal of research on similar 
issues, particularly as they pertain to the work of central banks. BIS meetings provide central 
bank governors with the opportunity to further share their views. 
It would not be sufficient for the G-20 to focus on the risks facing the global economy without 
taking into consideration global financial safety nets. As you will know, many changes were 
made to the IMF toolkit following the GFC, recognising that it was simply not enough to have 
facilities which kicked in only once countries were in trouble, but that there was a need for 
precautionary facilities as well as liquidity facilities. Similarly, the BRICS countries signed the 
Contingent  Reserve  Arrangement  Treaty  in  July  2014,  which  is  a  reserve-pooling 
arrangement to serve as a precautionary instrument that the BRICS countries can use in the 
event of short-term liquidity pressures. Mutual support will thus be provided, financial stability 
will  be  strengthened,  and  the  treaty  will  complement  and  strengthen  the  global  financial 
safety net and existing international arrangements. Our work on global financial safety nets 
continues and remains an important agenda item for the G-20. 
Conclusion 
The GFC has significantly transformed the environment in which monetary policy operates. 
While  uncertainty  is  always  part  of  monetary  formulation,  it  is  the  ever-escalating  level  of 
uncertainty  in  the  aftermath  of  the  GFC  that  has  presented  the  major  challenge  for  policy 
formulation in the current environment. 
What,  then,  are  the  implications  for  monetary  policy  in  South  Africa  going  forward?  As 
indicated  earlier,  the  main  risks  stemming  from  global  monetary  policy  normalisation  are 
embedded in the exchange rate of the rand and bond yields, and in their resultant impact on 
portfolio  flows,  particularly  in  the  context  of  South  Africa’s  twin  deficits.  Any  significant 
weakening  of  the  exchange  rate  in  reaction  to  US  monetary  policy  tightening  could  cause 
inflation  to  diverge  even  further  from  target,  which  may  lead  to  second-round  inflationary 
pressures.  In  addition,  domestic  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  persist,  including  electricity 
tariffs and wage settlements. 
We  at  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  are  mindful  of  our  mandate  and  are  committed  to 
achieving  our  inflation target  in the  interest  of  sustainable  and  balanced  economic growth. 
The MPC has indicated that the balance of risks to our inflation outlook continues to be tilted 
to  the  upside,  and  that  recently  inflation  risks  have  increased,  which  suggest  that  an 
unchanged monetary policy stance cannot be maintained indefinitely. 
The current environment calls for continued vigilance from policymakers and preparedness 
to  respond  to  the  fast-changing,  domestic  and  global,  economic  and  financial  markets 
environment. As indicated previously, the MPC therefore stands ready to adjust the monetary 
policy stance when deemed appropriate. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
