  Christian Noyer: Fostering economic growth in Europe 
Introduction  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, for the Round Table 3: Bank of 
France Financial Stability Review “Financing the Economy: New Avenues for Growth”, at the 
Paris Europlace International Financial Forum, Paris, 20 April 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The purpose of this third round table is to launch the latest issue of the Banque de France 
Financial  Stability  Review  entitled  “Financing  the  economy:  new  avenues  for  growth”  and 
which  basically  discusses  the  need  for  more  market–based  financing.  I  am  thrilled  to 
exchange  views  over  this  particularly  topical  issue  today  in  a  country  that  shifted  towards 
market-financing a long time ago and which has a lot to tell us. In the United States, 80% of 
debt  financing  takes  place  in  capital  markets  whereas  this  proportion  is  only  20%  in  the 
Eurozone. This new edition of our FSR, just like previous ones, brings together contributions 
from prominent academics, practitioners and policy-makers from all over the world. I warmly 
thank all the contributors. I cannot mention all of them but Sheila Bair and Barbara Novick 
among others are with us today. These contributions are very diverse, or even divergent, in 
their analysis and proposals. This is precisely how we want it to be. It is clear that we don’t 
necessarily share the views expressed in the articles but we believe in exchanging ideas. 
All in all, this new FSR underlines three main aspects with respect to financing the economy: 
The  regulatory  drivers  have  and  will  continue  to  have  an  important  bearing  on 
– 
market participants’ behavior and strategies. 
The transition towards a more balanced financing pattern needs to be supported by 
public intervention. 
There is still a lot to do in order to drain resources more effectively and ensure a 
sufficient  flow  of  long-term  financing,  which  is  a  prerequisite  for  recovery  and 
growth. 
  Before we get into the discussion, let me briefly share with you some personal thoughts in 
this regard. 
In my view, the challenges to finance the economy are mainly two-fold: 
– 
the  one  hand,  some  segments  of 
On 
the  economy,  namely  SMEs  and 
infrastructures,  rely  heavily  on  bank-financing,  due  to  the  existence  of  high  fixed 
costs and significant information asymmetries. Indeed, banks are better equipped to 
assess the credit-worthiness of such counterparties or projects. Facing this situation 
requires to unlock bank lending. 
On  the  other  hand,  and  that  concerns  the  economy  as  a  whole,  it  is  essential  to 
foster  the  development of  a  market financing  as  a  complement to  bank financing. 
Although the process has already started, the speed and extent of the shift differs 
across countries and sectors. 
 The development of a more balanced funding structure is a necessarily long process, which 
requires  a  strong  commitment  and  support from public  intervention.  In  Europe,  a  series  of 
initiatives, led by the authorities, are under way to revive the moribund securitization market 
but also to develop the private placements markets. On securitization, incidentally, allow me 
to note that it suffered unduly in Europe from the US experience, while having been much 
less  prone  to  default.  More  generally,  the  European  Commission’s  Capital  Markets  Union 
project  will  support  the  increase  in  funding  flows,  the  diversification  of  risks  and  a  better 
allocation of resources. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This shift towards more market-based financing entails two main implications from a financial 
stability perspective: 
– 
First,  the  proliferation  of  regulation  brings  uncertainty  to  market  participants.  The 
analysis of the cumulative impact and the interactions between regulations is still in 
its early days but it must be continued. Vigilance is indeed required to ensure that 
the implementation of reforms does not result in a reduction of activities that are vital 
for  financing  investments  and  firms.  I  notably  think  of  the  market-making  activity 
which shows signs of decline, partly due to the regulatory costs. This decline needs 
to be monitored in a financial system where we are promoting market financing and 
where market making is key for issuers and investors. 
Second,  the  development  of  alternative  sources  of  funding,  outside  the  banking 
system,  brings  a  necessary  diversification.  Yet 
to 
disintermediation  are  clear,  notably  a  limited  assessment  of  risks  by  investors  or 
less  ability  to  address  difficult  situations  and  gaps  in  supervision.  In  parallel,  re-
intermediation by non-banks raises level-playing field questions linked with uneven 
regulation and supervision across sectors and countries. 
risks  associated 
the 
 To discuss these important issues, we are extremely fortunate to gather an exceptional panel 
today, with: 
• 
Mrs  Sheila  Bair,  Chair  of  the  Systemic  Risk  Council,  former  chair  of  the  Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), who is obviously a prominent regulator. Dear 
Sheila, your work to build a more robust financial system, that serves the economy, 
is particularly impressive and your views on how to make it even more resilient are 
very sharp; 
We  also  have  Mrs  Barbara  Novick,  Vice-chair  of  Blackrock  and  the  author  of 
impactful  articles  on  asset  management  and  public  policy;  as  well  as  Mr  Alain 
Papiasse, Deputy Chief Operating Officer (COO) at BNP Paribas, representing the 
group in North America. Barbara and Alain are two top market practitioners with a 
comprehensive experience in both asset management and investment banking. So, 
dear  Barbara,  dear  Alain, 
I  hope  you  will  provide  us  with  “insider”  and 
complementary visions of what it really means to finance the economy. 
And  finally  let  me  introduce  Mr  Thomas  Philippon,  a  distinguished  academic  from 
NYU,  notably  specialized  in  the  evolution  of  the  financial  industry.  Dear  Thomas, 
your research on the financialization of the economy will provide a unique viewpoint 
by putting in perspective the links that exist between the financial industry and the 
economy. 
  Thank you all for being with us today. 
Let me now give the floor to our panelists. I suggest that each speaker delivers a 10-minute 
presentation before we start the actual discussion between the members of the panel and 
turn later on to the audience. Mrs Bair will speak first, followed by Mrs Novick, then Professor 
Philippon and eventually Mr Papiasse. Sheila, would you start? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
