  Andreas Dombret: The role of national supervisors in European banking 
supervision 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at Chatham House, London, 30 January 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for this opportunity to speak at Chatham House today. It is an honour for me to 
speak at such a distinguished institution and to share my thoughts with you. The topic of my 
speech  today  is  European  banking  supervision,  but  the  underlying  theme,  of  course,  is 
integration. 
Since  the  Treaties  of  Rome  were  signed  in  1957,  the  history  of  Europe  has  been 
characterised  by  ever-deepening  integration.  Once  it  had  been  set  in  motion,  European 
integration proved to be a steady process marked by a number of leaps. One such leap was 
taken  in  1999.  In  that  year,  11  European  countries  adopted  the  euro  as  their  common 
currency. Today, the euro is shared by 19 countries and more than 300 million people. 
However, as you know, the sun does not always shine in the euro area. In the wake of the 
global  financial  crisis  of  2008,  the  euro  area  slid  into  a  crisis  of  its  own.  In  2010,  Greece 
stumbled into a sovereign debt crisis. This led to a rapid loss of confidence in other countries 
at  the  periphery  of  the  euro  area  and  eventually  brought  the  euro  area  to  the  brink  of 
collapse. Extensive rescue packages provided by the member states of the euro area as well 
as non-standard measures taken by the ECB helped to calm the markets and prevented the 
crisis from escalating. 
To some, the present situation might look familiar. Greece is again capturing the headlines, 
since last week’s elections put into power a party which is set to derail the train of reform. 
And just three days before the Greek elections, the ECB again decided to take non-standard 
measures in order to address the risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation – as you 
know, the Bundesbank takes a rather critical view of these measures. 
But  even  though  some  might  be  reminded  of  2010,  it  is  obvious  that  the  situation  has 
improved over the past five years. And at some point, the focus should shift from managing 
the current crisis to preventing future crises. With regard to the European banking sector, the 
focus shifted in mid-2013 and, once again, the response was a leap in integration. 
The idea behind European banking supervision 
2. 
About  a  year  later,  on  4  November  2014, the first  pillar  of  a  European banking  union  was 
erected. On that date, the ECB assumed responsibility for supervising the 120 largest banks 
in the euro area – with the accession of Lithuania, the number of supervised banks has risen 
to 123. These 123 banks account for more than 85% of the aggregate balance sheet of the 
euro area’s banking sector, making the ECB one of the biggest banking supervisors in the 
world. 
The idea of European banking supervision was undoubtedly born out of the crisis. The crisis 
lent new urgency to something that had already been obvious before: in banking and finance, 
national borders are far less relevant than in other areas of life. 
Such  an  integrated  financial  system  is  certainly  desirable  for  all  the  well-known  reasons, 
including efficiency gains and risk-sharing. However, that which distributes gains among all 
of us in good times, forces us all to share the pain in bad times. In an integrated financial 
system, problems in one country can quickly spread to others. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This  is  what  happened  during  the  recent  crisis  and  it  made  us  realise  that  banking 
supervision  had  to  adapt  –  with  international  banks  that  operate  across  borders,  isolated 
supervision was not so “splendid” after all. To quote the IMF, the European banking union is 
the  “logical  conclusion  of  the  idea  that  integrated  banking  systems  require  integrated 
prudential oversight”. 
To  be  sure,  there  was  a  certain  amount  of  cooperation  in  supervisory  matters  before  the 
crisis. There was an exchange between home and host supervisors of internationally active 
banks. And there were supervisory colleges in which supervisors of global banks convened 
and  shared  their  insights.  However,  this  was  not  enough.  An  integrated  financial  system 
cannot be supervised through cooperation, it requires an integrated approach. 
Taking banking supervision from the national level to the European level has three specific 
benefits. 
First, European banking supervision makes it possible for banks in the entire euro area to be 
supervised to the same, high standards. These standards will emerge from sharing insights 
and  empirical  findings  internationally  and  taking  the  best  from  each  national  approach  to 
banking supervision. Germany, for instance, could benefit from a more quantitative-oriented 
approach, which has already been adopted by other countries. 
Second, European banking supervision makes it possible to effectively identify and manage 
cross-border  problems.  This  is  essential,  because,  as  I  have  mentioned,  large  banks  are 
usually  active  in  more  than  one  country.  The  failure  of  the  Franco-Belgian  bank  Dexia  in 
2011  is  a  classic  example  of  a  case  where  banking  supervision  with  a  cross-border focus 
could  have  improved  crisis  management.  Another  example  is  German  Hypo  Real  Estate, 
which failed in 2009. 
Third, taking banking supervision from the national to the European level will add a layer of 
separation between supervisors and the banks they supervise. This will prevent supervisors 
from treating their banks with kid-gloves out of national interest. 
You see that we have come to expect a lot from European banking supervision. But even 
though  I  am  extremely  optimistic,  we  have  to  bear  one  thing  in  mind:  European  banking 
supervision is an immensely complex operation that has been put together in a very short 
space of time. We should not expect everything to run smoothly from day one. It will certainly 
take  some  time  before  every  detail  is  sorted  out  deep  down  in  the  engine  room  of  actual 
banking supervision. 
Let us take a tour down into that engine room and see how European banking supervision is 
organised and what that entails for the national supervisors. 
The role of national supervisors 
3. 
A  question  I  often  heard  during  the  run-up  to  European  banking  supervision  was:  “Aren’t 
national supervisors digging their own grave? Now that supervision has been transferred to 
the European level, where will that leave you as national supervisors?” 
First of all, we should certainly not succumb to the illusion that European-level supervision is 
going to spell the end of national supervision. In the entire euro area there are about 3,400 
banks,  of  which  only  123  are  directly  supervised  by  the  ECB  –  the  rest  remain  the 
responsibility of national supervisors. In Germany, for instance, about 1,800 credit institutions 
are still being supervised by the Bundesbank and BaFin. 
Nevertheless, the ECB will certainly play a part in harmonising the supervisory approaches to 
all  banks  in  the  euro  area.  Consequently,  national  supervisors  will  have  to  take  a  more 
European perspective in supervising those banks which remain within their direct sphere of 
responsibility. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  But  what  about  those  banks  which  are  directly  supervised  by  the  ECB?  Are  national 
supervisors being pushed to the sidelines in these cases? Well, let us consider the facts. The 
ECB has to supervise 123, mostly very large and complex banking groups, which are located 
in 19 different countries. To do so, the ECB has a staff of 1,000, most of whom are located in 
Frankfurt. There is no other option for European banking supervision than to rely on national 
supervisors. 
The  role  of  national  supervisors  builds  on  their  expertise  and  experience,  as  well  as  their 
resources and their presence on the ground. The Bundesbank, for instance, has decades of 
experience in banking supervision, has nine regional offices and about 1,300 supervisors. 
Consequently,  the  ongoing  banking  supervision  lies  with  “joint  supervisory  teams”.  These 
teams  are  headed  by  ECB  staff,  but  are  comprised  mainly  of  national  supervisors.  The 
Bundesbank is represented in all the joint supervisory teams for German banks and also in 
some teams for foreign banks. Altogether, about 300 supervisors from the Bundesbank work 
in the context of European banking supervision. 
And  here,  I  am  just  talking  about  ongoing  supervision.  In  addition  to  that,  all  the  national 
supervisory authorities are represented on the Supervisory Board, the decision-making body 
of European banking supervision. For the Bundesbank that means we are ceding, in whole 
or in part, responsibility for supervising 21 German institutions, but becoming involved in the 
supervision of 102 foreign institutions. 
You  can  imagine  that  all  this  requires  national  supervisors  to  adjust  –  not  only  from  an 
organisational point of view but also from a personal standpoint. Supervisors who, for years, 
were responsible for national banks are suddenly being pushed into an international working 
environment.  This  is  exciting  and  challenging  at  the  same  time,  and  it  will  be  some  time 
before everyone has adjusted to the new circumstances. Experience of the first few weeks is 
rather encouraging, though. 
From  an  organisational  perspective,  the  Bundesbank  has  already  adapted.  We  have 
changed our structure to allow us to play an efficient and effective role in European banking 
supervision: we have set up a new Secretariat to prepare the meetings of the Supervisory 
Board,  we  have  set  up  a  new  department  to  analyse  the  foreign  banks  which  fall  under 
European  banking  supervision,  and  we  have  set  up  a  staff  unit  to  coordinate  those 
colleagues from the Bundesbank who work in the joint supervisory teams. 
All  this  requires  great  effort  and  represents  a  formidable  challenge.  However,  the  real 
challenge does not lie in organising day-today supervision in the new system. In my view, the 
real challenge lies in the decision-making processes. 
Since the ECB is responsible for European banking supervision, the Governing Council is the 
highest  decision-making  body  not  only  for  monetary  policy  issues  but  also  for  matters  of 
banking supervision. These two responsibilities converge on the banks. Banks are a crucial 
element in the transmission process of monetary policy, while, at the same time, being the 
object of banking supervision. This, of course, gives rise to conflicts of interest, as it creates 
a banking supervisor with access to central bank liquidity. 
To minimise such conflicts of interest, a governance structure has been created that limits 
the  Governing  Council’s  involvement  in  supervisory  decisions.  Time  will  tell  whether  this 
structure  truly  helps  to  avoid  conflicts  of  interest  between  monetary  policy  and  banking 
supervision  or  whether  it  might  have  been  better  to  create  an  independent  banking 
supervisor. 
 Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
European  banking  supervision  certainly  represents  the  biggest  step  towards  financial 
integration in Europe since the launch of the euro. And, to me, it is the most logical step to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  take. Single monetary policy requires integrated financial markets – which includes, without 
doubt, European-level banking supervision. 
And  for  anyone  who  has  gained  the  impression  that  we  have  transferred  responsibility  for 
banking supervision to an institution with no previous experience of supervising banks, rest 
assured: that is not the case. National supervisors will continue to play an important role in 
supervision within the new system. 
For  us,  as  national  supervisors,  this  is  an  extremely  exciting  challenge.  Since  colleagues 
from  the  Bundesbank  began  taking  part  in  the  joint  supervisory  teams,  our  tasks  and 
perspectives have been broadened substantially. I am sure that our national supervision will 
also benefit from the experience we gain by working in the joint European teams. And I firmly 
believe  that  European  banking  supervision  will  benefit  from  the  involvement  of  national 
supervisors. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
