  Josef Bonnici: Enhancing competitiveness 
Address by Professor Josef Bonnici, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the ifs Malta 
Annual Dinner of the Institute of Financial Services, Saint Julian’s, 15 December 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Hon. Minister, Members of the Institute, Distinguished Guests, 
I would like to thank the President and Committee of IFS-Malta for once again organising this 
Annual Dinner and giving me the opportunity to share my thoughts with such a distinguished 
audience. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  welcome  Ms  Pelin  Berkmen,  Head  of  an  IMF 
delegation, and members of her team, who are with us tonight and who have just concluded 
the annual Article IV Mission. A warm welcome also to Mr Antonio Bassanetti, from the IMF’s 
Executive Director’s office. I trust you will find this evening of relevance. 
Mr  President, I  was  pleased  to  hear  about the achievements  of  the  Institute  over  the  past 
year. Education and training are fundamental components of a successful and sustainable 
financial services sector. The endeavours of the Institute deserve due recognition. Well done 
to all of you and I wish every success for the future. 
Introduction 
The  aftermath  of  the  crisis  provides  an  important  starting  point  for  the  discussion  of 
competitiveness, which will be the main theme of my remarks tonight. 
I  will  commence  by  focussing  on  Chart  1,  which  compares  the  performance  of  various 
economies since the onset of the crisis. All the curves start from a common point of 100 in 
2008. Setting the Maltese economy aside for a moment, several considerations stand out. 
The real GDP of the Euro area has yet to return fully to its 2008 level, and the same can be 
said  about  the  United  Kingdom.  In  fact,  the  Euro  area  economy  is  currently  1.9%  smaller 
than in 2008, while the British economy is 0.5% smaller. 
The  Euro  area  average  is  composed  of  countries  recovering  at  different  speeds.  For 
example,  Germany  is  a  top  performer  in  the  Euro  area,  though  its  economy  has  lagged 
somewhat behind the United States. In fact, German output is currently 4.8% higher than in 
2008, while in the U.S. it is 6.5% higher. 
Where does Malta fit in all this? As the Chart shows, Malta compared favourably throughout 
the crisis and the aftermath. The contraction at the trough in 2009 was relatively moderate. 
The path taken in the recovery has been stronger – in fact consistently stronger – than in the 
other economies shown in the Chart. Output is at present 12% higher than in 2008. 
I believe that a number of factors have shaped the course taken by the Maltese economy. 
Malta  passed  through  a  liberalization  and  restructuring  experience  that  saw  the  exit  of 
inefficient  entities  and  businesses  mostly  prior  to  E.U.  accession  in  2004.  This  process  of 
rationalization, which occurred only a few years before the start of the crisis in 2008, made 
the overall economy resilient and in a better position to weather adverse events in external 
markets. 
Post-2008 growth was enabled by the smooth entry into the Euro area, which coincided with 
the start of the crisis in 2008. The transition was facilitated by the fact that in the preceding 
decades,  there  was  no  recourse  to  monetary  financing  of  government  debt,  generally  no 
recourse  to  currency  depreciation  to  offset  internal  competitiveness  issues,  while  fiscal 
policies were in large part prudent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Another consideration relates to the growth of new sectors which improved the capacity of 
the economy to offset downturns in external demand. Diversification is often more difficult to 
achieve in relatively small economies. However, the degree of diversification in the private 
sector  in  Malta  is  remarkable,  and  has  resulted  primarily  from  the  growth  of  financial 
services, internet related services and aviation servicing, along with the reorientation of both 
the tourist sector and manufacturing. 
Although  we  have  experienced  higher  GDP  growth,  we  must  be  aware  that  some  of  our 
competitors are starting to benefit from the structural reforms and internal devaluation that 
they  went  through  in  response  to  the  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  on  their  economies. 
Chart 2 displays unit labour costs in the Euro area since 2002, distinguishing between the 
stressed economies and the relatively unstressed ones. The path of Malta’s ULC is displayed 
separately. The Chart shows that Malta trends lower than either of the two groups. However 
one also notes that costs in the stressed countries have been levelling off, so that Malta’s 
competitive advantage has somewhat narrowed. 
This  suggests  that  Malta  must  remain  extra  attentive  to  the  factors  that  influence 
competitiveness.  Over  the  course  of  the  crisis,  Malta’s  economy  was  never  in  need  of 
austerity  measures,  which  in  itself  is  a  manifestation  of  economic  and  financial-sector 
resilience and good governance. But at this stage, we need to ensure that our competitive 
edge is not eroded. 
Structural and fiscal policies in the Euro area 
Turning  to  current  policy  issues  at the  Euro  area  level,  one  of the  major  challenges  is the 
choice of the right instruments, or finding the proper balance between demand-oriented and 
supply-oriented policies. 
In view of the serious damage caused by the financial crisis, there is widespread realization 
that  a  durable  solution  to  the  current  economic  stagnation  needs  to  be  built  around  a 
structural  reform  programme.  Over  time  these  reforms  would  result  in  a  greater  degree of 
competitiveness, improving the growth potential of the economy. In the short run, however, 
such supply-side reforms often involve transitional costs. Hence the importance of demand-
side measures that alleviate the impact on those that are negatively hit by structural reforms. 
This would prevent deflation and high levels of unemployment. 
Unfortunately,  the  choice  of  policy  instruments  has  been  severely  constrained  by  the 
absence  of  space  to  manoeuvre  on  the  budgetary  side.  Indeed,  the  financial  crisis  hit  the 
European  economies  at  a  time  when  a  number  of  Member  States  had unsustainably  high 
public debt levels, leaving less room for demand management. Major structural reforms and 
internal  devaluations,  which  included  outright  cuts  in  nominal  wages,  were  inevitable,  and 
these  had  to  be  effected  without  the  possibility  of  complementing  them  with  appropriate 
compensation  on  the  demand  side.  The  result  is  a  prolonged  and  painful  recovery  with 
permanent effects on potential economic growth, in some countries driving a disinflationary 
process. 
A  further  challenge  arises  from  the  fact  that  in  the  Eurosystem  the  centralised  monetary 
stance  is  accompanied  by  a  fragmented  fiscal  effort  on  the  part  of  the  various  national 
governments. This contrasts with, for example, the United States where both monetary and 
fiscal policies are more centralised and hence they can be harmonised towards a common 
goal. 
While these limits on national fiscal policies have influenced the slow momentum of recovery, 
there are still various options that can address this weakness. On the fiscal side, the recent 
proposal by the Commission to create a European Fund for Strategic Investments is one way 
of  funding  large  scale  investment  projects  that  would  promote  competitiveness  and  boost 
activity in stressed areas. The Fund would be backed by guarantees from the EU budget and 
the  European  Investment  Bank.  A  complementary  policy  is  the  switching  of  government 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  expenditure to more investment and growth friendly areas, while reducing bureaucracy and 
other inefficient expenditure. 
Monetary policy in the Euro area 
Against  this  background,  the  role  of  monetary  policy  has  become,  and  is  likely  to  remain, 
more  accommodative  in  the  Euro  area.  The  ECB  has  played  a  major  role  in  supporting 
economic  growth  using  its  interest  rate  policy  –  now  at  near  zero  levels  –  and  policies 
designed  to  influence  credit  provisioning  and  risk  reduction.  The  ECB  has  also  reaffirmed 
that, if necessary, further measures will be taken to counter the risk of a prolonged period of 
low or negative inflation and to bring inflation to its medium term target of under but close to 
2%. 
The possibility of a deflationary situation materializing in the Euro area is of concern as its 
dynamics would raise real interest rates. It would penalize investors and increase the burden 
of holding business inventories. It would also discourage consumption, as buyers await lower 
prices  by  delaying  spending.  A  de-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  carries  a  risk  of  the 
Euro  area  becoming  stuck  in  a  stagnant  environment  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time. 
Basically, a deflationary scenario would be inconsistent with what is needed to support an 
economic recovery in Europe. 
The  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  the  Euro  area  depends  on  a  properly  functioning 
banking sector, since the transmission of monetary stimulus operates at least partly through 
the bank lending channel. In the Euro area, the debt overhang in the private sector and the 
balance  sheet  position  of  the  banks  have  been  hampering  the  transmission  and 
effectiveness of the ECB’s accommodative policy measures. 
Turning to Chart 3, the solid line shows that in spite of the various measures adopted by the 
ECB, whether those operating through the interest rate channel or through credit volumes, 
the net injection of liquidity remains relatively low. The upper part of the Chart, in blue, shows 
the liquidity injected by the ECB into the Euro area economies. The lower part, in red, shows 
the balances deposited with the Eurosystem by Euro area banks. The Chart also shows how 
a large part of new liquidity was deposited back at the ECB by banks. The objective of the 
current Targeted Long Term Refinancing Operations (TLTROs) is to inject more liquidity at a 
low  rate  that  is  fixed  for  four  years  while  the  negative  deposit  rate  is  to  discourage  funds 
going back to the ECB. 
There  are  indications  that  the  contraction  in  credit  supply  is  bottoming  out.  This  signals  a 
potential turnaround in credit dynamics in the Euro area. Also, the latest ECB’s Bank Lending 
Survey saw banks report a further easing of overall credit standards. The various announced 
measures  are  expected  to  inject  liquidity  into  the  system  in  two  different  ways,  namely 
through  direct  asset  purchases  and  through  bank  borrowing  from  the  Eurosystem.  Both 
routes essentially transfer risks from the financial system to the Eurosystem, and hopefully 
should  lead  to  a  greater  ability  to  fund  investment  in  the  economy.  In  the  process,  the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet will expand. 
Prudential reform in the Euro area 
I will now turn to financial stability issues. As you are aware, the Comprehensive Assessment 
of major banks undertaken by the ECB marked the start of a trilateral relationship between 
banks, National Competent Authorities and the ECB in its role of supervisor of banks in the 
Euro  area.  The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism’s  micro-prudential  responsibilities  will 
complement the existing ECB’s macro-prudential role in shaping the future of banking in the 
Euro area. Banking supervision, viewed as one of the tools at the disposal of the ECB, will 
help  ensure  financial  stability  which  is  needed  to  sustain  macroeconomic  growth.  The 
demanding  Asset  Quality  Review  and  stress  tests  coupled  with  an  overall  result  that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  exceeded expectations set a positive mood in the market and should lead to easier access to 
bank funding for investment growth. 
Financial sector dimension of Malta’s competitiveness 
Turning to  the  Maltese  context,  it  would  be  a  pity  if  the  low-cost  credit conditions  that  are 
being  offered  by  the  ECB  are  not  fully  exploited  in  Malta.  Broadly  speaking,  the  overall 
participation  in  the  TLTRO  programme  by  core  Maltese  banks  has  been  somewhat 
disappointing, with the participation of very few banks and with the actual take up being way 
short of the limits available. 
On the  positive  side,  we  have  noted  the  introduction  of  a  lending  scheme that  a  domestic 
bank is funding from the ECB’s TLTROs. These TLTROs provide funds at very favourable 
terms  –  at  a  very  low  interest  rate  that  is  fixed  for  four  years.  Although  the  size  of  this 
particular  scheme  is  limited,  one  hopes  that  it  can  be  expanded  and  emulated  by  other 
banks.  Such  programmes  are  a  prime  example  of  the  banking  sector  fulfilling  its  role  of 
promoting economic growth by providing the necessary low cost funding, while at the same 
time contributing to the profits of the bank. 
It is worth noting also that competitiveness does not depend only on costs; as the crisis has 
reminded  us, financial  stability  is  equally  essential.  In  Ireland for  example,  it  was  the  poor 
governance  and  risky  credit  practices  of  commercial  banks that  drove  the  country  into  the 
crisis, even though the competitiveness indicators were very positive. 
Generally speaking, Maltese banking is run on a prudential and cautious business model and 
this is particularly true of the systematically-relevant banks, which manifest for example a low 
loan-to-deposit ratio. Nevertheless, we have stepped up our efforts, jointly with the MFSA, to 
ensure that the soundness of the banking system is not only preserved but also enhanced. 
The Joint Financial Stability Board between the Central Bank and the MFSA has contributed 
to  major  initiatives,  notably  amendments  to  the  Banking  Rules  09  and  12.  These 
amendments  will  improve  the  overall  coverage  ratio  and  strengthen  provisioning  practices. 
They also boost bank capital and reserves to mitigate potential risks from lending portfolios. 
The amendments also address the risks arising from banks’ concentration in the real estate 
sector. 
I want to take this opportunity to commend our banks, particularly those participating in the 
Comprehensive  Assessment,  as  this  was  a  very  challenging  year.  The  changes  I  just 
mentioned  coincided  with  the  new  requirements  and  rules  under  the  Comprehensive 
Assessment. I  recognize  that  these  changes  may  impact  profitability  in  the  short-term,  but 
sound governance sets the stage for sustainably higher returns in the longer term. 
Banks are now subject to the single rule book and this calls for increased awareness and 
focus to meet these new challenges. This will reduce the overall risk in the financial system 
both in Malta and elsewhere. 
Going  forward,  there  are  other  challenges  that  will  need  to  be  addressed  by  our  financial 
system in order to further mitigate certain risks. 
In the aftermath of the sovereign debt crisis there is a heightened recognition that a more 
diversified investment portfolio would reduce the risk exposure related to the bank-sovereign 
nexus.  Looking  into the future, further  diversification  of  our sovereign  debt  market may  be 
warranted. It would be advisable if, going forward, stable alternative options are identified to 
complement current practice. Long-term placements with certain international wealth funds, 
for example, would ensure that government securities can have a more diversified investor 
base and possibly reduce the government’s borrowing costs at the same time. 
There is a further consideration that I have raised on previous occasions – one that would 
enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the  intermediation  role  in  our  financial  system,  and  address 
some  of  the funding gaps,  resulting  possibly  in  instances  of  market failures.  Malta  lacks a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  consistent supply of long term finance that would efficiently fund a project addressed to SME 
funding  needs  or  to  finance  structural,  economic,  social  and  environmental  policies  in 
connection with the long term financing of priority projects. If we look at other countries, such 
as Germany and France, they managed to cater for SMEs as well as for other environmental 
and infrastructure investment through promotion or development banks. A development bank 
would contribute to economic growth by funding sectors and projects that are not catered for 
by  commercial  banks  on  their  own.  The  Central  Bank  looks  at  such  an  initiative  as  a 
necessary diversification of our financial base. I understand that progress is being made on 
this initiative and I find this to be a very positive development. 
The road ahead 
Against  a  rapidly  changing  economic  landscape,  Malta  needs  to  be  attentive  to  take 
advantage  of  its  flexibility  and  adaptability.  In  the  past  years,  the  Maltese  economy  went 
through significant structural change. Not only by diversifying into a number of new growth 
sectors such as aviation services, pharmaceuticals and internet related activity, but also by 
upgrading its investments in the traditional sectors. For example, the tapping of new source 
markets for tourists in European cities that were newly serviced by low-cost airlines allowed 
the  hospitality  sector  to  overcome  the  recession-driven  weak  demand  in  already  serviced 
markets.  Similarly,  the financial  and  other services  sectors  continued  to expand,  thanks to 
the right conditions for growth, including the appropriate legislative environment. 
There  are  a  number  of  reasons  for  being  positive  and  optimistic  about  Malta’s  potential 
growth in the future. In contrast to various developed countries, Malta has some structural 
issues that, if addressed, can provide opportunities for an on-going momentum to growth. 
Take for example the labour participation rate in Malta. Although it is among the lowest in the 
Euro area (as shown in Chart 4), Malta has gone a long way in achieving progress on this 
issue.  Over  the  past  ten  years,  Malta  registered  the  largest  increase,  among  the  Member 
States, in the female activity rate, which rose from 36% in 2004 to over 50% this year. The 
recently introduced incentives for female participation will continue to steer our labour market 
in the right direction, also boosting Malta’s potential economic growth. 
At  the  same  time,  we  also  observe  a  higher  number  of  foreigners  who  are  contributing  to 
economic activity in a variety of sectors. First, it has to be remarked that an expanding labour 
force through this route is in itself a sign of Malta’s strong rate of economic growth relative to 
other areas of the EU. Secondly, it reduces the likelihood of skill gaps in the labour market. 
Though this added flexibility needs to be recognised for the positive effect it has on potential 
output, the role of retraining programmes by the ETC remains of utmost importance in better 
matching skills with vacancies and further reducing the rate of unemployment. 
Turning to the fiscal dimension, government forecasts the deficit to decline to 2.1% of GDP 
this year and to 1.6% in 2015. This is a financially responsible objective which needs to be 
truly maintained. The government debt-to-GDP ratio has reached around the 70% level. This 
ratio needs to plateau and eventually to drop and this requires sustainable management of 
both budgetary inflows and outflows. 
Clearly,  budgetary  performance  depends  on  economic  performance  as  higher  growth 
ensures  higher  tax  revenues.  In  turn,  faster  growth  is  only  possible  by  producing  and 
delivering more goods and services. This can only be attained by being competitive. 
Moreover,  other  significant  challenges  remain.  Inefficiencies  in  public  administration 
processes  hamper  the  development  of  the  Maltese  business  environment  and  need  to  be 
improved, so as to better support competitiveness and encourage foreign direct investment. 
As  I  already  mentioned,  there  is  also  room  for  further  improvement  in  the  business 
environment in terms of access to credit. The cost of credit in Malta remains on the high side 
and  further  easing  would  help  our  businesses  to  invest  at  a  lower  cost.  Going  forward, 
various initiatives are envisaged to improve the current situation, including the introduction of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  a credit register that will be administered by the Central Bank. A credit register will narrow the 
information  gap  that  exists  in  the  Maltese  banking  system  by  reducing  asymmetric 
information  between  borrowers  and  lenders.  It  also  improves  risk  management  thereby 
contributing to a better performing loan portfolio and as a result, a lower cost of capital. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me close with a few concluding remarks. 
As you are well aware, the banking sector across the Euro area is passing through regulatory 
and  supervisory  changes  that  are  sometimes  viewed  as  expensive  and 
imposing 
unnecessary  burdens  on  the  sector.  This  is  a  short-sighted  assessment.  Though  dividend 
pay-outs may be lower in the short-run, their sustainability will be strengthened in the longer 
term. Similarly, higher bank capital does not necessarily lead to lower volumes of loans over 
the long run. Instead, a higher capital base mitigates balance sheet risk, lowers bank funding 
costs, hence allowing banks to charge a lower risk premium on their loans, to the advantage 
of both lenders and borrowers. 
The  crisis  has  uncovered  various  shortcomings  in  corporate  governance  in  the  banking 
sector, mainly in areas like risk management and internal controls, compensation, corporate 
structures and transparency. Some Maltese banks have yet to adopt a number of necessary 
risk oversight practices that would ultimately benefit the banks and their stakeholders. 
What needs to be stressed is that reputation is a key asset of Malta’s financial system which 
cannot be taken for granted. Efforts to safeguard financial sector reputation need to be on-
going and undertaken by all concerned in the financial sector. 
Reforms in the banking system need to be accompanied by structural reforms in other parts 
of the economy. However, this can only be possible if the economy is growing sustainably. 
Within the context of limited fiscal space, there is a need for the appropriate environment to 
encourage investment and stimulate growth in the private sector. Going forward, we need to 
enhance Malta’s competitive position in order to attract a higher volume of capital investment 
in the future. A strong education and skills base, an upgraded infrastructure and a clean and 
sustainable  source  of  energy  are  essential  elements  that  would  pave  the  way  for  future 
investment. 
The financial sector provides an important contribution to output and employment growth in 
Malta. Going forward, the sector also has room for expansion in a range of activities that link 
it  with  the  domestic  economy  in  the  sense  that  value  is  added  in  Malta  by  engaging  the 
services  of  financial  experts,  lawyers,  accountants  and  so  on,  but  catering  to  demand 
abroad,  such  as  in  the  Mediterranean  region  and  beyond.  For  example,  the  recently 
announced initiative to create space for a new commercial activity in the form of facilities for 
Islamic banking is consistent with this vision for Malta. 
Enhancing our competiveness requires a constant search for new areas of activity as well as 
strengthening  and  refining  the  currently  successful  ones.  It  is  the  only  way  that  we  can 
ensure  that  the  standard  of  living  can  keep  increasing  and  that  the  value  added  of  the 
Maltese economy can keep advancing. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
   8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
