  
 
Sarah Dahlgren: The importance of addressing cybersecurity risks in the 
financial sector 
Remarks  by  Ms  Sarah  Dahlgren,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution 
Supervision Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the OpRisk North America 
Annual Conference, New York City, 24 March 2015. 
 Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  Operational  Risk  &  Regulation  for  inviting  me  to  speak  here  today.  I 
appreciate the opportunity to address this group and kick off what looks like a very interesting 
and comprehensive few days of dialogue around current and future risks facing the industry. 
As always, my remarks today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. 
I will begin my remarks with a high-level overview of the progress made in recent years in 
addressing some of the most significant risks facing the industry following the financial crisis. 
I will then go on to discuss one of the areas where I see some of the biggest challenges in 
the road ahead. As the industry continues to adapt to and implement necessary regulatory 
changes, it is also adapting to and leveraging technology changes: technology changes that 
offer both exciting opportunities and more complex risks than – I think – we are prepared for. 
Progress 
Coming out of the financial crisis, we all knew that we needed to be better prepared for future 
crisis events, whatever their character, source or timing. We needed financial firms, and a 
financial system, that was better prepared to weather all storms. 
In 2011, we developed the Framework for Supervision – a framework designed to ensure we 
had firms and a system that were less complex, more resilient and better managed. 
Collectively, we have made a lot of progress since 2011 – and the industry is in much better 
condition relative to the pre-crisis period. But, as you all know, business does not stand still 
and this constant evolution results in new risks and new challenges. 
Before turning to one of the biggest risks or challenges I see, I want to pause and recognize 
two things: 
• 
First,  it’s  clear  that  progress  has  been  made  across  the  industry  in  a  number  of 
areas  –  particularly  in  making  firms  and  the  system  more  resilient  through 
improvements in capital and liquidity, as well as enhancements in risk management, 
including  capital  planning  and  stress  testing  across  the  range  of  risks  firms  face. 
But,  in  the  remaining  two  areas  of  the  Framework  –  less  complex  and  better 
managed – I think it’s safe to say that despite the fact that firms are addressing a 
number  of  outstanding  issues,  these  areas  continue  to  present  challenges  in 
reaching the desired end state. 
Second, as I’m sure you would agree, we collectively still have quite a bit of work to 
do to fully implement all of the changes required under new rules and regulations. 
And, we must continue to devote sufficient attention and resources to complete the 
efforts. At the same time, though, it is important to take stock of the changes made 
over the past few years – for two important reasons: first, to assess the impact of 
those  changes,  both  intended  and  unintended;  and,  second,  to  understand  the 
contours of the “new” financial system operating under the range of new rules and 
regulations,  both  national  and  global  in  nature. Such  a  stocktaking  is  important to 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  ensure that we collectively understand how the “new” financial system is operating. 
Firms and supervisors will continue to face challenges and competing demands as 
we press, in the months and years ahead, on implementing necessary changes and 
assessing the “new” financial system. 
What the future holds 
One  of  the  topics  that  I  feel  will  compete  for,  and  will  deserve,  a  lot  of  attention  in  the 
foreseeable future is cybersecurity. 
I am often asked about my list of “things that keep me awake at night,” and I think it’s fair to 
say that cybersecurity is at the top of that list – as I’m sure it is for many of you in this room. 
In fact, I think cybersecurity is one of the topics that should be on everyone’s list – from the 
most  senior  managers  and  boards  of  directors,  all  the  way  down  to  line  managers. 
Cybersecurity is not a topic or an issue just for the Information Technology staff or the CIO to 
address; it is a risk that isn’t exclusive in who, what or where it targets. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
It is a risk that is difficult to clearly define. 
It is a risk that is constantly evolving. 
It is a risk that is not limited to one source. 
It  is  a  risk  that  is  faced  by  every  single  financial  firm,  regardless  of  size  or 
complexity. 
In fact, it is a risk that is faced by every business, organization, school, church or 
group  that  uses  technology.  In  other  words,  no  company  is  immune  (unless,  of 
course, you operate an all cash business from a brick and mortar store and keep 
your earnings under your mattress – not something we see a lot of in today’s world). 
The financial sector, in particular, is under unprecedented attack from a broad spectrum of 
intent  and  attack  methods 
increasingly 
interconnected. These highly dynamic systems give rise to the “new normal” – system design 
and architecture that needs to support rapid and compartmentalized change. 
So, where do we begin when we look at a risk of this magnitude? And, how do we get our 
arms around the many associated risks that surround it? 
Let me begin with what it is not. Cybersecurity is not an “Information Technology” issue. It is 
not a risk that can be addressed by simply having a strong IT team in place. It is not a risk 
that  just  affects  a  firm’s  technology  –  it  affects  the  business  itself,  in  every  aspect  –  the 
bottom line, reputation, processes, and so much more. 
However,  information  technology  and  cybersecurity  are  intrinsically  linked.  I’d  like  to  cover 
both of these issues in my remaining remarks and focus on several of the underlying issues 
that need to be addressed. 
that  are  complex,  widely  distributed,  and 
 Information technology and legacy issues 
The first dimension is legacy: there is still a great deal of “clean-up” to do to fix longstanding 
technology and data issues that have built up over the years. The investments necessary are 
long-term  and  the  fixes,  in  many  cases,  will  take  multiple  years  to  execute.  The  range  of 
issues  include:  systems  or  processes  that  are  manual  or  not  fully  automated;  asset 
management tools that are drastically insufficient; and business processes and models built 
without security requirements, to name but a few. 
As firms address these challenges, they must also be flexible and agile enough to keep up 
with  the  changing  environment  and  incorporate  new  developments  as  they  arise.  While  a 
number of firms have sound programs in place to address these longstanding issues, strong 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  project management and tenacity will be crucial to see them through. In addition, continued 
prioritization  and  commitment  of  resources,  as  well  as  support  from  the  firm’s  senior 
management and board of directors, are critical. I see commitment to this basic “blocking and 
tackling” as essential to financial institutions’ continuing to be competitive – and relevant – in 
the digital world. 
While the legacy issues need to be addressed in the near-term and quickly, we can’t hold off 
on addressing the vast number of issues around cyber – since cyber is upon us now. 
Information technology and cybersecurity 
The area where I will spend most of my time discussing today is cybersecurity. Suffice it to 
say that as I think about the kinds of risks that might cause the next crisis, cybersecurity is 
the one that worries me the most. While I will focus my remarks on the financial sector, my 
concern is not limited to the financial sector. This is much bigger than just banks or financial 
institutions; it includes many other sectors as well. 
As it relates to the financial industry in particular, the interconnectedness of firms continues 
to pose a particular risk to financial stability; from trading systems to settlement activities, we 
are at risk of a major disruption to financial stability. During the last financial crisis, we began 
to get a glimpse into the challenges faced as a result of interconnectedness and systemic 
failures. Years later, we are still faced with some of the same challenges, with only a limited 
view  into  the  true  complexities  behind  how  firms  are  linked,  connected,  and  ultimately 
intertwined to form the fabric of the financial industry. While we have begun to address other 
areas of systemic risk, I feel the industry as a whole is just beginning to scratch the surface 
of the potential system-wide impact of a significant cyber-attack. This risk can be referred to 
as “single point of failure.” What is this? These are areas that, despite all of the work that has 
already been carried out, are significantly more vulnerable than others. We need to identify 
where they are and focus our combined efforts on understanding their systemic impact and 
addressing them. 
I want to be very clear here. I don’t think that this isn’t a regular topic of conversation among 
directors,  executives  and  managers  –  in fact,  based  on  discussions I’ve  had  with  many  of 
you, I know that it’s quite the opposite. There is a lot of discussion within firms about the topic 
– and there’s quite a bit of activity more broadly that suggests that many different people are 
talking about cyber. There are conferences on cybersecurity every week. Consultancy firms 
are working with the industry on how to protect against attacks. Law enforcement agencies 
are investigating and cracking down on attacks and those behind them. Everyone is talking 
about this! And, I think that’s appropriate and necessary – this is everyone’s issue. 
As we engage in discussions on the subject and flesh out our plans to address this risk, there 
are a number of topics that are key to keep in mind. Before I go through that list, I want to 
provide  an  overview  on  where  we,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  are  in  our 
process. 
While  cybersecurity  has  been  on  our  agenda  for  quite  some  time,  and  we  have  been 
dedicating  resources  to  assessing  it  in  large  complex  firms  and  setting  expectations  for 
smaller firms, we have elevated our efforts in recent months and have formed a dedicated 
team focused on further strengthening our overall supervisory approach to cybersecurity. As 
I mentioned at the beginning, I think we’ve done a reasonable job in developing rules and 
regulations  to  ensure  firms  are  prepared  to  withstand  the  other  types  of  shocks  we  have 
experienced in the past. But, cyber adds an element to planning for the next crisis that goes 
beyond what additional capital and liquidity, for example, can provide to the system. 
The newly-formed team, led by Roy Thetford, the former Information Security Officer for the 
Bank, will be working with our examination teams to establish a new risk-based cybersecurity 
assessment framework, based on best practices in the field, as well as exploring additional 
standards that might be set out for supervised institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In  addition,  to  further  strengthen  and  build  out  our  program,  we  will  be  collaborating  with 
critical  stakeholders,  including  experts  in  security  and  cybersecurity;  financial  institutions, 
including  both  banks  and  non-banks;  critical  third-party  service  providers;  domestic 
regulatory bodies; enforcement agencies; and international supervisors. As we move forward 
with developing the framework and standards, we are reviewing current and emerging laws, 
regulations and guidance; further researching best practices; and identifying gaps in current 
assessment efforts. As we do this, we have identified a set of issues that are top of mind: 
This is not just an IT issue 
1. 
As I mentioned earlier, cyber isn’t just an IT issue. I don’t think I can say this enough. It is a 
business issue first and foremost and needs to be tackled as such. Cyber needs to be owned 
by the business leaders in the firm – partnering with the experts of course. There needs to be 
a foundational shift in thinking at the top of the house: it needs to be a regular topic on the 
agenda  for  the  board  of  directors;  it  needs  to  be  at  the  top  of  the  priority  list  for  senior 
management of the firm; and it needs to be on the mind of every employee, to some extent. 
It needs to be part of everyone’s vocabulary and recognized as a valid threat at every level. 
Good risk management is the foundation 
2. 
Good  risk  management  and  good  IT  practices  set  the  foundation  for  a  solid  program  to 
address cyber-related risk. It’s hard to imagine that a firm that doesn’t manage its IT risk well 
is  ever  going  to  be  able  to  manage  cyber  risk  well.  In  fact,  two  areas  that  we  recently 
reviewed that require attention include basic IT asset management and strengthening patch 
and vulnerability management practices. These are necessary hygiene steps and should be 
a fundamental for a sound cyber security defense program. 
As  part  of  good  risk  management,  firms  also  need  to  start  considering  how  to  assess  the 
costs of cyber and connect the pricing of cyber risk to the businesses. You must ask yourself 
“what is my cyber exposure?” And, you need to think about how you should price it, because 
until cyber is priced, it may not get the attention it needs. 
It’s not just the banks 
3. 
Cyber  isn’t  just  about  the  banks  –  it’s  about  the  entire  financial  sector,  as  well  as  the 
connections between the financial sector and other sectors like the utilities, retail, and others. 
We know that every area of the industry is interconnected; and it’s not just financial firms. As 
the old saying goes, we are only as strong as the weakest link. In the financial system, that 
weak link could be a weak firm, a weak vendor, a weak point of vulnerability in a payments or 
clearing system, etc. A weakness in any of these areas exposes the entire system, because 
the interconnections mean that you are all linked to each other, to non-financial firms, and to 
every system that supports the operations and structure of the industry. The additional risk to 
keep in mind here is the growing number of unregulated firms operating in and competing in 
this arena. As the industry moves to overcome the risks associated with cybersecurity, you 
have  to  consider  the  additional  vulnerabilities  you  are  exposed  to  through  non-regulated 
entities that will not be subject to the same guidance and standards. The big question lies in 
how  you,  as  an  industry,  ensure  that  the  ‘industry  as  a  whole’  is  safe,  not  just  regulated 
entities. 
One size does not fit all 
4. 
Just as firms are diverse in size, complexity and product offerings, so too are technologies, 
processes  and  systems.  While  some  firms  house  all  technology  work  internally,  others 
outsource the entire function or a significant part of it to third-party vendors. 
In addition to the variety of systems used and approaches to information security within firms, 
as  I  said  earlier,  we  have  an  entire  subsystem  that  supports  the  financial  sector  and 
ultimately connects every firm to some extent. In response to this, we are working under the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  assumption that there will not be a one-size-fits-all solution and the approach taken will need 
to be comprehensive and flexible enough to be adopted by all types of firms. 
 We are in this together 
5. 
Cybersecurity is an area where I believe our interests are aligned and our shared goal is two-
fold. In addition to wanting to see firms that are adequately protected against cyber-attacks 
and  prepared  to respond  should  they  occur,  we  are  equally  as  concerned  with  the  overall 
safety and soundness of the financial system – as a whole. No one firm or agency is going to 
come up with the one and only permanent solution or protection against cyber-attacks. I see 
how  we  approach  cybersecurity  similar  to  how  we  approached  Y2K  –  I’m  sure  you  all 
remember that. 
• 
• 
We need an approach that everyone agrees to adopt. 
We  need  to  see  more  public/private  partnerships  in  the  development  of  that 
approach. 
We need to come together to identify the vulnerabilities that are shared and  what 
needs to be done. 
We need to agree on a path forward and how we test it. 
We need to acknowledge that, unlike Y2K, this does not have an expiration date. 
• 
• 
Cybersecurity is a “new normal.” It is going to become part of our vocabulary in nearly every 
exam we conduct, conversation we have with senior management, and conversation about 
the future of financial services. 
To be successful, we have to agree that we have common goals; although we can approach 
them  from  different  angles  and  think  creatively  about  solutions,  we  should  all  be  working 
toward understanding the threats we are facing. The threat landscape is shifting constantly, 
and  we  are  all  responsible  for  keeping  up  with  the  changes  and  adapting  our  controls 
accordingly.  This  includes  firms,  systems  that  support  the  industry,  third  party  vendors, 
consultants, regulators, and law enforcement. 
We need to leverage best practices 
6. 
Leveraging a common set of best practices across the industry will be an important first step 
in  closing  the  gap  on  the  current  vulnerabilities.  Unlike  the  approaches  taken  by  other 
supervisors  to  address  cybersecurity  concerns,  our  initial  focus  in  this  area  is  on  better 
understanding the vulnerabilities, how firms are addressing them, what  progress has been 
made by firms and assessing where the industry stands as a  whole. Yes, we  want  you to 
address the weaknesses, but this is a lot bigger than the weaknesses identified at one firm. 
We  will  be  looking  to  firms  to  leverage  guidance  around  best  practices  to  identify  their 
weaknesses,  and  we  want  firms  to  bring  forward  other  issues,  concerns  or  vulnerabilities 
they encounter in doing so. We need to identify, as an industry, where the risks truly lie and 
what we are doing about them. 
There has been a lot of  work done in this area  by experts, including the NIST, the FBIIC, 
FINRA, PRA, FFIEC, NCUA, etc. – the list goes on. And, there are a number of sets of best 
practices  already  published.  We  are  aware  that  firms  have  been  looking  for  guidance  on 
which approach to take or framework to adopt. As we review all published guidance, assess 
the  broad  volume  of  research  that  is  already  out  there  and  come  to  consensus  on  an 
evaluation framework, we encourage firms to look at the fundamental commonalities across 
all best practices and build them into your ongoing/current activities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Assessing the threat 
7. 
To fully assess a threat or risk to a firm, we must first understand where the risk lies, who it 
affects, how it is defined, and what the associated costs are. In the case of assessing the risk 
and  impact  of  cyber-attacks,  I  believe  firms  need  to  be  cognizant  that  every  business 
decision, every process, every change a firm makes ultimately has a cyber-related element 
to it. To add to the complexity of this, the firm’s self-awareness must extend beyond the four 
walls of their company and must also take into account the impact critical service providers 
have on the firm. You can outsource the service, but not the risk. 
Everyone should be using threat intelligence as we go about our day-to-day activities – using 
the potential of a cyber-attack as another filter through which we view every decision. As we 
think about the variables to be considered in the decision-making process, we must build in 
the potential for creating weaknesses, vulnerabilities or opportunities for cyber-attacks, and 
be aware of the associated costs. 
I fear that  until  we  can assign financial  consequences  to  cyber  risks,  and  ensure staff are 
taking that into account when making decisions, we will not get the commitment needed from 
every level of the organization to adequately address the problem. As long as decisions are 
made and actions are taken without this type of assessment, we are going to see more and 
more of these weaknesses exposed. These vulnerabilities are not necessarily new, but the 
exposure  to  them  is  increasingly  being  made  available  to  attackers.  For  instance,  a  weak 
patch management process comes with the risk that systems may take longer to patch (or 
not be patched at all!) resulting in a much larger target window of opportunity for attackers. 
As we assess the potential impact, it is also important to remember that protecting against an 
attack is only half the solution – particularly because, as my InfoSec colleagues like to say: 
“It’s  not  a  matter  of  IF  we  get  hacked;  it’s  a  matter  of  WHEN.”  A  strong  cyber  resiliency 
program is a good starting point to address this, but we also need to focus on limiting the 
impact following an attack by addressing the fundamental structure within the organization – 
how safe is the system, how compartmentalized are the core areas of technology, and what 
your ability is to isolate the threat. 
Need to address communications 
8. 
Finally, to successfully address this risk with a unified front, we must develop an approach to 
enhanced  communications  around  cyber  threats  and  events,  and  revisit  supervisory 
guidance  in  this  area.  Silence  and  fear  of  sharing  intelligence  in  this  area  could  be 
detrimental  to  efforts  to  address  the  vulnerabilities  systematically. We  know  that  breaches 
have occurred and will continue to occur until the industry is better equipped to be ahead of 
the  attackers,  not  playing  catch  up.  Right  now  we  are  interested  in  learning  from  these 
breaches and using intelligence garnered to get ahead of game. 
There is a lot to think about here. With all this in mind, I will end this part of my remarks with 
a  reminder  of  what  we  see  as  the  key  components  of  any  solution  designed  to  address 
cybersecurity. It must: 
• 
• 
• 
Be comprehensive, risk-based and threat-informed; 
Be a joint effort between public and private sectors; 
Be flexible enough to evolve as technology advances; 
– 
– 
Support information sharing; 
Leverage best practices; 
Automated 
Scalable 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 6 
    Include  all  in  the  industry  –  regardless  of  size  or  processes  (internal  systems  or 
external providers); and 
Delve deeper than one step below the surface. 
 Conclusion 
We  live  in  an  ever-changing  environment  where  speed  and  agility  are  of  the  essence. 
Demands  from  customers  change,  expectations  from  shareholders  fluctuate  and  the 
regulatory landscape you work within will continue to evolve to keep pace. Constant change 
–  and  commitment  to  evolution  –  is  not  a  choice.  It  is  the  only  way  to  survive,  stay 
competitive and stay safe in a complex and vulnerable world. 
As  it  relates  to  cybersecurity,  I  believe  we  are  at  a  pivotal  moment:  we  know  there  is  an 
issue; we will work with you on fully understanding the scope and breadth of the risk; we will 
be pragmatic and add value; we are looking at this holistically; and our goal is to come out 
with a set of next steps that will benefit all of us, including protecting the financial system and 
the U.S. economy as a whole. 
We  need  to  address  cybersecurity  before  we  see  a  catastrophic  event,  not  analyze  it 
afterwards. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
