  S S Mundra: Banker-borrower interplay – synergies & challenges 
Inaugural address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
“Bankers-Borrowers-Business Meet”, organized by the Associated Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi, 23 March 2015. 
Assistance provided by Shri R. Kesavan is gratefully acknowledged. 
 1. 
Shri  A.C.  Mahajan,  Chairman,  BCSBI;  Shri  M.  Narendra,  Chairman,  Assocham 
National  Council  for  Banking  &  Finance;  Shri  Ashvin  Parekh,  MD  APAS  LLP;  other 
dignitaries  on  the  dais;  colleagues  from  the  banking  fraternity;  members  of  Assocham; 
representatives  of  the  print  and  electronic  media;  ladies  and  gentlemen!  Let  me  begin  by 
complimenting ASSOCHAM for flagging an issue that is so relevant and contemporaneous 
for  the  banking  industry.  Banks  face  immense  challenges  in  the  area  of  management  of 
loans and advances in view of the mounting non-performing assets. These challenges exist 
in  spite  of the  normal  rigors  that  are  specified by  the  regulator  and  banks’  own  Head  and 
controlling offices. An increasing number of enabling statutes and enactments coupled with 
fair  practice  lending  codes  make  the  job  of  a  lender  extremely  challenging  and  open  to 
scrutiny.  It  is  against  this  backdrop  that  the  bankers-  borrowers  “love-hate”  relationships 
need to be analysed. It seems to be an imaginative idea on part of ASSOCHAM to invite the 
banking supervisor to inaugurate the session in a bid to arbitrate between the banker and 
borrower and invite the wrath of both! On a more serious note, a determining aspect of the 
banker-borrower  relationship  is  built  on  trust  and  understanding.  It  is  also  important  that 
these relationships  neither get  too  cosy  nor  do  they  get too strained  as either  would  have 
deleterious consequences for the sector and the larger economy. The banking regulations in 
a  way  set  the  ground  rules  for  bank-borrowers  relationship,  while  the  supervisory  process 
ensures that this relationship remains healthy. Based on my own practical experience in the 
field- first as a commercial banker and now as the banking supervisor, I intend to highlight 
some  of  the  behavioral  practices  that  RBI  expects  from  the  bankers  and  the  borrowers.  I 
would also emphasize some regulatory/supervisory concerns that currently exist and could 
arise from unhealthy relationships between the two. 
Banker-borrower relationship: Built on foundation of trust and understanding 
2. 
Relationships  demand  honest  discharge  of  certain  responsibilities  by  the  parties 
concerned and that alone leads to development of mutual trust and respect. This is equally 
applicable  to  a  banker-borrower  relationship  as  well.  A  non-receptive  banker  or  a  truant 
borrower is a malady that the credit system can ill-afford. The banker-borrower relationship is 
essentially symbiotic as both need each other. Both have certain expectations from the other 
and when these don’t get fulfilled on account of a malafide or fraudulent intent on the part of 
either of them, the relationship gets strained. 
Recent spurt in instances of forensic audit being conducted by bankers on their borrowers 
signifies a breakdown in the implicit trust. There has also been an increase in incidence of 
suits filed against defaulters and cases of wilful default – an unwillingness to pay, despite an 
ability  to  pay.  These  problems  could  have  their  genesis  in  a  failure  to  exercise  the  right 
amount  of  prudence  and  due  diligence  on  part  of  the  banker  or  an  ab  initio  intent  of  the 
borrower to defraud the bank. This, however, is not a one-way street. The bankers have also 
been  known  to  be  indifferent  and  negligent  of  the  genuine  needs  or  problems  of  the 
borrowers in many cases. More often than not, it is due to a lack of basic understanding of 
the borrowers’ business. At times it is due to factors which are beyond the borrowers’ control. 
In fact, both extremes- excessive or too little trust and due diligence can prove detrimental to 
banking business. A middle course perhaps would be the most ideal mix  with the bankers 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  following the right regulatory rigor and the borrowers following a model code of conduct in 
their dealings. 
3. 
Having  set  out the  broader  realm  of the  banker-borrower  relationship;  let  me  now 
turn  to  some  specifics  insofar  as  the  expectations  from  bankers  and  the  borrowers  are 
concerned and non-observance of which can vitiate the relationship between the two. 
4. 
i). 
ii) 
iii) 
5. 
i) 
ii) 
2 
 Expectations from bankers 
Timely sanctioning and disbursal of the loans – Borrowers approach the banks 
because  they  need  finance.  The  business  needs  varying  quantum  of  money  at 
different  stages.  I  do  not  need  to  go  into  the  details  but  what  is  of  essence  is 
observing timeliness by the banks in sanctioning the loans and disbursing as per the 
needs of the borrower. The borrower would have his commitments to its creditors, 
suppliers etc. and if these are not met his projections can go haywire. This issue is 
of  far  greater  significance  in  case  of  small  borrowers  like  MSMEs.  Unlike  large 
corporate they do not have multiple sources of finance and they could quickly go out 
of business. The banks also need to provide handholding support to the borrowers, 
especially in times of stress. 
Adequacy of finance – A related issue is to ascertain how much finance should the 
bank give when the borrower approaches. It is at this stage that the efficacy of the 
credit appraisal process of the bank comes under scrutiny. The bankers should be 
able to appreciate the business prospects of the borrower and be able and willing to 
logically reason with the borrower about the projections and assumptions. Excessive 
financing might result in funds being siphoned off for other purposes and inadequate 
finance could mean stalled projects and idling of resources. The lending decisions 
cannot, however, be made alone on an idiosyncratic analysis of the riskiness of the 
project/business that the borrowers seeks funds for. A very important dimension to 
contend  for  the  banks  is  risk  of  concentration  in  a  particular  segment.  There  is  a 
need  to  eschew  the  urge  to  lend  to  a  sunrise  sector  following  the  herd  mentality. 
Concentration risk can hurt the banks badly as has been the case in past in lending 
to  steel,  mining,  gems  and 
infrastructure  sector.  Exposure 
concentration in one sector in a geographical area (eg. Exposure to sugar mills in 
UP) also suffers from political risk. 
Pricing of loan – An aspect related to adequacy of finance is the pricing of loan. 
Not  only  does  the  finance  need  to  be  adequate  but  also  the  price  charged  to  the 
borrower.  Bestowing  finer  pricing  of  loans  on  an  inferiorly  rated  or  an  unrated 
borrower does raise red flags from the banking supervisor. Loan pricing needs to be 
risk-based, fair  and  transparent.  If the  interest rate  being charged  is too  coercive, 
the borrower would be squeezed, the business would suffer with banks being forced 
to take the ultimate hit. 
jewellery  and 
Expectations from the borrowers: 
Refrain from Q to Q existence – The pressure from shareholders tends to drive 
many imprudent business managers and owners to look for short-term wins. This is 
reflected in their approach whereby they look to report better financial results than 
the preceding quarter. In the process, they end up diluting their own internal norms 
such  as  extending  larger  credits  than  normal  and  also  extending  credit  for  longer 
periods  etc.  It  must  be  understood  that  while  the  business  managers  may  be 
temporary,  the  businesses  themselves  are  going  concerns  and  they  cannot  be 
expected to perform miracles even under unfavourable business environment. The 
efforts to appease the shareholders by all means “Fair or foul” must end. 
Focus  on  core  competencies  –  Rather  than  looking  to  make  quick  bucks  by 
diversifying into so- called “hot” but unrelated activities, the businesses must focus 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  iii) 
iv) 
on their core competencies. Diversification, if at all, must be a well-considered and 
long-term  measure  rather  than  “quick-fix”  decision.  Another  trend  that  has  caught 
the attention of the borrowers is taking a view on the movement of exchange rates 
and keep unhedged positions. The disturbing part is that even businesses with no 
earnings/expenses  in  foreign  currency  are  taking  such  bets  and  are  likely  to  burn 
their  fingers.  Taking  a  view  on  currency  is  a  job  of  the  domain  experts  and  the 
businesses  having  no  core  competency  in  the  area  &  hence  should  resist  the 
temptation as wrong -way bets can potentially obliterate a firm overnight. 
Over leverage – Excessive leverage run up by the Indian corporate is a matter of 
great  concern.  Over-leveraging  is  like  having  blood  pressure- too  low  or  too  high, 
both  are  detrimental  to  the  health.  While  banks  need  to  do  proper  due  diligence 
taking  into  account  a  consolidated  balance  sheet  of  the  group;  on  their  part  the 
borrowers and the large business houses must end over-reliance on borrowed funds 
for  achieving  extraordinary  growth  rates.  Operating  with  too  little  equity  in  the 
enterprise  is  like  treading  on  thin  ice.  Too  much  leverage  dilutes  promoter’s 
responsibility  and  has  implications  for  banks’  ability  to  recover  loans.  Double 
leveraging,  where  promoters  pledge  their  own  shares  for  funding  their  other 
companies  needs to  be viewed  with  caution. This,  then denigrates to  a possibility 
where  the  promoter  is  responsible  only  to  the  extent  of such  shares  pledged  with 
banks  while  funds  solicited  on  the  strength  of  such  securities  finds  its  way  to  the 
books  of  SPVs  floated  or  the  company’s  subsidiaries.  I  am  sure  that  responsible 
corporate  borrower  behavior  and  banks’  mechanisms  to  counter  the  same  will  be 
given due thought in this seminar. 
Diversion of funds – There are several instances of borrowers diverting money to 
real  estate  or  capital  market  for  short  term  gains  without  deploying  them  for 
purposes  borrowed.  Rather  than  de-risking  the  balance  sheet,  such  short-term 
misadventures often prove very costy. 
Let  me  now  briefly  touch  upon  some  other  issues  which  we  as  regulators/ 
6. 
supervisors of the banking sector feel uncomfortable about. 
The regulatory / supervisory view 
7. 
As members of global standard setting bodies, we are committed to implementation 
of  the  global  best  practices  in  regulation  and  supervision.  While,  we  continue  to  apply 
discretionary  judgments  in  contentious  issues  in  the  best  national  interest,  it  must  be 
understood that our actions are liable for scrutiny. We have been subjected to a peer review 
by a BCBS committee for regulatory consistency on Basel III capital standards already and a 
FSB peer review is scheduled later in the year. These developments signify the importance 
of  being  consistent  in  rule  making  and  supervisory  assessments. The  scope for  extending 
regulatory  forbearances  is  getting  limited  by  the  day.  With  this  backdrop,  let  me  highlight 
some issues which should help shape the behavior of banks and borrowers alike. 
• 
While  on  one  hand,  there  are  issues  around  delaying  of  sanctions  to  borrowers 
resulting  in  escalation  of  project  costs,  very  often  as  banking supervisors  we  also 
observe  instances  where  bankers  appear  to  be  too  liberal  in  sanctioning  loans  or 
bringing in restructuring or CDR dispensation for the benefit of the borrower. 
The  level  of  stressed  assets  in  the  system  underscores  the  need  to  improve  the 
monitoring of performance of banks as lenders as also the need for the borrowers to 
adhere to the loan covenants. A key point in this context for the banks is that they 
cannot  afford  to  outsource  their  responsibility  of  credit  appraisal  which  is  a  basic 
function  to  a  third  party.  Lending  is  the  most  critical  of  banks’  functions  and  that 
cannot be outsourced. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
       Pricing  of  loans  does  not  always  follow  the  corresponding  rating.  Similarly,  the 
computation of Base Rate by the banks has not been found to be very scientific and 
transparent. 
Often the smaller borrowers allege bias by banks in favour of corporate entities in 
matters of lending. An oft heard grievance from SME borrowers is the insistence on 
collaterals where it is neither mandated nor necessary. Perhaps there is also a need 
for significant percolation of regulatory intent across the wide network of branches 
and offices of banks. 
The  transparency  in  disclosures  of  fees/charges  payable  by  borrowers  for 
processing of loan etc. needs improvement 
The  regulatory  intent  of  resolving  stressed  assets  through  the  means  of  a  Joint 
Lender forum framework, sometimes gets undermined due to differences amongst 
the  bankers.  There  are  instances  of  banks  complaining  about  non-cooperation  by 
other  lenders,  taking  unilateral  action  in  reaching  compromises  or  restructuring 
outside the JLF, declaring wilful defaults to stall the concerted operation of JLF 
Innovation  is  important  but  let  us  not  innovate  to  the  extent  of  securitising  the 
receivables of a project which is yet to fully come into existence 
Early recognition of stress in loan accounts 
8. 
A  very  common  occurrence  that  strains  the  banker-borrower  relationship  is 
recognition  of  stress  in  loan  accounts.  An  account  can  turn  non-performing  on  account  of 
genuine difficulties – an unfavorable business environment, certain unforeseen political, legal 
or judicial development. Projects do suffer from delays due to delay in getting permissions 
and  witness  cost  and  time  –  overruns.  It  may  be  difficult  for  even  the  most  precise  of 
business projections or the most efficient of credit appraisals to foresee these problems. It 
would be irrational on part of either the supervisor or the banker to cast aspersions on the 
intent of the borrowers in such cases. However, it is important in such cases that the bankers 
as well the borrowers do admit the problem at the earliest and initiate measures to revive the 
account including infusion of new equity, sanction of new debt, induction of new promoters 
etc. Restructuring of problem accounts is a perfectly genuine banking tool and must be used 
if in the bankers’ assessment the business is worthy of revival and holds economic value. 
Any delay in reviving a project showing signs of incipient sickness would only lead to loss of 
further value which the banking system /economy can ill afford. 
Dealing with errant behavior 
9. 
It is a presumption in banking that all borrowers will be scrupulous and adhere to a 
general  code  of  conduct.  The  issue  is  how  to  deal  with  imprudent  and  non-co-operative 
borrowers,  wilful  defaulters  or  for  that  matter,  fraudsters?  It  is  important  that  the  errant 
borrowers are quickly brought to book and recovery proceedings be completed as early as 
possible.  A  non-performing  account  of  whatever  origin  and  pedigree,  is  a  drag  on  the 
banking system and increases the cost of intermediation, which pinches an honest borrower 
the  most.  It  is  important  for  the  system  to  weed  out  the  unethical  elements  at  the  earliest 
opportunity  to  ensure  the  credibility  and  the  efficiency  of  the  credit  system  in  the  country. 
Several attempts are already underway, one of which is the establishment of a central fraud 
registry,  which  will  enable  quick  sharing  of  information  on  entities  found  to  be  defrauding 
banks.  RBI  and  IBA  together  have  also  taken  upon  themselves  the  circulation  of  “caution 
advices”  relating  to  all  types  of  frauds,  including  those  pertaining  to  loans  and  advances. 
Efforts also need to be made to alienate the willful defaulters and fraudsters and debar them 
from accessing the banking system for further finance. Similarly, there would also be a need 
to the deviant behavior within the banking community through effective vigilance practices, 
quick staff accountability measures and timely institution of criminal cases in fraud cases. A 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  message  needs  to  go  down  loud  and  clear  that  intentional  wrong-doings  will  not  go 
un-punished and lax credit monitoring or reckless sanctions will be appropriately dealt with. 
Conclusion 
10. 
I  am  sure  that  not  just  RBI,  but  an  industry  body  like  the  ASSOCHAM,  the  large 
assembly of bankers and borrowers gathered here are all seized of the real problems that 
beset the financial sector today. The need is for taking strong and timely measures. I hope 
the seminar would deliberate on some of the issues that I have raised today and do some 
soul-searching. With  giant  strides  that  have  been  made  in  IT,  the  banks  should  not  find  it 
difficult  to  exercise  a  stricter  oversight  regime  to  identify  early  sign  of  impending  default.  I 
would  also  exhort  the  borrowers  (individual  or  corporate)  to  understand  their  basic 
responsibilities,  co-operate  with  lenders  and  adhere  to  a  general  code  of  conduct  and 
discipline.  The  minimum  one  can  do  is  to  adhere  to  the  loan  agreements.  Use  of  judicial 
channels  should  not  be  too  prolific  and  frequent;  instead,  these  should  be  used  to  foster 
better borrower protection rather than to undermine the credit discipline in banks. Any lender-
borrower relationship can only survive on mutual trust and co-operation; breach of trust can 
ultimately become either an offence (under criminal law) or a civil wrong thereby defeating 
the credit system in India. 
11. 
success. 
Thank you. 
I thank you all for inviting me here to share my thoughts. I wish the conference all 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
