  Jeffrey M Lacker: Education, Innovation and Economic Growth 
Speech by Mr Jeffrey M Lacker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, at the 
2015  Emerging 
Issues  Forum  “Innovation  Reconstructed”,  Raleigh,  North  Carolina, 
10 February 2015. 
 I am grateful to Jessie Romero, Kartik Athreya, Jamie Feik, Ann Macheras, and Urvi Neelakantan for assistance 
in preparing these remarks. 
Highlights: 
• 
Innovation is the primary driver of long-run economic growth, and human capital is a 
key driver of innovation. 
New innovations recently have tended to increase the demand for skilled workers, 
leading to higher wages for them. But, in general, as the higher wages spur more 
people to obtain the necessary education, the supply of skilled workers responds to 
the demand, and the wage differential narrows. 
The increase in the college premium over the past several decades suggests that 
we are not keeping pace with the economy’s demand for skilled workers. 
Strategies  to  increase  human  capital  investment  include  providing  students  with 
more information about college preparedness; informing them about multiple career 
and educational options; and laying a foundation with early childhood education. 
A comprehensive approach to human capital investment is essential to our nation’s 
prosperity and to providing workers with the skills to share in that prosperity. 
    **** 
Good  morning.  It’s  a  pleasure  to  be  here  and  to  be  a  part  of  this  important  conversation 
about the role of innovation in North Carolina’s future growth and prosperity. Of course, as 
you  all  know,  innovation  is  an  elusive  concept,  and  no  less  elusive  is  what  we  can  do  to 
create more of it. But I do believe we can be certain about three things. First, innovation is 
essential to economic growth. Second, human capital – the knowledge and skills that make 
people more productive – drives innovation. Finally, innovation in turn affects the return on 
investment in human capital. These three insights have important implications for our efforts 
to help individual workers make fruitful investments in their own human capital and to create 
the skilled workforce our economy requires. Today, I’d like to talk about several key elements 
in a comprehensive approach to improving human capital investment: providing students with 
a  better  understanding  of  college  preparedness;  informing  them  about multiple  career  and 
postsecondary education options; and laying the foundation for success with early childhood 
education. Before I discuss these ideas in more detail, I must note that these are my own 
views and should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 
Innovation and human capital 
I  started  out  by  saying  that  innovation  is  an  elusive  concept.  So  what  do  I  mean  by 
innovation?  There  is  a  consensus  among  economists  that  long-run  growth  in  economic 
standards of living depends critically on the rate of technological change. Growth occurs not 
only because we have more people working or more machines (or, in economic terms, more 
labor  and  more  capital)  but  also  because  technological  advances  make  existing  workers 
more  productive.  Such  advances  might  be  entirely  new  types  of  machines,  such  as  the 
steam engine or the transistor, or they might be new techniques for making existing products. 
In  the  1980s,  for  example,  the  steel  industry  was  transformed  by  the  introduction  of  mini-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  mills,  which  used  scrap  instead  of  iron  ore  and  dramatically  lowered  the  time  and  cost  of 
producing  steel.  (As  an  aside,  the  first  mini-mill  was  developed  by  Nucor,  whose 
headquarters are just a few hours south in Charlotte.) 
The million-dollar question, of course, is how and why do such innovations occur? There are 
a variety of economic forces and incentives at work, but a large body of research suggests 
that human capital is an important determinant of long-run growth in productivity. Countries 
with  more  initial  human  capital  appear  to  have  a  greater  capacity  to  develop  new 
technologies and to copy or adapt technologies developed in other countries. 
But  innovation  and  human  capital  also  are  linked  by  the  fact  that  new  technologies 
sometimes increase the demand for skilled workers who can operate those technologies, a 
phenomenon known as “skill-biased technical change.” Because it takes time for people to 
learn new skills, this increase in demand initially leads to higher wages for skilled workers 
relative  to  less-skilled  workers.  But  as  the  higher  wages  spur  more  people  to  obtain  the 
necessary education, the supply of skilled workers tends to respond to the demand, and the 
wage differential tends to narrow. 
Economists Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz have documented this dynamic – the “race 
between education and technology” – throughout the 20th century in the United States.1 In 
the early 1900s, new technologies such as typewriters and adding machines created a new 
class of white-collar clerical jobs that required a high school education. Because few people 
had a degree, these jobs paid about twice as much as jobs that did not require a high school 
degree.2  The  response was  a  dramatic  increase  in  high  school  graduation  rates.  Between 
1910 and 1940, the number of 19-year-olds in the United States with a diploma increased 
from 9 percent to 51 percent.3 Over that same time period, the wage premium associated 
with high school completion collapsed. 
In  the  latter  half  of  the  20th  century,  as  the  computer  revolution  took  hold,  demand  for 
college-educated workers began to rise, and hence their relative wage rates rose as well. As 
one  would  expect,  there  has  been  an  increase  in  the  number  of  people  with  a  college 
degree. In 2013, about 29 percent of adults over age 25 had at least a bachelor’s degree; in 
1980, that number was only 17 percent.4 And yet, the “college premium” has continued to 
increase:  In  1980,  the  average  worker  with  a  college  degree  or  higher  earned  about 
40 percent  more  than  the  average  worker  with  only  a  high  school  diploma.  In  2013,  the 
college-educated worker earned over 80 percent more.5 The inescapable conclusion is that 
we are failing to keep pace with our economy’s growing demand for skilled workers. 
This has implications not only for our ability to develop and implement new technologies but 
also  for  the  distribution  of  income  in  our  society.  Recent  data  on  economic  inequality  and 
economic  mobility  show  that  inequality  has  increased  in  recent  years,  while  mobility  has 
either decreased or remained flat. In other words, the rich are increasingly likely to remain 
rich and the poor are increasingly likely to remain poor. Many factors contribute to inequality 
and  the  persistence  of that  inequality  both  within  and  across generations.  But the growing 
                                                
1   Claudia  Goldin  and  Lawrence  F.  Katz,  The  Race  Between  Education  and  Technology,  Cambridge,  Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 2008. 
2   Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, “Human Capital and Social Capital: The Rise of Secondary Schooling 
in America,” NBER Working Paper no. 6439,March 1998; Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, 1995, “The 
Decline  of  Non-competing  Groups:  Changes  in  the  Premium  to  Education,  1890  to  1940,”  NBER  Working 
Paper no. 5202, August 1995. 
3   Claudia Goldin, “America’s Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of Secondary Schooling 
in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Economic History, June 1998, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 345–374. 
4   The 1980 Census reported the share of people who had completed at least four years of college. 
5   Based on median weekly earnings as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  disparity in the acquisition of skills, often in the form of college education, appears to play a 
significant role. 
Preparing a skilled workforce 
You don’t need to be an economist to be concerned that we are not adequately preparing the 
next  generation  of  workers.  Nationwide,  about  20  percent  of  high  school  students  fail  to 
graduate within four years, and there are significant disparities in graduation rates between 
white students and black or Hispanic students, and between students from high-income and 
low-income families. In some large urban school districts, as many as 40 percent of students 
do not graduate in four years. 
A  growing  share  of  those  who  do  complete  high  school  now  go  on  to  college.  But far  too 
many of these students fail to earn a degree: Nationally, the college dropout rate is around 
40  percent.6  The  benefits  of  attending  college  for  a  few  semesters  without  graduating  are 
relatively  small.  The  unemployment  rate  for  workers  with  some  college  education  but  no 
degree  is  comparable  to  the  rate  for  workers  with  only  a  high  school  degree.  And  while 
students who have attended some college do earn on average about 15 percent more than 
high school graduates, this pales in comparison with the average earnings of those who have 
completed bachelor’s degrees. 
There  is  also  substantial  anecdotal  evidence  that  employers  are  having  difficulty  finding 
workers with the right skills. This is a common refrain on our visits to communities throughout 
the  region,  and  it’s  supported  by  employer  surveys.  For  example,  75  percent  of 
manufacturers reported a moderate to severe shortage of skilled workers, such as welders, 
who  must  have  strong  math  skills  and  be  able  to  read  blueprints.7  There  is  an  ongoing 
debate among researchers about the actual amount of “skill mismatch” in the labor market,8 
but many employers certainly seem to perceive that such mismatch is real. 
The  key  question  is  what  can  we  do  to  increase  the  supply  of  skilled  workers?  The  large 
increase  in  the  college  premium  has  led  many  policymakers  and  educators  to  advocate 
college  for  all.  But  as  the  high  college  dropout  rate  indicates,  there  is  a  big  difference 
between  enrolling  in  college  and graduating.  During focus group meetings  held  recently  in 
Virginia  by  the  Richmond  Fed,  representatives  from  four-year  colleges  and  community 
colleges shared that many students are surprised to discover they lack the basic math skills 
necessary  for  college-level  work.  If  students  overestimate  their  readiness  for  college,  they 
may be more likely to enroll in college but then drop out after they get there. That can be a 
costly lesson to learn; the average debt burden among college dropouts who took out loans 
is more than $14,000.9 The high college dropout rate thus suggests that many students could 
benefit from more information about what is required for college success. 
Of  course,  it’s  not  enough  to  simply  prescribe  what  students  need  to  know;  we  must  also 
help them learn it. This points to the value of improving the effectiveness of the K-12 portion 
of our education system. While that subject is beyond the scope of this talk, I applaud the 
ongoing  efforts  here  in  North  Carolina  and  across  the  country  to  increase  student 
achievement and close the gaps between students of different backgrounds. 
                                                
6   The National Center for Education Statistics defines college completion as earning a bachelor’s degree within 
six  years of matriculating. Graduation rates are calculated according to where students started as full-time, 
first-time students. Transfer students and students who return to college after an absence are not included. 
7   Accenture and The Manufacturing Institute, 2014 Manufacturing Skills and Training Study, January 2015. 
8   For  example,  see  R.  Jason  Faberman  and  Bhashkar  Mazumder,  “Is  There  a  Skills  Mismatch  in  the  Labor 
Market?” Chicago Fed Letter no. 300, July 2012. 
9   See Christopher Avery and Sarah Turner, “Student Loans: Do College Students Borrow Too Much—Or Not 
Enough?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2012, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 165–192. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  I also believe we should supplement information about college preparedness with information 
about other career and postsecondary education options. Community colleges, for example, 
are a venue where students can learn more about their interests and aptitudes and hone the 
skills that are required for success at four-year schools. Moreover, there are a range of other 
post-high-school educational institutions that can help students acquire the skills they need 
to succeed without a college degree. One factor in the high school dropout rate may be the 
increasing focus of many high schools on college preparation. Some students, however, may 
not wish to attend college or may see large barriers to doing so. If these students believe that 
the only reason to complete high school is to attend college, they might not see much value 
in  doing  what’s  required  to  graduate.  Learning  about  alternative  career  and  educational 
opportunities  that  also require  a  high  school  degree  could  increase the  perceived  value  of 
high school completion and improve their labor market outcomes relative to dropping out. 10 
On the other hand, we can do more to ensure that well-qualified students don’t forgo college 
because of perceived obstacles such as cost or because of social norms that cause them to 
underestimate the potential benefits or their likelihoods of success. Researchers have found 
that  providing  these  students  with  targeted  information  and  assistance  –  a  fairly  low-cost 
intervention  –  can  increase  their  matriculation  rates  and  can  play  an  important  role  in 
changing the beliefs of students who erroneously think they’re not college material.11 
So far I have discussed ways to increase cognitive skills, the specific things we learn through 
formal education or on-the-job training. But non-cognitive skills such as patience, work ethic 
and following directions also are critical. These are the skills that make it possible for us to 
acquire  more-complex  cognitive  skills,  and  they  also  are  critical  for  success  in  the  labor 
market.  For  example,  during  our  focus  group  meetings,  high  school  teachers  and 
administrators  shared  that  many  students  did  not  know  how  to  self-direct  or  self-motivate, 
skills  that  are  critical  for  college  success. Workforce  development  professionals  we  spoke 
with reported that a lack of “soft skills” was a major obstacle to employment for their adult 
clients.  We  also  hear  from  the  employers  who  participate  in  our  industry  roundtables  that 
many job applicants are lacking in soft skills. 
How does one acquire these non-cognitive skills? Led by the work of Nobel laureate James 
Heckman,  many  economists  and  other  social  science  researchers  have  come  to  a 
consensus that the foundation is laid very early in life, and that it can be difficult for children 
who fall behind to catch up. Skill gaps are evident as early as age 5 and tend to persist into 
adulthood.12 The importance of early skill development also means that the return on a dollar 
invested in early childhood education can be much higher than the return on a dollar invested 
later  in  life.  High-quality  early  childhood  education  thus  should  be  a  crucial  –  and  cost-
effective – element of a comprehensive strategy to improve human capital investment. 
The costs of innovation 
Before I conclude, I should acknowledge that while the benefits of innovation are numerous, 
there are costs for some individuals. Steel mini-mills were a great advance, for example, but 
they also contributed to the demise of former giants such as Bethlehem Steel, which in its 
heyday employed nearly 300,000 people in the United States. North Carolina is no stranger 
to  this  tradeoff.  For  decades,  people  and  communities  throughout  the  state  depended  on 
                                                
10   See Julie Berry Cullen, Steven D. Levitt, Erin Robertson, and Sally Sadoff, “What Can Be Done to Improve 
Struggling High Schools?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2013, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 133–152. 
11   For example, see Caroline M. Hoxby and Sarah Turner, “Informing Students about Their College Options: A 
Proposal  for  Broadening  the Expanding  College  Opportunities  Project,”  Hamilton  Project  Discussion  Paper, 
June 2013; and Scott E. Carrell and Bruce Sacerdote, “Late Interventions Matter Too: The Case of College 
Coaching New Hampshire,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 19031, May 2013. 
12   James Heckman, “Schools, Skills, and Synapses,” Economic Inquiry, July 2008, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 289–324. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  furniture  and  textile  manufacturing  to  provide  well-paying  jobs,  but  advances  in  global 
transportation and shipping facilitated the movement of much of that activity overseas. And 
while  there  has  been  a  resurgence  in  manufacturing  in  the  state,  the  new  advanced 
manufacturing  techniques  require  far  fewer  workers.  Today,  there  are  only  about  half  as 
many  people  employed  in  manufacturing  in  North  Carolina  as  there  were  in  1990,  even 
though the value of the goods produced has increased – a story that is true nationwide as 
well. 
More  broadly,  while  technological  innovation  may  increase  the  demand  for  some  types  of 
workers, it often reduces the demand for others – even, sometimes, for skilled workers, as 
occurred  during  the  1800s  when  new  production  techniques  displaced  glassblowers, 
shoemakers, bakers and other artisans.13 More recently, computers have not been a boon 
for  everyone.  Many  lower-skilled  workers  have  been  replaced  by  machines,  and  an 
increasing  number  of  middle-skill  workers,  such  as  tax  preparers  and  paralegals,  also  are 
vulnerable to automation. 
But  the  technological  displacement  of  workers  has  been  part  and  parcel  of  rising  living 
standards  for  centuries.  In  1900,  more  than  40  percent  of  the  U.S.  workforce  worked  in 
agriculture; today, that number is less than 2 percent. Just as technology reduced the need 
for farm labor, it also allowed the creation of new jobs in new sectors, and I don’t think any of 
us  would  argue  that  we  would  be  better  off  if  nearly  half  our  population  was  employed  to 
supply  our  caloric  needs,  rather  than  being  free  to  work  as  engineers  or  truck  drivers  or 
nurses. We must understand the needs of the workers who are displaced and recognize that 
adjusting  to  evolving  circumstances  takes  time,  but  history  provides  good  reason  to  be 
optimistic  that  the  changes  wrought  by  technological  innovation  ultimately  yield  broadly 
shared gains. 
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  innovation  is  the  primary  driver  of  economic  growth,  and  human  capital  is 
essential for innovation to occur. At the same time, technological advances also change the 
skills  demanded  by  our economy.  In  recent  decades,  innovation  has  tilted  demand toward 
more-skilled  workers,  and  these  trends  seem  likely  to  continue.  An  increasingly  better-
educated workforce thus will be essential to the long-term prosperity of a region or a nation. 
A comprehensive approach to supporting human capital investment – one that focuses on 
the full range of educational stages and options – can help provide our citizens with the skills 
they need to share in that prosperity. 
                                                
13   Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Origins of Technology-Skill Complementarity,” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, August 1998, vol. 113, no. 3, pp. 693–732. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
