  Haron Sirima: Improving the quality of data through statistical surveys 
Remarks by Dr Haron Sirima, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch 
of the 2015 Foreign Investments Survey, Nairobi, 12 May 2015. 
 Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury; 
Chief Executives of State Agencies and Private Enterprises; 
Representatives of Media Houses; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
International  Monetary  Fund  and 
Welcome to the breakfast meeting to kick off the 2015 Foreign Investment Survey 
under the Enhanced Data Dissemination Initiative Project. This project was initiated 
in  2010  with  the  objective  to  improve  the  quality  of  data  through  statistical 
surveys, such as the one we are launching this morning. 
The purpose of this meeting is to raise awareness among the enterprises that will 
be covered by the survey to ensure its success. It also provides an opportunity to 
share our experience on past surveys and receive feedback. 
Comprehensive, accurate and timely data is a prerequisite for better policy and 
strategic  decision  making,  particularly  in  the  quest  to  attract  foreign  direct 
investment  to  Kenya.  It  is  therefore  important  that  the  exercise  is  carried  out 
flawlessly.  The  data  collected  through  past  surveys  has  been  incorporated  in  the 
Balance  of  Payments  statistics  and  also  enabled  the  compilation  of  Kenya’s 
International  Investment  Position  (i.e.  the  stock  position  foreign  assets  and 
liabilities). 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Kenya has made good progress in improving the quality of 
its Balance of Payments statistics. This would not have been achieved within the set 
timeframe without the technical and financial support extended by the World Bank, 
International 
the 
Development (DfID). The Macroeconomic and Financial Management Institute 
of Eastern and Southern Africa (MEFMI) has also been instrumental in providing 
the necessary software for processing the data generated through the surveys and 
in capacity building both at the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS) and 
the  Central  Bank  (CBK).  Indeed,  the  2015  Foreign  Investment  Survey  will  be 
conducted and financed exclusively by both KNBS and CBK. 
While the overall position on Kenya’s Balance of Payments has been positive, the 
current account has weakened over time on account of both rapidly growing 
capital imports associated with the momentum of economic growth. Kenya’s export 
growth has been sluggish while the tourism sector, our traditional source of foreign 
exchange  earnings,  has  been  reflecting  negative  growth  rate.  According  to  the 
latest  Economic  Survey,  Kenya’s  current  account  deficit  stands  at  10  percent  of 
GDP,  financed  mainly  through  capital  and  financial  inflows.  The  widening  current 
account deficit continues to exert pressure on the Kenya Shilling exchange rate. 
Over the past four months, the Kenya Shilling exchange rate to the US Dollar 
has come under unusually intense pressure on account of a strong US Dollar 
and enhanced seasonal corporate demands. The strengthening of the US Dollar 
globally  largely  reflects  the  strong  recovery  of  the  USA  economy,  the  uncertainty 
around the timing of the first interest rate increase in the US following the tapering of 
Quantitative  Easing  (QE), expectations of lower interest rates  in  the Eurozone 
following adoption of QE by the European Central Bank in late January 2015, and 
the  Department 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
 
 
the  weak  Eurozone  growth  recovery.  During  the  period,  the  Kenya  Shilling 
exchange rate against the US Dollar depreciated by 5 percent. At the Global 
Market  it  is  quite  volatile  with  many  countries  experiencing  strong  capital 
outflows.  The  Nigerian  Naira  (9%),  Uganda  Shilling  (9%),  Tanzania  Shilling 
(4%), Ghanian Cedi (20%) and even the Euro (11%) were hard hit. 
What  is  the  Central  Bank  doing  to  stem  volatility?  First,  the  Bank  adopted  a 
tight monetary policy  operations stance to  minimise  any  likelihood  of  arbitrage 
activities  between  the  interbank  and  foreign  exchange  markets  –  the  average 
interbank rate now stands at 10.4 percent. This is in excess of 250 basis points 
above the CBR. Second, the Bank continues to intervene in the foreign exchange 
market through direct sale of foreign exchange to commercial banks both to ease 
demand pressures and drain Kenya Shilling liquidity. In addition to dampening 
volatility,  the  interventions  slowed  down  the  rate  of  depreciation  of  the  exchange 
rate.  The  Bank  also  enhanced  the  prudential  guidelines  of  banks  on  foreign 
exchange  dealings  to  promote  transparency  and  safeguard  the  integrity  of  the 
financial market. The Bank has and will continue to actively use moral suasion with 
the banking industry to stem expectations. 
Going  forward,  the  intense  seasonal  demand  pressure  on  the  Kenya  Shilling 
exchange rate is slowly dissipating though there is evidence of speculation in the 
foreign  exchange  market.  In  response,  the  Bank  will  scale-up  OMO  to  tighten 
liquidity  further  to  stem  expectations.  The  resilient  diaspora  remittances  and 
recovery of the global economy  will support exchange rate stability. In addition, 
the  Central  Bank’s  foreign  exchange  reserves  coupled  with  a  precautionary 
facility from the IMF are adequate to stem volatility. The Central Bank will continue 
to  monitor  developments  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  but  allow  genuine 
demand and supply factors to determine the level of the Kenya Shilling exchange 
rate. Finally, measures to promote exports including foreign direct investment 
are critical to the long term stability of the Kenya Shilling exchange rate. 
In closing, let me take this opportunity to thank the over 300 private enterprises 
that  responded  to  the  year  2013  foreign  investment  survey  questionnaires. 
The response rate of 75 percent was impressive and we look forward to better this 
performance  in  this  year’s  survey.  The  time  spent  building  this  critical  information 
base is for our mutual benefit and the people of Kenya. 
It is now my pleasure to invite the Cabinet Secretary, National Treasury to make his 
remarks and official launch the 2015 Foreign Investment Survey. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
