  Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 16 June 2015. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am happy to be back to this committee for my regular hearing. Today, I would like to share 
with you the ECB’s assessment of the current economic and monetary conditions in the euro 
area. I will then touch on the subject chosen for our exchange of views, namely the risks and 
side-effects  of  our  asset  purchase  programme.  Finally,  I  will  say  a  few  words  about  the 
current situation in Greece. 
Economic outlook and monetary policy 
The  latest  economic  indicators  and  survey  data  broadly  confirm  our  assessment  that  the 
economic  recovery  is  proceeding  at  a  moderate  pace.  While  growth  has  been  mainly 
supported  by  private  consumption  in  recent  quarters,  we  now  see  encouraging  signs  that 
also  private  investment  is  picking  up,  which  underlies  our  expectation  that  the  economic 
recovery  should  broaden.  This  will  be  supported  in  particular  by  our  monetary  policy 
measures, which are working their way through to the real economy, by the comparatively 
low price of oil, and by improvements in external price competitiveness. This is also reflected 
in the latest Eurosystem staff projections: we project economic growth to increase from 1.5% 
of GDP in 2015 to 1.9% in 2016 and to 2.0% in 2017. 
After  some  months  with  negative  or  zero  rates,  inflation  in  May  has  increased  modestly, 
standing at 0.3% in year-on-year terms, as the negative contributions from energy prices are 
fading. We expect inflation to remain low in the months ahead before rising stepwise around 
the  turn  of  the  year.  Thereafter,  inflation  is  expected  to  gradually  converge  toward  levels 
closer to but still below 2%. In the Eurosystem staff projections of June, inflation is projected 
to increase from 0.3% in 2015 to 1.5% in 2016 and 1.8% in 2017. 
Over the last quarter, money and credit dynamics have strengthened overall. The growth of 
broad money in April stood at 5.3%, and in part reflects the expansion of bond purchases by 
the Eurosystem. While improving further, loan growth to the private sector, standing at 0.8% 
in  April,  has  lagged  somewhat  the  pace  at  which  monetary  trends  have  been  firming.  It 
remains moderate – atypically so, after such a prolonged phase of credit compression – and 
uneven across the euro area economies with new loans to enterprises particularly weak. 
Overall,  we  remain  prudently  confident  that  all  economic  and  monetary  conditions  are  in 
place  to  support  a  gradual  reflation  of  the  euro  area  economy,  with  a  sustained  return  of 
inflation rates to levels below, but close to, 2%. 
This  assessment  is  based  on  the full  implementation  of  all  our monetary  policy  measures. 
We  need  to  keep  a  steady  monetary  policy  course  and  firmly  implement  those  measures, 
including  our  expanded  asset  purchase  programme.  It  is  our  clear  intention  to  purchase 
private and public sector securities of EUR 60 billion per month on average until the end of 
September 2016 and, in any case, until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation 
that is consistent with our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Over recent weeks, financial markets have registered a measurable trend reversal in prices 
and a surge in volatility, with the fixed-income market the epicentre of the correction. 
Let  me  make  two  observations  in  this  respect.  First,  a  period  of  higher  volatility  is  a 
phenomenon  that  is  frequently  observed  not  long  after  the  start  of  a  large  quantitative 
programme, when short-term rates are pressed against their lower bound. Price discovery is 
gradual and complex in a world in which central banks intervene in long-dated securities and 
markets re-appraise prospects for the macro-economy in exceptionally uncertain conditions. 
Second,  and  notwithstanding  these  developments,  financial  market  conditions  remain 
accommodative  and  supportive  of  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area.  For  example, 
given the amount of accommodation that was introduced even before our expanded asset 
purchase programme commenced in March, bank lending rates – a key indicator of financing 
conditions  in  the  euro  area  –  are  still  trending  down.  Since  the  announcement  of  the 
expanded APP, the composite bank lending rates for euro area NFCs declined by 13 basis 
points  to  2.30%  in  April  (and  compared  with  2.79%  in  June  2014).  Bank  lending  rates  on 
loans to households for house purchase declined by 25 basis points to 2.25% in April (and 
compared with 2.87% in June 2014). In addition, most measures of cross-country dispersion 
show tangible declines for NFCs. 
As interest rates on outstanding loans are re-set, and new credit contracts embodying more 
favourable  terms  for  borrowers  replace  old  ones,  financial  accommodation  reaches  a 
growing  number  of  consumers  and  investors. This  incremental  process has  not  yet  run  its 
course. It is still on-going. 
This being said, in the process of price adjustment, the term structure of the money market 
interest  rates  has  come  under  intense  upward  pressure.  The  expected  policy  rate  path 
implied  by  money  market  quotes  has  shifted  up  and  steepened  noticeably  as  a 
consequence. The very short end of the curve – because of expanding surpluses of liquidity 
–  has  remained  well-anchored  around  levels  that  are  broadly  in  line  with  our  forward 
guidance over those horizons. 
We  are  closely  monitoring  conditions  to  detect  signs  of  an  unwarranted  tightening  of  our 
stance, to which we would need to react. 
Risks and side-effects of APP 
Engaging in a large-scale asset purchase programme is not without risks and side effects. 
Let  me  focus  here  on  the  financial  risks  of  our  own  balance  sheet,  on  financial  stability 
implications for the euro area, and on effects on income distribution. 
We  monitor  very  closely  the  risks  for  the  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  associated  with  our 
asset purchase programmes and we manage those risks to keep them at levels that do not 
threaten our capacity to fulfil our policy mandate to maintain price stability. In particular, we 
manage credit risk by exclusively purchasing assets of sufficient credit quality, by defining an 
asset allocation and a limit framework that ensures some degree of diversification, and by 
applying  severe  due  diligence  and  monitoring  processes.  With  regard  to  PSPP,  we  also 
decided that the purchases of government bonds conducted by the Eurosystem NCBs will 
not  be  risk-shared  within  the  Eurosystem.  This  does  not  hamper  the  effectiveness  of  the 
purchase programme and the singleness of our monetary policy. The Governing Council has 
full  control  over  all  the  design  features  of  the  programme.  The  specific  risk-sharing 
agreement takes into account the unique institutional structure of the euro area, in which a 
common currency and a single monetary policy coexist alongside 19 national fiscal policies. 
As  regards  possible  financial  stability  risks,  we  assess  these  risks  as  rather  contained  for 
now.  Looking  in  particular  at  housing markets  in  the  euro  area,  we  don’t  see  any  signs of 
general overvaluation. Important indicators for increasing financial imbalances are real estate 
prices  and  credit  growth,  but  so  far  we  have  witnessed  low  growth  rates  of  both.  For 
instance,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  prices  for  houses  and  apartments  in  the  euro  area 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  increased on average by 0.8% in the last quarter of 2014. The annual growth rate of loans for 
house  purchases  stood  at  0.1%  in  April  2015.  Nevertheless,  we  monitor  developments 
closely.  If  needed,  macro-prudential  policy  tools  should  be  used  to  safeguard  financial 
stability. 
Finally,  large-scale  asset  purchases  –  as  any  other  monetary  policy  measure  –  have 
distributional consequences. In the short run, the current combination of low interest rates, 
forward  guidance  and  asset  purchases  is  conducive  to  a  change  in  asset  prices  and  to 
wealth gains for investors holding a wide spectrum of assets. But this mechanism of asset 
price  changes  lies  at the  heart  of  monetary  policy  transmission  and  is  set  in motion  every 
time  a  central  bank  activates  its  instruments  of  monetary  policy,  whether  conventional  or 
unconventional,  in  the  pursuit  of  its  objective.  Interest  rate  changes  always  alter  the 
attractiveness  of  saving  relative  to  consumption  and  can  influence  the  debt  burden  of 
borrowers. 
Likewise,  the  current  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  eases  financing  conditions 
throughout  the  economy,  boosting  consumption  and  investment  and,  ultimately,  inflation. 
This is an absolute precondition for interest rates to return to more normal levels consistent 
with  sustainable  growth  and  price  stability.  By  reducing  the  cyclical  component  of 
unemployment,  it  also  contributes  to  reducing  a  major  source  of  inequality,  particularly 
amongst the young and lower-income groups. In the end, all citizens across the euro area 
will  benefit  most  from  an  environment  of  stable  prices,  macroeconomic  stability,  economic 
growth and job creation in the longer run. 
The current situation in Greece 
Finally, let me say a few words on the situation in Greece and the ECB’s role. As is the case 
for any member country of the euro area, the ECB, in the context of the euro system, fulfils 
its mandate as central bank toward Greece. Furthermore, the SSM Regulation you adopted 
together with the Council in 2013 made the ECB the supervisor of the Greek banking system 
through  direct  and  indirect  supervision.  And  in  the  two-pack,  Parliament  and  Council  have 
asked the Commission to liaise with the ECB when negotiating the conditionality attached to 
the adjustment programmes and when reviewing their implementation. 
When it comes to monetary policy and supervisory action, the ECB will continue to take its 
decisions in full independence and in accordance with our legal framework. This rules-based 
approach is what is required from us. This is what we have been following and will continue 
to follow. 
In  this  context,  the  Eurosystem  has  provided  support  to  allow  Greek  banks  to  continue 
financing  the  economy.  Currently,  the  central  bank  liquidity  extended  to  Greek  banks 
amounts to around EUR 118 billion, more than double the amount at end 2014. The current 
liquidity  support  represents  around  66%  of  Greece’s  GDP,  the  highest level  as  a  share  of 
GDP of any euro area country. Last week, the Governing Council decided not to object to a 
further  increase  in  the  ELA  ceiling,  by  EUR  2.3  billion  to  EUR  to  83  billion.  Liquidity  will 
continue to be extended as long as Greek banks are solvent and have sufficient collateral. 
However,  in  a  situation  where  the  Greek  government  does  not  have  market  access,  this 
liquidity can not be used to circumvent the prohibition of monetary financing, as laid out in 
Art.  123  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union.  This,  together  with 
supervisory considerations, explains why there is a ceiling on the Greek T-bills held by the 
Greek banking sector. 
For  the  Governing  Council  to  reconsider  the  T-Bills  ceiling,  there  should  be  a  credible 
perspective for a successful conclusion of the current review and subsequent implementation 
which would imply the disbursement of programme funds by euro area Member States. This 
would  also  significantly  improve  the  outlook  for  future  market  access  by  the  Greek 
government. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  It  should  be  absolutely  clear  that  the  decision  on  whether  to  conclude  the  review  of  the 
current  programme  and  disburse  further  financial  support  to  Greece  lies  entirely  with  the 
Eurogroup, so ultimately with euro area Member States. Hence this is a political decision that 
will have to be taken by elected policymakers, not by central bankers. 
In the meantime, we will continue to provide our advice on the adjustment programmes. It is 
within this context, that we need a strong and comprehensive agreement with Greece, and 
we need this very soon. By strong and comprehensive I mean an agreement that produces 
growth, that has social fairness, but that is also fiscally sustainable, ensures competitiveness, 
and addresses the remaining sources of financial instability. I can assure you that the ECB is 
doing all it can to facilitate a successful outcome. 
Such  a  strong  and  credible  agreement  with  Greece  is  needed,  not  only  in  the  interest  of 
Greece, but also of the euro area as a whole. While all actors will now need to go the extra 
mile, the ball lies squarely in the camp of the Greek government to take the necessary steps. 
Conclusion 
The  situation  in  Greece  reminds  us  again  that  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  is  an 
unfinished construction as long as we do not have all tools in place to ensure that all euro 
area members are economically, fiscally and financially sufficiently resilient. To complete the 
Economic and Monetary Union, we need a quantum leap towards a stronger, more efficient 
institutional architecture. As you know, my colleagues and I are currently working on a report 
that will aim at showing a roadmap for this. We are in the final stages of this process, and I 
hope you understand that also out of respect for my colleagues, I will not be able to tell you 
more  than  what  I  have  already  said  repeatedly:  That  we  will  need  to  put  our  institutional 
framework on a much stronger footing; that we need, as I just said, a quantum leap. 
I am now looking forward to our discussion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
