  Luis M Linde: Role and situation of Spanish banks and the outlook for 
the Spanish economy 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  II  National 
Congress  on  “The  Present  and  Future  of  the  Mortgage  Market.  A  Second  Chance  for 
Consumers and Entrepreneurs”, University of Granada, Granada, 10 April 2015. 
 Let me begin by thanking Miguel Olmedo and Inmaculada Sánchez for inviting me to participate in the closing 
session of this II National Congress on “The Present and Future of the Mortgage Market. A Second Chance for 
Consumers and Entrepreneurs”. 
The  relevance  and  scope  of  the  matters  addressed  in  this  Congress  more  than  justify  a 
debate  on  the  adaptation  of  the  law  and  financial  system  regulations  to  social  reality.  A 
balance must be struck between respect for property rights, the efficient functioning of the 
financial system and protection of the socially excluded. 
A second chance 
The so-called “second chance” legislation seeks to provide individuals with the possibility of a 
“fresh start” after a financial, business or personal failure, without being indefinitely saddled 
with  a  debt  which  they  may  never  be  able  to  repay.  Second-chance  mechanisms  are 
considered to be positive for debtors and also for society since, among other things, they are 
a deterrent to the black economy and promote an enterprise culture. 
Among  the  main  changes  approved,  I  would  highlight  Royal  Decree-Law  1/2015  of 
27 February  2015.  This  legislation,  now  in  passage  through  Parliament  as  a  draft  law, 
includes initiatives in the area of insolvency law to strengthen the application of out-of-court 
payment settlements, and introduces a second-chance mechanism. In relation to the Code of 
Good Practices, the exclusion threshold, the application of so-called “floor clauses” and the 
calculation of the limit on the price of properties acquired to be able to avail oneself of the 
dation  in  payment  envisaged  in  the  code  have  all  been  reviewed.  Lastly,  the  law  on 
measures  to  strengthen  the  position  of mortgage  debtors  provides for  an  extension  of  the 
moratorium  on  evictions  in  the  cases  of  particular  vulnerability  identified  in  Law  1/2013. 
These improvements are in addition to those adopted as a result of the financial crisis. 
They  are  steps  in  the  right  direction  which,  given  their  significance,  merit  analysis  and 
assessment. And, in this respect, I would like to voice two ideas. 
First, in this new setting it is essential that legislation should preserve the payment culture 
that has traditionally existed in the Spanish mortgage market. The erosion of this culture, as 
occurred in some euro area member countries under European Union bail-out programmes, 
would truly be most negative for the stability of the financial system. 
Second, the legislative amendments must strike an appropriate balance between the rights 
of  creditors  and  those  of  debtors,  especially  the  socially  excluded,  and  I  should  like  to 
highlight the advisability of concentrating efforts in the field of social policies: a country as 
economically, socially and institutionally developed as Spain has sufficient resources to face 
up  to  and  resolve  the  most  dramatic  and  unacceptable  situations  of  exclusion  and  need 
without affecting financial stability in the process. 
All these issues have been duly discussed in this Congress, which is why I shall focus on the 
situation of our banking system and on our economic outlook. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Role and situation of Spanish banks 
I should first like to highlight the crucial importance of banks in resource allocation and their 
role  of  intermediation  between  those  supplying  and  demanding  financing.  Mass  access  to 
owner-occupied housing would be almost inconceivable without their intermediation. 
Mortgage lending is a very important segment of the financial intermediation in which credit 
institutions engage. As at December 2014, mortgage loans for house purchase extended by 
credit  institutions  to  households  amounted  to  slightly  over  €541  billion,  more  than  40%  of 
total  bank  lending.  The  number  of  outstanding  mortgage  loans  for  house  purchase  is  at 
present  5.8  million,  a  large  percentage  of  which  (82%)  are  at  floating  rates,  which  has 
allowed for the transmission of the Eurosystem’s more accommodative  monetary policy to 
household financing conditions. 
The quality of mortgage lending is crucial for the quality of our banks’ assets and, ultimately, 
for their solvency and stability. A deterioration in the quality of mortgage assets would affect 
the conditions on which financial institutions themselves are funded, since it might lead to a 
downgrading  of  mortgage  market  securities  and  that,  in  turn,  might  ultimately  worsen 
borrowing conditions for households and firms. 
That said, Spanish banks are better placed today than one or two years ago to cope with the 
increase in the demand for credit that our economy will see with the recovery in activity and 
higher growth. This is due to three interrelated factors. 
First,  the  improvement  in  financial  markets,  in  particular  in  the  euro  area.  The  monetary 
policy measures adopted by the European Central Bank and the reforms to the institutional 
framework of the euro have made a decisive contribution here. 
Second,  the  recovery  in  the  Spanish  economy,  one  component  of  which  has  been 
underpinned by the reforms already pushed through, which are contributing to correcting the 
imbalances built up during the upswing that ended in 2008. 
However, and this is the third factor, the favourable developments in the Spanish banking 
sector cannot be understood without considering the transformation it has undergone. This 
has  involved  the  recapitalisation  and  restructuring  of  bank  balance  sheets;  downsizing, 
entailing reductions in staff and in bank offices; and an overhaul of the savings bank sector, 
improving  the  corporate  governance  structure  and  resolving  the  situation  whereby  it  was 
impossible for these institutions to tap the capital market for funds. 
These favourable developments are apparent in the behaviour of certain variables, which I 
shall briefly review. 
Non-performing loans 
i. 
Non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  as  a  proportion  of  lending  to  the  resident  private  sector  in 
Spain  have  been falling  since  early  2014. On the  preliminary  data for February, the  latest 
figures available, the NPL ratio for Spanish banks as a whole declined to 12.6%, the lowest 
proportion  for  the  past  18  months.  This  improved  asset  performance  is  the  case  both  for 
households and for non-financial corporations. 
Funding 
ii. 
Spanish banks have improved their access to both retail and wholesale funding, and have 
significantly reduced their recourse to the liquidity provided by the Eurosystem. 
Nonetheless, recourse to the Eurosystem remains high given the limited activity on interbank 
markets. 
The  trajectory  of  deposits  in  2014  and  the  still-declining  trend  of  credit  have  allowed  the 
narrowing  of  banks’  loan-deposit  gap  to  continue.  The  gap  has  narrowed  by  almost  40% 
since 2007. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Profitability 
iii. 
The  capacity  of  banks  to  generate  profit  reflects  their  resilience  in  the  face  of  potential 
difficulties  and,  at  the  same  time,  their  possibilities  of  developing  banking  business  in  a 
sustainable fashion. 
Figures for the first nine months of 2014 confirm that the sector has left behind the losses 
recorded in 2012. This better performance is underpinned by both the reduction in operating 
expenses and the lower provisioning needs derived from asset value adjustments. 
Net interest income, under downward pressure from limited business activity and low interest 
rates, increased moderately in 2014 compared with the same period in 2013. That said, this 
recovery is as yet modest and the downside pressures on the statement of income persist, 
meaning banks must persevere in containing their operating costs. 
Solvency 
iv. 
Attesting to Spanish banks’ solvency were the results of the stress test conducted before the 
start-up  of  the  SSM,  in  2014.  As  you  will  recall,  no  Spanish  bank  had  to  submit  a 
capitalisation plan at the end of the year, even under the worst scenario considered. That is 
to  say,  under  a  hypothetical  highly  adverse  macroeconomic  scenario,  all  the  participating 
Spanish banks evidenced solvency levels above the thresholds demanded by the European 
Central  Bank  and  the  European  Banking  Authority,  the  two  institutions  responsible  for 
conducting the test. 
The latest available figures, for December 2014, confirm that the Spanish banking sector as 
a whole is operating  with solvency levels that comfortably exceed the  minimum regulatory 
levels required. 
Indeed, the top-quality common equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio stands at 11.8% for the sector as 
a whole, well above the minimum regulatory level of 4.5%. The total capital ratio was 13.6%, 
also above the regulatory level of 8%. 
The far-reaching transformation of the banking system and the enhanced position of Spanish 
banks  will  enable  them  to  meet  the  foreseeable  increase  in  the  demand  for  credit  as  our 
economy picks up. 
Outlook for the Spanish economy 
To conclude, I wish to refer to our economic outlook within Monetary Union. 
On  the  information  available  for the first  quarter  of  the  year,  Spanish  GDP  is  expected  to 
have increased at a quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.8%, making for a year-on-year rate of 2.5%, 
above the forecasts at the start of the year. This improved growth should be viewed as part 
of the overall picture for the euro area, which saw growth of 0.9% in 2014 compared with 
0.4%  in  2013.  Both  in  the  Spanish  economy  and  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  this 
improvement in growth is being driven by consumption, the contribution of exports and the 
improvement  in  gross  capital  formation  due,  above  all,  to  the  pick-up  in  construction, 
although the decline in oil prices and the depreciation of the euro are also playing their part. 
Allow me to focus on two key elements here: employment and the change of tempo in the 
construction sector. 
The employment figures confirm this recovery in activity. In March, 1.4 million contracts were 
registered,  18.5%  more  than  in  March  2014,  with  significant  growth  in  permanent  and,  in 
particular, in full-time contracts. 
Yet  despite  the  historically  positive  figures  in  terms  of  the  decline  in  the  number  of 
unemployed (over the past 12 months, registered unemployment saw the biggest year-on-
year decline ever in the related time series), joblessness remains very high, with more than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
4.4 million people out of work, reaffirming the need to persevere with the reforms and policies 
that have driven the improvements to date. 
It  is  also  interesting  to  see  that,  during  the  fourth  quarter  of  2014,  residential  investment 
posted  quarter-on-quarter  growth  of  0.4%,  meaning  it  has  increased  for  four  consecutive 
quarters. These figures confirm the change in cycle and a moderately upward trajectory. In 
turn, open-market house prices, according to INE figures, are estimated to have increased by 
0.3% in 2014, following six years of declines. The year-on-year rate in the fourth quarter was 
1.8%, suggesting incipient – but growing – price rises, albeit with notable differences across 
regions  and  real  estate  market  segments.  Lastly,  house-purchase  figures  for  February 
announced yesterday also indicate a clear recovery, especially in second-hand housing. 
Underpinning  the  growth  forecasts  for  our  economy  for  2015  and  2016  are  the  growth  of 
private domestic demand and the strength of exports, along with the lower tax burden and 
the monetary stimulus measures adopted by the ECB, which are already having a significant 
impact on the cost of financing both for firms and households. Our current forecast – which is 
scheduled for review in June, September and December – is for Spanish GDP to grow by 
2.8% over the course of 2015, and by 2.7% in 2016. 
As to employment, the March figures reinforce our view that the unemployment rate should 
continue to fall, down to around 20% of the labour force by the fourth quarter of 2016. 
In  Europe,  the  figures  appear  to  support  the  view  that  the  risks  of  deflation  have  been 
averted  and  that  the  economies  of  the  Monetary  Union  and  of  the  European  Union  as  a 
whole  are  recovering  and  gaining  momentum.  If  the  Spanish  economy  is  to  benefit  from 
these changes and likewise enjoy sustained higher growth, it will be essential to persevere 
with the reforms geared to adding market flexibility and boosting investment. 
Admittedly, however, the European and international financial context is unprecedented. The 
US exit from quantitative easing, with the interest rate rises that the markets expect, and the 
proliferation  of  negative  interest  rates  on  various  financial  and  government  debt  markets, 
make  for  an  unprecedented  scenario  that  poses  undoubted  risks  to  financial  stability  with 
potentially highly volatile movements in financial asset prices. But if the risk of deflation in the 
euro area has finally been averted, and the US economic recovery continues apace, we may 
expect the financial markets to return to normal and yield curves to move back in step with 
normal, sustained economic growth. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
