  
 
Takehiro Sato: Toward further development of the Tokyo financial market 
– issues on repo market reform 
Keynote speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at 
the  Futures  Industry  Association  Japan  (FIA  Japan)  Financial  Market  Conference  2015, 
Tokyo, 13 May 2015. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  on  the  further 
development of Japan’s financial markets with distinguished participants from major financial 
institutions, pension funds, and portfolio managers in Japan, the United States, Europe, and 
other Asian countries. 
Today, I would like to talk about the repo market in Japan. The Bank of Japan, collaborating 
with market participants at home and abroad, is taking active steps to help create a market-
wide infrastructure. This is done with the aim of further enhancing the functioning of Japan’s 
financial markets – which are a focus of the Bank’s monetary policy implementation and a 
touchstone of policy effectiveness. 
The repo market plays the extremely important role of supplying liquidity to the primary and 
secondary markets, as does the Japanese government bond (JGB) futures market. Repos 
and  futures  transactions  are  an  integral  part  of  market-making  activities  and  the  markets’ 
price discovery mechanism. In this sense, the futures market works hand in hand with the 
repo  market.  In  the  same  vein,  the  development  of  the  repo  market  drives  further 
development  of  the  futures  market by  boosting  the  liquidity  of  the  JGB  market.  Hoping  for 
such positive feedback to continue, I would like to talk about the international discussions on 
repo market reform. I will also touch on issues related to the role of market participants and 
the Bank in such discussions. 
As  you  are  well  aware,  repos  are  transactions  that  involve  the  exchange  of  cash  and 
securities  for  a  set  of  period.  The  repo  market  is  an  important  place  for  borrowing  and 
lending of cash and securities in many global financial markets. The amount outstanding of 
repos in Japan declined temporarily in 2008 due to the collapse of Lehman Brothers, but has 
regained  its  size  markedly  in  recent  years.  It  now  accounts  for  almost  half  of  the  total 
transaction amount in the money market (Charts 1 and 2). 
Currently, market participants are taking initiatives in repo market reform in accordance with 
international discussions. In my view, these initiatives center on four key ideas: transparency, 
stability, efficiency, and globalization. I would like to touch on each idea. 
International discussions on repos 
I.  
Drawing on the lessons learned from the recent global financial crisis, discussions on repos 
have taken place at international forums such as the G20 and the Financial Stability Board 
(FSB), with the aim of further increasing the transparency and stability of the repo market. 
The Bank is also taking part in these discussions (Charts 3 and 4). 
The awareness here is that the financial crisis was worsened by the large increase in repos 
using illiquid securitized products, particularly in the United States. Excessive leveraging and 
risk taking in the repo market posed a serious threat to financial stability. This development 
drew attention to the so-called shadow banking problem. To prevent the repo market from 
seizing  up,  the  FSB  deemed  it  necessary  for  regulatory  authorities  to  closely  monitor  the 
repo  market.  It  also  required  further  strengthening  of  risk  management  by  setting  haircuts 
appropriately. In sum, from a prudential policy perspective, there has been an international 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
agreement that increasing transparency and stability of the repo market is an important step 
in addressing global financial stability risks. 
Reforms to increase transparency (building of a data collection framework) 
A.  
With regard to transparency – the first key idea that I mentioned – the FSB set out its policy 
recommendation  for  strengthening  repo  data  collection  at  both  the  national  and  the  global 
level. This was aimed at collecting detailed data on repos such as the type of collateral. By 
collecting such data, national authorities can monitor financial stability risks such as a buildup 
of  leverage,  the  degree  of  maturity  mismatch,  and  the  risk  concentration  among  certain 
market  participants.  An  FSB  Data  Experts  Group  is  working  on  the  details  of  this  data 
collection  framework,  and  the  Bank  is  also  taking  part.  A  consultation  paper  containing 
details such as the data template was released in November 2014, and the framework will be 
finalized by the end of 2015, after taking account of the results of public consultation. 
In the coming months, active discussion on the domestic data collection framework will take 
place  in  Japan,  mirroring  developments  at  the  global  level.  To  facilitate  the  smooth 
introduction of the framework, it is necessary to pay due attention to the burden on market 
participants and implications for the market. 
National  authorities  see  the  data  collection  project  as  marking  significant  progress  toward 
increasing transparency of the repo market as well as shadow banking activities. The project 
should also help to contain financial stability risks. Active participation in it will contribute to 
global  financial  stability.  Furthermore,  the  project  will  enhance  Japan’s  international 
competitiveness by ensuring global trust in the nation’s money markets. In cooperation with 
stakeholders both at home and abroad, the Bank will continue to contribute actively to this 
project. 
B.  
Reforms to increase stability (implementation of appropriate risk 
management) 
The second key idea concerns the stability of the repo market. In this regard, “haircuts” are 
intended to increase the safety of a transaction by reducing the market value of the collateral 
in  proportion  to  factors  such  as  fluctuations  in  the  collateral  price.  At  the  height  of  the 
financial crisis, the prices of asset-backed securities (ABSs) plunged. These securities were 
used as repo collateral, and the level of haircuts for them rose sharply. This led to a further 
decline in prices and liquidity, destabilizing the entire repo market. 
With  these  experiences  in  mind,  the  FSB  is  requesting  regulatory  authorities  to  apply  two 
measures to all the repo transactions that are not cleared by a central counterparty (CCP). 
The  first  measure  is  numerical  haircut  floors  (Chart  5).  The  thinking  is  that  in  good  times 
market  participants  tend  to  underestimate  price  volatility  risk  and  set  haircuts  that  are  too 
optimistic. By setting a floor, this measure aims to avoid “procyclicality”: excessive buildup of 
leverage in good times and rapid deleveraging in stressed market conditions due to a sudden 
rise in haircuts. 
Repos using government securities are exempted from the numerical haircut floors. This is 
because price movements in government securities tend not to be procyclical, and haircuts 
on government securities are zero or close to zero for most transactions. Unlike in the United 
States, where a considerable amount of repos uses ABSs, government securities are mainly 
used  in  Japan  (Charts  6  and  7).  For  this  reason,  the  implementation  of  numerical  haircut 
floors would have little impact on the repo market in Japan. 
The  second  measure  requested  by  the  FSB  concerns  methodology  standards.  Regulatory 
authorities are required to establish qualitative standards for the methodologies that market 
participants use to calculate haircuts, incorporating stress scenarios. 
As  just  mentioned,  nearly  all  the  repos  in  Japan  use  government  securities,  for  which 
haircuts are hardly applied. However, even the most creditworthy and liquid assets such as 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
government securities can entail a risk of price fluctuations. Therefore, to ensure repo market 
stability, it is important to establish a common understanding among market participants on 
what risk management, including methodology standards, should entail. 
The  FSB  will  establish  a  monitoring  process  to  prevent  market  participants  from  avoiding 
numerical haircut floors by booking transactions in different jurisdictions. Depending on the 
results  of  this  monitoring  process,  the  FSB  will  consider  reviewing  the  scope  of  the 
application, which currently excludes repos using government securities, as well as the level 
of haircut floors as necessary. The Bank deems it necessary to continue actively participating 
in  the  international  discussions  regarding  the  framework  for  numerical  haircut  floors,  while 
making sure that these do not have unintended consequences for liquidity in the global repo 
markets. 
Reforms to increase efficiency (shortening of the JGB settlement cycle) 
II.  
In parallel with the international discussions just mentioned, there is an ongoing initiative on 
efficiency. In Japan, market participants are aiming to further shorten the settlement cycle for 
outright transactions of JGBs from two business days (T+2) to one business day (T+1) after 
the trade date. 
This initiative was taken in response to the significant increase in settlement fails in the JGB 
market at the height of the Lehman crisis. By compressing the unsettled transaction amount, 
it intends to reduce settlement risks. In addition, shortening the settlement cycle would bring 
drastic changes to the repo market, because the initiative is accompanied by the creation of 
a new market-wide infrastructure. 
The repo market complements the JGB market, because it accommodates the need to adjust 
excesses or shortages of cash resulting from outright transactions. Therefore, it is essential 
to introduce a T+0 settlement cycle for the general collateral (GC) repo market in conjunction 
with  achieving  the  T+1  settlement  cycle  for  outright  JGB  transactions.  To  this  end,  much 
greater speed and efficiency are required in processing repo transactions. This leads to the 
third  key  idea:  increasing  efficiency.  Japan’s  repo  market  is  planning  to  introduce  the 
subsequent  collateral  allocation  method  for  GC  repo  transactions.  For  this  purpose,  the 
market  will  establish  a  new  collateral  management  infrastructure  with  sufficient  allocation 
capacity. 
Heightened efficiency in the repo market has the potential to bring considerable change to 
the money market in Japan. More specifically, it could lead to the creation of a significantly 
expanded T+0 funding market. 
If  all  of  the  overnight  GC  repos  currently  settled  on  T+1  shift  to  T+0,  the  market  size  is 
roughly expected to reach 20 to 30 trillion yen (Chart 8). On the other hand, the size of the 
brokered  and  uncollateralized  overnight  call  market  is  currently  2  to  3  trillion  yen.  This 
suggests that there is a high probability that the size of the T+0 GC repo market will exceed 
that of the call market and become the largest money market in Japan, offering same-day 
liquidity. 
As I mentioned, the size of Japan’s repo market is expanding. From a broader perspective, 
while  unsecured  funding  has  been  diminishing  globally  after  the  financial  crisis,  secured 
funding has been relatively robust. This result seems to reflect structural factors, such as the 
increase  in  the  awareness  of  credit  risks  of  interbank  transactions  following  the  financial 
crisis,  as  well  as  the  introduction  of  financial  regulations  that  discourage  unsecured  short-
term funding. 
On the basis of this broad trend, the establishment of the T+0 repo market has the potential 
to  not  only  affect  the  current  call  market  but  also  bring  structural  change  to  the  money 
market,  which  is  vital  to  the  money  market  operations  of  the  Bank.  Currently,  banks  and 
money  market  brokers  are  major  cash  borrowers  in  the  call  market,  while  in  the  GC  repo 
market  securities  firms  are  major  cash  borrowers  (Chart  9).  The  T+0  repos  may  greatly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
increase  the  depth  of  the  T+0  funding  market  and  the  diversity  of  its  participants.  These 
changes could help to further vitalize the money market as a whole. 
With these possibilities in mind, the Bank will work closely with market participants and follow 
the  potential  impact  of  these  changes.  Specifically,  the  Bank  is  greatly  interested  in  the 
potential  impact  on  the  size  of  call  and  repo  market,  the  diversity  of  participants,  and  the 
money flow. Changes in these factors might also affect the behavior of the money market 
rates. 
Reforms toward globalization (shifting to the new gensaki method) 
III.  
Another  important  initiative  is  the  unification  of  contract  types  for  repos.  Recently,  market 
participants  agreed  on  the  uniform  adoption  of  the  new  gensaki  method,  a  more  globally 
accepted form of a repurchase agreement. They are now working on the transition process, 
such as amending the master agreement. This leads to the fourth key idea: globalization. 
In Japan, loan-type repos (called gentan repos) have been widespread in the market. This is 
because the securities transaction tax – although now abolished – used to be levied on the 
purchase  and  sale  of  securities.  Thus,  there  have  been  three  types  of  repo  contracts  in 
Japan  (gentan,  new  gensaki,  and  old  gensaki),  with  correspondingly  diverse  market 
conventions (Chart 10). This is considered to be one factor that impedes efforts to improve 
efficiency and automation in the processing of repo transactions. 
In addition, it is often said that the loan-type repos cause difficulties in communication among 
domestic  participants,  and  overseas  authorities  and  participants,  because  the  loan-type 
repos have the same legal characterization as securities lending in major overseas markets. 
Consequently,  the  unification  of  repos  to  the  new  gensaki  contracts  will  contribute  to  the 
further  globalization  of  Japan’s  money  market  and  lead  to  the  vitalization  of  Japan’s  repo 
market,  including  transactions  with  foreign  investors  who  are  present  here  today.  Market 
participants are expected to improve their IT systems, change market conventions, and seek 
clients’ involvement. The Bank is committed to offering support to achieve these goals. 
Concluding remarks 
Today, I have talked about the four key ideas regarding the reform of Japan’s repo market: 
transparency,  stability,  efficiency,  and  globalization.  In  the  creation  of  a  market-wide 
infrastructure,  these  four  ideas  are  important  for  not  only  the  repo  market  but  also  the 
financial markets as a whole. 
The share of JGB holdings by foreign investors is expected to expand over the medium and 
longer term, reflecting changes in domestic savings and investment. Developing a safe and 
attractive repo market for investors both at home and abroad would contribute to boosting 
liquidity in the JGB market. This would also increase trust in Japan’s financial markets. 
Reforms in the repo market, which were initiated by the failure of the Lehman Brothers, are 
expected to reach their final stage in two to three years. In this regard, we are at a critical 
moment for fulfilling the reforms. The Bank judges that it is extremely important for the repo 
market,  the  epicenter  of  Japan’s  money  market,  to  become  more  transparent,  stable, 
efficient, and easily accessible for foreign investors. 
The Bank will hold a Repo Market Forum on May 14, and will exchange opinions with major 
repo market participants on the four key ideas behind the reform. The Bank aims, together 
with market participants, to contribute further to the development of the repo market and to 
the Tokyo financial market. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5
  6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9
