  Daniel K Tarullo: Application of enhanced prudential standards to bank 
holding companies 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 19 March 2015. 
 Chairman  Shelby,  Ranking  Member  Brown,  and  other  members  of  the  committee,  I 
appreciate the opportunity to testify on the threshold in section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Wall 
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) for application of enhanced 
prudential  standards  to  bank  holding  companies.  In  my  testimony  this  morning  I  will  try  to 
provide,  from  a  regulator’s  perspective,  some  context  for  the  committee’s  consideration  of 
this subject by explaining how the Federal Reserve has differentially implemented prudential 
regulations  based  on  the  size,  scope,  and  range  of  activities  of  banking  organizations,  as 
well  as  how  we  have  organized  our  supervisory  portfolios.  In  both  our  supervisory  and 
regulatory practices, we are pursuing a tiered approach to prudential oversight. 
Regulatory differentiation in the Dodd-Frank Act 
Traditionally,  statutes  creating  prudential  regulatory  requirements  or  authorities  generally 
took what might be termed a unitary approach. That is, the statutes simply made a particular 
requirement  or  authority  applicable  to  banks  or  banking  organizations  generally,  with  few 
clear distinctions based on the characteristics of the regulated entities. The federal banking 
agencies  did  adopt  some  regulations  with  requirements  that  applied  only  to  larger 
institutions. And, as I will describe a bit later, through supervisory practice they administered 
some  statutory  requirements  differently  based  on  the  size  of  banks  and  the  scope  of their 
activities. But the starting point was a more or less similar set of statutory requirements. 
The  Dodd-Frank  Act  explicitly  broke  with  this  traditional  approach  by  creating  prudential 
requirements  that  vary  with  the  size  or  systemic  importance  of  banking  organizations.  Of 
particular importance is the Dodd-Frank Act emphasis on financial stability, both in markets 
generally  and  with  respect  to  the  largest  financial  firms,  which  had  been  associated  with 
market perceptions that they were too big to fail. The law created some new authorities for 
financial  regulators  and  instructed  regulators  to  use  authorities  they  already  had  to  put  in 
place regulations to contain systemic risk. As to regulations applicable to individual firms, the 
Dodd-Frank  Act  creates  thresholds  for  various  prudential  regulations  at  asset  sizes  of 
$1 billion, $10 billion, and $50 billion. Of special note is that section 165 of the Dodd-Frank 
Act  requires  the  Federal  Reserve  to  establish  enhanced  prudential  standards  for  bank 
holding  companies  with  total  assets  of  $50  billion  or  more  and  other  financial  firms 
designated  as  systemically  important  by  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council.  Among 
other areas, these standards include capital, liquidity, risk management, resolution planning, 
and single-counterparty credit limits. Of particular significance is the section 165 requirement 
that 
the  size, 
interconnectedness,  role  in  credit  intermediation,  and  other  factors  specified  in  the  law.  In 
addition to these enhanced, graduated standards, section 165 requires that firms with greater 
than $50 billion in assets be subject to annual supervisory stress tests. 
The Federal Reserve has implemented the section 165 requirement of graduated stringency 
for enhanced prudential standards by creating what are, in effect, three categories within the 
universe of banking organizations with $50 billion or more in assets. As required by statute, 
all firms within this universe are subject to basic enhanced standards. Firms with assets of 
between  $50  billion  and  $250  billion  are  subject  only  to  these  basic  enhanced  standards. 
Firms with at least $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign assets are 
also subject to more stringent requirements, including the advanced approaches risk-based 
in  stringency  depending  on 
these  enhanced  standards 
increase 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  capital requirements, the supplementary leverage ratio, the countercyclical capital buffer, and 
the full-scope liquidity coverage ratio. 
Finally,  the  eight  U.S.  bank  holding  companies  that  have  been  designated  as  global 
systemically important banking organizations will be subject to an additional set of regulatory 
requirements.  An  enhanced  supplementary  leverage  ratio,  equally  applicable  to  all  eight 
firms, has already been adopted. We are also working on two requirements that will vary in 
stringency even among these eight firms, based on their relative systemic importance. One is 
the set of risk-based capital surcharges for which we issued a notice of proposed rulemaking 
late last year. The other, on which we anticipate issuing a notice of proposed rulemaking in 
the  coming  months,  is  a  long-term  debt  requirement  designed  to  support  effective  orderly 
resolution processes. 
In sum, the stringency of the Federal Reserve’s prudential regulations increases in proportion 
to  the  systemic  importance  of  the  banking  organizations.  With  this  tiered  approach  to 
regulation,  the  Federal  Reserve  aims  not  only  to  achieve  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  goal  of 
mitigating risks to U.S. financial stability, but to do so in a manner that limits regulatory costs 
and  the  expenditure  of  supervisory  resources  where  not  needed  to  promote  safety, 
soundness, and financial stability. 
Tiered regulatory and supervisory experience 
The Federal Reserve also takes a tiered approach to supervision. We organize the firms we 
supervise  into  portfolios  based  predominately,  although  not  exclusively,  on  asset  size. We 
have four such groups: (1) community banking organizations, which are generally those with 
$10 billion or less in total assets; (2) regional banking organizations, which have total assets 
between $10 billion and $50 billion; (3) large banking organizations, which have total assets 
over $50 billion but are not among the largest and most complex banking organizations; and 
(4)  firms  overseen  by  the  Large  Institution  Supervision  Coordinating  Committee  (LISCC), 
which are the largest and most complex banking organizations.1 
As with tiered regulation, our tiered supervision is intended to take into account differences in 
business models, risks, relative regulatory burdens, and other salient considerations. Where 
specific  regulatory  goals  for  the  different  portfolios  vary,  the  supervisory  programs  reflect 
those  differences.  And  even  where  the  goals  are  similar  across  portfolios,  supervisory 
programs  should  nevertheless  take  account  of the  differences  among the firms  in  the four 
portfolios.  In  general,  we  shape  our  supervisory  expectations  for  each  portfolio  by 
considering  the  increase  in  safety  and  soundness  that  we  are  likely  to  achieve  through  a 
specific practice or requirement, in light of the regulatory costs for the banking organizations 
in the portfolio and the impact that the stress or failure of those institutions would likely have 
on credit intermediation, the deposit insurance fund, and financial stability. 
So, for example, there are heightened expectations with regard to corporate governance for 
large  banking  organizations  that  are  not  applied  to  regional  or  community  banking 
organizations. Among other areas, the Federal Reserve expects the boards of directors of 
these  larger  firms  to  set  direction  and  oversight  for  revenue  and  profit  generation,  risk 
management,  and  control  functions;  to  ensure  that  senior  management  has  the  expertise 
and level of involvement required to manage core business lines, critical operations, banking 
offices, and other material entities; and to maintain a corporate culture that emphasizes the 
importance  of  compliance  with  laws,  regulation,  and  consumer  protection.  While  strong 
corporate  governance  is  important  at  all  banking  organizations,  it  is  vital  at  large  banking 
organizations, given that their systems and operations are typically much broader and more 
                                                
1   For  more 
information  on 
supervision.htm. 
the  LISCC, 
see  http://federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  complex than those of the smaller-scale and more localized regional and community banking 
organizations. 
While  asset  size  is  the  principal  determinant  of  the  general  supervisory  program  for  a 
banking organization, other factors are taken into account as appropriate. For example, if a 
regional banking organization were to become involved in activities typically undertaken only 
by  larger  banking  organizations,  we  might  add  to  that firm’s  supervision  an  expectation  or 
practice drawn from the large banking organization portfolio. Moreover, in determining which 
banking organizations belong in the LISCC portfolio, the Federal Reserve has focused on the 
risks  to  the  financial  system  posed  by  individual  firms  –  size  has  not  been  the  dispositive 
factor. For example, three large banking organizations are not in that portfolio, even though 
they  have  larger  balance  sheets  than  the  processing-  and  custody-focused  bank  holding 
companies  that  are  in  the  LISCC  portfolio.  The  stress  or  failure  of  these  large,  essentially 
regional banking organizations could have a serious effect on credit intermediation across a 
significant  part  of  the  country  and,  in  some  situations  of  generalized  stress,  might  have 
consequences for the financial system as a whole. However, we judge that the functions of 
the  two  processing-  and  custody-focused  LISCC  firms  implicate  systemic  concerns  to  a 
greater extent than the substantial balance sheets of the larger regionals. 
The role of statutory thresholds 
As I hope by now is apparent, the Federal Reserve has done considerable work to tailor our 
supervision  of  banking  organizations  by  reference  to  their  size,  business  model,  and 
systemic  importance.  Similarly,  using  the  statutory  discretion  granted  us,  and  frequently  in 
cooperation with other regulatory agencies, we have also tailored the application of certain 
statutory requirements to different groups of banks. The question of statutory thresholds is 
thus  a  fairly  narrow  one:  Does  a  threshold  specify  a  cut-off  point  that  is  appropriate  for 
mandatory  application  of  a  particular  regulatory  requirement,  taking  into  account  whatever 
discretion is given to the implementing regulatory agencies? 
In  answering  this  question,  it  is  first  worth  noting  the  case  for  establishing  such  statutory 
thresholds.  In  the  past,  Congress  has  at  times  not  simply  given  the  banking  agencies 
authority to engage in a particular form of prudential regulation, but has required that they do 
so. Capital regulation and prompt correction action are two examples. Not coincidentally, I 
think,  congressional  action  followed  banking  crises  that  revealed  possible  shortcomings  in 
the regulatory and supervisory structures that had existed preceding the crisis. In requiring 
certain kinds of prudential regulation, Congress was in effect protecting against memories of 
those problems fading and the consequent possibility of supervisory relaxation, which might 
allow for a recurrence of similar banking problems in the future. 
The  creation  of  mandatory  thresholds  for  certain  enhanced  prudential  standards  is  an 
important  advance  in  the  traditional  congressional  role  of  specifying  a  set  of  mandatory 
regulations. This statutory structure recognizes the substantially divergent risks presented to 
the  economy  and  the  financial  system  by  the  potential  stress  or  failure  of  banking 
organizations  of  different  sizes  and  with  different  activities,  while  preserving  considerable 
discretion for the banking agencies in implementing those regulations. Here again, statutory 
enactment  of  mandatory  measures  for  banking  organizations  of  a  certain  size  or  systemic 
importance  serves  as  a  form  of  safeguard  against  the  erosion  of  prudential  oversight  that 
could  occur  were  predominant  reliance  to  be  placed  on  the  details  of  firm-specific 
supervision, which are sometimes hard for the public to discern. Removal or change of such 
thresholds,  as  with  generally  applicable  prudential  requirements,  will 
thus  require 
congressional  action  and  an  occasion  for  considered  public  debate  on  the  merits  of  such 
change. 
Experience to date, however, suggests that there are some statutory thresholds that might 
bear reexamination. One pertains to the applicability of some Dodd-Frank Act provisions to 
community  banks.  For  example,  the  Volcker  rule  and  the  incentive  compensation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  requirements  of  section  956  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  are  directed  at  concerns  generally 
present only with larger institutions, but the Volcker rule by its terms applies to all banking 
organizations, and the incentive compensation provisions apply by their terms to all banking 
organizations with $1 billion or more in assets. The banking agencies have done their best to 
tailor the application of these rules to smaller banks and, indeed, to make clear the limited 
extent to which they should affect those banks. However, some compliance effort on these 
rules  is  still  needed  at  community  banks.  Raising  the  asset  threshold  for  these  two 
requirements  to  $10  billion  would  eliminate  this  compliance  burden,  the  cost  of  which  is 
probably not worth whatever incremental prudential benefits might be gained at these small 
banks.  Even  in  the  relatively  unusual  circumstance  in  which  a  practice  at  a  smaller  bank 
might raise safety and soundness concerns, the supervisory process would remain available 
to rectify any problems. 
The second threshold that is worth discussing is the $50 billion level established by section 
165  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act.  As  noted  earlier,  the  import  of  this  threshold  is  to  require 
enhanced  prudential  standards  and  supervisory  stress  testing  for  banking  organizations 
whose  assets  exceed  that  amount.  As  also  noted, the  Federal  Reserve has  tailored those 
standards in accordance with the increasing stringency requirement of section 165, so that 
they are more flexible for institutions closer to the $50 billion threshold and most demanding 
for  the  eight  firms  of  global  systemic  importance.  It  has  been  somewhat  more  difficult  to 
customize supervisory stress testing. While some elements of the test, such as the market 
shock and single-counterparty default scenarios, are applied only to larger firms, the basic 
requirements for the aggregation and reporting of data conforming to our supervisory model 
and  for  firms  to  run  our  scenarios  through  their  own  models  do  entail  substantial 
expenditures of out-of-pocket and human resources. This can be a considerable challenge 
for a $60 billion or $70 billion bank. On the other side of the ledger, while we do derive some 
supervisory benefits from inclusion of these banks toward the lower end of the range in the 
supervisory  stress  tests,  those  benefits  are  relatively  modest,  and  we  believe  we  could 
probably realize them through other supervisory means. 
These are the factors that lay behind my suggestion last year that it might be worth thinking 
about the level of this threshold, which I understand to be a purpose of today’s hearing. That 
said,  I  want  to  emphasize  a  few  points.  First,  consideration  of  potential  increases  in  the 
threshold for mandatory prudential measures should not remove the discretion of the banking 
agencies to require additional measures – including such things as more capital or liquidity – 
for specific firms or groups of firms in appropriate circumstances. That is, while it is sensible 
to limit mandatory measures for classes of firms where most banks in that class are unlikely 
to present a particular kind of risk, it would be very ill-advised to preclude supervisors from 
requiring such measures of firms where that risk may become more of a concern. 
Second, any consideration of raising the threshold to take account of the factors I mentioned 
earlier should not extend to removal of the application of enhanced standards and other rules 
to the largest banking organizations. As senators and regulators have discussed many times 
before in this committee, the tasks of combatting the reality and the perception of too big to 
fail, and of vulnerabilities in broader financial markets, are crucial and ongoing. 
Conclusion 
The innovation in the Dodd-Frank Act that requires tiered regulation is central to our shared 
goals of protecting financial stability and ensuring the availability of credit. Smaller banks do 
not  pose  risks  to  financial  stability,  though  they  can  suffer  collateral  damage  when  stress 
builds  throughout  the  financial  system.  And,  while  enhanced  prudential  standards  are 
important to ensure that larger banks can continue to provide credit even in periods of stress, 
some of those same enhancements could actually inhibit credit extension by rendering the 
reasonable  business  models  of  middle-sized  and  smaller  banks  unprofitable.  The  Federal 
Reserve will continue to use statutory authorities to calibrate our regulation and supervision 
to the risks posed by the different classes of banks, avoiding a one-size-fits-all approach. We 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and, I believe, many others are committed to the dual goals of protecting systemic stability 
and fostering the efficient intermediation of credit by the overwhelming majority of American 
banks that do not pose systemic or far-reaching risks. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take any questions you may have. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
