  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Animal spirits in a period of volatility 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Bloomberg FX Forum, Makati City, 2 September 2015. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. 
Fortuitous or Good Planning? 
Someone in Bloomberg must be psychic, to have chosen “Hedging World Volatility” as theme 
for its 2015 FX Forum and at the same time to have scheduled the Forum in Manila during 
this precise week. Was that sixth sense or “bread and butter” excellent market reading? 
How do you hedge in a volatile market? 
Indeed, market volatility of late has not been contained to just a few countries or jurisdictions. 
It has neither been restricted to just either advanced or emerging markets, but it has spanned 
all categories of countries. And volatility has not been concentrated in one market or asset 
class alone, but it has crossed over from the commodity to the financial, and to some extent, 
the real goods market as well. 
With the variable forms of feedback loops and the uneven transmission mechanisms in the 
macrofinancial system, the relationships and correlations – as predicted by traditional models 
– appear to no longer be valid. Therefore, the question of how to “hedge” world volatility – as 
intimated by the theme of this Forum – is quite well timed. 
For those of you who have been in the market for a while now. A quick look around the room 
tells me, there aren’t too many of you around today. Perhaps, a sign of the changing times? 
Those of you who have already seen a number of episodes of volatility in “your day”, may be 
saying, this is a “healthy” correction. To a degree, I’ll have to agree with that. 
This “correction” is one good positive that is falling out of the recent market price action. We 
needed  a  tap  on  the  brakes,  so  to  speak,  because  the  markets  had  been  following  one 
strong underlying trend for a while now, seemingly oblivious to other factors. 
Each time we come to a crossroads such as this, analysts would say we are in “uncharted” 
territory. I also cannot disagree with that. For certain, no one can be absolutely sure about a 
few things: 
1.  
The convergence between the recent pronouncements of various Fed officials and 
what the Fed will ultimately end up doing. Over the Jackson Hole weekend, Bill Dudley of the 
New York Fed said in an unscheduled interview that a September hike is “less compelling” 
now. For her part, Esther George of the Kansas City Fed  who has repeatedly called for a 
hike, said “it’s too soon to say that recent market developments have altered the fundamental 
view”  that  the  economy  is  prepared for  normalization.  Then  Stan  Fischer,  Fed  Vice  Chair, 
spoke  at  a  panel  saying  “there  is  good  reason  to  believe  inflation  will  move  higher”,  thus 
keeping the door open for a September hike. 
Can anyone really tell with certainty when and by how much the Fed will tighten? Some are 
of the view that while a September lift off may not seem prudent, given market volatility, it 
may just be what the market needs in order to eliminate one element of uncertainty, after all, 
monetary policy has significant lags. 
2.  
what extent, in what form, and how such intervention will be funded. 
Some analysts put the cumulative decline in Chinese reserves since July to be over $300B. 
Question is, will they sell more US Treasuries to fund intervention? And if so, how will that 
impact on the US yield curve, and the Fed’s projected path of normalization? 
The next steps of Chinese authorities – whether they will continue to intervene, to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  What the ECB still has up its sleeves – how dependent these next moves would be 
3.  
on the behavior of its members, such as Greece. 
4.  
How the combination of these factors will be accounted for in the reaction functions 
of  the  other  central  banks  and  how  these  will  ultimately  all  work  themselves  out  in  the 
currency, bond and commodity markets, and 
5.  
What  would  happen  to  global  growth  if  China  slows  down  significantly,  and  if  the 
touted US growth ends up to be a “false” start. What or where then would be the engine for 
global growth? 
What concerns BSP the most? 
I have been asked, what is it that the BSP is most concerned about. Of all the risks I’ve listed 
just now, which would influence monetary policy the most? 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is very hard to say, with any degree of certainty, which factor would 
affect domestic monetary policy more, because, all these factors are interrelated. 
Therefore, for the rest of the time that has been given to me, let me – instead of singling out 
one  risk  –  consider  each  item  on  the  list  and  try  to  address  what  I  believe  are  burning 
questions in your mind. 
Let’s start with the Fed moves. You may ask, will the BSP follow the Fed’s cue in terms of 
the timing and magnitude of the lift-off? 
My answer – not necessarily. We won’t have to sing the same tune, but we will certainly have 
to sing in harmony. 
What do I mean? Recall Q2 last year when we embarked on a series of monetary tightening 
actions. The Fed had not yet moved, but markets were certainly talking about it at the time. 
A  number  of  factors  were  at  play  during  that  period  last  year.  1)  Domestic  inflation  was 
threatening to breach the inflation target on the upside, and 2) M3 had been growing over 
30 percent as a result of the operational adjustments in our SDA facility that we put in place 
to  account  for  capital  inflows.  Fortunately,  the  economy  was  growing  robustly  then,  and 
therefore there  was  no  need  to  provide  any  monetary  stimulus.  In  other  words,  it  was  our 
assessment that the economy could withstand some tightening in financial conditions at that 
time. 
You will recall that in our communication then, we further indicated that the moves were also 
motivated by the anticipation of Fed normalization. It was pre-emptive monetary tightening in 
order to help guide the domestic markets and break any tendency to under value/appreciate 
risks. Our concern was that an acute/unabated undervaluation of risks would create financial 
stability pressures, particularly in the real asset markets. 
While the risk of overhearing in the asset markets has since dissipated, we are not about to 
reverse  that  course  of  action  yet.  We  will,  however,  consider  1)  the  actual  and  expected 
capital outflows that may result from the current global financial market rout and their impact 
on M3 growth, and, 2) carefully review the balance sheets/portfolios of the banking system to 
see if there is a need to adjust policy settings or tweak macroprudential measures. 
We will also, and more importantly, monitor inflation expectations. We have shared with you 
that for 2015, inflation is likely going to be lower than the government’s target band. Even so, 
inflation is seen to move higher and into target range in 2016 and 2017. 
Mindful  therefore  of  the  significant  lags  of  monetary  policy,  we  will  be  careful  in  making 
adjustments to policy settings going forward. 
Now  let’s  talk  about  China.  You  may  ask,  shouldn’t  we  also  devalue  the  peso,  after  all  a 
currency war seems to be in play? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Textbooks describe competitive devaluation as a “beggar thy neighbor policy”. But that said, 
we  know  that  policy  makers  will  always  do  what  they  believe  would  be  best  for  their  own 
specific  needs,  sometimes  without  much  concern  for  the  impact  of  their  actions  on  other 
jurisdictions. 
This brings to mind a higher policy consideration – the principle of “enlightened self-interest” 
as  espoused  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements.  BIS  General  Manager  Jaime 
Caruana said that while it may seem that “keeping one’s house in order” is good defense, 
having a policy mindset of also taking into account spillovers of one’s actions may lead to 
improved  overall  welfare.  After  all,  we  share  the  same  space,  so  to  speak,  and  the  same 
spillovers  may  “spill  back”  to  one’s  economy.  My  own  appreciation  of  this  principle  is  that 
seeking only one’s own goals may lead us to sub-optimal results. 
Given the size of our domestic market, we don’t think there is compelling reason to deviate 
from our current FX policy of allowing the markets to broadly determine the exchange rate. 
Just as we did during the period of strong capital inflows in earlier years, we will allow the 
exchange rate to adjust to market conditions also during this period when the potential for 
capital outflows may increase. 
The BSP will not go against the fundamental trend in the FX market, but we reserve scope 
for official action to smoothen volatilities that could disrupt business planning and dislodge 
inflation expectations. 
This policy is both efficient and equitable because the exchange rate affects different sectors 
of the economy, differently. Depreciation benefits exporters and other dollar earners, while it 
weighs on the debt burden of borrowers in foreign currency and increases the input cost of 
importers. 
I  hear  some  murmurs,  even  see  some  quizzical  looks. Well,  let  me  borrow  a  phrase  from 
Stan Fischer when he spoke at Jackson Hole over the weekend. I don’t wish to “disappoint 
your rational expectations” that I won’t tell you whether a breach of a certain exchange rate 
level would worry the BSP or not. 
Actually,  the  BSP  has  no  “magical”  exchange  rate.  As  I  have  repeatedly  said,  the  BSP 
doesn’t target specific exchange rate levels. But, we would be concerned if the rate is going 
too fast in one direction or the other, in a manner that is not consistent with fundamentals. 
As you may be aware, the Philippines enjoys a current account surplus. In fact, our current 
account  has  been  in  surplus  for  over  a  decade  now  supported  by  remittances,  which 
continue to be “volatility-proof” and receipts from BPO services. This is important to bear in 
mind – because, at the end of the day, investors will discriminate. And, it has generally been 
the  case  that  economies  with  strong  external  liquidity  positions  have  been  better  able  to 
minimize the impact of external shocks on their domestic economy and financial markets. 
Moving on to oil price developments. The most often asked question in relation to oil is – Is 
the  BSP  concerned  with  deflation,  especially  given  the  latest  inflation  outturns  have  been 
below 1 pct. and the fact that our forecast for August inflation is 0.2 to 1 pct.? 
With  global  growth  prospects  weakening,  global  oil  prices  may  remain  soft.  Fuel  and  fuel-
related items account for about 9 pct. of the items in the CPI. It stands to reason therefore 
that  domestic  inflation  can  be  expected  to  also  be  soft  going  forward.  That  said,  we  see 
upside  factors  to  inflation.  These  include:  1)  that  domestic  wages  are  rigid  downward 
(especially  the  mandated  minimum  and  related  benefits);  2)  El  Nino  is  projected  to  be 
prolonged,  and  may  likely  intensify;  and  3)  that  potential  economic  output  is  estimated  at 
around 5.5 to 6.5 pct. Current actual (1H 2015) output is at a respectable 5.3 pct. 
In  other  words,  there  are  countervailing  factors  against  low  oil  prices.  Our  assessment 
therefore  is  that  the  risks  to  deflation  are  contained.  But  we  remain  watchful  of  the 
supply/demand conditions in the international oil markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Closer to home, let’s talk about GDP. Q1 was revised downward to 5 pct. Q2 was announced 
to  be  5.6  pct.,  driven  by  consumption.  Government  spending  accelerated  in  Q2  and 
contributed  positively  to  growth. With these, full-year  growth  is  looking  to  be  more modest 
than the government’s growth target of 7–8 pct. 
A question you may have in the back of your minds – Is there a need for the BSP to loosen 
policy settings to support growth, especially with the prospect of lower global growth? 
From indications, there may be no need at this time for economic stimulus from monetary 
policy.  The  government  has  fiscal  space.  As  they  did  in  Q2,  government  should  step  up 
spending  on  the  vital  infrastructure  needed  for  economic  growth  to  be  sustainable.  The 
forthcoming  election  spending,  though  a  one-time  shot  in  the  arm,  could  also  provide 
economic stimulus. 
What the BSP will do to help raise the growth trajectory – in addition to ensuring a low and 
stable  inflation  environment  –  is  to  further  enhance  banking  sector  policy  to  cement  the 
strength of the banking system. The BSP will also continue to pursue market reform to help 
establish the financial market infrastructure for the efficient intermediation of funds between 
fund sources and users. 
NEDA  projects  that  a  more  realistic  economic  growth  rate  for  2015  is  6–6.5  pct.  It  is 
comforting that even at these levels, the Philippines would likely still be among the fastest 
growing economies in the region. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I’ve  covered  a  lot  of  ground  this  afternoon.  Let  me  summarize  by 
saying: The BSP is watchful of domestic and external conditions. And, we are ready to take 
the  appropriate  policy  actions,  as  and  when  needed,  to  minimize  the  potential  adverse 
impact of risks to the economy. 
In the pursuit of creating growth opportunities for the economy, the BSP continues to look to 
the whole market’s continued support. 
I  know  market  players  live  for  volatility.  It  is  what  gets  your  juices  going.  But  let  me  just 
provide some words of advice: These are not your typical “vols.” There is not necessarily any 
historical  price  action  that  you  could  confidently  go  back  to,  to  calculate  your  VARs. 
Therefore, be very careful of any new products and markets that you are looking to deal in. 
Be sure you understand these well. Have the necessary credit, market and operational risk 
mitigants in place. 
Finally, this is not a bout of volatility that is likely to go away quickly. So, if you are in this 
game for the long haul, you need to temper animal spirits with a healthy dose of reflection 
and humility. 
I think I’ve said enough for now. Let me end here. I wish you all  well. Thank you for your 
attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
