  François Groepe: South Africa’s structural unemployment challenge – 
the most important issues to be addressed to place South Africa on a 
sustainable growth path in an effort to reduce unemployment levels 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, on 
the  occasion  of  the  release  of  the  14th  UASA  South  African  Employment  Report, 
Johannesburg, 30 April 2015. 
 Chairperson, ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to be part of the proceedings of the day, as 
we gather here for the release of the 14th UASA Employment Report. This publication has 
grown  in  stature  over  the  years  and  has  earned  itself  a  place  amongst  various  high-level 
publications informing on the state of the South African labour market. 
This  morning,  I  shall  focus  on  the  most  important  issues  to  be  addressed  to  place  South 
Africa on a sustainable growth path in an effort to, amongst others reduce the unemployment 
levels. 
South  Africa  counts,  among  its  key  challenges,  its  high  level  of  structural  unemployment 
which  is  exacerbated  by  the  levels  of  poverty  and  inequality  in  the  country.  These 
challenges, in turn, give rise to a host of other socio-economic and socio-political challenges. 
Earlier policies, such as the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative (ASGISA) (2006), as 
well  as  the  more  recent  long-term  vision  for  South  Africa,  as  captured  in  the  National 
Development  Plan  first  released  in  2012,  highlight  the  requirement for  economic growth  in 
excess of 5 per cent on a sustained basis to meaningfully make inroads towards reducing the 
high levels of unemployment. Prior to the global financial crisis in 2008/09, some progress 
had been made in reducing overall levels of unemployment in the country as strong global 
and local economic growth resulted in higher levels of output leading to increased demand 
for labour. South Africa, in fact, had experienced one of its longest periods of uninterrupted 
economic growth – 55 quarters of growth averaging between 3 and 5,6 per cent annually. As 
the  global  economic  growth  recovered  after  the  financial  crisis,  albeit  hesitantly  and 
unevenly,  South  Africa  lagged  behind, growing at  rates  well  below  its  potential,  which  had 
been  negatively  been  impacted  by  strained  relations  and  industrial  action,  but  also  by 
structural deficiencies such as the electricity load shedding. 
While  South  Africa  has  performed  well  in  managing  to  largely  contain  inflation,  within  the 
inflation target range, and no doubt assisted in part by the lower international food and oil 
prices, the country has been less successful in matching levels of growth as experienced in 
other  developing  countries.  Within  the  BRICS  partnership,  South  Africa  is  the  smallest 
economy in terms of its gross domestic product and population size and had both the lowest 
levels of average growth and employment over the past decade. Of some concern is the fact 
that  South  Africa  continues  to  experience  levels  of  inequality  that  are ranked  amongst  the 
most elevated in the world. All these indicators require a renewed focus on both the basic 
drivers  of  development,  such  as  education  enhancement  and  interventions  that  directly 
address structural barriers to growth and employment. 
Broadly speaking, any effective solution should not only focus on stimulating growth in key 
industries,  but  those  industries  that  are  lagging  should  actively  be  engaged  through 
appropriate  policies.  Such  policies  should  improve  the  micro-foundations  of  economic 
growth, which include education and skills training, industrial and trade policy, labour market 
policies and competition policy. 
Along  these  lines  the  National  Development  Plan  (NDP)  has  as  its  central  focus  the 
elimination  of  unemployment,  poverty  and  inequality  by  2030.  Within  this  Plan,  nine  main 
challenges are being highlighted, namely: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
          The elevated levels of unemployment; 
The standard of education, which for a large proportion of learners is arguably of an 
undesirable quality; 
Infrastructure,  which  is  not  always  optimally  located,  and  which  at  times  is  under-
maintained and insufficient to foster higher growth rates; 
Spatial patterns which exclude the poor from the benefits of development; 
An  economy  is  that  could  be  described  as  overly  and  unsustainably  resource 
intensive; 
A widespread disease burden that is compounded by the challenges faced by the 
public health system; 
Public services that are uneven and often of in certain circumstances of inadequate 
quality; 
The corruption levels that is perceived to be wide spread; and 
The perception that exist regarding the divisions within the broader society. 
• 
• 
The  NDP  provides  a  useful  framework  by  which  these  issues  can  be  addressed  in  a 
systematic and structured manner as government actively pursues its implementation. The 
challenge remains the alignment of medium-term and short-term planning by government in 
its  efforts to  effectively  implement the  NDP.  The  adoption  by  cabinet  of  the  Medium  Term 
Strategic Framework for 2014 to 2019 for each outcome of the NDP is clear evidence of the 
government’s commitment towards the successful implementation of the NDP. 
The key pillars of the Medium Term Strategic Framework comprise the following: 
• 
Infrastructure programmes must lead to a crowding in of productive investment as 
government  spending  boosts  the  demand  for  goods,  leading  to  increased  private 
demand for new output sources, such as factories; 
Growth  and  employment  of  the  productive  sectors  of  our  economy  should  be 
supported; 
Red tape and the unintended consequences of regulation should be reduced; 
Skills planning, to address the needs of the economy, should be improved; 
The level of employment in agriculture should be increased; 
Growth and investment should be supported by sustainable fiscal policies; 
Strong  partnerships,  with  business  and  labour,  should  be  built  and  workplace 
conflict should be reduced; 
Public Employment Programmes should be scaled up; 
Economic  opportunities  for  historically  excluded  and  vulnerable  groups  should  be 
expanded; and 
Investment in research, development and innovation should be supported. 
• 
Returning now to the NDP, as part of a broader development agenda, business investment is 
being  identified  as  a  cornerstone  to  create  11-million  jobs  and  eliminate  poverty  in  South 
Africa by 2030. It sets a target of reducing the unemployment rate from its current level of 
25 per cent to 14 per cent in 2020 and to 6 per cent in 2030 and to increase the labour force 
participation  rate from  54  per  cent  to  65  per  cent.  Per  capita  income  is  also  envisaged  to 
increase from around R50 000 to around R120 000 per year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  NDP  suggests  that  some  labour  regulations  be  relaxed  in  an  effort  to  encourage 
business enterprises to employ more easily, as well as lower entry-level wages to facilitate a 
higher uptake of young people in the jobs market. Some of the proposals in this Plan will no 
doubt  fall  within  the  area  of  public  discourse  on  possible  contestation  and  will  require 
continued  intense  negotiations  among  all  social  partners  in  an  effort  to  reach  broad 
consensus in order to secure its implementation. 
The Plan takes a pragmatic and broad-based approach to the challenges that South Africa 
faces in eradicating unemployment. The role that the Plan sees for government’s intervention 
is  permeated  with  a  willingness to  work  with  the  private  sector,  as  the  plan  leans  towards 
less  regulation  of  the  economy.  The  Plan  envisages  small  and  expanding  companies 
creating around 90 per cent of the new employment opportunities in the economy in the next 
20  years.  This  will  place  South  Africa  in  step  with  global  employment  trends.  Small  firms 
would  benefit  from  bold  proposals  to  drastically  reduce  so-called  “red  tape”  and  improve 
employment and practices and procedures. 
The  NDP  strives  towards  an  economy  that  will  be  more  enabling  for  business  entry  and 
expansion,  with a focus on credit and market access. Cognisance is taken of the fact that 
any  inclusive  growth  strategy  that  does  not  harness  the  creativity,  innovation  and 
competitiveness of the private sector is unlikely to succeed. Regulatory reform and support 
being advocated by the Plan has the intention to boost mass entrepreneurship. 
The  topic  of  strained  labour  relations  is  also  addressed,  indicating  that  it  is  inconceivable, 
that  the  economy  will  evolve  into  a  more  labour-intensive  structure  if  tensions  between 
employers  and  labour  persist.  Ways  need  to  be  found  to  reduce  the  probability  of  the 
occurrence  of  lengthy  strikes,  such  as those  experienced  during  last  year. These  tensions 
need to be dealt with in a transparent and honest manner and not only by amending labour 
legislation,  in  order  to  be  conducive  of  enhanced  labour  absorbing  growth.  As  the  social 
partners,  re-establish trust  among themselves,  it  will  go  some  way  towards the  process of 
reinforcing their social pact. 
Central to the propositions made in the NDP related to the jobs market, is the statement that 
over  a  20-year  horizon  wage  growth  needs  to  be  linked  to  productivity  growth  as  it  is  not 
feasible to sustain a labour absorbing path, unless both are growing in tandem. 
In an effort to enhance the labour absorption rate of the economy, the Plan has already led to 
a  reduction  in  the  initial  cost  of  employing  young  labour-market  entrants,  through  the 
implementation of the Employment Tax Incentive, Act no 26 of 2013 which came into effect 
on  1  January  2014.  This  initiative  compliments  government’s  measures  to  create  jobs  for 
young  workers  and  those  in  special  economic  zones  through  offering  tax  incentives  to 
employers to encourage the employment of these workers. This initiative, according to the 
Minister of Finance, had led to 200 000 young people being employed, which is significantly 
in excess of government’s initial expectation of 70 000 within six months of implementation. 
Furthermore, newly introduced changes to labour legislation, in general, hold the promise of 
improving  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market,  as  it  better  addresses  discrimination,  and 
advances the approach of equal pay for work of equal value. These changes will not only 
benefit  young  people,  but  will  result  in  a  more  equitable  labour  relations  environment  in 
general. 
Over  and  above  the  focus  on  the  jobs  market,  the  NDP  also  advances  some  frank 
recommendations  in  areas  such  as  education,  health  and  the  public  sector,  as  part  of  the 
creation of a nurturing and enabling environment for business to prosper. A set of integrated 
actions is being proposed to address the issue of inefficiency and other challenges related to 
public service delivery. To improve educational outcomes, the Plan directly confronts issues, 
such as teacher performance, appointment procedures and accountability. The challenges in 
public  health  management  are  also  addressed  and  in  building  a  capable  state,  detailed 
recommendations  are  made  on  professionalising  the  public  service.  Some  areas  of 
Government,  where  improvements  have  occurred,  such  as  the  South  African  Revenue 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Service  through  an  improvement  in  operational  procedures,  management  and  delivery 
systems should be emulated by other organs of state. 
An initiative worth mentioning in terms of already improved processes in the public sector is 
the introduction of an e-portal on 1 April 2015 that will reshape the South African government 
supply chain processes, particularly as it relates to government tenders. It is envisaged that 
the public will eventually be able to see all tenders, bidders and their prices quoted, as well 
as minutes of bid committee meetings. Over and above the e-portal, a national database of 
all approved and compliant suppliers and an “online shop”, where government departments 
will  place  orders  of  less  than  R500  000,  will  be  established.  Initiatives  such  as  these  are 
laudable  and  will  contribute  towards  increased  efficiencies  in  service  delivery  which  is 
essential for improved growth prospects. 
The focus within the NDP on the eradication of corruption from the system is most welcome, 
in taking cognisance of the fact that for state officials to act in a corrupt fashion, requires a 
willing  counter  party  from  the  private  sector  is  necessary.  The  introduction  of  the 
government’s new tender process, as already mentioned, will go a long way in exposing and 
limiting possible corruption within the system. 
The NDP recognises the need for increased fixed investment in the economy and has set a 
target of raising the level of gross fixed capital formation from around 20 per cent of GDP 
currently,  to  as  high  as  30  per  cent  by  2030.  Inarguably,  well-planned  and  appropriate 
infrastructural  development  is  conducive  to  higher  levels  of  economic  growth  and  job 
creation.  The  NDP  clearly  distinguishes  between  investment  that  generates  immediate 
financial returns, such as in airports and power stations and those projects where financial 
returns are far less measurable, such as in schools and hospitals. The role of business in 
increasing the overall level of fixed investment in the country will most appropriately lie in the 
area  of  fixed  investment  where  financial  returns  are  more  evident,  through  public  private 
partnerships.  International  experience  has  shown  that  private  sector  participation  in 
infrastructure  provision  is  most  successful  in  the  transport  and  energy  sectors.  The 
participation of the private sector contributes to effective cost containment through the profit 
motive, improves efficiency and leads to more sustainable jobs through more ambitious skills 
transfer initiatives. 
An  area,  in  which  the  private  sector  can  excel,  given  appropriate  incentives,  is  that  of 
research and development which could act as a driver of competitiveness and job creation. A 
number of large R&D projects have already shown feasibility and have the ability to develop 
into  new  industries,  creating  substantial  opportunities  for  increased  employment,  foreign 
revenue income, beneficiation and competitiveness. 
Many  infrastructure  investment  projects  can  act  as  an  attractive  asset  class  for  private 
investors, due to the predictable nature of returns, thereby providing a low risk investment 
profile.  Infrastructure  investment  projects  may  provide  a  means  whereby  a  consistent  real 
return over inflation can be attained through a low volatility investment vehicle. Private sector 
funding is, however, subject to policy certainty so that private investors can be assured that 
they will be able to realise a return on their investments. 
The NDP proposes that Regulatory Impact Assessments be done on all new regulations, and 
that an expert panel be appointed to prepare a comprehensive regulatory review for small- 
and  medium-sized  firms  in  an  effort  to  assess  whether  special  conditions  are  required  for 
such entities. To this end, a new unit is being created in the Presidency to carry out thorough 
impact  assessments  of  both  new  and  existing  legislation  and  regulations  within  a  Social 
Economic Impact Assessment System that will ensure alignment with the NDP and reduce 
the risk of unintended consequences. 
The continued drive towards the establishment of a viable renewable energy sector in South 
Africa should be supported and is an example of an area in which small businesses could 
rapidly  gain  traction,  as  countries  become  more  inclined  to  embrace  a  Green  Growth 
development approach, as we enter the so-called Solar Age. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  proper  implementation  of  the  NDP  will  be  conducive  to  an  increased  level  of 
entrepreneurship  in  the  economy,  as  the  ease  of  doing  business  improves.  The  obvious 
outcome of such a process will be the creation of more sustainable jobs. Small businesses 
generally  have  the  capacity  to  attract  those  who  are  low  to  moderately  skilled  and  are, 
therefore, best placed to recruit from among the significant pool of unemployed workers.  
The NDP is already facilitating the bringing together of various stakeholders in the economy 
within  an  environment  of  common  purpose.  The  NDP  thus  constitutes  a  powerful  and 
integrated development agenda for the state and the whole of South Africa, and for the Plan 
to succeed it should continuously be translated into action plans, with clear milestone along 
the way, within realistic time frames. 
To yield relatively swift results, in terms of improved growth, the following two focus areas 
deserve mentioning. The first is a better integration of the South African economy with that of 
Africa.  This  will  indeed  be  beneficial  through  boosting  interregional  trade,  investment  and 
capital flows, and allow the domestic economy to tap into the more vibrant growth rates being 
experienced in the rest of sub-Saharan Africa. It is estimated that an effective integration with 
the  sub-continent  could  add  as  much  as  1,5  per  cent  to  South  Africa’s  growth  rate. 
Furthermore,  South  Africa  should  capitalise  on  its  comparative  advantages,  related  to 
physical, financial and telecommunication infrastructure to attract international firms with the 
aspiration to gain a foothold in Africa. 
A  study,  recently  conducted  by  the  World  Bank,  identified  three  areas  of  opportunity  to 
improve this country’s export competitiveness, namely, boosting local competition by opening 
South African markets to domestic and foreign entry; promoting deeper regional integration 
in goods and services within Africa; and alleviating infrastructure bottlenecks. 
This brings us to the second factor which would meaningfully enhance South Africa’s growth 
potential,  namely  the  forceful  implementation  of  the  R1  trillion  infrastructure  expenditure 
programme of government. Through multiplier effects, and in terms of job creation, especially 
with  regard  to  the  promotion  of  low-skilled  jobs,  economic  growth  can  be  materially 
enhanced.  Several  studies  have  shown  that  investment  in  economic  infrastructure  has the 
potential to act as one of the most effective policies in terms of promoting economic growth. 
Employment is created during the construction phase of such infrastructure projects, as well 
as during the operational life thereof. 
Moreover, the key driver of private sector investment is public sector investment as it inspires 
both business and consumer confidence. A combination of these two driving forces has the 
potential to easily boost South Africa’s growth to rates well in excess of current levels, putting 
this country on a higher road to economic prosperity, thus hopefully reducing unemployment 
levels,  poverty  levels  and  the  degree  of  inequality.  I  further  believe  that  it  will  positively 
contribute to further restore the dignity of our fellow South Africans. 
South  Africans  at  times  can  tend  to  be  fairly  pessimistic.  The  challenges  we  face  are 
immense,  but  not  dissimilar  in  scale  and  extent  to  those  faced  not  only  by  developing 
economies but also developed economies. I however choose to be optimistic and do believe 
that we have many factors that do count in our favour and am convinced that with the right 
policy choices we can go a long way towards successfully addressing the triple challenges of 
structural unemployment, poverty and inequality. 
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
