  Mario Draghi: Plenary debate of the European Parliament on the ECB’s 
Annual Report 2013 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, to the 
plenary debate of the European Parliament on the ECB’s Annual Report 2013, Brussels, 25 
February 2015. 
 Mr Vice-President, 
Mr Vice-President of the Commission, 
Honourable Members of Parliament, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to participate in this plenary debate. To lay the ground for our discussion, I 
would like to discuss three topics: the ECB’s monetary policy, focussing on the rationale for 
our  latest  monetary  policy  measures,  the  ECB’s  commitment  to  accountability  and 
transparency,  and  the  progress  towards  building  a  deeper  economic  and  monetary  union 
(EMU). I will thereby address most of the issues which the ECON Committee highlighted in 
its draft resolution. 
The ECB’s monetary policy 
For  several  quarters  now,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  been  on  a  continuous  downward 
trend.  At  the  same  time,  in  January  2015  market  participants  were  expecting  inflation  to 
return to levels closer to our policy aim only over a horizon which stretched well beyond any 
meaningful  definition  of  medium  term.  In  an  environment  of  weak  economic  recovery  and 
subdued  money  and  credit  developments,  risks  were  increasing  that  falling  inflation 
expectations would feed back into weakening actual inflation. Such a self-reinforcing process 
could have posed severe downside risks to our price stability objective. 
Against this  background,  we  judged  that  the  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  that  had 
been introduced in 2014 was insufficient. A more forceful monetary policy response became 
necessary. With key interest rates at their lower bound, the Governing Council of the ECB 
considered outright purchases of public securities to be the only remaining instrument which 
could be activated on a sufficient scale to broaden and strengthen the measures already in 
place. Thus, we decided in January to launch an expanded asset purchase programme. 
Under the programme the Eurosystem will continue its purchases of simple and transparent 
asset-backed  securities and  of  covered  bonds. In  addition,  we  will  start purchasing  on  the 
secondary  market  investment-grade  securities  issued  by  euro  area  governments,  public 
agencies  and  European  institutions.  The  purchases  will  start  in  March.  The  combined 
purchases of public and private sector securities will amount to €60 billion per month. The 
programme  is  intended  to  last  until  end-September  2016.  In  any  case,  it  will  last  until  the 
Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation which is consistent 
with its aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
As in the case of the existing purchases of private sector securities, the purchases of public 
securities have a high transmission potential to the real economy. They will further support a 
broad based easing of financial conditions in the euro area, including those relevant for the 
borrowing conditions of euro area firms and households. In fact, we have already seen some 
positive effects of our measures. Financial conditions in money and bond markets throughout 
the euro area have eased further. Accordingly, lending rates to households and firms have 
come down considerably. Loan dynamics have continued to recover, with the growth in credit 
to  the  private  sector  turning  positive  in  December  for  the  first  time  since  mid-2012.  Also, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
evidence  from  the  recent  January  2015  Bank  Lending  Survey  provides  positive  signals, 
showing a further improvement in credit standards for all loan categories in the fourth quarter 
of  2014.  Moreover,  most  recently,  we  have  also  seen  a  measurable  improvement  in 
indicators of business and consumer confidence. 
Overall, our measures will support economic activity, underpin the firm anchoring of medium 
to long-term inflation expectations, and contribute to a sustained return of inflation towards a 
level below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
The ECB’s commitment to accountability and transparency 
Today’s session is also an opportunity to take a wider perspective on ECB policies. In that 
context, let me touch upon a topic that is of high relevance to you: the ECB’s accountability 
and  transparency.  Accountability  of  the  central  bank  is  the  essential  counterpart  to  its 
independence. To this end, the ECB has an elaborate framework to discharge accountability 
to European citizens and your house, and today’s debate is a key element of this framework. 
Taking  up  new  tasks  in  the  supervisory  field  required  adding  further  elements  to  this 
framework,  and  I  believe  the  first  months  of  operation  of  the  SSM  have  proven  our 
commitment to accountability in this domain as well. 
But accountability would not be meaningful without an appropriate degree of transparency. 
From  the  start,  due  also  to  its  unique  institutional  set-up,  the  ECB  has  strived  to  be 
transparent.  For  instance,  we  were  the  first  major  central  bank  to  hold  a  regular  press 
conference immediately after our policy meetings. The ECB also regularly publishes a variety 
of data on the execution of its monetary policy operations and the liquidity conditions of the 
Eurosystem. 
More  recently,  we  have  decided  to  go  one  step further  and to  publish  regular  accounts of 
Governing Council monetary policy discussions, starting with the meeting on 21–22 January 
2015, the account of which was published last Thursday. Through these accounts, we are 
enriching the communication of the rationale behind our monetary policy decisions and seek 
to give a sense of the discussion that has taken place among Governing Council members 
and the main arguments that were exchanged. We believe that this will enable members of 
the  public  and  markets to  improve  their  understanding  of  our  assessment  of  the  economy 
and our policy responses in the light of evolving conditions, our so-called “reaction function”. 
In the current circumstances, it will also underpin our forward guidance on interest rates. It 
will thereby further enhance the effectiveness of our monetary policy. 
The future of EMU governance 
The past few years have been challenging for the conduct of our monetary policy in view of 
the environment of financial fragmentation, which brings me to the topic of the foundation of 
our economic and monetary union. At the beginning of EMU stood a clear commitment by 
Member States to converge economically and institutionally. Progress has been significant 
when it comes to common institutions. We now have not only one currency and one central 
bank,  but  also  one  supervisor,  one  resolution  authority  and  one  crisis-management 
mechanism. These institutions are built on the principles of shared sovereignty and of strong 
enforcement  of  common  rules.  Together,  these  institutions  clearly  set  the  euro  area  apart 
from the arrangements that were in place prior to the start of EMU. 
But we have not yet reached the stage of a genuine EMU. Economic convergence has not 
been  as  sustainable  as  it  was  hoped  for  at  the  outset.  This  still  puts  at  risk  the  long-term 
success of monetary union when faced with an important shock. In my view, there are two 
complementary  responses  to  address  this  situation:  First,  the  economies  of  euro  area 
Member States need to become more resilient. This requires sound public finances and, in 
particular at the current juncture, decisive reforms of their economic structures. Fully applying 
the strengthened economic governance framework will support this objective. Second, in the 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  medium to longer term, we need to move from a system of rules and guidelines for national 
economic policy making to a system of further sovereignty sharing within common institutions 
so as to strengthen our economic policy governance. A common rule is only as strong as the 
common institution that can enforce it. The discussions on the new Four Presidents’ Report 
will certainly provide a good opportunity to think further on these matters, and I am looking 
forward to your views in the upcoming Berès report on the economic governance framework. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
