  Kikuo Iwata: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Kikuo  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Miyagi, 4 February 2015. 
Accompanying slides can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in Miyagi Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity to 
express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s 
Sendai Branch. 
It  is  almost  four  years  since  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake,  which  caused  immense 
damage  to  the  Tohoku  region.  I  renew  my  deepest  condolences  to  the  victims  of  the 
earthquake and tsunami. In addition, I express my great respect to all of you who have made 
every effort to swiftly rebuild their businesses soon after the disaster and to reconstruct the 
cities thereafter. 
In visiting Sendai this time, I have come with an expectation to confirm the current state of 
the disaster-stricken areas and to listen in person to the recent business sentiment and the 
situation of rebuilding in various fields as well as your thoughts on the Bank’s policies and 
activities. 
Today,  before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  will  briefly  explain  the  recent  economic 
developments  at  home  and  abroad,  and  then  touch  on  some  notable  points  regarding 
monetary policy. Following my speech, I would like to have your views on the actual situation 
of the local economy and your candid opinions about the Bank of Japan. 
I. 
The current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
The current situation of Japan’s economy 
A. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend. Although the effects of the 
decline in demand after the consumption tax hike in April 2014 have still been seen in part, 
those effects have been waning on the whole. 
Before going into the details about the current situation of Japan’s economy, I will talk about 
the developments in overseas economies (the left table in Chart 1). The U.S. economy has 
continued  to  recover  steadily,  led  by  private  demand.  On  the  back  of  robust  employment 
conditions,  the  household  sector  has  increased  consumption  and  housing  investment. 
Business  sentiment  and  production  have  maintained  the  momentum for improvement,  and 
business  fixed  investment  has  continued  to  recover.  As  for  the  European  economy,  some 
weakness  in  the  momentum  for  recovery  has  recently  been  seen  in  part,  due  mainly  to 
concern over geopolitical risk. The Chinese economy has continued with a stable growth for 
now, underpinned by an improvement in external demand and the authorities’ measures to 
support  economic  activity,  although  there  is  concern  over  adjustments  in  the  real  estate 
market  and  over  a  slowdown  in  fixed  asset  investment  in  manufacturers.  Other  emerging 
economies as a whole have been losing steam, as an improvement has been seen in many 
countries  and  regions  but  economic  stagnation  in  countries  facing  structural  issues  or 
political instability has been protracted. Specifically, the economies of the NIEs, ASEAN, and 
India have shown a pick-up or a slightly moderate recovery. By contrast, the economies of 
Brazil  and  Russia  have  remained  increasingly  lackluster  due  mainly  to  weak  domestic 
demand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Let  me  turn  to  the  recent  developments  in  Japan’s  economy  amid  such  an  external 
environment. Exports, which had been more or less flat, have shown signs of picking up (the 
right table in Chart 1). By region, exports to the United States and Asia have increased. As 
for the United States, exports of capital goods and parts used in overseas production sites 
have  been  increasing,  and,  as  for  Asia,  exports  of  capital  goods  and  parts  as  well  as  IT-
related goods have been increasing. 
With  regard  to  domestic  demand,  in  the  corporate  sector,  business  fixed  investment  has 
been on a moderate increasing trend as corporate profits have continued to improve. Due to 
the  decline  in  demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike,  inventory  stocks  increased  and 
production declined. But as inventory adjustments have progressed in line with the picking up 
of  final  demand,  production  of  late  has  bottomed  out.  In  the  household  sector,  against  a 
backdrop  of  a  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation,  private 
consumption has remained resilient as a trend. As for durable consumer goods, which were 
affected substantially by the effects of the decline in demand following the consumption tax 
hike,  those  effects  have  recently  been  waning.  Housing  investment,  which  continued  to 
decline  following  the  front-loaded  increase,  has  recently  started  to  bottom  out  (Chart  2). 
Looking somewhat in detail about labor market conditions, they have continued to improve 
steadily. The unemployment rate has recently been around 3.5 percent, which is at the same 
level as around 1997, and the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has risen to the highest 
level since 1992. The nominal wage per employee has risen moderately. The year-on-year 
rate of increase in both monthly wages per worker for full-time employees and hourly wages 
of part-time employees has accelerated at a moderate pace. Later, I will talk in more detail 
about this employment and income situation in the context of its implications for prices and 
monetary policy. 
With regard to the price developments, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax 
hike, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh 
food) was 0.5 percent for December 2014. 
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
B. 
The Bank of Japan releases the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices semiannually  in 
April  and  October.  At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  last  month,  the  Policy  Board 
members,  as  their  interim  assessment,  revised  their  projections  of  real  GDP  and  the  CPI 
made  last  October.  With  regard  to  the  outlook,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue 
growing at a pace above its potential as a trend, while it will be affected by the front-loaded 
increase  and  subsequent  decline  in  demand  prior  to  and  after  the  consumption  tax  hike. 
Exports are expected to increase moderately mainly against a background of the recovery in 
overseas  economies.  As  for  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to 
continue  with  a  moderate  increasing  trend  with  corporate  profits  following  their  improving 
trend. Private consumption is expected to remain resilient with the employment and income 
situation continuing to improve steadily, and the effects of the decline in demand after the 
consumption tax hike are expected to dissipate gradually. Reflecting those developments in 
demand both at home and abroad, industrial production is expected to resume its moderate 
increase. 
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, excluding the direct effects of 
the consumption tax hike, is likely to slow for the time being, reflecting the decline in energy 
prices. Meanwhile, the outlook for the underlying trend remains unchanged from that made 
last October, based on expectations that an improvement in the output gap continues as a 
trend  and  that  the  increasing  trend  in  the  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations 
continues. Taking a closer look at various surveys, the expected inflation rates remain likely 
to accelerate steadily, despite the recent decline in crude oil prices (Chart 3). In this interim 
assessment,  on  the  assumption  that  crude  oil  prices  will  rise  moderately  from  the  recent 
levels, the Bank expects that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to accelerate 
gradually  as  the  base  effect  of  the  falling  crude  oil  prices  dissipates  and  reach  around 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2 percent  around  the  middle  of  the  projection  period;  that  is,  in  or  around  fiscal  2015. 
Thereafter, Japan’s economy is expected to shift to a growth path that sustains such inflation 
in a stable manner. 
Let me explain the outlook in specific figures (Chart 4). As for the median of the Policy Board 
members’  projections  in  this  interim  assessment,  compared  with  those  made  in  October 
2014, real GDP growth for fiscal 2014 will likely be lower at minus 0.5 percent, but it will likely 
be  higher  at  plus  2.1  percent  for  fiscal  2015,  and  at  plus  1.6  percent  for  fiscal  2016  due 
mainly  to  the  positive  effects  from  the  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  and  the 
government’s fiscal stimulus package. With regard to the CPI, the outlook for the underlying 
trend remains unchanged. Compared with that made in October 2014, the year-on-year rate 
of increase will likely be lower toward fiscal 2015, due to the significant decline in crude oil 
prices, as already mentioned. That for fiscal 2016 will likely be more or less unchanged from 
the October forecast. 
Risks  to  such  baseline  scenario  include  developments  in  the  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies, the prospects regarding the debt problem and the risk of low inflation 
being protracted in Europe, and the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
Now, I will talk about monetary policy that the Bank pursues. 
In January 2013, the Bank set the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-
year rate of change in the CPI; in other words, the introduction of an inflation target. 
Toward achieving this target, the Bank has been implementing aggressive monetary easing 
called quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) since April 2013, and expanded 
the measure in October 2014. 
These  measures  aim  at  converting  people’s  deflationary  mindset,  which  has  been  formed 
firmly amid the prolonged period of deflation, to the mindset that expects moderate inflation. 
That is, in other words, preparing a platform on which people can act on the assumption that 
prices continue to rise moderately. 
Therefore, in order to have the mindset convert proactively, I believe it is very important to 
thoroughly explain the Bank’s policy and deepen your understanding. 
Change in policy regime 
A. 
Whenever  I  am  asked  what  the  core  of  the  QQE  is,  I  answer  that  it  is  dispelling  the 
deflationary mindset through a regime change (Chart 5). 
One who first discussed economic policy by using the term “regime” was Professor Thomas 
J. Sargent, who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics in 2011. Professor Sargent is 
famous for  his  studies  in  the field  of  rational  expectations.  He  also  presented  a  view  on  a 
mechanism of how fiscal and monetary policies will influence the real economy. Namely, he 
indicated that economic policies are effective because people will respond to a regime that 
the policy authorities rely on. 
A policy regime is a term that is difficult for a proper Japanese translation. Tentatively, you 
can  consider  that  it  means  something  like  “a  system  of  rules  that  form  the  basis  of  policy 
choice”  or  “a  basic  framework  of  thinking.”  You  can  simply  say  “the  rules  of  a  game.”  A 
regime  change  in  a  policy  means  that  the  system  of  rules  that  forms  the  basis  of  policy 
choice changes. 
People’s behavioral pattern depends on the rules of a game which people are participating 
in. If the rules change, people’s behavior will also change. Why is such a self-evident truth 
important  to  economic  policy?  That  is  because  expectations  and  the  behavior  of  various 
economic entities, such as households and firms, will depend on whether a regime change in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  policy was to take place. Reflecting such expectations and the behavior, the resulting policy 
effects themselves would completely be different. 
For  example,  suppose  the  policy  authorities  facing  hyperinflation  embark  on  monetary 
tightening. If such policy is not perceived to be a long lasting measure, inflation will not be 
reined in because households’ and firms’ expectations for a future course of prices do not 
change  and  they  continue  to  behave  based  on  the  same  assumption  of  high  inflation.  By 
contrast,  if  the  policy  authorities’  firm  stance  toward  overcoming  inflation  would  gain 
credibility,  the  credible  policy  stance  will  lead  to  a  change  in  firms’  and  households’ 
expectations  for  future  policy  path,  together  with  their  behavior  based  on  that  renewed 
expectations. Accordingly, inflation will be contained in a self-fulfilling manner. 
Practical examples could be found in the ending of hyperinflation in the European countries 
after the World War I and in the emerging process from the Great Depression in Japan and 
the United States in the first half of the 1930s. 
The Bank’s current monetary policy is rooted in the point of departure where it changed its 
past policy regime to a different regime characterized by a view that “overcoming deflation 
can  be  achieved  through  aggressive  monetary  easing  because  both  inflation  and  deflation 
are ultimately monetary phenomena.” 
In  the  past,  the  Bank  pursued  various  monetary  easing  measures  as  a  front  runner  in 
monetary policy history, such as the introduction of zero interest rate policy and quantitative 
easing. Nevertheless, the Bank was not successful in getting out of deflation for a long time 
of  more  than  15  years.  One  reason  might  be  that  a  policy  regime  of  “deflation  can  be 
overcome through monetary policy” was not adopted, or, at the minimum, the Bank was not 
able to gain such credibility from private economic entities. 
Based on such bitter experience, through clearly hammering out a change in a policy regime, 
the Bank has currently been trying to dispel the deflationary mindset of households, firms, 
and financial institutions and to fundamentally alter their behavior. 
Transmission channels of the QQE 
B. 
For the policy regime change to gain credibility, a clear and tangible message needs to be 
delivered from the policy authorities. 
In  the  current  monetary  policy,  (a)  the  Bank  set  a  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  and 
strongly  committed  itself  to  achieve  that  target,  and  (b)  the  Bank  has  been  powerfully 
pursuing the QQE as a tangible action. With those, a change in a policy regime has been 
taking place (Chart 6). 
As strong downward pressure has been exerted on nominal interest rates through massive 
purchases of long-term government bonds under the QQE, people’s expected real interest 
rates  will  be  lowered,  given  that  a  change  in  a  policy  regime  raises  people’s  inflation 
expectations  (Chart  7).  Expected  real  interest  rates  are  subjective  expectations  of  “what 
interest rates in real terms will be when future price changes are taken into account,” and will 
have  various  influences  on  people’s  savings  and  investment  behavior  as  well  as  asset 
prices. 
As you may know, financial markets have responded most vibrantly to such a policy regime 
change,  and  a  rise  in  prices  of  risk  assets,  including  stocks  and  foreign  currency-
denominated  assets,  has  been  stimulating  private  consumption  through  wealth  effects 
(Chart 8).  In  addition,  the  correction  of  excessive  yen  appreciation  has  led  to  an  upturn  in 
profits of export-related firms mainly through an improvement in export profitability and to a 
marked increase in inbound tourism. 
Furthermore, prompted by a decline in expected real interest rates and an improvement in 
the income and financial footing, households and firms, which have been striving to increase 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  savings and holding of cash and deposits based on their deflationary mindset, are expected 
to expand housing investment and business fixed investment. 
As explained so far, a transmission mechanism that the ongoing monetary policy intends to 
operate is that a rise in inflation expectations prompted by the policy regime change – as an 
ignition point – will expand aggregate demand through multiple channels. 
Reasons of the bank’s expansion of the QQE 
C. 
Given the aforementioned view, you could naturally understand why the Bank expanded the 
QQE at the end of October last year (Chart 9). 
The  consumption  tax  hike  in  April  last  year  brought  about  substantial  fluctuations  in  the 
economy,  that  is,  a  front-loaded  increase  in  demand  immediately  before  the  hike  and  a 
subsequent decline after the hike. As somewhat weak demand, mainly for durable consumer 
goods like automobiles, was protracted, a substantial decline in crude oil prices also exerted 
downward pressure on prices (Chart 10). 
Weakness  in  demand  associated  with  the  consumption  tax  hike  already  waned,  and  the 
decline in crude oil prices will likely, over time, have a favorable impact on Japan’s economy 
and work to put upward pressure on prices. However, as developments in actual prices and 
inflation expectations will mutually feed back, if there is downward pressure on actual prices, 
even for a short term, we should take a risk into account that it will delay the conversion of 
the deflationary mindset. 
To  preempt  manifestation  of  such  risk  and  to  maintain  the  improving  momentum  of 
expectation  formation,  it  was  necessary  to  expand  the  QQE.  That  was  the  judgment  the 
Bank made at the end of last October. 
How to evaluate employment and wage developments 
D. 
As aggregate demand expands, ignited by a rise in inflation expectations, a virtuous cycle 
from production to income and spending operates, and thereafter, stable employment and an 
improvement in labor conditions would ensue. 
In that regard, as mentioned earlier, an improvement in the labor market conditions since last 
year, such as a sizable increase in the number of employees and a substantial improvement 
in  the  unemployment  rate  and  the  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio,  has  not  been 
interrupted  even  amid  the  seemingly  lackluster  real  GDP  growth  due  to  the  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike (Chart 11). 
As for the increase in the number of employees, there is criticism noting that only non-regular 
employment  was  increasing  in  number  while  regular  employment  was  not.  However,  that 
criticism  seems  to  mix  up  a  forward-looking  development  of  “gradually  increasing 
employment starting from non-regular employment,” which has been occurring as the pie of 
employment  as  a  whole  has  been  expanding,  with  a  backward-looking  development  of 
“replacing  regular  employment  with  non-regular employment,”  which  had  been  seen  in  the 
past. 
It  is  natural  that  non-regular  employment,  which  can  be  adjusted  relatively  flexibly,  will 
increase at the early stages of economic recovery. At this stage, we should fairly value the 
achievement  that  many  non-workers  have  gotten  a  job  and  become  able  to  earn  wage 
income. 
There  is  also  a  similar  criticism  regarding  the  continued  uptrend  in  wages  that  a  rise  in 
nominal wages has not been keeping up with a rise in consumer prices and thus real wages 
have been declining. 
On that point, it will be necessary to distinguish price increases due to demand expansion 
from those due to the effects of the consumption tax hike. Excluding the negative contribution 
of the consumption tax hike, both real wages of full-time workers and real hourly wages of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  part-time workers have not that much declined from 12 months earlier (Chart 12). The year-
on-year rate of change in real income of employees as a whole, excluding the effects of the 
consumption tax hike, has also been positive for nine consecutive months since March 2014 
(Chart 13). 
Therefore, in my view, a fair assessment of real wages would be that “while both a wage per 
worker and labor income as a whole have been increasing to the extent that matches price 
increases  brought  about  by  demand  expansion,  those  have  yet  to  rise  to  offset  also  the 
effects of the consumption tax hike.” 
In  the  case  of  stimulating  demand  through  monetary  easing,  normally,  as  a  rise  in  prices 
precedes  a  rise  in  nominal  wages,  real  wages  will  decline  at  initial  phases.  Because, 
however, there is a channel that a decline in real wages spurs firms’ labor demand, leading 
to an increase in employment and a decline in the unemployment rate, the declines in real 
wages at this point of time are not necessarily bad news. As employment conditions tighten, 
nominal wages will rise and downward pressure on real wages will start to wane. As workers 
will  be  able  to  work more  efficiently  along  with  production  increases,  labor  productivity  will 
rise. In such a manner, real wages will eventually start to increase (Chart 14). 
While monetary policy will surely influence the real economy, there is a sequence of steps for 
such influence to spread and thus it takes a certain length of time for the policy to come into 
full  effect.  In  addition,  Japan’s  economy  is  in  the  midst  of  tackling  a  difficult  issue  of 
overcoming  deflation  of  more  than  15  years.  I  would  request  your  patience,  with  a  good 
hope, while the virtuous cycle  –  in which an improvement in income encourages spending, 
leading to a further expansion of production and income  –  would make more progress as 
we move forward. 
Concluding remarks 
In conclusion, let me touch on the economy of Miyagi Prefecture. 
The regional economy is recovering moderately, with the decline in demand affected by the 
consumption  tax  hike  waning  gradually.  Somewhat  weak  developments  in  production  will 
continue.  Reflecting  the  demand  resulting  from  rebuilding  and  reconstructing,  public 
investment  has  been  increasing  and  housing  investment  has  remained  at  a  high  level, 
particularly  for  building  public  housing  for  people  affected  by  the  disaster.  Business  fixed 
investment  has  also  continued  to  be  on  an  increasing  trend  and  private  consumption  has 
remained resilient on the back of an improvement in the employment and income situation. 
Looking  at  reconstruction  in  the  disaster-stricken  areas,  I  have  recognized  that  while 
reconstruction has been steadily progressing, rebuilding day-to-day life and rehabilitation of 
livelihood are still half-way through. The pace of reconstruction differs between the regions 
and  the  difference  between  the  regions  seems  to  have  been  widening.  At  the  root,  there 
seems to be also a challenge that is common nationwide, namely, the declining population 
and aging. In addition, a labor shortage and prices of materials rising or remaining at high 
levels have been affecting not a little the progress in reconstruction in the disaster-stricken 
areas. How that will develop going forward also warrants due attention, in my view. 
I have heard that big events are scheduled for this year in Miyagi Prefecture. Sendai City will 
host  next  month  the  United  Nations  World  Conference  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction,  the 
cumulative  number  of  participants  of  which  is  expected  to  be  more  than  40,000,  and  has 
announced  itself  as  a  candidate  for  the  2016  Summit  Meeting.  The  city  has  disclosed  its 
plans to develop in the future as an international convention city as well as has aggressively 
been  trying  to  tap  inbound  demand.  An  improvement  and  reinforcement  of  transportation 
infrastructure will be promoted. The JR Ishinomaki and Sengoku lines that have been cut off 
by the disaster are scheduled to be reopened throughout, the Tozai subway line is expected 
to open in Sendai city, and the privatization of the Sendai airport is being pursued. I expect 
that,  triggered  by  those  events  and  creating  and  tapping  new  demand,  a  stream  of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  reconstruction  will  further  accelerate  and  vitalization  of  the  local  economy  will  gain 
momentum. 
The  Bank  conducts  an  operation  that  provides  long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  to 
financial  institutions  that  have  business  offices  in  the  disaster-stricken  areas  in  order  to 
support  their  efforts  to  meet  the  demand  for  funds  for  rebuilding  those  areas.  The  Bank 
expects to continue to play a part in rebuilding and developing the region’s economy while 
carefully  examining  financial  and  economic  developments,  including  those  of  the  disaster-
stricken areas. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
