  Peter Praet: The low interest rate environment in the euro area 
Keynote speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  a  Pension  Funds  Conference,  organised  by  the  Netherlands  Bank,  Bussum,  The 
Netherlands, 10 September 2015. 
 I would like to thank Jonathan Yiangou, John Hutchinson and Katri Mikkonen for their contributions to this speech. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me to address this conference. 
Over the last year conditions in fixed income markets have been, by any standards, highly 
unusual. Policy interest rates in the euro area have fallen to close to 0% – and negative in 
case of our deposit facility – while we have seen the 10-year German government bond yield 
drop as low as 0.075%, with at one point up to about 36% of euro area euro-denominated 
government bonds in negative territory. And though interest rates have retraced some way 
back up since mid-April, they clearly remain at historical lows. 
For investors whose business models are centred around fixed income this is undoubtedly a 
very  challenging  environment.  I  am,  of  course,  aware  of  the  challenges  the  pension  fund 
sector in particular is facing. What I would therefore like to focus on in my remarks today is 
the ensuing question: what are the conditions that will allow for rates to rise back to levels 
that, looking retrospectively, are considered “more normal”? 
My answer can be summarised as follows. Very low interest rates are not so much a choice 
of the central bank as a reflection of economic malaise in the global and euro area economy. 
Some of the drivers of that malaise are secular, which are more challenging for public policy 
to  affect.  But  others  are  related  to  demand  conditions  that  appear  weak  even  when 
compared with a long-term potential growth rate that is already disappointingly low. 
Such  persistent  economic  slack  relative  to  potential  can  be  reversed  through  targeted 
measures.  That  includes  tackling  the  cyclical  headwinds  that  are  dragging  on  aggregate 
demand; facilitating the process of balance sheet repair; and removing the structural barriers 
to  higher  real  growth  prospects,  which  can  itself  reinvigorate  demand  through  expectation 
and confidence channels. 
The  role  of  monetary  policy  is  mainly  to  provide  countercyclical  stabilisation  while  the 
economy  goes  through this  transition. When  the  economy  is  weak,  after  all,  disinflationary 
pressures  increase,  which  we  have  to  counter  to  deliver  on  our  mandate.  The  monetary 
policy measures currently in place in the euro area follow from this: they were decided as a 
direct  result  of  a  euro  area  inflation  rate  well  below  comfortable  levels  and  persistent 
weakness  in  the  economy.  And  in  meeting  our  objective,  we  support  growth  and  inflation, 
which in turn creates the conditions for interest rates to “normalise” once more. Of course, 
the  level  that  rates  will  return  to  in  the  future  is  dependent  upon  the  degree  to  which  the 
secular drivers, currently depressing rates, can be reversed. 
Challenges of the low interest rate environment 
Let me start, however, by briefly touching on the challenges the current situation poses for 
the pension fund sector, as well as for the insurance sector given its similar focus on fixed 
income  assets  and  the  prevalence  of  long-term  liabilities.  Large  euro  area  insurers  show 
quite reasonable profitability,1 albeit the aggregate picture masks substantial heterogeneity 
                                                
1   See ECB (2015), “Financial Stability Review”, May. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  across countries and types of business. Small and medium-sized, non-diversified life insurers 
with high policyholder guarantees are typically highly exposed to low yields and have found 
their  business  models  more  under  pressure.  For  pension  funds  the  impact  of  low  interest 
rates is strongest on those maintaining defined benefit schemes. 
The challenges for the insurance sector were underscored by the mixed performance in the 
stress  test  undertaken  in  2014  by  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions 
Authority  (EIOPA).2  While  the  top  30  European  insurers  all  fulfilled  the  Solvency  II 
requirements in the baseline scenario, 14% of participants – mainly small firms representing 
3%  of  total  assets  in  the  sample  –  did  not  do  so.  The  similar  exercise  currently  being 
conducted by EIOPA for pension funds will provide valuable insights into the strengths and 
vulnerabilities of the sector in the current market environment, an issue for which, at present, 
data is relatively scarce. 
The challenges, however, are not limited to the sectoral level. How insurance companies and 
pension funds adjust to the low interest rate environment could also have wider implications. 
With total assets of over €9 trillion, the strategies they employ to cope with low investment 
returns  could  clearly  have  spillover  effects  both  to  financial  markets  and  the  broader 
economy. 
One  dimension  of  adjustment  that  could  be  relevant  here  is  related  to  reallocation  of 
portfolios towards higher return assets. “Healthy risk-taking” – to borrow a famous expression 
coined by Ben Bernanke – is at the very heart of monetary transmission. When central banks 
lower  short-term  interest  rates  in  normal  times,  financial  entities  respond  by  shifting  their 
portfolio  allocations  in  precisely  the  direction  that  is  needed  to  advance  the  objectives  of 
monetary policy: they reinforce their duration exposure and step up risk-taking in general. By 
doing  so,  they  amplify  the  stimulus  that  central  banks  introduce  by  intervening  in  an 
otherwise  narrow  and  relatively  unimportant  market  segment  –  the  overnight  interbank 
market.  It  is  via  this  transmission  mechanism  that  monetary  policy  is  effective  at  all  in 
producing a generalised easing of financial conditions. 
But  that  said,  the  longer  low  rates  persist,  the  more  we  have  to  be  watchful  that  healthy 
diversification does not morph into under-appreciation of risk that may create fragilities down 
the road. This could impact a broad swathe of market participants given the importance of 
insurance and pension funds, in particular as providers of long-term funding. Data for large 
euro  area  insurers  provide  some  evidence  of  re-risking  via  a  gradual  rotation  of  portfolios 
towards the bonds of vulnerable euro area countries and emerging markets, and a maturity 
extension, although there are no indications yet of excessive risk-taking. 
Another dimension of adjustment that could have broader effects is related to the possible 
changes  in  saving  behaviour  generated  by  stronger  incentives  for  risk-shifting  towards 
policyholders.  While  moving  towards  unit-linked  and  defined  contribution  policies  might 
increase the resilience of insurance and pensions companies, it could increase uncertainty 
over future benefits and thus raise precautionary savings among several cohorts of people. 
Data suggest, however, that this dimension of the adjustment remains contained. Unit-linked 
insurance  and  defined  contribution  pensions  still  constitute  below  20%  of  life  insurance 
policies  and  pensions  in  the  euro  area,  and  the  pace  of growth  remains  slow.  In  addition, 
survey  results  by  EIOPA  indicate  that  insurers  have  adjusted  largely  by  focusing  on 
diversification into non-life and asset management businesses or lowering of the guaranteed 
rates on new policies.3 
                                                
2   EIOPA (2014). “EIOPA Insurance Stress Test 2014”, available at https://eiopa.europa.eu. 
3   EIOPA 
rate  environment  stock 
interest 
“Low 
https://eiopa.europa.eu. 
(2014), 
taking  exercise  2014”,  available  at 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A  third  potentially  problematic  dimension  of  adjustment  is  related  to  incentives  to  increase 
concentration to reduce costs, which can bring with it financial stability concerns. In Europe, 
a handful of large insurers – some part of financial conglomerates – already play a central 
role  in  the  financial  system,  although  their  individual  links  to  banks  and  to  other  market 
participants  do  not  currently  seem  to  be  over-concentrated.4  The  creation  of  ever  larger 
champions,  however,  could  change  that  picture.  The  work  conducted  under  the  Financial 
Stability Board on Global Systemically Important Insurers (G-SIIs) is thus highly topical, and 
also important from the European perspective. 
Understanding low interest rates5 
In this environment, I can appreciate why some in the industry may call for higher interest 
rates. After all, the simplest solution to the challenges facing the sector would seemingly be 
for interest rates to rise as quickly as possible. But it is important to understand why interest 
rates  are  so  low.  And  a  closer  examination  reveals  that  the  underlying  drivers  are  not  so 
much central bank policies as global and euro area-specific economic factors, some of which 
are more secular in nature and others which are more associated with the legacy of the post-
Lehman financial crisis. 
To  comprehend  this  point,  it  is  useful  to  decompose  long-term  nominal  yields  into  four 
components: expected inflation over the term of the asset; the expected path of short-term 
real  rates; the  inflation  risk  premium  and  real  term  premium,  which  together  represent the 
compensation required by investors for holding long-term bonds as opposed to rolling over 
short-term securities. All these components have contributed to the very low long-term rates 
we observe today. 
From a long-term perspective, nominal yields on long-term bonds have been on a declining 
trend  in  all  major  advanced  economies since  the  1980s. Improvements in  monetary  policy 
frameworks have played a role in this: the commitment to low and stable inflation, and the 
adoption of explicitly quantified price stability objectives (or targets) by an increasing number 
of  central  banks,  have  brought  down  long-term  inflation  expectations  and  compressed 
inflation premia, both of which have contributed to lower nominal yields. But the decline in 
nominal long-term rates is also explained by the real component: the expected real rate as 
well as the real term premium. Part of this decline in real interest rates can be accounted for 
by long run, secular forces; the other part is due to more cyclical dynamics. 
If one takes the textbook Solow growth model as an organising device for the different forces 
driving real interest rates in the long run, they ultimately pertain to productivity and population 
growth, and savings behaviour. The intuition is that these forces determine investment and 
therefore the demand for loanable funds, which have to be matched by savings. Seen over 
the long-term, the growth rate of total factor productivity (TFP) has been slowing in the euro 
area for decades. Population growth has also declined from about 0.7% in the early 1970s to 
around 0.3% in recent years. And looking into the very distant future, the downward pull from 
adverse  demographics  could  accelerate:  some  model-based  simulations  suggest  that 
demographic trends – notably a rising supply of funds provided by an ageing population – 
could result in a significant reduction in the real rate in the long-run.6 
                                                
4   Alves, I., J. Brinkhoff, S. Georgiev, J.C. Héam, I. Moldovan and M. Scotto di Carlo (2015), “Network analysis 
of the EU insurance sector”, ESRB Occasional Paper No. 7 (July). 
5   For this section see charts 1–12. 
6   Kara,  E.  and  von  Thadden,  L.,  INTEREST  RATE  EFFECTS  OF  DEMOGRAPHIC  CHANGES  IN  A  NEW 
KEYNESIAN LIFE-CYCLE FRAMEWORK, Macroeconomic Dynamics, forthcoming, (Published online: 14 July 
2014.) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  On top of the gravitational pull of these secular forces, there are cyclical factors weighing on 
real  interest  rates that  are  more  directly  linked  with  the global financial  crisis.  Notably,  the 
euro area is still working its way through a “balance sheet recession”, where a situation of 
severe  debt  overhang  sets  the  conditions  for  a  sharp  downturn,  which  in  turn  creates  the 
need for substantial deleveraging and prolongs the length of the slump. 
This is the product of a pre-crisis period where, misreading the signs of declining productivity 
growth, firms, households and in some cases governments accumulated excessive debt on 
the basis of overly optimistic real income expectations. The result has been excess savings 
in  the  post-crisis  period  caused  by  the  need  for  all  three  sectors  to  repair  their  balance 
sheets, while over-indebted firms and households in some countries have been confronted 
with  higher  credit  premia,  further  depressing  investment.  Investment  indeed  remains  well 
below pre-crisis levels. 
The damage caused to the economy by these dynamics has been massive. Youth and long-
term  unemployment  has  risen  significantly  in  the  euro  area,  with  “hysteresis”  effects 
estimated  to  have  notably  reduced  labour  supply.  This  feeds  back  into  a  slower  potential 
growth rate, and potentially for some time, given the strong sectoral dimension to the crisis 
and  the  need  for  extensive  re-skilling  and  reallocation  of  workers.  Slower  potential  growth 
has  also  coupled  with  heightened  uncertainty,  discouraging  new  investment  projects.  The 
upshot has been a continuous decline of long-term growth expectations in the euro area, all 
of which adds to the downward pressure on real rates. 
Such post-debt crisis effects have been visible in many advanced economies, contributing to 
the low level of global interest rates we see today. But most would agree that the negative 
impact  of  the  crisis  has  been  stronger  for  the  euro  area  than  for  other  jurisdictions.  The 
reason for this is that certain features of the euro area have made working through a debt 
crisis  harder  and  more  protracted,  namely  institutional  and  structural  weaknesses  at  both 
national and euro area levels. 
The absence of an integrated euro area banking system is one such weakness. The Great 
Moderation  –  and  a  euro-specific  misrepresentation  of  the  type  of  risk  that  investors  were 
exposed to when accepting to finance imbalances in other members of the monetary union – 
had encouraged a formidable expansion in cross-border banking activities prior to the crisis. 
Yet  despite  an  illusion  of  integration,  the  euro  area  still  effectively  consisted  of  multiple 
juxtaposed  national  banking  systems.  Large  savings  and  investment gaps  within  monetary 
union  were  therefore  financed  mainly  through  short-term  banking  debt,  creating  latent 
vulnerability to a “sudden stop”. 
When the cycle turned, there was little scope for risks to be reallocated across the union – 
also due to lack of formal macroeconomic risk-sharing mechanisms in the architecture of our 
Treaty  institutions.  Worse,  as  banks  in  some  of  the  most  vulnerable  countries  remained 
heavily exposed to their own sovereigns, the banking sector in fact amplified the crisis via the 
“diabolical loop” between banks and sovereigns. In these ways the structure of the euro area 
banking  sector  interacted  with  the  incomplete  construction  of  our  institutions  to  aggravate 
financial  fragmentation  and  credit  constraints,  thereby  magnifying  the  impact  of  balance 
sheet adjustment on the economy. 
Other mechanisms which could have cushioned the shock also turned out to be unavailable. 
The  possibility  for  a  sequenced  macroeconomic  deleveraging,  where  the  public  sector 
leverages  while  the  private  sector  deleverages,  was  hindered  by  fragile  public  finances 
entering the crisis and a weak fiscal framework that could not maintain market confidence in 
public debt. Fiscal policy has therefore been largely pro-cyclical, and all sectors have had to 
deleverage simultaneously in a context of weak nominal growth. 
Ways to accelerate balance sheet restructuring while minimising its fallout on the economy 
were  also  inoperative  due  to  shortcomings  in  the  legal  frameworks  of  many  countries.  In 
particular,  weak  national  insolvency  frameworks  and  slow  judicial  systems  made  write-offs 
and resolution of bad loans a more negligible source of debt reabsorption in the euro area, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  especially compared with other post-crisis experiences, such as that of the US or the UK. All 
this has contributed to continuing savings and investment imbalances. 
The final component affecting long-term interest rates is the term premium. Here too longer-
term  forces  have  mingled  with  more  cyclical  dynamics  connected  to  the  financial  crisis  to 
push nominal interest rates down. Term premia in the euro area have been suppressed – 
including before the crisis – by supply and demand imbalances for safe assets at the global 
level, especially as increasing demand from foreign investors has interacted with a shrinking 
supply  of  highly-rated  securities  denominated  in  euro,  owing  to  crisis-time  downgrades  of 
certain  sovereign  issuers  and  progress  in  fiscal  consolidation  in  some  other  AAA  issuers. 
More  recently,  regulatory  changes  under  Basel  III  have  boosted  demand  for  safe  assets 
even  further.  Safe-haven  flows  in  periods  of  financial  unrest  have  also  exacerbated  these 
effects. 
The role of monetary policy7 
Monetary policy has certainly contributed to reducing interest rates. Yet our policy should be 
understood  as  a  response  to  this  challenging  context.  Monetary  policy  cannot  affect  the 
secular  forces  weighing  on  the  euro  area  economy,  nor  can  it  provide  an  answer  to  our 
institutional and structural questions. What it can and must do, however, is respond to the 
weakness in aggregate demand and the disinflationary pressures that creates. 
That is essentially the course we have been steering with our policy since 2008, and it is in 
fact remarkable that, given the strength of the headwinds, inflation has remained relatively 
stable.  We  have  always  addressed  signs  of  a  de-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  with 
determination.  This  is  testament  to  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  preserving  a  nominal 
anchor. 
Given the depth and length of the crisis, however, that anchor could not be provided through 
conventional monetary policy alone. The short-term interest rate has eventually run into its 
effective lower bound, reducing the potential for further rates cuts to support the economy. 
And even before the short-term rate became constrained in this way, we have also, unlike 
other economic areas, had to deal with serious disruptions in the transmission of our policy 
caused by the financial fragmentation of the euro area. We have therefore had no choice but 
to resort to unconventional measures to ensure price stability in this environment. 
Operating in a bank-centric economy, the main focus of our unconventional measures in the 
early  phase  of  the  crisis  was  ensuring  the  transmission  of  our  policy  across  banking 
institutions,  in  the  context  of  a  generalised  collapse  in  the  interbank  market.  Then,  when 
fragmentation  became  more  pronounced  along  national  lines  in  the  post-debt  crisis  phase 
starting in 2011, our focus shifted more to ensuring adequate liquidity to banking sectors. By 
the  middle  of  last  year,  however,  it  became  clear  that  the  measures  we  had  adopted  to 
provide a liquidity backstop for banks were becoming less effective, in terms of their pass-
through into credit conditions for the real economy, as banks were actively deleveraging. We 
therefore adopted the Targeted Long-Term Refinancing Operations (TLTRO), as part of our 
credit easing package, in order to create incentives for banks to lock-in low long-term central 
bank funding and originate cheaper loans to the real economy. 
After  we  launched  this  credit  easing  in  the  summer  2014,  the  inflation  picture  materially 
worsened. Throughout the second half of the year macroeconomic outlook deteriorated and 
underlying  inflation  dynamics  weakened,  which  began  to  spillover  into  long-term  inflation 
expectations.  That  fall  in  inflation  expectations  also  corresponded  to  a  rise  in  real  interest 
rates – an effective monetary tightening. Faced  with growing disinflationary risks, and with 
the scope for rate cuts now exhausted, we at that point moved to asset purchases as the 
                                                
7   For this section see charts 15–17. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  main tool to expand our monetary policy stance. This was the context in which we launched 
our expanded Asset Purchase Programme (APP). 
We are generally satisfied with how these measures are working so far, and we will continue 
our monthly asset purchases until the end of September 2016, or beyond if necessary, and in 
any case until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with 
our price stability objective. Notably, our asset purchases have contributed to a compression 
of term premia, which are currently negative according to several model-based estimates. 
Our  measures  are  also  having  a  positive  impact  on  transmission.  Banks’  intermediation 
capacity is strengthening via the incipient improvement in their asset quality and increased 
profitability.  Bank  lending  rates for  both  households  and  non-financial  corporations  (NFCs) 
are converging downwards across euro area countries, with those banks that participated in 
at least one of the TLTROs reducing lending rates to NFCs – including SMEs – more than 
non-participating banks. And the July 2015 Bank Lending Survey showed improving lending 
conditions, which we expect to support the recovery in loan growth. 
Banks have so far been able to buffer borrowers from the higher rates that they now face in 
the market following the recent re-pricing in financial markets. The improving macroeconomic 
environment has lowered other costs faced by banks’, such as the amount of provisioning 
required for non-performing loans, and has thereby allowed them not to pass-through their 
higher cost of financing to borrowers. Still, credit is starting from a low base and volumes on 
aggregate  remain  relatively  weak.  The  justification  for  our  credit  easing  therefore  remains 
very much in place. Moreover, the Governing Council will remain vigilant that recent volatility 
does  not  materially  affect  the  broad  array  of  financial  conditions  and  therefore  lead  to  an 
unwarranted tightening of the monetary policy stance. 
On  the  real  side,  while  our  measures  are  feeding  through  to  domestic  demand,  we  do 
observe a deceleration in the pace of economic recovery. The latest ECB staff projections 
see  lower  growth  in  2015,  2016  and  2017  as  well  as  a  slower  increase  in  inflation  rates 
compared with the previous exercise in June. The weaker growth outlook primarily reflects 
slower  growth  in  emerging  markets,  while  the  downward  revisions  to  inflation  are  largely 
explained by lower oil prices. On account of the external environment, risks to both euro area 
activity and inflation are on the downside, and these risks have intensified since the cut-off 
date of 12 August for the technical assumptions which underpin the projections. 
In  this  context,  the  Governing  Council  will  closely  monitor  the  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook 
over the medium-term. It has emphasised its willingness and ability to act, if warranted, by 
using  all  the  instruments  available  within  its  mandate.  In  particular,  the  asset  purchase 
programme contains sufficient flexibility to adjust its size, composition and duration. 
To sum up, low interest rates are ultimately a consequence of weak secular trends, coupled 
with the cyclical consequences of a complex debt crisis, exacerbated by a monetary union 
with institutional and structural flaws. “Normalisation” is therefore not about the central bank 
raising  policy  rates  or  removing  the  accommodation  provided  through  its  unconventional 
policy measures – this would only result in too tight a monetary policy stance and make the 
situation worse – it is about addressing each of these underlying drivers that are holding real 
rates and inflation expectations down. 
Addressing structural and institutional challenges 
Monetary easing alone cannot achieve this. Certainly, our policy creates the pre-conditions 
for  rates  to  rise  back  towards  more  normal  levels.  When  expected  real  rates  are  below 
expectations  of  economic  growth  –  as  we  see  at  present  –  there  should  be  incentives  for 
entrepreneurs  to  capitalise  on  this  differential  to  invest  in  new  projects,  increasing  the 
demand for funds. Incomes also rise faster than debts, supporting a faster deleveraging and 
reducing  the  supply  of  funds.  But  monetary  policy  is  only  a  necessary  condition  for 
“normalisation”; it is not a sufficient one. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  If monetary policy is to have its full effects on the economic cycle, it needs to be supported 
by policies that help dislodge negative sentiment about the euro area’s prospects and induce 
higher  investment.  It  is  surprising,  for  example,  that  businesses  currently  perceive 
themselves  to  have  limited  excess  capacity,  despite  a  large  estimated  output  gap. 
Expectations of long-term prospects are also depressed. If such pessimism were to persist, 
we would risk that low investment and high unemployment enter a feedback loop, increasing 
the likelihood of the economy settling into a form of “underemployment equilibrium”. Cyclical 
drags would then become structural. 
In my view addressing this situation has three parts. 
The  first  is  boosting  the  euro  area’s  long-term  growth  prospects,  which  given  our 
demographics  comes  down  chiefly  to  raising  TFP.  The  determinants  of  TFP  growth  are 
complex, but broadly speaking it is a function of within-firm and across-firm efficiency. The 
former relates to how well firms innovate and adopt new technology, while the latter relates 
to how well capital and labour reallocate to the most productive firms. Structural reforms are 
decisive  in  both  cases.  OECD  research  finds  that  structural  factors  produce  considerable 
differences  in  productivity  diffusion  from  frontier  firms8  as  well  in  the  responsiveness  of 
labour and capital to innovative activity.9 
The second part is accelerating the process of private sector debt workout within the euro 
area.  Raising  productivity  growth  would  certainly  support  this,  insofar  as  higher  long-term 
growth increases future debt service capacity. But reductions in numerator of the debt ratio – 
nominal debt – must also be part of the equation. The provisioning for non-performing loans 
as part of the Comprehensive Assessment takes us halfway towards a solution. What is now 
key is that written-down loans can be quickly restructured through more efficient insolvency 
regimes10  or  worked  out  privately  through  deepening  markets  for  distressed  debt.  The 
Capital  Markets  Union  project  could  be  an  important  catalyst  here  as  it  should  ultimately 
induce convergence in both these areas. 
The third part is addressing the institutional incompleteness of our monetary union. There are 
several dimensions to this, as laid out in the recent Five Presidents’ Report, but a priority is 
completing  Banking  Union  and  the  integration  of the  euro  area  banking  sector.  This  could 
have  a  direct  impact  on  investment,  insofar  as  it  encourages  financial  reintegration  and 
reduces credit frictions. Institutional reform is also necessary, and would act as a statement 
of intent on behalf of members of their lasting commitment to the euro area. 
Progress on these three fronts would not only go a long way towards removing the factors 
preventing  higher  and  sustainable  growth.  It  would  also  accelerate  the  normalisation  of 
interest rates away from low levels. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
What I have tried to explain today is that the central bank policies should not be interpreted 
as  a  cause  of  low  interest  rates  but  rather  as  a  consequence  of  economic  malaise  and 
disinflationary  pressures,  which  the  central  bank  aims  to  forestall.  That  is  to  say,  they  are 
simply the mirror image of global and euro area specific factors that are pulling both long-
term nominal and real interest rates down to very low levels. Addressing those factors with 
determination can accelerate the process of “normalisation”. 
                                                
8   OECD, “The Future of Productivity”, OECD Policy Note, 2015. 
9   Andrews,  D.,  C.  Criscuolo  and  C.  Menon  (2013),  “Do  Resources  Flow  to  Innovative  Firms?  Cross-Country 
Evidence from Firm-Level Data”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers. 
10   For more on this point see IMF Global Financial Stability Review, April 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  That implies on our side the full implementation of the asset purchase programme, on which 
the cyclical recovery hinges. And it implies on the side of other policymakers addressing the 
structural and institutional factors that are preventing our monetary policy from producing a 
stronger and more sustained recovery. In other words, a lasting return to normalcy depends 
on all policymakers playing their part – and the longer others wait, the greater the hurdles 
that the euro area will ultimately have to climb. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
