  Chris Salmon: Remarks given at the first meeting of the Working Group 
on Sterling Risk-Free Reference Rates 
Remarks by Mr Chris Salmon, Executive Director for Markets of the Bank of England, at the 
first  meeting  of  the  Working  Group  on  Sterling  Risk-Free  Reference  Rates,  London, 
18 March 2015. 
 Over  the  past  two  and  a  half  years,  the  Bank  of  England  has  been  firmly  committed  to 
benchmark  reform.  Much  has  already  been  achieved  by  regulators,  administrators  and 
market  participants.  Those  achievements  include  the  Wheatley  Review  of  Libor,  the 
development of IOSCO Principles for Financial Benchmarks, the FSB’s recommendations on 
interest  rate  benchmark  reform,  and  most  recently  the  extension  of  the  UK  regulatory 
framework to cover additional critical benchmarks – including the interest rate benchmarks, 
SONIA and RONIA. 
But  there  is  still  much  to  do.  The  way  ahead  was  signposted  in  the  July  2014  Financial 
Stability Board Report, “Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks”. 
That  Report  recommended  a  “multi-rate”  approach  involving  the  strengthening  of  existing 
“IBOR” rates (such as LIBOR) by using, to the greatest extent possible, transactions data; 
and  developing  alternative  near  risk-free  reference  rates  (RFRs)  for  use  in  derivatives 
contracts. 
The  FSB’s  recommendation  to  develop  alternative  reference  rates  alongside  LIBOR 
recognises  that  there  are,  broadly  speaking,  two  main  applications  for  benchmark  interest 
rates: (i) as reference rates in credit products, including bank loans, thereby helping banks to 
hedge  their  unsecured  funding  costs;  and  (ii)  as  reference  rates  in  derivatives  contracts, 
whose users are likely to be seeking to hedge exposure to the general level of interest rates, 
or to hedge secured funding costs. 
LIBOR originated as a reference rate for bank loans, and became the dominant reference 
rate in interest rate swap contracts because it was already the major established reference 
rate at the time the swap market developed. However market participants’ input to the FSB 
report suggested that many users of derivatives would prefer not to have exposure to banks’ 
term  funding  costs  through  LIBOR  swaps,  and  would  instead  prefer  those  contracts  to 
reference a near risk-free rate. 
This  change  will  not  happen  spontaneously  –  liquidity  in  long-dated  swaps  is  firmly 
concentrated  in  contracts  referencing  LIBOR  and  no  individual  player  can  change  that 
situation. What is required is a collective effort to change market practice. 
That is why we have initiated the Working Group on Sterling Risk-Free Reference Rates. It 
will be tasked with identifying a suitable near risk-free reference rate for sterling markets, and 
formulating  a  transition  plan  to  catalyse  a  change  in  market  practice  so  that  a  significant 
portion of derivatives contracts reference the new RFR rather than LIBOR. I believe that this 
is a critical component of the interest rate benchmark reform agenda. 
Structure of the group 
The Working  Group  we  have  initiated  today  is  a  private-sector  group  comprised  of  senior 
subject matter experts from major sterling swap dealers. Participation is at the invitation of 
the Bank of England, and we have convened this particular group because our experience of 
derivatives  reform  suggests  that  the  swap  dealer  community  can  be  most  influential  in 
catalysing a transition. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
It  will  of  course  be  necessary  to  reach  out  to  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders  –  but  the 
commitment  to  change  must  originate  from  this  group,  and  this  group  is  best  placed  to 
promote adoption amongst the swap user community. 
In  particular,  we  expect  that  you  will  reach  out  to  CCPs,  exchanges,  benchmark 
administrators, and end users – including institutional investors and corporate treasures. The 
Bank  is  prepared  to facilitate  this  outreach  process  by  hosting  roundtable  meetings  at the 
request of the Working Group. 
The International Swaps and Derivatives Association will participate in a non-voting capacity 
and provide guidance on contract robustness and reference rate transition. 
Representatives  from  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  FCA  will  participate  as  ex-officio 
members. The Bank will also provide a secretariat, host meetings, and publish the terms of 
reference of the Group, meeting agendas and minutes on our website.1 
Aims of the group and timeline 
The rest is up to you. The first task for the Group is to identify the most appropriate near risk-
free  reference  rate  for  sterling  markets.  Alongside  that  you  will  consider  how  contracts 
referencing the rate can be made robust to changes in market structure. We expect these 
discussions to reach a conclusion during the third quarter of this year. 
The  Group  will  then  develop  an  adoption  and  transition  plan  over  the  remainder  of  2015, 
considering the factors that could facilitate adoption of the chosen RFR, as well as metrics of 
success and a timeline for the transition process. It is anticipated that firms participating in 
the Working  Group  will  sign  letters  of  agreement  to  support  adoption  of  the  chosen  RFR, 
referencing these metrics. Implementation is expected to begin in 2016. 
We believe that this needs to be a market-driven process and that the choice of RFR is yours 
to  make.  However,  this  is  not  an  academic  exercise.  A  “choice”  means  that  you  will  be 
prepared to make meaningful transition commitments over a 12 to 24 month horizon. 
Bank of England data collection initiative 
Before I hand over to you all to begin the important work of this Group, I want to make you 
aware  of  a  new  initiative  the  Bank  is  embarking  on,  aimed  at  enhancing  our  measures of 
overnight interest rates in sterling markets. 
The Bank has a special interest in monitoring the overnight money market because it is a key 
aim of monetary policy to influence conditions in that market. Understanding developments in 
money  markets  is  a  crucial  part  of  the  Bank’s  assessment  of  monetary  and  financial 
conditions.  It  is  therefore  of  considerable  importance  to  the  Bank  that  robust,  transparent 
measures of overnight interest rates are available. 
It  is  also  in  the  interests  of  sterling  markets  more  broadly  that  robust  benchmarks  are 
available. 
The two main existing sterling overnight benchmark interest rates, SONIA and RONIA, are 
based on the rates paid respectively on unsecured and secured deposits placed via brokers. 
The volume of transactions underpinning these benchmarks has fallen significantly in recent 
years, reflecting reduced money market activity as well as a decline in brokers’ share of that 
activity. The decline in transactions volumes raises questions about the long-term robustness 
of  these  benchmarks.  That  is  of  particular  concern  in  respect  of  SONIA,  which  forms  the 
basis of the sterling overnight indexed swap market, and is referenced in contracts with a 
gross notional outstanding value in excess of £13tn. 
                                                
1   See http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/sterlingoperations/rfr/rfr.aspx. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In our view there is a clear need for a more secure and broad-based source of transactions 
data to support robust overnight benchmark interest rates in sterling markets. 
Accordingly, we have reached the conclusion that the Bank of England should collect each 
day, from banks and building societies active in sterling money markets, data on their sterling 
overnight deposit transactions. The purpose of this data collection is to secure and improve 
the information available to the Bank on conditions in money markets, benefiting our analysis 
of both monetary policy and financial stability. 
We  have  written  to  around  30  banks  who  we  will  ask  to  participate  in  this  data  collection 
exercise. 
The Bank and the Financial Conduct Authority are in discussion with the Wholesale Market 
Brokers  Association,  the  administrator  of  SONIA,  regarding  the  future  evolution  of  that 
benchmark. We believe that the data we plan to collect should, in time, play an important part 
in providing firmer foundations for this existing benchmark. 
Clearly a stronger overnight unsecured benchmark will be a more attractive candidate RFR 
than is SONIA in its current form. However I want to be clear that the Bank will pursue this 
data-collection initiative regardless of the outcome of your discussions on RFRs,  since we 
believe it to be necessary for our own monetary policy purposes, and because it is in the 
interests of sterling markets more broadly to have robust benchmark interest rates in sterling 
markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
