  Elvira Nabiullina: Current economic environment and monetary policy in 
Russia 
Statement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, at the State Duma of the 
Russian Federation on the Bank of Russia Annual Report for 2014, Moscow, 16 June 2015. 
 Good afternoon, distinguished colleagues! 
While  introducing  the  Bank  of  Russia  Annual  Report,  I  will  give  a  brief  overview  of  our 
activities such as monetary policy, banking and financial market regulation and supervision, 
and the national payment system. 
Before  passing  on  to  the  report,  I  would  like  to  briefly  describe  the  current  economic 
situation, the environment, in which we implement our policy. The last year was a troubled 
one,  oil  price  fall  and  financial  sanctions  emerged  as  serious  challenges  to  the  Russian 
economy. 
The economy has slowed while decline in investments became manifest in the period of high 
oil prices and rather low interests rates. This determined the specifics of the current situation 
–  unfavourable  developments  in  external  conditions  overlapped  structural  economic 
slowdown.  The  situation  was  especially  challenging  as  the  economic  downturn  coincided 
with high inflation. 
Currently, we have managed to curb inflation. According to our forecast, an economic growth 
(quarter-on-quarter) is expected to resume later this year. Certainly, a lot will depend on the 
efficiency of the joint efforts of the Government and the Central Bank. 
The  observed  improvement  and  financial  stabilisation  must  be  supported  by  structural 
changes. They are indispensable for a sustainable economic growth. These include a better 
business  climate  and  higher  labour  productivity.  I  think  that  infrastructure  is  also  a  crucial 
factor. 
Last year we had to react quickly to changes in external conditions. Meanwhile, we did not 
abandon our strategic objectives, we still adhere to inflation targeting that allows us to control 
inflation and ensure its gradual reduction. 
Early  last  year,  the  Central  Bank  actively  intervened  in  the  FX market  to  ease  the  market 
response to the Crimea developments and to support the ruble exchange rate. In 2014, we 
implement interventions in the amount of about US$80 billion. At the same time, we  were 
preparing for a floating exchange rate regime. We planned to have completed the transition 
by late 2014. During the year, the Bank of Russia took consecutive decisions thus gradually 
moving to the floating exchange rate. 
The policy to support the ruble through interventions was sound until two important events 
took place last autumn. The first one was the issuance of large-scale financial sanctions, and 
the  second  one  was  the  decline  in  oil  prices  that  began  in  summer  and  accelerated 
dramatically  following  the  November  decision  of  OPEC  to  maintain  the  volumes  of  oil 
production. 
Then we decided to accelerate the transition to the floating exchange rate. Looking behind, I 
would  like  to  confirm  once  again  that  our  country  needed  the  transition  to  the  floating 
exchange rate and it was a timely decision. It was the introduction of the floating exchange 
rate that quickly normalised the financial situation and saved us gold and foreign currency 
reserves. Different solutions were unlikely to stabilise the financial system. 
The impact of external factors moved inflation up to 11.4% in 2014. Unfortunately, it turned 
out to exceed the level we had expected. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
According to our estimates, sanctions and external trade restrictions account for one-third of 
the surfeit of inflation over the 5% target level, and ruble depreciation accounts for two-thirds. 
These are one-off factors and now we can see the inflation going down. It responds to the 
set of measures taken by the Bank of Russia to stabilise the situation. 
Let me remind you of these measures. These are both the transition to the floating exchange 
rate, and the unpopular but absolutely needed decision to raise the key rate. I would like to 
emphasise that as soon as the situation began to stabilise we started to gradually reduce the 
key rate. We have already cut it four times as we realise its importance for the economy and 
lending. 
The Bank of Russia introduced non-conventional refinancing instruments and started to lend 
foreign currency. This allowed us to pass the spikes in external debt repayments relatively 
easily this year amid restricted access to foreign markets. 
We  worked  with  exporters  to  ensure  that  our  major  suppliers  of  foreign  currency  sell  it 
evenly. 
Meanwhile, the stabilisation of the financial system in January should not be tied to the oil 
price growth alone. Certainly this process was supported by the oil price growth. Against this 
backdrop  the  ruble  started  to  appreciate  and  the  situation  even  allowed  us  to  start 
replenishing our gold and foreign currency reserves. 
Now I will give you the details of our monetary policy in 2014. 
We have decided to grant the access to the main refinancing instruments to a wider range of 
banks  (the  so-called  3rd  tier  banks)  and  promptly  extend  the  Lombard  List.  In  making  the 
Lombard List we abandoned the exclusive reliance on the international ratings agencies in 
order to reduce the dependence on them and make our own asset estimation. 
We  are  developing  special  purpose  instruments  to  compensate  for  the  so-called  market 
failures and support lending in certain areas amid low availability of loans, high interest rates, 
and lack of long-term money. 
I am talking about four instruments – support of investment projects, small and medium-sized 
enterprises, military mortgages and non-commodity exports. The total of 290 billion rubles is 
currently allocated for these instruments. 
The  special  purpose  instruments  will  be  limited  in  volume  in  order  to  avoid  distortions  in 
monetary policy mechanisms. However, since  we have introduced these instruments, they 
must prove effective. Currently, our main objective is to increase their efficiency. 
To summarise the results of the monetary policy we implemented last year, I would like to 
emphasise  that,  first,  we  acted  in  strict  compliance  with  the  functions  assigned  by  the 
Constitution and the Central Bank Law, second, in the challenging conditions we tried to be 
flexible and to apply non-standard approaches, yet using only market mechanisms. 
How  do  we  see  our  objectives  in  the  current  conditions?  Our  priority  task  remains 
unchanged– it is the price stability. Despite a leap in inflation last year and earlier this year, 
our  medium-term  inflation  target  is  still  4%.  We  estimate  it  to  be  achievable.  Another 
important  task  is  to  maintain  financial  stability  amid  current  turbulence.  And  third,  we 
ultimately aspire to creating balanced macroeconomic conditions to put the economy on the 
track of sustainable economic growth. 
We will have to tackle these issues in challenging external conditions. The pace of the global 
economic growth will not be high; other countries’ monetary policy will keep influencing the 
Russian  economy;  the  oil  market  is  likely  to  remain  unstable. Therefore,  the  economy  will 
have to adjust to the new realities when both oil prices and exchange rates fluctuate both 
upwards and downwards. 
A few words on the banking industry. Economic developments of the last year could not help 
but impact banks. Generally, all the economic indicators showed quite good dynamics last 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
year – assets and lending were on the rise. Profits, though 40% lower than in 2013, were 
non-negligible  at  the  level  of  600  billion  rubles.  However,  the  situation  certainly  began  to 
change. We can see slower lending rates. In some months of the year we have registered 
losses in the banking system as a whole. Profits in January-May this year amounted to nine 
billion  rubles.  Lending  to  the  economy  shrank  by  3%  in  the  first  five  months  (by  1.5% 
adjusted for foreign currency revaluation). Meanwhile, capital grew by 1.2%. It is important 
since capital growth is a key condition for increasing lending to the economy. 
The trend towards deposit outflow and dollarisation has been reversed (currently, we can see 
their inflow). 
Mortgage lending was supported by measures taken by the government. Currently, we can 
see this market recovering. According to our estimates, this trend will persist and residential 
construction will support the economy. It is the engine for many other sectors. 
Our  banking  system  is generally  stable  and  banks  –  also  supported  by  the  government  – 
meet the emerging challenges. 
To allow banks to adjust to the new environment and support the banking system in the most 
challenging period, we temporary eased the regulation. Our task was far from allowing banks 
to  disguise  their  problems,  we  rather  aim  at  mitigating  the  impact  of  external  factors  and 
enabling banks to adjust to the new environment. 
Currently,  we  are  gradually  abandoning  the  anti-recessionary  regulation  regime.  Following 
the  discussion  with  the  banking  community,  we  decided  to  gradually  reverse  these 
measures. 
Undoubtedly, decisions on additional capitalisation of the banking system played a positive 
role. I would like to thank the State Duma for this decision. 
The Government and the Bank of Russia are unanimous that funds allocated for additional 
capitalisation of banks should be spent on expanding lending to real sectors of the economy 
rather  than  patching  up  the  loopholes  in  banks’  capital  (they  are  not  aimed  at  supporting 
owners). 
To  our  regret,  interest  rates  on  bank  loans  have  grown  and  accessibility  of  loans  for  the 
economy  slumped.  However,  we  can  see  that  in  recent  months  banks  have  followed  the 
reduction of the key rate and above all the mitigation of inflation risks and gradually cut their 
loan rates. 
Furthermore, difficulties in the economy and finance are not a reason for curtailing the policy 
of  banking  sector  resolution.  Besides,  we  consider  it  necessary  to  enhance  banking 
supervision. 
In 2014, banking licences were revoked from 86 credit institutions and earlier in 2015 from 
another 30, mostly due to the violation of banking laws, suspicious transactions, accumulated 
financial problems, and non-disclosure of real financial standing through misreporting. 
The  supervisory  objective  for  the  near  future  is  to  identify  banks’  problems  as  soon  as 
possible.  This  will  allow  us  to  protect  the  stability  of  both  the  financial  system  and  banks’ 
creditors. 
As  for  suspicious  transactions,  the  number  of  banks  servicing  the  shadow  economy  is 
constantly declining: according to our estimates, currently there are about 20 of them, and 
when we started their number approximated 150. The volume of overseas money diversion 
and cash withdrawal through the banking system has declined. We make use of the powers 
conferred on us under the amendments to the law approved by the parliament. I would like to 
express special gratitude to you for that. 
We  progressively  stamp  out  suspicious  transactions  from  the  banking  sector.  Our  current 
objective  is  to  introduce  end-to-end  supervision  over  both  credit  institutions  and  non-bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 financial  market 
infrastructure  by  creating  new  and 
 
 
organisations through implementing our functions of a megaregulator in order to prevent the 
spillover of suspicious transactions from the banking to the non-banking sector. 
The  last  year  was  important  as  the  first  full  year  in  our  capacity  of  megaregulator.  We 
completed  the  transition  period  nine  months  earlier  than  expected.  Along  with  internal 
restructuring at the Bank of Russia, we kept working on legislative initiatives. We continue 
developing 
improving  existing 
instruments.  High-quality  improvements  in  the  system  of  financial  market  regulation  and 
supervision are impossible without legislative amendments. 
Non-governmental pension funds had to be incorporated and join the guarantee system. We 
inspected non-governmental pension funds before their accession to the guarantee system. 
As a result, 26 funds joined the system. The supervision obliged many funds to improve the 
quality of their assets and to make the ownership transparent, so that the guarantee system 
incorporated  only  resilient  funds  capable  of  ensuring  safety  of  pension  savings.  We  will 
further monitor and supervise these funds very closely. 
Some words about insurance. We applied new laws on compulsory motor third party liability 
insurance  (OSAGO)  and  raised  the  tariffs.  The  decision  is  not  very  popular,  but  it  is 
necessary to ensure the economic efficiency of OSAGO. At the same time, we are looking 
for new growth areas together with the market. In particular, this is about developing life and 
medical insurance. 
We also had to take supervisory measures. As a recent example licence of a major market 
participant  was  restricted  for  two  weeks.  Certainly,  the  licence  restriction  of  such  a  large 
player was an outstanding event for the market. As a regulator we realised the importance of 
such a step, but we consider it necessary for the benefit of consumers to implement all the 
available  measures  to  restore  order  and  eliminate  unlawful  practices  such  as  imposing 
services, non-applying bonus-malus ratio, etc. 
We have established a consumer right protection service, and  we pay special attention to 
processing claims. We will try to make the process of lodging claims convenient for citizens 
and will try to respond to claims in an efficient manner. One of our important objectives is to 
work out a concept of financial literacy. We also consider accessibility of financial services to 
be an important condition for proper functioning of the financial market. 
Another field of our concern is the development of the national payment system. In less than 
a year after the decision was taken, a processing and clearing centre was created and inter-
Russian transactions of international payment systems were transferred there. Currently, we 
are actively developing our own payment card. 
In conclusion I would like to say that the integration of Crimea into the Russian financial and 
payment system became an important part of our job last year. We implemented accelerated 
transfer of settlements from hryvnias into rubles. Initially, in compliance with the law, we had 
to complete this process by 1 January 2015, but it became evident that such a long period of 
circulation of two currencies is unreasonable. As a result the transition was implemented in 
two months. 
As many as 530 branches of Russian banks have been opened on the territory of Crimea 
and are ready to offer their customers a complete range of services. Cash circulation has 
been arranged and the necessary amount of coins and banknotes has been delivered. 
A  few  words  about  internal  changes  in  the  Bank  of  Russia.  In  2014,  the  organisational 
structure  of  the  Bank  of  Russia  underwent  serious  changes  aimed  at  increasing  our 
efficiency and optimising the workforce. 
The improvement of the Bank of Russia territorial structure initiated in 2014 was completed in 
January 2015. 
As  many  as  79  main  branches  and  national  banks  were  transformed  into  seven  main 
branches with subordinated divisions. Due to the accession of the Republic of Crimea and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the federal city of Sevastopol to the Russian Federation, in 2014 a Division for the Republic 
of Crimea and a Division for the City of Sevastopol were established. 
Resulting from the structural optimisation held in 2014, the Bank of Russia cut 3,500 jobs or 
5.3% and its workforce amounted to 61,800 employees as of early 2015. I would like to note 
that the number of employees was reduced, while the Bank of Russia obtained vast powers 
as a megaregulator. However, we will continue reducing the workforce. 
In  conclusion  I  would  like  to  say  that  the  Bank  of  Russia  faces  challenging  tasks  in  a 
challenging  period  in  the  country’s  history. We completely  assume  our responsibility.  I  am 
convinced that there are all the prerequisites to put the economy on the track of sustainable 
growth  while  ensuring  the  necessary  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  in  joining  our 
efforts. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
