  Yves Mersch: The future of banking – a central banker’s view 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Economist Future of Banking Summit, Paris, 10 March 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  to  open  this  conference  on  the  “The  Future  of 
Banking”. What I would like to discuss in my remarks is the challenges facing the European 
banking sector and the right policy responses. The main point I would like to make is that we 
need a balanced approach – supporting the healthy forces of creative destruction, while at 
the  same  time  protecting  consumers  and  the  essential  functions  of  banks  in  servicing  the 
economy. 
The  future  for  the  European  banking  sector  is  currently  clouded  in  uncertainty.  European 
banks are coming out of the crisis facing disruptive forces from all sides. They confront three 
main challenges to their business models. 
The first is dealing with the legacy effects of the crisis on their balance sheets. 
Since  2009  banks  have  been  going  through  an  arduous  process  of  restructuring  and 
deleveraging:  shedding  non-core  business  lines,  writing  down  impaired  assets  and 
increasing  provisions.  This  process  has  been  costly  both  in  terms  of  lower  profits  and 
diverted management time. Many banks also still have to work through their large stock of 
non-performing  loans  (NPLs),  which  further  weighs  on  earnings  prospects.  Sufficient 
recovery  from  NPL  resolution  is  hindered  by  slow  national  insolvency  procedures for firms 
and an underdeveloped European distressed debt market. 
The second challenge is adapting to the new wave of regulation since the crisis. 
Banks have been required to improve both the quantity and quality of their capital, which has, 
in  the  short-term  at  least,  led  to  a  de-risking  of  banks’  balance  sheets  to  improve  risk-
weighted assets. The incoming leverage ratio, which will put a cap on balance sheet size, is 
also  obliging  banks  to  make  difficult  decisions  over  how  to  allocate  assets  and  which 
business  lines  to  maintain.  And  reform  proposals  are  on  the  horizon  that  will  limit  cross-
subsidisation between banking and trading activities, which will require some adaptation in 
the business models of Europe’s universal banks. 
Third, banks are faced with profound structural changes. 
As evolving customer preferences interact with new technology, for instance in the growth of 
internet  and  mobile  banking,  barriers  to  entry  into  banking  are  falling.  Banks  with  large 
branch  networks  are  being  exposed  to  competition  from  lower  cost  and  less  regulated 
operators.  We  see  this  already  in  the  emergence  of  peer-to-peer  lenders  and  technology 
firms  offering  banking  services.  There  is  also  increasing  competition  in  banking  services 
more generally, as firms like Paypal become well-established in markets like retail payments 
that were previously the preserve of high street banks. 
On top of this, the trend towards more capital market-based financing in Europe – supported 
by the new initiative on Capital Markets Union – will inevitably weaken banks’ market power, 
especially  for  firms  that  can  easily  substitute  bank  and  market  finance.  And  though  still 
relatively small in quantitative terms, we are also seeing a greater role of “shadow banks” in 
direct  lending  –  asset  managers,  pension  funds,  private  debt  funds  –  that  heralds  a  shift 
towards a less bank-dominated financing mix. 
Taken together, this represents a uniquely challenging environment for European banks, and 
this is visible in their generally weak financial performance: price-to-book ratios are low and 
profitability is meagre. Many banks have a cost of equity exceeding their return on equity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Moreover,  there  is  little  chance  of  the  economy  coming  to  the  rescue  or  of  interest  rates 
rising any time soon. Banks will have to return to profitability in the context of a slow recovery 
with depressed net interest margins. 
So, should we be concerned about how banks will fare in this difficult climate? As I already 
intimated,  in my  view  we  need  to  take  a  nuanced  stance  here  that  balances  principle  and 
practice. 
In principle, the developments in the banking sector should be largely positive for society at 
large. Many banks grew too quickly before the crisis and developed unsustainable business 
models,  so  a  period  of  consolidation  is  both  desirable  and  inevitable.  The  aim  of  the 
regulatory  agenda,  which  is  to  make  banks  more  resilient  and  reduce  the  burden  of  bank 
failure on society, is also fully justified. 
And  the  ongoing  structural  changes  are  welcome.  If  we  believe  in  the  benefits  of  creative 
destruction for normal firms, then we must also believe in it for financial firms. Innovation that 
raises competition in retail lending, and leads to better and cheaper services for customers, 
is a net gain for the economy. So, a priori, I do not see any role for regulators in protecting 
banks from new operators – on the contrary, innovation should be nurtured and encouraged. 
Equally,  the  objective  of  a  Capital  Markets  Union  is  clearly  in  the  public  interest.  It  would 
benefit,  in  various  ways,  financial  stability,  access  to  finance  and  entrepreneurship.  In 
particular  for  equity  risk  capital,  which  is  critical  for  innovative  young  firms,  market 
fragmentation in Europe creates a self-fulfilling brake on progress. Venture capital firms do 
not have a large enough deal flow to cover the majority of investments that will fail, meaning 
fewer investments are made.1 So we need to work towards a genuine single market for all 
forms of financing – for loans, bonds and equity. 
Still, despite all these positive aspects, we must also recognise that, in practice, the process 
of  adaptation  and  structural  change  in  the  financial  sector  could  have  unwelcome 
consequences. As such, we cannot be completely agnostic about how that process evolves. 
Indeed,  there  are  at  least  two  possible  outcomes  from  this  changing  environment  that  we 
need to be particularly careful to avoid. 
The first is that innovation comes at a cost to consumer protection. 
We have already seen in some European countries the risks posed by the emergence of new 
actors with little official oversight – internet payday lenders, for example. And such activities 
by  unregulated  non-banks  can  create  pressure  for  a  race-to-the-bottom  among  more 
regulated banks, which would also be detrimental consumer security. We therefore need to 
ensure  the  right  balance  between  innovation  and  regulation.  The  regulatory  landscape 
should  not  stifle  new  operators  or  protect  the  rents  of  banks,  but  it  also  needs  to  be 
consistent and fair. 
The second outcome we need to avoid is that the pressures of the new environment cause 
bank lending to fall too much and then stay too low. 
I say this not because there is any ex ante preference for bank lending over other forms of 
credit. I say it because, whether we like it or not, banks have a vital social function in Europe 
in  taking the  credit risk to  lend  to  small-  and medium-sized  enterprises (SMEs).  And  even 
with a more diversified financing mix in Europe, this function is essentially irreplaceable by 
non-banks. 
It  is  only  really  banks  –  and  in  particular  larger  banks  –  that  have  large  enough  balance 
sheets to effectively diversify the idiosyncratic risks from SME lending, by lending to a broad 
enough range of firms. And it is only banks that have the relationship networks and screening 
                                                
1   Veugelers, R. (2011), “Mind Europe’s early-stage equity gap”, Bruegel Policy Contribution 2011/18, December 
2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and  monitoring  processes  to manage the  information  asymmetries  associated  with  smaller 
firms.  For  non-banks  obtaining  adequate  information  is  simply  too  costly  and  resource 
intensive. 
Thus, were banks to respond to regulatory and structural changes and weak profitability by 
taking  less  credit  risk  vis-à-vis  SMEs,  or  shifting  their  asset  allocation  to  mortgages  or 
securities, non-banks could not easily fill the gap. And as SMEs account for around 85% of 
total employment growth in the EU, and have a much higher employment growth rate (1% 
annually) than large enterprises (0.5% a year), the costs for the European economy would be 
very high. 
So how can we avoid this scenario? 
First of all, a large body of research suggests that banks need to be strong to lend: to give 
just one example, the BIS finds that European banks with higher capital levels and stronger 
profitability have lent more during the crisis than others.2 So, banks themselves need to face 
the challenge; they need to reinvent themselves and reinvigorate their business models. 
Many banks have already begun this process, for example by shifting focus from trading and 
wholesale banking to retail banking and asset management. They have also worked hard to 
reduce costs. All this is an important part of adapting to the new environment. 
But I think banks must be careful that responding to short-term pressures does not come at 
the expense of longer-term viability. Specifically, if they elect to cut costs and boost profits 
through  underinvestment,  over  time  they  will  not  be  able  to  keep  up  with  technological 
change  and  evolving  customer  demands  –  and  in  the  end  they  will  not  have  a  business 
model. 
Most importantly, retail customers now expect to be able to move seamlessly across digital 
channels such as online and mobile banking, which requires adequate investment in digital 
platforms.  And  if  these  expectations  not  met,  they  are  also  now  increasingly  prepared  to 
switch accounts, causing banks to lose a cheap source of funding. In short, more than ever 
banks need to innovate to keep their customers loyal. 
One  way  for  banks  to  raise  profits  without  shirking  on  investment  is  through  genuine 
efficiency gains. And in this context I see a large “low hanging fruit” in Europe that is ripe to 
be picked – consolidation within the sector. According to most indicators there are too many 
banks in Europe relative to the size of the market.3 This implies that there is significant scope 
to  benefit  from  rationalisation,  and  without  exacerbating  the  problem  of  “too  big  to  fail”. 
Moreover, these benefits have become easier to realise now that we have a Banking Union 
and an end to supervisory divergence. 
To  give  some  examples,  research  suggests  that  the  economies  of  scale  from  within  and 
cross-country banking M&A could be sizeable in terms of, among other things, information 
technology and corporate overhead costs.4 Banks that implement a pan-European balance 
sheet  strategy  could  also  access  a  more  diversified  customer  base  and,  under  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism,  optimise  their  use  of  capital  and  liquidity.  And  being  European 
provides a platform for banks to launch new products on a European scale, thus increasing 
the returns to investment and innovation. 
                                                
2   Cohen, B.H. and M. Scatigna (2014), “Banks and capital requirements: channels of adjustment”, BIS Working 
Papers No. 443, March. 
3   For example, the Herfindahl-Hirschman concentration index (HHI) for the euro area currently stands at around 
700. As a general rule, an HHI below 1,000 signals low concentration, while an index above 1,800 signals high 
concentration. For values between 1,000 and 1,800, an industry is considered to be moderately concentrated. 
See ECB Banking Structures Report, October 2014. 
4   Kovner, A., J. Vickery, and L. Zhou, “Do Big Banks Have Lower Operating Costs?,” Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York Economic Policy Review, Volume 20, No. 2, forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In short, there is every reason for banks to capitalise on the opportunity provided by Banking 
Union and turn themselves into genuinely European players. And this would go a long way 
towards creating a banking sector with the resilience and capacity to maintain the essential 
social function of lending to Europe’s smaller firms. 
But addressing the SME issue is not only about banks adapting; it is also about policymakers 
in various fields setting the right incentives for banks. That means, first of all, ensuring that 
Banking Union delivers on its promise – that the era of national champions is really over. But 
it  also  means  making  a  rigorous  assessment  of  the  wider  policy  environment  confronting 
banks – and the various ways in which it might be holding back bank lending. 
In my view there are three areas in particular where we could make improvements. 
The first is by accelerating efforts to put the legacy of the crisis behind us. 
For example, there is a great deal more that could be done at the national level to make NPL 
workouts  more  efficient,  like  improving  intercreditor  mediation  or  in-  and  out-of-court 
restructuring frameworks. To complete insolvency proceedings in Italy takes 1.8 years, while 
in Ireland it takes just 0.4 years.5 Pan-European initiatives could also play a role in reducing 
the legacy stock of NPLs, for example by adopting a centralised approach to speed up the 
pace of NPL write-offs. 
The second area is advancing with the agenda to revive high quality securitisation in Europe. 
Securitisation  is  where  banks  and  capital  markets  meet  –  a  well-functioning  asset-backed 
security (ABS) market means more bank lending. There are many issues involved in reiving 
the market, which I have discussed at length elsewhere,6 but one of the most important is 
improving  information for  investors.  The  ECB  is  playing  its  part  here  through  its  loan-level 
initiative, and various credit scoring initiatives by national authorities are helpful. But over the 
medium-term  I  am  convinced  we  need  to  work  towards  a  pan-European  central  credit 
database. This would facilitate multiple country SME ABS, which in turn would reduce both 
the risk and price of issuance. 
Third, I think it is now key to provide more regulatory clarity. 
Regulators have put a large burden on banks and it has probably come at a cost. If banks 
are  simultaneously  having  to  lower  costs  while  raising  the  resources  they  dedicate  to 
regulatory compliance, there must be a consequence elsewhere. For instance, IT resources 
may  be  diverted  away  from  innovation. We  also  still  hear  reports from market  participants 
that regulatory uncertainty is constraining bank lending. It is therefore time to make clear how 
the future regulatory landscape will look. 
Let me conclude. 
What  I  have  tried  to  show  today  is  that  the  European  banking  sector  is  facing  profound 
challenges  that  are  reshaping  financial  intermediation  in  Europe.  These  are  in  principle 
positive forces and we should not stand in their way. It is banks that need respond and face 
the challenge. 
But we should also not be naïve: we need strong banks in Europe to support our economy, 
and policy has a role to play to achieving that. This does not mean helping individual banks 
or  promoting  national  champions,  it means  creating  an  environment  with  better  capitalised 
banks, better information and better regulation. Then, banking will have a solid future in the 
emerging European financial landscape. 
                                                
5   World  Bank  (2013),  Doing  Business  2014:  Understanding  Regulations  for  Small  and  Medium-Size 
Enterprises. 
6   See speech by Y. Mersch, “Next steps for European securitisation markets”, Barcelona, 11 June 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
