  
 
Chris Salmon: Financial market volatility and liquidity – a cautionary note 
Speech by Mr Chris Salmon, Executive Director for Markets of the Bank of England, at the 
National Asset-Liability Management Europe symposium, London, 13 March 2015. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Andrew  Butcher,  Jonathan  Rand,  Allison  Parent,  Joseph  Noss,  Olga  Cielinska,  Liam 
Crowley-Reidy, Sebastian Vismara, Lu Liu and Yuliya Baranova for their comments and contributions. 
As Executive Director for Markets at the Bank of England it is my job to manage the balance 
sheet, implementing various policy decisions that the Bank makes. I am also responsible for 
ensuring  that  the  Bank  extracts  as  much  “market  intelligence”  from  financial  market 
developments as is possible to inform those decisions. But it’s not my job to set policy. 
Given that, my remarks will focus on the key insights we have drawn from financial market 
developments  over  the  past  year  or  so,  in  the  context  of  what  has  been  quite  a  dynamic 
period for monetary policy. But I will not speculate on the future course of policy by the Bank 
of England or any other central bank, nor the likely effectiveness of the different strategies 
employed by central banks to achieve their targets. 
And my punch line will reveal me to be the central banker that I am: there are reasons to be 
cautious.  In  particular,  recent  periods  of  financial  market  volatility  suggest  that  there  are 
reasons to be cautious about the robustness of liquidity in core financial markets. 
To set the scene let me return to the middle of last summer, when volatility was exceptionally 
low across a range of financial markets; both compared to the period of heightened volatility 
that we saw in the crisis years and the period preceding it. That can be seen from this spider 
chart which shows measures of short-term implied volatility for a number of assets relative to 
these two periods. Anything less than zero is less volatile than the past, with the opposite 
true for positive plots (Chart 1). 
Our  market  intelligence  suggests  that  a  number  of  factors  contributed  to  these  stable 
outcomes. There was a relatively low level of uncertainty about the macroeconomic outlook. 
The extraordinary policy easing from central banks had depressed both implied and realised 
volatility. Forward guidance, as well as repeated rounds of quantitative easing had also led to 
market participants to take comfort from the mantra of “low-for-long”. This in turn incentivised 
investors  to  “search  for  yield”,  which  of  course  was  an  intended  consequence  of  the 
monetary  stance,  but  which  depressed  volatility  and  compressed  risk  premia  in  a  self-
reinforcing cycle. 
Since last summer volatility in many financial markets has picked up and there have been a 
number  of  short-lived  episodes  of  extreme  volatility  and  impaired  market  liquidity.  Implied 
volatilities have risen and in a number of the cases I showed earlier have returned to around 
pre-crisis  levels  (Chart  1).  Moreover,  longer-term  measures  of  volatility  have  generally 
increased  alongside  shorter-term  measures,  as  this  chart  which  plots  2-year  implied 
volatilities alongside 3-month volatilities suggests (Chart 2). 
We  have  also  witnessed  some  very  large  moves  in  financial  markets  over  the  past 
six-months.  Here  I  am  going  to  draw  on  two  examples  –  the  15  October  increase  in  US 
Treasury yields following the publication of unexpectedly weak US retail sales data, and the 
15 January appreciation of the Swiss franc following the SNB’s decision to remove its peg to 
the euro. The events had different drivers, but there are some common themes I would like 
to draw out. 
What unites the 15 October and 15 January episodes is that the immediate intra-day reaction 
to  the  news  was  unprecedented.  The  intra-day  change  in  10-year  US  bond  yields  was 
37 bps,  with  most  of  this  move  happening  within  just  an  hour  of  the  data  release.  The 
intraday range represented nearly eight standard deviations, exceeding the price moves that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  happened immediately following the collapse of Lehman Brothers. On 15 January, the Swiss 
franc appreciated by 14%. The intraday range was several times that number, and market 
participants continue to debate the highest traded value of the franc on the day. 
Such  events  could  imply  that  a  number  of  major  asset  markets  may  have  become  more 
sensitive  to  news,  so  that  a  given  shock  causes  greater  volatility.  A  number  of  recent 
statistical studies also imply this conclusion, suggesting that these recent episodes are a part 
of a broader pattern, even if they were exceptional in their scale. The following chart, using 
the output of a model estimated by Bank staff, is representative of the statistical analysis just 
referred  to1.  The  chart  compares  the  estimated  impact  on  UK  equity  and  corporate  debt 
asset price volatility of a given price shock in the post-crisis period relative to the pre-crisis 
period (Chart 3). Post crisis, both corporate debt volatility and equity market volatility appear 
to have become more responsive to a given price shock. This pattern is also apparent when 
the  model  is  applied  to  a  number  of  other  important  asset  markets,  including  for  example 
US-listed equities. 
Liquidity  was clearly affected on each of 15 October and 15 January. Measures of trading 
volumes, which provide one metric of liquidity, were reportedly high on both days for most 
affected markets. But the ability of market participants to trade without affecting prices, or in 
some  cases,  to  trade  at  all,  was  clearly  very  limited  at  various  points  on  these  days.  The 
intra-day loss of liquidity was probably even starker on 15 January, from what we can tell, 
with  widespread  feedback  that  foreign  exchange  trading  platforms  stopped  quoting  Swiss 
francs for periods of time, while liquidity in the Swiss fixed income market was all but lost on 
the day and remained impaired for a few days. The performance of the US Treasury market 
was  also  materially  affected  on  each  of  these  days,  such  that  much  smaller  trades  than 
normal moved prices. 
But in each of these cases there were stabilising forces that meant volatility subsided and 
liquidity  returned  relatively  quickly.  In  the  case  of  the  15  October  event,  what  had  been  a 
crowded  trade  was  pushed  so  far  from  prices  viewed  as  “justified”  by  fundamentals  that 
market participants were willing to provide support to the market. Similarly there was a re-
appraisal of the fundamentally justified level of the Swiss franc in the days that followed the 
removal of the peg, following public comments by the SNB. Volatility declined, if not all the 
way back to the pre-news level, relatively quickly following these initial spikes. This is most 
true of the 15 October episode: the implied volatility of 10-year interest rate swaps retraced 
about half of its upward move after two days, and was back to pre-October 15th levels within 
just two weeks. This quick stabilisation helped to limit contagion to other markets. 
Neither the increase in “baseline” volatility, nor the recent episodes I have just described, in 
of themselves materially affected stability in the United Kingdom. For us then, the question 
becomes what lessons can we learn? Why have volatility and liquidity evolved in this way? 
And is there an important “So what?” 
Starting with the “Why?”, market intelligence suggests that uncertainty surrounding the global 
outlook has been one factor; itself in no small part a consequence of the unexpected rough 
halving  in  the  price  of  oil  since  last  summer.  This  uncertainty  can  be  seen  in  the  recent 
increase in the dispersion of economists’ forecasts for inflation in the US, UK and euro area 
during 2015. 
Central banks themselves have reacted to the changed global outlook and monetary policy 
makers have been active in recent months. Indeed, so far this year 24 central banks have cut 
their policy rates. Moreover, the decisions by the ECB and three other central banks since 
                                                
1  An EGARCH model is fitted to FTSE All-Share daily returns and returns on a sterling-denominated investment-
grade corporate bond flat price index. The EGARCH model allows for conditional volatility to react differently to 
negative  and  positive  shocks  to  returns.  The  model  is  fitted  on  returns  data  split  into  two  sub-samples  of 
approximately equal length: pre-crisis (Jan 2001 – Jun 2007) and post-crisis (Apr 2009 – Jan 2015). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  last summer to set negative policy rates have raised questions about where the lower bound 
for monetary policy exists. Clearly the answer is no longer as simple as just above zero for all 
central  banks.  And  those  decisions  are  raising  questions  about  how  markets  work  when 
negative rates persist several years down the yield curve (Chart 4). The combination of this 
macroeconomic news and central bank action means the assumed known of “low-for-long” 
(but  positive)  policy  rates  which  market  participants  could  cite  as  little  as  a  year  ago  has 
been replaced by a less than certain landscape, helping to explain why  “baseline” volatility 
has picked up since last summer. 
But while this increase in macroeconomic uncertainty and central bank activity can explain 
some of the general increase in the level of volatility, it cannot explain the severity of events 
such  as  15  October  or  15  January.  To  explain  these  events  we  probably  need  to  look 
elsewhere. The obvious place to turn to is market structure, given that FICC markets, which 
rely on intermediaries to make markets and warehouse risk, are going through considerable 
change. 
Here I want to highlight two important contributing themes noted by market participants in our 
Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review,  both  related  to  the  provision  of  liquidity.  First,  market 
makers  have  become  more  reluctant  to  commit  capital  to  warehousing  risk.  During  our 
market  intelligence  conversations  some  have  suggested  that this  reflects  a  combination  of 
reduced  risk  tolerance  since  the  financial  crisis,  and  the  impact  of  regulation  designed  to 
improve the resilience of the financial system. 
This reduction in market making capacity has been associated with increased concentration 
in many FICC markets, as firms have been more discriminating about the markets which they 
make,  or  the  clients  they  serve.  And  this  trend  has  gone  hand-in-hand  with  a  growth  in 
assets  under  management  by  the  buy-side  community.  The  combination  has  served  to 
amplify  the  implications  of  reduced  risk  warehousing  capacity  of  the  intermediary  sector 
relative to the provision of liquidity from market makers during times of market stress relative 
to the past. 
That said, I would hesitate in drawing too much of a comparison between the market liquidity 
of today and that of pre-crisis. You don’t need a long memory to recall the impact of under-
pricing  liquidity  risk  on  the  highly  leveraged  market  makers.  Returning  to  such  a  situation 
would be a misplaced aspiration. 
The second theme I want to draw out is the evolution of market micro-structure. Electronic 
platforms  are  now  increasingly  used  across  the  various  FICC  markets.  In  some  cases 
regulation has been the cause but in others, such as foreign exchange markets, firms have 
over  a  number  of  years  increasingly  embraced  electronic  forms  of  trading.  This  includes 
using “request-for-quote” platforms to automate processes previously carried out by phone. 
Electronic  platforms  are  effective  in  pooling  liquidity  in  “normal”  times  but  may  have  the 
potential, at least as currently calibrated and given today’s level of competition, to contribute 
to  discontinuous  pricing  in  periods  of  stress  if  circuit-breakers  result  in  platforms  shutting 
down. There has been much commentary about the temporary unavailability of a number of 
electronic trading platforms in the immediate aftermath of the removal of the Swiss franc peg. 
A contrarian view, which I do not ascribe to, would be that no explanation is required. The 
argument would be that the apparent change in ability of markets to digest news is a mirage: 
the  statistical  analysis  would  prove  to  have  captured  a  transient  trend,  and  that 
intermediaries were never prepared to stand in the way of large market moves, during good 
times or bad. On this view, the reduction in balance sheet and the move towards electronic 
structures have been correlated with, but are not a cause of, the events we have seen. And 
the fact that the spikes in volatility have been visible in equity as well as bond markets, where 
market structure has not undergone as profound change as FICC markets, would be taken 
as  supporting  evidence.  This  view  would  caution  against  over-interpreting  a  few  isolated 
case  studies,  where  excessive  market  conviction  –  that  the  next  move  in  US  rates  would 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  definitely  be  up;  and  the  Swiss  peg  was  immutable  –  led  to  highly  crowded  trades 
accentuating the price moves and the impact on volatility. 
But  this  is  not  the  interpretation  I  lean  towards.  Not  least  because  we  hear  from  market 
participants  that,  far  from  biting  in  extreme  circumstances,  these  are  issues  that  FICC 
businesses  are  grappling  with  on  a  daily  basis.  An  eight  standard  deviation  move  in 
US Treasuries,  on  weaker-than  expected  US  retail  data,  lies  outside  the  bounds  of  what 
could  be  considered  a  transient  trend.  Consolidation  and  electronification  have  plausibly 
combined to accentuate the sharp moves seen last autumn and this January. The apparent 
increase in the incidence of such spikes in recent months may be because the “comforting 
cloak”  of  “low-for-long”  has  been  less  of  a  factor  in  suppressing  volatility  in  preceding 
months. 
Turning to the “So what?”, it is definitely not that the rise in volatility that is a concern per se: 
if  anything,  policymakers  have  long  been  concerned  about  the  potential  financial  stability 
risks  associated  with  a  long  period  of  low  volatility.  Even  with  the  recent  rises,  volatility  in 
most asset classes is only close to the average level of the pre-crisis period; a period which 
after the fact proved to have been associated with the under-pricing of risk and suppressed 
market volatility. 
Nor is it that necessarily the case that some decline in the liquidity of financial markets would 
be a concern: the correct answer is not always maximal liquidity as I noted earlier. We are 
unlikely to return to this pre-crisis world and should not see it as an aspiration. 
But,  if  we  accept  the  hypothesis  that  the  market’s  ability  to  digest  significant  news  has 
changed such that sudden increases in volatility and loss of liquidity are more likely, then the 
concern is that the stabilising factors which dampened the impact of such events in recent 
months may not always kick-in. In those circumstances the period of market dislocation could 
become  more  persistent,  increasing  the  scope  of  spillovers  across  financial  markets,  with 
potentially more significant impacts for financial stability. 
Put  another  way,  recent  months  have  shown  the  potential  for  short,  sharp  shocks.  But 
financial  markets  may  not  have  been  truly  tested  for  the  ability  to  absorb  price  moves  or 
flows that persist for a prolonged period, or for a wider spillover between markets. As such, 
the “So what?” is that market participants need to take note of the recent periods of volatility 
and illiquidity and remain aware of the possibility of these events occurring more frequently, 
and the potential for them to have more persistent effects. As the Bank’s December Financial 
Stability  Report  concluded,  “Adjustments  will  be  more  disruptive  if  investors’  pricing  of 
liquidity risk does not fully reflect structural changes in market liquidity.” 
In conclusion, financial market conditions have changed quite noticeably over the past year 
or  so.  In  part  this  is  conjunctural:  the  macroeconomic  outlook  has  changed  and  perhaps 
become less certain. Central banks have reacted, and in some cases pushed the innovation 
envelope  further.  Unsurprisingly  these  developments  have  been  associated  with  more 
volatile  financial  markets.  Given  that  policy-makers  have  previously  been  concerned  that 
persistently 
this 
development  is  not  necessarily  an  unwelcome  development.  But  recent  months  have  also 
seen a number of short episodes of sharply-higher volatility which coincided with periods of 
much impaired market liquidity. There are good reasons to believe that the severity of these 
events was accentuated by structural change in the FICC markets. There must be a risk that 
future  shocks  could  have  more  persistent  and  more  widespread  impacts  across  financial 
markets than has been the case in the recent past. One tool available to all central bankers 
to address such concerns is to raise awareness, so that traders appropriately price risk. 
And  that  is  why  it  is  only  fit  and  proper  for  me  to  finish  on  a  cautionary  note:  market 
participants take heed. 
 
financial  markets  could  encourage  excessive 
risk-taking, 
tranquil 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Appendix 
 Option-implied volatilities across selected asset classes 
Chart 1 
 Pre-crisis: 01 Jan 2003 - 08 Aug 2007
Crisis: 09 Aug 2007 - 31 Dec 2009
Jun 2014 FSR: 26 Jun 2014
11 Mar 2015
USDGBP
1.5
Gold
Oil
EM FX
Japan long rates
Japan short rates
US long rates
0.0
-1.5
-3.0
JPYUSD
USDEUR
FTSE 100
S&P 500
Nikkei 225
UK short rates
US short rates
UK long rates
Sources: Bank of England, Barclays Live, Bloomberg and Bank calculations. 
(a)  Number  of  standard  deviations  from  historical  mean  of  three-month  implied 
volatilities. Historical means calculated over the period since 2003. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Chart 2  
Longer-term measures of option-implied volatility 
 GBP/USD 3m option volatility
GBP/USD 2y option volatility
3m S&P variance swap rate
2y S&P variance swap rate
3m10y normalised imlied vol on USD IR (LHS)
2y10y normalised imlied vol on USD IR (LHS)
Basis points 
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Jan 10 Jul 10 Jan 11 Jul 11 Jan 12 Jul 12 Jan 13 Jul 13 Jan 14 Jul 14 Jan 15
Per cent 
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Sources: Barclays Live, Bloomberg. 
Implied volatilities are “normalised” by the level of interest rates, so the data show the volatility of absolute (rather 
than percentage) changes in swap rates. 
 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Impact of asset price news on volatility in UK equity and debt markets 
Chart 3  
 Pre-crisis credit (Jan 2001 - Jun 2007)
Post-crisis credit (April 2009 - Jan 2015)
Pre-crisis equity (Jan 2001 - Jun 2007)
Post-crisis equity (April 2009 - Jan 2015)
-3%
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
Unexpected daily change in price (per cent) 
Sources: Bank of American Merrill Lynch, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations. 
 
 Conditional daily 
volatility (%) 
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Negative rates in European government bond markets 
Chart 4 
Positive Negative
Switzerland
Germany
Finland
Netherlands
Denmark
Austria
Belgium
France
Sweden
Spain
Italy 
Norway 
UK
1
-0.89
-0.27
-0.20
-0.80
-0.16
-0.16
-0.19
-0.16
0.07
0.03
0.73
0.35
2
-0.99
-0.25
-0.18
-0.18
-0.62
-0.17
-0.16
-0.20
-0.17
0.10
0.11
0.59
3
-0.81
-0.24
-0.15
-0.15
-0.17
-0.13
-0.16
0.18
0.23
0.76
0.87
 4
-0.61
-0.21
-0.11
-0.13
-0.12
-0.08
-0.09
0.01
0.28
0.36
1.12
Maturity (years)
6
-0.38
-0.09
-0.06
-0.05
-0.04
-0.05
0.02
0.08
5
-0.47
-0.16
-0.08
-0.07
-0.31
-0.06
-0.06
0.01
0.24
0.47
0.50
0.92
1.31
0.63
0.65
1.47
7
-0.32
-0.02
-0.03
0.00
0.02
0.15
0.18
0.44
0.74
0.79
1.16
1.61
8
-0.29
0.05
0.09
0.07
0.15
0.12
0.24
0.27
0.61
0.88
0.93
1.72
9
-0.24
0.13
0.14
0.17
0.19
0.34
0.36
1.05
1.06
1.34
1.82
10
-0.11
0.20
0.22
0.26
0.26
0.29
0.43
0.45
0.73
1.15
1.19
1.45
1.91
Bloomberg and Bank calculations
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
