  Benoît Cœuré: Consolidating the euro area’s economic recovery 
Introductory remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, prior to an informal exchange of views with the European Affairs Committee 
and the Finance Committee of the National Assembly, Paris, 13 May 2015. 
 Madam Chairman, 
Mr Vice-Chairman, 
Ladies and Gentlemen of the National Assembly, 
Thank you for the opportunity to address you today. 
The National Assembly, like all of the national parliaments, plays a vital role every day in the 
necessary interaction between national and European institutions. The effectiveness of our 
policies is in the balance: our economies are too interdependent for us to turn our backs on 
one another. Our legitimacy is also in the balance: European strategies and decisions that 
require national political involvement cannot be effectively implemented unless they are fully 
understood and supported by the Member States. 
I know that your committees pay close attention to economic developments in the euro area 
and  to  the  European  Central  Bank’s  decisions.  These  will  be  the  crux  of  my  introductory 
remarks.  I  also  want  to  hear  what  you  have  to  say  and  take  your  questions,  because 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  is  an  ongoing  project.  The  crisis  showed  us  that  we  need 
more coherent economic policies and a stronger institutional foundation for the euro area. 
The ECB’s monetary policy during the crisis 
1. 
During the crisis, the European Central Bank was confronted with considerable challenges. 
The  first  was  to  maintain  confidence  in  the  single  currency  amid  tremendous  financial 
instability and uncertainty. 
The second was to maintain price stability despite financial fragmentation in the euro area. 
And the third was to combat the risk of prolonged weakness in inflation at a time when all of 
the ECB’s conventional instruments had already been used. 
These challenges guided our actions in pursuit of our price stability objective. 
This led to an unprecedented accommodative stance in our monetary policy, a stance carried 
out via a wide range of measures, some conventional and others unconventional. 
As you know, the principal channel used to implement conventional measures, those used by 
central banks in normal times, is the interest rate channel. In response to weak growth and 
inflation, we lowered our key interest rates to their lower bound. By doing so, we reduced the 
cost of borrowing in order to support investment and consumption. 
To amplify the impact of the rate cuts, we also issued forward guidance on the likely path of 
key interest rates. This transparency allowed us to keep short-term interest rates in the euro 
area low and stable, which suited conditions in the euro area, despite the pressures seen on 
international capital markets. 
However, the lack of confidence in certain Member States in the financial system and in the 
solvency of sovereign borrowers was an impediment to the transmission of monetary policy 
to  the  broader  economy  during  the  crisis.  In  countries  gripped  by  financial  difficulties, 
financing conditions remained restrictive, despite the easing of monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
To  restore  uniform  monetary  policy  transmission  and  tackle  the  risks  to  price  stability,  the 
ECB thus needed to combine conventional measures with unconventional measures tailored 
to  the  particular  situation  in  the  euro  area.  The  ECB  pursued  this  strategy  throughout  the 
crisis. 
We  initially  sought  to  make  sure  that  banks  could  refinance  themselves  under  good 
conditions so that they could continue to finance the economy. The Governing Council, for 
example,  decided  to  supply  banks  with  unlimited  liquidity  at  a  fixed  interest  rate,  to 
significantly extend the maturity of our refinancing operations and to expand the list of assets 
eligible for use as collateral. 
When  fears  regarding  the  euro  area’s  integrity  surfaced  at  the  height  of  the  crisis,  in 
August/September  2012,  the  Governing  Council  created  Outright  Monetary  Transactions 
(OMTs). These monetary transactions made it possible to intervene, if needed, in secondary 
sovereign  debt  markets  in  the  event  of  a  speculative  attack,  notably  one  linked  to  single 
currency  fears.  They  were  conditional  on  the  establishment  of  a  financial  aid  programme 
under the European Stability Mechanism, which would constitute an indication of confidence 
in the economic convergence and fiscal viability of any country in which we would be called 
upon to intervene. This decision led to a dramatic decline in the risk premia on sovereign 
yields, notably those of Italy and Spain. Thus, it contributed to the efforts undertaken in the 
euro area, which also involved the creation of the banking union, to break the vicious circle of 
sovereign risk undermining banks’ stability and thus their ability to finance the real economy. 
The OMT tool has not been used, but it still could be if fears of the single currency’s integrity 
resurface. 
More recently, to help stimulate the flow of financing to the economy, the Governing Council 
decided on new unconventional measures to support the provision of credit. We gave banks 
access to five-year refinancing operations on the condition that, in exchange, they boost their 
lending to the real economy. In September 2014 we also established a programme to buy 
covered  bonds  and  asset-backed  securities  directly  linked  to  the  financing  of  the  real 
economy. 
Together,  these  measures  have  already  helped  –  and  continue  to  help  –  ease  financing 
conditions in the euro area. 
Expanded asset purchase programme 
2. 
Despite this progress, the growing threat of prolonged weakness in inflation has made new 
measures necessary. As a result, in January 2015 the Governing Council decided to launch 
an expanded asset purchase programme. 
At a time of weak domestic inflationary pressures, the steep drop in oil prices from mid-2014 
onwards  caused  inflation  to  weaken  further.  Moreover,  an  extended  period  of  excessively 
weak inflation can affect inflation expectations and thereby become self-perpetuating. 
A firm monetary response was needed. 
Thus, we decided to expand our asset purchase programme. 
The  combined  purchases  of  public  and  private  sector  debt  will  amount  to  €60  billion  per 
month. They began in March and are expected to continue until the end of September 2016. 
In any event, they will continue until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in 
the path of inflation that is consistent with its goal of achieving rates below, but close to, 2% 
over the medium term. 
How does this asset purchase programme affect the real economy, and thereby, inflation? 
The first transmission channel is that of confidence. The purchases put inflation back on a 
path consistent with a pace of close to 2% over the medium term and give the confidence 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
boost needed for a recovery in private investment, which remains too far from its pre-crisis 
level (16.8% of GDP in 2014 compared with 19.9% in 2007 in the euro area). 
A second transmission channel involves lowering sovereign bond yields, which are used as a 
price-setting  benchmark  for  a  wide  range  of  private  sector  financial  instruments,  such  as 
bank loans to households and businesses. 
Thirdly,  the  large  amounts  of  liquidity  injected  through  these  purchases  will  allow  private 
investors  (banks  and  non-banks)  to  undertake  portfolio  shifts  into  other  financial  assets, 
particularly  loans  to  the  economy.  This  will  lead  to  more  favourable  conditions  for  all 
instruments used to finance the economy. 
Lastly, the easing of financing conditions also influences the exchange rate, although this is 
not an objective in and of itself. 
Where  do  we  stand  with  respect  to  the  programme’s  implementation?  We  have  begun 
purchasing  securities  with  no  major  difficulties,  and  the  pace  of  monthly  purchases  is 
consistent with the stated target. The positive impact of our most recent measures on the 
financing of the real economy can already be seen. Bank lending rates have fallen by 40 to 
50 basis points since summer 2014, and they should continue to fall, in the wake of the steep 
drop in sovereign yields. 
Lower  financing  costs  for  businesses  and  households  are  expected,  in  turn,  to  support 
growth in lending and investment. In fact, the contraction in lending appears to be reversing 
in the euro area. Bank lending to non-financial corporations grew 1% year on year in the first 
quarter, compared with a 2% decrease the year before. In France, year-on-year growth in 
lending to businesses came to around 4% in March, compared with just 1% a year earlier. 
In light of these improvements, euro area growth projections and inflation expectations have 
both been revised upward. The macroeconomic projections produced by ECB staff in March 
2015 predicted euro area growth of 1.5% in 2015, 1.9% in 2016 and 2.1% in 2017. Growth 
will  be  supported  by  rising  external  demand,  lower  oil  prices  and  the  accommodative 
monetary  policy  stance.  The  first-quarter  euro  area  growth  figures  released  on  13  May 
confirm this trend. Inflation is expected to gradually return to a level below, but close to, 2% 
by 2017. This trend reversal is already evident in the upswing in inflation expectations seen 
on financial markets. 
Finishing the job: from a cyclical recovery to a structural recovery 
3. 
Despite these positive signs, the recovery remains insufficient and uneven. 
The  factors  supporting  growth  today  are  temporary  in  nature.  Serious  risks  remain  at  the 
international  level.  The  recovery  is  chiefly  supported  by  the  euro’s  depreciation  and  lower 
energy  costs,  whose  effects  will  diminish  over  time.  This  is  also  true  of  monetary  policy, 
which cannot have a lasting impact on an economy’s long-term growth trend. It is up to euro 
area governments to act so that the recovery is more than a flash in the pan and long-term 
growth takes over from cyclical support factors. 
The euro area’s unemployment rate remains very high, at 11.3% in March, and has reached 
unacceptable levels in several countries. In some countries, more than half of young people 
in the labour force are out of work. This situation is largely structural in nature1  (structural 
unemployment  is  now  over  10%).  Furthermore,  given  the  low  level  of  potential  growth,2 
                                                
1   On this point, see “Unemployment in the euro area”, a speech by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, to the 
annual central bank symposium in Jackson Hole, 22 August 2014. 
2   On the prospects for economic growth potential, please refer to Anderton, R. et al., “Potential output from a 
euro  area  perspective”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper  Series,  No 156,  November  2014;  European  Economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
strongly undermined by the crisis and estimated at under 1%, there are clear priorities for 
reform from  the  ECB’s standpoint:  encourage  productive  investment,  improve  employment 
rates and training, and restore the overall productivity of inputs by reducing barriers to entry 
and  to  innovation  and  by  improving  economic  conditions  for  companies.  These  are  the 
priorities that the Governor of the Banque de France laid out in his letter to the President of 
the  French  Republic.3  It  is  not  the  role  of  the  ECB  to  say  specifically  how  these  reforms 
should be designed and implemented. 
A chief complaint is that structural reforms hurt growth and employment in the short term. I 
would  counter  that  if  reforms  are  ambitious,  complementary  and  credible,4  they  will  elicit 
expectations  of  a  sustained  period  of  higher  income,  encouraging  households  to  increase 
consumption and businesses to invest. 
Recent  European  Commission forecasts  show  that  euro  area  countries  that  have  pursued 
the  most  ambitious  reforms,  such  as  Spain,  are  now  experiencing  stronger  growth.  The 
countries that reform the most will benefit the most from our accommodative monetary policy. 
In  terms  of  fiscal  policy,  here  again  it  is  not  the  role  of  the  ECB  to  say  specifically  what 
countries  should  do,  but  I  want  to  remind  you  of  three  simple  tenets  that  we  think  are 
extremely important. 
First  of  all,  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  is  a  community  of  interest  founded  on  a 
capacity for joint action and the application of rules. Rules can change, a point I will come 
back to, but first they have to be applied. It is a question of mutual trust, and in this the larger 
countries must set an example. 
Second, managing macroeconomic conditions in the euro area means paying just as much 
attention to the fiscal situation in each country to which the rules apply as we do to the area’s 
overall fiscal situation: “all for one and one for all”. From this standpoint, our recommendation 
is  clear.  The  fiscal  stance  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  (measured,  for  example,  by  the 
change in the structural budget balance) is neutral overall, and in our view is suited to the 
current economic situation, but the room for manoeuvre in individual countries differs greatly. 
Countries  in  excessive  deficit  situations  must  continue  their  efforts,  and  those  with  some 
leeway can use it, particularly to encourage investment. 
Lastly, the composition of the fiscal adjustment is of the utmost importance. Better targeted 
spending, notably on investment, the public sector portion of which fell during the crisis (from 
7.1% of public spending in the euro area in 2007 to 5.5% in 2014), will create more growth 
and more jobs. 
Strengthen the euro area’s institutional foundations 
4. 
In countries that share a single currency, economic policies are a point of common interest. 
This  is  in  the  economic  interest  of  the  Member  States  and  is  also  a  legal  obligation:  the 
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is clear on this point. This is a necessary 
condition if we want to fully benefit from monetary union and, at the same time, remedy the 
structural,  fiscal  and  financial  weaknesses  within  the  euro  area:  the  crisis  showed  us  that 
local fragilities quickly become everyone’s problem. On the flip side, our monetary policy and 
banking union have shown the power of joint action. It is a lesson we must not forget. 
                                                                                                                                                   
Forecast Spring 2015, European Commission; and “Where are we headed? Perspectives on potential output”, 
in World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, 2015. 
3   Christian Noyer, “Introductory Letter to the Banque de France’s Annual Report”, 4 May 2015. 
4   Anderson, D., Barkbu, B., Lusiyan, L. and Muir, D., “Assessing the Gains from Structural Reforms for Jobs 
and Growth”, in Schindler, M., Berger, H., Bakker, B. and Spilimbergo, A. (eds), Jobs and Growth: Supporting 
the European Recovery, International Monetary Fund, 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  crisis  has  already  led  to  major  progress  on  institutional  matters,  such  as  the 
establishment  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  or  the  banking  union,  with  a  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism and a Single Resolution Fund based on common rules. These two 
achievements have played a key role in strengthening monetary union during the crisis. 
The  establishment  of  the  banking  union  is  also  an  example  of  an  institutional  process 
allowing the sharing of risk, which followed several steps. 
First: political agreement on European legislation laying down common rules and putting an 
end to bank sector abuses. I am thinking specifically of strengthening capital at systemically 
important  banks,  bail-in  rules  that  will  eventually  rid  the  banking  sector  of  the  practice  of 
“privatising profits and socialising losses”, and – I hope – application at European level of the 
principle of bank structural reform, which the ECB supports.5 
Second:  shared  institutions  incorporating  national  institutions  that  ensure  the  credible 
implementation  of  those  rules  for  the  prevention  and  resolution  of  crises.  The  ECB  is  a 
demanding  bank  regulator,  freed  from  the  hindrance  of  national  interests.  Third:  a 
transparency  and  convergence  exercise  aimed  at  resolving  the  fragilities  of  the  past.  And 
finally: clear political legitimacy and an obligation to answer both to the European Parliament 
(for the President of the ECB and the Chair of the Supervisory Board) and to the national 
parliaments (for the competent national authorities). 
It  is  now  important  to  identify  the  areas  where  additional  progress  is  required  in  order  to 
ensure  the  coherence  and  cohesion  that  is  necessary  for  the  effective  functioning  of 
Economic and Monetary Union. In particular, I believe it is essential that monetary union is 
more resilient when faced with shocks and fosters all of the potential benefits of integration in 
terms  of  European  prosperity.  This  means  moving  towards  more  effective  economic 
structures,6  but  also  exploiting  the  economies  of  scale  and  risk-sharing  that  are  made 
possible  by  integration.7  Such  economic  risk  sharing  involves  chiefly  the  development  of 
larger and more stable internal markets,8 as well as rules that protect European consumers 
and workers within these larger markets, and lastly, a more ambitious fiscal union. 
It is true that this development implies sharing our sovereignty. But sharing sovereignty does 
not mean losing it; in fact, it is a way of regaining it. And a shared European sovereignty on 
the  basis  of  democratically  accountable  common  institutions  allows  us  to  go  beyond  a 
system based on rules by recreating a space for political debate. 
It  is  not  the  task  of  the  ECB  to  lay  down  the  details  of  these  reforms,  whose  nature  is 
eminently  political.  But  it  is  our  duty  to  warn  that  the  construction  of  the  euro  area  is 
incomplete.  We  are  only  half-way  there.  Stopping  now  would  mean  that  we  would  be 
responsible for leaving our Economic and Monetary Union in a lasting state of fragility, which 
the economic recovery could only temporarily conceal. 
The  “Four  Presidents  Report”  (by  the  Presidents  of  the  European  Council,  the  European 
Commission,  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Eurogroup),  which  is  in  the  process  of 
being  prepared,  will  reflect  on  the  progress  that  needs  to  be  made  with  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union.  I  hope  that  this  report  will  set  out  an  ambitious  vision  of  the  future  of 
                                                
5  
“Opinion on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on structural measures 
improving the resilience of EU credit institutions”, 19 November 2014. 
“Investing  in  Europe:  towards  a  new  convergence  process”,  speech  by  Benoît  Cœuré,  member  of  the 
Executive Board of the ECB, Athens, 9 July 2014. 
“The  political  dimension  of  European  economic  integration”,  speech  by  Benoît  Cœuré,  member  of  the 
Executive  Board  of  the  ECB,  at  the  19th  Université  d’automne  de  la  Ligue  des  droits  de  l’Homme,  Paris, 
23 November 2013. 
6  
7  
8   As regards capital markets, for example. See, in this regard, “Completing the single market in capital”, speech 
by Benoît Cœuré, member of the Executive Board of the ECB, Paris, 19 May 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
Economic and Monetary Union, without neglecting the pragmatic steps that are possible in 
the short term without Treaty change, notably to improve economic policy coordination and 
the functioning of the European Semester. 
We must now seek to put this to its fullest possible use. I know that some have construed the 
European Semester, and especially its country-specific recommendations, as the European 
Commission meddling in national economic and fiscal policy, which they equate with a loss 
of  sovereignty.  I  do  not  share  their  view.  In  an  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  that  is  still 
incomplete,  it  is  vital  that  authorities  at  both  the  national  and  the  European  level  take 
responsibility for treating economic policies as a question of common interest. The objective 
is not coordination for coordination’s sake. It is an open debate among the Member States on 
the  areas  in  which  each  of  them  must  make  progress  to  strengthen  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union as a whole and, finally, a joint decision by the Member States on what to 
recommend to each of them. However, it must also be clear that once the decision is made 
by the Council of Ministers, all participants at both the European and national level have a 
responsibility to make sure that the recommendations are fully incorporated into the legal and 
regulatory framework. Previous efforts have been disappointing in this respect, and I hope 
that 
the  announcement  of  planned 
recommendations by the European Commission, will be different. 
The  National  Assembly  has  an  essential  role  to  play  in  this  context  and  in  the  process of 
strengthening Economic and Monetary Union. 
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
round,  which  begins 
today  with 
the  2015 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
