  Andrew G Haldane: Who owns a company? 
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of 
England,  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh  Corporate  Finance  Conference,  Edinburgh, 
22 May 2015. 
 The  views  are  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Bank  of  England  or  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee. I would like to thank Jeremy Franklin, Conor Macmanus, Jennifer Nemeth, Ben 
Norman,  Peter  Richardson,  Orlando  Fernandez  Ruiz,  John  Sutherland,  Ali  Uppal  and 
Matthew Willison for their help in preparing the text. I would also like to thank Andrew Bailey, 
Mark Carney, Iain de Weymarn, Sam Harrington, Alan Murray, Rhys Phillips and David Rule 
for their comments and contributions. 
Introduction 
This might  seem  like  a simple  question  with  a simple  answer.  At  least for  publically  listed 
companies, its owners are its shareholders. It is they who claim the profits of the company, 
potentially in perpetuity. It is they who exercise control rights over the management of the 
company from whom they are distinct. And it is they whose objectives have primacy in the 
running of the company. 
This is corporate finance 101. It is the centrepiece of most corporate finance textbooks. It is 
the  centrepiece  of  company  law.  It  is  the  centrepiece  of most  public  policy  discussions  of 
corporate governance. And it is a structure which, ultimately, has survived the test of time, 
having  existed  in  more  or  less  the  same  form  for  over  150  years  in  most  advanced 
economies. 
That the public company has been a success historically is not subject to serious dispute. It 
was no coincidence that its arrival in a number of advanced economies, in the middle of the 
19th  century,  marked  the  dawn  of  mass  industrialisation.  The  public  company  was  a  key 
ingredient in this second industrial revolution. Perhaps for that reason, the public company is, 
in many people’s eyes, the very fulcrum of capitalist economies. 
Yet despite its durability and success, across countries and across time, this corporate model 
has  not  gone  unquestioned.  Recently,  these  questions  have  come  thick  and  fast,  with  a 
rising tide of criticism of companies’ behaviour, from excessive executive remuneration, to 
unethical  practices,  to  monopoly  or  oligopoly  powers,  to  short-termism.  These  concerns 
appear to be both strongly-felt and widely-held. 
Among  the  general  public,  surveys  suggest  a  majority  do  not  trust  public  companies, 
especially big companies.1 Among professional investors, sentiment is well-encapsulated by 
the following quote from Larry Fink, CEO of Blackrock – the world’s largest asset manager – 
in a letter sent to the Chairmen and CEOs of the top 500 US companies earlier this year:2 
“[M]ore and more corporate leaders have responded with actions that can deliver 
immediate  returns  to  shareholders,  such  as  buybacks  or  dividend  increases, 
while  underinvesting  in  innovation,  skilled  workforces  or  essential  capital 
expenditures necessary to sustain long-term growth.” 
Among academics, John Kay’s UK government-initiated review into short-termism in equity 
markets and their effect on listed companies (Kay (2012)), Colin Mayer’s Firm Commitment 
                                                
1 
2  Full letter published on Business Insider. See http://www.businessinsider.com/larry-fink-letter-to-ceos-2015-4?IR=T.  
2015 Edelman TrustBarometer. For further details please see: http://www.edelman.com/.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
(Mayer (2013)) and Lynn Stout’s The Shareholder Value Myth (Stout (2012)) each raise deep 
and far-reaching questions about the purpose and structure of today’s companies. 
Are these concerns legitimate? What is their precise micro-economic source? And are they 
now of sufficient macro-economic importance to justify public policy intervention? To answer 
those questions, it is useful to start with the origins of modern-day companies, before looking 
at  the  potential  incentive  problems  among  stakeholders  embedded  in  those  structures. 
Finally, I consider public policy actions that might mitigate these problems. 
These problems are not specific to any industry. But banks’ balance sheets and governance 
structures  mean  they  may  be  especially  prone  to  these  incentive  problems.  So  I  will  use 
them  to  illustrate  some  of  the  micro-economic  frictions  and  their  macro-economic  impact. 
Indeed,  it  is  no  coincidence  that  the  most  significant  changes  to  corporate  governance 
practices recently have been within the banking sector. 
A short history of companies 
Let  me  begin  by  defining  “corporate  governance”  in  its  broadest  sense:  as  the  set  of 
arrangements that determine a company’s objectives and how control rights, obligations and 
decisions are allocated among various stakeholders in the company (Allen and Gale (2000)). 
These  stakeholders  comprise  not  only  shareholders  and  managers,  but  also  creditors, 
employees, customers and clients, government, regulators and wider society. 
Over the past two centuries, several dozen pieces of company legislation have been enacted 
in  the  UK  alone.  This  legislation  has  successively  defined  and  redefined  these  purposes, 
rights and obligations among stakeholders. This legislative path has been long and winding – 
Table  1  provides  a  summary.  It  has  been  shaped  importantly  by  the  social,  legal  and 
economic climate of the day. And it is the interplay between these contextual factors that, 
through an evolutionary process, has delivered today’s corporate governance model. 
Moving to incorporation 
Tracing definitively the origins of what today are called companies is not straightforward. It is 
possible  to  sketch  a  timeline  stretching  back  at  least  to  Rome  around  700BC  to  find 
something  resembling  a  company  (Shelton  (1965)).  Certainly,  by  the  sixth  century  AD  a 
number of corporate entities were codified in Roman Law (Moyle (1913)). 
Modern  concepts  of  tradable  “shares”  in  companies  appear  to  have  emerged  in  the 
mid-thirteenth century in continental Europe. In England, early methods of incorporation were 
set out in a common law case in 1615: incorporation was a privilege bestowed by the state, 
either by a Royal Charter or a private Act of Parliament.3 At least in principle, this meant a 
company was incorporated with public good objectives in mind. 
A prominent early example of such a company was the Bank of England. It was established 
in 1694 under both a Royal Charter4 and an Act of Parliament.5 The Charter establishing the 
Bank made clear that its purpose was “to promote the public good and benefit of our people”. 
And so it remains today. 
But this incorporation process was costly, lengthy and cumbersome. It was also subject to 
favouritism  and  abuse.  Lawyers  and  businessmen  began  to  find  legal  loopholes  allowing 
them  to  found  companies  while  remaining  unincorporated.  These  unincorporated  entities 
                                                
3   Chief Justice Coke set out how “lawful authority of incorporation…may be by four means[:]…by the Common Law, as the 
King  himself;…by  authority  of  Parliament;  by  the  King’s  Charter;  and  by  prescription.”  See  Hunt  (1936),  and 
http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/911/106352#lf0462-01_head_102 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Documents/legislation/1694charter.pdf  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Documents/legislation/1694act.pdf  
4 
5 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
were generally small partnerships, whose members both owned and controlled the company 
and faced unlimited liability. 
This  model  was  an  incentive-compatible  one.  It  delivered  a  close  alignment  between  the 
interests of directors and shareholders – typically, they were one and the same. Meanwhile, 
unlimited  liability  created  sharp  incentives  among  owners  to  avoid  insolvency  as  typically 
their  very  livelihoods  depended  on  it.  And  this,  in  turn,  helped  protect  wider  stakeholders, 
including creditors and customers, from company risk. 
From unlimited to limited liability 
Times were, however, changing. Approaching the middle of the 19th century, the era of mass 
industrialisation was dawning. Pressures to expand companies, financed by larger pools of 
capital,  began  to  mount.  Unlimited  liability  was  felt  by  some  to  create  an  insurmountable 
barrier to such expansion, inhibiting prospective deep-pocketed investors from putting their 
money into unlimited liability ventures. 
As Liberal MP William Clay said in 1836 “unlimited liability has a tendency to deter persons 
of fortune, intelligence and respectability from becoming partners or managers of joint-stock 
banks”. Walter Bagehot attacked unlimited liability on the grounds that its financial benefits 
were illusory, as most shareholders simply did not have deep enough pockets to make good 
prospective losses (Bagehot (1862)). 
International  practices  were  also  shifting.  Limited  liability  had  been  introduced  in  parts  of 
continental Europe from the  17th  century onwards. It had also begun its journey across the 
Atlantic, with Connecticut and Massachusetts adopting it from 1817 (Haldane (2011)). 
In 1854, a Mercantile Law Commission in the UK reported on its review into limited liability. 
Its verdict was clear: “although the details of our mercantile laws may require correction…it 
would  be  unwise  to  interfere  with  principles  which…have  proved  beneficial  to  the  general 
industry of the country” (Johnson (2013)). In short, the costs of limiting liability outweighed its 
benefits. 
It was to no avail. A well-connected, and newly wealthy, middle class was eager to protect its 
riches  when  owning  and  investing  in  business  (Ireland  (2010)).  And  an  eager-to-please 
political  class  was  keen  to  expand  business  to  stimulate  economic  activity  (Blumberg 
(1986)). Parliament passed the Limited Liability Act in 1855. 
With  limited  liability,  incentives  to  avoid  insolvency  were  no  longer  so  sharp.  As  share 
ownership widened, directors and shareholders became distinct entities. In the eyes of the 
law,  a  share  was  no  longer  an  equitable  interest  in  a  company’s  assets  (Ireland  (2010)). 
Instead it was a residual claim on its future profits. A Rubicon had been crossed. 
Britain’s early banks 
Interestingly, banks followed a somewhat more circuitous route, albeit to the same end-point. 
Until 1826, the number of partners in a note-issuing bank in England was limited to six. The 
six-partner rule for English banks was relaxed in 1826. But it was not until 1858 that English 
banks were allowed to limit their liability, three years after non-financial institutions. This was 
recognition that the risks posed by banks were on an altogether greater scale. 
Even  after  legislation  was  passed,  the  initial  response  by  banks  was  lukewarm.  Their 
directors fretted  about  the  signal  that  limited  liability  sent  to  depositors.  That  concern  was 
reinforced  when  Overend  and  Gurney  failed  in  1866;  it  had  adopted  limited  liability  just 
months  before  its  failure.  For  the  eleven  British  banks  with  unlimited  liability  that  failed 
between 1836 and 1878, every depositor had been paid out in full (Turner (2014)).6 
                                                
6  Turner (2014) Table 5.6. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Shareholders’  willingness  to  do  so  was  helped  by  them  vetting  share  transfers to  exclude 
owners without sufficient funds. Indeed, banks’ shareholders remained liable even after they 
had sold their shares: in Scotland, former shareholders were liable for debts incurred when 
they had been a shareholder, while in England and Ireland a shareholder remained liable for 
three years after they had sold their shares (Button et al (2015)). 
But critics of unlimited liability for banks were becoming increasingly vocal. George Rae, an 
Aberdonian  who  became  a  prominent  banker  during  the  19th  century,  feared  that  “men  of 
wealth and position would gradually sell out” such that unlimited liability was reduced to “a 
husk without its kernel” (Rae (1885)).7 The tide was gradually turning. 
In 1849, only the five original joint-stock banks set up by state charter – the Bank of England, 
the 
Bank of Scotland, the Royal Bank of Scotland, the Bank of Ireland and the British Linen Bank 
– were statutorily permitted to operate with limited liability. By 1869, roughly a third of British 
banks had limited their shareholders’ liability.8 
But it was the failure of the City of Glasgow Bank in 1878 that precipitated a decisive shift 
away from unlimited liability.9 Such a large proportion – 86% – of its shareholders were wiped 
out that a public relief fund was set up to support them. As The Economist reported at the 
time,  “the  share  lists  of  most  of  our  banks  exhibit  a  very  large  –  almost  an  incredible  – 
number of spinsters and widows” (Button et al (2015)). 
The Companies Act 1879 introduced a different liability concept  – reserve liability  – under 
which a shareholder was liable to meet a bank’s debt up to a fixed multiple of their equity 
investment  in  the  case  of  its  failure.  This  was  analogous  to  the  double-liability  system 
adopted  for  US  bank  shareholders  at  the  time.10  By  1889,  all  bar  two  British  banks  had 
limited their shareholders’ liability and nearly two-thirds had opted for reserve liability.11 
But  even  reserve  liability  was  felt  to  be  precarious,  stoking  rather  than  abating  banking 
crises.  As  Bank  of  England  Deputy  Governor  Catterns  stated  in  a  secret  memo  of  1937 
“today  a  bank  could  not  in  a  crisis  make  a  call  on  shareholders  without  aggravating  the 
crisis”.12  In  the  1950s,  the  major  British  banks  eliminated  their  remaining  uncalled  capital 
(Turner (2009)). 
Entrenching shareholder rights 
Yet, even once firmly rooted, limited liability quickly gave rise to a new set of questions. If 
managers  were  no  longer  personally  liable  for  failure,  what  incentivised  them  to  protect 
investors’ money? And what provided the incentives for shareholders, increasingly dispersed 
and with their claims protected from downside risk, to remain engaged? 
In  the  19th  century,  maximising  shareholder  return  was  not  the  centrepiece  of  companies’ 
objectives  or  directors’  duties.  To  be  sure,  paying  a  regular  dividend  was  important  and 
shareholders  could  –  and  often  did  –  challenge  directors  regarding  its  size.  But  wider 
considerations played as important a role. 
Introducing his reflections in 1885 on “the  rights  and  duties  of  shareholders”, George Rae 
observed that “when a man becomes a shareholder in a bank he becomes to all intents and 
                                                
7  Rae (1885). 
8  Acheson, Hickson & Turner (2010). 
9  Button et al (2015). 
10  Esty (1998). 
11  Acheson et al (2010). 
12  Turner (2014). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  purposes a co-partner in the business transacted by it. True, he is only one partner amongst 
a thousand others in your Bank; but that does not release him from the obligation of doing 
what he can for the common good” (Rae (1885)). 
Walter  Leaf,  chairman  of  Westminster  Bank  Ltd,  writing  in  the  1920s  remarked:  “The 
confidence in British banking which has been acquired by long experience is mainly due to 
the sense that Directors have conducted the business of their banks with constant attention 
to public interests in the first place” (Leaf (1937)). The public good remained centre-stage in 
companies’, and in particular banks’, objectives. 
Yet even as Rae and Leaf were writing, shareholders’ focus on returns was sharpening. Rae 
comments:  “There  are  shareholders  to  be  found  here  and  there,  to  whom  their  own  Bank 
would appear to be a hostile institution, which it is their business to attack on the slightest 
pretext… He is disappointed with the dividend, and objects to the balance carried forward to 
next year as excessive” (Rae (1885)). 
The legal framework underpinning companies was also starting to fray. It had failed to keep 
pace with the boom in the number of shareholders and their quest for dividends. Cases of 
company  fraud  began  to  proliferate  (Ireland  (2010)).  In  1848,  Arthur  Smith  published  a 
pamphlet where he uncovered that most railway companies – the poster child for the modern 
corporation  –  were  in  fact  profitless  and  paying  dividends  to  shareholders  out  of  capital 
(Smith (1848)). 
The law responded with a number of measures to protect shareholders. These included the 
requirement for companies to disclose information about their operations, such as through 
company accounts, and powers for shareholder to sue directors (Bryer (1993)). These were 
augmented  with  shareholder  General  Meetings  (GM),  the  forerunner  of  today’s  Annual 
General Meetings (AGMs). 
Initially, shareholders’ voting powers at these GMs varied significantly. In a sample of pre-
1850  companies,  233  different  shareholder  voting  systems  were  found.  The  Companies 
Clauses Consolidation Act of 1845 set as the default voting structure a graduated system of 
shareholder rights, in which rights reduced according to the scale of shareholding. But during 
the course of the 19th century, the “one share, one vote” voting model familiar today gradually 
came into the ascendency (Freeman et al (2012)). 
Shareholder primacy 
Accompanying this rise in shareholder rights was a steady rise in acceptance of shareholder 
primacy as the key objective of a company, at least in the UK and US. A number of legal 
case decisions, on both sides of the Atlantic, saw this objective enshrined. 
In the UK, the case of Hutton vs West Cork Railway Company in 1883, the company had 
been  wound  up  and  yet  still  resolved  to  pay  directors  for  their  past  service.  Shareholders 
successfully challenged these awards on the grounds that they did not benefit the company 
which, crucially, was interpreted to mean its shareholders (Mukwiri (2013)). 
In the US in 1919, a case against Henry Ford  was brought before the Michigan Supreme 
Court  by  the  Dodge  brothers,  a  minority  shareholder.  They  challenged  Ford’s  decision  to 
reinvest  the  firm’s  profits  to  expand  the  business  and  pay  better  wages,  which  they  felt 
contradicted  the  purposes  of  the  corporation  –  maximising  shareholder  return.  The  Court 
ruled that Ford owed a duty to his shareholders and ordered him to pay a special dividend 
(Fisch (2006)). 
In  the  light  of  these  cases,  lawyers  began  to  debate  shareholder  primacy  as  a  company 
objective. In a series of law review articles in the 1920s and 1930s, Adolf Berle proposed 
treating  corporate  managers  as  trustees  with  fiduciary  obligations  to  act  for  the  benefit  of 
shareholders. Berle’s motivation, interestingly, was in having a corporate governance model 
that redistributed power away from managers and towards “the people”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 risked  entrenching 
the  power  of  management,  creating 
 
 
Together with economist Gardiner Means, Berle published in 1932 The Modern Corporation 
and Private Property (Berle and Means (1932)). It argued that the ever-wider dispersion of 
shareholders 
“ownerless 
corporations”.  Around  the  same  time,  Joseph  Schumpeter  warned  that  corporations  could 
become increasingly bureaucratic and run for their own ends, hampering the dynamism of 
capitalism  (Schumpeter  (1942)).  The  solution  proposed  by  Berle  and  Means  was  to  give 
shareholders primacy in a company’s objectives, together with the control rights necessary to 
meet this objective. 
In  the  1960s,  Henry  Manne  started  to  weave  Berle’s  legal  perspective  into  economics 
(Manne  (1965)).  He  argued  that  shareholder  primacy  acted  as  a  disciplining  device  on 
management. Inefficient management would be reflected in a lower share price, making the 
company an attractive target for a more efficient competitor. In other words, it was possible to 
create a market in corporate control which could drive out company inefficiencies. 
The shareholder-centric model also appeared efficient from a risk allocation perspective. If 
control rights were placed in the hands of the party shouldering greatest risk – shareholders 
– this provided the strongest possible incentives to safeguard the fortunes of the company. 
The shareholder-centric model appeared to be a recipe for higher economic returns at the 
lowest  possible  risk.  This  was  an  awe-inspiring  combination.  By  the  1980s,  corporate 
success and the level of share prices had, in effect, become synonyms.13 
Corporate governance today 
The UK Companies Act 2006 can, in some respects, be seen as a natural evolution of this 
historical trajectory. It arose out of the work of The Company Law Review Steering Group, 
appointed by the government in 1998.14 Two fundamental issues arose. First, should the law 
expect companies to consider responsibilities broader than shareholder maximisation? And 
second, should the law attribute specific responsibilities to company directors? 
It concluded that directors’ duties should not be recast to include a wider set of stakeholders. 
Giving  directors  pluralist  duties  risked  turning  “company  directors  from  business  decision 
makers into moral, political or economic arbiters”. In other words, shareholder primacy was 
not  just  retained  but  now  made  legally  explicit  in  Section  172  of  the  UK  Companies  Act 
(2006): 
“A director of a company must act in a way he considers, in good faith, would be 
most likely to promote the success of the company for the benefit of its members 
as a whole…” 
The Group also suggested that directors’ duties be defined in law. They were to serve the 
interests of shareholders, first and foremost, but also had to “have regard” to wider interests, 
including  employees,  customers,  suppliers  and  the  wider  community.  This  “enlightened 
shareholder  value”  objective  was  to  be  supported  by  public  accountability,  with  annual 
reporting on how companies were meeting their wider interests.15 
The findings of the review were drafted into legislation, with the Company Law Act of 2006. 
Under it, shareholders were given new legal rights to initiate proceedings against directors if 
they  breached  their  responsibilities.  And  the  precise  role  of  the  “have  regards”  provisions 
                                                
13  Empirical  evidence  appeared  to  support  this  case.  Companies  in  which  shareholders  had  stronger  rights  relative  to 
management  had  higher  stock  returns  and  relative  to  the market  (Gompers,  Ishii  and  Metrick  (2003)),  while  acquisitions 
involving  companies  where  there  were  stronger  takeover  defence  measures  tended  to  have  lower  shareholder  returns 
(Masulis, Wang and Xie (2007)).  
14  See Chapter 1 of The Company Law Review Steering Group (1999). 
15  See paragraph 3.2 of The Company Law Review Steering Group (2000).  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
was left open to interpretation. Meanwhile, for the first time in history, shareholder primacy 
had been hard-wired into companies’ statutory purposes. 
The microeconomics of companies 
Given this corporate structure, what incentive problems might arise among stakeholders? It 
is worth noting up front that the existence of these frictions is not, in of itself, a criticism of the 
current corporate model. All corporate governance models embody these frictions to some 
degree. A set of fully state-contingent contracts among all stakeholders could eliminate them. 
But this first-best is infeasible (Hart (1995)). So the aim of any corporate governance model 
is to minimise these frictions, rather than eliminate them, in a second-best or worse world. 
In identifying incentive frictions within a company, it is useful to consider three distinct sets of 
stakeholder relationships: 
• 
• 
First, between shareholders and managers. 
Second,  between  shareholders/managers  and  other  company  stakeholders 
(bondholders, depositors, borrowers and employees). 
Third,  between 
(regulators, government and wider society). 
internal  stakeholders  and  external  stakeholders 
firm’s 
the 
 Classic principal/agent problems 
Shareholders and managers 
In  a  modern  public  company,  shareholders  and  managers  are  distinct  and  serve  distinct 
roles.  This  separation  has  a  micro-economic  rationale.  From  Fama  and  Jensen  (1983),  it 
generates gains from specialisation, with risk/return monitoring undertaken by the board of 
Directors (acting on behalf of shareholders) and risk/return decision-making by management. 
The micro-economic question is at what cost this separation is achieved. 
(a) 
Following  the  work  of  Jensen  and  Meckling  (1976),  the  most  extensively  studied  cost  of 
separation arises when management pursues their own private interests at the expense of 
shareholders: for example, through corporate perks such as private jets or sponsored football 
teams,  empire-building  such  as  value-destroying  acquisitions,  or  rent  extraction  through 
excessive executive remuneration. This is a classic principal/agent problem. 
Those  theoretical  concerns  gained  practical  prominence  during  the  1970s.  The  response 
then  was,  on  the  face  of  it,  ingenious:  to  align  shareholder  and  managerial  incentives, 
remuneration contracts for management needed simply to be linked to shareholder returns. 
This  could  be  achieved  by  paying  managers  not  in  cash  but  in  equity  or  in  equity-linked 
instruments, such as stock options. 
And so it came to pass. Between 1980 and 1994, the average value of stock options granted 
to CEOs of large US companies rose by almost 700%, while salaries and bonuses rose by 
less than 100% (Hall and Liebman (1998)). The proportion of companies remunerating their 
CEOs in stock more than doubled. 
Those  trends  have  continued  apace  in  the  two  decades  since.  In  1994,  US  CEO 
compensation  was  split  roughly  one  third  salary,  one  third  bonus  and  one  third  stock  and 
stock options. By 2006, the dawn of the crisis, that split was less than 20% salary, less than 
30% bonus and more than half stock and stock options. Among banks, the latter fraction was 
higher still. 
Whether this shift in compensation practices put a lid on CEO rent-seeking seems altogether 
more questionable. Experience in the run-up to the crisis suggests, if anything, the opposite. 
Paying in equity appears to have increased the probability of failure. Among US bank CEOs 
pre-crisis,  the  top  five  equity  stakes  were  held  by  Dick  Fuld  (Lehman  Brothers),  Jimmy 
Cayne (Bear Stearns), Stan O’Neill (Merrill Lynch), John Mack (Morgan Stanley) and Angelo 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
Mozilo (Countrywide). This is not a random sample.16 It also suggests the macro-economic 
costs of this principal/agent problem may have been non-trivial. 
(b) 
Collective action problems: the “ownerless corporation” 
A second stakeholder friction arises because a diffuse and dispersed set of shareholders are 
likely  to  find  it  difficult  to  corral  management  (Shleifer  and  Vishny  (1986)).  There  is  a  co-
ordination  problem  among  shareholders.  Moreover,  most  individual  shareholders  tend  to 
have  modest  amounts  of  skin  in  the  game.  This  reduces  their  incentives  to  exercise 
corporate control in the first place. 
This shareholder collective action problem is not new. It lay at the heart of Berle and Mean’s 
concern  about  “ownerless  corporations”  in  the  1930s.  But  there  are  good  reasons  for 
believing this problem may have become more acute since then, as the shareholder base 
has become more fragmented and diffuse and shareholder co-ordination more difficult (Kay 
(2012)). 
One  reason  is  that  the  role  of  institutional  investors  has  changed.  They  have  tended 
historically  to  play  an  important  stewardship  role.  But  this  role  has  waned.  As  recently  as 
1990, pension funds and insurance companies held more than half of UK equities. Today, 
that fraction is less than 15%. 
There has also been a sharp fall in the fraction of shares held directly by individuals, from 
more than 50% in the 1960s to little more than 10% today. Today, these individual holdings 
tend to be indirect, operating through investment intermediaries of various types. That means 
the beneficial owners of shares – individuals – tend to have little direct communication with, 
involvement in, or indeed knowledge of, the firms in which they are investing. 
One  consequence  of  a  more  dispersed  and  disinterested  ownership  structure  is  that  it 
becomes  harder  to  exert  influence  over  management,  increasing  the  risk  of  sub-optimal 
decision-making.17  There  is  some  empirical  support  for  this  hypothesis.  For  example, 
companies tend to have higher valuations when institutional shareholders are a large share 
of cashflow, perhaps reflecting their stewardship role in protecting the firm from excessive 
risk-taking (La Porta et al (2002), Claessens et al (2002)). 
(c) 
A  third  friction  in  the  manager/shareholder  relationship,  distinct  but  related,  arises  when 
different classes of shareholder have different rates of time preference. In particular, there 
have been concerns about the rising share of investors with excessively high discount rates 
and low holding periods – in other words, about “short-termism” (Kay (2012)). 
There is clear evidence of the investor scales having rebalanced in this direction over time. 
Average  holding  periods  of  shares  have  been  in  secular  decline  in  a  large  number  of 
countries for a number of decades (Chart 1). In the UK and US, they have fallen from around 
6 years in 1950 to less than 6 months today.18 
Another  diagnostic  on  short-termism  is  found  by  looking  at  company  pay-out  behaviour. 
Chart 2 compares dividend pay-out behaviour among companies during two eras – the mid-
19th century period before shareholder primacy took hold, and the period since 1980 when it 
has been uppermost in the minds of management (Haldane (2010)). 
Short-termism 
                                                
16  Haldane (2011). 
17  Recognition  of this  problem lay  at  the  heart  of John  Kay’s  proposals,  in  his  review,  for  an  “Investor  Forum”. This  was  a 
mechanism for bringing together in particular institutional investors to mobilise and strengthen their hand (Kay (2012)). 
18  See Haldane (2010). Within this, the move to high frequency trading has contributed to a downwards shift in this average 
holding period. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In the earlier period, dividends decreased as often as they increased. This is as we would 
expect if profits fluctuate both up and down. After 1980, however, we see a one-way street. 
Dividend  payout  ratios  almost  never  fall.  This  is  evidence  that  the  short-term  quest  for 
smoothing shareholder returns has come to dominate payout behaviour, almost irrespective 
of profitability. 
Another  way  to  remit  profits  to  shareholders  is  through  share  buybacks.  These,  too,  have 
risen  in  prominence.  Among  UK  companies,  share  buybacks  have  consistently  exceeded 
share issuance over the past decade, albeit to a lesser degree more recently (Chart 3). In 
other  words,  over  the  past  decade  the  equity  market  no  longer  appears  to  have  been  a 
source of net new financing to the UK corporate sector. 
These patterns are, if anything, even more acute among US companies. Total buybacks by 
US S&P 500 companies totalled over $500 billion in 2014, taking them back to their peak 
levels in 2007. Total payouts to shareholders, both dividends and buy-backs, are also back 
to their pre-crisis peaks, totalling almost $1 trillion in the US, and £100 billion in the UK, in 
2014 (Chart 4). More generally, total payouts by companies have been on a steadily rising 
trend since the 1970s, from around 10% of total internal cashflow in 1970 to around 60% 
today (Chart 5). 
The macro-economic consequences of this behaviour are likely to be far from benign. The 
other side of the coin to high pay-out ratios from internal funds is low investment. There is 
both  direct  and  indirect  evidence  of  investment  having  been  adversely  affected  by  short-
termism on the part of either investors or managers or both. 
The indirect evidence comes from looking at the discount rates used in, for example, equity 
markets to assess investment projects. My own work has found evidence that these discount 
rates appear to be around 5–10% higher than would rationally be expected at the one year 
horizon (Davies and Haldane (2011)). And while that may sound modest, accumulated and 
compounded  that  would  act  as  a  significant  barrier  to  longer-horizon  investment  projects. 
Moreover, this “excess” discounting has increased over time. 
Evidence  on  companies’  investment  behaviour  supports that  conclusion  – for  example,  by 
looking at the investment choices of two otherwise-identical firms, one of which is publically 
listed, the other private-owned. Studies in the US have found evidence otherwise-identical 
private  companies  consistently  invest  considerably  more,  for  given  profits,  than  public 
companies (Asker et al (2014)). 
Chart 6 shows some diagnostics for a matched sample of public and private UK companies 
(Davies et al (2014)). In line with US evidence, it suggests that investment is consistently and 
significantly  higher  among  private 
identical 
characteristics, relative to profits or turnover. In other words, shareholder short-termism may 
have  had  material  costs  for  the  economy,  as  well  as  for  individual  companies,  by 
constraining investment. 
than  public  companies  with  otherwise 
Risk-shifting 
Shareholders/managers and other stakeholders 
(a) 
A fourth incentive friction arises in the relationship between shareholders and creditors in a 
company. From the work of Robert Merton, under limited liability the equity of a company can 
be valued as a call option on its assets, with a strike price equal to the value of its liabilities 
(Merton (1974)). 
The  value  of  this  option  is  enhanced  by  increases  in  the  volatility  of  asset  returns.  Why? 
Because,  under  limited  liability,  this  increases  the  upside  return  to  shareholders,  without 
affecting  their  downside  risk.  So  for  a  firm  seeking  to  maximise  shareholder  value,  an 
expedient way of doing so is simply to increase the volatility of company profits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  
 
This  risk  does  not,  however,  disappear  into  the  ether.  Instead  it  is  shifted  onto  other 
stakeholders in the company, most obviously creditors. There is, in the words of Jensen and 
Meckling (1976), an incentive for the management of a limited liability company to engage in 
“risk shifting” from shareholders to debtors, by increasing company-specific risk. 
The scale of these incentives will depend importantly on how alert creditors are to this risk. If 
they  are  wide-awake  and  price  that  risk  by  charging  the  firm  a  higher  interest  rate  in 
anticipation of risk-shifting, this serves as a disciplining device on management. Risk shifting 
will then be stymied. However, if creditors lack the information or incentives to monitor risk, 
risk-shifting will be amplified given the cheap costs of borrowing. The upshot, then, will be 
companies engaging in a sub-optimally high amount of risk-taking from a stakeholder, if not 
shareholder, perspective. 
Banks  provide  an  interesting  case  study  of  these  incentive  dynamics  in  practice  and  their 
adverse implications for creditors and the wider economy. They have a particularly simple 
way of increasing the volatility of their asset returns – increasing leverage. They may also 
have stronger incentives to do so if their creditors – largely depositors – are de-sensitised to 
risk when setting their cost of borrowing (Haldane (2012)). 
If  so,  this  is  a  recipe  for  super-charged  risk-shifting  –  and  was  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis. 
Leverage among global banks rose at real pace in the pre-crisis period, in a quest for ever-
higher banking returns on equity (Chart 7). And this quest for shareholder returns was in turn 
aided and abetted by creditors who, far from pricing this rising risk, charged a low and falling 
interest rate to the banks, further fuelling risk-taking incentives. 
This risk-shifting crystallised as the crisis broke. At that point, yields on bank borrowing shot 
up and risk-taking was crushed. Creditors bore large losses, which would have been larger 
still  without  government  support.  This  experience  makes  clear  that  risk-shifting  is  not  a 
theoretical phenomenon; it is very much real, with large costs for creditors and for the wider 
economy. 
Indeed, the welfare implications of risk-shifting are doubly troubling. Not only does it generate 
excessive risk-taking and credit creation during upswings. As importantly, it also contributes 
to excessive caution and a credit crunch during the downswing. Risk-shifting results in two-
sided deadweight costs, for creditors and for the macro-economy.19 Both have been much in 
evidence over recent years. 
(b) 
A  related,  but  distinct,  micro-economic  risk  friction  concerns  how  rights  are  allocated  to 
different stakeholders in a company. Standard corporate finance theory sets out, on the face 
of it, a coherent allocation of control rights and risks. Shareholders have a junior claim on the 
profits of a company, in that they are paid out after employees, creditors and the taxwoman. 
Theirs is the riskiest piece of the profits pie. 
This means “ownership” is really a misnomer when applied to shareholders. What defines 
shareholders is not that they own most or all of the company. Rather they “own” least, as 
residual claimants. Associating “shareholding” with “ownership” thus makes little substantive 
sense, despite its widespread use in popular discourse. 
Indeed, it is precisely because shareholders own least, not most, that justifies granting them 
control rights over management in the first place. By vesting control rights in the stakeholder 
whose claim is riskiest, the firm is immunised against taking too much risk in the first place. 
The shareholder model is thus, in principle, incentive-compatible, as it properly aligns risks 
and rights within a company. 
Risk-alignment 
                                                
19  Research with Peter Richardson and Matthew Willison casts these results in a theoretical model (Haldane, Richardson and 
Willison (forthcoming). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The problem with this line of argument, as Martin Wolf of the Financial Times has articulated 
brilliantly,  is  that  it  confuses  diversifiable  and  un-diversifiable  risk  (Wolf  (2014)).  While 
shareholders hold the residual risk in a company, this risk can easily be diversified away by 
holding a broad portfolio of assets. Shareholders are hence likely to be rather risk-insensitive 
and unlikely to discipline risk-taking by management. 
Interestingly, the situation is different for other stakeholders in the company – for example, 
employees,  customers  and  clients.  Typically,  the  company  risk  they  face  is  not  easily 
diversifiable. They cannot easily invest in a portfolio of jobs, or products or supply lines. So 
their incentives to restrict excessive risk-taking are likely to be, if anything, sharper and more 
acute than among shareholders. 
But under the current shareholder-centric model, these wider stakeholders are not given any 
control rights over management. This constrains their ability to rein in managerial excesses, 
even  though  their  incentives  to  do  so  may  be  sharpest.  In  other  words,  the  standard 
corporate  governance  model  may  be  predicated  on  a  misclassification  of  risk  and,  as  a 
result,  a  misalignment  between  these  risks  and  control  rights,  with  potentially  adverse 
implications for corporate risk-taking. 
Externalities and systemic risk 
Companies and society 
(a) 
At  least  for  some  types  of  firms,  their  actions  can  have  an  impact  beyond  internal 
stakeholders  –  shareholders,  creditors,  employees,  customers  and  clients.  They  impose 
social  externalities  on  the  economy  and  wider  society.  If  companies’  objectives  are 
shareholder-centric,  these  externalities  are  unlikely  to  be  internalised  fully  within  firms’ 
decision-making.  In  other  words,  there  is  a  potential  disconnect  between  company  and 
societal incentives. 
These  externalities  can  be  both  good  and  bad.  For  example,  many  companies  are  in  the 
business of creating public or quasi-public goods – for example, health, education, transport 
and utilities. And that is why, historically, their corporate governance structures have typically 
tended to weigh broader stakeholder and societal interests. 
In other cases, these social externalities may be negative – the creation of public “bads”. The 
classic  example  is  environmental  pollution.  But  these  social  externalities  can  also  arise  in 
more subtle ways – the mistreatment of customers and clients through delayed payment or 
mis-selling, exploitation of employees through inadequate working practices, or attempts to 
avoid paying sufficient tax to government. 
Banking produces a particular form of social pollution – financial crises. We have had many 
hundreds  of  years  of  experience  of  such  crises.  The  global  financial  crisis  will,  however, 
almost certainly require a re-think of their costs. The cumulative GDP costs of the crisis so 
far  in  the  US,  UK  and  the  euro-area  are  well  in  excess  of  25%  of  GDP  (Chart  8).  In  net 
present value terms, they could easily end up equating to a year’s GDP or more. 
This suggests, pre-crisis, the misalignment between private and social incentives in banking 
was  larger  than  perhaps  at  any  time  in  the  recent  past.  In  the  language  of  Jensen  and 
Meckling, risk had been shifted by management and shareholders onto a much wider set of 
societal stakeholders, with significantly adverse macro-economic implications. 
(b) 
That brings me to the final of the incentive frictions. When the social costs of an activity are 
high, as during financial crises, there are strong incentives to cushion the effects on wider 
society. The global financial crisis provides no better example of those incentives, with extra-
ordinary  levels  of  government  support  to  the  global  banking  system  in  the  form  of 
recapitalisation, liquidity support and guarantees. 
Moral hazard 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  
 
While these levels of support were arguably necessary to limit the costs of the crisis, they 
came with their own longer-term costs. The most important of those costs was probably the 
adverse  effects  of  such interventions  on  risk-taking  incentives  –  in  other  words,  the  moral 
hazard of government insurance (Alessandri and Haldane (2009)). 
This is not a new issue. The historical evolution of the financial system has been a game of 
cat and mouse between the state and the banking system (Haldane (2010)). Because the cat 
has  typically  failed  to  keep  pace  with  the  mouse,  the  result  has  been  a  widening  and 
deepening  of  support  mechanisms  for  banks  over  time.  Elsewhere,  I  have  called  this 
dynamic link between bank and sovereign balance sheets the “doom loop” (Haldane (2012)). 
One  measure  of  the  extent  of  this  problem  is  found  in  estimates  of  the  “implicit  subsidy” 
banks earn as a result of the expectation of government support. Chart 9 plots one measure 
of  this “implicit  subsidy”  to  UK  banks. This  peaked following  the  bail-outs  at  a  remarkable 
£150bn  in  2009.  Since  then,  it  has  fallen  substantially  –  to  around  £10bn  in  2013  –  as 
regulatory reforms have been put in place to constrain risk-taking and the financial strength 
of banks has improved. But it remains in positive territory, suggesting an on-going distortion 
to risk-taking incentives. 
Public policy responses 
The modern company harbours a range of micro-economic frictions. In some cases, these 
seem likely to have generated significant macro-economic costs, in the form of sub-optimally 
low rates of investment and sub-optimally high  degrees of risk-taking. These issues  – low 
growth and high risk – are the bread and butter of central banking. These costs are not the 
fault of any party, whether businesses or investors or other stakeholders. Rather they are the 
result of the incentives embodied within the current structure of companies. 
These frictions are not just multiple, but potentially interact in important ways. When framing 
policy choices, that means heeding the “theory of the second best”, in the sense of Lipsey 
and Lancaster (1956)): with multiple frictions, taking measures to address a friction in one 
place need not necessarily lead to an improvement in social welfare in aggregate. 
As  one  example  of  that  in  a  corporate  governance  context,  the  shift  to  equity-based 
compensation  practices  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  addressed  one  incentive  friction  –  the 
principal/agent problem between shareholders and managers. But it may have done so at 
the expense of amplifying other incentives frictions – for example, it may have amplified risk-
shifting incentives from shareholders to creditors and to wider society. 
In  some  areas,  there  has  been  considerable  progress  in  tackling  some  of  these  incentive 
frictions  since  the  crisis,  especially  among  banking  firms.  One  prominent  example  is 
regulatory  capital  reform.  Significant  increases  in  banks’  equity  and  loss-absorbing  capital 
have  been  put  in  place  or  are  planned.  This  is  likely  to  have  reduced  the  incentives  of 
shareholders  to  engage  in  risk-shifting,  either  to  creditors  or  to  wider  society,  thereby 
lowering the macro-economic costs of these activities.20, 21 
But there are also areas where there has been somewhat less progress and more may be 
needed  to  mitigate  corporate  governance  frictions.  All  involve  acting  on  the  structure  of 
incentives at source, to generate higher returns for lower risk for businesses, investors and, 
                                                
20  Admati and Hellwig (2014). 
21  There  have  also  been  initiatives  aimed  at  increasing  levels  of  accountability  amongst  senior  individuals  in  financial 
institutions. One example is the PRA and FCA’s Senior Managers Regime (SMR) which will come into force in March 2016. 
The  SMR  intends  to  create  stronger  incentives  for  senior  individuals  to  run  institutions  prudently  and  to  take  greater 
responsibility  for  their  actions.  The  PRA  has  also  recently  published  a  consultation  on  its  expectations  of  the  collective 
responsibilities  shared  by  board  members  which  will  complement  the  SMR.  The  PRA  published  its  consultation  paper 
“Corporate 
at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Documents/publications/cp/2015/cp1815.pdf.  
Responsibilities” 
Governance: 
available 
Board 
2015, 
May 
in 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
ultimately, wider society, helping central banks meet their objectives. Let me mention three 
areas in particular: executive remuneration and accountability; control rights; and company 
law. 
Executive remuneration and accountability 
Historically,  perhaps  the  most  commonly-pursued  approach  to  tackling  corporate  finance 
problems has been to adjust managerial compensation practices – for example, the shift to 
equity-based compensation practices in the 1980s. This shift worsened incentive problems 
elsewhere  within  firms.  In  response,  attention  more  recently  has  switched  to  paying 
executives  in debt, rather than equity. The aim here is to align managerial incentives  with 
those of wider stakeholders, specifically creditors, so mitigating risk-shifting incentives. 
This is not a new idea. In their original paper on risk-shifting, Jensen and Meckling (1976) 
proposed structuring a CEO’s compensation such that it was aligned with the firms’ debt-to-
equity ratio. In practice, companies in general, and financial firms in particular, have fallen 
well  short  of  that  objective.  Fewer  than  1%  of  bank  CEOs  have  been  found  to  have 
remuneration  packages  with  debt-to-equity  ratios  greater  than  their  firms.22  The  new  EU 
bonus cap rules also arguably weaken the link between performance and compensation as 
they shrink the proportion of variable pay and make it harder to cut back total remuneration.23 
Since  the  crisis,  consideration  has  been  given  by  both  academics  and  policymakers  to 
switching remuneration practices towards debt-like instruments (for example, Becht, Bolton 
and Roell (2011), PCBS (2013)). This appears to have had some policy impact. For example 
in  Europe,  payment  in  debt  instruments  is  now  permitted  under  the  new  Capital 
Requirements Directive IV (CRD IV). 
To  date,  however,  there  are  only  limited  signs  of  remuneration  practices  having  shifted 
significantly towards debt. UK banks provide one case study. Their structures remain heavily 
skewed towards equity, at around 50–75% of total pay, compared with around 5–15% in debt 
(Chart 10). Among non-financial firms, the balance of pay appears, if anything, to be even 
more heavily skewed towards equity. 
A  second  strand  of  the  policy  debate  involves  lengthening  the  horizon  of  remuneration 
contracts.  This  can  be  achieved  by  requiring  bonus  payouts  to  be  deferred  for  a  period 
(“deferral”) and subsequently not paid out if performance is poor (“malus”) or clawed back 
after payment. If deferral periods broadly match the duration of a typical risk cycle, incentives 
to risk-shift through time are likely to be significantly reduced. Incentives to act in a short-
termist fashion should also be reduced. 
These  proposals  have  an  element  of  back  to  the  future  about  them  too.  Deferral  and 
clawback  in  some  respects  mimic  19th  century  company  practices,  when  shareholders  and 
managers remained liable for losses that occurred on their watch, even after they had sold 
their  stake.  Recently,  these  ideas  have  been  resurrected  in  some  countries,  at  least  for 
banking firms. For example, CRD IV in Europe requires that the variable portion of senior 
bank executives’ pay be deferred for 3–5 years. Last July, the Bank of England consulted on 
a minimum deferral and clawback period of 7 years for Senior Managers and earlier this year 
these proposals were finalised. These rules now allow for clawback of up to ten years from 
award,  providing  a  material  incentive  to  reduce  excessive  risk  taking  by  executives.24  In 
finance, you generally reap the risks you sow over that horizon. This new policy aligns risks 
and horizons. 
                                                
22  Bennett, Güntay, and Unal (2012). 
23   See Bailey (2014) for further details. 
24  The PRA and FCA published their Policy Statement, ‘Strengthening the alignment of risk and reward: new remuneration 
rules’ in June 2015, available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Documents/publications/ps/2015/ps1215.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  
 
These positive moves have prompted new proposals. Some are not so innovative, including 
the  use  of  role-based  allowances  as  part  of  fixed  pay,  to  link  more  explicitly  reward  to 
responsibility. But others are more pioneering – for instance the proposals being pursued by 
some banks to pay certain staff in “performance bonds”, which they would forfeit in the case 
of  the  bank  receiving  a  large  fine.  These  could  include  Contingent  Convertible  bonds 
(CoCos), which either get wiped out  when a bank runs into trouble or get exchanged into 
equity. All of these measures align personal incentives with the interests of creditors, and the 
longer-term wellbeing of the firm.25 
A final area where progress has been made is shareholder control of remuneration policies. 
Since 2013, shareholders have had a “Say on Pay” in both the UK and US. Remuneration 
policies  now  need  explicitly  to  be  approved  by  a  majority  of  shareholders  (in  the  UK)  or 
advised on (in the US). And in Europe, a Shareholder Rights Directive granting a “Say on 
Pay” is moving through European Parliament. It is too early to tell whether these initiatives 
will signal a “Shareholder Spring”. 
Taking  pay  issues  together,  progress  on  restructuring  executive  compensation  has  been 
made, particularly in the EU and particularly for banks. Elsewhere, however, progress has 
been relatively piecemeal and modest. 
Control rights 
A  second  way  of  addressing  some  of  the  agency  problems  embedded  in  the  current 
company  model  would  be  to  modify  the  control  rights  of  shareholders  –  for  example,  by 
redistributing  rights  between  them.  This,  too,  has  been  an  area  of  recent  interest,  among 
both academics and practitioners. 
One  example  is  the  work  of  Bolton  and  Samama  (2012)  who  have  advocated  so-called 
“loyalty  shares”  –  shares  whose  voting  rights  increase  the  longer  they  are  held  by  the 
investor.26 They can be seen as an explicit attempt to tackle investor, and hence managerial, 
short-termism. Interestingly, these ideas are now beginning to find their way into custom and 
practice in some countries. 
In  April  last  year,  France  introduced  a  so-called  Florange  law,  automatically  granting 
shareholders in French-listed companies double voting rights if they are held for two years or 
longer. A similar law has recently passed in Italy, with loyalty shares automatically granted 
provided there is approval by two-thirds of shareholders. The provision for enhanced voting 
rights  for  longer-term  shareholders  has  also  been  discussed  in  the  context  of  the  EU 
Shareholder Rights Directive. 
There have been moves, similar in spirit if different in detail, in the US too. For example, a 
number of companies have recently adopted so-called “proxy access” – granting groups of 
longer-term  shareholders  the  right  to  appoint  directors  on  their  behalf.  At  present,  proxy 
access is a market-practice led initiative, rather than a legal or regulatory imposition. 
A  more  radical  reformulation  of  voting  rights  still  would  be  to  use  so-called  “dual  class” 
shares. These involve granting differential voting rights to different classes of shares. This 
too,  in  some  respects,  is  back  to  the  future.  It  has  echoes  of  the  restricted  or  graduated 
shareholder rights models seen over a century ago. 
Dual  class  listings  remain  common  practice  in  a  number  of  countries  today,  especially  in 
emerging  markets.  Interestingly,  however,  there  have  also  been  some  signs  of  dual  class 
shares recently playing a greater role in the US. A number of recent high profile US company 
IPOs, such as Facebook and Google, have issued dual class stock. 
                                                
25  See Carney (2014). 
26  See also Mayer (2013). 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
These  laws  and  emerging  practices  are  in  their  early  throes  and  are  not  uncontentious, 
especially  among  institutional  shareholders.  Nonetheless,  they  are  symptomatic  of  a 
common  desire  to  strengthen  long-term  investors’  hand  in  the  oversight  of  companies.  If 
these initiatives grew in prominence, they would begin to address some of the short-term and 
risk-shifting problems embedded in the current corporate governance model. 
Corporate governance 
If alterations to the balance of shareholder rights are increasingly under debate, the same is 
not true of the rights of creditors and other stakeholders. In principle, the case for recognising 
explicitly these broader interests seems sound enough. In a recent paper, I considered the 
risk-shifting problem within companies and various solutions to it (Haldane, Richardson and 
Willison (forthcoming)). The most effective was simply to alter the objectives of the company 
to reflect creditor, as well as shareholder, interests. 
This is likely to be a fairly general result, whether the externality is between shareholders and 
creditors  or  between  shareholders  and  wider  society.  The  most  straightforward  way  of 
tackling embedded stakeholder externalities is to have those stakeholders’ interests weighed 
explicitly in the objectives and decision-making of the company. In practical terms, that would 
mean modifying the objectives, rights and responsibilities of a firm under Company Law. 
Such  modifications  are  not,  in  fact,  that  radical  either  from  an  historical  or  international 
perspective.  History  clearly  suggests  that  shareholder  primacy  has  not  always  been  the 
centrepiece of company law. Nor has the current practice of endowing only shareholders with 
explicit control rights. 
Even  today,  international  experience  suggests  a  range  of  other  corporate  models  can 
operate successfully. The UK and US shareholder-centric model sits very much towards one 
end  of  the  international  spectrum  (Allen  and  Gale  (2000)).  In  countries  such  as  Japan, 
German  and  France,  employees  and  other  firms,  especially  banks,  are  assigned  a  more 
prominent role on the boards and in the running of companies. In the language of German 
company law, there is “co-determination” in the decisions of the company. 
As  an  illustration  of  that,  Chart  11  is  drawn  from  a  survey  of  senior  executives  at  large 
companies in the UK, US, Japan, Germany and France. On the question “Whose company is 
it?”,  a  strong  majority  in  all  countries,  bar  Japan,  view  shareholders,  rather  than  broader 
stakeholders, as the ultimate owners. 
But when asked a subtly different question, about the relative importance of job security for 
employees  versus  dividends  for  shareholders,  a  strikingly  different  pattern  emerges.  A 
majority of Japanese, German and French company executives put employee job security 
above  shareholder  dividends.  For  UK  and  US  companies,  a  strong  majority  place  the 
balance the other way around. This suggests a very different set of managerial objectives 
and incentives across countries. 
Empirical evidence on the relatively efficacy of these different models does not give a clear-
cut answer. Prior to the crisis, some papers pointed to broader stakeholder representation 
boosting market value (Fauver and Fuerst (2006)), others to it reducing value (Gorton and 
Schmid (2004)). Experience since the crisis might provide clearer clues. For example, banks 
with shareholder-friendly boards in general fared worse during the crisis (Belratti and Stulz 
(2009)). The debate here seems set to continue and this is a place where further research 
would be valuable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  Conclusion 
Challenges  to  the  shareholder-centric  company  model  are  rising,  both  from  within  and 
outside  the  corporate  sector.  These  criticisms  have  deep  micro-economic  roots  and  thick 
macro-economic  branches.  Some  incremental change  is  occurring  to  trim  these  branches. 
But it may be time for a more fundamental re-rooting of company law if we are to tackle these 
problems  at  source. The  stakes  – for  companies,  the  economy  and  wider  society  –  could 
scarcely be higher. 
 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
     18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
     20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
   22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   23 
  24 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   25 
  of 
Bank 
Reserve 
available 
Chicago, 
(2014),  speech  delivered  at 
the  City  Banquet  London,  available  at: 
References 
Acheson,  G,  Hickson,  C  and  Turner,  J  (2010),  “Does  limited  liability  matter?”  Evidence 
from  nineteenth  –century  British  banking,  review  of  Law  and  Economics,  Vol  6(2), 
pages 247–73. 
Admati, A and Hellwig, M (2014), “The Bankers” New Clothes: What’s Wrong with banking 
and What to Do about it’, Princeton University Press. 
Alessandri,  P  and  Haldane  A  G  (2009),  “Banking  on the  State”,  speech  delivered  at  the 
Federal 
at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2009/speech409.
pdf. 
Allen, F. and Gale, D (2000), “Comparing financial systems”, MIT Press. 
Asker,  J,  Collard-Wexler,  A  and  De  Loecker  J  (2014),  “Dynamic  Inputs  and  Resource 
(Mis)Allocation”, Journal of Political Economy, vol 122. 
Bagehot, W (1862), “Limited Liability in Banking” – I’ and “Limited Liability in Banking” – II’ in 
St John-Stevas, N (1978) “The Collected Works of Walter Bagehot Vol. 9”, The Economist, 
London. 
Bailey,  A 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech763.pdf. 
Becht,  M,  Bolton,  P  and  Roell  A  (2011),  “Why  Bank  Governance  is  Difference”  Oxford 
Review of Economic Policy, vol 27. 
Bennett,  R  L,  Güntay,  L  and  Unal,  H  (2012),  “Inside  debt,  bank  default  risk  and 
performance during the crisis”, Mimeo. 
Berle, A and Means, G (1932), “The Modern Corporation and Private Property”, Transaction 
Publishers 
Belratti, A and Stulz, R M (2009),  “Why did some banks perform better during the credit 
crisis? A cross-country study of the impact of governance and regulation”, National Bureau of 
Economic Research Working paper 15180. 
Blumberg,  P  (1986),  “Limited  Liability  and  Corporate  Groups”,  Journal  of  Corporate  Law, 
Vol 11. 
Bolton, P and Samama, F (2012), “L shares: rewarding long term investors”, Mimeo. 
Bryer,  R  (1993),  “The  Late  Nineteenth-Century  Revolution  in  Financial  Accounting: 
Accounting  for  the  Rise  of  Investor  or  Managerial  Capitalism?”  Accounting,  Organizations 
and Society, vol. 18. 
Button,  R,  Knott,  S, Macmanus,  C  and  Willison,  M  (2015),  “Desperate  adventures  and 
men of straw: the failure of City of Glasgow Bank and its enduring impact on the UK banking 
system”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2015 Q1, pages 23–35. 
Carney, M (2014), “The future of financial reform”, speech delivered at the 2014 Monetary 
Authority 
at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech763.pdf. 
Claessens,  S,  Djankov,  S,  Fan,  J  and  Lang  L  (2002),  “Disentangling  the  incentive  and 
entrenchment effects of large shareholdings”, Journal of Finance, vol 57, pages 2741–71. 
Davies, R and Haldane, A (2011), “The Short Long” speech delivered in Brussels, available 
at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2011/speech495.
pdf. 
Singapore 
available 
Lecture, 
of 
26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Davies,  R,  Haldane  A,  Nielsen  M  and  Pezzini  S  (2014),  “Measuring  the  costs  of  short-
termism” Journal of Financial Stability, vol 12, pages 16–25. 
Esty. BC (1998), “The impact of contingent liability on commercial bank risk taking”, Journal 
of Financial Economics, vol 47, pages 187–218. 
Fama, E F and Jensen M C (1983), “Separation of Ownership and Control”, Journal of Law 
and Economics, vol 26, pages 301–25. 
Fauver,  L  and  Fuerst,  M  E  (2006),  “Does  good  corporate  governance  include  employee 
representation? Evidence from German corporate boards” Journal of Financial Economics, 
Vol 82, pages 673–710. 
Fisch, J (2006), “Measuring Efficiency in Corporate Law: The Role of Shareholder Primacy”, 
Penn Law: Legal Scholarship Repository. 
Freeman,  M,  Pearson,  R  and  Taylor,  J  (2012),  “Shareholder  Democracies?  Corporate 
Governance in Britain and Ireland before 1850”, The University of Chicago Press. 
Gorton,  G  and  Schmid,  F  A  (2004),  “Capital,  Labor,  and  The  Firm:  A  Study  of  German 
Codetermination”,  Journal  of  the  European  Economics  Association,  vol  2,  issue  5,  pages 
863–905. 
Haldane, A (2010), “Patience and Finance”, speech delivered at the Oxford China Busines 
Forum, Beijing, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2010/speech445.
pdf. 
Haldane, A (2011), “Control rights (and wrongs)” Wincott Annual Memorial Lecture. 
Haldane, A (2012), “The Doom Loop”, London Review of Books, vol 34, pages 21–22. 
Haldane, A, Richardson, P and Willison, M (forthcoming), “Risk shifting, debt contracts 
and corporate governance in the banking system”, Bank of England. 
Hall, B and Liebman, J (1998), “Are CEOs really paid like bureaucrats?” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, vol 113. 
Hart, O (1995), “Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure”, Oxford University Press. 
Hunt, B C (1936), “The Development of the Business Corporation in England 1800–1867”, 
Harvard Economic Studies Vol. LII, Harvard University Press. 
Ireland,  P  (2010)  “Limited  liability,  shareholder  rights  and  the  problem  of  corporate 
irresponsibility”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol 34. 
Jensen, M C and Meckling, W H (1976), “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency 
Costs and Ownership Structure”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol 3, pages 305–60. 
Johnson,  P  (2013),  “Making  the  Market  –  Victorian  Origins  of  Corporate  Capitalism”, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Kay, J (2012), “The Kay review of UK equity markets and long-term decision making”, 
available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/253454/bis-
12–917-kay-review-of-equity-markets-final-report.pdf. 
La Porta, R, Lopez-de-Silanes, F, Shleifer, A and Vishny R (2002), “Investor protection 
and corporate valuation”, Journal of Finance vol 57 (3), pages 1147–70. 
Leaf, W (1937), “Banking”, Third Edition, revised by Ernest Sykes. 
Lipsey,  RG  and  Lancaster,  K  (1956),  “The  general  theory  of  second  best”,  review  of 
economic studies vol 24 (1) pages 11–32. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 27 
  
 
Manne,  H  (1965),  “Mergers  and  the  market  for  corporate  control”,  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, Vol 32. 
Mayer, C (2013), “Firm Commitment: Why the corporation is failing us and how to restore 
trust in it”, Oxford University Press. 
Merton,  RC  (1974),  “The  pricing  of  corporate  debt:  the  risk  structure  of  interest  rates”, 
Journal of Finance, vol 29 (2) pages 449–70. 
Moyle, J B (1913), “The Institutes of Justinian”, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Mukwiri,  J  (2013)  “Myth  of  shareholder  primacy  in  English  law”,  European  business  law 
review, 24. 
PCBS (2013), “Changing banking for good”, Parliamentary Commission on Banking 
Standards Final Report, available at: 
http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/joint-select/professional-
standards-in-the-banking-industry/news/changing-banking-for-good-report/. 
Rachel, L and Smith, T (forthcoming), “Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate”, 
Bank of England. 
Rae, G (1885), “The Country Banker: His Clients, Cares, and Work”, London, John Murray. 
Schumpeter, J R (1942), “Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy”, Harper & Brothers. 
Shelton,  J  P  (1965),  “The  First  Printed  Share  Certificate:  An  Important  Link  in  Financial 
History”, Business History Review Vol. 39(3). 
Shleifer, A and Vishny R (1986), “Large Shareholders and Corporate Control”, Journal of 
Political Economy, vol 94 pages 461–88. 
Smith, A (1848), “The Bubble of the Age; Or, the Fallacies of Railway Investment, Railway 
Accounts, and Railway Dividends”, 3 editions, Sherwood, Gilbert, and Piper. 
Stout,  L  (2012),  “The  Shareholder  Value  Myth:  How  Putting  Shareholders  First  Harms 
Investors, Corporations, and the Public”, Berrett-Koehler. 
The Company Law Review Steering Group (1999), Modern company law for a competitive 
economy: the strategic framework. 
The Company Law Review Steering Group (2000), Modern company law for a competitive 
economy: completing the structure. 
The Company Law Review Steering Group (2001), Modern company law for a competitive 
economy: final report. 
Turner,  J  D  (2009),  “The  last  acre  and  sixpence:  views  on  bank  liability  regimes  in 
nineteenth-century Britain”, Financial History Review Vol. 16(2). 
Turner, J D (2014), “Banking in Crisis – the Rise and Fall of British Banking Stability, 1800 to 
the Present”, Cambridge University Press. 
Wolf,  M  (2014),  “AstraZeneca  is  more  than  investors”  call’,  Financial  Times,  available  at: 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/6fe31054-d691–11e3-b251–00144feabdc0.html#axzz3gPwZ57K7. 
28 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
