  Sayuri Shirai: Unconventional monetary policies of the Bank of Japan 
and European Central Bank 
Remarks by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at the Panel 
Discussion “Monetary Policy and Central Banking: A Global Outlook”, at the Bruegel Annual 
Meeting, Brussels, 8 September 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Thank you very much for inviting me as a panelist to the discussion on monetary policy at the 
Bruegel  Annual  Meeting.  Recently,  the  directions  of  monetary  policy  among  advanced 
economies  have  become  increasingly  divergent.  Whereas  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  has 
begun  considering  normalization  of  its  policy  interest  rates,  the  Bank  of  Japan  (BOJ)  and 
European Central Bank (ECB) continue their large-scale asset purchase programs. As one of 
the policy makers at the BOJ, I have closely monitored developments in the global economy 
and the monetary policies of major central banks. I would therefore like to talk today about 
the features of monetary easing of the two central banks (BOJ and ECB) as well as about 
developments regarding inflation expectations in Japan and the euro area. Let me stress that 
the views expressed here are entirely my own and do not necessarily represent those of the 
BOJ. 
Unconventional monetary policies – common features of the BOJ and ECB 
II. 
The monetary-easing instruments adopted by the two central banks have several features in 
common.  They  are  (1)  large-scale  asset  purchases  centered  on  government  bonds, 
(2) forward guidance used to indicate a future monetary-easing stance, and (3) a conditional 
long-term lending facility (Chart 1 and Reference Chart). 
Regarding the first instrument, the large-scale asset-purchase program is referred to as a 
“balance sheet policy.” This enables a central bank to expand the size of its balance sheet to 
a  predetermined  level  and  to  maintain  that  size  over  a  relatively  long  period.  One  of  the 
expected results here is a portfolio rebalancing effect. This policy aims at promoting holders 
of government bonds to shift away from those bonds and invest in riskier assets, such as 
loans  and  corporate  bonds,  stocks,  foreign  securities,  and  real  estate,  thereby  affecting  a 
wide range of markets and energizing economic activity. 
Since  April  2013,  the  BOJ  has  adopted  an  aggressive  balance  sheet  policy  by  setting  a 
target on the annual pace of the monetary base increase under quantitative and qualitative 
monetary easing (QQE). The BOJ has been increasing the monetary base at an annual pace 
of about 80 trillion yen. It has also been purchasing Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so 
that their amount outstanding will increase at an annual pace also of about 80 trillion yen. 
With a view to encouraging a decline in interest rates across the entire yield curve, JGBs with 
all maturities, including 40-year bonds, are eligible for the BOJ’s purchase and the average 
remaining maturity of government bonds to be purchased is currently targeted in the range of 
seven  to  ten  years.  In  addition  to  government  bonds,  the  BOJ  makes  such  purchases  as 
exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  This 
balance sheet policy has contributed to an expansion of corporate profits and employment 
together with a stock price hike and depreciation of the yen, which have helped improve the 
output gap by about 2 percentage points. 
The  ECB  (as  well  as  European  national  central  banks)  has  purchased  euro-denominated 
bonds issued by euro-area governments, agencies, and European institutions since March 
2015 in an effort to restore the size of its balance sheet to that of March 2012 – or about 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
3 trillion  euros.  In  conjunction  with  covered  bonds  and  asset-backed  securities  (ABS) 
purchased since October 2014, the monthly pace of the combined asset purchase is set at 
about 60 billion euros. Except for very long-dated assets, the remaining maturity of eligible 
public sector assets to be purchased must be within two to 30 years. In principle, the assets 
need to be investment grade (above BBB–). This policy may be regarded as a reaction to 
growing concerns over the potentially weakened effectiveness of monetary easing as a result 
of  the  shrinking  balance  sheet  amid  a  decline  in  some  inflation  expectation  indicators. 
Although  the  interest  rate  applied  to  a  central  bank’s  asset  purchases  is  generally 
determined through supply and demand forces in the relevant market, the ECB applies the 
deposit facility rate of minus 0.2 percent as a floor rate. 
With regard to the second common monetary-easing instrument, forward guidance has 
been adopted by the two central banks with the objective of indicating a future direction for 
the  ongoing  monetary  easing.  This  is  expected  to  produce  a  signaling  effect.  The  most 
commonly  observed  form  is  to  signal  the  intention  to  maintain  a  significantly  low  policy 
interest rate over a long period. This instrument is supposed to exert downward pressure on 
the  short-  to  medium-term  yield  curve  to  achieve  additional  monetary  easing.  Moreover, 
forward guidance could also be used to signal a central bank’s future stance over an ongoing 
asset purchase program, and thereby exert downward pressure mainly on the long-term yield 
curve (albeit dependent on the remaining maturity spectrum of purchased assets). 
Unlike the Federal Reserve, the BOJ has had no forward guidance related to a policy interest 
rate since the BOJ switched its main operating target for money market operations from the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate to a monetary base when it introduced QQE in 2013. The 
BOJ thus applies forward guidance to indicate its future stance over the continuation of QQE 
as  a  package  (monetary  base  targeting  together  with  the  size  and  type  of  assets  to  be 
purchased).  Forward  guidance  is  expressed  mainly  according  to  the  following  outcome-
based  statement:  The  Bank  will  continue  with  QQE,  aiming  to  achieve  the  price  stability 
target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. 
That statement is followed by a qualifying clause, which declares that both the upside and 
downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices  will  be  examined  and  that  adjustments  to 
QQE will be made as appropriate. The BOJ’s forward guidance therefore signals a condition 
that  determines  continuation  of  QQE  provided  no  major  risks  materialize.  Given  that  the 
short- 
the  previous 
comprehensive  monetary  easing  (October  2010  to  March  2013),  the  intention  with  the 
forward  guidance  related  to  QQE  is  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  the  longer-term  yield 
curve.1  At  the  same  time,  this  form  of  forward  guidance  is  expected  to  raise  inflation 
expectations – considering that  maintaining  a price stability target of  2 percent in a stable 
manner is equivalent to anchoring inflation expectations at around 2 percent. 
With the ECB, forward guidance was first applied to policy interest rates in July 2013. It was 
achieved in terms of the following statement: “The Governing Council expects the key ECB 
interest  rates  to  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time.”  In 
September 2014, when the ECB cut policy rates by 10 basis points – to 0.05 percent for the 
main refinancing operations (MRO), 0.3 percent for the marginal lending facility, and minus 
0.2  percent  for  the  deposit  facility  –  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  reported  that  further 
downward  adjustments  would  no  longer  be  possible.  Thus,  the  ECB’s  present  forward 
guidance refers to the duration of maintaining the ongoing low policy interest rates. The ECB 
also  adopted  forward  guidance  in  March  2015  to  signal  its  future  stance  over  combined 
monthly asset purchases of about 60 billion euros with the following remark: “Intended to be 
carried out until the end of September 2016 and will, in any case, be conducted until we see 
to  medium-term  yield  curve  was 
lowered  substantially  under 
                                                
1   The BOJ also purchases short-term treasury bills and maintains a 0.1-percent interest rate on excess reserves 
(IOER).  Those  moves  have helped  promote  market expectations  that  very  short-term  market interest  rates 
would remain substantially low for a long period. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation which is consistent with our aim of achieving 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2 percent over the medium term.” 
The third common monetary-easing instrument is a conditional long-term lending facility. 
The  BOJ  provides  low-cost  funding  (fixed  at  0.1  percent)  to  financial  institutions  up  to  an 
amount that is twice the net increase in their lending – with a maximum of four years under 
the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility. This measure is planned to continue until June 2016. 
Similarly,  the  ECB  launched  Targeted  Longer-Term  Refinancing  Operations  (TLTROs)  in 
September  2014.  Since  March  2015,  TLTROs  have  provided  low-cost  funding  (at  interest 
rate  on  MRO)  to  financial  institutions  up  to  an  amount  three  times  as  much  as  the  net 
increase in lending to non-financial firms and households (excluding loans to households for 
house  purchases).  Currently,  the  maximum  is  three  years;  TLTROs  are  scheduled  to 
continue until June 2016. Both Japan and the euro area are characterized by a system of 
bank-based  financial  intermediations;  thus,  the  ultimate  goal  with  these  instruments  is  to 
promote bank lending to the private sector. At the same time, they could also help expand 
the central bank’s balance sheet. 
Unconventional monetary policies – differences between the BOJ and ECB 
III. 
I would now like to examine differences in monetary-easing policies (Chart 2). 
Background to the ECB’s adoption of a negative deposit facility rate 
A. 
The ECB adopted its first negative deposit rate of minus 0.1 percent in June 2014, followed 
by minus 0.2 percent the following September. I believe that three main factors contributed to 
the ECB’s decision to maintain the negative interest rate up to the present. First, there are 
many nonresident holders of government bonds in the euro area: their holdings account for 
over  50  percent  of  outstanding  bonds  issued. The  types  of  nonresident  investors  are  also 
diverse,  ranging  from  short-term-oriented  hedge  funds  to  long-term-oriented  institutional 
investors  and  foreign  central  banks.  Some  of  those  investors  are  therefore  likely  to  sell 
government bonds to the ECB in search of capital gains without being overly affected by the 
negative interest rate or with the need to rebalance their portfolios, giving higher weight to 
corporate bonds and stocks in the euro area. Second, as long as potentially large demand 
exists for credit among firms and households, financial institutions in the euro area could be 
encouraged to extend credit to the private sector in an attempt to avoid a negative deposit 
rate, or they may be able to charge a higher lending rate without restraining credit demand. 
Consequently, financial institutions may achieve profits that will more than offset the negative 
interest rate by promoting credit creation. Third, given the presence of segmentation in the 
cross-border interbank markets in the euro area after the global financial crisis, the negative 
interest rate policy is unlikely to harm the behavior of liquidity-abundant financial institutions. 
B. 
The BOJ’s decision to hold a positive interest rate on excess reserves (IOER) 
By contrast, the BOJ has maintained a 0.1-percent IOER since 2008. I would like to explain 
the  broad  background  behind  this  decision.  That  is,  it  is  important  to  note  that  QQE  was 
adopted in an environment that provided little room for further cuts in short- to medium-term 
interest rates. To generate a large-scale monetary-easing effect, therefore, the BOJ decided 
to adopt a strategy of exerting downward pressure on real long-term interest rates; it did so 
through  a  decline  in  nominal  long-term  interest  rates  and  an  increase  in  inflation 
expectations. This strategy is more accommodative than a policy of seeking further marginal 
cuts in shorter-term interest rates. 
That said, I will give three reasons for the decision to keep a positive IOER. First, it reflects 
the view that further cuts in the IOER could give rise to a more challenging environment for 
the BOJ in terms of smoothly fulfilling the targeted amount of asset purchases. Unlike in the 
euro area, there are  substantial numbers of resident holders of  JGBs: the amount of their 
holdings accounts for over 90 percent of outstanding bonds issued. Many of those investors 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
are  long-term-oriented financial  institutions. With  such  a  market  structure,  a  positive  IOER 
may have the effect of inducing those holders to sell government bonds to the BOJ. 
Second,  a  negative  IOER  may  incur  the  risk  of  undermining  the  intermediary  function  of 
financial institutions by lowering profitability in the banking system. Banks may be unable to 
pass the increased cost (caused by the negative interest rate) on their retail depositors by 
lowering the deposit interest rate (which, at around 0 percent, is already low). Alternatively, 
financial institutions may attempt to raise their lending rates in an effort to maintain profits; 
however, that may discourage credit demand and thus undermine lending activities. Some 
European central banks charge a negative interest rate on both the deposit facility rate and 
on the main lending (refinancing) policy rate. Some of those financial institutions apparently 
apply a negative interest rate on the deposits of large clients and interbank markets as well 
as charging a higher lending rate for some corporate clients; they do this while maintaining a 
positive interest rate on retail deposits. This practice is unlikely to occur in Japan given that 
the  loan-to-deposit  rate  remains  around  70  percent  and  competition  for  lending  is  fierce. 
Banks may ultimately absorb the increased cost by squeezing their profit margins, thereby 
somewhat stifling the incentive to take credit risks by increasing lending activities. 
Third,  it  is  important  to  support  the  function  of  interbank  markets  to  a  certain  degree  by 
allowing  arbitrage  in  interest  rate  transactions  between  banks  holding  current  account 
balances  at  the  BOJ  and  those  without  access  to  such  accounts.  Such  transactions  also 
enable  market  interest  rates  to  function  relatively  effectively  as  reference  interest  rates, 
which  are  conducive  to  various  other  related  financial  transactions  and  monetary  policy 
judgments.2 
More importantly, the ECB faced a decline in some inflation expectation indicators and the 
accumulated disinflation risk in the second half of 2014, when a negative deposit facility rate 
was in place. This suggests that a positive impact of raising inflation expectations that the 
BOJ emphasizes could not really be expected at any significant level from a negative interest 
rate policy. Thus, although the feasibility of lowering the IOER should not be denied, such a 
policy  needs  to  be  better  understood  and  properly  discussed  in  light  of  differences  in  the 
financial market structures of each country and region. 
Differences in importance of credit easing between the BOJ and ECB 
C. 
Another difference between the ECB and BOJ is that the ECB’s monetary easing generally 
entails an element of credit easing. Recently, the lending rate charged on the private sector 
has dropped and credit growth has turned positive in the euro area. Nonetheless, small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in some peripheral countries still face restrictive lending 
criteria,  higher  funding  costs,  and  limited  access  to  the  credit  volume.  For  these  reasons, 
TLTROs  aim  to  promote  financial  institutions’  lending  activities  by  reducing  their  funding 
costs, thereby indirectly lowering the lending rates charged on the private sector. In addition, 
the  ABS  purchase  program  was  initiated  to  activate  the  market  through  purchases  of 
securities and promote the securitization market for bank loans, including those for SMEs. 
The ECB thus continues to place the priority on credit easing as the banking system has not 
yet  fully  recovered  its  financial  intermediary  function  arising  from  the  global  financial  and 
European debt crises. 
By  contrast,  Japan  experienced  a  decline  in  the  functions  of  the  CP  and  corporate  bond 
markets immediately after the global financial crisis. That caused the BOJ to purchase those 
assets as a credit-easing policy in 2009. However, Japan did not face a banking crisis, and 
                                                
2  
In a speech I delivered in Italy in January 2013, I touched on the pros and cons of a cut in the IOER and 
suggested the positive impact of such a cut on correcting the yen’s excessive appreciation. However, after 
QQE,  those  arguments  no  longer  apply.  See  Shirai,  Sayuri,  “Japan’s  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Challenging 
Environment,” Speeches at the Bank of Italy and the Eurasia Business and Economics Society Conference 
Held in Rome (January 11–12), Bank of Japan, 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the balance sheet of the banking sector generally remains sound. Even before QQE, SMEs 
had therefore enjoyed an accommodative monetary environment, such as with low funding 
costs  and  availability  of  credit  volumes.  Credit  easing  has  now  become  a  less  important 
element of monetary easing. 
Inflation expectations in Japan and the euro area 
IV. 
Let me now proceed with inflation expectations – a key to achieving the price stability target 
– starting with those of economists and market-based indicators before turning to those of 
households and firms. 
Japan’s agenda – restoring inflation expectations to around 2 percent 
A. 
According  to  economists  whose  long  time-series  data  are  available,  their  inflation 
expectations stood at around 2 percent before Japan entered the era of long-standing mild 
deflation  (Chart  3).  Medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  (i.e.,  five  years  ahead) 
remained around 2 percent in the first half of the 1990s. The year-on-year rate of change in 
the consumer price index (CPI) and short-term inflation expectations (i.e., one year ahead) 
were also around 2 percent until the early 1990s. From around 1992, after the collapse of the 
asset bubble, however, the rate of change in the CPI began to drop, turning negative from 
around 1999. The first half of this period coincided with a declining trend in real GDP growth 
rates. Since these rates were mostly lower than potential GDP growth rates, which had been 
on a declining trend, the output gap deteriorated significantly, generating downward pressure 
on actual prices (Chart 4). Short-term inflation expectations dropped in line with actual price 
performance:  they  turned  negative  around  1999  and  subsequently  fluctuated  at  about 
0 percent before QQE.3 
One  interesting  feature  of  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  is  that  they  were 
unstable from the second half of the 1990s to 2012, with year-on-year movements ranging 
from around 0.5 percent to 2 percent. It was evident that those inflation expectations were 
insufficient  to  raise  the  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  and  short-term  inflation  expectations. 
Inflation expectations thus did not fully play anchoring role. The BOJ’s expression of price 
stability may be attributable to the instability in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. In 
2006, the BOJ introduced the concept of  the  understanding  of medium-  to  long-term  price 
stability and described price stability as, in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI,  approximately  between  0  and  2  percent  with  the  median  of  1  percent.  The  BOJ’s 
description was clarified somewhat in 2009 to a positive range of 2 percent or lower, with a 
midpoint of around 1 percent, thereby eliminating the possibility of a 0-percent price change. 
In 2012, the BOJ introduced the price stability goal in the medium to long term, describing it 
as a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI, while setting the goal at 1 percent for the time being. Despite these statements, it was 
not wholly clear whether the BOJ was ultimately pursing a 2-percent level or a lower one. 
Against this background, the BOJ adopted the 2 percent target and QQE in 2013 to restore 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  back to  around  2  percent  –  the  level  that  had 
been achieved over 20 years earlier. Since the introduction of QQE, medium- to long-term 
inflation  expectations  of  economists  and  the  inflation  swap  rate  (implied  five-year  forward 
rate,  five  years  ahead)  have  risen  moderately  and  remain  around  1  percent  today. 
Nevertheless, the 2 percent target remains distant (Chart 3). 
From Japan’s experience, it is essential first to make a continuous improvement in the output 
gap and thereby steadily raise the rate of change in the CPI. In this regard, the output gap 
                                                
3  
It must be noted that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, as well as short-term inflation expectations, 
rose substantially, owing to consumption tax hikes in 1997 and 2014, and the surge in commodity prices in 
early 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
estimated by the BOJ turned positively to 0.1 percent in the January–March quarter of 2015. 
After  a  temporary  deterioration  projected  for  the  April–June  quarter,  the  output  gap  is 
expected to gradually improve in positive territory from the July–September quarter this year 
and increase its upward pressure on prices. The change in the core CPI (all items less fresh 
food)  is  currently  about  0  percent.  However,  the  CPI  excluding  food  and  energy  is  about 
0.6 percent, which exceeds the core CPI. The proportion of items whose prices have risen 
among  all  core  CPI-composing  items  has  increased  to  around  65  percent  (Chart  5). 
Moreover, some price hikes have accompanied increased sales. For those reasons, it is fair 
to  say  that  there  has  been  no  deterioration  in  the  underlying  trend  in  prices.  The  BOJ 
projects that the rate of change in the core CPI will begin to rise from the second half of fiscal 
2015.  Once  the  rising  trend  of  the  core  CPI  becomes  stable,  inflation  expectations  are 
projected to rise gradually toward around 2 percent. 
B. 
Euro area’s inflation expectations: broadly consistent with the price stability 
target 
By contrast, in the euro area, the medium- to long-term inflation expectations of economists 
have been more or less stable at around 2 percent since the initial phase of adopting the 
euro (Chart 6). This is evident in two ways: one is that the rate of inflation had already moved 
to around 2 percent a few years prior to the euro adoption; the other is that the ECB initially 
defined price stability as inflation rates below 2 percent over the medium term. Medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations appear to have stabilized more firmly after the ECB further 
clarified its definition in 2003 as inflation rates below, but close to, 2 percent over the medium 
term. 
This  situation  changed  somewhat  after  2012,  when  the  rate  of  change in  the  Harmonized 
Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  began  to  decrease  continuously.  The  decline  occurred 
across a wide range of goods and services in the face of a re-deterioration in the output gap 
and a price drop in various commodities (Charts 7 and 8). Nevertheless, the HICP excluding 
food and energy remains at around 1 percent. Following the decrease in HICP, short-term 
inflation  expectations  declined  significantly,  whereas  medium- 
inflation 
expectations decreased moderately; they currently stand at around 1.8 percent. The inflation 
swap rate (implied five-year forward rate, five years ahead) strengthened a declining trend 
from mid-2014 and reached around 1.5 percent by early 2015, which triggered concerns over 
the  risk  of  disinflation.  Thereafter,  the  inflation  swap  rate  has  increased  moderately  and 
recovered  to  around  slightly  below  2  percent,  owing  to  the  impact  of  the  ECB’s  asset 
purchase  program  (including  an  announcement  effect)  and  the  greater-than-expected 
performance of economic activity and prices. But most recently, the gap from the target has 
somewhat widened, partly owing to the recent re-drop in crude oil prices (Chart 6). A recent 
decline in the inflation swap rate is also observed in Japan. This might be a reflection of a 
decrease in inflation risk premium associated with declining oil prices rather than declining 
inflation expectations. 
long-term 
to 
C. 
Gap between households’ price perception and price performance in Japan: 
different feature from the euro area 
I would now like to turn to households’ price expectations and spending patterns. Owing to 
the  lack  of  comparable data,  I  will  use  short-term  data  (about  one  year  ahead).  From the 
BOJ’s Opinion Survey on the General Public’s  Views and Behavior, the following data are 
available from June 2006: (1) the perception diffusion index (DI) of present price levels (the 
present price perception DI); (2) the one-year-ahead price DI;  and (3) the one-year-ahead 
spending DI. From the European Commission’s Business and Consumer Surveys, I will use 
the following data from 1999: (1) the price trend DI over the previous twelve months; (2) the 
price trend DI over the next twelve months; and (3) the spending expectation DI for major 
purchases  (such  as  furniture  and  electrical  or  electronic  devices)  over  the  next  twelve 
months. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
As a commonly observed feature, households in Japan and the euro area tend to perceive 
that the present price level represents an increase – except for a short period immediately 
after the global financial crisis – and they tend to expect higher price levels about one year 
ahead (Charts 9 and 10).  Moreover, those households commonly tend to  expect to  spend 
less in the near future. From these features, it may be said that households plan to reduce 
their  spending  about  one  year  ahead  because  they  expect  a  tighter  budget  as  a  result of 
expected higher prices. 
A  different  feature  is  evident  with  regard  to  the  relationship  between  actual  price 
performance and households’ present price perception (as well as their one-year-ahead price 
expectation). In the euro area, households’ present price perception and price expectation 
DIs  are  roughly  in  line  with  actual  price  performance.  By  contrast,  Japanese  households’ 
present  price  perception  (except  for  a  short  period  immediately  after  the  global  financial 
crisis) and price expectation DIs remained positive even when mild deflation prevailed from 
2009 to mid-2013. More recently, despite the rate of change in the core CPI having dropped 
to around 0 percent, the rising trend in the present price perception DI has been firm and the 
relatively high level of price expectation DI has been sustained. Thus, Japanese households’ 
price  perceptions  and  expectations  constantly  differ  from  the  movements  of  official  price 
statistics.  On  this  front,  it  is  known  that  Japanese  households’  price  perceptions  and 
expectations are heavily affected by the price movements of daily necessities and gasoline, 
resulting in an upward bias. This could be interpreted as a sign of a strong defensive action 
against  the  anticipated  tighter  budget.  If  so,  households  may  perceive  a  rate  of  actual 
inflation of much higher than 2 percent in the process of approaching the 2 percent target, 
and regard such price rises as unacceptable. Thus, it is important for the BOJ to promote 
public understanding that its objective is to achieve a moderate price rise and a sustainable 
increase in household spending. Additionally, households’ tolerance for price rises needs to 
improve in accordance with a sustainable income rise. 
Euro area firms’ price expectations becoming comparable with those of Japan 
D. 
With  respect  to  firms’  price  expectations,  the  sales  price  expectation  DI  for  three  months 
ahead is available from the BOJ’s Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in 
Japan) and the European Commission’s surveys (Chart 11). One interesting finding is that in 
Japan, firms’ sales price expectation DI has fluctuated in negative territory since the first half 
of the 1990s, when the rates of change in the CPI remained positive. Among those firms, the 
DI of manufacturing firms remains negative today even though there has been improvement 
after the global financial crisis. By contrast, the euro area’s sales price expectation DI mostly 
moved in positive territory before the global financial crisis, which suggests that European 
manufacturing firms found it relatively easy to raise sales prices. However, especially after 
2012, when the European debt crisis deepened, the sales price DI became sluggish and has 
since remained around 0 percent. This implies that European manufacturing firms now find it 
more challenging to raise their sales prices and are in a similar position to Japanese firms. 
An  exception  is  Germany,  where  the  sales  price  expectation  DI  has  remained  in  positive 
territory despite a drop in the present sales price DI. This may indicate that German firms 
continue to provide more differentiated, higher value-added products than other firms in the 
euro area. 
With  regard to  the  sales  price  expectation  DI  of  non-manufacturing  firms,  the  DI  in  Japan 
turned moderately positive after QQE, and it remains positive although low. The sales price 
expectation  DI  in  the  euro  area  has  become  stagnant  –  albeit  with  large  fluctuations  – 
following  the  European  debt  crisis.  In  three  non-manufacturing  sectors,  the  current  DIs  in 
services and retail trade are moderately positive, albeit at low levels, like those of Japanese 
firms. The DI of construction has mostly been in significantly large negative territory since the 
global financial crisis. In the case of Germany, the sales price expectation DI of services has 
shown a remarkable recovery and already exceeds the pre-crisis level. Nonetheless, the DI 
of retail trade has recently been at a low level, although moderately positive, which suggests 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
that  consumption  activities  have  not  yet  fully  recovered.  The  DI  in  construction  has  been 
sluggish and was often negative even before the global financial crisis; the current level is 
low. 
Conclusions 
E. 
In  the  euro  area,  short-term  price  expectations  of  households  and firms  dropped  after  the 
financial crises and are currently stagnant; the medium- to long-term inflation expectations of 
economists and market-based indicators are somewhat below, but roughly in line with, the 
price  stability  target.  This  may  suggest  that  the  sluggish  households’  and  firms’  price 
expectations  are  temporary  and  that  those  expectations  will  eventually  begin  to  rise  as 
economic conditions improve. 
In Japan, the medium- to long-term inflation expectations of economists and market-based 
indicators remain around 1 percent. This is partly because the price rising trend – except for 
the oil price – seems to have been settling. This may imply that firms’ short-term sales price 
expectations,  although  still  low,  may  begin  to  rise  as  the  recovery  process  improves. 
Moreover, households’ price expectations tend to be substantially high owing to the upward 
bias, and they deviate substantially from actual price performance. However, such an upward 
bias  may  be  corrected  in  the  future  once  households’  tolerance  for  price  rises  gradually 
improves together with a sustainable income rise and more widespread understanding of the 
2  percent  target.  That  said,  it  is  important  for  the  BOJ  to  maintain  an  accommodative 
monetary environment to support economic recovery and make greater efforts to increase 
public awareness of that target and the BOJ’s intention. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17 
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   19 
