  Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Perspectives on Thailand’s economy 
Speech by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Global Macro 
Conference, Hong Kong, 27 January 2015. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to share with you my perspectives on Thailand’s economy in these 
times  of  growing  concerns  about  global  financial  markets  and  economic  recovery.  I  would 
like to thank Goldman Sachs for arranging this platform for policymakers like us (the Bank of 
Thailand), senior global leaders and investors to exchange information and ideas. And, it is 
very  important, at this juncture, to foster constructive dialogues between policymakers and 
industry specialists. 
I would like to first share with you my thoughts on Thailand’s recent economic development 
and the direction in which I see the Thai economy is heading. 
Update on economic activity 
Last year marked a bumpy ride for Thailand’s economy. In the first half of the year, the 
economy  was  stagnant  due  to  a  combination  of  low  domestic  demand  and  external 
challenges. In the second half of the year, clarity of political situation boosted private sector’s 
confidence, which in turn encouraged a turnaround in private consumption and a pick-up of 
private  investment  in  some  sectors,  such  as  telecommunication. With  the  resumption  of  a 
functioning government, public spending resumed somewhat, although not as much as we 
had hoped. Throughout the year, low interest rates made the overall financial condition an 
accommodating  factor.  Despite  occasional  challenges,  the  financial  and  the  real  sectors 
remained resilient. We are currently awaiting the official figure, but project that the economy 
in the second half of 2014 to have grown by 1.7%, which translates into an annual growth of 
0.8% for 2014. (Slide 1) 
Prospect for 2015 and projections 
As for 2015, we project that the Thai economy will continue to recover at an annual 
growth rate of 4%. Let me briefly highlight a few key points underlying this projection. 
First,  we  anticipate  that  the  growth  momentum  is  carried  forward  from  last  year’s 
second half. The  economy  should  show  stronger  signs  of  recovery.  Private  consumption, 
investment  and  government  spending  will  be  the  main  drivers  of  growth.  Lower  oil  prices 
certainly  have  also  given  consumers  a  hand  in  the  recovery  process.  Exports  are  also 
expected to grow, but at a slower pace than we have seen in the past. 
Second, our estimate of exports is conservative. We project merchandise exports to grow 
mere 1% this year compared to 3–4 % expected by the market. Demand growth from our 
trading partners is still slowly recovering, especially in the euro zone and Japan. While the 
US  economy  is  picking  up  its  growth  momentum,  the  risk  of  global  growth  and  lower 
commodity prices has undermined many Asian countries’ exports including ours. With regard 
to exports of services, particularly the tourism sector, things are however somewhat brighter. 
With  tentative  signs  of  improvement,  we  project  tourism  to  grow  approximately  10% 
compared to last year. 
Third, there are critical assumptions in this projection, which hinges on government 
spending. As we all know, there are many uncertainties when dealing with an assumption of 
political  nature.  And,  for  this  year  in  particular,  our  forecast  team  had  a  hard  time  making 
fiscal  assumptions.  On  the  one  hand,  the  government  is  trying  to  accelerate  budget 
disbursement  and  push  through  infrastructure  projects.  On  the  other  hand,  the  country  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  undergoing  structural  reforms  in  many  areas.  Some  on-going  reform  processes,  such  as 
those  related  to  fighting  corruption1,  cannot  help  but  delay  government  spending  and 
investment. This is dynamism of the current reform period. Some measures incur “short-term 
pain” but are necessary to create “long-term gains”. (Slide 2) 
Underlying fundamentals and medium-term outlook 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Despite headwinds and disappointing growth last year, the underlying fundamentals 
that have been attracting investors to Thailand are still in place. The country’s overall 
economic stability remains sound against a backdrop of low unemployment, well-anchored 
inflation and a strong current account position. (Slide 3) 
Thanks to the painful lessons of the crisis back in 1997 and the adjustment thereafter, the 
main sectors in the economy (be it banks, corporate, households or government) have also 
kept their leverage in check. The banking and corporate sector had undergone a dramatic 
change and now possesses a fairly healthy structure. NPLs of the banking sector dropped 
from 43% during the crisis, to 2.3% in 2014, while debt-to-equity ratio in the corporate sector 
declined from 5.1 in 1997 to 1.3 in 2014.2 As for the household sector, even though the level 
of debt had risen somewhat in the recent years, approximately 85% of GDP last year, the 
decelerating growth provides us a relief. The transparent and prudent macroeconomic policy 
frameworks, used for both fiscal and monetary policy, also command trust from investors and 
the public. For these reasons, the reputable credit agencies have still reaffirmed their positive 
assessment of the Thai economy. 
Indeed,  the  recent  economic  conditions  have  underscored  the  importance  of 
preserving  sound  macroeconomic  fundamentals  in  order  to  create  resilience  in  the 
face  of  unexpected  shocks.  Domestically,  the  recent  economic  slowdown  has  put  some 
small  businesses  and  indebted  households  under  financial  strains.  Loan  quality  has 
deteriorated somewhat, with NPL increasing slightly as a result, but these risks have been 
contained to specific sectors. The banking system and corporate sector remain strong and 
have coped with the slowdown well, owing to their improved risk management policies. 
Externally, like many emerging markets, Thailand faced a couple episodes of capital 
flow volatility in recent years. The economy, however, has withstood these challenges 
reasonably well. For instance, during the “Taper Tantrum” in May 2013 and our own political 
unrest towards the end of 2013, Thai baht had swung by more than 10 percent in a year, 
fluctuating  from  30  baht  per  US  dollar  to  28  and  back  to  close  to  33  baht.  Despite  this 
volatility,  market  reactions  (in  terms  of  outflows)  have  been  relatively  dampened.  Foreign 
participation  in  the  Thai  bond  market  decreased  from  a  peak  of  13  percent  to  the  current 
level  of  around  10  percent  of  total  outstanding  public  sector  bond.  The  strong  local 
institutional investor base was able to pick up from where foreigners left. Despite foreigners 
exiting  the  Thai  bond  market,  total  portfolio  outflows  last  year  (2014)  amounted to  a  mere 
1 percent of our international reserves. 
A  flexible  exchange  rate,  a  relatively  balanced  external  position  and  a  modest  external 
exposure, altogether acting as the first line of defence, contributed to the success. The Bank 
of Thailand is also equipped with comprehensive policy tools, along with ample international 
reserves,  that  can  be  used  as  a  backstop  to  deal  with  disruptive  capital  flows  and  to 
                                                
1  Examples of anti-corruption measures are 1) the Construction Sector Transparency Initiative (CosT) which 
promotes transparency in state enterprise projects and 2) Integrity Pacts which oversee purchase plans of 
government and state enterprise projects. Among the big projects already implemented are 1) Suvarnabhumi 
Airport Phase II 2) the Blue Line metro extension, and 3) Bangkok NGV bus purchase plan. 
2  Total corporate debt / total corporate equity. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  safeguard financial stability. In fact, these are our multiple lines of defence available at our 
disposal. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
We, should not be under the illusion, however, that good fundamentals can be taken 
for  granted.  In  fact,  the  slowdown  of  economic  growth  in  the  recent  years  pinpoints  to 
structural problems, holding back the economy. Chief among these are supply bottlenecks 
such  as  a  shortage  of  labour  and  public  infrastructure,  eroding  competitiveness  and 
productivity,  and  corruption.  If  not  properly  addressed,  these  could  restrain  the  country’s 
growth potential in the medium term. 
The  good  news  is  that  ongoing  developments  in  Thailand  are  constructive.  The 
current reform agenda holds promises for moving the country forward.  The  National 
Reform Committee, along with other task forces, has been founded to push forward much-
needed measures. (Slide 4) The Bank of Thailand is currently involved in the reform of state-
owned  enterprises,  as  this  sector  includes  8  State-Owned  Financial  Institutions  (SFIs), 
whose  asset  size  accounts for  approximately  a  quarter  of  total  assets  in  the  Thai  banking 
system. Starting from this year, we at the Bank of Thailand are appointed to be a “regulator” 
for such financial institutions, whilst the Ministry of Finance remains a “policy-maker” and an 
“owner”.  This  is  one  of  the  reform  attempts  to  clearly  separate  the  roles  among  those 
involved, in order to avoid potential conflict of interests and to ensure that SFIs are subject to 
a proper supervision akin to that of commercial banks. (Slide 5) 
While the reform efforts are welcome developments, to what extent reform plans will 
be  put  into  action remains  to  be  seen.  One  of  the  main  challenges  will  be  keeping  the 
reform  momentum  going,  as  certain  reforms  may  take  years  to  complete.  I  think  of 
sustainable  reforms  as  running  a  marathon.  You  have  to  keep  going  steadily,  slowly  but 
surely. It’s not sprinting as fast as you can for 100 meters until the finish line. If you told me 
today  to  run  a  full  marathon  tomorrow,  I  could  not  make  it.  But,  if  you  gave  me  time  to 
prepare and get fit, I would be in the run. 
Monetary policy 
Let me now devote the last few minutes of my talk to update you about our monetary policy. 
Throughout the last couple of years, the Monetary Policy Committee has maintained 
an accommodative policy stance to support the economy. Mindful of downside risks to 
growth,  the  Committee  carefully  adjusted  the  degree  of  policy  accommodation  to  ensure 
sufficient  support  to  domestic  demand  and  to  shore  up  confidence.  Since  May  2013,  the 
policy  rate  was  cut  three  times,  as  lower  risks  to  domestic  financial  stability  and  subdued 
inflation opened room for monetary easing. Nonetheless, since the interest rate has been low 
for a prolonged period, we continue to be vigilant in monitoring any risks to financial stability. 
(Slide 6) 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
This year marks the 15th anniversary of Bank of Thailand’s adopting of the “flexible 
inflation targeting’ monetary policy framework. Thus far, this framework has served us 
well  and  resulted  in  a  satisfactory  record  of  price  stability,  which  is  a  remarkable 
improvement from previous decades. (Slide 7) The headline inflation rates were on average 
2.6%  since  2000  under  inflation-targeting,  while  they  were  more  than  4%  prior  to  that 
(15 years during 1985–1999). Equally important is that, inflation targeting has helped restore 
credibility and has brought transparency to the monetary policy deliberation process. 
To continue improving communication with the public, the Committee has decided to 
change the inflation target from core inflation to headline inflation starting this year. 
The new headline inflation target of 2.5 ± 1.5 percent aims to better reflect the cost of living 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and public  inflation expectations. In practice, however, the monetary policy framework and 
deliberations will remain the same, irrespective of the choice of the target. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude, 
Key  takeaway  of my  talk  is that  the growth  outlook for  this  year  is more  positive  than  last 
year’s  growth.  Due  to  the  Thai  economy’s  strong  fundamentals  and  resilience,  we  remain 
optimistic  about  the  near  future.  But,  it  is  important  to  see  through  much-needed  reforms, 
which would strengthen the country’s foundation for the medium and long term. 
Thank you very much! 
Slide 1 
 1
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Slide 2 
Dynamism During the Reform Process
Dovernment pushing
infrastructure and 
investment projects
Anti-corruption 
measures delaying 
government spending 
and investment
33
 Slide 3 
 Thailand Profile
Inflation
Current Account
(Billion USD)
NPL
(% of total loan)
D/E Ratio of corporate sector
Household Debt
(% of GDP)
Public Debt
(% of GDP)
1997
2005 2014E
5.6%
4.5%
1.9%
9.3
-7.6
8.6
42.9%
10%
2.3%
5.1
n/a
1.3
1.3
54%
85%
42%
51%
46%
Note: 2014 numbers as estimated; NPL as of Q2, 1998
 5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Slide 4 
Reform Efforts: National Reform Council
EQUALITY
DECENTRALIZATION
ANTI-CORRUPTION
INTRA-REGIONAL
COaPLEaENTARITY
 Slide 5 
State-owned Financial Institutions (SFIs) in Thailand 
Ministry of Finance
Bank of Thailand  
Policy-maker
hwner
wegulator
SFIs
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Slide 7 
15 Years of Inflation Targeting (IT) 
Headline Inflation
4.4% 
Pre-IT
2.6% 
Post-IT
Transparent
deliberation
process
Clear target
Independence
Policy
Credibility
%
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Monetary policy target for 2015 : 
Headline inflation 2.5 ± 1.5%  (annual average)
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
