  Takahide Kiuchi: Recent developments in economic activity, prices and 
monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Takahide  Kiuchi,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Aomori, 3 September 2015. 
I. 
Economic activity and prices 
 Recent developments at home and abroad 
A. 
I would like to start my speech with a look at developments in economic activity and prices. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately. The first preliminary estimate of the 
real GDP growth rate registered negative growth for the first time in three quarters, at minus 
1.6  percent  on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis  for  the  April-June  quarter  of  2015. 
Industrial production also dropped in that quarter on a quarter-on-quarter basis for the first 
time  in  three  quarters,  mainly  due  to  the  effects  of  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies 
toward  around  spring  2015,  as  well  as  to  inventory  adjustments  of  small  cars  with  engine 
sizes of 660cc or less. However, it has been picking up, albeit with some fluctuations. With 
regard to the outlook, industrial production is expected to increase moderately – albeit with 
some  fluctuations  –  reflecting  the  developments  in  demand  both  at  home  and  abroad  on 
which  I  will  elaborate  shortly.  In  this  situation,  the  economy  is  expected  to  continue 
recovering moderately. 
Looking at domestic demand, private consumption has been resilient, with the employment 
and  income  situation  improving  steadily.  The  number  of  new  passenger-car  registrations 
excluding small cars with engine sizes of 660cc or less has moved upward in the April-June 
quarter  of  2015,  but  declined  in  the  July-August  period  relative  to  that  quarter.  Sales  of 
household electrical appliances in real terms have trended moderately upward, supported by 
increased  sales  of  smartphone  products  and  a  rise  in  sales  to  foreign  visitors  to  Japan. 
However, sales of household electrical appliances have shown somewhat weak movements, 
due in part to lackluster sales of air conditioners as a result of irregular weather in the early 
summer. Sales at department stores have remained firm, due in part to the wealth effects as 
a result of the rise in stock prices and to improvement in consumer sentiment, but fell in the 
April-June  quarter,  affected  mainly  by  irregular  weather.  Meanwhile,  as  for  service-related 
consumption,  outlays  for  travel  have  been  firm  on  the  domestic  side,  although  those  in 
overseas travel have fallen, and sales in the food service industry have remained steady. 
As  for  the  employment  and  income  situation,  labor  market  conditions  have  continued  to 
improve steadily, and employee income has risen moderately. The unemployment rate has 
been  at  a  low  level  of  3.3  percent  or  slightly  higher,  and  has  continued  on  a  moderate 
improving  trend,  with  the  fluctuations  smoothed  out.  The  improving  trend  in  the  active  job 
openings-to-applicants ratio has become evident recently, as seen in the fact that it recorded 
1.21 in July, a high level since that in February 1992. Scheduled cash earnings on a year-on-
year  basis  as  a  whole  –  including  those  of  part-time  employees  –  have  increased 
moderately, since the rate of increase in scheduled cash earnings of full-time employees has 
accelerated at a moderate pace, mainly due to the effects of the rise in base pay. As for the 
outlook,  employee  income  is  expected  to  continue  increasing  moderately,  in  line  with  the 
recovery in economic activity and business performance. With the employment and income 
situation  continuing  to  improve  steadily  as  described,  private  consumption  is  expected  to 
remain resilient. 
Business  fixed  investment  has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend  as  corporate  profits 
have improved. The aggregate supply of capital goods (excluding transport equipment) – a 
coincident indicator of machinery investment – has been trending moderately upward, albeit 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  with fluctuations. Looking at leading indicators, machinery orders (private sector, excluding 
orders  for  ships  and  those  from  electric  power  companies)  have  increased  at  a  moderate 
pace,  notably 
in  manufacturing.  Moreover,  construction  starts  (floor  area,  private, 
nondwelling use) have started to pick up, albeit with fluctuations, since the turn of the year. In 
these circumstances, business fixed investment plans are projected to grow further for fiscal 
2015  from  the  previous  fiscal  year.  Taking  these  factors  into  account,  business  fixed 
investment  is  projected  to  continue  increasing  moderately  as  corporate  profits  follow  their 
improving trend. 
Let me turn to overseas demand. Regarding the environment surrounding exports, overseas 
economies  – mainly  advanced  economies  –  have  been  recovering,  albeit  with  a  lackluster 
performance still seen in part. Looking at movements by major region, the U.S. economy has 
continued  to  recover,  assisted  by  household  spending,  although  adjustments  have  been 
seen in the industrial production sector, mainly on the back of the decline in crude oil prices 
and  the  appreciation  of  the  U.S.  dollar.  The  European  economy  has  been  on  a  moderate 
recovery trend. The Chinese economy has maintained its stable growth as a trend but there 
has  been  downward  pressure  from  an  overhang  in  supply  capacity  in  the  manufacturing 
sector  and  adjustments  in  the  real  estate  market.  Apart  from  China,  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies as a whole have shown sluggish growth, due in part to the 
effects of the slowdown in the Chinese economy. 
In this situation, Japan’s exports have been picking up, albeit with some fluctuations. Real 
exports had increased for three quarters in a row starting with the July-September quarter of 
2014, and fell in the April-June quarter of 2015. They have shown sluggishness recently due 
to the effects of the slowdown in overseas economies toward around spring 2015. As for the 
outlook,  exports  are  expected  to  increase  moderately,  albeit  with  some  fluctuations,  as 
overseas  economies,  mainly  advanced  economies,  are  expected  to  continue  recovering 
moderately  –  although  there  are  issues  that  require  attention,  such  as  the  outcome  of  the 
European  debt  problem,  including  the  situation  in  Greece,  and  developments  in  emerging 
and commodity-exporting economies. 
Turning to price developments, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index 
(CPI, all items less fresh food) is about 0 percent. With regard to the outlook, it is likely to be 
about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices. 
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
B. 
So far, I have illustrated recent developments in economic activity and prices. Let me now 
turn  to  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  interim  assessment  of  the  April  2015  Outlook  for  Economic 
Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report),  which  was  made  in  July  2015.  In  this 
assessment, the Bank revised the forecasts for economic activity and prices through fiscal 
2017. 
In the Bank’s interim assessment, the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the 
real GDP growth rate was revised somewhat downward to 1.7 percent for fiscal 2015, mainly 
due  to  the  sluggishness  in  exports,  but  was  more  or  less  unchanged  at  1.5 percent  and 
0.2 percent for fiscal 2016 and 2017, respectively, from the forecasts presented in April. 
In other words, Japan’s economy is likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential 
through fiscal 2016 and maintain its positive growth in fiscal 2017, although with a slowing in 
its pace, due mainly to the effects of the consumption tax hike planned in April 2017. With 
regard to the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food), the median 
of the Policy Board members’ forecasts was more or less unchanged at 0.7 percent for fiscal 
2015, 1.9 percent for fiscal 2016, and 1.8 percent for fiscal 2017, from the April forecasts. 
The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to be about 
0 percent for the time being, but the rate will likely accelerate gradually, on the assumption 
that Dubai crude oil prices will rise moderately from 60 U.S. dollars per barrel. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Keys to assessing the outlook for economic activity and prices 
II. 
I  believe  that  Japan’s  economic  and  price  conditions  have  already  regained  stability 
consistent with the economy’s growth potential, mainly due to the effects of almost two and a 
half years of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). I expect that such stable 
conditions  will  continue  through  fiscal  2017  –  the  projection  period  covered  in  the  Bank’s 
April  2015  Outlook  Report  and  its  interim  assessment  in  July.  However,  I  hold  a  more 
cautious  view  on  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices  compared  with  the 
aforementioned  forecasts  in  the  Policy  Board  members’  baseline  scenario  regarding  that 
activity and prices in the July interim assessment. Let me share some of my considerations 
regarding the outlook with you. 
Output gap, potential economic growth rate, and outlook for the growth rate  
A. 
According  to  the  estimates  the  Bank  presented  in  the  April  2015  Outlook  Report,  the 
potential  growth  rate  of  Japan’s  economy,  which  represents  –  from  the  supply  side  –  the 
pace  of  growth  that  is  consistent  with  the  economy’s  growth  potential,  has  been  around 
0.5 percent  or  lower,  and  thus  remains  at  a  low  level.  The  Bank  also  estimates  Japan’s 
output  gap,  which  represents  the  degree  of  utilization  of  labor  and  production  capacity,  at 
0.1 percent for the January-March quarter of 2015. The output gap has maintained a neutral 
level of around 0 percent since the end of 2013. I would like to note that the output gap in 
Japan is also at a favorable level compared with those in other major countries, according to 
the  estimates  made  by  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(OECD). While these estimates are subject to a considerable margin of error, they generally 
have  been  in  line  with  developments  in  the  weighted  average  of  the  diffusion  indices  for 
production capacity and employment conditions in the Bank’s Tankan (Short-Term Economic 
Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan).  The  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  and  other 
indicators also suggest that supply and demand conditions in the labor market are tightening 
further, rather than being neutral. However, in a situation where the economy enters a phase 
in which the negative output gap almost closes, it is considered that it becomes more difficult 
for the economy to grow at a pace well above its potential compared with the early stage of 
economic recovery when the output gap is wide. I also consider the possibility that supply-
side  constraints  such  as  labor  shortages  will  have  the  effect  of  constraining  economic 
activity. 
Based on these developments, as I will describe in more detail later, my assessment is that 
the economy will continue to grow at a moderate pace as a trend through fiscal 2017, which 
is roughly equivalent to its growth potential, and that – although lower than the Policy Board 
members’ baseline scenario in the July interim assessment – stable economic activity and 
prices  will  be  maintained.  This  is  because  the  cumulative  effects  of  QQE  will  continue  to 
exert a positive impact on the economy, while on the demand side of the economy, there is 
downward pressure on exports, business fixed investment, and private consumption. 
Overseas economies and Japan’s exports 
B. 
The  latest  forecasts  for  global  economic  growth  for  2015  released  by  international 
organizations such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) were revised downward from 
those made at the end of last year. This was mainly due to weaker-than-expected growth in 
the United States and China, which are Japan’s major trading partners. 
The U.S. economy has been picking up on the whole, after being sluggish in the January-
March quarter of 2015, reflecting effects such as of the severe winter weather and the labor 
disputes  at  West  Coast  ports.  However,  the  sluggishness  remains,  particularly  in  private 
consumption. The average growth rate in the first half of 2015 fell below the past trend, and it 
is  still  uncertain  whether  the  pace  will  recover  in  the  second  half.  If  the  growth  in  labor 
productivity continues to follow a downtrend, this would increase anticipation of a downward 
deviation in the growth trend, and an optimistic view on the economic outlook consequently 
would seem unlikely to spread on the basis of support from a favorable employment situation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  alone.  Meanwhile,  the  growth  in  the  Chinese  economy  has  also  continued  to  trend 
downward, and considering the deterioration in the employment situation and the decline in 
the  inflation  rate,  it  cannot  necessarily  be  said  that  the  economy  is  currently  in  a  stable 
condition  that  is  neutral  to  the  output  gap.  The  rate  of  economic  growth  appears  to  be 
slowing  faster  than  the  rate  of  decline  in  potential  growth.  As  for  Asian  economies  with 
vulnerabilities arising from the high-level accumulation of private-sector debt, their downtrend 
may  become  more  evident  amid  the  spreading  effects  of  the  weaker-than-expected 
economic growth in the United States and China. 
In this environment, Japan’s real exports for the April-June quarter of 2015 turned negative 
on  a  quarter-on-quarter  basis  for  the  first  time  in  three  quarters,  registering  minus 
3.6 percent, and I consider that this has become one of the factors behind the weaker-than-
expected real GDP growth rate for the April-June quarter – that is, the temporary lull in the 
economy. Real exports are expected to increase on a quarter-on-quarter basis in the July-
September quarter, albeit moderately. Thereafter, however, they are likely to continue to lack 
momentum for some time and overall economic growth is expected to be quite modest as a 
result of the adverse effects on production and employment in manufacturing. 
Growth expectations and business fixed investment 
C. 
Business  fixed  investment  has  continued  to  be  on  an  increasing  trend  on  the  back  of 
improvement  for  the  situation  in  corporate  profits  and  of  higher  capacity  utilization  rates. 
However, firms’ cautious investment stance still has not changed considerably, particularly in 
terms  of  business  fixed  investment  in  Japan.  This  seems  contrary  to  firms’  active  stance 
toward hiring new employees, due in part to strong concern over future labor shortages. 
In this situation, for firms to become more active in their fixed investment, it is essential to 
bring about a clear rise in medium- to long-term growth expectations – underpinned as well 
by  the  government's  growth  strategy  and  measures  to  respond  to  the  population  decline. 
Meanwhile, focusing on the capital stock cycle of business fixed investment, I consider that 
fixed  investment  is  likely  to  increase  in  fiscal  2015,  and  thereafter  the  pace  of  increase  is 
likely  to  generally  peak  out  toward  fiscal  2017,  on  the  assumption  that  the  current  growth 
expectations will be maintained. 
Expectations of price rises and private consumption 
D. 
Private  consumption  has  continued  to  lack  momentum,  despite  the  favorable  environment 
evidenced  by  such  factors  as  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  and 
accommodative financial conditions. One factor behind this may be consumers’ expectations 
of  price  rises  for  the  time  being.  Since  April  2015  in  particular,  a  rise  in  prices  of  daily 
necessities such as food has been widely observed. In my view, comments by respondents 
in the recent Economy Watchers Survey and the sluggishness in the consumer confidence 
index in the Consumer Confidence Survey are evidence that this rise has negatively affected 
consumer sentiment. 
Let me consider this situation together with the effects of monetary easing. While real interest 
rates  continued  to  decline  due  to  the  policy  effects  of  QQE  at  the  time  of  its  introduction, 
there was no significant change in the outlook for real income. Therefore, a monetary easing 
effect emerged temporarily – that is, the bringing forward of future consumption. However, in 
the current phase, the decline in real interest rates has come to a halt, and a view seems to 
be spreading among consumers that the rate of increase in wages will not easily catch up 
with that in prices. Therefore, if expectations spread of a rise in prices of daily necessities in 
the near future, the outlook for real income for the time being may deteriorate, thereby further 
constraining consumption activity. This trend may be observed more clearly among elderly 
households, including those of pensioners, and low-income households. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Price developments and the outlook 
E. 
Turning to price developments, retail price statistics released by the private sector show a 
clear uptrend, particularly in prices of food. However, no significant changes have yet been 
observed in CPI statistics released by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, 
which cover a wider range of goods and services. In terms of the CPI for all items less food 
and energy – which tend to fluctuate largely – or the core-core CPI, the year-on-year rate of 
increase may have started to accelerate somewhat. However, it still cannot be judged that 
there has been a clear change in the underlying trend; this is partly because, in 2014, the 
rate of increase in prices had slowed after the consumption tax hike, and the rate of increase 
in that index reflected this effect. Comparing the recent situation with that from 2013 through 
the  beginning  of  2014  –  when  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  accelerated 
markedly – there is a large difference in the pace of improvement in the output gap and of 
the  rise  in  prices  of  electronic  appliances,  which  has  been  relatively  stable  recently  even 
amid the depreciation of the yen. Under these circumstances, the effects of the depreciation 
of the yen so far on price rises seem to have weakened on the whole compared with those 
observed last year. 
Supermarkets  have  recently  been  passing  on  increases  in  costs  by food  manufacturers  to 
sales prices and refraining from holding discount sales that are intended for sales promotion, 
as food sales do not decline even when prices are increased. However, this can be regarded 
as an overvaluation by retail stores that the relatively high level of the year-on-year rate of 
increase in sales since April 2015 – which actually is due to the base effect of the decline in 
demand after the consumption tax hike in 2014 – is an indication of the firmness in sales. 
Furthermore, one reason behind the fact that sales of food are less likely to decline despite 
the rise in sales prices may be that the necessity for food is high and the price elasticity of its 
consumption is considered to be relatively low. It is necessary to take into consideration the 
possibility that the rise in prices of daily necessities such as food will  intensify consumers’ 
defensive attitude toward spending and, as a result, restrain price increases. 
Under these circumstances, I expressed dissent from the description presented in the April 
2015 Outlook Report regarding the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less 
fresh food) that the timing of reaching around 2 percent is projected to be around the first half 
of fiscal 2016. Even now, I still hold the view that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI 
(all items less fresh food) will be about 0 percent for the time being, and thereafter accelerate 
very moderately, and consider that the rate of increase is unlikely to reach 2 percent even in 
fiscal 2017. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
In April 2013, the Bank introduced QQE with a view to achieving the price stability target of 
2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI at the earliest possible time, 
with a time horizon of about two years. Furthermore, in October 2014, the Bank decided to 
expand QQE. Specifically, the Bank decided to (1) accelerate the annual pace of increase in 
the  monetary  base  from  about  60–70  trillion  yen  to  about  80  trillion  yen,  (2)  increase  its 
Japanese government bond (JGB) purchases so that the amount outstanding of its holdings 
would be increased from an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen to about 80 trillion yen, and 
(3)  triple  the  annual  paces  of  increase  in  the  amounts  outstanding  of  its  holdings  of 
exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). 
Despite  supporting  the  introduction  of  QQE,  I  cast  a  dissenting  vote  on  the  decision  to 
expand  it  in  October  2014.  Moreover,  since  April  2015  –  that  is,  two  years  after  the 
introduction  of  QQE  –  I  have  continued  to  submit  a  proposal  to  change  the  guidelines  for 
money  market  operations  and  asset  purchases, including  a  reduction  in the  pace  of asset 
purchases. Next, I would like to explain in detail my policy stance and the idea behind it from 
the viewpoint of positive effects and side effects of QQE. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  My view on QQE 
A. 
The Bank introduced QQE in April 2013 and decided on the following guidelines for money 
market  operations  and  asset  purchases:  accelerate  the  annual  pace  of  increase  in  the 
monetary  base  to  about  60–70  trillion  yen  and  purchase  JGBs  so  that  the  amount 
outstanding of the Bank’s holdings would be increased to an annual pace of about 50 trillion 
yen. I supported these guidelines employed at the time of introduction, judging that the scale 
was one in which the associated positive effects would just about outweigh the side effects 
when confined to a certain time period. In the meantime, however, I have considered that the 
associated  side  effects  would  outweigh  the  positive  effects  over  time.  Therefore,  I  have 
continued to submit a proposal – that is, to designate QQE as an intensive measure with a 
time frame of about two years, and thereafter to review the monetary easing measures in a 
flexible manner – since the introduction of QQE in April 2013 through the Monetary Policy 
Meeting  (MPM)  held  in  March  2015.  This  was  because,  while  I  personally  considered  it 
difficult  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  in  a  short  period  of  time,  I  was 
concerned that, if the Bank carried out QQE with the rigid purpose of achieving the 2 percent 
price  stability  target,  the  policy  decided  at  the  time  of  introduction  would  be  protracted  or 
would strengthen and the side effects would increase in a cumulative manner. Based on this 
view,  in  deciding  the  expansion  of  QQE  in  October  2014,  I  judged  that  the  timing  of  the 
associated  side  effects  outweighing  the  positive  effects  would  be  moved  forward  due  to 
increases  such  as  in  the  amount  outstanding  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  holdings  from  an  annual 
pace of about 50 trillion yen to about 80 trillion yen. I therefore cast a dissenting vote on the 
measure  and  insisted  that  it  was  appropriate  for  the  Bank  to  continue  with  the  guidelines 
employed  at  the  time  of  the  introduction  of  QQE.  Since  then,  I  have  continued  to  cast  a 
dissenting vote on the current guidelines. 
On this basis, I submitted another proposal at the MPM held on April 7 and 8, 2015 – that is, 
to  (1)  reduce  the  annual  paces  of  increase  in  the  monetary  base  and  in  the  amount 
outstanding of the Bank’s JGB holdings from the current ones of about 80 trillion yen to about 
45 trillion yen, which are levels below the initial pace employed at the time of the introduction 
of QQE; (2) change back the average remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB purchases from 
the current one of about 7–10 years to the initial one of about seven years; and (3) reduce 
the annual paces of increase in the amounts outstanding of the Bank’s holdings of ETFs and 
J-REITs from the current ones of about 3 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively, to 
the initial ones of about 1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen. Since then, I have continued to 
submit  the  same  proposal  through  the  most  recent  MPM  held  on  August  6  and  7.  This 
proposal  was  formulated  based  on  the  judgment  that  the  associated  side  effects  would 
outweigh  the  positive  effects  even  under  the  guidelines  employed  at  the  time  of  the 
introduction of QQE, in terms of such aspects as the pace of the Bank’s JGB purchases. This 
judgment  was  formed  on  careful  examination  of  whether  the  side  effects  of  QQE  are 
outweighing  the  positive  effects  now  that  two  years  have  passed  since  the  time  of  the 
introduction, a milestone that had been borne in mind over that period. I also considered that, 
if the Bank changed the current guidelines so that the annual pace of increase in the amount 
outstanding of the Bank’s JGB holdings would be about 45 trillion yen – a level below the 
initial pace employed at the time of the introduction of QQE – excessive pressure on the JGB 
market  would  be  eased  considerably,  as  the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases  on  an  annual  basis 
would be reduced to a level equivalent to below about half the amount of JGBs planned to be 
issued in scheduled auctions from April 2015 to March 2016 (calendar base). 
The  proposal  I  just  mentioned  is  intended  only  to  reduce  the  pace  of  the  Bank’s  asset 
purchases, and not in any way reduce the amount outstanding of its asset holdings. Even if 
the paces of increase in the monetary base and of the Bank’s JGB purchases were to be 
reduced, accommodative financial conditions would be strengthened in a cumulative manner 
as  the  amount  outstanding  of  its  asset  holdings  increases.  I  personally  consider  it 
appropriate, first of all, to proceed with phased reductions, aiming to stabilize the amounts 
outstanding of the monetary base and of the Bank’s JGB holdings at certain levels. However, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  this does not mean that the Bank will end QQE. It will take considerable time before the end 
of  QQE  –  that  is,  when  excess  reserves  are  depleted  and  the  amount  outstanding  of  the 
Bank’s JGB holdings is normalized. I consider my proposal as a first step toward somewhat 
lowering  the  weight  of  QQE  in  the  overall  policy  package  and  shifting  to  a  flexible  policy 
conduct using a combination of a range of policy tools, including virtually zero interest rates 
and  the  fund-supplying  measure  to  stimulate  bank  lending  (the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending 
Facility). 
Positive effects of QQE 
B. 
I would now like to explain the idea behind my proposal in more detail from the viewpoint of 
positive effects and side effects of QQE. 
Firstly,  as  was  stated  in  “Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing:  Assessment  of  Its 
Effects in the Two years since Its Introduction,” released by the Bank in May 2015, QQE has 
been  effective  in  increasing  domestic  private  demand  through  a  decline  in  long-term  real 
interest rates, thereby continuing to exert positive effects on Japan’s economy as a whole. In 
addition, I think that the cumulative effects of the policy have already firmly taken hold in the 
economy. 
I  consider  that  this  is  evident  judging  from  the  degree  of  narrowing  of  the  following  three 
gaps.  First,  when  the  economy faces  a shortage  of  demand,  it  is  considered  an  important 
role of monetary policy to close the negative output gap by stimulating the economy from the 
demand side. As I explained earlier, according to the Bank’s estimate, the negative output 
gap  in  Japan seems  to have  almost  closed  at around  the  end  of  2013, and  thereafter the 
output  gap  has  been  at  a  neutral  level.  Second,  Japan’s  economy  had  long  been  in  an 
undesirable  situation  because  the  observed  inflation  rate  had  been  sluggish  whereas  the 
medium- to long-term expected rates of inflation, on which basis firms and households carry 
out their economic activities, had generally been positive. Since the introduction of QQE, the 
gap between the medium- to long-term expected rates of inflation and the observed inflation 
rate  has  narrowed.  Third,  reflecting  the  narrowing  of  the  output  gap  and  the  rise  in  the 
inflation rate, some estimates indicate that the level of the policy interest rate derived from 
the  Taylor  rule  has  risen  from  negative  territory  to  around  0  percent,  and  that  the  gap 
between the actual short-term interest rates – which are virtually at around 0 percent – and 
the derived policy interest rate has almost closed. This suggests the possibility that QQE is 
overcoming the negative effects of the zero lower bound of interest rates. 
However, I consider that the additional effects of QQE have been diminishing since around 
the middle of 2014, given that the decline in long-term real interest rates, which is considered 
to be the main source of policy effects, has come to a halt. With regard to nominal interest 
rates,  the  declining  trend  in  yields  on  10-year  JGBs  observed  through  2014  seems  to  be 
coming to a halt. While these developments are affected in part by developments in overseas 
interest rates, I think that they also stem from a domestic factor of the significant decline in 
term  premiums  on  JGBs  in  recent  years  already  having  approached  its  limit.  Meanwhile, 
there  have  not  been  major  changes  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  so  far, 
judging from various surveys and market indicators; these expectations have been relatively 
stable at a level that remains far from that deemed to be consistent with the price stability 
target of 2 percent. Given that the global disinflationary trend is likely to persist, I think that it 
is difficult to encourage medium- to long-term inflation expectations to continue rising solely 
by presenting the Bank’s policy stance of exerting influence on expectations. 
Side effects of QQE 
C. 
The  side  effects  of  QQE  are  not  necessarily  evident  at  present  because  they  are  mostly 
potential  effects.  However,  due  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  the  risk  that,  once  the  side 
effects  materialize  at  some  point  in  the  future,  it  will  become  difficult  to  handle  them 
appropriately,  and  it  may  become  too  late  to  take  action.  Given  this  feature  of  the  side 
effects,  I  personally  pay  particular  attention  to  a  range  of  problems  arising from  excessive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  impairment  of  functioning  of  the  JGB  market  caused  by  the  Bank’s  large-scale  purchases 
and holdings of JGBs. In other words, these problems are potential risks that could lead to 
instability  in  the  financial  system  –  such  as  impairment  of  functioning  of  the  JGB  market, 
including decreased liquidity or impairment of the price-discovery function. 
For example, if liquidity in the JGB market were to decline substantially, the market would 
become  less  resilient  against  negative  shocks  and  thereby  become  unstable  more  easily, 
such  that  volatility  in  the  market  would  increase.  In  particular,  since  JGB  prices  affect  the 
price formation of many financial products and assets, risks already may have accumulated 
in  such  a  way  that  drastic fluctuations  in  JGB  prices  could  lead  to  revisions  to  prices  of a 
wide range of financial products and assets, thereby exerting severe effects on the financial 
system and economic activity. In addition, attention should be given to (1) the possibility of a 
higher  risk  that  the  Bank’s  large-scale  JGB  purchases  will  be  perceived  as  central  bank 
financing of fiscal deficits and (2) a risk that the mechanism of maintaining fiscal discipline 
through  interest  rates  will  be  impaired,  reflecting  overly  heightened  expectations  that  the 
stability in the JGB market will be ensured. Furthermore, considering that there is a limit to 
the amount of JGBs and that the Bank cannot purchase from the market all JGBs issued, a 
problem regarding the sustainability of the policy of purchasing JGBs may materialize sooner 
or later. It is very difficult to predict when a limit to the Bank’s JGB purchases will arise, but if 
the  purchases  were  to  be  hindered  suddenly,  this  could  impair  the  credibility  of  monetary 
policy and rapidly increase uncertainty regarding the future monetary policy conduct, thereby 
leading to a sudden heightening of instability in financial markets. 
In addition to these problems related to the JGB market, I am concerned about another side 
effect  of  QQE;  namely,  the  risk  that  the  Bank’s  profits  might  be  reduced  in  the  course  of 
normalizing monetary policy in the future, which could impair its capital or increase the public 
burden. For example, if the Bank reduced the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings in line 
with the pace of redemption, its interest income on JGBs would decrease, while its payment 
of interest on financial institutions’ accumulated excess reserves would increase. As a result, 
the  environment  for  the  Bank’s  profits  might  deteriorate,  thereby  impairing  its  capital.  It  is 
necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that,  if  such  a  situation  were  to  occur,  this  could  (1)  generate 
uncertainty about the Bank’s financial soundness and impair the stability in the value of the 
currency and (2) ultimately cause unexpected increases in the public burden as a result of a 
possible  decrease  in  the  Bank’s  payment  to  the  government  and  capital  injection  into  the 
Bank. 
I think that such side effects of QQE have not diminished but rather have been increasing 
with the continuation of QQE. In addition, even if the Bank starts to normalize QQE, it will 
take considerable time for this to be completed; given this, it is important to fully take into 
account  the  side  effects  of  QQE  that may  emerge  over  a  considerable period  of  time  and 
conduct  monetary  policy  in  a  more  forward-looking  manner  than  when  conducting  the 
conventional  interest  rate  policy.  Relative  to  other  economic  measures,  the  side  effects  of 
monetary policy are difficult to grasp until they actually materialize. Therefore, I believe that 
the Bank should thoroughly explain the side effects of QQE widely to the public and show 
that it conducts policy paying full attention to these effects. I believe that this will enhance the 
credibility of the Bank’s policy, and thereby boost the policy effects. 
Examination and comparison of positive effects and side effects of QQE 
D. 
So  far,  I  have  described  in  detail  the  positive  effects  and  side  effects  of  QQE.  My 
understanding  is  that,  while  the  positive  effects  are  largely  determined  by  the  amount 
outstanding of the Bank’s JGB holdings – that is, the stock of its JGB purchases – the side 
effects, such as the decline in JGB market liquidity, are considerably affected not only by the 
stock of the Bank’s JGB purchases but also by the pace of such purchases – that is, the flow 
of these purchases. It is already the case that long-term real interest rates have become less 
likely to decline despite the increase in the amount outstanding of the Bank’s JGB holdings, 
and therefore additional effects of QQE clearly have been diminishing. Given this situation, I 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  consider that a reduction in the pace of Bank’s JGB purchases will reduce the side effects of 
QQE  without  significantly  constraining  the  positive  effects,  thereby  enabling  the  balance 
between the positive effects and the side effects to improve marginally. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  my  policy  proposal  is  not  to  reduce  the  stock  of  the  Bank’s  JGB 
purchases but to reduce the flow of such purchases. In my view, the cumulative effects of 
QQE  have  already  firmly  taken  hold  in  the  economy,  and  such  effects  will  not  diminish 
significantly  unless  the  Bank  reduces  the  amount  outstanding  of  its  JGB  holdings.  If 
normalization  of  QQE  –  such  as  the  measure  to  reduce  the  pace  of  the  Bank’s  JGB 
purchases – is postponed in fear of a negative market reaction, this could further increase 
the potential risk of financial markets becoming unstable, which consequently could ruin the 
positive results of QQE gained so far. The success of QQE will be judged at the time when 
its normalization is completed smoothly, and this should be kept in mind. 
Progress toward achieving the price stability target 
E. 
As explained so far, I have been proposing at MPMs a change to the guidelines for money 
market  operations  and  asset  purchases,  including  a  reduction  in  the  pace  of  asset 
purchases. I also have been submitting a proposal not to restrict the time frame for achieving 
the 2 percent price stability target to about two years, but to aim to achieve it in the medium 
to long term. 
The Bank’s price stability target of 2 percent aims to maintain the 2 percent inflation rate in a 
stable  manner,  and  not  to  merely  reach  it  temporarily.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  it  is  a 
necessary condition that firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
– on which basis they carry out their economic activities – increase to about 2 percent and 
remain  stable  at  that  level.  I  consider  that  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations  are  mainly  determined  by  supply-side  factors  –  or,  the  economy’s 
growth potential – such as the potential growth rate and the labor productivity growth rate, 
rather than by factors such as the following: the level of the Bank’s price stability target; the 
supply  and  demand  balances  in  goods  and  services,  as  well  as  in  the  labor  market;  and 
developments  in  the  observed  inflation  rate.  From  this  point  of  view,  I  think  that  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent is well above the level that is consistent with the current growth 
potential of Japan’s economy. Therefore, in my view, it is difficult at this point to achieve the 
2 percent target in a stable manner through monetary policy alone, unless structural changes 
that would increase the underlying trend in inflation make further progress. In this situation, if 
excessive monetary easing is to continue in order to push prices higher in the short term than 
levels  justified  by  the  economy’s  growth  potential,  this  could  in  turn  impair  the  stability  in 
economic activity and prices. 
Moreover,  to  raise  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy,  it  is  necessary  for  firms  to  make 
technological innovations, as well as active fixed investment, so that such innovations lead to 
increased productivity. In order to encourage firms to make active fixed investment in Japan 
and increase the economy’s growth potential through accumulation of capital stock, it also is 
necessary  to  take  measures  to  increase  firms’  medium-  to  long-term  expectations  for  the 
growth rate of domestic demand. From such a viewpoint, it is important to address structural 
issues such as population decline and massive government debt, both of which can hinder 
expansion of domestic demand in the medium to long term. Efforts toward achieving fiscal 
consolidation are also important not only in terms of ensuring the stability in financial markets 
and thereby creating an environment in which the effects of QQE will be maximized, but also 
in terms of enabling smooth normalization of QQE in the future. 
As mentioned earlier, my assessment is that QQE has exerted a considerable effect in light 
of the role originally expected of monetary policy. In this current situation, the future role that 
monetary  policy  should  play  in  the  overall  economic  policy  is  to  shift  the  focus,  while 
maintaining favorable financial conditions, toward consistently providing indirect support for 
efforts  by  the  government  and  firms  so  that  the  productivity  growth  rate  and  the  potential 
growth rate will increase to levels consistent with the 2 percent inflation rate. To this end, it is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  important  to  conduct  monetary  policy  with  the  aim  of  achieving  prolonged  economic 
recovery, albeit moderate, at a pace consistent with the economy’s growth potential – that is, 
the potential growth rate – by reducing the side effects of monetary easing that could lead to 
financial market turmoil, thereby working to lessen future risks and uncertainty. My proposal 
to  change  the guidelines for money  market  operations  and  asset  purchases,  which  I  have 
been submitting at MPMs, is based on such a viewpoint. I believe this proposal is a quicker 
way of achieving the 2 percent price stability target. 
In the future conduct of monetary policy, I consider it necessary for the Bank to conduct its 
policy  flexibly,  giving  greater  consideration  to  its  policy  framework  of  “two  perspectives.” 
Specifically, the first perspective is examining, as regards economic activity and prices over 
the next two years or so, whether the outlook deemed most likely by the Bank is reasonable 
judging from the growth potential of Japan’s economy at each point in time. In relation to this, 
the inflation rate that the Bank should aim at achieving through monetary policy over roughly 
the  next  two  years  is  expected  to  climb  gradually,  as  the  potential  growth  rate  and  the 
sustainable inflation level rise due to efforts by entities such as the government and firms. 
Such an inflation rate could possibly reach around 2 percent in the medium to long term, but I 
consider it important to conduct monetary policy based on a reasonable level consistent with 
the  economy’s  growth  potential  at  each  point  in  time.  The  second  perspective  places 
importance on thoroughly examining, over a longer term, various risks that are most relevant 
to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  aimed  at  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth  under 
price stability. In doing so, it is important to not focus too much on short-term developments 
in economic activity and prices, but instead to pay close attention to medium- to long-term 
risks  that  could  lead  to  instability  in  the  financial  system,  and  thereby  aim  to  achieve 
economic and price stability in the long run. This contributes to the sound development of the 
national economy, thereby maintaining and enhancing the credibility of the Bank’s policy into 
the future. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
