  Andrew G Haldane: On microscopes and telescopes 
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of 
England,  at 
the  Lorentz  centre  workshop  on  socio-economic  complexity,  Leiden, 
Netherlands, 27 March 2015. 
 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I would like to 
thank Thibaud de Barman, Lucy Canham, Chiranjit Chakraborty, Jeremy Franklin, Rashmi Harimohan, John Hill, 
Bradley Hudd, Ben Kempley, Lu Liu, Katie Low, Anna Jernova, Carsten Jung, Damien Lynch, Yaacov Mutnikas, 
Tobi Neumann, Paul Robinson and David Ronicle for their assistance in preparing the text. I would also like to 
thank  Stephen  Burgess,  Oliver  Burrows,  Pavel  Chichkanov,  Nicholas  Fawcett,  Bob  Hills, Ronan  Hodge,  Glenn 
Hoggarth, Catrin Jones, Vas Madouros and Simon Whitaker for their comments and contributions. 
Accompanying charts and the table can be found on the Bank of England’s website. 
At  least  since  the  financial  crisis,  there  has  been  increasing  interest  in  using  complexity 
theory to make sense of the dynamics of economic and financial systems (Newman (2011), 
Arthur (2014)). Particular attention has focussed on the use of network theory to understand 
the  non-linear  behaviour  of  the  financial  system  in  situations  of  stress  (Gai  and  Kapadia 
(2011),  Haldane  and  May  (2011),  Gai,  Haldane  and  Kapadia  (2011)).  The  language  of 
complexity  theory  –  tipping  points,  feedback,  discontinuities,  fat  tails  –  has  entered  the 
financial and regulatory lexicon. 
Some progress has also been made in using these models to help design and calibrate post-
crisis  regulatory  policy.  As  one  example,  epidemiological  models  have  been  used  to 
understand  and  calibrate  regulatory  capital  standards  for  the  largest,  most  interconnected 
banks – the so-called “super-spreaders” (Craig et al (2014)). They have also been used to 
understand the impact of central clearing of derivatives contracts, instabilities  in payments 
systems  and  policies  which  set  minimum  collateral  haircuts  on  securities  financing 
transactions (Haldane (2009)). 
Rather  less  attention  so  far,  however,  has  been  placed  on  using  complexity  theory  to 
understand the  overall  architecture  of  public  policy  –  how  the  various  pieces  of the  policy 
jigsaw fit together as a whole. This is a potentially promising avenue. The financial crisis has 
led  to  a  fundamental  reshaping  of  the  macro-financial  policy  architecture.  In  some  areas, 
regulatory foundations have been fortified – for example, in the micro-prudential regulation of 
individual  financial  firms.  In  others,  a  whole  new  layer  of  policy  has  been  added  –  for 
example,  in  macro-prudential  regulation  to  safeguard  the  financial  system  as  a  whole 
(Hanson, Kashyap and Stein (2010)). 
This new policy architecture is largely untried, untested and unmodelled. This has spawned a 
whole  raft  of  new,  largely  untouched,  public  policy  questions.  Why  do  we  need  both  the 
micro- and macro-prudential policy layers? How do these regulatory layers interact with each 
other  and  with  monetary  policy?  And  how  do  these  policies  interact  at  a  global  level? 
Answering these questions is a research agenda in its own right. Without answering those 
questions,  I  wish  to  argue  that  complexity  theory  might  be  a  useful  lens  through  which  to 
begin  exploring  them.  The  architecture  of  complex  systems  may  be  a  powerful  analytical 
device for understanding and shaping the new architecture of macro-financial policy. 
Modern economic and financial systems are not classic complex, adaptive networks. Rather, 
they are perhaps better characterised as a complex, adaptive “system of systems” (Gorod et 
al (2014)). In other words, global economic and financial systems comprise a nested set of 
sub-systems,  each  one  themselves  a  complex  web.  Understanding  these  complex  sub-
systems,  and  their  interaction,  is  crucial  for  effective  systemic  risk  monitoring  and 
management. 
This “system of systems” perspective is a new way of understanding the multi-layered policy 
architecture which has emerged since the crisis. Regulating a complex system of systems 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
calls for a multiple set of tools operating at different levels of resolution: on individual entities 
– the microscopic or micro-prudential layer; on national financial systems and economies – 
the macroscopic or macro-prudential and monetary policy layer; and on the global financial 
and economic system – the telescopic or global financial architecture layer. 
The architecture of a complex system of systems means that policies with varying degrees of 
magnification  are  necessary  to  understand  and  moderate  fluctuations.  It  also  means  that 
taking  account  of  interactions  between  these  layers  is  important  when  gauging  risk.  For 
example, the crisis laid bare the costs of ignoring systemic risk when setting micro-prudential 
policy. It also highlighted the costs of ignoring the role of macro-prudential policy in managing 
these risks. That is why the post-crisis policy architecture has sought to fill these gaps. New 
institutional  means  have  also  been  found  to  improve  the  integration  of  these  micro-
prudential,  macro-prudential,  macro-economic  and  global  perspectives.  In  the  UK,  the first 
three are now housed under one roof at the Bank of England. 
In  what  follows,  I first  set  out  some  background  on  the  dynamics  of  a  complex  system  of 
systems using some stylised examples. I then discuss some stylised facts on the “system of 
systems” that is today’s economic and financial network. Finally, I draw out some tentative 
conclusions  for  future  research  and  policy  which  follow  from  viewing  the  macro-financial 
system through this lens. 
The architecture of complexity 
The literature on complexity theory, and its implication for system dynamics, is now deep and 
rich (Newman (2011)). Although there is no generally-accepted definition of complexity, the 
one  contained  in  Herbert  Simon’s  classic  1962 article  on the  Architecture  of  Complexity  – 
“one made up of a large number of parts that interact in a non-simple way” – continues to 
capture well its everyday essence (Simon (1962)). In complex systems, the whole behaves 
very differently than the sum of its parts. 
Although there is no single unifying theory of complexity, the dynamic properties of complex 
systems are now reasonably well-understood, based on analytical and experimental studies 
of networks of all types – physical, natural, social, biological and economic (Ladyman et al 
(2013)).  These  dynamic  properties  include  non-linearity;  discontinuities  in  responses  to 
shocks; amplifying feedback effects; and so-called “emergent” system-wide behaviour which 
is difficult to predict from the behaviour of any one element. 
These  properties  of  complex  systems  typically  give  rise  to  irregular,  and  often  highly  non-
normal,  statistical  distributions  for  these  systems  over  time.  This  manifests  itself  as  much 
fatter tails than a normal distribution would suggest. In other words, system-wide interactions 
and  feedbacks  generate  a  much  higher  probability  of  catastrophic  events  than  Gaussian 
distributions  would  imply  (Newman  (2005),  Gabaix  (2009)).  They  may  also  result  in 
distributions which are multi-modal, consistent with models of multiple equilibria (Bisin et al 
(2011)). 
The topology and wiring of these complex systems appears, perhaps predictably, to have a 
crucial bearing on their resilience to shocks. Many complex networks have been found, in 
practice, to exhibit a “scale-free” property (Barabasi and Albert (1999)). That is to say, they 
comprise  a  core  set  of  nodes  with  a  large  number  of  connections  and  a  large  set  of 
peripheral  nodes  with  few  connections.  There  is  a  core-periphery,  or  hub-and-spokes, 
network configuration. This scale-free property has been found in everything from food webs 
to  the World Wide Web, from  eco-systems  to  economic  systems, from synapses  to  cities, 
from social networks to financial networks (Jackson (2010)). 
These scale-free topologies have important, if subtle, implications for system resilience. For 
example, core-periphery models have been found to be very robust, at a systemic level, to 
random  shocks.  That  is  because  these  shocks  are  very  likely  to  fall  on  peripheral  nodes 
unconnected with, and hence unlikely to cascade through, the system as a whole. But these 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
systems are also vulnerable to targeted attack on the core nodes – the “super-spreaders” – 
whose hyper-connectivity risks generating a systemic cascade (Albert, Jeong and Barabasi 
(2000)). 
Another  typical  feature of  complex  systems  is  that  they  tend  to  organise  themselves  as  a 
hierarchy, with a well-defined structure of systems and sub-systems (Simon (1962, 1976)). 
Herbert Simon believed hierarchical structures of a particular type were likely to dominate, 
namely ones which were “decomposable”. By this he meant organisational structures which 
could be partitioned such that the resilience of the system as a whole was not reliant on any 
one  sub-element.1  For  evolutionary  reasons  of  survival  of  the  fittest,  Simon  posited  that 
decomposable networks were more resilient and hence more likely to proliferate as a species 
(Simon (1962)).2 
While Simon’s evolutionary theory may be a reasonable long-run description of some real-
world complex systems – natural and biological – it may be less good as a description of the 
evolution  of  socio-economic  systems.  The  efficiency  of  many  of  these  networks  relies  on 
their  hyper-connectivity.  There  are,  in  the  language  of  economics,  significantly  increasing 
returns  to  scale  and  scope  in  a  network  industry.  These  returns  increase  with  network 
connectivity (Goldin and Mariathason (2014)). Think of the benefits of global supply chains 
and global interbank networks for trade and financial risk-sharing. This provides a powerful 
secular incentive for non-decomposable socio-economic systems. 
Moreover, if these hyper-connected networks do face systemic threat, they are often able to 
adapt in ways which avoids extinction. For example, the risk of social, economic or financial 
disorder will typically lead to an adaptation of policies to prevent systemic collapse. These 
adaptive policy responses may preserve otherwise-fragile socio-economic topologies. They 
may even further encourage the growth of connectivity and complexity of these networks. For 
example,  policies  to  support  “super-spreader”  banks  in  a  crisis  may  encourage  them  to 
become  larger,  and  more  complex,  still  over  time  (Haldane  (2009)).  The  combination  of 
network economies, and policy responses to failure, means socio-economic systems may be 
less Darwinian, and hence decomposable, than natural and biological systems. 
It is against this backdrop that a complex, socio-economic “system of systems” may emerge. 
This can defined as one comprising an interlocking set of individually complex webs ((Gorod 
et al (2014)). The system of system concept initially emerged for engineering and enterprise 
systems,  which  involved  the  multi-layered  assembly  of  component  parts.  But  it  has  since 
found  its  way  into  a  number  of  other  domains  including  military  planning,  ecological 
evolution, power grids, transport networks and neurological structures (Gao et al (2014)). 
Although  still  in  its  infancy,  there  are  some  general  properties  of  a  “system  of  systems” 
perspective that are worth bringing out. For example, Kurant and Thiran (2006) look at the 
behaviour of a particular topology – a layered complex network. Specifically, they focus on 
the  behaviour  of  transport  networks  with  a  two-layer  structure.  Simulations  of  this  network 
suggest that monitoring risk on a layer-by-layer basis is likely to understate significantly the 
risk facing each individual layer. 
Layered complex networks may also be less robust to failure than might be apparent from 
assessing the resilience of each layer in turn. In other words, the risks in a layered network 
are strikingly different than the sum of their parts. The greater the complexity of each layer, 
and the stronger the correlation between layers, the greater is this vulnerability (Kurant and 
                                                
1   As  an  example,  early  TV  sets  were  built in  a  non-decomposable  way,  which  made  them  vulnerable  to  the 
failure  of  one  element.  Later,  TV  sets,  cars  and  other  complex  gadgets  tend  to  be  constructed  in  a 
“decomposable” fashion to improve their resilience. 
2   Charles  Perrow’s  concept  of  “tightly  coupled”  –  non-decomposable  –  systems  is  closely  linked  (Perrow 
(1984)). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Thiran  (2006)).  In  some  respects,  this  is  the  counterpart  of  Simon’s  “decomposability” 
hypothesis in a system of systems context. 
Most recently, research has focussed on the controllability of complex, layered networks (Liu, 
Slotine and Barabasi (2011), Gao, Liu, D’Souza and Barabasi (2014)). It has tended to find 
that, even when the dimensionality of a network is large (a large number of layers), effective 
control can be exercised by acting on a relatively small number of key layers or nodes. This 
is particularly the case when the network has scale-free properties – in other words, a core-
periphery-type topology. 
These points can be brought to life using some simulations of the statistical distribution of a 
simple  set  of  systems  of  systems.  These  are  constructed  by  mixing  together  component 
distributions,  which  proxy  the  layers  or  sub-systems.  These  layers  may  themselves  be 
complex.  This  mixing  of  layers,  or  distributions,  is  done  using  an  assumed  distribution  of 
correlations, which may itself be non-normal and complex. In other words, there are multiple 
layers of complexity in this system of systems. The inputs to the simulations are shown in 
Table 1. 
Chart 1 shows a set of joint (system-wide) distributions from these simulations, where each 
line  represents  a  probability  contour  of  the  distribution.3  Chart  1a  is  the  baseline  case.  It 
involves a mix of two normal distributions with a low correlation coefficient (0.3) where these 
correlations  are  themselves  normally  distributed.4  This  joint  distribution  represents  a  two-
layer system of systems, with neither layer complex (hence the normal distribution for each) 
and where the correlation between the sub-systems is weak and regular. The resulting joint 
distribution is slightly more elliptical than the normal – meaning a greater likelihood of large 
positive or negative outcomes occurring simultaneously – but is otherwise unexceptional.5 
We can now add progressively greater degrees of complexity to this base case to assess its 
impact on the distribution of systemic risk. Chart 1b raises the correlation between the two 
layers to 0.8; there is now strong feedback between the sub-systems. It results in a notable 
elongation  of  the  system-wide  distribution  and  an  even  greater  probability  of  good  or  bad 
news striking simultaneously; it becomes more non-normal, closer to the statistical properties 
we expect from natural, biological and social networks. 
If we allow one of the layers of this cake to exhibit the properties of a complex system, by 
assuming it is t- rather than normally-distributed, then the system-wide distribution is shown 
in Chart 1c.6 The tails of this distribution have now further widened. And if we allow for a non-
normal distribution of correlations between the sub-systems – by assuming correlations rise 
when  there  is  a  bad  draw,  as  during  crises  –  the  lower  tail  is  larger  still  and  the  mass  is 
skewed downwards (Chart 1d). 
The final, and perhaps most interesting, case is shown in Chart 1e. This shows a three-layer 
network. Two of these layers are themselves complex (they are t-distributed) and all of the 
layers are strongly correlated in the network tree. The resulting system-wide distribution is 
highly  irregular.  It  is  also  heavily  fat-tailed,  meaning  that  catastrophically  good  or  bad 
outcomes  are  now  much  more  probable  than  the  normal  distribution  would  suggest.  Its 
topology is significantly more complex than any of its individual layers. 
These  simulations,  although  simple,  provide  some  insight  into  the  likely  behaviour  of  a 
complex system of systems. For example, they suggest that viewing risk through the lens of 
a single layer is likely to provide a significantly distorted picture of the true risk distribution, 
                                                
3   Which are based on one million replications of the data generating process. 
4   Technically, this is done using the so-called Gaussian copula. 
5   With zero correlation between the two distributions, Chart 1a would be a set of concentric circles. 
6   The t-distribution has fatter tails than the normal. In the simulations, we assume 5 degrees of freedom. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
with the probability of tail events materially under-estimated. As an example of that, Chart 1f 
looks at the unconditional and conditional distributions of one of the sub-systems in Chart 1c. 
The conditional distribution is conditioned on outcomes in the second layer lying in the lower 
half of the distribution. 
A  risk  manager  looking  at  the  unconditional  distribution  (a  single  layer  perspective)  would 
significantly under-estimate the true tail risk they were facing. This has direct parallels with 
the pre-crisis situation, when the actions of individual risk managers at banks, and individual 
supervisors of those banks, ignored the role of systemic risk when gauging individual firm 
risk.  This  led  to  a  material  under-estimation  of  individual  firm  risk.  The  micro-prudential 
microscope was wrongly focussed. 
Ignoring  a  layer,  or  sub-system,  is  likely  to  be  equally  distorting.  That  can  be  seen  by 
comparing the risk distributions in Chart 1d (two layers) and 1e (three layers). If the world 
involves  three  layers  of  complexity,  then  missing  a  layer  will  lead  to  a  significant  under-
estimation  of  risk.  This,  too,  has  a  parallel  with  the  pre-crisis  situation  where  the  macro-
prudential  layer  was  essentially  ignored  by  both  micro-prudential  and  macro-economic 
policymakers. This led both to under-estimate the policy risk they faced. 
Pulling this together, what are the public policy implications which follow from this complex 
system of systems perspective? First, it underscores the importance of accurate data, and 
timely  mapping,  of  each  layers  in  a  system  of  systems. This  is  especially  important  when 
these  layers  are themselves  complex.  Granular data  is  needed  to  capture  the  interactions 
within and between these complex sub-systems. 
Second, modelling of each of these layers, and their interaction with other layers, is likely to 
be important, both for understanding system risks and dynamics and for calibrating potential 
policy responses to them. 
Third, in controlling these risks, something akin to the Tinbergen Rule is likely to apply. There 
is  likely  to  need  to  be  at  least  as  many  policy  instruments  as  there  are  complex  sub-
components of a system of systems if risk is to be monitored and managed effectively. Put 
differently,  an  under-identified  complex  system  of  systems  is  likely  to  result  in  a  loss  of 
control, both system-wide and for each of the layers. 
The architecture of macro-financial systems 
How,  then,  does  this  theory  relate  to  real-world,  macro-financial  systems?  These  systems 
are  likely  to  contain  many  moving  parts.  Moreover,  these  moving  parts  are  likely  to  be 
significantly  more  tightly-coupled  than  in  the  past  as  a  result  of  financial  and  global 
integration.  In  other  words,  the  global  economic  and  financial  system  may,  over  recent 
decades,  have  become  a  “system  of  systems”,  with  multiple,  interacting  layers  each  a 
complex system in its own right. 
Chart 2 provides a stylised characterisation of those layers, decomposed four ways. At the 
highest resolution – the “micro-prudential” layer – are individual financial firms. These are, if 
you like, the atoms of the financial system. Like atoms, however, some individual banks are 
themselves complex entities, with many moving and interacting business parts. 
At one lower level of resolution – the “macro-prudential” layer – is the financial system. This 
comprises  interactions  between  financial  firms  in  the  network,  as  might  arise  from 
counterparty relationships in interbank, repo and derivatives markets. This layer is akin to an 
organ,  like  the  brain,  whose  behaviour  is  the  result  of  interactions  between  complex 
neurological sub-components. 
At a lower level of resolution still – the “macro-economic” layer – is the national economy. 
This comprises complex interactions between the financial sector and the wider economy – 
the  flows  of  funds  which  intermediates  money  from  owners  to  borrowers.  It  is  akin  to  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
physiology  of  a  human,  whose  behaviour  in  the  result  of  complex  interactions  among  its 
organs, themselves complex sub-components. 
Finally, at the lowest level of resolution of all – the “telescopic” layer – is the global economic 
and  financial  system.  This  involves  cross-border  trade  and  financial  interactions  between 
countries, with flows of goods, services or information at increasing volumes and velocities. It 
is akin to interactions within a social network or across the World Wide Web. 
At least in principle, each of these individual layers could be complex. These layers are also 
likely to interact. For example, there are likely to be strong interactions between the financial 
system and the macro-economy and between individual national financial systems and the 
global financial system. This coupling between sub-systems adds to the degree of complexity 
of the system as a whole. 
Let  me  present  some  stylised  facts  on  each  of  these  layers,  from  microscopic  through 
telescopic, to illustrate why each has the characteristics of a complex sub-component. I will 
also present some evidence on interactions between these sub-systems, which means we 
have a genuine macro-financial system of systems. 
Complexity among individual firms 
(a) 
There is no off-the-shelf measure of organisational complexity, whether within banks or more 
generally, but a number of proxies have recently been constructed. For example, the Basel 
Committee has recently devised a range of complexity metrics for the world’s so-called SIFIs 
–  systemically  important  financial  institutions.7  So  far,  30  institutions  globally  have  been 
designated by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) as SIFIs, from across a range of countries. 
Chart 3 looks at a set of four complexity proxies for each of the designated SIFIs in 2006, the 
year  before  the  financial  crisis  broke:  total  balance  sheet  size;  the  notional  value  of  their 
derivatives portfolio; the number of legal entities in the group; and their trading assets. They 
are shown by their country of incorporation. 
In 2006, the average SIFI had a balance sheet of $1.35 trillion – roughly the same as the 
annual  GDP  of  a  small  G7  country.  The  largest  SIFI  had  a  balance  sheet  totalling 
$3.0 trillion. This is many multiplies of the largest non-financial firm. It also only covers on-
balance sheet positions. Turning to off balance sheet positions, the derivatives portfolio of an 
average SIFI totalled $19 trillion in notional terms in 2006.8 For the largest SIFI, it was $60 
trillion. This, too, is many multiples of the largest non-financial firm’s position. 
These massive SIFI balance sheets were, in turn, spread across a very large array of distinct 
legal  entities  within  each  group.  In  2006,  the  average  SIFI  had  around  328  legal  entities 
within the group. The largest had almost 900 distinct legal entities. Most of the largest global 
SIFIs had numbers of legal entities running to four figures. By comparison, the world’s largest 
non-financial firms had less than half this number of legal affiliates (Carmassi and Herring 
(2014)). 
A final complexity metric is the proportion of so-called trading assets. This is a diagnostic on 
the diversity of a bank’s business model  – whether it is engaged in investment as well as 
commercial banking. Some of these trading assets will also be complex and hence difficult to 
price and trade – so-called Level 2 and 3 assets. As Chart 3 shows, the average SIFI had a 
trading book of around a quarter of assets in 2006. For the largest, this was closer to around 
50% of assets. 
                                                
7   See BCBS (2014). 
8   Notional  exposures  are  likely  to  be  a  poor  proxy  of  the  underlying  risk  on  this  portfolio,  but  provide  an 
indication of the scale of gross derivative positions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Since  the  crisis,  there  is  little  evidence  of  these  complexities  having  reversed.  Chart  4 
updates the four metrics using end-2013 data. The balance sheet of the average SIFI has 
not shrunk. In fact, it had risen to around $1.8 trillion by end-2013. For the largest SIFI, it was 
around  $4.0  trillion.  The  pattern  is  even  more  striking  off  balance  sheet.  For  the  average 
SIFI, the derivatives book has risen by over 50% to over $30 trillion by 2013. For the largest, 
it had risen to $75 trillion. 
On  the  other  complexity  metrics,  the  number  of  legal  entities  for  the  average  SIFIs  is 
essentially  unchanged  comparing  2006  and  2013.  And  despite  a  significant  rise  in  risk 
weights,  there  had  been  only  a  modest  slimming  of  SIFI  trading  books  by  2013,  with  the 
average share of assets going from 22% to 19%. 
An  alternative,  more  micro-economic,  approach  to  gauging  organisational  complexity  is  to 
look  at  internal  structures.  For  example,  Collinson  and  Jay  (2012)  use  a  five-way 
classification  of  complexity:  governance;  internal  structures;  staff  capabilities;  roles  and 
responsibilities;  and  corporate  culture.  They  use  this  to  evaluate  the  world’s  largest 
200 companies, including 26 banks. 
Financial  services  rank  sixth  overall  as  an  industry  on  complexity  grounds.  Within  this, 
however, there is a striking diversity in performance, with a number of banks standing out as 
having high levels of complexity and low performance. Chart 5 plots banks’ complexity and 
performance,  based  on  a  study  by  Simplicity  Consulting  in  2012.9  It  shows  an  inverted 
U-shaped  pattern.  While  modest  degrees  of  bank  complexity  are  good  for  performance, 
beyond a threshold these complexity benefits go into reverse and performance worsens. 
This U-shaped pattern is consistent with micro-economic theory. It suggests economies of 
scale and scope in banking can give way to diseconomies beyond some threshold. There is 
empirical evidence suggesting diseconomies of scale may operate for some SIFIs, consistent 
with them being “too complex to manage” (Davies and Tracey (2014)). Taken together, this 
evidence  suggests  the  world’s  SIFIs  are,  and  remain,  highly  complex  entities  in  their  own 
right. 
Complexity within the financial system 
(b) 
As  with  individual  banks,  there  are  no  perfect  metrics  of  financial  system  complexity.  But 
maps of the topology or wiring of the financial sector can be revealing about the strength, 
direction and complexity of the counterparty links between, and interactions among, financial 
firms.  As  one  example,  Chart  6  looks  at  the  interbank  connections  between  UK  banks  in 
2013.10 
This  suggests  the  wiring  of  the  interbank  network  is  messy  and  dense.  The  network’s 
epicentre is a small set  of large banks with a  very large number of connections  – “super-
spreader”  banks.  There  are,  in  addition,  a  large  number  of  peripheral  banks  with  few 
connections. In other words, the interbank system has all the properties of a classic scale-
free network. 
Chart  7  looks  at  the  pattern  of  interbank  funding  exposures  among  UK  banks.  It,  too, 
suggests a complex web with scale-free properties. Networks with these properties are prone 
to failures among the super-spreader nodes. Since these are likely to be the entities most 
exposed to “too complex to manage” problems, this topology harbours a potential systemic 
vulnerability, the type of which was exposed in 2008. 
                                                
9   “True Cost of complexity in the banking sector”, Simplicity Consulting (2012). 
10   It is taken from Langfield, Liu and Ota (2014). Exposures comprise unsecured loans, marketable securities, 
CDS sold minus CDS bought, securities lending and repo and derivatives exposures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
Complex  interactions  are  not  confined  to  the  banking  sector.  The  non-bank  (“shadow” 
banking) sector has become increasingly important over recent years. In the US, estimates 
suggest it was broadly equivalent in scale to banking in the run-up to the crisis. At a global 
level, non-bank intermediation is currently estimated at around $75 trillion, around half of the 
assets of the global banking system. 
Because  many  of  these  entities  sit  outside  of  the  regulatory  perimeter,  data  on  their 
exposures  and  interactions  is  thin  on  the  ground.  But  work  in  the  US  to  map  these 
interactions  suggests  they  too  are  dense  and  complex  (Pozsar  et  al  (2010)).  Chart  8 
presents a stylised map of the shadow banking sector and its interaction with the banking 
sector. These interactions are highly complex and multi-layered. 
Complexity of macro-financial interactions 
(c) 
The links and interactions between the financial sector and the wider economy are, in some 
respects, even less well mapped than the shadow banking sector. They, too, have evolved 
significantly over recent decades in scale and complexity. 
As  an  example  of  that  evolution,  Chart  9  looks  at  a  representation  of  the  flow  of  funds 
between  various  sectors  in  the  UK  –  companies,  households,  the  rest  of  the  world  and 
government.  It  also  shows  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  in  intermediating  these  flows  of 
funds between ultimate asset-owners (shown at the top) and liability-holders (shown at the 
bottom). The intermediation sector is further decomposed into banking and “other” financial 
intermediaries such as pension, hedge and other funds and insurance companies. The Bank 
of England’s is also shown. 
These balance sheets are scaled relative to GDP at two dates, 1978 and 2011. The changes 
over  time  in  the  scale  and  pattern  of  intermediation  are  striking.  In  1978,  the  UK  banking 
system  was  dominated  by  foreign  banks.  Banks’  assets  summed  to  a  little  over  100%  of 
GDP. Non-bank intermediaries, meanwhile, accounted for little more than 50% of GDP and 
were dominated by traditional real-money investors, such as pension funds and insurance 
companies. The Bank of England’s balance sheet was a mere 6% of GDP. 
Fast forwarding to 2011, this flow of funds picture has been transformed. The balance sheets 
of  ultimate  asset-owners/liability-holders  has  risen  from  around  200%  of  GDP  to  around 
600%  of  GDP  –  a  threefold  rise.  The  scale  and  pattern  of  intermediation  between  these 
sectors has also been transformed. The banking sector has also risen substantially over this 
period. UK universal banks now dominate the landscape, accounting for 80% of total banking 
assets. They are the new “super-spreaders” of the UK financial sector. 
Non-bank  intermediation  has  also  seen  a  dramatic  scaling-up  of  its  balance  sheets,  rising 
sixfold  to  300%  of  GDP.  Within  this,  growth  has  been  particularly  strong  within  the  non-
traditional sectors (such as hedge funds and unauthorised funds) and among new types of 
vehicle (such as ETFs and private equity funds). These are a new strain of potential “super-
spreader”. The Bank of England’s balance sheet has also grown rapidly, rising to over 25% 
of GDP, largely courtesy of QE. 
Overall, the picture is of a much larger, much more diverse and potentially considerably more 
complex set of channels of intermediation than in the past. Of course, this stylised map offers 
only the most cursory of indications of the true degree of complexity in individual interactions 
within and between sectors. 
Complexity of global macro-financial interactions 
(d) 
A final dimension to network complexity is the global one. There has been a dramatic rise in 
the  scale  of  global  trade  and,  in  particular,  capital  market  integration  over  the  past  few 
decades. Both are now at their highest levels for several centuries and, most probably, ever 
(Chart 10). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
For global trade, Chart 11 compares trade flows across 70 countries constituting around 80% 
of world exports at two dates – 1995 and 2013. The size of the nodes reflects the importance 
of a country to world trade and the thickness of the links the size of trade flows. It is clear that 
the  wiring  of  the  international  trading  systems  has  become  considerably  more  dense  and 
complex  over  this  period,  reflecting  the  deepening  and  lengthening  of  global  value  chains 
(OECD (2013), de Backer and Miroudet (2014)). 
This  highly  interconnected  and  complex  set  of  global  supply  chains  has  the  potential  to 
propagate disturbances much more virulently than in the past, as two recent events illustrate. 
The  first  was  the  correlated  collapse  of  world  trade  during  the  financial  crisis.  Between 
2008Q1  and  2009Q1,  real  world  trade  fell  by  almost  15%.  Correlations  between  regional 
import volumes rose to close to unity at the height of the crisis (Chart 12). The strength and 
length of global supply chains caused a synchronous collapse in trade (Bems et al (2012)). 
The  second  was  the  Japanese  earthquake  and  tsunami  in  2011.  Because  Japan  plays  a 
central role in global supply chains as a producer of high-value intermediate goods, this had 
a cascading effect on global production. For example, as Japanese car producers ceased 
production, their foreign  affiliates  were  unable  to  compensate  because they  depending  on 
inputs from Japan (OECD (2013)). Deepening global supply chains mean a large number of 
countries are now potential “super-spreaders” of global trade contagion. 
The  story  is  similar,  if  on  an  even  more  dramatic  scale,  when  it  comes to global banking. 
Chart  13  plots  the  network  of  cross-border  bank  lending  flows  across  a  wide  range  of 
countries, in 1980 and in 2007. As with trade, the wiring of the international banking network 
has become significantly more dense and complex (Minoiu and Reyes (2013)).11 And as with 
domestic  banking  networks,  there  is  a  clear  core-periphery  pattern  to  the  network,  with  a 
small number of nodal “super-spreader” banking sectors serving as international lenders to 
the periphery banks. 
The global financial crisis provided a telling illustration of the susceptibility of such a network 
to  a  weakening,  or  failure,  of  the  core  banking  sector.  As  these  core  sectors  came  under 
stress,  it  caused  a  significant  cascading  of  global  interbank  contagion. Cross-border  inter-
bank  lending  flows  fell  by  around  20%  between  2008Q2  and  2010Q2.  The  largest  cross-
border banks – the “super-spreaders” – appear to have played a central role in instigating 
and propagating this global contagion (Hills and Hoggarth (2013)). 
Correlations among sub-systems 
(e) 
Another  dimension  when  gauging  risks  to  the  macro-financial  system  is  the  correlation 
between  layers  of the  system.  For  correlations between  individual  banks  and  the financial 
system as a whole, one metric is provided by looking at the common component within the 
joint distribution of bank equity prices. For example, the first principal component of UK bank 
equity prices accounts for around 70% of the overall movement in bank equities. At the time 
of the financial crisis, this common component rose to nearer 90%. These correlations are 
high and highly crisis-sensitive, suggesting a close link between individual and systemic bank 
risk. 
The  picture  is  similar  when  looking  at  correlations  between  developments  in  the  financial 
system and the wider economy. For example, the pairwise correlation between the financial 
and non-financial components of UK equity prices is high, at around 0.8–0.9. The picture is 
similar if we move from the national to the international level: the first principal component of 
international  equity  prices  accounts  for  around  80–90%  of  the  variation.  Each  of  these 
                                                
11   This analysis uses the Bank for International Settlements bilateral locational statistics. This does not capture 
flows between periphery countries, so there is a risk that it overstates the importance of the core. See Minoiu 
and Reyes (2013) for more information 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  
 
correlations  is,  in  their  own  way,  a  rather  imperfect  metric  of  cross-system  interaction. 
Nonetheless, they suggest these interactions are, in general, both important and strong. 
A final, indirect and reduced-form, piece of evidence on the complexity of the macro-financial 
system comes from looking at the statistical distribution of behaviour in these systems. For 
other  complex  systems,  physical,  natural,  biological  and  social  systems,  this  statistical 
distribution  is  known  to  be  highly  non-normal  (Newman  (2005)).  Indeed,  many  of  these 
systems are found to be Power-law distributed, with much fatter tails than would be expected 
from a normal distribution. 
To what extent are these statistical properties evident in macro-economic and financial time-
series data? Chart 14 looks at the statistical distribution of GDP growth, credit growth, equity 
prices  and  rice  prices,  using  a  long  time-series  covering  several  hundreds  of  year.  These 
densities have been transformed such that, if the underlying distribution is normal, the dots 
trace a straight line. Any deviation at the extremities is evidence of a fat-tailed distribution. 
It  is  clear  from  Chart  14  that  all  four  series  exhibit  a  significant  degree  of  fat-tailedness, 
considerably  more  so  than  a  normal  distribution.  This  is  consistent  with  economic  and 
financial systems, locally and globally, exhibiting complex system of systems properties. For 
example,  a  four-standard  deviation  event  –  a  true  catastrophe  –  would  under  a  normal 
distribution  be  expected  to  occur  roughly  every  15,000  years.  Under  the  estimated 
distributions  for  economic  and  financial  systems,  such  an  event  would  occur  every  10  to 
15 years. 
Implications for policy design 
So  what  might  this  mean  for  the  design  of  the  policy  architecture?  Let  me  mention  three 
areas where clear progress has been made since the crisis, but where more may be needed 
in the period ahead if we are to manage effectively this complex, macro-financial system of 
systems: data, modelling and policy design. 
Data 
(a) 
Monitoring risk in a system of systems requires data on each of the sub-systems, often at a 
high  level  of  granularity.  Often  in  response  to  crisis,  efforts  have  been  made  over  time  to 
improve data on economic and financial systems. For example, there have been successive 
waves of improvement to statistics on international banking flows, starting in the 1970s. In 
response to the latest crisis, renewed efforts have been made to fill data gaps and to improve 
the degree of disclosure by banks of their balance sheet positions (FSB (2012)). 
As one example, data on banks’ cross-border assets and liabilities only distinguish between 
banks  and  non-banks.  In  practice,  a  richer  sectoral  decomposition  of  these  data  is  often 
desirable  to  understand  interactions  between  different  parts  of  the  financial  sector  and 
between it and the wider economy (Hills and Hoggarth (2013), Lane (2014)). For example, 
the dollar funding crisis which faced European banks in 2011/12 involved a complex string of 
cross-border financing. Funds raised in the US from money market funds were round-tripped 
back into the US through the purchase of asset-backed securities by European banks. When 
US money funds withdrew their dollar funding, this chain went into reverse gear causing a 
dollar  funding  problem.  Understanding  those  links  in  the  cross-border  financing  chain  is 
impossible without detailed sectoral data. That is now in train. 
Yet there remain significant data constraints on our ability to map the macro-financial system 
of systems in the detail necessary to capture accurately interactions within and across sub-
systems.  Even  among  the  world’s  largest  banks,  data  on  their  bilateral  exposures  to  one 
another remains partial and patchy, especially for off balance sheet positions and securities 
holdings.  That  means  large  parts  of  the  core  of  the  international  banking  map  remain, 
essentially, uncharted territory. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
These data gaps are even more acute when moving beyond the banking system. Large parts 
of the non-bank sector remain in the shadows from a data perspective. For example, reliable 
measures  of  the  aggregate  and/or  individual  leverage,  maturity  and  foreign  currency 
mismatch positions of non-bank intermediaries – some of the key vulnerability metrics – are 
thin on the ground. The FSB has an agenda to fill these data gaps. 
More  broadly,  flows  of funds  data,  both  within  the financial  sector  and between  it  and  the 
wider economy, domestically and internationally, is at present partial. Chart 15 takes the UK 
flows of funds map shown earlier and colour codes this according to one measure of its data 
availability. There remain a number of key areas for improvement, particularly within the non-
banks  part  of  the  intermediation  chain,  as  well  as  among  companies,  households  and 
externally. 
In response to this, the Bank and the UK’s Office for National Statistics (ONS) have recently 
initiated a project to improve the UK’s flows of funds data. Although at an early stage, this 
aims to provide more granular picture of sectoral (“who-to-whom”) flows. Once complete, this 
should  enable  interactions  between  and  within  the  financial  and  real  sectors  of  the 
UK economy to be better tracked and modelled. 
This pattern of data gaps is mirrored globally. Global flow of funds data beyond banking is 
patchy. Data on flows, and in particular stocks, of cross-border portfolio and foreign direct 
investment are often low in quality and lack timeliness. For example, official data suggest the 
UK  has  a  net  external  liability  position  of  around  20–30%  of  GDP.  But  if  foreign  direct 
investment stocks are valued at market (rather than book) prices, this switches to a net asset 
position of around the same amount (Bank of England (2014)). 
Derivatives  positions  and  net  foreign  currency  positions  are  also  imperfectly  captured  in 
global flows of funds data, particularly for companies. For example, over recent years many 
emerging market companies have borrowed cheaply in dollar-denominated instruments. But 
gauging the scale of that borrowing, and whether it is hedged either with derivatives or dollar 
income receipts, is a real data challenge. This is a significant gap because unhedged dollar 
borrowing  is  one  potential  fault-line  in  the  international  financial  system  at  present  (BIS 
(2014)). 
Modelling 
(b) 
Once  the  necessary  data  is  in  place,  a  natural  next  question  is  how  best  to  use  this  to 
understand the dynamics of the macro-financial system of systems. There are a number of 
potentially fruitful, if fledgling, avenues of research currently being pursued on that front. 
In making sense of the macro-financial system, it would be desirable to have a quantitative 
framework for understanding and evaluating interactions both within the financial system and 
between  it  and  the  wider  economy.  Pre-crisis,  such  models  were  close  to  non-existent. 
Indeed,  many  mainstream  macro-economic  models  did  not  even  contain  a  well-defined 
financial sector, much less interactions within it (Roger and Vleck (2011)). 
The Bank of England was an early pioneer of an approach which placed the financial sector 
centre-stage,  with  its  so-called  RAMSI  (Risk  Assessment  Model  of  Systemic  Institutions) 
model  (Burrows  et  al  (2012)).  A  stylised  overview  of  RAMSI  is  given  in  Chart  16.  RAMSI 
embodies interactions between the elements of individual banks’ balance sheets (the micro-
prudential  layer),  between  individual  banks  (the  macro-prudential  layer)  and  between  the 
financial system and the economy (the macro-economic layer). 
As an example, RAMSI embodies an interbank network which allows counterparty network 
contagion to propagate. It also contains a behavioural model of funding markets and banks’ 
liquidity positions which can generate liquidity crisis externalities (Aikman et al (2009)). There 
are  also  explicit  behavioural  links  between  macro-economic  variables  and  bank  balance 
sheets  (through  arrears,  defaults,  losses  given  default  etc).  These  complex,  non-linear 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  
 
channels  of  risk propagation  mean the  probability  distributions  generated from  RAMSI  are 
fat-tailed (Chart 17). 
These ingredients, with rich interactions both within and across banks and between banks 
and the economy, mean RAMSI is a useful framework when undertaking top-down stress-
testing. Alongside bottom-up granular models, the Bank used RAMSI in its concurrent stress-
testing  of  UK  banks  at  the  end  of  last  year.  Because  it  can  be  used  to  draw  probability 
distributions  of  bank  balance  sheet  measures,  such  as  liquidity  and  solvency,  in  time  this 
may enable probabilistic “fan charts” of bank strength to be constructed. These would be akin 
to the fan charts for inflation and output produced in the Bank’s Inflation Report for monetary 
policy purposes. 
In a broadly similar spirit, but at a greater level of granularity, Agent-Based Models (ABM) are 
a  natural  vehicle  for  modelling  behavioural  interactions  within  and  across  macro-financial 
systems  (Farmer  and  Foley  (2009)).  There  has  been  some  progress  towards  developing 
ABMs, in particular since the financial crisis. For example, the CRISIS (Complexity Research 
Initiative  for  Systemic  Instabilities)  project  is  a  consortium  of  EU  universities,  private  firms 
and  policymaking  institutions  which  is  building  large-scale  calibrated  models  to  capture 
sectoral behaviour, including between the economy and the financial system.12 
At national level, promising progress has also been made in developing ABM models of the 
housing market. For example, Geanakoplos et al (2012) develop a regional model of the US 
housing market, which does a much better job than aggregate macro-economic models in 
matching housing market patterns, both in in the run-up to, and following, the financial crisis. 
As  part  of  its  new  research  agenda,  the  Bank  of  England  is  working  currently  with  the 
Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET) at Oxford to try and develop an ABM model of 
the  UK  housing  market.13  As  with  Geanakoplos  et  al  (2012),  the  aim  is  to  provide  a 
calibrated, granular model which better captures the dynamics of the housing market. It could 
also, potentially, be used to help evaluate the efficacy of macro-prudential interventions in 
that  market  –  for  example,  policies  which  alter  mortgage  loan-to-income  or  loan-to-value 
limits. 
A third promising area of research concerns the interaction the macro-prudential and macro-
economic  layers  of  the  system  –  that  is,  the  interplay  between  macro-prudential  and 
monetary  policy  tools.  This  is  another  priority  area  for  the  Bank’s  new  research  agenda. 
Although  these  policies  have  distinct  primary  objectives,  their  transmission  channels  are 
likely  to  be  closely  interwoven,  with  both  affecting  risk-taking  and  economic  activity.  This 
adds additional complexity to the setting of monetary and macro-prudential policies. 
It is possible to explore this complex interplay using simulations from models comprising both 
nominal and financial frictions. Both are needed to accommodate a role for monetary policy 
(whose  effectiveness  relies  primarily  on  nominal  frictions)  and  macro-prudential  policies 
(whose  effectiveness  relies  principally  on  financial  frictions).  A  number  of  models  have 
recently  been  developed  with  these  core  ingredients  and  have  been  used  to  explore 
monetary  and  macro-prudential  policy  interactions  (Smets  (2013),  Paustian  and  De  Paoli 
(2013)). 
Chart 18 shows the results of a simulation from a model developed by two colleagues at the 
Bank (Aikman and Nelson (2014)). This, too, embodies both nominal and financial frictions. 
On the axes are plotted two measures of stability – macro-economic stability (as proxied by 
the variability of nominal GDP) on the x-axis, financial stability (as proxied by the variance of 
                                                
12   More details are available at www.crisis-economics.eu. 
13   For more on the Bank’s research agenda, please see 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/onebank/discussion.pdf. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
credit spreads) on the y-axis. Historically estimated levels of these two variables, normalised 
to one, are shown at point A in Chart 18. 
If  we  now  allow  monetary  policy  to  play  an  active  role  in  stabilising  the  business  cycle, 
through an optimal policy rule which weights output and inflation deviations from target, we 
can move the economy to point B. This is unambiguously preferred to point A, with greater 
stability in both the financial system and, in particular, the wider economy. But could we do 
better still by having monetary policy assume explicit responsibility for safeguarding financial 
stability? 
If we augment this monetary policy rule to take account of financial stability factors, by having 
interest  rates  respond  to  credit  spreads,  we  move  to  point  C.  This  has  the  benefit  of 
improving financial stability relative to the conventional monetary policy case. But this comes 
at  the  cost  of  destabilising  somewhat  the  macro-economy.  It  is  unclear  whether  point C 
dominates B in a welfare sense. In other words, having monetary policy meet both macro-
economic and macro-prudential objectives involves a trade-off. 
Once we add an explicit macro-prudential instrument to the equation, however, this trade-off 
disappears, or at least is lessened. In particular, let’s add a regulatory-set counter-cyclical 
capital buffer for banks, the like of which is now part of Basel III. Used in tandem with optimal 
monetary  policy,  this  moves  the  economy  to  point  D.  This  involves  both  greater  macro-
economic and financial stability than the alternatives. On the face if it at least, it is welfare-
improving. 
Although the model used is specific, the policy lesson appears to be a general one. Having 
two instruments (monetary and macro-prudential) leads to an improvement in macro-financial 
stability. Two policy hands beat one when there are two policy objectives. This in a sense 
underscores the importance of Tinbergen’s augmented policy rule – that there should be as 
many policy tools as there are complex sub-systems – when managing a complex system of 
systems. 
None  of  the  models  so  far  considers  global  spill-overs,  either  through  trade  or  financial 
channels.  Generally-speaking,  there  is  a  dearth  of  macro-economic  models  which  take 
seriously these international spillovers in an analytically-coherent fashion. Even if modelling 
this behaviour is over-ambitious in the short-term, there may be merit in improved monitoring 
of  these  global  flows  of  financing  over  time,  given  their  importance  for  the  stability  of 
economies and financial systems. 
Elsewhere, I have likened this to the creation of “global weather map”. This could be used to 
track and map the source, scale and nature of cross-border capital flows in close to real-time 
(Haldane (2012, 2014) and IMF (2013)). Plotting this complex, rapidly-adapting web would 
be a natural precursor to using it to address “what if” questions. What, for example, would be 
the impact of a rise in US interest rates on the international flow of funds? The IMF would be 
the natural guardians of this surveillance-cum-stress-testing machine. 
Policy design 
(c) 
Significant  changes  have  been  made  to  the  macro-financial  policy  architecture  since  the 
crisis. In general, these frameworks have moved closer towards meeting Tinbergen’s rule of 
having  as  many  distinct  policy  tools  as  there  are  complex  layers  in  the  macro-financial 
system. These frameworks are now equipped with tools for assessing and addressing risks 
at a range of resolutions – microscopic, macroscopic and telescopic. And the gaping hole in 
the pre-crisis policy architecture – the macro-prudential layer – has now been filled. 
The institutional architecture for macro-financial policy has also been adapted since the crisis 
to  better  enable  interactions  between  these  policy  layers  to  be  addressed.  In  the  UK,  the 
micro-prudential, macro-prudential and monetary policy arms of policy are now attached to a 
single body, the Bank of England. Each arm has a separate policy committee tasked with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  
 
setting policy. But these policy committees have shared inputs of information and meet jointly 
to discuss areas of intersecting policy responsibility (Bank of England (2014)). 
Taking each of the arms of policy in turn, at the highest level of resolution micro-prudential 
policy frameworks have been significantly revised in a number of countries since the crisis. 
Often, this has had the aim of refocussing the microscope on the systemic, as well as firm-
specific, risks facing banks. For the world’s largest banks, significant extra cushions of loss-
absorbing capacity are now being required, together with changes to banks’ organisational 
structures to make them credibly resolvable. In some countries, including  the UK and US, 
large banks’ activities are being separated or ring-fenced. These initiatives ought, over time, 
to lower the degree of complexity and inter-connectivity of these entities, making them less 
virulent super-spreaders of financial contagion. 
A second area of progress is stress-testing. A major step forward was taken last year in the 
concurrent stress-testing of banks across Europe. This followed the successful practice first 
adopted in the US in 2009. Concurrent stress-testing of the whole banking sector allows both 
top-down  and  bottom-up  perspectives  to  be  brought  to  bear  when  assessing  individual  firms’ 
risks. 
This opens up the possibility of taking seriously complex behavioural interactions, both within 
the financial sector and between it and the wider economy. For example, a capital-deficient 
firm  might  withdraw  funding  and  cause  wider  liquidity  pressures  for  other  banks.  Or  a 
sequence  of  capital-deficient  banks  might  contract  lending  in  a  credit  crunch,  thereby 
damaging  the  wider  economy  and  feeding  back  negatively  to  other  banks’  portfolios 
(Haldane (2009)). 
Yet  it  remains  early  days  in  the  development  of  stress-testing  technologies.  A  system  of 
systems perspective could be useful in enabling stress-testing technologies to better capture 
system-wide  risks.  For  example,  interaction  and  feedback  channels  could  usefully  be  built 
into future stress-testing frameworks used by central banks, including the Bank of England, 
the Federal Reserve and the ECB. 
At the next level of policy resolution, a key area of progress in the post-crisis period has been 
in developing the macro-prudential framework and the instruments necessary to execute it 
(IMF  (2013)).  Many  countries  internationally  now  have  a  macro-prudential  framework  in 
place. And international case law on the efficacy of different macro-prudential tools is being 
built rapidly (IMF (2013)). 
Nonetheless,  there  is  much  further  to  go  in  understanding  and  calibrating  the  impact  of 
macro-prudential  tools.  As  well  as  country  case  studies,  this  is  likely  to  draw  on  models 
which  explore  how  micro-economic  interactions  shape  macro-economic  phenomena.  For 
example, the Bank has recently begun using a Product Sales Database (PSD) compiled by 
the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). This covers almost all UK mortgage transaction 
since 2006, containing around 13 million transactions. 
This large micro database can be used both to understand the dynamics of the UK housing 
market and to help calibrate macro-prudential interventions to shape it. For example, Chart 
19 shows the regional distribution of loans made at a loan-to-income multiple in excess of 
4.5 at two dates – 2009Q1 and 2014Q2. Cooler colours signify a smaller proportion of loans. 
As can be seen, there was a discernible warming in the UK housing market up to 2014, at 
least for higher loan-to-income loans. 
At around this time, the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC) made a macro-
prudential  intervention,  constraining  to  15%  the  proportion  of  mortgages  with  a  loan-to-
income multiple in excess of 4.5. This was the first time such a macro-prudential measure 
had been taken in the UK, though a number of other countries have capped mortgage loan-
to-income or loan-to-value multiples (IMF (2013)). 
This was not, however, a step into the dark for the FPC. The calibration of its intervention 
drew explicitly on the micro-evidence contained in the PSD database. This gave a very clear 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
idea of how many households and banks might be affected by such an intervention and by 
how much. This was a macro-prudential policy calibrated from micro-prudential constituents. 
Although a first step, there is clearly further to go in using micro-level data to calibrate the 
impact of macro-prudential tools on lender and borrower behaviour. 
Turning  to  the  global  economic  and  financial  system,  it  is  here  where  the  existing  policy 
architecture may at present be most deficient. Some have gone further and argued that there 
is nothing at present that much resembles a global financial architecture at all (de Larosiere 
(2014),  Haldane  (2014)).  Despite  the  crisis  being  the  first  truly  global  one,  reform  of  the 
global financial architecture has been slow. 
There are many dimensions to reform of the global financial architecture. These include the 
appropriate role and resourcing of the IMF, the reserve currency role of the dollar and the 
appropriate role of so-called for capital flow management policies to modulate fluctuations in 
the global flow of funds (IMF (2012)). Each of these has been widely discussed and debated 
over many decades. On some issues, there has been progress. For example, the IMF now 
endorses the use of capital flow management policies in some situations, in contrast to its 
position a few years ago. 
But there is one area where progress in strengthening the international financial architecture 
has been much slower. This is how best to deal with common shocks to global safe and risky 
yields.  One  striking feature  of  the  past few  years  has  been  the  extremely  high  correlation 
among asset prices globally, in particular among advanced economies. This is true of both 
“safe”  rates  of  return  on  government  assets  and  “risky”  rates  of  return  on  private  assets 
(Chart 20). In either case, correlations are extremely high, hovering around 0.9. 
This begs a number of questions, both research and policy. What is the root cause of these 
correlations?  One  possibility  is  portfolio  shifts  by  global  asset  managers,  allocating  their 
portfolio  on  an  asset-by-asset  basis.  If  so,  what  implications  does  this  carry  for  national 
monetary  and  macro-prudential  policymakers,  seeking  to  steer  safe  and  risky  rates 
respectively? Do high global correlations strengthen the case for international co-ordination 
of monetary and macro-prudential policies? 
There may be greater scope to co-ordinate macro-prudential tools. One way of doing so is to 
develop macro-prudential instruments which operate on an asset-class basis, rather than on 
a  national  basis.  This  would  be  recognition  that  asset  characteristics,  rather  than  national 
characteristics, may be the key determinant of portfolio choices and asset price movements, 
perhaps reflecting the rising role of global asset managers. 
There  has  already  been  some  international  progress  towards  developing  asset  market 
specific macro-prudential tools, specifically in the context of securities financing transactions 
where minimum collateral requirements have been agreed internationally (FSB (2014)). But 
there  may  be  scope  to  widen  and  deepen  the  set  of  financial  instruments  covered  by 
prudential  requirements,  to  give  a  richer  array  of  internationally-oriented  macro-prudential 
tools. These would then be better able to lean against global fluctuations in a wider set of 
asset markets. 
Conclusion 
This  time  was  different:  never  before  has  the  world  suffered  a  genuinely  global  financial 
crisis, with every country on the planet falling off the same cliff-edge at the same time. This 
fall  laid  bare  the  inadequacy  of  our  pre-crisis  understanding  of  the  complexities  of  the 
financial system and its interaction with the wider economy, locally but in particular globally. It 
demonstrated why the global macro-financial network is not just a complex adaptive system, 
but a complex system of systems. 
The crisis also revealed gaps and inadequacies in our existing policy frameworks. Many of 
those  gaps  have  since  been  filled.  Micro-prudential  microscopes  have  had  their  lens 
refocused.  Macro-prudential  macroscopes  have  been  (re)invented.  And  global  telescopes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  
 
have  been  strengthened  and  lengthened.  Institutional  arrangements  have  also  been 
adapted, better enabling co-ordination between the micro, macro and global arms of policy. 
So far, so good. 
Clearly, however, this remains unfinished business. The data necessary to understand and 
model a macro-financial system of systems is still patchy. The models necessary to make 
behavioural  sense  of  these  complexities  remain  fledgling.  And  the  policy  frameworks 
necessary to defuse these evolving risks are still embryonic.  More  will need to be done  – 
both research and policy-wise – to prevent next time being the same. 
References 
Aikman,  D,  Alessandri,  P,  Eklund,  B,  Gai,  P,  Kapadia,  S,  Martin,  E,  Mora,  N,  Sterne, 
G and Willison, M (2009), “Funding liquidity risk in a quantitative model of systemic stability”, 
Bank of England Working Paper No. 372. 
Aikman, D, Haldane, A and Nelson, B (2014), “In search of macroprudential policy rules for 
the UK”, mimeo. 
Aikman,  D,  Haldane  A  and  Nelson,  B  (2014),  “Curbing  the  credit  cycle”,  The  Economic 
Journal. 
Albert,  R,  Jeong,  H  &  Barabási,  A  (2000),  “Error  and  attack  tolerance  of  complex 
networks”, Nature 406, 378–382. 
Arthur, W. Brian (2014), “Complexity and the Economy”, Oxford University Press. 
Barabási, Albert-László; Albert, Réka. (1999), “Emergence of scaling in random networks”. 
Science 286 (5439): 509–512. 
BCBS (2014), “The G-SIB assessment methodology – score calculation” available at 
http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d296.pdf. 
Bems,  R.,  Johnson,  R.C.  and  Yi,  K.  (2012),  The  Great  Trade  Collapse,  NBER  working 
paper 18632. 
BIS (2014), Annual Report, No. 84, available at 
http://www.bis.org/publ/arpdf/ar2014_ec.pdf. 
Bisin,  A,  Moro,  A  and  Topa,G  (2011),  The  Empirical  Content  of  Models  with  Multiple 
Equilibria  in  Economies  with  Social  Interactions,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff 
Reports, no. 504. 
Burrows,  O,  Learmonth,  D  and  McKeown,  J  (2012),  “RAMSI:  a  top-down  stress-testing 
model”, Bank of England Financial Stability Paper No.17. 
Carmassi,  J  &  Herring,  R  (2014)  “Corporate  structures,  transparency  and  resolvability  of 
global systemically important banks”, The Systemic Risk Council research paper. 
Collinson, S, Jay, M (2012), “From Complexity to Simplicity”, Palgrave Macmillan. 
Craig,  B,  Alter,  A  and  Raupach,  P  (2014),  “Centrality-based  Capital  Allocations”,  IMF 
Working Paper, December 2014. 
Davies, R & Tracey, B (2014), “Too Big to Be Efficient? The Impact of Implicit Subsidies on 
Estimates of Scale Economies for Banks” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. 
De  Paoli  and  Paustian  (2013),  “Coordinating  Monetary  and  Macroprudential  Policies”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 653. 
Farmer, J.D., and Foley, D (2009), “The Economy Needs Agent-Based Modelling” Nature 
vol. 460. 
FSB (2012), “Enhanced Disclosure Task Force”, available at 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/pr_120510.pdf. 
FSB (2014), Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking Report, available 
at http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/r_141013a.pdf. 
Gai, P, Haldane, A and Kapadia, S “Complexity, Concentration and Contagion”, Journal of 
Monetary Economics, Vol. 58, (5), pages 453–470, 2011. 
Gai, P and Kapadia, S (2011), “Contagion in financial Markets”, Bank of England Working 
Paper Number 383. 
Gabaix,  X  (2009),  “Power  laws  in  economics  and  finance”,  Annual  Review  of  Economics, 
1 pp. 255–93. 
Gao,  J  Liu,  Y,  D’Souza,  R  &  Barabási,  A  (2014),  Target  control  of  complex  networks, 
Nature Communications 5, 5415. 
Geanakoplos, J, Axtell, R, Farmer, J.D., Howitt, P, Conlee, B, Goldstein, J, Hendrey, M, 
Palmer and N.M., Yang, C–Y (2012), “Getting at systemic risk via an agent-based model of 
the housing market”, American Economic Review vol.102. 
Goldin,  I.  and  Mariathasan,  M.  (2014),  “The  Butterfly  Defect:  How  Globalization  Creates 
Systemic Risks, and What to Do about It”, Princeton University Press, July. 
Gorod, A, White, B, Ireland, V, Gandhi, S and Sauser, B (2014), “Case Studies in System 
of  Systems,  Enterprise  Systems,  and  Complex  Systems  Engineering”,  CRC  Press, 
Pages 3–32. 
Haldane, A. G (2009), “Rethinking the financial network”, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf 
Haldane, A. G (2009), “Banking on the State”, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2009/speech409.
pdf. 
Haldane, A and May, R (2011), “Systemic risk in banking ecosystems”, Nature, issue 469, 
351–355. 
Haldane, A (2012), “Tails of the unexpected”, speech at “The Credit Crisis Five Years On: 
Unpacking  the  Crisis”,  conference  held  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh  Business  School, 
8–9 June, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2012/speech582.pdf. 
Haldane,  A  (2014),  “Twin  Peaks”,  speech  at  the  Kenilworth  Chamber  of  Trade  Business 
Breakfast, 17 October 2014, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech716.pdf. 
Hanson, S.G, Kashyap, Anil and Stein, Jeremy (2010), “A Macroprudential Approach to 
Financial regulation”, Chicago Booth Research Paper, No. 10–29. 
Hills,  B  and  Hoggarth,  G  (2013),  Cross  border  bank  credit  and  global  financial  stability, 
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q2, 2013. 
IMF (2013), “Key Aspects of Macroprudential Policy”, available at 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/061013b.pdf. 
Jackson, M O (2010), “Social and economic networks”, Princeton. 
Kurant, M and Thiran, P (2006), Layered Complex Networks, Physical Review Letters 96. 
Ladyman, J, Lambert, J & Wiesner, K (2013), “What is a Complex  System?”. European 
Journal for Philosophy of Science, vol 3., pp. 33–67. 
Langfield,  S,  Liu,  Z  and  Ota,  T  (2014),  “Mapping  the  UK  interbank  system”,  Bank  of 
England Working Paper, No. 516. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
  
 
Liu, Y, Slotine,J and Barabási, A.L (2011), Controllability of complex networks, Nature 473, 
167–173 (2011) . 
Minoiu,  C.  and  Reyes,  J.A.  (2013),  A  network  analysis  of  global  banking:  1978–2010, 
Journal of Financial Stability 9 (2013) 168–184. 
Newman,  M  E  J  (2005),  “Power  laws,  Pareto  distributions  and  Zip’s  law”,  Contemporary 
Physics, 46 (5), pp. 323–51. 
Newman, M. E. J. (2011), “Complex Systems: A Survey”, Am. J. Phys. 79, 800–810. 
OECD (2013), Interconnected Economies: Benefiting from Global Value Chains, OECD. 
Perrow, C (1984), Normal Accidents: Living with High-Risk Technologies, Basic Books, NY. 
Pozsar,  Z,  Adrian,  T,  Ashcraft,  A  and  Boesky,  H  (2010),  “Shadow  Banking”,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 458 
Roger,  S  and  Vlcek,  J  (2011),  Macrofinancial  Modeling  at  Central  Banks:  Recent 
Developments and Future Directions, IMF Working Paper 12/21. 
Shakir, T and Tong, M (2014)The interaction of the FPC and the MPC, Bank of England 
Quarterly Bulletin Q4, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin-
/2014/qb14q403.pdf. 
Simon,H (1962), The Architecture of Complexity, Proceedings of the American Philosophical 
Society, Vol. 106, No. 6., pp. 467–482. 
Simplicity consulting (2012), “True Cost of complexity in the banking sector” available at 
http://www.simplicity-consulting.com/wp-
content/files_mf/1340875856BankingTrueCostofComplexity2012.pdf. 
Smets,  F  (2013),  “Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy:  How  Closely  Interlinked?” 
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review. 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
