  Andreas Dombret: Interest rate reversal in the United States and German 
banks 
Introductory  statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Verein  für  Socialpolitik,  Münster, 
17 September 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
The British rock band The Alan Parsons Project charted in 1978 with a single entitled “What 
goes up ...”, the first two lines of which read as follows: “What goes up, must come down / 
What must rise, must fall”. These words of wisdom are also worth heeding in the financial 
markets – indeed, they’re the secret of any successful trader. But interestingly, the precise 
opposite  also  holds  true  in  the financial  markets.  So,  we  could  equally  say:  “Interest  rates 
that fall, must rise again.” 
But for now, the euro area is still in the midst of a protracted spell of very low interest rates. It 
goes  without  saying  that  this  low-interest-rate  environment  is  making  itself felt  on  banks  – 
particularly on those whose business models are very reliant on interest income. So it’s not 
surprising  that  many  a German  credit  institution  is  struggling  with  weak  earnings. That’s a 
topic which has been on the agenda for quite some time now. Incidentally, we will be getting 
a better idea of how German banks are coping with the currently low level of interest rates 
next  week  –  on  18  September,  to  be  precise,  when  the  Bundesbank  and  BaFin  will  be 
releasing the findings of a joint survey on the low-interest-rate environment. 
What can banks do? In a nutshell, banks should act on the meagre state of their earnings at 
present by reflecting on their business models and tapping fresh sources of income. While 
The  Alan  Parsons  Project  might  have  a  point,  living  off  ever-diminishing  resources  and 
simply sitting tight until interest rates reverse isn’t what I would consider the right course of 
action. That’s because interest rates in the euro area are likely to remain very low for some 
time to come – the low rate of inflation, the modest economic outlook and the ECB’s forward 
guidance suggest as much. 
The  picture  is  a  different  one  across  the  pond.  For  all  extents  and  purposes,  the  United 
States already began edging towards the monetary policy exit back in May 2013. That was 
when the US Federal Reserve announced its plans to “taper” its bond purchase programme. 
So  a  possible  interest  rate  hike  would  represent  a  return  to  conventional  monetary  policy 
terrain.  And  it  is  not  so  much  the  timing  of  the  interest  rate  move  that  matters  as  the 
subsequent interest rate path which the Fed follows. 
What would a return to normal policy rate conditions in the United States mean for the euro 
area  and  for  Germany’s  banks?  Since  2013  we  have  observed  that  policy  divergence 
between  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area  has  had  two  knock-on  effects.  First,  the 
differential  between  US  and  euro-area  interest  rates  has  widened;  second,  the  euro 
exchange rate has dwindled. This trend gained traction early this year when the Eurosystem 
announced  the  large-scale  purchase  of  government  bonds.  That  increased  the  spread 
between US Treasuries and German Bunds and sent the euro plummeting against the dollar. 
So German banks need to remember that even if the Fed raises its policy rates, the spell of 
low interest rates in the euro area looks set to continue. Remember what I said just a few 
minutes  ago  –  sitting  tight  and  hoping  for  the  best  simply  isn’t  an  option.  And  as  far  as 
possible  exchange  rate  volatility  is  concerned,  banks  might  theoretically  be  exposed  to 
currency risk. Two factors play a role here. The first is banks’ funding gap in dollars. That gap 
measures the excess of a bank’s US dollar assets over its US dollar liabilities. The bigger 
this overhang, the more exposed the bank is to exchange rate risk. The second factor is the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  mismatch  between  the  maturities  of  assets  and  liabilities  denominated  in  US  dollars.  This 
maturity mismatch measures both exchange rate risk and interest rate risk. 
At  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008,  both  the  funding  gap  and  the  maturity 
mismatch of German banks were very large indeed. When the forex markets dried up and 
German banks got cut off from US dollar funding, the central banks had to step in and lend a 
helping hand. Since then, the ECB, to name but one, has been providing swap facilities, but 
the take-up now is virtually non-existent. 
German banks have reduced their vulnerability since those days, slashing their funding gap 
by downsizing their stock of US dollar assets. What remains substantial, though, is the scale 
of the maturity mismatch of their US dollar investments. However, the actual risk exposure 
here is relatively small, because German banks these days are much better hedged against 
currency risk than they were just a few years ago. 
All in all, then, the expected interest rate reversal in the United States is unlikely to impact 
strongly on German banks – and it’s not as if the move is coming entirely out of the blue. And 
that’s a point worth noting, because there are three qualities that are crucial for any exit from 
an  accommodative  monetary  policy  –  transparency,  predictability  and  communication.  We 
are unlikely to see a turnaround in euro-area interest rates in the near future. In closing, I 
would like to quote again from The Alan Parsons Project: “Someday, you’ll know where you 
are”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
