  Pentti Hakkarainen: Economic outlook 
Presentation by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, to the YIT 
group and division management boards, Lahti, 17 September 2015. 
The slides can be found at the Bank of Finland website Slides 
 Global economy 
1.  
The  world  economy  is  growing,  albeit  a  bit  slower  than  it  was  expected  a  year  ago.  The 
economic  outlook  in  the  United  States  has  remained  encouraging  and  the  Euro  area 
prospects have clearly improved.  
However last August was a bumby month for financial markets. Stock markets around the 
world  were  infected  by  the  Chinese  stock  market  crash.  The  crash  was  preceded  by  the 
Shanghai composite index more than doubling in the course of little less than a year. The 
stock market bubble burst in two phases: in June and in August. First phase had little effect 
globally, but in August, the crash spread around the major stock exchanges causing turmoil. 
Since then, the situation has somewhat stabilized. Volatility has remained high, but around a 
new – and lower – level. 
Also raw material prices have decreased, partly reflecting the impaired economic outlook in 
China. In oil markets, the supply side is also partly to be blamed for. Oil supply has remained 
solid despite the price collapse.  
What did stock market volatility and falling raw  material prices reflect? One answer is that 
these illustrated at least partially the uneven progress of the world economy. Especially the 
general  assessments  on  Chinese  growth  prospects  have  been  revised  down.  Situation  in 
China has also increased downward risks for other emerging market economies.  
Growth moderation in China is caused by the change in its economic structure. Currently the 
economy is undergoing a phase shift with the share of household consumption increasing. In 
2012,  the  share  of consumption to GDP  was  just  35 %  which  is  low  by  all  standards.  For 
example  in  the  United  States,  household  consumption  makes  roughly  70  %  of  GDP.  This 
shift will take time. Bank of Finland’s forecast for Chinese GDP growth in 2016 is 6 %. And 
that is still a very good number.  
Euro area  
2.  
Euro area economy has been doing better for some time. Total production is increasing in 
the four biggest Euro area economies; Germany, France, Italy and Spain. In the first half of 
2015, Euro area economy grew 0,5 % in the first quarter and 0,4 % in the second. Especially 
Spain has been growing rapidly after all the hard years it has lived through.  
In  Euro  area,  unemployment  is  slowly  declining,  although  from  high  levels.  Improved 
employment, lowered oil price and low interest rates have increased household real income 
and  consumption. 
investments  have  been  supported  by 
accommodative  monetary  policy  and  improving  financial  conditions.  Although  investments 
have been very low for a long time, there is finally some positive signs available. Looking at 
the European Central Bank Staff projections from September, Euro area GDP growth rate is 
projected to pick up from 1,4 % in 2015 to 1,8 % in 2017. Inflation is projected to be 0,1 %in 
2015, and gradually increase to 1,1 % in 2016 and to 1,7 % in 2017. 
the  corporate  sector, 
In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Russia 
3.  
Russian economy has faced economic headwinds. The largest impact has come from the fall 
of the oil price that occurred since the middle of 2014. This illustrates the dependence of the 
economy on exports of oil, oil products as well as gas. A decreasing oil price easily puts the 
exchange rate on a downward slide. That has been the case also in Russia.  
The fall of the oil price also has pushed down domestic demand in Russia this year. This has 
pressed the GDP to a level that in the second quarter was 4.6 % lower than one year earlier. 
There are signs that the slide may have stopped. However, for example the Bank of Russia 
in its latest forecast projects that this year the decline of the GDP will amount to 3.9–4.4, if 
the oil price stays at slightly below 50 dollars per barrel for the rest of the year. 
Similar  to  the  crisis  of  2009,  Russia’s  imports  have  fallen  significantly  this  year,  reacting 
strongly both to diminishing domestic demand and the weakening of the rouble. In terms of 
their value in euros, imports of goods and services into Russia fell by 20 % in the first half of 
this year from the first half of 2014. Expectations about the fall of the import volume for the 
entire year 2015 range between 20 and 30 %. 
Regarding another burden, GDP growth in Russian slowed down already years earlier befor 
oil  price  declined  and  sanctions  due  to  geopolitical  tensions.  This  slowdown  reflected  the 
economy’s  systemic  shortfalls  like  low  level  of  fixed  investments.  This  is  naturally  the 
fundamental burden when thinking about the future, about Russia’s growth perspectives in a 
longer term. 
Finland 
4.  
Finland  is  falling  further  behind  euro  area  growth.  According  to  the  last  Bank  of  Finland 
forecast from June 2015, Finland will not catch up with the pace of recovery in the other euro 
area countries.  
Economic growth in Finland has been slow for a prolonged period, both historically and by 
international comparison. Finnish exports have suffered a considerable loss of market share 
since 2009, the most severe year of the recession.  
Growth has been depressed by sectoral and structural problems. The forest industries and 
electrical  engineering  and  electronics,  in  particular,  have  experienced  serious  difficulties. 
Also  an  ageing  population  and  lackluster  productivity  development  have  weakened  the 
growth potential. In addition, Finnish export growth remains subdued partially because of the 
weak performance of the Russian economy.  
During the first half of the year the growth rate of the Finnish economy has been pulled to 
mildly positive territory mainly due to global economic developments. These include oil price 
developments  and  low  interest  rates  and  the  Euro  area  recovery.  However,  there  are 
headwinds to a more robust recovery. In addition to the structural factors mentioned above, 
factors  such  as  weak  competitiveness,  labour  market  matching  problems,  and  lacking 
implementation of planned structural reforms hamper growth in Finland. 
The labour market situation has deteriorated rapidly during the past year. Unemployment is 
now  higher  than  in  the  recession  year  2009,  the  unemployment  rate  standing  at  9.6  %  in 
July.  The  employment  rate  is  falling.  The  rise  in  unemployment  has  been  widespread, 
affecting all age groups, although especially the rise in youth unemployment has accelerated 
during the first half of the year.  
Over the past 5 years there has been a soft, if lengthy landing in the Finnish housing market, 
reflecting  the  protracted  economic  downturn.  The  housing  loan  cycle  in  Finland  is  now 
passing its second trough after the burst of the global financial crisis. 
There  can  be  a  strong  regional  divergence  in  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness 
within countries, too. These regional differences are driven by both demand and supply-side 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  factors.  Growth  areas  are  typically  characterised  by  increasing  population,  younger 
residents,  a  better  employment  situation  and  higher  household  income  than  the  national 
average. This is also reflected in brisker housing markets and higher house prices in these 
areas. 
For example, in Finland the market conditions in the metropolitan areas are diverging from 
the conditions prevailing in areas where the population is diminishing. The largest housing 
loans  are  concentrated  in  the  biggest  cities  and  growth  centres.  In  these  centres,  house 
prices are also highest. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me know draw main conclusions: 
• 
The US economy is growing and today we will hear from the Fed OMC-meeting how 
strong the growth is, and also we will hear whether monetary policy stance needs to 
be changed. 
Emerging market  economies  have  had  difficult  times;  e.g.  Brazil  and  Russia  have 
faced strong headwinds and China’s growth is levelling off. 
Growth  outlook  for  Europe  has  improved,  unfortunately  Finnish  economy  has  not 
recovered  accordingly  and  our  economy  requires  tough  medicine  to  cure  its 
worsened and dire competitive position. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
