  Ravi Menon: An economic history of Singapore – 1965–2065 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Singapore Economic Review Conference 2015, Singapore, 5 August 2015. 
 It  is  always  wise  to  look  ahead  but  difficult  to  look  further  than  you  can  see”  –  Winston  Churchill. 
Everything about the future said here is pure imagination. It does not represent in any way a forecast or projection 
by  MAS  or  by  me.  My  intention  is  merely  to  paint  a  plausible  scenario  for  Singapore.  I  can  only  be  sure  that 
someone reading this in 2065 will view it as totally lacking in imagination or realism or both. 
Professor Euston Quah, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
This  year,  Singapore  celebrates  100  years  as  an  independent  nation.  The  Global-Asian 
Economic Review, or GAER, is relatively young, at 25 years old. But the GAER comes from 
a long tradition that goes back to the very beginnings of Singapore. 
• 
It began life as the Malayan Economic Review in 1956, was renamed the Singapore 
Economic  Review  in  1969,  and  took  new  birth  as  the  Global-Asian  Economic 
Review in 2040. 
As  the  leading journal  on  economic  issues that lie  at  the  intersection  of  the  world 
and Asia, the GAER’s evolution has mirrored that of Singapore itself – starting life as 
part of Malaya, becoming independent, and then expanding its vision to become a 
Global-Asian entity limited neither by geography nor history. 
 We are a young nation by the standards of other countries but a hundred years is not a flash 
in the pan either. Amidst the centennial celebrations, it is worthwhile recalling the journey that 
Singapore has made as a nation since its humble beginnings in 1965. As this is a gathering 
of economists, I will do so in the form of a brief economic history of Singapore over the last 
century. 
Our economic progress in a nutshell 
Let  me  begin  by  reviewing  the  economic  progress  we  have  made  as  a  nation  in  the  last 
100 years, from three perspectives, namely the level, generation, and distribution of income. 
First,  the  level  of  income.  I  will  use  Gross  Domestic  Product  rather  than  Gross  National 
Income since the GNI measure that we use today is not available for the earlier years. 
• 
In 1965, Singapore’s nominal GDP per capita was around US$500. We were at the 
same level as Mexico and South Africa. 
In 1990, GDP per capita had risen to about US$13,000, surpassing South Korea, 
Israel, and Portugal. 
In 2015, GDP per capita was about US$56,000. We had caught up with Germany 
and the United States. 
By  2040,  when  our  GDP  per  capita  had  reached  US$96,000,  we  were  already 
among the top-ranked countries in the world and our benchmark became cities. We 
were among the top 25 cities then. 
Today,  in  2065,  GDP  per  capita  is  US$120,000,  fifth  highest  among  cities  in  the 
world. 
    Second,  the  generation  of  income.  Just  as  important  as  the  level  of  income  is:  how  we 
produced it, and what resources did we use? 
• 
Output per hour worked has increased considerably. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   o 
o 
o 
In 2015, Singaporeans worked 2,300 hours. 
This year Singaporeans are expected to work only 1,400 hours. 
But we are now generating nearly three times as much income as 50 years 
ago. 
The carbon intensity of our economy has fallen sharply. 
o 
o 
In 2015, we emitted 0.2 kilograms of carbon to produce a dollar of output. 
Today, we emit just 0.05 kilograms. 
Third, the distribution of income. 
• 
Income distribution has become more equal, thanks to heavy investments in building 
human  capital  and  skills  as  well  as  a  tax  and  transfers  system  that  has  become 
more progressive over the years. 
o 
In  2015,  the  Gini  coefficient  after  taking  account  of  taxes  and  transfers  was 
0.41. 
Today, it is 0.36. 
o 
Wealth inequality has remained more stubborn though. 
o 
Today, the top 1% and 10% of wealth holders in Singapore own around 20% 
and 60% of total wealth respectively. 
This is little changed from 30 years ago, when we first started to collect this 
data. 
o 
1965–1984: Export-led industrialisation through multinationals 
In 1965, when Singapore left the Federation of Malaysia, few expected it to survive let alone 
prosper. Singapore’s first Prime Minister, Mr Lee Kuan Yew, had said in 1957 that the idea of 
an independent Singapore was a “political, economic, and geographical absurdity”. It is not 
hard to see why. 
• 
An island of 580 squares kilometres at low tide, Singapore in 1965 had no natural 
resources, no hinterland, no industry. 
It depended on the outside world not just for food and energy, but even water. 
Industrial strife was common. Unemployment was close to 9%. 
• 
• 
Singapore’s birth pangs were traumatic. 
• 
Separation  from  Malaysia  meant  the  loss  of  not  just  a  common  market  but  a 
hinterland. 
Indonesia’s Confrontasi cut off Singapore’s southern hinterland, further undermining 
the fledgling nation’s traditional role as an entrepot trading post for the region. 
In  1968,  the  British  government  announced  a  withdrawal  of  its  troops  from 
Singapore, which left thousands of workers without a job and as much as a fifth of 
the economy at risk of coming to a halt. 
Surviving  as  a  nation  and  creating  a  better  life  for  the  people  were  thus  the  over-riding 
priorities. And economic growth was seen as the principal means to help achieve this. 
The government made two strategic decisions – both sharply at odds with the conventional 
economic wisdom of the time. 
• 
The  first  was  to  shift  away  from  import-substitution  in  favour  of  export-led 
industrialisation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     The second was to attract global multinational corporations as vehicles to achieve 
industrial growth. 
 These  two  decisions  proved  to  be  among  the  most  important  in  our  economic  history. 
Promoting  exports  and  promoting  foreign  direct  investments  at  a  time  when  few  other 
countries were doing the same gave Singapore a decisive advantage. 
But it was an advantage that Singapore had to work hard to realise. 
• 
The  government  developed  industrial  land,  put  in  place  infrastructure  facilities, 
reformed labour laws to promote industrial peace, and invested in basic education 
with emphasis on technical skills relevant to industrialisation. 
Sound 
underpinned investor confidence. 
fiscal  and  monetary  policies  ensured  macroeconomic  stability  and 
 The two strategies paid off handsomely. 
• 
By  1975,  Singapore  had  established  a  substantial 
manufacturing’s share in GDP climbing to 22% from 14% in 1965. 
The economy was at full employment and it was clear that Singapore had to move 
up the value chain towards more capital-intensive and skill-intensive activities. 
industrial  base,  with 
 The compositional change within manufacturing was striking. 
• 
Industrialisation began in the 1960s with factories producing items such as matches, 
fish hooks and mosquito coils. 
o 
By  the  way,  for  those  unfamiliar, mosquitoes  used  to  spread  life-threatening 
diseases  in  the  tropics  in  those  days  until  the  disease-causing  ones  were 
eradicated in 2033 by genetic modification. 
 In  any  case,  these  labour-intensive  industries  saw  a  steady  decline  through  the 
1970s. 
By the late 1970s and early 1980s, we saw the emergence of strong clusters in higher value-
added electronics, petrochemicals, component and precision engineering. 
• 
In the 1980s, Singapore became the world’s leading producer of hard disk drives – 
an early form of memory storage used in computers at the time. 
The first two decades of Singapore’s economic history could be described as the “take-off” 
phase. It was the period when the economic fundamentals of prudent public finances, sound 
monetary  policies,  co-operative  industrial  relations,  outward  orientation,  and  market-based 
strategies took root. The economy grew by an average of about 10% each year during this 
period,  and  Singapore  emerged  as  a  newly-industrialised  economy  at  the  forefront  of 
developing countries. 
1985–2010: Liberalisation and the rise of modern services 
In  1985,  the  Singapore  economy  went  into  recession  –  the  only  time  in  our  history  the 
domestic  economy  contracted  while  the  global  economy  was  still  growing.  The  1985 
recession  exposed  structural  strains  in  the  economy,  which  had  hitherto  been  masked  by 
strong economic growth. 
• 
As the earlier phase of “catch-up” growth came to an end, resource constraints and 
diminishing returns to investment began to set in. 
The cost advantage that Singapore enjoyed began to narrow. 
• 
The 1985 recession was a significant milestone in Singapore’s development history. It led to 
a  fundamental  review  of  the  policies  and  strategies  that  prevailed  at  the  time.  The  most 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  important  outcomes  from  that  period  of  review  which  continued  into  the  1990s  were  the 
structural reforms to: 
enhance wage flexibility in the labour market; 
• 
tap more decisively into regional markets for trade and outward investment; 
• 
step up the pace of industrial upgrading; 
• 
promote innovation, enterprise, and entrepreneurship in the economy; and 
• 
• 
liberalise various services sectors such as finance, telecommunications, and utilities. 
In fact, the key story post-1985 recession up till the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 was the 
rise of modern services as a twin engine of growth alongside manufacturing. 
• 
The share of modern services in GDP increased steadily, from 16% in 1965 to 24% 
in 1985 and 28% in 2010. 
Financial  services.  Singapore  was  already  a  thriving  regional  financial  centre  since  the 
1970s.  In  the  late  1990s  and  early  2000s,  the  insurance  and  securities  industries  were 
completely  liberalised  and  progressive  steps  were  taken  to  open  up  the  domestic  banking 
industry to foreign competition. 
Business services. A broad range of business activities – accounting, law, advertising, and 
consultancy – grew in importance, playing an important role in cementing Singapore’s status 
as a regional hub. 
Info-communications services. The government embarked on a plan to computerise the civil 
service in the early 1980s. This helped to kick-start the info-communication services industry, 
one of the mainstays of the economy ever since. 
Entertainment  services.  In  2005,  the  government  decided  to  allow  two  casinos  to  operate 
within integrated resorts that also included leisure facilities, business and convention zones, 
and  high-end  retail  outlets.  This  sparked  the  growth  of  a  thriving  entertainment  services 
industry over the next few decades, attracting the burgeoning Asian middle class. 
This second phase of our economic development essentially saw the transition of Singapore 
from Third World to First World. By 2010, Singapore was an affluent society and a global city, 
at the cross-roads of international flows of trade, investment, finance and talent. Real GDP 
grew an average 6.7% per annum during this period. 
It was also a period in which the economy was buffeted by one crisis after another: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
But  the  economy grew  in  resilience,  rebounding  sharply  and  emerging stronger  after  each 
economic shock. 
the Asian Financial Crisis in 1998; 
the collapse of the global IT industry in 2001; 
the spread of the deadly SARS virus in 2003; and 
the Global Financial Crisis in 2008 
2011–2025: Demographic slowdown and economic restructuring 
The dominant theme in the third phase of Singapore’s economic history was the overcoming 
of resource constraints through a significant restructuring of the economy. While Singapore 
had always been short of land and labour, these constraints came to a head in the 2010s. 
By 2011, annual growth in the total working age population had declined to less than 3%, 
and continued to fall steadily over the decade. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    Foreign  labour,  which  had  driven  Singapore’s  labour  force  growth  since  the  late 
1970s, was already one-third of the total workforce. 
It  was  neither  economically  efficient  nor  socially  desirable  to  allow  the  foreign 
workforce to expand much faster than the local workforce.  
By 2020, average total labour force growth was down to 1% per annum. 
 
The central thrust of economic strategies in the 2010s and early 2020s was therefore to shift 
to a productivity-driven growth model. The aim was to increase productivity growth to at least 
2% per annum, from the 1.4% averaged during the 2000s. 
• 
The  growth  of  lower-skilled  foreign  labour  was  curbed  through  increases  in  the 
foreign worker levy and reductions in the foreign worker dependency ratio ceilings. 
Financial incentives were given to firms to undertake capital deepening and adopt 
technology solutions to raise productivity. 
Programmes were put in place to help Singaporeans develop and master skills in 
new growth clusters. 
  While the manufacturing sector had continually  undergone restructuring and moved up the 
value  chain  in  the  preceding  five  decades,  this  was  the  first  time  the  entire  economy  was 
undergoing such a transition. 
• 
It proved particularly challenging for many traditional domestically-oriented services 
like retail, hospitality, construction, real estate, and social services, which had come 
to be heavily dependent on cheap labour over the decades. 
While many firms in these sectors successfully upgraded themselves and became 
more efficient, there was a substantial reduction in the size of these sectors by the 
early 2020s. 
 But the decisive turnaround in the quest for productivity came when services industries with a 
traditionally domestic orientation, like education and healthcare, re-positioned themselves by 
scaling up, investing in technology and talent, and exporting their services. 
The  idea  of  Singapore  as  a  Global  School  House  was  not  new  but  it  was  pursued  with 
renewed vigour and came to full fruition only during this period. Singapore positioned itself as 
a choice location for quality education for a growing Asian middle class. 
• 
By  2025,  international  students  studying  in  Singapore  could  be  awarded  joint 
degrees from 10 of the top 20 universities in the world. 
Singapore was well on its way to become the premier educational hub of Asia. 
• 
Similarly, the healthcare sector was opened up. 
• 
 By 2025, Singapore had become a multi-faceted medical hub hosting the world’s top 
medical professionals and multi-national healthcare companies. 
This led to a vibrant ecosystem that created jobs in areas from research and training 
to conventions for medical professionals both locally and abroad, in addition to the 
large and diverse number of good jobs in hospitals. 
This third phase of Singapore’s economic history marked the most significant step-down in 
Singapore’s economic growth, with real GDP growing by 3.6% per annum. However, it also 
marked  the  painful  but  successful  economic  transition  towards  productivity-led  growth.  By 
2025,  the  economy  had  matured,  with  productivity  growth  accounting  for  virtually  all  of 
economic growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  the  period 
that  saw  widespread 
2026–2040: Regional integration and technological transformation 
The fourth phase of Singapore’s economic development saw the fruition of the decades-long 
quest for regional  integration  and  the rise  to  prominence  of  what  we  refer to  today  as  our 
offshore  economy.  This  was  also 
technological 
transformation and the emergence of the ideas economy. 
By 2040, the global centre of economic gravity had shifted decisively to Asia. 
• 
China  was  by  far  the  largest  economy  in  the  world,  with  per  capita  incomes 
approaching that of upper middle income countries. 
India  emerged  as  the  third  largest  economy  in  the  world,  with  the  largest  middle 
class and a global network of indigenous multinationals. 
But perhaps most significant for Singapore was the emergence of Indonesia as the 
fastest  growing  economy  in  the  world,  following  far-reaching  economic  reforms  in 
the early 2020s. 
  Singapore’s high-end manufacturing and modern services benefitted significantly from trade 
and investment links with these Asian giants, in addition to the Unites States and the North 
Euro Area. 
But the real game-changer was the setting up of two supra-national economic zones. 
In 2028, Malaysia and  Singapore got together to set up the Iskandar-Singapore Economic 
Zone or ISEZ: one economic system spanning two sovereign countries. 
• 
The  experiment  succeeded  beyond  expectations,  providing  global  and  regional 
investors  an  integrated  production  and  services  base  that  was  unmatched  in 
Southeast Asia. 
In  2030,  the  most  ambitious  blueprint  of  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  process  came 
into being, with the establishment of the ASEAN Free Economic Zone, or AFEZ. 
• 
Unlike traditional economic zones like the ISEZ which were contiguous entities, the 
AFEZ  was  a  network  of  the  major  cities  across  ASEAN  connected  by  extensive 
road, rail, air, and sea links, not to mention advanced digital communications. 
There  was  free  movement  of  goods,  services,  capital,  and  people  between  these 
cities, which become vibrant hubs for trade and enterprise. 
 While  the  bulk  of  the  economic  benefits  of  the  AFEZ  rightly  accrued  to  the  developing 
economies of Indo-China, Singapore benefitted from being the nerve centre of this network 
with  extensive  backward  and  forward  linkages  between  the  offshore  economy  and  the 
territorial economy. 
The Singapore economy which had hitherto been characterised by the export of goods and 
services was increasingly being driven by the export of capital and people. 
• 
Singapore firms shifted a substantial volume of production offshore and increased 
ownership of production facilities in the AFEZ. 
Increased connectivity enabled large numbers of Singaporeans to work in the AFEZ 
while maintaining home in Singapore. 
The  government  partnered  the  private  sector  to  build  offshore  satellite  towns  and 
industrial parks in the AFEZ to cater to the needs of Singapore MNCs and overseas 
communities. 
  The gross inflows of income derived from the deployment of Singapore’s capital and people 
abroad rose by 50% between 2026 and 2040. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   For the first time, these inflows exceeded the income repatriated abroad by MNCs 
operating in Singapore. 
Gross  National  Income  (GNI)  per  capita  became  the  more  relevant  measure  of 
Singapore’s income and standard of living than just GDP per capita. 
 The 2020s and 2030s saw the proliferation and convergence of several technological trends 
that transformed economies and societies globally. 
• 
Rapid progress in digital and mobile technologies, coupled with advanced biometrics 
and  global  wi-fi  access,  made  payments  virtually  costless  and  highly  secure, 
precipitating an explosion in the growth of digital commerce and digital finance. 
Advances  in  cloud  computing,  big  data  analytics,  smart  sensors  and  learning 
machines transformed the provision of consumer and business services, including 
financial, legal, auditing, consultancy, and logistics. 
They  also  spurred  a  transformation  in  the  provision  of  social  and  public  services 
such  as  telemedicine,  online  learning,  and  congestion  control,  substantially 
enhancing efficiency and consumer welfare. 
  Singapore  was  well-positioned  for  the  pervasive  digitisation  of  the  global  economy  that 
occurred  in  the  2020s  and  2030s,  mainly  due  to  two  key  initiatives  that  it  embarked  on  in 
2015 in the drive towards productivity-led growth: 
• 
The  first  was  the  concerted  national  effort  to  build  and  deepen  skills  at  all  levels 
through extensive worker retraining programmes and subsequent introduction of the 
teaching of digital technology across the education system. 
The second was the drive to create a Smart Nation – building critical infrastructure 
and capabilities in digital and sensor technologies. 
 By 2040, a thriving ideas economy had taken root in Singapore, with value-added embedded 
in ideas rather than physical form. 
• 
The  creation  of  economic  value  was  associated  increasingly  with  “dematerialised 
products”  such  as  telecommunications,  algorithms,  software,  design,  testing  and 
research. 
At the same time, Singapore built on its traditional strengths in the ideas economy, 
namely marketing, branding, and global supply chain management. 
 Advances in robotics and 3-D printing helped to spawn new activities in Singapore’s offshore 
facilities in the AFEZ: 
• 
• 
Technological advances also transformed the structure of the territorial economy. 
• 
production of space vehicles and supersonic jet engines; 
additive manufacturing of components for electric cars and autonomous vehicles. 
Cutting-edge  biologics  to  produce  drugs  for  cancer,  auto-immune  diseases, 
congenital  disorders  and  dementia  emerged  as 
largest  component  of 
manufacturing. 
Real-time genome sequencing for disease control started from scratch to become 
one of the fastest growing segments within the territorial economy. 
Infrastructure  financing  became  the  largest  contributor  to  modern  services,  with 
Singapore-based financial  institutions  and markets financing  projects  ranging from 
the Sino-Indian lunar complex to the pan-ASEAN nuclear fusion reactors. 
  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  During  this  period,  regional  integration  and  technological  advances  helped  sustain  GNI 
growth of 2.9% per annum and GDP growth at 2.6% per annum, a remarkable performance 
given the maturing of the economy. But the period was not free of crisis. 
• 
The  Global  Cyber  Crisis  of  2034  triggered  the  deepest  recession  in  Singapore’s 
history, with the economy contracting by 8.5% that year. 
The  resurgence  of  smallpox  and  resultant  pandemic  in  2039  plunged  the  global 
economy  into  a  recession  that  lasted  two  years,  not  to  mention  the  tragic  toll  on 
human lives. It remains till today the darkest period in our nation’s history. 
 2041–2065: Climate change mitigation and adaptation 
By 2040, climate change had become the defining issue facing the global economy, including 
Singapore. It has been the key driver of the transformation of our economy over the last 25 
years. 
As  recently  as  50  years  ago,  climate  change  was  still  a  matter  of  debate  internationally, 
although it was known that global surface temperatures had been rising since 1850. 
• 
But by 2020, it had been established firmly that man-made emissions of greenhouse 
gases were the dominant cause of global warming and that climate change on an 
existential scale was inevitable if urgent actions were not taken. 
It  took  the  global  community  another  10  years  to  reach  an  agreement  on  carbon 
emission reductions. 
 The Global Climate Change Compact of 2030 – with subsequent reviews every ten years – 
was probably the most important international agreement in history. 
• 
By  committing  countries  to  significant  absolute  reductions  in  carbon  emissions,  it 
helped  slow  down  and  eventually  arrest  global  warming,  thereby  forestalling 
calamitous changes in the climate. 
But in some respects, the Compact was too late. Some degree of climate change 
and  its  effects  could  not  be  avoided,  chief  of  which  was  a  persistent  rise  in  sea 
levels. 
 Adapting  to  climate  change  thus  became  as  important  a  consideration  as  mitigating  it.  In 
2041, the government announced a comprehensive programme to restructure the economy 
and reposition society for the new world emerging in the wake of climate change. 
The  introduction  of  a  carbon  tax  helped  to  reduce  carbon  intensity  in  economic  activities, 
increase  energy  efficiency,  and  modify  consumption  patterns.  By  2055,  the  green  industry 
emerged as the largest contributor to Singapore’s Gross National Income, covering a wide 
range of economic activities: 
• 
reconfiguration  of  earlier  technologies,  such  as  robots  that  were  powered  by 
electricity, to make them more sustainable in a carbon-constrained world; 
development of geo-engineering solutions to reduce the earth’s capacity to absorb 
heat and re-freeze the polar ice caps through altering the natural environment; 
research,  production,  and  deployment  of  renewable  energy  solutions  centred  on 
solar,  hydrogen,  nuclear  fusion,  algae  biofuels,  and  zero-carbon  diesel  fuels 
recycled from atmospheric carbon; 
trading of carbon emission permits, carbon credit options, and other derivatives to 
manage carbon-related risks; 
energy consultancy and engineering services as well as specialty insurance against 
various kinds of climate change occurrences. 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  the  area  of  climate  change  adaptation,  the  Dyke  Construction  Programme,  launched  in 
2045, proved critical not only in preventing the ongoing rise in sea levels from inundating our 
island, but also in generating a variety of ancillary economic activities. Adapting and building 
on the earlier Dutch designs and technologies, Singapore became a major exporter of dyke 
solutions to many other coastal cities around the world. 
The last 25 years have seen perhaps the most significant transformation of the Singapore 
economy  –  competitive,  dynamic,  resilient,  and  environmentally  sustainable.  GDP  grew  by 
an average 1.5% per annum, and GNI 1.7% per annum. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
I  have  described  the  evolution  of  our  economy  over  the  last  100  years,  chiefly  from  the 
perspective of industrial developments, technological trends, and other global forces. It is a 
story of continuous restructuring, made possible by a judicious blend of the invisible hand of 
the market and the visible hand of good government. 
But the key non-economic factor that made this development journey possible is the culture 
of our people. 
It is a culture of innovation. Today, we have a highly productive and engaged workforce with 
deep  skills,  continually  learning  and  taking  advantage  of  new  technologies,  and  building 
meaningful careers. It is this spirit of constant adaptation and lifelong learning that has 
It is also a culture of resilience. Singapore has undergone various upheavals and crises over 
the  last  100  years  –  recession,  terrorism,  pandemic  –  not  to  mention  the  dislocations  and 
anxieties  caused  by  globalisation,  technological  advance,  population  ageing,  and  climate 
change. Our strength has not been to insulate ourselves from crisis but to bounce back from 
it, stronger and more resolute. 
Finally, it is a culture of cohesion. We have come this far because we have worked together 
and stayed together, with those who have done well doing their part for the less fortunate. It 
is not only about a willingness to pay higher taxes to support an ageing population but the 
spirit of philanthropy and volunteerism that has taken root in our society, especially over the 
last 50 years. Our economic success could not have been possible without this deeper social 
cohesion that has held the nation together. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
