  Vítor Constâncio: Interview in Het Financieele Dagblad 
Interview  with  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  Het 
Financieele  Dagblad,  conducted  by  Mr  Marcel  de  Boer  and  Ms  Saskia  Jonker  on  29  April 
2015 and published on 4 May 2015. 
 Front page 
The  ECB’s  controversial  purchase  programme  will  not  be  halted  prematurely,  even  if  the 
economy in Europe is picking up more rapidly than expected, said Vítor Constâncio, Vice-
President of the European Central Bank (ECB), in an interview with Het Financieele Dagblad. 
“The  programme  is  working  well. Why  should  we  think  of  discontinuing  it  when  inflation  is 
negative and inflation expectations are nowhere near our medium-term goal of close to 2%?” 
So that option is not even on the table for the Executive Board of the ECB. “We only started it 
a few months ago. It would be very strange if we were already talking about stopping.” 
Critics  argue  that  the  ECB  is  creating  bubbles  in  asset  markets  because  all  markets  are 
being driven up by the large-scale purchase programme (known as quantitative easing). But 
the  Portugese  central  banker  is  not  afraid  of  that.  “There  is  no  generalised  asset 
overvaluations  in  the  euro  area.”  He  acknowledges  that  quantitative  easing  is  making 
investors  take  more  risks  because  that  is  more  profitable.  “That  is  partly  what  we  want  to 
achieve  through  our  programme,  this  so-called  portfolio  shift.  The  only  danger  is  that  the 
“search for yield” might get out of hand. We need to keep a close eye on that. It is the job of 
macroprudential policy, not of monetary policy, to avoid the build-up of bubbles”. 
Article/Q&A 
The  view  from  the  41st  and  top  floor  of  the  European  Central  Bank’s  new  premises  is 
overwhelming: huge buildings that suddenly look quite small, bright green patches of spring 
foliage, and aeroplanes in the distance glistening in the sun as they take off from Frankfurt. 
Vítor  Constâncio  contentedly  takes  in  his  surroundings  as  he  enters  the  meeting  room, 
slightly late but completely relaxed. Slight of stature and wearing a grey suit, Constâncio, a 
Portugese  national,  has  every  reason  to  be  pleased:  the  ECB’s  purchase  programme  is 
working, he says. “The European economy is moving in the right direction.” And he has the 
data to support that statement at his fingertips. 
“The sale of durable consumer goods has grown by 4.5% in a year, share prices have risen 
by 13% since the start of this year, the price of capital for non-financial firms is 7.7% – which 
is similar to pre-crisis levels. For banks, too, funding has become considerably cheaper.” In 
short,  financial  conditions  have  improved.  “Even  though  some  critics  said  that  quantitative 
easing would be less effective here than in the United States, because much of the financing 
is provided by banks. They forget that banks are listed on the stock exchange too.” 
But  Constâncio  disagrees  that  things  are  going  well  enough  to  already  start  tapering  off 
quantative  easing  –  inflation  expectations  are  too  low  for  that.  Until  inflation  comes 
sustainably close to 2%, the ECB will continue to intervene in the financial markets, with the 
attendant risks such as rapid asset price increases and the disadvantage of low returns for 
pension funds. 
The sharp depreciation of the euro is another side effect. Does Constâncio think that 
will result in a global currency war? 
“Exchange rates reflect the economic situation in the various countries. The US economy, for 
example, is in a completely different phase of the business cycle than Europe. That explains 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  why monetary policy here is not the same as in the United States. The G20 also look at it 
that way.’ 
Do you feel responsible for the fact that Dutch pension funds and insurance firms are 
struggling with the current low market interest rates? 
“All  policy  measures  have  their  side  effects.  There  is  collateral  damage,  but  we  have  a 
mandate and that states that we must maintain price stability. Having said that, it is important 
to note that insurance firms especially have not done so badly in recent years. The value of 
their assets increased precisely on the back of the lower interest rates and they were able to 
push up the profit per share, more so than the banks could in any case. Low interest rates 
are now causing problems, but it is exactly our objective to bring things back to normal. Once 
we have price stability, interest rates will also go up again.” 
“Here and there, we see that the maturity of the investments is out of sync with the maturity 
of  liabilities.  We  also  see  that  few  strategies  have  yet  been  designed  that  would  render 
insurance  firms  immune  to  this  mismatch.  That  is  why  they  should  be  cautious  about  the 
promises that they make to their customers.” 
Talking about promises, are sufficient securities available for purchase? 
“The stock of available securities is vast. The universe of eligible assets which we could buy 
amounts to €600 billion in covered bonds, €400 billion in asset-backed securities and more 
than €3,000 billion in sovereign bonds. It is true that we are not purchasing any securities on 
which  the  interest  rate  has  dropped  below  –0.2%.  But  there  is  still  plenty  of  securities 
available for purchases. What we could do if that changes is hypothetical, and you know that 
policy-makers don’t discuss hypothetical situations.” 
Wouldn’t it have been better if the ECB had simply given a cheque to households? 
Then not so much money would have been pumped into the financial system, but 
would have flowed directly into the real economy. 
“First and foremost, the purchase of securities is an instrument that we can use because it is 
in line with our statute. There is nothing that controversial about it, but the same cannot be 
said for your “helicopter money”. Moreover, with our programme we are injecting money into 
the economy. That money will bring about an improvement in market conditions and thereby 
make it easier for private parties to access financing. 
“Helicopter money has had different meanings in various contexts, from giving money directly 
to households to financing of public infrastructure. But all these options would bring us very 
close to pursuing fiscal policy. And that’s what we cannot do.” 
Are you concerned about Greece and, if it comes to a Grexit, do you fear the spread of 
contagion effects to other euro area countries? 
“Like everyone else, I am concerned. But I am also absolutely convinced that the worst-case 
scenario will be avoided. At the same time, everyone acknowledges that the degree of stress 
and vulnerability in the euro area has totally changed. There are no signs of contagion.” 
But if it goes wrong and a Grexit does come about, wouldn’t the ECB incur huge 
losses? 
“The  Eurosystem  (the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks,  ed.)  has  lent  a  total  of  some 
€110 billion  to  Greek  banks.  But  the  risk  on  just  over  €70  billion  of  that  amount  has  been 
shifted to the Greek central bank. We jointly bear the risk on the rest of the amount. But bear 
in mind that collateral has been provided. We are talking about securities that are not linked 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to the Greek sovereign and which, on top of that, are subject to a “haircut”. This should offer 
sufficient protection.” 
Last year saw the start of the banking union. What is the next big project for the ECB? 
“That  would  be  the  capital  markets  union.  Although  it  is  not  our  direct  responsibility  –  the 
European Commission is responsible for the proposals – it is very important for us. A well-
integrated and deep capital market would facilitate the functioning of our monetary policy, as 
our key interest rates would then be transmitted more smoothly. And there would be more 
risk-sharing via ownership of assets. If an economic recession arose in a euro area country, 
an effective capital markets union would soften the consequences of that recession. But the 
benefits of a capital markets union can only be reaped if a truly ambitious approach is taken 
here.“ 
Could you explain that some more? 
“An effective capital markets union requires the harmonisation of company law, of bankruptcy 
law, of taxation of financial products and of regulatory and supervisory frameworks. That is 
an enormous task. This way firms could issue shares and debt across the union, to a much 
greater extent than they do now, as a result of the level playing field for all stakeholders (the 
shareholders, the issuers, etc., ed.). But we must not forget that the European countries have 
already come far in harmonising policy, especially the euro area countries.” 
Did EU Commissioner Jonathan Hill not say that a capital markets union would not be 
in place before 2019? 
“If it is completed in 2019, I would be very happy.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
