  Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Singapore – a widely respected centre of 
Asian and global finance 
Keynote address by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore,  at  the  Association  of  Banks  in  Singapore  (ABS)  Annual  Dinner,  Singapore, 
30 June 2015. 
 Chairman and Council Members of the ABS, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
1. Thank you for inviting me to join you this evening. 
2. We meet at a time of renewed uncertainty in global finance. Greece has imposed capital 
controls and declared a banking holiday to stem a full-blown financial crisis. 
3. No one has been able to predict each step in the game of brinkmanship that we have seen 
over  the  last  few  weeks.  But  the  underlying  reality  of  a  sharply  deteriorating  economy  in 
Greece, and the prospect of bankrupt Government, has not been a surprise. It is too early to 
say  if  some  form  of  Grexit  becomes  a  reality,  but  it  is  a  contingency  that  Eurozone 
governments and financial institutions have been preparing for. 
4.  The  direct  impact  of  a  collapse  of  the  Greek  economy  is  not  significant,  even  in  the 
Eurozone. The ECB and the EU are also likely to take all steps necessary to safeguard the 
Eurozone financial system in the coming weeks. Markets have hence not shown great panic, 
with credit spreads widening only slightly in the Eurozone periphery. 
5. But there are downside risks we should be mindful of. Economic distress may give way to 
political  and  social  turmoil  in  Greece,  with  an  unpredictable  interplay  with  the  broader 
dynamic  of  geopolitical  tensions.  Any  setback  in  confidence  could  hurt  a  still  tentative 
economic  recovery  in  Europe,  which  will  have  spill-over  effects  on  the  rest  of  the  world 
economy. 
6. We should therefore not be alarmed, notwithstanding the drama of recent days, but we 
should stay alert and vigilant. Although the risk of a sudden brake in global growth remains 
low, we are closely monitoring developments and their potential impact on Singapore. 
50 Years of Singapore’s Financial Centre 
7.  This  year’s  ABS  annual  dinner  also  comes  as  we  mark  our  50th  year  of  nationhood  in 
Singapore. Our financial centre has been both beneficiary and driver of the nation’s progress 
over the five decades. 
8.  We  can  take  quiet  pride  in  how  it  has  evolved,  from  its  beginnings  in  the  financing  of 
merchant  trade  with  our  neighbours,  into  a  well-diversified,  vibrant  and  widely  respected 
centre of Asian and global finance. 
9. It was never a given that Singapore would be a major financial centre. We started at a time 
when Hong Kong had a major head start, as the Asian outpost of the City of London. There 
was no natural reason why a broad range of global financial institutions and services had to 
be located in Singapore, a small island state separated from its Malayan hinterland. 
10. It took a certain boldness to stake a place in international finance, constant supervisory 
vigilance,  and  sound  leadership  of  the  local  banks  which  have  been  the  anchor  in  the 
financial system. We earned the respect of both markets and regulators internationally. 
• 
As  Mr  Lee  Kuan  Yew  put  it,  “We  had  to  fight  every  inch  of  the  way  to  establish 
confidence in our integrity, competence and judgement.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  11.  This  evening,  I  will  talk  about  two  important  initiatives  for  Singapore’s  financial  sector, 
that will buttress the foundations for its future progress: 
• 
international  banking  operations, 
First,  MAS  will  rationalise  the  regulatory  framework  that  has  distinguished  the 
domestic  and 
into  account  market 
developments  over  the  years  and  global  regulatory  changes  over  the  last  half 
decade. 
Second,  we  will  introduce  several  manpower  and  talent  development  initiatives  to 
ensure  a  strong  Singaporean  core  across  the  range  of  activities  in  the  financial 
sector. 
taking 
 Removing the DBU-ACU Divide 
12.  Let  me  start  with  the  regulatory  framework  that  has  distinguished  domestic  from 
international banking in Singapore. 
13. The creation of the Asian Dollar Market (ADM) in 1968 was a path-breaking step. It put 
Singapore on the map of international finance. It also enabled our financial sector to serve as 
a  major  source  of  funding  for  the  investment,  trading  and  risk-management  needs  of  a 
growing region and beyond. 
14. Financial stability has however been a paramount objective from the time we established 
the ADM. Banks have been required to segregate their domestic and offshore operations into 
domestic  banking  units  (DBU)  and  Asian  Currency  Units  (ACU),  as  separate  accounting 
entities. 
• 
The  DBU  of  a  bank  holds  its  domestically-focused  operations,  which  are 
predominantly denominated in Singapore dollars. 
The ACU of a bank holds its offshore operations, which are (entirely) denominated 
in foreign currency. 
 15. This framework has in the initial decades provided a way to safeguard domestic financial 
stability,  without  unduly  impinging  on  the  regional  activities  of  banks  in  Singapore.  For 
example, MAS imposed liquidity requirements on banks’ Singapore dollar liabilities (i.e. only 
within  the  DBU).  In  addition,  DBU  activities  were  subject  to  large  exposure  and  equity 
investment limits. 
16.  The  Asian  Dollar  Market  was  hence  regulated  along  broadly  similar  lines  as  the 
Eurodollar market in London. Foreign banks had to meet high standards before they were 
admitted to Singapore, but once in, their offshore operations were regulated in the same way 
as in other reputable financial centres. Much weight was placed on the foreign banks having 
reputable  home  regulators  exercising  oversight  of  their  global  operations.  However,  MAS 
imposed an additional overlay of prudential requirements on the banks’ domestic businesses 
in Singapore. 
17. The DBU-ACU divide also provided a simple basis for offering developmental incentives 
to encourage the growth of offshore banking activities out of Singapore. The incentives were 
in the past focused on the ACU. 
18.  The  DBU-ACU  divide  served  us  well  for  decades,  but  has  been  losing  its  relevance. 
There are a number of reasons for this development. First, since 2004, our developmental 
incentives have no longer been based on the domestic vs offshore distinction. Second, the 
divide between domestic and offshore banking has in practice become increasingly porous. 
19.  Third,  and  most  importantly,  there  have  been  major global  regulatory  developments  in 
the last five years, that have resulted in banks’ offshore activities being subject to rules that 
are broadly similar to those governing the domestic banking business in Singapore. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   New  global  rules  have  increased  the  amount  and  quality  of  capital  as well  as  the 
liquidity buffers that banks need to hold 
Global  regulators  have  also  agreed  on  a  common  framework  to  control  large 
exposures to a single counterparty 
 20.  These  global  regulatory  reforms  have  put  all  banks  on  a  sounder  footing.  It  has  also 
reduced the relevance of MAS rules that distinguish between offshore and domestic banking 
activities of foreign banks, since home regulators will now be requiring their banks to meet 
enhanced standards on a group-wide basis. 
21. Post-global financial crisis, we have also seen a strengthening of co-ordination among 
home  and  host  regulators.  MAS  is  an  active  member  of  the  global  Crisis  Management 
Groups of regulators of foreign banks with significant operations in Singapore. This aims to 
enhance regulators’ preparedness and coordination in crisis management. 
22. A fourth reason why the DBU-ACU divide is of less relevance today has to do with the 
significant changes in MAS’ own banking regulations, aimed at reducing systemic risks. 
• 
All banks will be required to meet enhanced liquidity requirements that apply to the 
entirety of their operations by January 2016. 
Banks which are designated as domestic systemically important banks (D-SIBs) in 
Singapore  will  be  subject  to  additional  supervisory  measures  over  both  their 
domestic and offshore businesses.1 
In  addition,  where  a  foreign  bank  branch  has  significant  retail  presence  in 
Singapore,  it  will  also  be  required  to  locally  incorporate  its  retail  operations.  The 
subsidiary will be subject to the same suite of regulation as the local banks, and the 
same supervisory regime aimed at minimising risks to local depositors. 
  23. Together, the enhanced global and domestic regulatory standards mean that the DBU-
ACU divide is no longer useful. If we continue with the divide, it would merely impose undue 
administrative  burden  on  banks,  without  materially  enhancing  prudential  soundness  or 
systemic stability. 
24. Hence, MAS will be removing the DBU-ACU divide in its banking regulations. The details 
will  be  released  in  an  MAS  consultation  paper  by  August.  There  is  no  rush.  We  will 
implement the changes in close consultation with the banking community, and phase them in 
over time. 
25.  This  is  a  significant  rationalisation  in  our  banking  regulation  landscape.  But  I  have  to 
emphasise  that  one  thing  remains  unchanged,  and  that  is  Singapore’s  commitment  to 
promoting  the  growth  of  the  Asian  Dollar  Market,  and  the  international  business  of  banks 
based in Singapore. 
Establishment of Financial Centre Advisory Panel (FCAP) 
26. Indeed, a strong partnership between the MAS and industry leaders and practitioners has 
been key to the development of Singapore’s financial sector, and how we got to where we 
are today. It will be even more important in the coming years, with changes accelerating in 
the financial world. 
27.  MAS  will  therefore  strengthen  its  dialogue  with  the financial  industry. We  will  set  up  a 
Financial  Centre  Advisory  Panel  (FCAP)  comprising  senior  leaders  from  the  banking, 
                                                
1   For  example,  as  a  D-SIB,  the  foreign  bank  will  be  required  to  conduct  recovery  and  resolution  planning  to 
reduce the potential for failure and promote their resolvability for an orderly winding-down. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  insurance and asset management industries. The Panel will provide guidance in two broad 
areas: 
• 
First, overall financial sector developmental strategies. Industry leaders and experts 
will  provide  advice  on  opportunities  across  the  various  financial  activities,  and 
propose initiatives to ensure continued vibrance in Singapore’s financial centre. This 
includes  building  synergies  across  different  activities  –  for  example,  spurring  the 
development of the capital markets by building on the asset management sector to 
catalyse equity, fixed income and FX trading activities. 
Second,  we  have  to  build  deep  skills  and  expertise  relevant  to  the  future  and 
harness  technology.  These  ‘horizontals’  of  skills  and  technology  will  be  the  key 
drivers in the next phase of our financial centre’s growth. 
 28.  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  MD  MAS,  spoke  just  yesterday  about  the  new  technologies  that  are 
transforming financial services and how  MAS and the industry could work together to take 
advantage of these technologies. I will talk now about how we can build the depth of skills 
and expertise, across all levels of the financial sector workforce, and how we aim to achieve 
quality jobs for Singaporeans in a rapidly-changing financial environment. 
SkillsFuture in Financial Services 
29. The next 10 years will be both disruptive and transformative for financial institutions and 
markets. New technologies will have a significant bearing on the scale and nature of financial 
sector  jobs  –  everywhere  from  the  front-end  of  consumer  transactions  and  advice,  to  the 
middle and back-end business of processing, risk management and data analysis. 
30.  Many  jobs  in  finance  will  be  at  risk  around  the  world.  But  if  we  prepare  well  for  the 
changes reshaping global finance, there is significant opportunity in this for Singapore and 
for Singaporeans working in finance. 
31. Our vision is to be a financial centre that is among the leaders globally in workforce skills 
and expertise, and one with a strong core of Singaporeans at every level. 
32. MAS has been engaging the top leadership of key financial institutions, here in Singapore 
and  in  headquarters  overseas,  on  our  initiatives.  Their  response  has  been  positive.  They 
recognise and support our desire to develop deep skills and a strong pipeline of Singaporean 
talent,  as  part  of  a  vibrant  and  competitive  global  financial  centre.  It  is  in  our  collective 
interest that we do this, and in the interests of each financial institution over the long term. 
33.  As  part  of  the  national  SkillsFuture  effort,  MAS  in  partnership  with  the  industry  and 
educational and training institutes is now embarking on further initiatives. We will strengthen 
support for every finance professional to learn continuously, develop his or her expertise, and 
have  a  good  career.  This  includes  developing  Singaporean  leaders  in  finance,  with  the 
capabilities to take on responsibilities in Asia and further afield. 
Continual Learning and Deepening Specialist Skills 
34.  Let  me  describe  these  initiatives  briefly,  starting  with  our  efforts  to  promote  continual 
learning and to develop deep pools of financial sector expertise in Singapore. 
Finance Scholarship Programme (FSP) 
35.  First,  under  the  Finance  Scholarship  Programme  (FSP),  MAS  supports  early-career 
Singaporeans  in  developing  specialist  capabilities  through  post-graduate  studies.  This 
includes  specialisations  in  quantitative  finance,  risk  management,  actuarial  science  and 
specialty insurance, and emerging priorities such as cyber security, data analytics and fraud 
risk detection. Since the scholarship’s inauguration in 2006, more than 150 FSP scholarships 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  have  been  awarded.  MAS  will  provide  30  scholarships  per  year  to  add  to  the  pipeline  of 
specialist talents in the financial sector. 
SkillsFuture Study Awards 
36. Second, MAS will offer up to 70 SkillsFuture Study Awards each year for financial sector 
professionals. These awards aim to equip Singaporeans, especially those in the early to mid-
stages  of  their  careers,  to  develop  and  deepen  their  skills  through  a  wide  range  of 
programmes, including shorter courses, especially in areas where industry expertise remain 
in short supply. 
Subsidies for Continual Learning 
37. Third, and most broadly, we will also provide generous subsidies to support Singaporean 
finance  professionals  in  continual  learning  related  to  financial  sector  competencies.  MAS 
currently  funds  up  to  70%  of  the  costs  of  financial  sector  training  courses.  In  addition,  as 
announced in this year’s Budget, subsidies for all Singaporeans aged 40 and above will be 
enhanced to a minimum of 90% of training costs for approved courses. This is a significant 
subsidy from the Government, as we recognise there are opportunity costs that mid-career 
Singaporeans face when they go for further education and training. 
Earn and Learn Programmes 
38. The initiatives I have just described are aimed at all Singaporeans in the financial sector, 
and  especially  to  help  our  PMEs  stay  on  top  of  a  changing  world  of  professional  jobs. 
Regardless of whether they start their careers with a master’s degree or diploma, we must 
help them learn continuously, and pick up the skills needed for new jobs in finance. 
39.  Our  fourth  initiative  is  more  specific,  and  is  aimed  at  providing  fresh  polytechnic 
graduates  with  good  opportunities  early  in  their  careers.  MAS  will  be  introducing  the 
Financial Sector Earn and Learn Programmes for this purpose. 
40. For the prospective polytechnic graduate, this 12–18 month work-study programme will 
allow  him  or  her  to  gain  valuable  employment  experience  at  a  financial  institution  and  to 
receive training which counts towards a Specialist or Advanced diploma upon completion of 
the  programme.  These  work-study  programmes  will  be  designed  in  collaboration  with 
financial  institutions,  the  polytechnics  and  the  Singapore  Workforce  Development  Agency 
(WDA). 
41. I am pleased to see that the major banks in Singapore have committed to provide at least 
200  places  for  polytechnic  graduates  in  the  coming  year,  through  the  Earn  and  Learn 
Programmes or their in-house structured programmes. (They include all three local banks – 
DBS, OCBC, UOB – as well as ANZ, Barclays, BNP Paribas, Citibank, JP Morgan, Maybank 
and  Standard  Chartered  Bank.)  These  will  be  in  the  banks’  core  functions  of  technology, 
consumer banking, operations and risk management. 
42.  Wherever  you  start,  we  will  help  you  progress.  To  give  an  example,  Oryan  Ang, 
graduated from Nanyang Polytechnic and joined DBS in 2004 as a Home Advice Specialist. 
He was given opportunities to learn on the job, demonstrate his abilities and rise through the 
ranks, and is today a Vice-President in Consumer Banking (Deposits and Secured Lending) 
at the bank. 
Developing strong core of Singaporean Leaders in Finance 
43. Let me turn finally to the second thrust of our initiatives to develop professional talent and 
skills, which concerns leadership development. This too is a key priority under SkillsFuture. 
The  development  of  a  strong  core  of  Singaporean  leaders  in  finance,  working  in  diverse 
global teams, will define our continued success as a financial centre. MAS takes this very 
seriously. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  44.  We  have  in  recent  years  introduced  several  initiatives  to  promote  the  development  of 
Singaporean leaders in the financial industry. 
• 
The  Finance  Associate  Management  Scheme  (FAMS)  offers  promising  young 
professionals  exposure  to  different  aspects  of  a  financial  institution’s  global 
operations and mentorship by senior leaders. 
The 
than 
35 overseas  postings  of  Singaporeans  in  finance  since  its  launch  in  2013.  They 
have  acquired  valuable  practical  experience  in  diverse  working  cultures  over  their 
6 to 24-month attachments to regional and global offices of financial institutions. 
International  Posting  Programme 
(iPOST)  has  supported  more 
 Asian Financial Leaders Programme (AFLP) 
45. To further strengthen these efforts, I am pleased to announce the launch of the Asian 
Financial Leaders Programme (AFLP). 
• 
The AFLP will take advantage of Singapore’s strong and expanding linkages in the 
region,  including  ASEAN,  China  and  India,  and  aim  to  strengthen  those  links 
through leadership development. 
It  is  aimed  at  equipping  finance  professionals  aspiring  to  C-suite  roles  with  the 
knowledge  and  capabilities 
to  operate  effectively  across  diverse  business, 
regulatory, and legal environments. 
Participants will be given the opportunity to learn from and interact with top policy-
makers  from  the  region  and  to  also  build  networks  with  fellow  financial  sector 
leaders. 
The  AFLP  will  be  administered  jointly  by  Temasek  Management  Services  and 
Singapore Management University, with the first intake of AFLP participants slated 
for November this year. 
   Conclusion 
46. Singapore’s financial sector has thrived on constant adaptation: the development of new 
capabilities and instruments, a willingness to take risks, and at every stage the evolution of 
regulation and risk-management practices so that we can mitigate the downsides inherent in 
the business. 
47. We are now embarked on our next phase of development as a financial centre. It will be 
driven by deeper collaboration between MAS and the industry, a collective effort to leverage 
on new technologies, and by staking a position as a leading global centre of financial skills 
and expertise. The exciting thing is that we can actually achieve this. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
