  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Kathimerini 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Kathimerini, conducted by Mr Alexis Papahelas on 22 April 2015. 
 The Greek government would like to reach an agreement on a new programme in June 
without concluding the current review. Is that acceptable? Will Greece need a new 
programme anyway in order to finance its fiscal needs? 
Since  the  elections  were  announced,  heightened  uncertainty  has  been  dragging  down 
economic activity and risks impacting the health of the financial system. The current situation 
is clearly not sustainable and requires quick and decisive action by the Greek authorities to 
turn  things  around.  In  recent  days,  there  has  been  tangible  progress  in  the  quality  of  the 
discussions with the three institutions – the ECB, the European Commission and the IMF – 
which  can  be  built  upon.  Still,  significant  differences  on  substance  remain  and  substantial 
further work is needed. We wish these discussions to succeed. The current programme was 
extended by the Eurogroup on 20 February with the express purpose of working towards a 
conclusion of the review. It expires on 30 June, and the Eurogroup has also made it clear 
that a new programme would, as a minimum, require the present one – and thus the present 
review – to be successfully concluded in good time. This is what the Greek government now 
has  to  focus  all  its  energy  on.  Issues  related  to  a  possible  follow-up  arrangement  can  be 
addressed afterwards. 
The Greek government claims that it should get the SMP profits without concluding 
the programme review in order to overcome the liquidity crunch it is facing. Could this 
happen? 
The  so-called  “SMP  profits”,  i.e.  the  profits  made  by  the  ECB  on  the  Greek  bonds  it 
purchased during the crisis, are distributed to the National Central banks that are members 
of  the  ECB  and  then  are  transferred  to  the  Member  States.  It  is  therefore  for  euro  area 
governments  to  decide  when  to  transfer  the  money  to  Athens.  The  Eurogroup  clarified  on 
20 February that only a successful conclusion of the review will permit this transfer. 
There has been speculation that the Greek government might not pay the next 
instalment to the IMF. What would the consequences of such a move be? 
You  are  right  to  ask  about  consequences.  And  it  is  important  to  understand  all  the 
consequences for the economy and for the people, direct and indirect, that would result from 
a failure to repay debt in a timely manner. Let me give you just one very important one, which 
is that it would constrain the ability of banks to support the economy: if the government were 
to  default  on  its  debt,  then  obviously  the  value  of  government  bonds  would  be  negatively 
affected.  This  would  make  it  more  difficult  for  banks  to  obtain  liquidity,  because  at  the 
moment  they  rely  for  that  on  government  bonds  which  they  use  as  collateral,  both  in  the 
market  and  with  the  Eurosystem.  So  it  would  impair  the  ability  of  banks  to  provide  credit, 
which  would be detrimental to the Greek people in general. But the government has been 
clear that it intends to honour its obligations to all its creditors, so I don’t want to speculate on 
other, more adverse scenarios. 
Is the Greek banking system adequately capitalised or will it need further 
recapitalisation? Is the “Cyprus model” of a bail-in an option? 
The  Greek  banking  sector  is  better  capitalised  than  in  previous  years  due  to  the  capital 
injections  under  the  programme  over  the  last  two  years  and  continued  progress  in  bank 
restructuring.  These  measures  made  Greek  banks  attractive  to  external  investors,  who 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  participated last year in capital increases. The improved resilience was also confirmed last 
year in the ECB’s comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets. At the same time, 
non-performing  loans  continue  to  weigh  on  banks’  balance  sheets.  The  progress  that  has 
been  achieved  in  the  Greek  banking  sector  is  currently  overshadowed  by  the  heightened 
political uncertainty, hence the importance of prompt policy action. 
According to various reports, the ECB has prepared capital controls or IOU 
contingencies for Greece. Could you comment on these, and under what 
circumstances would they be applied? 
Capital controls are not a working assumption. In any case, it would not be up to the ECB to 
take measures of that sort. Those fall within the competence of national authorities, which 
means the Greek authorities. 
Is there a limit to the increase in emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) to the banking 
system? If no agreement is reached by 11 May, is the ELA going to be affected? 
We are the central bank of Greece and we have always fully played our role to support the 
banking system and thereby its ability to fund the economy. This means in particular that we 
have always ensured that solvent banks remained funded, despite the stress they have been 
under.  But  like  everybody,  we  have  to  act  within  the  law.  And  the  EU Treaty  requires two 
things of us: first that we lend only to solvent banks; and second that we lend only against 
adequate collateral. So we  will continue to extend liquidity to the Greek banks, as long as 
they are solvent and they have adequate collateral, as is the case today. Indeed, the amount 
of assistance we have provided is considerable. Just look at the facts: emergency liquidity 
assistance  has  been  increased  week  after  week  by  the  Bank  of  Greece  according  to  the 
needs  of  the  system.  As  a  result,  the  Greek  banking  system  currently  receives  around 
€110 billion of central bank liquidity, more than double the level of last December and 61% of 
Greek GDP, the highest level of any euro area country. 
At the last press conference the President of the ECB, Mario Draghi, called discussion 
of a “Grexit” premature. Isn’t this scenario a huge risk for the euro area? 
It is out of the question to speculate about such a scenario. The euro area needs Greece just 
as Greece needs the euro. An overwhelming majority of the Greek population want to keep 
the  euro.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Greek  government  to  take  the  appropriate  steps  to 
ensure that its policies are in line with these clear preferences. 
Is the Greek debt viable? Was it a mistake not to restructure it at the beginning of the 
programme? How would the sustainability of debt be affected if the targets for growth, 
fiscal indicators and privatisations aren’t met? 
Let  me  start  by  expressing  regret  that  several  of  the  latest  policy  initiatives  and 
announcements  have  worsened  the  outlook  for  debt  sustainability.  In  the  short  term,  the 
burden and risks associated with the large stock of debt are substantially mitigated  by the 
fact  that  more  than  60%  of  Greece’s  debt  is  financed  by  the  European  Financial  Stability 
Facility and euro area governments through bilateral loans at very favourable conditions. The 
low  interest  rate  on  official  loans  has  a  positive  impact  on  fiscal  accounts,  and  the  long 
average  maturity  of  Greek  debt  reduces refinancing  risks.  Over  the  coming  years, Greece 
will devote a much lower share of national income to debt service than many other euro area 
countries, such as Spain, Portugal and, in particular, Italy. The Greek government can use 
the  opportunities  created  by  this  concessional  funding  support  provided  by  European 
partners to undertake reforms and maintain a prudent fiscal path, with the ultimate objective 
of  allowing  a  return  to  full  market  financing.  Looking  ahead,  whether  long-term  debt 
sustainability will require further effort by the Member States is not for the ECB to decide. As 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  for  the  debt  held  by  the  ECB  itself  through  the  SMP,  the  EU  Treaties  do  not  allow  us  to 
cancel or extend that debt. 
While the rest of the euro area is already benefiting from quantitative easing, Greece is 
totally isolated from this development. Doesn’t this undermine the long-term growth 
prospects of Greece and consequently the possibility of reducing unemployment 
faster? What can the ECB do about it? 
It is true that one consequence of the policy uncertainty currently prevailing in Greece is that 
the economy is benefiting less than it could from the cyclical rise in demand in the euro area, 
which our monetary policy is facilitating with visible effects. This is unfortunate for growth and 
employment in the near term, and one more reason to wish that this period of uncertainty is 
brought to an end as soon as possible. As regards long-term growth, let me clarify, however, 
that our asset purchase programme can do little to lift long-term growth, in Greece or in any 
other  euro  area  country.  Our  policy  is  aimed  at  bringing  euro  area  inflation  back  to  levels 
below but close to 2%. It can engineer a cyclical recovery, not a long-lasting one. Long-term 
growth  is  driven  by  the  capacity  to  innovate  and  to  efficiently  allocate  capital  and  labour, 
which hinges on reforms undertaken by governments. 
Why aren’t we currently buying Greek bonds? For their bonds to be eligible for the ECB’s 
asset purchase programme, euro area countries need to have a sufficiently high credit rating. 
This requirement can be waived only if an EU-IMF programme has been implemented and 
successfully reviewed, which is not the case today in Greece. 
Greek government officials have said that the ECB is using liquidity as a means to 
blackmail Greece. Prime Minister Tsipras even said that the ECB has got a rope 
around Greece’s neck. What is your comment on that? 
Decisions by the ECB are guided by rules, not political considerations. Following these rules, 
the ECB has fully played its role as the central bank of Greece, continuously increasing its 
liquidity provision to Greek banks to ensure that they can serve the real economy. What we 
cannot do is fund the government, for example by refinancing Greek banks’ purchases of T-
bills at a time when the Hellenic Republic does not have market access. This is due to the 
fact that, for very good reasons, the EU Treaty prohibits any central bank from financing its 
government.  This  applies  to  Greece  as  to  any  other  euro  area  country,  and  our  decisions 
have followed exactly the same rules under this government as under the previous ones. The 
ECB is the central bank of Greece, but we are also the central bank of 18 other countries and 
we cannot bend our rules to suit the occasion. The Greek government can relieve funding 
constraints by pursuing policies which will open the way to disbursements by other Member 
States  under  the  programme  and,  ultimately,  restore  market  access.  Let  me  add  that  the 
ECB’s monetary policy stance is currently very accommodative. Greece also clearly benefits 
from this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
