  Øystein Olsen: Oil and the Norwegian economy – the challenges ahead 
Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at a 
lunch hosted by Danske Bank Markets, New York City, 27 March 2015. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Norges Bank’s website: Slides (PDF). 
It’s a great pleasure to be in New York City again and an honour to be invited to give a lunch 
presentation here today. 
As  Norges  Bank,  a  week  ago,  published  its  latest  monetary  policy  report,  the  economic 
outlook  and  the  considerations  behind  the  interest  rate  decision  naturally  warrant  some 
attention  in  my  speech  today.  First,  however,  I  would  like  to  give  some  background 
information on the economic policy framework in Norway, focusing on the sovereign wealth 
fund  –  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  –  the  fiscal  rule  and  Norges  Bank’s  foreign 
exchange transfers to the fund. 
Norway  is  a  small,  open,  natural  resource-rich  economy.  About  a  quarter  of  our  GDP  is 
related to oil and gas extraction, and a large share of our petroleum production is exported. 
The oil and gas industry has played a vital role for the strong growth in our economy over the 
past  40  years.  When  the  first  oil  was  brought  to  the  surface  in  1971,  GDP  per  capita  in 
Norway was lower than the average for a western economy. The picture has reversed since 
then. We have gradually caught up to the wealthiest nations. Measured by GDP per capita, 
Norway now ranks close to the top. 
Even if we disregard the oil sector’s contribution to growth for a moment, Norway’s mainland 
economy has shown relatively robust developments. The ripple effects from activities on the 
continental shelf to the wider economy have been wide-ranging. A growing number of firms 
have targeted the oil industry. A state-of-the-art oil service industry has emerged. For many 
firms,  the  contracts  on  the  Norwegian  continental  shelf  have  been  a  springboard  to  new 
export markets. 
Although Norway’s oil age began 40 years ago, the past 15 years stand out. From the end of 
the 1990s to 2013, the price of North Sea oil rose from about USD 10 to over USD 100 per 
barrel. High oil prices and a profitable petroleum production industry have been accompanied 
by  record-high  oil  investment  in  recent  years.  Increased  spending  of  petroleum  revenues 
over the fiscal budget has provided a growth impetus to domestic demand. Employment has 
remained high and unemployment low for many years, even when the financial crisis hit in 
2008. 
It  was  made  clear  at  an  early  stage  that  Norway’s  oil  and  gas  resources  belong  to  the 
Norwegian people and should be managed on their behalf. The tax system for private and 
state-owned  oil  companies  and  framework  conditions  for  the  petroleum  industry  were 
designed so that the bulk of the large resource rents generated by the industry would accrue 
to the Norwegian state. 
We  have  avoided  making  public  sector  budgets  dependent  on  volatile  income.  This  has 
mainly been achieved by establishing the sovereign wealth fund and a fiscal rule imposing a 
constraint on oil revenue spending. 
The Norwegian parliament passed the Act relating to the fund in 1990. Under the Act, the net 
budget surplus, including oil revenues, is transferred to the fund, and invested in international 
markets. 
The policy guidelines were clarified in 2001 through the introduction of the fiscal rule. Under 
these  guidelines,  government  spending  of  oil  revenues  –  measured  by  the  non-oil  budget 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
deficit – is limited to the expected real return on the fund – estimated at 4 percent annually. 
The idea is to leave the capital in the fund untouched, saving it for future generations. 
The fiscal rule provided for a gradual phasing in of oil revenues. Over time, we would have to 
expect  the  real  krone  exchange  rate  to  appreciate  as  a  result.  However,  due  to  the  fund 
mechanism  and  the  fiscal  rule,  actual  spending  is  decoupled  from  current  petroleum 
revenues. 
This has curbed the appreciation of the krone and thus reduced fluctuations in the exchange 
rate.  Compared  to  other  resource-based  economies,  the  real  krone  exchange  rate  has 
remained relatively stable, especially during the period of substantial increases in oil prices 
(cf. diagram). 
Let me elaborate on the transactions that actually take place. All revenues from the sale of oil 
and gas are originally in foreign currency. The oil companies convert some of their foreign 
exchange  revenues  to  kroner  in  order  to  pay  taxes  and  dividends  to  the  government.  In 
addition  to  tax  and  dividend  revenues  in  kroner,  the  government  has  large  revenues  in 
foreign currency from its ownership shares in petroleum fields on the Norwegian continental 
shelf.1 
As  long  as  government  revenues  in  kroner  from  the  petroleum  sector  exceed  annual 
petroleum revenue spending over the budget, the government is left with a surplus of kroner. 
This was the situation up until 2014. 
Norges Bank converted this surplus into foreign currency, which was in turn transferred to 
the fund. The amount of kroner converted into foreign exchange partly offset the amount of 
kroner previously bought by the oil companies. Consequently, these operations should not 
have any impact on the real exchange rate. 
In  2015,  government  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  over  the  budget  is  estimated  to  be 
higher than the revenues received in kroner. Government petroleum revenue spending over 
the  budget  has  increased  over  time,  in  pace  with  the  increasing  size  of  the  fund.  And 
recently, the government’s net cash flow from the petroleum sector started to decline. As a 
consequence,  Norges  Bank  will  move  from  a  position  of  selling  surplus  kroner  to  selling 
foreign currency in order to finance petroleum revenue spending. However, the effect on the 
real exchange rate will still be determined by the amount of petroleum revenues spent over 
the fiscal budget. 
It is not Norges Bank’s intention to influence the krone exchange rate through these foreign 
exchange  transactions.  Accordingly,  purchases  are  distributed  evenly  through  the  year.  At 
the end of each month, Norges Bank announces the size of the daily purchases or sales of 
kroner for the coming month, based on estimates of oil revenues and fiscal spending. The 
amount can be interpreted as our best estimate for the remaining months of the year. 
The economic outlook 
Let me now turn to the outlook for the Norwegian economy. We are about to leave behind us 
15 golden years. The Norwegian economy has made use of favourable tailwinds and seized 
the  opportunities  offered.  The  other  side  of  the  coin  is  an  economy  that  has  become 
increasingly  dependent  on  oil,  and  thereby  more  vulnerable  to  changes  in  oil  prices  and 
petroleum revenues. And as we know, oil prices have fallen by nearly 50 percent since last 
summer. 
The vulnerability manifests itself in several ways. A large share of the business sector and 
the labour market is linked to the petroleum sector in Norway and in other countries. 
                                                
1   Revenues received from the State’s Direct Financial Interest in the petroleum sector (SDFI). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Petroleum investment, which has long been an important driver of growth in the Norwegian 
economy, is now expected to fall in the years ahead. The fall in oil prices in recent months 
has accelerated and amplified an announced decline in the activity level on the Norwegian 
continental shelf. Lower oil prices reduce oil company cash flows and reduce the profitability 
of  new  investments.  Field  development  projects  that  are  now  underway  will  be  affected, 
although to a limited extent. In addition, some new projects may be postponed or cancelled. 
Lower demand for goods and services from the petroleum sector has spillover effects on the 
mainland economy, with a dampening effect on labour demand. 
The fact that activity in the petroleum sector is declining does not mean that the oil age is 
coming to an end. Nearly half of known oil and gas reserves on the Norwegian continental 
shelf have not yet been extracted. And large new discoveries have been made over the past 
few years. Nonetheless, the Norwegian economy must adapt to considerably lower demand 
from the oil sector. We will be more dependent on growth in other sectors to support growth 
in the economy. 
Another challenge is Norway’s high labour costs. The cost level in the business sector has 
increased sharply relative to our trading partners. To underpin a necessary transition towards 
non-oil industries, the cost level in Norway must again be brought more closely into line with 
that of our trading partners. 
A  necessary  adjustment  of  the  cost  level  in  Norway  can  occur  by  means  of  lower  wage 
growth in Norway than in other countries or a depreciation of the krone exchange rate. 
In  Norway,  monetary  policy  is  geared  towards  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.  The 
operational target of monetary policy is consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 percent over 
time.  The  inflation  target  provides  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  When  inflation 
expectations are firmly anchored, monetary policy serves as the first line of defence when 
the economy turns down. 
Over time, monetary policy can only influence inflation. Monetary policy cannot take primary 
responsibility for delivering the necessary structural changes in the Norwegian economy. But 
monetary policy can help facilitate the necessary restructuring process via the exchange rate 
channel. As long as there is confidence that inflation will remain low and stable over time, a 
pronounced depreciation of the krone can go hand in hand with a low key policy rate. 
The  krone  has  depreciated  markedly  since  last  September  and  is  now  about  10  percent 
weaker than the average for the first half of 2014. Developments in the krone exchange rate 
must  be  seen  in  the  context  of  lower  oil  prices  and  weaker  growth  prospects  for  the 
Norwegian economy. 
The depreciation of the krone underpins inflation and softens the impact of lower oil prices on 
the Norwegian economy. As seen in the diagram a weaker krone boosts competitiveness for 
Norwegian  firms  facing  competition  from  abroad.  At  the  same  time,  wage  growth  has 
moderated to some extent. There are prospects that real wage growth this year will be at its 
lowest for nearly 20 years. 
With  improved  competitiveness,  export  firms  are  in  a  better  position  to  maintain  market 
shares.  As  growth  picks  up  abroad,  demand  for  Norwegian  goods  and  services  may  also 
increase. At the same time, petroleum-related exports, which account for about a quarter of 
mainland exports, will likely decrease due to a decline in global offshore investment. 
It will likely take time for the effects of lower oil prices on the mainland economy to become 
fully visible. So far, unemployment has only shown a slight increase. A flexible labour market 
appears to be curbing the rise in unemployment. 
Employment growth has also remained firm, although an increasing mismatch between the 
number of unemployed and job vacancies points towards more slack in the labour market. In 
regions and sectors closely linked to the petroleum sector, unemployment has increased. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 for  weaker 
inflation,  while  prospects 
 
 
Weaker  growth  prospects  may  reduce  the  willingness  of  mainland  firms  to  invest.  On  the 
other hand, improved competitiveness will provide a basis for expanding capacity in some 
sectors. In addition, housing investment is likely to support overall investment activity. House 
price inflation remains high. 
Growth in household consumption has been moderate in recent years and household saving 
has reached a high level, in spite of low interest rates. The pension reform and uncertainty 
surrounding economic developments have probably induced households to increase saving. 
Overall, we expect growth in private consumption to remain moderate ahead and the saving 
ratio to remain at a high level. 
Debt-to-income ratios for Norwegian households are high, reflecting a long period of rapidly 
rising house prices. Low interest rates on loans to households are expected to fuel house 
price 
income  growth  and  somewhat  higher 
unemployment may have a dampening impact further ahead. 
For  some  time,  based  on  experience  from  the  recent  financial  crisis,  financial  stability 
considerations have to some extent influenced monetary policy. Put in other words: we have 
been “leaning against the wind”. 
As a small open economy, Norway is highly influenced by economic developments abroad. 
Many advanced economies have experienced a difficult time since the global economy was 
severely hit by the financial crisis. Global growth is expected to pick up. The fall in oil prices 
is a positive factor for the world economy. But the picture is mixed. In the US, the recovery 
seems to be on a firm footing. Developments in the UK and Sweden, two of Norway’s major 
export  markets,  have  also  been  positive,  although  inflation  remains  a  challenge.  The 
situation in the euro area appears to be more problematic. A large portion of the workforce is 
unemployed and production equipment stands idle. Inflation is worryingly low. 
Through winter, a number of central banks have undertaken unconventional monetary policy 
easing, and market expectations with regard to key rates in trading partner countries have 
fallen further. Low interest rates abroad influence the krone and thereby the prospects for 
inflation, contributing to low interest rates also in Norway. 
In  December  last  year,  Norges  Bank  cut  the  key  policy  rate  by  0.25  percentage  point  to 
1.25 percent. In our assessment, Norges Bank gave weight to the weakening of the growth 
outlook  for  the  Norwegian  economy  and  attached  importance  to  countering  the  risk  of  a 
pronounced downturn due to lower oil prices. 
Last  week,  Norges  Bank  presented  its  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report  with  updated 
projections  for  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy  and  a  new  assessment  of  the 
orientation of monetary policy. 
Developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy  this  winter  have  been  broadly  in  line  with 
expectations. Inflation remains close to 2.5 percent and unemployment has remained stable. 
So far, the effects of the fall in oil prices on the real economy have been relatively small. 
However, the outlook for the Norwegian economy has weakened somewhat. Oil prices have 
continued  to  fall  and  activity  in  the  petroleum  industry  appears  to  be  declining  more  than 
previously assumed. Wage growth in 2014 was lower than projected and there are prospects 
that  wage  growth  will  also  be  lower  ahead  than  projected  earlier.  This  will  lead  to  lower 
inflation further ahead. 
At  the  same  time,  house  prices  continue  to  rise  rapidly.  This  may  increase  household 
vulnerability and may trigger or amplify an economic downturn further ahead. 
The  Executive  Board  decided  to  keep  the  key  policy  rate  unchanged  at  1.25  percent.  If 
developments in the economy ahead prove to be broadly as projected, there are prospects 
that the key policy rate will be lowered. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  analysis  in  the  Report  suggests  a  key  policy  rate  of  approximately  1  percent  in  the 
coming  years,  followed  by  a  gradual  increase.  The  analysis  suggests  that  inflation  will 
increase  somewhat  in  the  coming  quarters  before  edging  down  and  lie  slightly  above 
2 percent  later  in  the  projection  period.  Capacity  utilisation  in  the  mainland  economy  is 
projected to decline further, before returning to a more normal level. 
Let  me  summarise.  After  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  Norwegian  economy  quickly 
rebounded, supported by robust public finances and strong growth in the petroleum sector. 
Since  last  summer,  oil  prices  have  fallen.  Activity  in  the  petroleum  sector  has  probably 
passed  the  peak.  So far,  the  impact  on  the  real  economy  has  been modest.  At the  same 
time, the Norwegian economy is facing new challenges. Vulnerabilities established during the 
golden years must be addressed. From being in a unique economic position, Norway is now 
headed for a period of restructuring. 
Norway’s starting point is favourable. Inflation is well anchored and the krone is functioning 
as a stabiliser. In addition, we have been able  to transform oil in the ground into financial 
wealth  in  a  period  when  oil  prices  were  high.  We  have  significant  fiscal  leeway.  But  the 
conditions and forces necessary for growth in the economy in the longer run will have to be 
brought more into line with those of other countries. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
