  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Generating more winners in microfinance 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the launch of the 2015 Citi Microentrepreneurship Awards, 
Manila, 22 May 2015. 
 factor 
Today  we  launch  the  2015  Citi  Microenterpreneurship  Awards  or  CMA,  a  groundbreaking 
program  that  has  allowed  us  to  discover  the  creativity,  tenacity  and  generosity  of  Filipino 
microentrepreneurs across our country. 
We just heard the testimony of Ms. Teresita Valdez, one of about a hundred CMA awardees 
so far. Their  stories  inspire,  inform  and motivate  those  who  want  to go  into  business. The 
challenges they faced  and  how  they  overcome seemingly  insurmountable  odds  strengthen 
the resolve of other entrepreneurial Filipinos that they too can succeed in the microfinance 
sector. 
Indeed, our microentrepreneurs represent a gold mine of lessons and information that has 
been helping us transform and improve the lives of millions of Filipinos through microfinance. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  A  significant 
in  our  growing  harvest  of  successful 
microenterprises stories is a regulatory environment that enables microfinance institutions or 
MFIs to provide appropriate products and services. 
Microentrepreneurs succeed when the regulatory framework is well-defined; enables various 
MFIs  –  whether  banks,  coops  and  NGOs  –  to  deliver  a  range  of  microfinance  services  to 
their  niche  markets;  and  encourages  institutions  under  our  supervision  to  cater  to 
microentrepreneurs, a market which “traditional” bankers tend to sidestep due to perceived 
high credit risks and transaction costs. 
In this connection, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas has issued clear guidelines and codes of 
conduct, so that banks can viably provide an array of products designed to fit the peculiarities 
of microfinance clients. 
I can say we are on the right track. The Philippine regulatory framework for microfinance has 
been  consistently  ranked  as  one  of  the  best  in  world  by  the  Economist  Intelligence  Unit 
(EIU). More recently, the EIU ranked the Philippines as the top country in Asia, and the 3rd in 
the world, with the most conducive environment for financial inclusion. 
The EIU further notes that countries like the Philippines with a long tradition of microfinance 
have better institutional and financial infrastructures – which can be leveraged to financially-
include more clients at the “bottom of the pyramid”. 
Back  in  2000  when  the  BSP  started  issuing  microfinance-related  regulations,  hardly  any 
bank  was  into  microfinance.  Today,  we  have  176  thrift  and  rural  banks  serving  over  1.2 
million microfinance clients with outstanding loans of PhP 11.4 billion – or an average of nine 
thousand  five  hundred  pesos.  These  microfinance  loans  now  include  different  types  –  for 
starting and growing microenterprises; for micro-agriculture ventures; and for housing. These 
are all designed for low-income households with varied financing needs. 
At  the  same  time,  microfinance  banks  have  opened  2  million  microdeposit  accounts  with 
nearly four billion pesos in deposits. In addition, 39 banks licensed as microinsurance agents 
are now serving 1.4 million clients. 
Big  banks,  on  the  other  hand,  are  participating  in  the  microfinance  market  by  providing 
wholesale loans to retail MFIs or to MSMEs through their subsidiaries. 
I  am  also  pleased  to  report  the  progress  being  made  by  other  MFIs  outside  the  BSP’s 
supervision  in  moving  the  industry  forward.  Among  others,  a  survey  indicated  that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  (MBOs) 
16 microfinance  NGOs  with  a  combined  network  of  2,190  branches  have  P11.6  billion  in 
outstanding loans served to 2.5 million borrowers – or an average of P4,640.00 per borrower. 
On  the  other  hand,  data  from  the  Cooperative  Development  Authority  (CDA)  indicate  that 
67.9  percent  of  the  10,675  reporting  coops  are  providing  financial  services  to  6.5  million 
members. 
It is clear: there is great potential for MFIs to accelerate the development of microfinance with 
appropriate, effective and responsive services. We have been monitoring this. 
Among  others,  35  banks  have  set  up  517  micro-banking  offices 
in 
334 municipalities; 64 of these municipalities are served only by an MBO. BSP regulations 
issued  in  2010  enabled  the  creation  of  MBOs  –  these  are  small  banking  units  where 
microfinance clients can conveniently access a range of banking services, including loans, 
microdeposits and microinsurance. 
The e-money regulations issued by the BSP in 2009 have also produced positive results: 52 
microfinance  oriented  banks  now  provide  e-banking  and  e-money  services.  They  see  the 
value of e-money as a transactional platform for faster, cost-efficient and convenient transfer 
of funds. Among others, e-money can be used by microfinance clients to purchase goods, 
pay bills or loans, and move value to their deposit accounts. 
Indeed,  the  e-money  ecosystem  offers  opportunities  for  MFIs  as  our  regulatory  framework 
allows  banks  and  non-banks  –  such  as  telco  subsidiaries  and  e-money  agents  –  to 
participate as issuers or delivery channels. 
Today, this ecosystem consists of more than 24,000 agents which complement over 10,000 
banking offices and over 15,000 ATMs as financial service access points. MFIs can tap into 
this  infrastructure,  in  response  to  clients’  need  for  easier  access  and  other  convenient 
functions. 
Please note that the number of e-money accounts opened over a period of five years has 
reached  26.7  million.  This  represents  exponential  growth  compared  with  the  47.4  million 
deposit accounts that took our banks 100 years to generate. 
While e-money accounts are just transactional accounts, it can be the first step or an “on-
ramp” to more valuable financial services such as savings, credit, even microinsurance. 
It is a fact –  MFIs that keep finding ways to serve clients thru efficient, sustainable business 
models can help nurture more successful microentrepreneurs. 
Strong  support  from  public  and  private  sector  partners  can  provide  more  impetus  to  grow 
more success stories in the microfinance sector. 
One prime example is CMA itself, made possible by mutual support and collective diligence 
of the Microfinance Council of the Philippines, Inc. (MCPI), Citibank, Citi Foundation, and the 
BSP itself. At the same time, the participation of distinguished members of the CMA National 
Selection  Committee  provides  prestige  and  valuable  linkages  that  generate  long-term 
benefits for CMA winners. Let’s give them a big hand. 
Networks such as bank associations and cooperative federations also play unique roles in 
providing support to their MFI members. 
The  role  of  media  is  also  important  –  you  raise  public  awareness  of  microfinance,  prompt 
discussions  about  its  promise  and  opportunities,  and  even  make microfinance  a  “trending” 
topic. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  us  keep  in  mind  that  with  appropriate  enabling  regulations, 
responsive  MFI  services,  and  multi-sectoral  support  for  microentrepreneurs,  we  can  help 
improve the lives of millions of Filipinos. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Through our collective efforts, we can help inspire more microentrepreneurs, generate more 
success stories from their ranks, and realize our goal of achieving balanced and sustained 
growth that is truly inclusive. 
Thank you all for joining today’s launch of the 2015 CMA. 
Mabuhay  ang  microfinance  sector!  Mabuhay  ang  ating  mahal  na  bansang  Pilipinas! 
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
