  Jon Nicolaisen: Should banks be bailed out? 
Speech by Mr Jon Nicolaisen, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, Oslo, 14 April 2015. 
 Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
On Sunday, 29 September 2008, two weeks after the bankruptcy of the US investment bank 
Lehman Brothers, the Irish government faced a dilemma: On the following morning, Monday, 
30 September, the debt of a number of Irish banks was falling due, and many of these banks 
could not meet their obligations. Unable to issue new debt in the market, they were in danger 
of failing. 
If the banks were to close, economic activity in Ireland would be crippled. The authorities had 
to act. 
It was not a matter of a trifling amount. At the time, the debt of Irish-owned banks was over 
two times Ireland’s GDP.1 Over half of the banks’ debt had been funded in the market. 
That  evening,  the  Irish  government  decided  to  guarantee  most  of  the  debt  of  Irish-owned 
banks for two years. The government and the Irish people thereby assumed a considerable 
risk. Eventually, the losses at Irish banks also proved to be enormous. Since then, the Irish 
authorities have made capital injections into banks equivalent to around 40 percent of GDP 
to keep the banks running.2  
This is money the Irish government has had to borrow. Along with the downturn that followed 
in the wake of the financial crisis, the Irish bank bailout quadrupled Ireland’s sovereign debt.3 
The interest on the debt is borne by all, rich and poor alike, regardless of who had benefited 
from the pre-crisis economic boom. 
The banking crisis and the government debt led to a deep economic downturn in Ireland. It is 
only now that Ireland has returned to its pre-crisis level of prosperity. But the economic and 
social  consequences  would  probably  have  been  even  more  serious  if  the  banks  had  not 
been kept afloat. 
The  Irish  bank  bailout  illustrates  a  number  of  classic  questions:  Was  it  right  for  the 
government to risk its citizens’ money to rescue the banks? Did the Irish authorities actually 
have  a  choice?  When  things  went  wrong,  was  it  right  to  protect  creditors  as  the  Irish 
authorities ultimately did? How has this affected the future risk taking of the banks’ owners 
and creditors? 
The  answer  to  the  question  of  whether  banks  should  be  rescued  is  about  economics  and 
incentives.  But  the  problems  banks  create  and how  these  problems  are  solved  are  also  a 
matter  of  morals  and  ethics  –  law  and  justice.  Norway  has  also  been  faced  with  these 
problems. 
Why are banks bailed out? 
In 1923, a little more than 90 years ago, there was a banking crisis in Norway. One of the 
banks in serious difficulty was Andresens og Bergens Kreditbank, or Foreningsbanken, as it 
                                                
1  
IMF Country Report No. 15/20. 
2   Schoenmacher Dirk (2015), “Stabilizing and Healing the Irish Banking System: Policy Lessons”, CBI-CEPR-
IMF Conference, Dublin, 15 January 2015. 
IMF Country Report No. 14/165. 
3  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
was also known.4 Losses were considerable, equity had to be written down sharply and the 
bank  needed  fresh  funds  to  stay  afloat.  At  that  time,  Foreningsbanken  was  indisputably 
Norway’s largest bank, with total assets of more than NOK 600 million, equivalent at the time 
to 16 percent of GDP. 
On  behalf  of  the  bank’s  board  of  directors,  the  businessman  and  former  Prime  Minister 
Christian Michelsen argued in favour of a rescue package in negotiations with the authorities. 
Michelsen warned Norges Bank of the problems that would result from allowing the bank to 
fail. Michelsen requested a government guarantee for the bank, or at least a NOK 100 million 
loan. 
There  were  drawn-out  negotiations  between  Norges  Bank,  headed  by  Governor  Nicolai 
Rygg,  and  the  board  of  Foreningsbanken.  The  resumption  of  pre-war  gold  parity,  fiscal 
concerns  and  Norges  Bank’s  financial  position  were  crucial  for  Norges  Bank’s  choice.  But 
Rygg also emphasised the importance of Norges Bank’s not supporting activities that should 
be wound up, activities that he referred to as “unsound lending and non-viable businesses”. 
The negotiations ended with Norges Bank’s refusal to provide support. 
“We’ll survive the bank’s closure too,” Rygg is reported to have said. 
“Even if you’re skinned alive, you’ll still live”, Christian Michelsen responded.5  
In any event, there would be pain. Not long afterwards, Foreningsbanken had to petition to 
be  placed  under  public  administration.  The  bank  Centralbanken  for  Norge  followed  only  a 
few days later and then Handelsbanken. 
Michelsen  was  on  to  a  fundamental  problem.  Banks  have  critical  functions  in  a  modern 
economy.  First,  banks  play  a  key  role  in  the  payment  system.  In  one  way  or  another, 
practically all payments go through banks. Individuals and firms have bank deposits that they 
depend on for making payments. Banks operate payment systems used by shops and other 
businesses.  They  operate  interbank  and  international  payment  systems  and  payment 
systems for securities trading. If payments come to a halt, the economy will seize up. 
Second, banks extend credit: Short-term trade credit and operating credit; long-term loans for 
investing  in  housing,  real  estate  and  businesses.  Without  this  credit,  businesses  and 
investments come to a standstill. 
Banks may be regarded as intermediaries. They channel money from depositors and other 
investors to borrowers. Banks determine who should be given credit and monitor borrowers 
and their projects. Moreover, they do so with considerable efficiency. Thus, depositors and 
investors avoid having to do this job themselves. 
This function makes banks unique: Banks extend long-term credit and raise short-term debt.6 
We  call  this  banks’  maturity  transformation.  But  this  transformation  also  makes  banks 
vulnerable. 
Banks are dependent on public trust. If any doubt arises as to a bank’s ability to service its 
debt, a run on the bank may ensue. Depositors will then try to withdraw their funds before the 
bank runs out of cash and other liquid funds. The bank will in turn be forced to sell its long-
term assets – its loans. This is a slow and loss-generating process. Normally, a bank will fail 
long before it gets that far. 
                                                
4   At that time, Norges Bank had already injected NOK 10 million in share capital as part of a new share issue 
totalling NOK 50 million in autumn 1922 (see Rygg, Nicolai (1950) Norges Bank i mellomkrigstiden [Norges 
Bank in the interwar years], p. 90 (in Norwegian)). 
Ibid, p. 119. 
5  
6   For a description of the relationship between bank lending and deposits, see McLeay et al. (2014), “Money 
creation in the modern economy”, Quarterly Bulletin Q1 2014, Bank of England. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Until  recently,  such  bank  runs  were  usually  associated  with  the  Great  Depression  of  the 
1930s.  That  is,  until  2007,  when  the  UK  bank  Northern  Rock  failed,  with  long  queues  of 
depositors outside its doors. This was a forceful reminder that banks may also be vulnerable 
today. 
The closure of a bank can create fear that also other banks will have to close, and depositors 
and other investors may begin to withdraw their funding from a large number of banks at the 
same time. Problem banks can infect other banks, partly because banks have claims on one 
another. If a large bank should experience difficulties, the contagion to other banks and the 
rest of the economy can be very serious. 
This is called systemic risk. Banks’ activities have considerable externalities.7  
Few  bank  failures  illustrate  this  point  better  than  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  on 
15 September 2008. In the course of the week following the closure of the bank, interbank 
lending  rates  soared.  Banks  distrusted  one  another.  Short-term  funding  markets,  money 
markets, dried up worldwide. US money market funds experienced payment problems. The 
spillovers  spread  throughout  the  financial  system.  One  of  the  world’s  largest  insurance 
companies, AIG, teetered on the edge of bankruptcy. 
To  prevent  the  Lehman  bankruptcy  from  ending  in  the  complete  collapse  of  the  financial 
system, the authorities in a large number of countries took measures on an unprecedented 
scale. Central banks in many countries injected large quantities of liquidity into the banking 
system  to  keep  the  wheels  turning.  The  aim  of  these  measures  was  to  keep  the  banking 
system operating so that the rest of the economy would not be impacted. 
That is why banks are bailed out. The costs associated with closing a bank are largely borne 
by parties other than the bank itself. We bail out banks to prevent systemic crises. We bail 
out banks to limit the substantial damage a deep banking crisis can inflict on the economy. 
Why should banks not be bailed out? 
But it is not that simple. There are also compelling arguments against bank bailouts. 
Most of the government measures in 2008 were targeted at viable banks and were intended 
to prevent the crisis from spreading. Supporting otherwise viable banks in times of financial 
turbulence  may  be  necessary  and  profitable  for  society.  An  interesting  feature  of  the  Irish 
crisis  is  that  this  was  exactly  what  the  authorities  believed  they  were  doing  when  the  first 
guarantees  were  issued.  But  eventually  it  transpired  that  Irish  banks  were  sitting  on  huge 
losses. 
Government support for insolvent banks violates a fundamental principle of economics: We 
should avoid supporting unprofitable activities. We do not rescue a business that is bankrupt. 
Instead, we should allow businesses that are profitable to take over. Over time, this improves 
the conditions for a healthy economy. 
Apportioning  losses  following  a  crisis  may  also  be  viewed  as  a  matter  of  morality  and 
fairness. When the authorities bail out banks, some parties are spared the consequences of 
their own choices. Bailing out investors and owners using public funds conflicts with people’s 
ordinary sense of fairness. 
Moreover, government support for insolvent banks undermines the stability of the financial 
system. When the authorities bail out banks, the banks can transfer their losses to others, 
while reaping the gains in good times. 
                                                
7   A  description  of  externalities  in  the  banking  sector  and  how  they  may  justify  regulation  is  found  in 
Borchgrevink et al. (2012), “Why regulate banks?” Norges Bank Staff Memo 16/2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  When  the  government  assumes  a  substantial  portion  of  bank  risk  in  this  way,  a  problem 
arises that we economists refer to as moral hazard: If there is a widespread perception that 
the authorities in reality stand behind banks, banks may take insufficient account of the risk 
of losses when making decisions. In particular, the risk that things can go horribly wrong may 
be  underestimated,  because  banks  do  not  have  to  bear  the  consequences  of  a  crisis.  By 
bailing out banks, we in turn reduce the motivation of banks’ owners and creditors to take full 
account of the risk associated with their activities. The pricing of risk is easily set too low. 
Banks may therefore end up taking excessive risk. 
Now, the authorities that bail out banks will often require that the former owners forfeit their 
equity. This means that bank owners should, at the outset, have incentives to hedge against 
the risk of large losses. But owners’ risk is limited. It does not cover losses beyond paid-in 
capital.  Owners’  motivation  to  avoid  risk  may  therefore  be  weakened  at  a  bank  with  little 
equity.  The  lower  the  equity  capital  is,  the  more  serious  the  problem  of  moral  hazard 
becomes. 
An interesting feature of the financial crisis was precisely banks’ low pre-crisis equity ratios. 
Many  large  international  banks  operated  with  equity  of  around  three  percent  of  their  total 
portfolios.8 This means that for every dollar or euro the banks owned they invested thirty. It is 
obvious that the risk inherent in such activity may easily become too high. And the solution is 
in itself simple enough: The authorities should require higher equity ratios for banks, so that 
owners must absorb a larger share of the losses if things go wrong. 
Another solution to this might be the one Governor Rygg chose in his day: Close insolvent 
banks and place the losses where they belong. If the authorities intervene and bail out one 
bank, expectations are created that they will also bail out others. We may then end up with a 
system in which banks take excessive risk, potentially increasing the likelihood of new and 
greater banking crises in the future. Therefore, banks should not be bailed out. 
We are facing a dilemma. Bailing out banks increases the risk of instability in the long term. 
Yet  the  cost  of  refraining  is  even  greater  instability  in  the  short  term.  Once  the  crisis  has 
arisen, there is no escaping it. If banks are facing sizeable losses, then someone must bear 
those  losses.  If  we  do  not  allow  the  Treasury  to  bear  the  losses  through  support  for  the 
banks, the populace will still be affected, especially if the consequence is a systemic crisis 
and economic downturn. 
This dilemma is what is called a time-inconsistency problem. In principle, it may be desirable 
to allow insolvent banks to fail, but there will be valid reasons to depart from this principle 
when actually faced with the decision. This means that even if it is the stated intention of the 
authorities to refrain from bailing out banks, this intention will not be particularly credible. 
In other words, and put succinctly: Banks should not be bailed out, but they must be bailed 
out nevertheless. 
Who should be bailed out? 
If  we  must  bail  out  banks  to  avoid  an  economic  breakdown,  the  next  question  is:  Is  there 
anything  we  can  do  to  reduce  the  damage  arising  from  setting  aside  normal  bankruptcy 
rules? The question becomes how, rather than whether, banks should be bailed out. Or more 
directly: Who should be bailed out? 
                                                
8  
IMF Global Financial Stability Report, October 2008, contains averages for leverage ratios of both commercial 
banks and investment banks. Morris, Steven and Shin, Hyun Song (2008), “Financial Regulation in a Systemic 
Context”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2008 (Fall 2008), pp. 229–261 reports figures for the 
large US investment banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is a critical function for a bank to accept and provide access to deposits. Depositors must 
have confidence that their deposits are safe. Arrangements that guarantee deposits and the 
ability of solid banks to meet their obligations stabilise banks and support a socially beneficial 
activity. Such measures are intended to reduce banks’ susceptibility to panicky withdrawals. 
Moreover,  ordinary  considerations  of  fairness  dictate  that  small  depositors  should  be 
protected.  Some  form  of  deposit  guarantee  for  limited  amounts  has  therefore  become 
common in most western countries. 
At the other end of the scale, we find bank owners – the shareholders. It seems reasonable, 
and in keeping with general perceptions of fairness, to allow shareholders to lose the equity 
they have paid into the bank when an insolvent bank must be taken over by the authorities. 
Moreover,  allowing  shareholders  to  bear  losses  will  not  result  in  the  closure  of  the  bank, 
since shareholders are not able to withdraw their capital. 
The current debate is focused on how creditors other than small depositors should be treated 
– the extent to which funding obtained in the market is to be guaranteed if banks fail. 
In this area, headway has been made in the years following the financial crisis, especially in 
Europe. However, how creditors can be made to pay when banks suffer losses – and exactly 
which  creditors can  be made  to  pay  without  triggering crises  are  not  simple questions. To 
elucidate this, let me begin with Norwegian legislation as it currently stands. 
Guarantee Schemes Act 
It is barely 24 years since the largest banks in Norway were on their knees. On 17 October 
1991, Finance Minister Sigbjørn Johnsen addressed the Storting (Norwegian Parliament) on 
the Government’s extraordinary measures aimed at the banking industry. By then the second 
largest bank, Kreditkassen, had lost more than its equity capital, and it quickly transpired that 
the other two large commercial banks were not in much better shape. Johnsen underscored 
the  seriousness  of  the  potential  consequences  for  the  Norwegian  economy  if  the 
Government did not intervene resolutely in the crisis:9  
“The gravity of the situation is simply this: A collapse of the banks will also break 
the  backbone  of  the  Norwegian  economy.  If  we  do  not  implement  extensive 
measures now, a good many ordinary people may lose their savings.” 
But  the  Minister  of  Finance  made  an  important  reservation.  In  the  same  account,  he  also 
stated that the banks’ owners could not expect to escape unscathed: 
“At the same time, the instruments are designed so that banks themselves will 
have  a  principal  responsibility  for  solving  their  financial  problems.  They will  not 
simply be able to send the bill for their misjudgements to the government.” 
That was also the case in practice. The shares in banks that lost all their equity capital were 
written  down  to  zero,  in  line  with  the  principles  pertaining  to  the  bankruptcy  of  other 
enterprises.  The  capital  injections  banks  received  were  made  on  the  condition  that  they 
restored  order  to  their  organisations  while  cutting  unnecessary  costs.  In  other  words:  we 
bailed out the financial system, but not the banks’ owners. On the other hand, practically no 
creditors lost their assets, even in the banks that had lost more than their equity. Creditors 
were bailed out through the government’s recapitalisation of the failed banks. 
In the aftermath of the crisis, the Banking Law Commission was tasked with drafting a new 
law  on  crisis  resolution.  In  1996,  the  Bank  Guarantee  Schemes  Act  was  passed,  which 
continues to be current Norwegian law. The act makes it possible to write down equity capital 
and force banks to issue new shares to the government, enabling them to be nationalised. 
                                                
9   Forhandlinger i Stortinget [Proceedings of the Storting] No. 18, 17 October 1991: Address by the Minister of 
Finance on the situation at Kreditkassen etc. (in Norwegian). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Subordinated debt – debt instruments with characteristics similar to equity capital – is to be 
written down in proportion to banks’ losses. In this way, banks can continue operating under 
government  ownership.  Should  a  bank  nevertheless  be  closed,  deposits  of  up  to 
NOK 2 million per depositor are guaranteed by the Norwegian Banks’ Guarantee Fund. 
For a long time, this was one of the world’s most modern bank resolution laws and Norway 
weathered the crisis in 2008 better than most countries. Moreover, Norwegian banks have 
probably also drawn lessons from the banking crisis of the 1990s. Norwegian banks had via 
that  crisis  gained  greater  insight  into  crisis  risk  than  banks  in  many  other  countries  had 
before  the  global  financial  crisis  erupted  in  2007.  Managements  and  boards  of  Norwegian 
banks were probably also more conscious of their social responsibility than those in many so 
called leading financial centres elsewhere in the world. 
But  the  Bank  Guarantee  Schemes  Act  does  not  provide  for  the  imposition  of  losses  on 
creditors who have made ordinary loans to banks, without, in practice, closing the bank. 
EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive 
Just as the banking crisis led to Norway’s Bank Guarantee Schemes Act, the financial crisis 
gave rise to a new EU framework for crisis resolution. In January 2015, the Bank Recovery 
and Resolution Directive entered into force.10 The aim of the directive is to enable insolvent 
banks to be resolved in a manner that ensures continuity of their critical functions, but without 
banks necessarily receiving public funds. The authorities are empowered to take control of a 
bank that is insolvent, or is at risk of becoming insolvent, and ensure that critical functions 
continue without bailing out shareholders and creditors. 
A new tool will make this possible. Beginning in 2016, national authorities in Europe will be 
able to write down and convert liabilities to equity while a troubled bank is kept open. The 
value of the bank’s assets is to be calculated and losses apportioned in accordance with the 
order  of  priority  of  claims.  If  the  bank  does  not  have  sufficient  equity,  liabilities  will  be 
converted to share capital. 
This  tool  is  called  bail-in.11  [Bail-in  requires  that  creditors,  and  not  the  authorities,  initially 
cover  losses  in  excess  of  equity.  Creditor  claims  are  converted  into  equity  to  ensure 
continued operation. Short-term liabilities and secured deposits are exempted. It is primarily 
long-term  liabilities  not  backed  by  certain  assets  or  guarantee  arrangements  that  will  be 
eligible for bail-in.12 Long-term creditors will then have to take account in advance of the real 
risk  inherent  in  the  bank  they  fund.  This  should  also  result  in  risk  being  priced  into  these 
loans to banks. 
Creditors  have  been  written  down  while  a  bank  was  kept  open.  On  5  February  2011,  the 
Danish  resolution  authority  Finansiel  Stabilitet  A/S  took  control  of  Amagerbanken,  a  mid-
sized Danish bank.13 All equity was written down to zero, and non-guaranteed deposits and 
wholesale funding were initially written down by nearly half of their original value. This was 
done  over  a  weekend.  On  Monday  morning,  the  online  banking  service  was  open  and  all 
                                                
10   The  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  may  be 
content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:32014L0059. 
found  at  http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
11   A more detailed description of the rules for bail-in and how it works is found in Vale, Bent (2014), “Kriseløsing 
av banker ved hjelp av bail-in – momenter ved innføring i Norge” [Bank resolution with the aid of bail-ins – 
factors associated with introduction in Norway], Norges Bank Staff Memo 12/2014 (in Norwegian). 
12   In addition, a number of other types of liabilities are exempted, such as covered bonds, accrued but unpaid 
salary, taxes payable and liabilities to ordinary commercial suppliers of goods and services necessary for the 
daily functioning of the bank. 
13   A detailed description of the resolution of Amagerbanken is found in the Finansiel Stabilitet A/S Annual Report 
for 2011 (in Danish). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  depositors  obtained  access  to  their  remaining  deposits.  The  bank  was  kept  open  as  a 
subsidiary  of  Finansiel  Stabilitet  A/S.  The  bank’s  critical  functions  were  kept  running. 
Shareholders and unsecured creditors were not bailed out. Over time, the creditors who were 
not covered by the deposit guarantee were paid back around 85 percent of the value of their 
original claims. The value of the bank’s assets was preserved to a larger extent than if the 
bank had been wound up. 
Danish banks’ funding costs rose following the resolution of Amagerbanken. However, it did 
not trigger a systemic crisis in the Danish banking sector, despite its occurrence in the middle 
of the European debt crisis. What the Danes got was a pricing of the true risk in their banks. 
Over time, this provides a basis for a less risky financial system. 
Bail-in may nevertheless be difficult to implement. Bail-in of a large bank, that is a bank with 
substantial liabilities, will inflict losses on a large number of creditors. That is the intention. 
But  if  these  liabilities  are  owned  by  institutions  that  are  critical  to  the  functioning  of  the 
financial system, the problems in one bank can spread quickly. If the losses are substantial, 
the authorities run the risk of triggering a systemic crisis. Moreover, bail-in of creditors may 
make  funding  more  expensive  for  other  banks,  particularly  in  turbulent  times.  For  large, 
systemically  important  banks,  the  time-inconsistency  problem  remains.  This  weakens  the 
credibility of the bail-in regime. 
Therefore, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive also provides for measures intended 
to  bolster  credibility.  An  important  measure  is  that  national  authorities  are  to  prepare 
resolution plans for individual banks. The authorities are to devise a strategy in advance for 
managing the bank if it is danger of failing. If the bank is large and important, there is to be a 
plan to ensure continued operation. 
If the bank is so large and complex that it probably cannot be resolved without the use of 
public funds, it can be restructured. The resolution authority can demand that complex parts 
of the institution be transferred to separate subsidiaries. As a last resort, the authorities can 
demand that large banks be broken up into several smaller ones. 
There should also be a  plan for how continued  operations can be funded. All systemically 
important  banks  in  Europe  shall  hold  a  minimum  amount  of  liabilities  that  can  quickly  be 
bailed-in. This entails a limit on the share of short-term and secured debt banks may issue. 
The  authorities  must  also  ensure that  large  banks  and  systemically  important  investors  do 
not invest too much in other banks’ risky debt. 
This is a new perspective on banks’ funding structure. In the future, banks will have to ensure 
that portions of their liabilities can quickly be written down and converted to equity. 
Bail-in as an instrument will be implemented in the EU on 1 January 2016, a year after the 
rest of the Directive. The Directive must be followed up in Norway under the EEA Agreement. 
Norway’s  own  bank  resolution  legislation  must  be  updated.  As  regards  the  Norwegian 
framework, the new elements are in particular the requirements for resolution plans and bail-
in. Otherwise, a large part of the framework is already in place. 
We  will  probably  never  entirely  solve  time  inconsistency.  There  may  still  be  creditors  who 
count on being bailed out. Owners with little at stake may take on excessive risk. One of the 
most important things we do, therefore, is to ensure that banks are solid. 
This  has  two  important  effects.  First,  the  obvious  one:  Higher  capital  ratios  reduce  the 
probability  that  banks  will  experience  a  crisis.  Banks  will  be  able  to  absorb  larger  losses 
before  encountering  problems.  But  as  I  touched  on  earlier,  higher  capital  ratios  also  have 
long-term  effects  on  owners  and  bank  behaviour:  The  more  equity  a  bank  has,  the  more 
capital owners stand to lose. They will have a stronger motivation to ensure that the bank 
operates prudently. 
Capital  ratios  at  Norwegian  banks  are  generally  somewhat  higher  than  at  banks  in  other 
European countries, which is a good thing. The plan to gradually increase Norwegian banks’ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  capital requirements as laid down in 2013 will continue until July 2016. The minimum risk-
weighted equity ratio for systemically important banks in Norway will then be 13 percent. 
What should be done? 
So what are the lessons we have drawn? 
Banks should not be bailed out, but banks’ functions must be bailed out. If not, all economic 
activity will be affected. We will bail out the small depositors – that is both profitable and fair. 
We  should  not  bail  out  all  creditors.  If  the  equity  capital  in  bank  is  lost,  long-term  lenders 
should also bear losses. The new tools that have now been introduced in Europe will ensure 
that this happens. Norwegian legislation must be updated in line with the new directive. This 
will improve the pricing of risk in the banking system. 
We will not bail out the shareholders. Ultimately, bank owners and management must ensure 
that  banks  are  run  prudently.  It  is  crucial  that  they  are  aware  of  their  responsibilities.  We 
cannot  regulate  banks  to  death.  I  am  confident  that  owners  and  managers  of  Norwegian 
banks will act responsibly. 
At the same time, banks must be regulated. Capital requirements must be high and we must 
ensure that banks are solid and well-run. This will reduce the risk of a systemic crisis. This 
will  also  give  banks’  owners  a  stronger  motive  to  take  account  of  long-term  risk.  Banks 
themselves and Finanstilsynet (Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway) have done a good 
job to ensure a solid Norwegian banking sector, so that the authorities avoid having to bail 
out banks. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
