  Jens Weidmann: Responsibility and liability in a monetary union 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  a  conference, 
organised by the Consiglio Regionale del Veneto, Venice, 5 February 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Mr Ruffato, Mr Palermo, Ladies and gentlemen. 
It’s a pleasure for me to be here in beautiful Venice to share some thoughts with you during 
today’s conference. My thoughts today will focus primarily on Europe in general and on the 
European monetary union in particular. Let me start off by referring to a specific European 
anniversary that lies ahead. 
The Schuman Declaration – almost 65 years later 
1.1 
Almost 65 years ago – more precisely, on 9 May 1950 – then French Foreign Minister Robert 
Schuman  put  forward  a  proposal  which  became  known  as  the  Schuman  Declaration.  It 
proposed creating a European Coal and Steel Community, whose members would pool their 
production of coal and steel. 
The  Coal  and  Steel  Community  was  the  first  of  a  series  of  supranational  European 
institutions which would ultimately become the “European Union” of today. For this reason, 
the date of the Schuman Declaration is commemorated each year as “Europe Day”. 
Back  then,  the  Schuman  Declaration  stated  that  “Europe  will  not  be  made  all  at  once,  or 
according to a single plan. It will be built through concrete achievements ...” As we know with 
the benefit of hindsight, this statement predicted with remarkable accuracy how Europe has 
evolved over the past six decades and more. 
Indeed,  since  Robert  Schuman’s  statement  there  have  been  outstanding  political  and 
economic achievements in Europe which are unprecedented when viewed from a historical 
perspective. These achievements have enhanced mutual understanding within Europe and 
safeguarded  peace  and  freedom  among  an  ever-growing  number  of  countries  that  have 
become part of the European Union. 
Of  these  achievements,  the  European  monetary  union  (EMU)  is  likely  to  be  the  most 
outstanding,  not  least  because  our  common  currency  is  probably  more  tangible  than  any 
other  European  project. Banknotes  and  coins  bearing the  European flag  and  circulating  in 
19 EMU member states can literally be seen as “Europe in everyone’s pocket”. 
However, one should be fair: due to the crisis in the euro area, scepticism has grown among 
the populations of some member countries as to the advantages of both the European Union 
and our common currency. 
I  sincerely  hope  that  this  kind  of  “Europe  fatigue”  will  be  overcome  in  the  future.  This  will 
surely be easier if we tackle head on the difficult economic situation facing some euro-area 
countries today. 
It is also important to bear in mind that both a stable euro area and a stable euro are, overall, 
beneficial to all member states – not just to a few, as some critics claim. 
For instance, the common currency eliminates the exchange rate risk for goods and services 
traded  within  the  euro  area,  which facilitates  businesses’  price  calculations  with  respect to 
both  imports  and  exports.  Furthermore,  the  euro  increases  price  transparency  and  allows 
easier price comparisons on the euro area’s internal market. 
As a result, the euro leads to higher competition within the euro area. Competition, in turn, is 
a  prerequisite  for  economic  prosperity,  mainly  because  it  drives  both  productivity  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  innovation. If national governments create an environment in which entrepreneurial activity 
and  inventive  spirit  can  unfold,  then,  at  the  same  time,  intensified  competition  offers 
consumers a much broader range of goods and services to choose from. 
Finally, the euro, as a stable currency, is without doubt beneficial to all inhabitants of the euro 
area.  Prices  which  are  predominantly  stable  are  beneficial  particularly  to  the  socially 
deprived, who are unable to protect themselves from inflation. 
Ladies and gentlemen, despite these economic considerations, it is clear to me that Europe 
and the monetary union have always been more of a political project than an economic one. 
The  overwhelming  European  solidarity  with  the  French  people  after  the  hideous  terrorist 
attacks  in  Paris  have  impressively  shown  that  the  Europe  of  today  is  the  result  of  shared 
values  with regard to human rights, democracy and the rule of law, to name just the most 
essential ones. 
I am quite confident that common values will help us to proceed towards a more prosperous 
European monetary union. In the end, however, political determination cannot compensate 
for the need to pay due attention to economic laws. Economic convergence, competitiveness 
and  sound  public  finances  are,  among  other  things,  of  the  utmost  importance  as 
preconditions of a stable monetary union. And such a stability union, in turn, is a prerequisite 
for the public acceptance of European integration in the long run. 
During my talk, I would like to focus on those aspects of the European monetary union which 
are especially important in terms of making it more stable and prosperous. 
2. 
Individual fiscal responsibility of member states as the fundamental concept 
of EMU 
Asymmetry between monetary and fiscal policy 
2.1 
In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  recall  the  set-up  of  the  European  monetary  union.  It  is 
remarkable  for  its  asymmetry:  whereas  monetary  policy  has  been  communitised  at  the 
European level, fiscal policy has remained a matter of national responsibility. 
This is by no means a bad thing in itself, as it does have lots of merits. In particular, it grants 
member  states  sufficient  leeway  to  preserve  their  diversity,  that  is,  to  establish  their  own 
business  models  or  to  tailor  economic  and  social  institutions  and  policies  to  their  own 
national preferences. 
But to make sure that such an asymmetrical set-up of a centralised, single monetary policy 
and  decentralised  fiscal  policies  works  well,  fiscal  discipline  is  absolutely  essential.  Past 
experiences have shown that monetary unions are rather like any normal family – if there is a 
quarrel, then it will be about money. 
This becomes particularly relevant as the set-up of the European monetary union can further 
compound the tendency of governments to finance their spending through debt because the 
consequence  of  bad  policy  choices  can  more  easily  be  externalised  to  neighbouring 
countries. 
In  addition,  if  market  participants  tend  to  see  the  monetary  union  as  a  system  of  mutual 
financial assistance in the event of serious trouble, doubts about a country’s solvency could 
spread more quickly to the other member states. 
This is why common fiscal rules are an integral part of the Treaty establishing the monetary 
union. ECB president Mario Draghi once aptly summed up the rationale behind these rules 
as  follows:  “The  consequences  of  misguided  fiscal  policies  in  a  monetary  union  are  too 
severe to remain self-policed.” 
The importance of sound fiscal policies from the perspective of a central banker also stems 
from the ability of monetary policy to accommodate high levels of public debt. This, however, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  could  threaten  price  stability  in  the  longer  run.  Thus,  the  higher  public  debt  becomes,  the 
greater the pressure that might be applied to monetary policy to respond accordingly. 
This once prompted Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, to quip that: 
“Central banks are often accused of being obsessed with inflation. This is untrue. If they are 
obsessed  with  anything,  it  is  with  fiscal  policy.”  This  “obsession”  holds  even  truer  for  a 
stability-oriented central bank within a monetary union. 
Against this backdrop and in order to keep monetary union on track despite these dangers, 
the founders of the European monetary union drew up the fiscal rules enshrined in both the 
Maastricht criteria and the Stability and Growth Pact. 
The Stability and Growth Pact is not the only safeguard against excessive government debt, 
however.  The  second  one  is  the  rule  that  member  states  remain  fully  responsible  for  the 
consequences of their own autonomous fiscal decisions. In other words, making a decision 
autonomously – which means being in control of it – and, at the same time, being liable for 
the  consequences  are  two  sides  of  the  same  coin.  This  nexus  can  be  referred  to  as  the 
liability principle or the principle of individual responsibility. 
The liability principle is simple and straightforward, but at the same time, it is of fundamental 
importance,  as  it fosters  responsible  behaviour  and  prudent  decisions  that  do  not  produce 
results  that  come  at  the  expense  of  others.  This  will  be  a  well-known  truth  for  all  the 
entrepreneurs among you. 
The  liability  principle  is  a  constituent  element  of  a  market  economy.  It  also  implies  that 
enterprises  must  be  allowed  to  fail  and,  in  consequence,  to  exit  the  market.  The  US 
economist  Allan  Meltzer  once  put  this  idea  as  follows:  “Capitalism  without  failure  is  like 
religion without sin. It doesn’t work.” 
In  the  context  of  European  monetary  union,  the  liability  principle  is  the  reason  why  the 
Maastricht  Treaty  explicitly  rules  out  the  assumption  of  any  member  state’s  debt  by  the 
European Union or by other member states – that’s the so-called “no bail-out” clause – or 
even by the Eurosystem, which would constitute prohibited monetary financing. 
Only  a  credible  no  bail-out  clause  and  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  enforce  the 
liability principle, which itself is the cornerstone of market discipline. And market discipline is, 
in addition to the fiscal rules, the second safeguard of sound public finances in a monetary 
union. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as we have seen, however, all the precautionary measures did not 
prevent public debt from rising and the sovereign debt crisis from materialising. 
In  this  crisis  situation,  only  the  European  fiscal  rescue  packages  and  the  Eurosystem’s 
stabilising  measures  prevented  the  crisis  from  escalating.  Nevertheless,  these  crisis 
measures  permanently  weakened  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility.  In  other  words: 
although the rescue measures helped to stabilise the euro area, they caused a redistribution 
of  risk  and  put  elements  of  mutualised  liability  in  place.  As  a  result,  while  fiscal  policy 
decisions are ultimately still made at the national level, joint liability has been considerably 
expanded. 
This imbalance, however, undermines the idea of individual fiscal responsibility, and with it, 
the necessary foundation for a stable and prosperous monetary union. 
Strengthening the liability principle as the way forward 
2.2 
The  key  question  now,  therefore,  is  how  the  framework  of  monetary  union  needs  to  be 
changed to provide the common currency with a more solid base in terms of public finances. 
It is in this context that calls for a true fiscal union or, as the ultimate consequence, a true 
political union are often put forward as a way to make the European monetary union more 
stable.  It  was  the  former  German  chancellor  Helmut  Kohl  who  famously  told  German 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  parliament in 1991: “It is absurd to expect in the long run that you can maintain economic 
and monetary union without political union.” 
Indeed,  the  idea  of  a  fiscal  union  completes  the  monetary  union  in  the  sense  that  it  puts 
individual responsibility and liability in balance. If common European debt were matched by 
common European control of public expenditure, incentives could be aligned. 
Nevertheless, a genuine fiscal union would require member states to cede sovereignty – in 
particular, budgetary control and intervention rights – to the European level. Looking at the 
current  national  discussions  in  the  European  states,  I  doubt  that  the  electorates  or  the 
governments  and  parliaments  would  be  willing  to  take  this  leap  –  either  now  or  in  the 
foreseeable future – despite the common values I have just mentioned. 
And the decision of the newly elected Greek government to stop cooperating with the Troika 
shows how unpopular sharing sovereignty rights with foreign creditors is, even in cases in 
which national expenditures are largely dependent on external financial help. It shows how 
difficult it is politically to accept European influence on national economic policy. 
But then, because a true fiscal union – which would also require extensive changes to the 
European  Treaties  –  seems  not  to  be  on  the  cards,  we  should  be  careful  not  to  take  the 
second  step  before  the  first:  we  should  not  broaden  joint  liability  before  ceding  budgetary 
sovereignty. 
To cut a long story short, I see no viable alternative to reinforcing the original set-up of the 
monetary union. This means that we have to strengthen the incentives to stick to the fiscal 
rules, and we have to  make sure that the disciplining effect of the financial markets is not 
weakened. 
One  thing  we  have  learned  from  other  common  currency  areas  with  autonomous  fiscal 
policies  –  like  Switzerland  or  even  Germany  –  is  the  need  for  effective  fiscal  rules. 
Experience in Germany shows that fiscal rules that are not implemented strictly enough are 
unable to prevent excessive indebtedness of at least some of the German federal states. In 
this context, State Secretary Weyland from the German federal state of Hesse will, during the 
course of this symposium, shed some more light on certain aspects of the financial relations 
within the German federal system. 
And if we look closely at Switzerland, we find that stricter cantonal debt brakes prove to be 
more effective – the debt brake being in any case quite a strict form of fiscal rule. However, 
in this context, one has to bear in mind a key component of Swiss fiscal policy: the principle 
of  direct  democracy.  This  concept  gives  the  general  public  a  say  in  fiscal  decisions, 
especially  at  the  cantonal  and  local  government  level,  and  studies  suggest  that  cantonal 
referendums  tend  to  curb  spending.  One  lesson  the  euro  area  can  learn  from  the  Swiss 
experience is this: if direct democracy as a safeguard for responsible fiscal policy decisions 
is not given, fiscal rules have to be stricter. 
With  respect  to  the  European  situation  and  in  order  to  reinforce  the  liability  principle,  the 
euro-area member states have already tightened the ground rules by rolling out the revised 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  Fiscal  Compact,  making  it  much  more  difficult  now  for 
finance  ministers  to  turn  down  the  European  Commission’s  recommendations.  The 
Commission therefore plays a central role given its important responsibility in enforcing the 
fiscal rules. 
The tougher fiscal rules are heading in the right direction, but they must now be implemented 
as  well.  Unfortunately,  the  rules  have  latterly  become  significantly  more  complex.  A  great 
deal of scope for interpretation and discretion has now been opened up. This is in contrast to 
one of the leading ideas regarding the stiffening of the rules, namely that the imposition of 
sanctions under the Excessive Deficit Procedure should be “semi-automatic” in future. 
Moreover,  greater  emphasis  has  recently  been  placed  on  the  use  of  “flexibility”.  And  the 
European Commission’s comments three weeks ago with regard to its future interpretation of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  fiscal  rules  unfortunately  indicate  that  these  tendencies  are  likely  to  become  even 
stronger. 
For example, in future, the Commission even plans to broaden its acceptance of investment 
and structural reforms as an excuse for weaker consolidation efforts. In the end, however, 
the binding effect of the rules is likely to be diluted further instead of being strengthened, and 
sound  fiscal  policy  is  more  likely  than  ever  to  take  a  back  seat  to  other  political 
considerations. 
But sound public finances are by no means at odds with robust and sustainable economic 
growth:  quite  the  opposite  is  true.  Sound  public  finances  in  conjunction  with  structural 
reforms are a key precondition for growth. 
The  reason  is  that  people’s  concerns  about  an  increasing  debt  burden  and  ensuing 
adjustment  needs  in  the  future  will  affect  their  spending  and  investment  today.  Thus,  it  is 
important  that  governments  adhere  to  the  consolidation  plans  they  announced.  This  will 
inspire confidence, which is an important prerequisite for the economy to grow. 
As Jean-Claude Trichet once said: “When you’ve lost confidence, when households have no 
trust, when businesses have no trust, when savers have no trust, then the best way to find 
growth and jobs is to recreate confidence.” 
In my view, this is true not just for the countries at the heart of the crisis. Thus, my appeal for 
consolidation does not stem from a desire to punish past sins. Rather, the goal should be to 
make  all  euro-area  countries  stronger,  to  regain  fiscal  and  economic  policy  scope  for  the 
future and to be better able to cushion adverse cyclical developments. 
In  the  current  context  some  critics  claim  that  such  a  stability-oriented  fiscal  policy  was 
choking  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area.  However,  the  fiscal  policy  stance  in  EMU  is 
expected to be broadly neutral in the years 2014 to 2016, not restrictive. Therefore, adhering 
to the fiscal rules would only imply a very moderate tightening but it would offer a chance of a 
massive gain in credibility. 
Ladies and gentlemen, besides this, regulatory changes should also be considered in order 
to  make  the  liability  principle  more  effective.  The  euro-area  crisis  has  shown  that  failing 
banks and stumbling states pulled each other down. 
Yet,  until  now,  the  insolvency  of  governments  and  systemically  important  banks  has 
practically not been permitted because of the – probably quite realistic – fear that this would 
threaten the stability of the financial system throughout the entire euro area. 
So what needs to be done is to break the potentially disastrous sovereign-bank nexus. Only 
this would ensure that sovereigns and banks can fail without creating a systemic risk for the 
financial system. And in this respect, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has an 
important role to play. 
First, it tightened the capital rules for banks, which are designed to enhance financial sector 
resilience  and  so  naturally  contribute  to  achieving  this  goal.  Second,  it  has  to  change  the 
regulatory  treatment  of sovereign  bonds  –  a  topic  which  is  now  on  the  Basel  Committee’s 
work programme. 
Why would this be an important step forward? Because it would help to enforce the credibility 
of the no bail-out clause. 
The  international  capital  rules  stipulate  that  government  bonds  issued  by  developed 
countries in their own currency be valued as risk-free assets. This means that banks do not 
have to back them with capital, and that large exposure limits are not in place for government 
bonds. 
This  preferential  treatment  of  government  bonds  as  opposed  to  loans  to  businesses  or 
households  has  made  banks  in  crisis-hit  countries  invest  massively  in  sovereign  bonds  of 
their  own  country  instead  of  providing  credit  to  the  private  sector.  Furthermore,  this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  preferential treatment of government bonds robs the no bail-out rule in the Maastricht Treaty, 
even today, of some of its credibility. 
And finally, the experience with Greece, amplified by the current discussions, shows that the 
underlying assumption of government bonds being risk-free is false. 
Undisputedly,  putting  an  end  to  zero-risk  weighting  and,  in  particular,  applying  a  large 
exposures  regime  to  sovereign  bonds  could  give  rise  to  substantial  repercussions.  These 
repercussions,  however,  would  be  manageable  if  they  were  phased  in  over  a  transitional 
period – which would undoubtedly need to be granted. 
Individual national responsibility also applies to economic policy 
3. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  concept  of  autonomous  decision-making  at  the  level  of  EMU 
member states does not apply only to their fiscal policies, but to their economic policies as 
well.  And  rightly  so.  Member  states  know  best  what  kind  of  economic  initiatives  suit  their 
national preferences. 
Notwithstanding joint initiatives at the EU level to foster growth, in the end it is primarily the 
task  of  each  individual  member  state  to  make  its  economy  competitive,  to  spur  economic 
growth and to facilitate job creation – not only in its own interest but also in the interest of the 
whole monetary union. 
In my view, all euro-area member states are responsible for ensuring that their economies 
are in good shape and are able to live up to the challenges that result from their euro-area 
membership. This also implies sufficient leeway to absorb economic shocks without risking 
the sustainability of public debt or ending in high rates of unemployment. 
With respect to shock resilience, studies have shown that a deeper integration of European 
capital  markets  could  also  make  a  key  contribution  to  improving  the  absorption  of 
macroeconomic  shocks  and  the  impact  of  heterogeneous  economic  developments  in  the 
euro area. The more the capital markets exercise this buffer function, the less fiscal policy is 
needed to stabilise the economy, which has a knock-on impact on government debt. 
Most important is a more integrated capital market for equity. This would make it easier for 
companies  to  find  investors.  New,  innovative  firms,  in  particular,  need  better  access  to 
equity.  This  is  where  the  venture  capital  market  comes  into  play.  For  the  venture  capital 
model to work, however, there has to be a minimum market size so that investments can be 
spread among a sufficiently large number of start-ups. 
But in Europe, the markets for venture capital have been segmented along national borders. 
While the Single Market Act of 2011 set out to harmonise venture capital regulations and to 
create  a  more  integrated  market,  many  areas  relevant  to  venture  capital  funds,  such  as 
investor protection and insolvency law, remain fragmented. This issue needs to be resolved 
– and it would come without imposing a financial burden on European countries. 
Conversely, in the event that a company were to fail, the loss would be spread throughout 
the  euro  area.  Studies  for  the  US  show  that  this  regional  distribution  effect  is  much  more 
important than fiscal policy measures. 
Ladies and gentlemen, you might remember that not so long ago, Germany was labelled “the 
sick  man  of  Europe”,  not  least  because  of  its  weak  economic  growth  and  high  level  of 
persistent structural unemployment. Other euro-area countries rightly expected Germany to 
set about resolving its economic problems. But unsurprisingly, the enacted reforms did not 
restore full employment overnight. 
The conclusion to be drawn from the German labour market experience is that implementing 
reforms requires quite some perseverance, but efforts do finally pay off – overcoming a crisis 
is  more  of  a  marathon  than  a  sprint.  The  same  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  the  reform 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  measures which have been put in place in Spain and Ireland, for example, over the past few 
years. 
However,  it  should  be  noted  that,  despite  the  improvements  in  the  past  decade,  not  all 
economic  challenges  in  Germany  have  been  eliminated.  For  example,  even  though  the 
employment  level  continues  to  rise,  it  is  still  clear  that  the  number  of  employed  people  in 
Germany  will  decrease  due  to  a  strong  demographic  effect.  That’s  why  it  is  essential  that 
economic  policy  in  Germany  carries  on  striving  to  further  enhance  the  labour  market,  and 
does not take today’s favourable employment situation for granted and reverse past reforms. 
Policies in Germany, like the option of long-term contribution payers drawing a full pension at 
the age of 63, do not only pose an additional financial burden on the pension system, which 
will have to cope with mounting demographic pressure pretty soon. Such policies might also 
reduce  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  German  economy  due  to  adverse  effects  on  the 
supply of skilled labour. 
Ladies and gentlemen, just as Germany is rightly asked by its European partners to resolve 
its  economic  problems,  all  the  other  euro-area  member  states  are  responsible  for  their 
economies, too. 
Because  the  economic  problem  differs from  one  country  to  the  next,  tailored  and  country-
specific  solutions  need  to  be  found  for  each  individual  country’s  problems.  And  it  is  up  to 
governments,  parliaments  and  their  advisors  to  assess  what  can  be  learned  from  other 
countries’ experiences. 
The  labour  market  reforms  in  Italy  and  Spain,  for  example,  seek  to  reduce  labour  market 
segmentation so as to prevent workers on temporary contracts from having to bear the brunt 
of the adjustment during the economic downturn. 
Indeed,  when  exploring  avenues  to  make  labour  markets  more  flexible  and  efficient,  the 
Nobel Prize-winning labour economist Chris Pissarides points in the right direction when he 
states:  “Protect  workers,  not  jobs.”  In  other  words,  less  stringent  employment  protection 
coupled  with  adequate  financial  support  in  the  event  of  job  loss  is  likely  to  reduce  overall 
unemployment, while still shielding workers against the vagaries of the market. 
these 
Prime  Minister  Renzi’s  reform  agenda 
labour  market 
considerations into account, and his efforts to establish a single labour contract, among other 
things, deserve every support. Passing the relevant law and the thorough implementation of 
the envisaged measures will now be of crucial importance. 
Italian 
takes 
the 
for 
The role of monetary policy 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, for quite some time now, the Eurosystem’s monetary policy has been 
pretty much at the centre of public attention amid the search for a solution to the euro area’s 
debt  and  unemployment  crisis.  However,  nobody  should  be  under  any  illusions  that  the 
Eurosystem  can  solve  the  severe  structural  difficulties  the  euro  area  is  facing.  Structural 
problems require a response in the form of structural measures. 
In other words: as monetary policy simply does not have the necessary instruments at hand, 
it remains primarily the task of economic policy to provide lasting solutions to the deep-rooted 
debt and unemployment crisis. There is still truth in what Wim Duisenberg, the first President 
of the ECB, once said: “Don’t ask for monetary policy to perform tricks it cannot deliver.” 
Two  weeks  ago,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  embarked  on  additional  measures  to 
further  loosen  its  monetary  policy  stance  and  announced  the  launch  of  an  extended  asset 
purchase  programme,  commonly  referred  to  as  quantitative  easing.  As  you  know,  I  am 
sceptical about this decision. 
I thought that there was no urgent need for this measure – not least because government 
bond purchases are not a monetary policy instrument like our policy rates, for instance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  It is true that inflation in the euro area has been very low for quite some time now, and the 
outlook for inflation is weak. However, the low level of inflation is mainly due to sharply falling 
energy  prices,  notably  the  plummeting  oil  price.  This  should  not  be  confused  with  a  self-
reinforcing  deflation  and  its  negative  consequences.  The  risk  of  broad-based  deflation 
continues to be very limited. 
The decline in oil prices works rather like an economic stimulus to the euro area, not like a 
harbinger of an imminent deflationary threat, as the lower oil price reduces the energy bills of 
both  households  and  businesses.  It  therefore  frees  up  financial  means  which  can  now  be 
used for other purposes – for consumption, investment or the reduction of debt. All of this is 
good for the economies of the euro-area countries. 
Without signs of second-round effects – and I do not see any – monetary policy need not 
take steps to counter the favourable oil price decline. In addition, all forecasts project inflation 
rates to rise over the medium term, albeit at a sluggish pace. 
Another development has to be taken into consideration: low inflation in crisis-hit countries is 
a consequence of the necessary economic adjustment process. Cost and price adjustments 
are  unavoidable  in  seeking  to  make  the  economic  structures  of  the  crisis  countries  more 
price-competitive. 
In assessing the need for action one has also to consider the instrument at hand, which is 
government  bond  purchases.  In  the  context  of  the  European  monetary  union,  however, 
massive purchases of government bonds are not just another instrument in the Eurosystem’s 
regular monetary policy toolbox. 
They bring with them specific risks and side-effects which are, in my view, not outweighed by 
the expected effect of the bond purchases. The high volume of government bond purchases 
will make the Eurosystem the biggest creditors of euro-area member states. In the end, the 
strong inter-linkage of fiscal and monetary policy might lead to intensified political pressure 
on the Eurosystem and might, as a result, put the independence of monetary policy at risk. 
Such  a  situation  could  become  particularly  relevant  once  monetary  policymakers  have  to 
start raising the policy rate – especially if the highly favourable financing conditions of today 
have been taken more or less for granted. 
The perception that monetary policy  will always step in as the “ultimate problem solver” is 
dangerous as it could weaken the incentive to implement structural reforms and to ensure 
sound fiscal public finances. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  at  the  beginning  of  my  talk,  I  quoted  Robert  Schuman  as  saying: 
“Europe will not be made all at once, or according to a single plan. It will be built through 
concrete achievements.” 
I would like to take this statement further by adding that concrete achievements also require 
the concrete and constant efforts of all member states – for the sake of the common goal. 
For good reasons and in order to allow diversity in unity, both EU and European monetary 
union respect national differences. But that is precisely why all member countries must live 
up to their responsibilities and ensure that their economies are competitive and their public 
finances are solid. 
Following these rules to ensure that is not an end in itself, but the prerequisite for maintaining 
the monetary union as a stability union. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
