  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: ASEAN financial integration – outlook and 
implications 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  ASEAN  Risk  Conference:  “ASEAN  financial 
integration – outlook and implications”, Kuala Lumpur, 14 May 2015. 
 Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  speak  on  the  subject  of  ASEAN  financial 
integration  and  its  implications  for  the  region.  The  theme  is  contemporary  and  relevant  as 
ASEAN  approaches  an  important  milestone  this  year  –  the  realisation  of  the  vision  to 
establish the ASEAN Economic Community. The path to economic integration is inherently 
challenging given that political and economic imperatives do not always converge. But at the 
same  time  there  are  enormous  opportunities  that  can  be  realised  for  the  good  of  member 
countries. For a region as diverse as ASEAN, where political systems, cultural backgrounds, 
stages  of  economic  development  and  domestic  priorities  vary  widely,  the  challenges  are 
substantially greater, but not insurmountable. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  ASEAN  leaders  had  adopted  the  ASEAN  Economic  Blueprint  in 
November  2007  when  the  global  financial  crisis  was  upon  us.  It  was  a  bold  and  visionary 
decision. The unfolding of the crisis, including the issues faced by the European financial and 
economic integration process, provided important lessons for the region in advancing its own 
integration journey. 
Taking  the  primary  lessons  learnt,  ASEAN  has  decided  on  an  integration  process  that  is 
flexible and pragmatic. This is fully supported by the commitment of its leaders to a shared 
vision to make meaningful progress in the implementation of the AEC Blueprint. 
The vision for an economically and financially integrated ASEAN represents the aspiration of 
many policy makers, old and new. A recent take on this can be found in a document titled 
“The  Road  to  ASEAN  Financial  Integration”,  a  study  on  the  financial  landscape  and 
formulating  milestones  on  ASEAN  monetary  and  financial  integration.  This  document 
endorsed  by  the  ASEAN  Central  Bank  Governors  and  approved  by  the  Finance  Ministers 
presents a clear, ambitious and committed statement by the region to collectively embark on 
this  journey.  In  this  respect,  ASEAN  has  made  meaningful  progress  in  the  identification, 
articulation and implementation of principles to advance financial and economic integration 
among its members. 
Work to craft the post-2015 plan is in progress, in line with the assessment of the current 
state  of  readiness  in  this  region.  As  we  enter  the  next  phase,  the  principles  that  underpin 
ASEAN’s integration model will continue to be tested, and whether ASEAN reaps  fully the 
benefits of economic and financial integration, will be very much determined by the collective 
actions of governments, policymakers and economic and financial agents, including those of 
us in this room today. 
In  my  remarks  this  morning,  I  will  discuss  the  role  of  financial  integration  as  both  a  key 
enabler and an outcome of the AEC. I will talk about where we are in this process and some 
of  the  priorities  for  policy  frameworks  as  well  as  for  the  management  of  risks  by  financial 
institutions as we move forward. This, I hope, will provide useful inputs for your deliberation 
and discussion in this conference. 
The case for greater financial integration 
ASEAN is home to more than 600 million people and if considered as a single entity, would 
represent  the  sixth  largest  economy  in  the  world  with  a  combined  GDP  of  USD2.5  trillion. 
According to the OECD, the region is projected to sustain an average annual growth of 5.6% 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
over  the  next  four  years  and  is  expected  to  be  the  fourth  largest  trading  bloc  by  2050. 
Concurrently, the standards of living among the general populace will continue to improve. 
Household purchasing power has risen significantly over the last decade, transforming the 
region  into  a  thriving  hub  of  consumer  demand.  The  size  of  ASEAN’s  consuming  class  is 
expected  to  double  from  81  million  to  163  million  by  2030.  By  2020,  Asia  is  estimated  to 
account  for  more  than  half  of  the  total  global  middle  class  population,  with  ASEAN 
representing more than USD2 trillion of additional consumption within the region. 
Also, as the sources of economic growth become increasingly domestic-based, this enables 
many  economies  to  diversify  their  sources  of  growth.  An  important  development  is  the 
significant increase in intra-regional trade. These developments augur well for the region and 
would expand domestic demand and further fuel greater intra-regional trade among ASEAN 
member countries. 
The  promise  of  higher  living  standards  and  employment  is  also  drawing  large  numbers  of 
people  from  the  countryside  to  cities.  Today,  just  over  a  third  of  ASEAN’s  population  are 
living in urban areas. This is expected to rise to 45% by 2030. 
Integrating  national  financial  systems  within  the  region  is  key  to  unlocking  ASEAN’s 
enormous  economic  growth  potential.  As  a  critical  component  of  the  AEC,  financial 
integration  will  significantly  enhance  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  intermediation  and 
allocation of resources. This is crucial as the region pursues greater economic prosperity that 
is both inclusive and sustainable. By allowing the region’s financial resources to move more 
freely across borders, financial integration will open up new opportunities for businesses and 
trade, enhancing further financial linkages within the region. 
A more integrated regional financial system would also allow a larger share of the region’s 
surplus  savings  to  be  deployed  within  the  region  towards  productive  ends,  such  as  in 
physical  infrastructure  projects.  According  to  the  Asian  Development  Bank,  ASEAN  will 
require  approximately  USD1  trillion  11  over  the  next  10  years  in  infrastructure  investments 
across  the  region.  This  includes  for  the  provision  of  sufficient  housing,  efficient  public 
transportation and access to clean water and electricity. While the numbers seem staggering, 
the ability to recycle the huge savings within ASEAN will substantially enhance the region’s 
prospects to fund and sustain such investments. 
With  one  of  the  highest  savings  rate  in  the  world,  at  approximately  30%  of  GDP  which 
currently  amounts  to  USD750  billion,  a  well-integrated  regional  financial  system  would 
provide  a  more  comprehensive  eco-system  for  an  efficient  and  competitive  intermediation 
and investment. 
An important component of ASEAN growth is the critical role of SMEs in all economies. The 
AEC  recognise  this  and  calls  for  SMEs  to  play  a  greater  role  in contributing  to  the  overall 
economic  growth  and  development  of  ASEAN  as  a  region.  Access  to  financing,  however, 
remains a key challenge for many businesses. Despite various national level efforts, more 
needs to be done for SMEs to obtain access to financing, including the funding required to 
grow  their  business  beyond  national  borders.  The  credit  gap  for  SMEs  in  East  Asia  is 
estimated  to  be  more  than  USD250  billion.2  The  difficulties  in  access  to  financing  are 
compounded  by  underdeveloped  financial  systems,  the  need  to  manage  multiple  banking 
relationships across different markets, and a lack of coordinated financial advisory support to 
help businesses navigate the regulatory and business environment in different jurisdictions. 
A larger presence of regional financial institutions can significantly reduce these challenges. 
                                                 
1   Speech  by  David  Lipton,  First  Deputy  Managing  Director,  IMF  on  19  March  2015  entitled  “ASEAN  –  The 
Challenges of Convergence and Integration”. 
2   Sources: International Finance Corporation and McKinsey & Company, “Two trillion and counting – Assessing 
the credit gap for micro, small, and medium-size enterprises in the developing world”, October 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Banks with wide regional networks would possess the intimate knowledge of each economy 
and understands the unique requirements of SMEs. Such banks are well placed to serve and 
harness  SMEs’  capability  to  participate  more  meaningfully  in  the  region’s  production 
networks. 
For ASEAN financial institutions, the prospect of regional financial integration will also serve 
to  raise  industry  standards  across  the  region.  This  includes  enhancing  the  breadth  and 
quality  of  financial  products  and  services  as  a  result  of  more  efficient  markets  and  the 
transfer  of  knowledge  and  technology.  Financial  institutions  will  also  need  to  meet  higher 
standards in how they manage risk and govern their operations. To some extent, this will be 
driven by regulatory efforts to elevate prudential and business conduct standards – a point 
which I will return to in a few moments. But aside from regulation, greater economies of scale 
and scope will also make it more feasible for financial institutions to invest in talent and more 
advanced technology and systems, to support business development and risk management. 
These benefits accrue not only to those individual financial institutions which are regionally 
oriented, but also more broadly to national financial systems. Greater market integration can 
contribute to the deepening of domestic financial markets which is important to encourage 
the  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital  and  dispersion  of  risk  more  broadly,  thereby 
strengthening the economy and financial system against external shocks. Best practices and 
innovative products from one part of the region can also be deployed to other parts of the 
region, to tackle a common need or challenge. 
An area that has considerable potential, both to support, not only greater regional financial 
integration but also for the development of national financial systems, is the establishment of 
credit  reporting  infrastructure.  For  example,  the  implementation  of  the  Central  Credit 
Reporting Information System in Malaysia, one of the most comprehensive in the world, has 
had  a  profound  impact  in  transforming  the  credit  landscape  in  Malaysia  by  improving 
efficiency  and  productivity,  enhancing  access  to  financing,  strengthening  risk  management 
and  encouraging  responsible  borrowing.  These  benefits can  be  extended  more  broadly  by 
establishing  and  linking  up  similar  systems  across  the  region  through  collaborative  efforts. 
The  potential  also  exists  for  similar  infrastructure  to  be  developed  in  the  insurance  sector 
which  can  serve  to  strengthen  underwriting  assessments,  and  allow  loss  data  such  as  for 
catastrophes to be shared more efficiently. Importantly, developments in this area will greatly 
advance financial inclusion and contribute towards narrowing the development gap among 
and within ASEAN economies. 
Key achievements in financial integration 
Let  me  now  turn  to  where  we  are  in  the  financial  integration  process.  Consistent  with  a 
flexible  and  pragmatic  approach  which  has  been  adopted  for  ASEAN,  implementing  the 
integration  process  within  ASEAN  is  grounded  on  the  state  of  readiness  of  each  member 
country.  Member  countries  are  given  flexibility  to  ensure  that  the  integration  process  is 
sustainable  and  meet  national  policy  objectives.  It  is  an  important  criteria,  as  the  level  of 
economic and financial development of member countries are very diverse. 
More importantly, member countries are given sufficient timeframe to fulfil the preconditions 
for a successful integration, so that when markets become more accessible, domestic and 
regional financial stability is maintained. 
Guided by these principles of pragmatism and flexibility, ASEAN has made significant strides 
on several fronts. A key milestone in 2015 will be the implementation of the ASEAN Banking 
Integration  Framework,  or  ABIF,  which  will  provide  for  an  expanded  presence  of  Qualified 
ASEAN  Banks  in  the  region.  Given  the  dominant  role  of  the  banking  system  in  financial 
intermediation  within  the  region’s  economies,  the  successful  implementation  of  ABIF 
represents  a  key  catalyst  to  drive  deeper  integration  and  enhance  the  region’s  growth 
potential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
While  the  specific  qualifying  criteria  for  Qualified  ASEAN  Banks,  or  QABs,  will  be  agreed 
mutually  on  a  bilateral  basis,  by  and  large,  these  will  focus  on  the  financial  capacity, 
governance quality and track record and business plan of the prospective candidate bank. 
With the QAB status, indigenous ASEAN banks will be accorded full operational flexibilities 
akin  to  privileges  accorded  to  domestic  banks.  Of  course  this  would  be  subjected  to 
prudential  safeguards  and  requirements  and  agreed  based  on  reciprocal  arrangements. 
Amongst the attractive propositions for QABs are a more flexible operating environment such 
as  branching  requirements  and  employment  of  expatriates.  Under  this  new  operating 
scenario, QABs ought to operate more competitively and enjoy greater economies of scale. 
With  the  conclusion  of  ABIF,  ASEAN  members  are  now  pursuing  reciprocal  bilateral 
agreements,  which  will  detail  measures  on  market  access  and  operational  flexibilities  for 
QABs  in  the  respective  countries.  The  future  looks  bright.  Last  December,  Malaysia  and 
Indonesia signed a Heads of Agreement which will provide opportunities for banks from both 
economies to expand their scope of operations and businesses in each other’s markets. As 
such, we should witness an expanding network of bilateral agreements in the coming years. 
In line with its focus on the principles of inclusiveness, reciprocity and mutual benefit, ABIF 
allows member countries to manage systematically the integration process, while taking into 
consideration,  national  development  objectives  and  financial  stability.  Countries  which  are 
ready  to  proceed  will  be  able  to  start  the  integration  process  early  and  at  their  own  pace. 
Other countries will aspire to meet the preconditions and will be supported by the region’s 
collective commitment to capacity building efforts, so that they can progress steadily towards 
achieving a state of readiness to enable full participation in the integration process. 
In  the  insurance  sector,  continuing  progress  is  being  made  to  strengthen  insurance 
regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  in  the  region  through  observance  of  the  Insurance 
Core  Principles  as  an  important  precondition  for  more  integrated  insurance  markets.  This 
process has been supported by the ASEAN Insurance Regulators forum and its training arm. 
Going forward, progressive liberalisation of the insurance sector in the region will be guided 
by the ASEAN Insurance Integration Framework. 
In this regard, ASEAN members have agreed to prioritise efforts to liberalise the cross-border 
supply of Marine, Aviation and Goods in International Transit (MAT) insurance and to support 
the establishment of an ASEAN Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (DRFI) mechanism. 
Progress  in  these  areas  will  enable  ASEAN  members  to  increase  capacity  for  such  risks 
which  are  growing  in  scale  and  complexity,  and  achieve  broader  diversification  of  risks 
across the region, leading to lower costs of insurance. It will also enhance the protection of 
ASEAN communities and economies against increasing exposures to catastrophes. 
Significant  progress  has  also  been  made  in  promoting  freer  flow  of  capital  and  greater 
connectivity  between  the  ASEAN  capital  markets  through  the  various  initiatives  and 
measures  by  the  ASEAN  Capital  Markets  Forum.  Market  participants  can  look  forward  to 
more seamless cross-border investments with reduced costs and greater access to ASEAN 
investments. 
Financial  integration  initiatives  are  also  focusing  on  harmonising  further  the  operating 
environments for payment systems within ASEAN countries. A key outcome is to create an 
efficient,  reliable  and  secure  payment  and  settlement  system  which  is  able  to  operate 
smoothly across ASEAN. Consumer transactions such as cash withdrawals and payments 
for  goods  and  services  will  be  further  simplified,  contributing  towards  the  growth  of  retail 
businesses in ASEAN economies. The development of more convenient and cost effective 
retail  payment  systems  can  also  help  realise  the  full  potential  for  e-commerce  in  ASEAN. 
Efforts are also underway to promote the use of ASEAN currencies for trade settlement. This 
will diversify the use of currencies by importers and exporters. 
The use of domestic currency for settlement of trade reduces the exposures to currency risk 
and costs associated with the need to hedge against such risks. Collectively, these initiatives 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
are  expected  to  contribute  towards  further  deepening  trade  and  financial  integration  in  the 
region. 
Priorities going forward 
With the developments described just now, in moving forward, we can expect the financial 
integration process to continue to gather momentum. To my own mind, an important question 
for policymakers and financial institutions is where should we focus our attention and efforts 
to adapt to the changes ahead? 
While further financial integration process has captured the imagination of many, because of 
the  numerous  benefits  and  opportunities,  at  the  same  time,  policymakers  in  the  region 
remain focused on ensuring strong and resilient financial systems which are critical to buffer 
against greater exposures to contagion in a more open and competitive market environment. 
Efforts  continue  to  be  taken  to  strengthen  financial  stability  frameworks.  This  includes 
continuing to develop arrangements, both formal and informal, for cooperation in monitoring 
risks  and  to  support  the  effective  supervision  and  resolution  of  financial  institutions  with  a 
significant  cross-border  presence.  Greater  consistency  in  the  implementation  of  minimum 
regulatory standards will also be as important, to reduce distortions arising from unfettered 
competition, regulatory arbitrage and transactional compliance costs incurred when operating 
across  borders.  In  implementing  the  minimum  regulatory  standards,  the  objective  is  not  to 
achieve  a  single  set  of  uniform  rules,  but  rather  to  focus  on  implementing  rules  in  the 
respective  ASEAN  member  countries  that  are  consistent  with  an  agreed  set  of  sound 
principles of regulation and supervision. 
This  will  entail  efforts  at  the  national  level  to  align  existing  regulatory  and  supervisory 
regimes  with  international  standards  such  as  the  Basel  and  Insurance  Core  Principles.  In 
addition, the implementation of well-designed financial safety nets such as deposit insurance 
systems will further support the successful management and transition during the financial 
integration process. 
Surveillance  mechanisms  also  need  to  be  enhanced  to  be  able  to  take  into  account  the 
implications of cross-border transactions and the diversity of the market structures across the 
region  which  will  affect  the  way  risks  are  measured  and managed.  Traditional  risk  metrics 
may not be able to fully capture more layered risk complexions. As financial systems develop 
at an uneven pace across the region, and as regional exposures become more significant, 
more granular and broader risk metrics will need to be developed to capture differences in 
market  structures  and  different  business  profiles  in  local  markets  which  reflect  prevailing 
economic and financial conditions. As an example, loan-to-deposit ratios vary considerably 
across  the  region,  partly  reflecting  differences  in  the  depth  and  sophistication  of  financial 
systems and to some the extent whether savers and borrowers have alternative avenues for 
investment and financing. 
Financial institutions – and in particular those with regional aspirations – must develop the 
capacity  and  capability  to  manage  risks  arising  from  cross-border  operations.  Given  the 
greater  complexity  of  business,  boards  and  management  will  be  confronted  with  more 
difficult  and  multi-dimensional  challenges  in  driving  strategy  and  in  overseeing  operations. 
This  calls  for  greater  emphasis  on  board  and  management  composition  and  diversity  in 
terms of skills and experience. 
Board  members  with  experience  in  the  areas  of  international  banking  and  finance  for 
instance, would be critical to help the institution in managing the new operating environment 
including new business models, while guarding against the attendant risks. 
The growth of the regional financial markets will also accompany such financial integration 
and  cross  border  banking  and  investment  activity.  This  could  open  up  new  sources  of 
revenues  for  the  financial  sector,  at  the  same  time,  new  risks  that  may  require  upgraded 
skills  and  infrastructure  to  manage.  Policymakers  will  try  to  harness  the  economic  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
financial  benefits  these  bring  while  ensuring  that  risks  will  be  well  managed.  For  financial 
institutions,  there  will  be  a  need  to  enhance  capacity  in  operations  and  connectivity  – 
developing  the  necessary  infrastructure,  systems,  counterparty  lines  and  settlement 
capability across the region. Risk management also needs to be enhanced correspondingly, 
capability of assessing market and credit risks which could be challenged by different liquidity 
conditions and market environments. 
Financial institutions must also be ready and able to comply with diverse legal and regulatory 
expectations in each country of operation. In this respect, the implementation of robust and 
consistent group-wide risk management, and a strong risk culture, is critical to mitigate risks 
of group contagion. 
Another critical element is the investment in talent development – both in industry and in the 
regulatory  community  –  to  provide  a  strong  pipeline  of  skilled  individuals  required  for  the 
management  of  a  more  integrated  financial  sector.  Sufficient  resources  and  attention  is 
needed  to  develop  and  implement  strategies  to  attract  and  retain  the  right  talent.  The 
demand for talent particularly in the area of risk management and compliance continues to 
rise in the aftermath of the global financial crisis as financial institutions adjust to implement 
regulatory  reform  measures.  Similarly,  training  and  development  programmes  must  be 
continuously enhanced to ensure that skill sets within the financial institution are kept current 
and relevant. Regional training institutions such as the Asian Institute of Chartered Bankers 
and  the  Asian  Banking  School  and  the  South  East  Asian  Central  Banks  Research  and 
Training  Centre,  or  SEACEN,  amongst  others,  will  play  an  essential  role  in  meeting  the 
demand for new talent with the necessary skill sets and experience. 
Concluding remarks 
The  success  of  financial  integration  in  ASEAN  will  be  critical  to  support  the  on-going 
transformation  of  ASEAN  economies  in  the  coming  decades.  No  doubt  there  are  risks, 
challenges and setbacks even. But benefits and risks are two sides of the same coin. We 
should  be  confident  enough,  ASEAN  is  more  than  40  years  old  now,  as  we  chart  our 
progress towards a more integrated economy as a group. Our ability to realise these benefits 
in future will largely depend on the investments and priorities that we make today. 
Our priorities should work to improve our ability to effectively manage financial stability in a 
more  integrated  financial  system,  and  to  build  stronger,  more  resilient  and  dynamic 
institutions that will effectively serve the economic needs of the people in this region. 
On  that  note,  let  me  conclude  my  remarks  and  wish  all  of  you  a  productive  and  fruitful 
conference. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
