  Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya: Towards a more inclusive financial 
system 
Speech by Mr Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  OKU  Awareness  Programm  “Towards  a  More 
Inclusive Financial System”, Kuala Lumpur, 26 May 2015. 
 Bridging the understanding on the needs of OKUs and preparing for the changing 
landscape due to higher expectation and enhanced legislation 
As  the  Malaysian  financial  sector  matures  and  with  the  long  term  vision  for  an  inclusive 
financial  system,  today’s  program  with  the  objective  of  enhancing  awareness  and 
understanding  of  the  rights  and  requirements  of  the  community  of  the  OKU  and  how  the 
financial industry could serve them better, would mark the beginning of this important journey 
at industry wide level. 
As  mentioned  by  Yang  Berhormat  Senator  Puan  Bathmavathi  earlier,  currently  there  are 
about 338,000 registered OKU in Malaysia or 1.1% of Malaysia’s total population. While the 
official data may be small, the actual number of Malaysians with disabilities is deemed to be 
more than what is reported. In addition, this number will increase as more Malaysians may 
fall into this category with the ageing process, becoming casualties of accidents and those 
suffering from chronic diseases. As the Government has initiated various efforts to integrate 
people with disabilities into all aspects of life, the financial industry should also continue to 
play  a  more  pro-active  role  in  providing  an  enabling  environment  to  ensure  that  their 
fundamental rights to have access to the banking and insurance products and services are 
actively promoted. 
Taking  into  account  the  Persons  with  Disabilities  Act  2008,  the  financial  industry  are 
expected to give appropriate consideration and take necessary measures to ensure services 
and facilities are accessible by all in the OKU community. Clearly, these obligations signify 
our accountability and responsibility towards providing the necessary access for members of 
the OKU community and not to deny their rights to be included in our financial system. 
Moving forward, under the RMK11 recently announced, the Uniform Building By-Laws, 1984 
is going to be strengthened with greater mandate to include the enforcement power of the 
authorities. With this possible enhancement to the legislation, the financial industry need to 
be ready to face this changing landscape whereby there is a possibility that action could be 
taken  against  those  service  providers  that  fail  to  provide  the  enabling  environment  to  the 
OKUs. 
Against  these  backdrop  of  higher  expectation  from  the  OKU,  stronger  legislation  and  our 
aspiration of more inclusive financial system, today’s program provides a platform for us to 
further understand the needs of the disabled, to be more preemptive and anticipatory in our 
approach and to collaboratively work towards ensuring that the financial industry of Malaysia 
becomes completely disabled-friendly and truly inclusive. 
Bank Negara as service provider has started OKU friendly environment 
On  that  note,  I  would  like  to  share  that  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  in  our  modest  ways,  has 
taken  some  efforts  towards  being  more  disabled  friendly.  Our  new  premises  at  Lanai  and 
Sasana Kijang and newly renovated Regional Offices, are OKU friendly with ramp passages 
at  major  entrances,  lifts  equipped  with  braille  buttons,  OKU  toilets  at  all  floors,  OKU 
designated parking lots and wheelchairs made available when requested. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Our Bank Negara Malaysia’s Museum and Art Galley (MAG) provides special services to the 
OKU.  We  have  four  front  liners  who  are  trained  in  basic  sign  language.  By  2016,  the 
numismatic gallery will have a “Touch and Feel” corner, with special exhibits to cater for the 
visually impaired. 
In 2014, we have started our series of financial awareness programme to the OKUs, starting 
with  trainees  and  staff  of  Pusat  Latihan  Gurney,  Malaysian  Association  of  the  Blind  in 
Brickfields. This year, we plan to conduct more of such programmes. 
Having said that, for Bank Negara Malaysia, we acknowledge that there are still a lot more 
that need to be done and we will continue to intensify our efforts in striving to provide a user 
friendly and barrier–free environment to increase accessibility to our services and products. 
Financial industry as service providers, has started in the journey, however more 
efforts are needed 
Likewise, the journey to become disabled-friendly has been initiated by the financial industry 
whereby some of the premises of the financial institutions are equipped with the necessary 
infrastructure  to  comply  with  building  by-laws  such  as  providing  appropriate  ramps, 
designated OKU  parking  lots,  OKU friendly  elevators  and  so  on.  The  banks  also  provided 
special care service counters and priority queue for their OKU customers. 
launched  a  programme  called  RISE  (Reach 
Maybank and Allianz are more forthcoming in the OKU agenda 
We also  noted that  a few  financial  institutions  are  ahead of  the  rest.  Normally,  we  will  not 
mention the name of specific institution but in this case, we would like to make an exception 
with the intention to motivate others. I would like to share the initiatives that have been taken 
by Maybank. Every year Maybank allocates a budget for certain number of branches to be 
designated as OKU friendly with proper ramps, auto doors, and ATMs with bigger space and 
lower  height  to  cater  for  wheelchair-bound  customers  and  designated  counter  for  OKU 
customers.  To  date  Maybank  has  49  branches  designated  as  OKU  friendly.  Maybank  has 
also 
Independence  and  Sustainable 
Entrepreneurship) providing guidance to the OKUs to expand business opportunities through 
structured mentoring programme and providing loan to grow business. As a result, the bank 
has assisted 280 OKUs to start their own businesses. 
From  the  insurance  industry,  Allianz  Malaysia  Bhd.  has  organized  a  5-day  workshop  to 
understand  the  needs  of  the  OKU  and  identify  actions  that  can  be  taken  to  help  improve 
accessibility  to  financial  services.  Arising  from  the  workshop,  Allianz  has  formed  a  special 
working  group  to  look  at  the  services  and  facilities  for  the  disabled  and  will  launch  three 
products specifically for the OKU soon. 
I am confident that more programmes have been initiated by other financial institutions which 
I do not have the opportunity to mention all of them here. I would like to urge all financial 
institutions to take greater effort towards these initiatives. 
Issues and challenges faced by OKUs that need to be addressed 
Later in this program, as we learn more on the issues and challenges faced by the OKUs in 
their daily life, especially with regards to their difficulty on accessing the financial product and 
services, we will appreciate better the challenges that this group has to go through. Let us 
pause for a while and take this opportunity to reflect on what each of our institution has done 
to assist and include the OKU into the financial system. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
One issue resolved to ensure greater accessibility to ATM cards/debit/internet banking 
Based  on  the feedback that  we  gathered from  our  engagements  with  the  OKUs, the most 
recent in April 2015, there are still a lot of challenges faced by the OKUs in accessing the 
products and services of the financial industry. However, to date, I am pleased to note that 
one issue has been resolved with regard to the plight of the visually impaired that they were 
sometimes denied access to own ATM cards and internet banking. The Association of Banks 
in Malaysia (ABM) together with its council members have worked with the NCBM (National 
Council  of  the  Blind)  and  as  a  result  have  now  reached  a  solution  that enables  access  to 
such  services  by  the  visually  impaired  individuals.  This  is  indeed  a  positive  step  to  move 
forward. 
However, there are other immediate needs that have not been addressed. For the banking 
industry, examples of such needs are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
lower bank counters for wheelchair-bound customers 
“Talking ATMs” for the visually impaired 
availability of sign language interpreters for the deaf 
the need for OKU-friendly bank website to enhance their accessibility to e-banking 
services,  which  would  augur  well  with  the  initiative  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  to 
promote the usage of e-banking. Banks are encouraged to provide websites which 
are W3C compliance. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is an international 
body that provides standards to enhance the web accessibility, enabling people with 
disabilities to participate equally on the Web, such as providing alternative text for 
images  to  allow  accessibility  by  the  visually  impaired,  providing  text  transcript  to 
allow  audio  information  accessible  to  the  hearing  impaired,  and  many  other 
services. 
For  the  insurance  industry,  more  needs  to  be  done  to  provide  products  that  cater  for  the 
OKUs’ needs and to address the issue of high loading of insurance premium imposed by the 
insurers. 
Another area for consideration – employment opportunities for OKUs 
On another aspect, the Government has issued a service circular to implement a 1% policy 
on employment opportunities for OKUs in the public sector as well as provided incentive by 
giving double tax relief for employers of OKU. It is encouraging to note that several financial 
institutions have provided opportunities for the OKUs to be employed in the financial industry 
and  recognized  that  they  have  the  necessary  capabilities  to  contribute  to  the  financial 
industry. Nevertheless, more needs to be done and I hope financial institutions will provide 
the opportunity for more OKUs to be employed in the financial industry. 
Global trend-benchmarking with financial sector in other countries showed that they 
are more advanced 
On  the  global  front,  looking  at  the  trends  and  initiatives  by  other  countries,  especially  the 
developed  countries,  we  observe  that  the  industry  associations  are  very  proactive  and 
undertake a leading role in ensuring the OKUs’ rights are met. For example, the Australian 
Bankers’  Association  issued  Guiding  Principles  for  Accessible  Authentication  to  provide 
guidance to financial institutions to adopt stronger authentication technologies to facilitate the 
access of people with disabilities. 
Strong human rights legislation that changed the banking system 
I  would  also  like  to  share  a  landmark case  in  Canada  in  1991  where  two  blind  customers 
were frustrated with their bank when they could not access information about their mortgage 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and  the  bank’s  other  services.  Since  they  were  both  blind,  they  could  not  read  banking 
information  that  was  only  available  in  printed  brochures.  They  filed  a  complaint  under  the 
Canadian Human Rights Act. The case inspired Canada’s banking system to make important 
changes such as offering brochures in Braille and offering Talking ATMs. Canada became 
the first country to offer “Talking ATMs” in 1997. 
Talking ATMs have been around in other countries for almost 20 years, easily available in 
countries like the UK, US, Australia, Japan and Canada. Countries like the Philippines, India 
and Turkey have also introduced Talking ATMs. In the United States, The ADA (Americans 
with Disabilities Act) requires that ATMs be equipped with innovative technology to enable 
the  visually  impaired  customers  to  use  the  machines  without  assistance.  In  India,  it  is  a 
requirement  for  its  banking  industry  that  all  ATMs  installed  from  1  July  2014  should  be 
Talking ATMs with Braille keypads. 
For the hearing impaired, Barclays Bank in the UK provides hearing induction loop fitted at 
the  counters  which  act  as  transmitters  for  hearing  aids  users.  Professional  sign  language 
interpreter are available by camera to facilitate video communication. 
Strong legislation to back up the requirement to provide insurance products 
As  for  the  development  in  the  insurance  industry,  life  insurers  in  Australia  are  permitted 
under the Disability Discrimination Act to offer applicants for insurance different terms based 
on  the  risk  they  present,  provided  they  are  basing  this  discrimination  on  actuarial  data  or 
statistics.  It  is  unlawful  under  the  Disability  Discrimination  Act  for  insurers  to  deny 
applications  for  insurance  without  having  reasonable  and  relevant  information  and  data  to 
support their decision. In Malaysia, we often received complaints from the OKU community 
that their applications were imposed with high premium loading as the OKUs are considered 
high  risk.  Therefore,  we  urge  for  the  insurance  industry  here,  to  base  their  decisions  on 
statistical evidence and not purely on assumptions. 
In  light  of  these  global  trends,  going  forward,  being  a  vibrant  and  progressive  financial 
industry,  we  must  always  be  at  the  forefront,  embrace  new  innovation  and  adopt  best 
practices in serving the needs of all segments of society including the OKUs. 
Expectations moving forward:  
Role of industry’s association – to drive industry towards OKU inclusive 
Moving  forward,  each  party  has  to  play  its  role  in  promoting  and  contributing  towards  this 
important  agenda.  Given  the  need  to  address  the  issues  faced  by  the  OKU  community  in 
gaining access to financial services in this country, the associations should drive the industry 
in  enhancing  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  towards  this  endeavor.  The  industry  needs  to 
develop  and  implement  an  action  plan  to  increase  access  of  the  OKUs  to  the  financial 
products and services. 
Role of individual institutions – to ensure enabling environment for OKUs 
For  a  start,  individual  financial  institution  is  encouraged  to  address  immediate  needs 
mentioned earlier that was highlighted by the OKUs such as providing lower counter, Talking 
ATMs, sign language for the deaf, website which is W3C compliance and offer appropriate 
insurance products for the OKUs. 
In providing the accessibility to the OKU community, the industry players need to ensure that 
the services and products are relevant, sustainable and affordable in meeting the needs of 
the OKUs, associated risks are mitigated and the OKU consumers are protected. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Role of Bank Negara Malaysia – to consolidate effort and move forward together 
As mentioned earlier, it has always been high on Bank Negara Malaysia’s financial inclusion 
agenda that all facets of the Malaysian society are served by the financial industry. As such, I 
would like to call upon all of us here, let us embrace this journey together towards a more 
caring and responsible industry by ensuring the needs of the OKUs are provided for. 
Launching of “Cash Test” for the visually impaired 
As  part  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  continuous  initiative  to  support  the  needs  of  OKU 
community, the Bank has introduced a device known as Ringgit Cash Test Cards, a credit 
card-sized  plastic  card  with  gauges  designed  to  assist  the  visually  impaired  in  identifying 
banknotes  and  coins.  They  contain  Braille  markings  as  well  as  tactile  symbols  to  denote 
each denomination. 
In  2000,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  presented  13,000  units  of  Ringgit  cash  test  cards  to  the 
visually impaired which measured third series banknotes of all denominations. This year, the 
Bank will distribute 20,000 units of Ringgit cash test cards to the visually impaired. 
The  Bank  has  made  several  improvements  to  the  new  cash  test  card  design  including  to 
measure the fourth series banknotes and a coin channel to measure third series coins after 
obtaining feedback from the National Council for the Blind, the Malaysian Association for the 
Blind and Kementerian Pembangunan Wanita, Keluarga dan Masyarakat. 
In conjunction with this program, I would like to take this opportunity to launch the new cash 
test card. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
