  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Increasing payment efficiency to improve 
productivity 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara  Malaysia), at the JomPAY’s Official Launch Event, Kuala Lumpur, 
9 April 2015. 
 In  today’s  challenging  and  rapidly  evolving  world,  one  must  constantly find  innovative  and 
efficient  ways  to  remain  productive,  or  risk  being  left  behind.  As  payments  represent  an 
indispensable  activity  for  both  individuals  and  businesses,  increasing  payment  efficiency 
through  the  adoption  of  electronic  payments  (e-payments)  will  improve  productivity  and 
reduce  the  cost  of  transactions.  At  the  macro  level,  the  adoption  of  e-payments  has  the 
potential to enhance Malaysia’s overall economic efficiency and competitiveness. 
The benefits in terms of cost savings and efficiency gains from a successful migration to e-
payments  are  substantial.  The  launch  of  JomPAY  today  is  part  of  the  journey  towards 
realization  of  these  objectives.  JomPAY  provides  greater  efficiency,  convenience  and 
accessibility for the public to make bill payments. It also represents a conscious strategy that 
will contribute towards making the way we conduct financial transactions more efficient. 
My speech today focuses on 3 areas: 
• 
Firstly, I will provide an update on the recent developments in Malaysia’s payment 
ecosystem  and  the  progress  that  we  have  made  thus  far  in  accelerating  the 
country’s migration to e-payments; 
Secondly,  I  will  highlight  how  JomPAY  helps  to  address  the  current  limitations  in 
online  bill  payments  and  how  it  complements  the  existing  efforts  to  expand  e-
payment services; and 
Finally, I will elaborate on the importance of industry-wide collaborative efforts and 
the role that MyClear and the industry can play in bringing the online bill payments 
market to greater heights. 
  Recent developments in Malaysia’s payment ecosystem 
The  use  of  cash  and  cheques  remains  prevalent  in  Malaysia.  Malaysia’s  cash  usage 
measured by currency-in-circulation (CIC) over GDP was about 6% in 2013, which is 100% 
higher  than the  average  in  advanced  economies1.  Likewise,  Malaysia’s  cheque  usage  per 
capita was 6.6 in 2013, which is 33 times higher than that in advanced economies2. 
But the recent measures being instituted have shown tangible results. I am pleased to inform 
you  that  promising  progress  has  been  made  since  the  introduction  of  the  Pricing  Reform 
Framework in May 2013 and the more concerted efforts taken to improve and promote the 
use  of  Interbank  GIRO  (IBG).  In  2014,  cheque  usage  declined  at  a  faster  rate  of  10%, 
compared to only 3% in 2013. At the same time, the number of IBG transactions increased 
by  36%  in  2014  compared  to  19%  in  2013.  Consequently,  Malaysia’s  cheque  usage  had 
fallen from 6.6 per capita in 2013 to 5.8 per capita in 2014. This is indeed an encouraging 
development. 
                                                
1   Australia, the United Kingdom, Sweden and Norway. 
2   Norway, Sweden, Denmark and Finland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
To  reduce  the  country’s  reliance  on  cash  usage,  the  Bank  has  issued  the  Payment  Card 
Reform Framework (Framework) which took effect in stages beginning 2 January 2015. The 
Framework aims to ensure that the cost of accepting payment cards is fair and reasonable, 
whilst  creating  an  enabling  environment  for  the  wider  acceptance  of  payment  cards, 
especially by smaller merchants. 
Over the next six years till 2020, together with the banking industry we plan to expand the 
payment card acceptance network from about 240,000 terminals to 800,000 terminals and 
further accelerate the use of debit cards. These measures, if implemented successfully, will 
lessen the need for cash payments. While this target seems ambitious, we can achieve this 
milestone with collective efforts by all. 
Cash and cheques are still the main modes for bill payments in Malaysia 
Whilst  efforts  are  being  made  to  facilitate  the  wider  acceptance  of  payment  cards,  bill 
payments in Malaysia are still predominantly made with either cash or cheques. In Malaysia, 
bill  payments  made  via  electronic  channels3  are  still  relatively  low  at  2.4  transactions  per 
capita4  in  2014  compared  to  more  than  10  transactions  per  capita5  in  countries  with 
successful electronic bill payment platforms such as Australia. 
Malaysia  has  an  online  bill  payments  model  where  merchants  need  to  maintain  multiple 
banking  relationships  in  order  to  receive  bill  payments  from  customers  who  bank  with 
different banks. Merchants, especially SMEs, find it difficult and costly to maintain multiple 
banking  relationships.  As  a  result,  only  about  1,000  merchants  are  currently  registered  to 
accept  online  bill  payments  via  the  individual  banks’  proprietary  bill  payments  system. 
Therefore, there is still tremendous potential for greater efficiency and cost savings through 
the consolidation and expansion of the online bill payments market in Malaysia. 
Enhancing the efficiency, accessibility and convenience of online bill payment via 
JomPAY 
JomPAY addresses the limitations of the current bank-centric model by establishing an open 
electronic  bill  payments  platform  which  leverages  on  the  combined  infrastructure  and 
network  of  the  entire  banking  industry. With  JomPAY,  merchants  only  need  to  maintain  a 
banking relationship with one bank, in order to receive bill payments from customers of all 
other banks. Likewise, customers only need to maintain an account with one bank in order to 
make  bill  payments  to  the  entire  network  of  merchants  registered  with  JomPAY.  The 
JomPAY  model  thus  reduces  duplication  and  facilitates  the  pooling  of  resources  from  the 
entire banking industry. This in turn will enable us to build a wider and more efficient network 
for online bill payments. 
Businesses should leverage on JomPAY to accept online bill payments from their customers. 
Handling  cash  and  cheques  is  very  costly.  Businesses  incur  an  estimated  RM2.7  billion6 
annually for cash handling, in addition to bearing the risk of pilferage and theft. Businesses 
also incur an estimated RM113 million7 annually for cheque handling. Migrating to electronic 
Internet banking, mobile banking and ATM. 
                                                
3  
4   BNM’s Financial Stability and Payment Systems Report 2014. 
5   Calculated based on the average monthly transactions of B-PAY (Australia) and the population in Australia. 
6   Based  on  the  European  Central  Bank’s  (ECB)  study  “The  social  and  private  costs  of  retail  payment 
instruments”  on  13  European  countries,  the  social  cost  incurred  by  retailers  for  cash  handling  amounts  to 
0.269% of GDP. 
7   Based on the ECB study, the social cost incurred by businesses for cheque handling amounts to 0.012% of 
GDP. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
bill  payments  would  lower  the  cost  of  transactions  and  provide  businesses  with  a  faster, 
more secure and more efficient means of collecting payments. Businesses should leverage 
on  JomPAY  not  only  for  bill  payments,  but  also  for  invoice  payments  to  facilitate  a  more 
efficient management of their receivables. 
Consumers, on the other hand, should also take advantage of the increased convenience of 
making  bill  payments  via  this  new  channel.  JomPAY  provides  a  one-stop  centre  for 
consumers  to  make  bill  payments  electronically  anytime,  anywhere  and  without  any 
transaction fee. 
By  migrating  to  electronic  bill  payments,  a  lot  of  time  and  effort  previously  incurred  by 
travelling and queuing to make over-the-counter payments can be saved and redirected to 
more productive use. 
Importance of industry collaborative efforts 
Now I will touch on the third and last point. The payments industry in Malaysia has a history 
of  collaboration  in  industry-wide  infrastructure  developments.  A  notable  example  is  the 
migration  from  magnetic  stripe  to  chip-based  cards.  The  migration  exercise,  which  was 
completed  in  2005,  successfully  eradicated  cases  of  counterfeit  fraud  and  contributed  to 
greater confidence in the use of payment cards in Malaysia. As a result, the investment cost 
of about RM200 million was recovered in just two and a half years, most of it arising from 
cost savings from fraud avoidance. Tourist spending via credit cards had also doubled from 
RM4.3 billion in 2006 to RM8.7 billion in 2014, signifying greater confidence and the ease of 
use  of  payment  cards  in  Malaysia.  This  is  a  very  good  illustration  on  how  industry 
collaboration  in  the  area  of  payment  systems  has  contributed  to  the  country’s  economic 
growth. 
A  successful  payment  system  is  often  dependent  on  the  network  of  payment  systems 
reaching an optimum size, thus enabling its participants to build critical mass and achieve 
economies of scale. However, building a payment system infrastructure and expanding the 
network  can  be  costly  to  an  individual  market  player.  Hence,  the  industry  should  pool  its 
resources to develop and share infrastructure costs. 
As  a  principle,  basic  payment  infrastructure  should  not  be  used  as  a  competitive  tool  but 
rather as a means to reduce cost, promote inter-operability and support an enlarged network. 
Such  collaborative  industry  effort  in  infrastructure  sharing  would  allow  the  industry  to 
compete  directly  on  product  offerings  and  the  quality  of  services  provided,  thus  providing 
better value to both consumers and merchants. 
In this regard, the recent industry-wide initiatives to enhance the payment card infrastructure 
and to modernise the online bill payments market via JomPAY are commendable and should 
be  sustained.  In  this  respect,  I  would  also  like  to  call  upon  MyClear  and  MEPS  to  jointly 
embark on payment infrastructure projects and initiatives that would benefit both the industry 
and the country. 
Role of MyClear and the industry moving forward 
Achieving the critical mass in terms of usage and acceptance remains a key priority. In this 
regard,  banks  in  collaboration  with  MyClear  should  take  concerted  efforts  to  expand  the 
number of businesses accepting JomPAY, especially among the underpenetrated sectors of 
SMEs  and  the  federal  and  state  government  agencies.  This  can  be  done  through 
coordinated  media  campaigns,  workshops,  roadshows  and  other  outreach  programs. 
MyClear and the participating banks should target to register 5,000 merchants onto JomPAY 
by 2020. 
To educate the public, especially those who are not IT savvy to use JomPAY, MyClear and 
the  banks  should  also  come  up  with  instructional  videos  and  pamphlets  to  provide  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
necessary guidance and assistance. This should move in tandem with the industry’s plans to 
promote the usage of electronic fund transfer services such as the Interbank GIRO (IBG) and 
the Instant Interbank Fund Transfer (IBFT) via different payment channels, and to drive more 
pervasive usage of debit cards. 
To provide the public with an alternative channel to access JomPAY services, banks should 
also  accelerate  the  offering  of  JomPAY  via  the  network  of  about  12,000  ATMs  and 
2,700 self-service Internet kiosks (SSKs) nationwide. This would expand the accessibility of 
online  bill  payments to a  greater  segment  of the  society,  including  those  that  have  limited 
access  to  the  Internet.  This  is  also  one  specific  area  where  MyClear  and  MEPS  should 
mobilise their resources for the collective good. 
To  drive  the  reduction  in  paper-based  bill  payments  over-the-counter  (OTC),  the  banking 
industry should also deploy more payment card terminals at merchant outlets, government 
counters and at the premises of collecting agents such as bank branches and post offices. 
With a high penetration of 45 million debit cards for a population of 30 million, Malaysians 
have  the  option  of using  their  debit cards  to  pay  bills  over-the-counter, thus  lessening the 
need to carry cash. 
In  addition,  banks  should  continuously  enhance  the  value  proposition  of  JomPAY  to  bring 
greater  convenience  to  consumers  and  efficiency  to  the  business  processes  of  corporate 
customers. Efforts should be directed towards creating an end-to-end solution by integrating 
electronic  bill  payment  facilities  with  electronic  presentment  of  bills  and  e-invoicing  to 
minimize the cost of print-and-mail billing. Banks should also explore the offering of real-time 
payment facilities for bill payments where there is demand for such services. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, the introduction of JomPAY will complement the existing measures to 
accelerate the country’s migration to e-payments. Moving forward, MyClear, MEPS and the 
banks  should  continuously  collaborate  to  explore  new  and  innovative  ways  to  achieve 
greater  payment  efficiency.  Both  consumers  and  businesses  should  capitalize  on  the 
benefits  and  opportunities  derived 
from 
to  enhance 
competitiveness in this rapidly evolving world. 
Let me conclude by congratulating MyClear and the banks on the successful establishment 
of  the  national  bill  payment  scheme,  JomPAY.  I  hope  such  a  collaborative  spirit  will  be 
enhanced to drive the country towards a successful migration to e-payments. 
the  adoption  of  e-payments 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
