  Chris Salmon: Remarks on the Sterling Monetary Framework (SMF) 
Annual Report 
Remarks by Mr Chris Salmon, Executive Director for Markets of the Bank of England, at the 
Money Markets Liaison Committee meeting, London, 13 July 2015. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Eleanor  Broughton,  Ronnie  Driver,  Sarah  John,  Ben  Martin  and  Ben  Morley  for  their 
comments and contributions. 
The  Bank  will  hold  an  Open  Forum  this  autumn.  The  Forum  will  facilitate  an  open  debate 
about the role of markets in society, and provide an opportunity to review how key financial 
markets  are  functioning.  The  Bank’s  own  mechanism  for  interacting  with  markets,  when 
implementing  monetary  policy  and  providing  liquidity  insurance,  is  set  out  in  the  Sterling 
Monetary Framework (SMF). Markets work more effectively when participants are open and 
transparent about their activities, and the Bank aspires to meet that standard in relation to its 
own market operations, including through publishing an annual report on the effectiveness of 
the SMF. 
This Committee brings together key participants in sterling money markets and is a natural 
venue to discuss the operation of SMF. As such, today I want to summarise the key themes 
that were covered in our most recent annual reports and to sketch out some of the issues 
that  the  Bank  is  likely  to  confront  in  coming  years.  These  are  areas  where  your  future 
feedback will be essential as we work to maintain the effectiveness of the SMF. 
included 
the  extension  of  SMF  membership 
Liquidity insurance 
We have made a number of significant changes to the way the Bank offers liquidity provision 
through  the  SMF.  As  the  Governor  has  remarked,  these  changes  have  been  aimed  at 
providing  more  liquidity,  at  longer  terms,  at  cheaper  rates,  and  to  a  wider  range  of 
counterparties with the objective of ensuring that the Bank of England is “open for business”. 
As  discussed  in  the  SMF  annual  report,  the main  highlights  over  the  past  couple  of  years 
have 
to  broker-dealers  and  central 
counterparties  (CCPs),  and  the  expansion  of  the  monthly  indexed  long  term  repo  (ILTR) 
operations. 
The extension of the SMF to broker-dealers and CCPs gives non-banks access to the Bank 
of England’s balance sheet for the first time. Non-banks are becoming increasingly important 
to  the  financial  system.  The  Bank  considered  three  key  themes  before  widening  SMF 
membership:  whether  the  non-bank  institutions  were  systemically  important,  whether  they 
were  exposed  to  sterling  liquidity  risk,  and  whether  they  were  appropriately  prudentially 
regulated  so  that  usage  of  the  facilities  remained  appropriate.  In  light  of  this,  the  Bank 
announced in November 2014 that broker-dealers and CCPs would be eligible to apply for 
access to the SMF. And some of these institutions have indeed formally signed up in recent 
months. 
Another recent, major change to the SMF was the reform to the Bank’s ILTR operations in 
February  2014.  These  auctions  offer  reserves  at  lower  prices  and  for  a  longer  maturity 
against a wider range of collateral than had been the case previously. And the auctions are 
responsive to market conditions, with the amount of liquidity available rising automatically if 
there  is greater  demand.  Reflecting  the  improved  financial  positions  of banks  and  building 
societies, and the liquidity provided to the market through QE, the Bank’s liquidity insurance 
facilities  saw  relatively  modest  usage  over  the  year  covered  by  the  most  recent  annual 
report. More recently, however, usage has increased, as banks sought to make use of the 
liquidity  insurance  provision  on  offer  by  pre-emptively  securing  term  funding  ahead  of  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  period  of  potential  uncertainty  around  key  events,  such  as  the  UK  general  election,  and 
Greece. This pattern of usage is encouraging and welcome, as it demonstrates that banks 
are prudently managing their liquidity position ahead of potential risks, and that the ILTR is 
an  active  part  of  their  liquidity  management.  Despite  the  increase,  however,  demand  has 
remained relatively low, with just over £4 billion allocated in the May operation: a high water 
mark for the expanded ILTR operation. 
Looking back to 2007, before the crisis, the cumulative changes we have made to the SMF 
have been transformative. The SMF now has 164 members, more than double the number 
signed up in 2007, with banks and building society SMF members accounting for 98% of total 
sterling deposits. The drawable value of collateral delivered to the Bank for actual or potential 
use  in  the  Bank’s  facilities  has  increased  dramatically,  and  stood  at  £327.4  billion  at  end-
June  2015.  And  the  Bank  now  has  a  comprehensive  set  of  market  wide  and  bilateral 
facilities.  These  developments  give  the  Bank  tremendous  flexibility  to  support  financial 
institutions during periods of stress. As you will see from the FPC’s published record, it was 
in that context that the Bank decided to announce two additional ILTR operations in the event 
of a “yes” vote in the referendum on Scottish Independence, as a precautionary measure to 
backstop sterling market liquidity. As part of its contingency planning, the Bank assessed its 
ability  to  provide  liquidity  support  to  the  banking  system  should  it  become  necessary  and 
concluded that the range of tools within the existing framework offered sufficient flexibility to 
respond. 
But  the  Bank  is  not  standing  still;  we  are  continuing  to  develop  our  liquidity  insurance 
framework to ensure that it can react to a wide range of liquidity challenges. 
First,  as  part  of  the  strategy  to  broaden  liquidity  provision,  the  Bank  has  committed  to 
consider  the  feasibility  of  offering  Shari’ah  compliant  facilities.  All  banks  must  hold  an 
adequate stock of liquid assets to meet prudential regulations and, as the most liquid assets 
in  the  economy  are  the  reserves  held  by  banks  and  building  societies  on  account  at  the 
Bank,  it  would  be  beneficial  to  Shari’ah  compliant  banks  to  have  access  to  our  balance 
sheet.  There  are  significant  challenges  to  this  work:  for  example,  in  designing  a  Shar’iah 
compliant deposit account which has similar economic properties to interest-paying reserve 
accounts and in identifying sufficient Shari’ah compliant collateral to support lending facilities. 
But the Bank is now actively working on these issues and I am hopeful that we will be able to 
release further details as early as the turn of the year. 
Second, the Bank has also started work to ensure there are no technical obstacles to our 
ability to accept equities as collateral should the need arise. At present, the Bank accepts a 
very  broad  range  of  collateral,  including  government  bonds,  asset  backed  securities  and 
pools of “raw” loans. But the Bank can further bolster its flexibility by removing any technical 
obstacles to accepting equities as collateral, should the need arise. Given the complexities 
involved, the project will take some time to deliver, and we currently anticipate that work to 
remove technical obstacles will continue throughout 2015 and 2016. 
Finally,  as  noted  in  the  Open  Forum  paper1  published  in  June,  the  Bank  stands  ready  in 
principle  to  support  core  markets  directly  through  “Market  Maker  of  Last  Resort”  (MMLR) 
actions.  Such  action  would  probably  only  be  contemplated  if  the  illiquidity  in  particular 
markets was judged to pose a threat to financial stability, or was judged to be important to 
the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  However,  MMLR  remains  a  relatively 
untested tool, and the Bank’s ability and willingness to act as a MMLR could be a fruitful topic 
to discuss at the forthcoming Open Forum. 
                                                
1  Open Forum: Building Real Markets for the Good of the People. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Monetary policy 
The task of evolving our liquidity insurance framework will not end, but given the substantial 
reforms made to it over recent years, it is likely that the focus will shift to monetary policy 
implementation, as and when the MPC decides to move policy away from its current settings. 
As the head of the Markets Directorate it is not my role to speculate when the policy setting 
might  change,  but  it  is  my  job  to  ensure  that  decisions  of  the  MPC  are  implemented 
effectively. That involves, in particular, ensuring that we have the tools needed for effective 
monetary control; that is, keeping overnight market interest rates in line with Bank Rate. 
The  Bank’s  current  approach  is  to  pay  Bank  Rate  on  the  full  balances  held  in  reserves 
accounts.  This  is  known  as  the  “floor”  system.  As  set  out  in  the  SMF  Annual  Report,  this 
approach remained successful at keeping sterling overnight market rates close to Bank Rate 
during 2014–15, with the “wedge” between policy rates and market rates relatively small over 
the past year. But over the year, activity in the sterling money markets remained low as the 
floor system, alongside a large-scale injection of reserves through QE, reduced the need for 
banks to transact in money markets. 
In the near-term, I expect that this system will remain effective at moving market rates in line 
with  any  change  made  to  policy  rates  by  the  MPC.  Nevertheless,  in  the  spirit  of  being 
prepared,  and  drawing  on  feedback from  previous  meetings  of  this  committee2,  staff  have 
developed plans should market rates persistently settle below Bank Rate, to such an extent 
that the Bank decided it was necessary to intervene in support of monetary control. In such a 
scenario,  the  presumption  is  that  the  Bank  would  issue  one-week  Bank  of  England  bills, 
draining reserves from the system. That would tend to put upward pressure on market rates, 
reducing the wedge that had opened up and tightening the link between policy and markets 
rates.  The  Bank  has  a  history  of  issuing  these  instruments  successfully:  Bank  of  England 
bills were first issued in 2008, to drain excess reserves following the increased size of long-
term repo operations. And Bank of England bills also have the advantages of being widely 
tradable, offering a close substitute to deposits for most participants in the money markets, 
and of providing additional supply of high quality collateral. 
I  have  no  particular  expectation  that  the  Bank  will  need  to  issue  Bills  in  the  foreseeable 
future, but the tool is ready if required. 
The  move  to  the  current  floor  regime  was  prompted  by  the  MPC’s  policy  decisions  to  cut 
Bank  Rate  to  the  effective  lower  bound  and  its  subsequent  decision  to  loosen  monetary 
conditions  via  asset  purchases.  It  is  unlikely  that  the  regime  would  have  been  adopted 
without these developments and so as and when the MPC starts to “normalise” the level of 
Bank Rate, the Bank is likely to review whether to retain the current “floor” system indefinitely 
or whether it should move to a different medium-term operating framework. 
One obvious option would be to return to the framework used before the introduction of QE – 
which  was  known  as  “reserves  averaging”.  That  operating  regime  was  introduced  after  a 
careful review of alternative regimes open to the Bank in the mid-2000s. But the world has 
changed markedly since that review was undertaken. Banks have structurally higher demand 
for central bank reserves than they did before the crisis, reflecting in part liquidity regulations, 
and as I noted earlier, a far wider range of institutions can directly access our balance sheet 
than  was  the  case  a  decade  ago.  Moreover,  the  structure  of  money  markets  has  evolved 
considerably over this period as banks have responded to lessons learned during the crisis 
and the impact of post-crisis regulation. 
These  changes  have  been  sufficiently  profound  that  the  Bank  no  longer  maintains  a 
presumption that it will return to a version of reserves averaging that existed prior to 2009. 
                                                
2  See 3.1-3.4 of the September 2014 MMLG Minutes  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/money/mmlgsep14.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  While such a decision remains possible, the choice of medium-term operating framework is 
now  a  genuinely  open  question  and  is  likely  to  be  become  a  key  issue  for  the  Bank  as  it 
considers the future design of the SMF. 
Whatever decision the Bank makes about its medium-term monetary policy framework it is 
likely that the floor system will be retained for some time after Bank Rate is increased from its 
current level. 
Conclusion 
The SMF defines how the Bank interacts with markets, when implementing monetary policy 
and  providing  liquidity  insurance.  It  is  important  that  we  are  open  and  accountable  for  the 
operation  of  the  SMF.  The  MMLC  itself  and  the  new  SMF  annual  review  process  help  us 
achieve  that  aim.  In  recent  years  we  have  transformed  the  SMF,  and  we  believe  for  the 
better. But reform of the SMF is an on-going process. As my remarks today have made clear, 
that process is incomplete: further changes to support liquidity insurance are in the pipeline 
and  the  Bank  needs  to keep  under review  its  tools for  implementing monetary  policy.  The 
Bank is both open for business and open to outside views, and we always welcome feedback 
from MMLC members or other interested parties on any aspect of the SMF, including at the 
forthcoming Open Forum. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
