  Vítor Constâncio: Remarks at the Symposium on Debt – economic, 
political and moral consequences 
Remarks prepared by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at 
the 37th Symposium on Debt – Economic, Political and Moral Consequences in honour of 
Benjamin M. Friedman, organised by the Institut für bankhistorische Forschung e.V. jointly 
with the Deutsche Bundesbank and Goethe University/Research Center SAFE, Frankfurt am 
Main, 24 June 2015. 
 It  is  indeed  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  this  homage  to  Professor  Benjamin 
Friedman  and  I  am  grateful  for  having  been  invited  by  Professor  Kotz  to  take  part  in  this 
panel. Over the years, Ben Friedman has made important contributions to macroeconomics 
and  monetary  theory.  From  1975  to  1990,  he  was  an  early  critic  of  the  use  of  partially 
endogenous variables like money or credit as intermediate targets in the design of monetary 
policy.1 He consistently underlined the importance of credit but later resigned himself to the 
demise of the (demand for money) LM curve2 and contributed recently to the extension of the 
modern  canonical  model  to  include  a  credit  and  bond  market.3  He  did  not  limit  himself  to 
mere technical work. His 2005 great book on “The moral consequences of economic growth”4 
shows  how,  in  the  absence  of  continuous  economic  growth,  political  and  social  stability 
vanish  and  our  democratic  societies  lose  their  moral  compass.  Ahead  of  the  subject 
becoming  so  topical  and  urgent,  he  also  underlined  how  inequality  corrodes  the  social 
compact and affects the Hegelian ethics of the community (Sittlichkeit). 
The  same  moral  perspective  underlies  the  BIS  paper  that  Ben  Friedman  wrote  last  year 
about how to deal with debt: “A predictable pathology”.5 That paper is a sort of background to 
this panel but I am in no position to react to the moral, social and political issues that the 
paper raises when it reminds us that the “consequence of economic stagnation, together with 
the  absence  of  widespread  employment  opportunities,  is  a  turn  away  from  liberal  values 
toward  xenophobic  populism  of  either  the  right  or  the  left”.  Unfortunately,  I  cannot  even 
provide  a  full  answer  to  his  policy  view  that  “With  European  monetary  policy  already 
expansionary …. and since Europe as such has no fiscal policy, the urgent need today is for 
debt restructuring and relief for the fiscally weak European countries… In a similar way, in 
the United States today there is need for relief for under-water homeowners whom the bail-
out of US lenders a half-decade ago largely neglected.” My own remarks today will be mostly 
of  a  more  descriptive  and  technical  nature  and,  in  view  of  the  time  constraint,  rather 
telegraphic. 
It is consensual that the financial crisis that started in 2007 was a crisis of excessive debt, 
resulting  from  an  excessive  credit  boom.  It  was  a  crisis  just  like  the  ones  analysed  for 
17 advanced  economies  from  1870  to  2011  by  Jordà,  Schularick  and  Taylor  (2014).6  The 
                                                
1   Friedman,  B.M.  (1975)  “Targets,  instruments  and  indicators  of  Monetary  Policy”  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics, 1, October 1975; Friedman, B.M. (1990) “Targets and instruments of monetary policy” Chapter 22 
of Benjamin Friedman and Frank Hahn, editors (1990) “Handbook of Monetary Economics” North-Holland. 
2   Friedman, B.M. (2003) “The LM Curve: a not-so-fond farewell”, NBER Working Paper 10123. 
3   Friedman,  B.M.  (2013)  “The  simple  analytics  of  monetary  policy:  a  post-crisis  approach”,  NBER  Working 
Paper 18960. 
4   Friedman, B.M. (2005) “The moral consequences of economic growth” Alfred A. Knof, New York. 
5   Friedman, B.M. (2014) “A predictable pathology” Keynote address at the Bank for International Settlements 
Conference on “Debt,” Lucerne, 26 June, 2014. 
6   Jordà, O., M. Schularick, and A. Taylor (2014) “Sovereigns versus banks: Credit, crises and consequences” 
Institute  for  Economic  Thinking  Working  Paper  No.  3  or  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  Working 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  authors concluded: “On the one hand, we reaffirm the central role played by private sector 
borrowing behaviour for the build-up of financial fragility. In advanced economies, the idea 
that financial crises typically have their roots in fiscal problems which in turn take a toll on the 
banking sector is not supported by history as a general matter. … On the other hand, our 
results also speak to the potential dangers of high public debt in some situations. While high 
levels  of  public  debt  make  little  difference  in  normal  times,  entering  a  financial  crisis 
recession  with  an  elevated  level  of  public  debt  seems  to  exacerbate  the  effects  of  private 
sector deleveraging and is typically accompanied by a prolonged period of sub-par economic 
performance.” In another paper Taylor7 goes as far as saying that: “As symptoms of financial 
crises, external imbalances are a distraction and so are public debts”. Evidence points to the 
fact that only excessive credit growth permits a good prediction of financial crises. 
My  first  point  is  thus  to  underline  that,  similarly  to  past  crises  episodes,  the  2007  crisis  is 
rooted in a private sector credit boom. Looking at figures at global level, between 2000 and 
2007, private debt (measured as a percentage of GDP) increased whereas the public debt 
came down.8 In the euro area, private debt increased by 27% whereas public debt declined 
by  7.4%,  from  1999  to  2007.  In  fact,  in  a  number  of  countries  public  debt  declined 
substantially: in Spain, it declined from 62% to 36% of GDP; in Ireland, over the same period, 
public debt fell from 47% to 25% of GDP Despite the relatively high levels, public debt also 
declined in Italy, from 113% of GDP to 103% of GDP whereas it increased slightly in Greece. 
In the latter two countries, debt levels were indeed still far above the 60% stipulated in the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.9  In  all  cases,  private  debt  increased  by  large  multiples  of  the 
public debt percentage increase over the period 1999 to 2007. Only after the crisis has the 
increase in public debt significantly accelerated. 
The  extraordinary  increase  in  debt  accompanied  a  strong  financialization  of  the  economy 
with  an  enormous  surge  of  financial  institutions’  total  assets  in  relation  to  GDP.  In  the 
literature,  these  developments  are  explained  by  a  period  of  general  financial  deregulation, 
the  emergence  of  a  world-wide  “savings  glut”  and  the  need  to  offset  inequality,  as  Rajan 
(2011)10 put it, by “letting them eat credit”. Two recent reports, one from McKinsey another 
published by CEPR11 highlight how total global debt continued to expand, having increased 
by 40% (or by USD 57 trillion) since 2007 with the debt ratio to GDP growing from 269% to 
286%. Among the 15 countries with highest total debt, 12 are from the EU, 9 of which within 
the euro area. In the ranking, the US comes 16th.12 
The negative effects of excessive high levels of debt are quite well known and I will not dwell 
on them. One could therefore expect that deleveraging or the reduction of debt ratios would 
be uncontroversial and the way right forward. Things are however more complex, especially 
in  the  wake  of  a  financial  crisis  when  economic  recoveries  tend  to  be  slower.  Advanced 
economies are caught in a sort of dilemma: either to press for both private and public debt 
reduction  thereby  further  slowing  the  pace  of  the  recovery,  helping  it  only  with  structural 
reforms  on  the  supply  side;  or  to  try  stimulate  aggregate  demand  in  the  short  term  which 
                                                                                                                                                   
Paper  Series  2013–37.  See  also  Schularick,  M.  and  A.  Taylor,  (2013)  “Credit  booms  gone  bust:  monetary 
policy, leverage cycles and financial crises 1870–2008” American Economic Review 102 (2). 
7   Taylor, A. (2012) “The great leveraging” presented at the BIS Annual Conference, Lucerne, 21–22 June 2012. 
8   See McKinsey Global Institute (2015) “Debt and (not much) deleveraging”, February. 
9   Constâncio, V. (2013) “The European crisis and the role of the financial system” speech at the Bank of Greece 
conference on “The crisis in the euro area” Athens, 23 May 2013. 
10   Rajan, R. (2011) “Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World Economy”, Princeton University 
Press. 
11   McKinsey Global Institute (2015) “Debt and (not much) deleveraging” and Buttiglione, L., P. Lane, L. Reichlin, 
and V. Reinhart, (2014) “Deleveraging, what deleveraging?” Geneva Report No. 16, CEPR Press. 
12   McKinsey Global Institute (2015) “Debt and (not much) deleveraging”, Exhibit 3, page 18. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  implies,  among  other  things,  normalising  credit  and  finance  after  the  initial  crunch.  The 
dilemma is thus liquidation and restructuring versus stabilisation and compensating stimulus 
to  aggregate  demand.  Reality  is  never  so  black  and  white  and  both  strands  have  been 
partially pursued with the end result that deleveraging has hardly happened both in the case 
of households or corporates, let alone sovereigns, as I mentioned before. The pressure to 
restore  growth  and  reduce  unemployment  has  been  understandably  very  strong  in  our 
societies. Countries with very high debt ratios were forced to take active measures of fiscal 
consolidation in order to regain regular access to financial markets. 
One  of  the  potential  negative  effects  of  high  debt,  which  has  been  overly  discussed, 
concerns the relation between debt and economic growth. High debt levels, initially seen as 
quite  negative  by  Rogoff  and  Reinhart  (2010)  and  Cecchetti  et  al.  (2012),13  setting  a 
threshold around 90% of GDP, subsequent research pointed to the ambiguity of results and 
the impossibility of defining any thresholds. Two-way causality, endogeneity and the effect of 
omitted variables, plagued the econometrics of the issue. In October 2012 the IMF concluded 
that  “there  are  many  factors  that  matter  for  a  country’s  growth  and  debt  performance. 
Moreover, there is no single threshold for debt ratios that can delineate the “bad” from the 
“good”.14 
In an IMF Staff Discussion Note published this month15 it is concluded that “ Where countries 
retain ample fiscal space, governments should not pursue policies aimed at paying down the 
debt, instead allowing the debt ratio to decline through growth and “opportunistic” revenues, 
living  with  the  debt  otherwise.”  The  rationale  is  that  the  deadweight  loss  of  high  debt  is  a 
sunk cost and the option value of reducing it as a risk management measure would be lower 
than the economic costs of the specific policies aimed at actively reducing the debt ratio now. 
The authors use the concept they have developed of fiscal space (distance to debt limit) as 
the  difference  between  the  present  debt  ratio  and  the  country  specific  debt  limit  that  is 
consistent  with  the  country’s  historical  track  record  beyond  which  the  debt  would  increase 
without  bound.  The  study  finds  fiscal  space  for  European  countries  such  as  Spain 
(115 percentage  points),  Ireland  (105  percentage  points),  Portugal  (59  percentage  points), 
while Italy and Greece stand at zero. 
Historically,  there  are  several  cases  of  successful  reduction  of  public  debt  ratios.  The 
possible  drivers  of  such  reductions  are  well  known:  accumulation  of  primary  surplus,  real 
growth, nominal interest rates and degree of financial repression, inflation and, finally, debt 
restructuring or rescheduling. 
In the IMF’s WEO of October 2012, the analysis of concrete episodes of debt ratio reductions 
drew three main conclusions. First, that to be successful in reducing debt ratios, tighter fiscal 
policy  usually  has  to  be  accompanied  by  accommodative  monetary  policy.  The  UK  case, 
from 1918 to 1933, failed because both fiscal and monetary policy stances were too tight. 
This was also the case of Japan, from 1997 to 2012, when monetary policy tried but could 
not become sufficiently expansionary. The second lesson is that international growth helped 
several successful cases. This was particularly true of Belgium, between 1992 and 2002 and 
of  Canada,  between  1995  and  2005.  The  third  lesson  is  that  success  depends  on  taking 
structural  fiscal  measures  and  creating  an  appropriate  institutional  framework.  The 
                                                
13   Reinhart, C. M. and K. Rogoff, (2010) “Growth in a time of debt” American Economic Review 100(2) 573–78; 
Cecchetti, S., M. Mohanty, and F. Zampoli, (2012) “Achieving growth amid fiscal imbalances: the real effects 
of debt” Jackson Hole Kansas FED Symposium; see also Panizza, U. and A. Presbitero, (2013) “Public debt 
and economic growth in advanced economies: a survey” Money & Finance Research Group Working Paper 
No. 78. 
14   IMF (2012) “The good, the bad, and the ugly: 100 years of dealing with public debt overhangs”, Chapter 3 of 
the October World Economic Outlook. 
15   Ostry, J., A.R. Ghosh, and R. Espinoza, (2015) “When should public debt be reduced?“ IMF Staff Discussion 
Note 15/10, June. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  impressive case of the US, between 1946 and 1961, benefited from high real growth, very 
accommodative low nominal interest rates with inflation engineering periods of negative real 
rates. 
In  all  successful  cases,  positive  primary  surplus  played  an  important  role.  The  cases  of 
Belgium, with a 5.4% primary surplus during 10 years, or Denmark with 5.3% during 26 years 
are  impressive.  However,  Eichengreen  and  Panizza  (2014)16, after  examining  54  countries 
from 1974 to 2013, show that from 185 episodes of positive primary surplus, only 12 were 
above 4% (and from which only 4 were above 5%). Duration of the episodes was also not 
very long, leading the authors to conclude that “large primary surpluses for extended periods 
are possible, but they are the exception” in successfully reducing debt ratios. 
Undoubtedly, the euro area needs to find ways to normalise debt ratios in several member 
countries. Right now, after the setback of the double dip in 2012, the strategy is based on 
appropriate  primary  surplus,  accommodative  monetary  policy  to  normalise  inflation  levels, 
and economic growth resulting from monetary stimulus and structural reforms. Many shocks 
and surprises may emerge during the implementation and so, many academics doubt that 
the  strategy  can  be  fully  successful  and  therefore  other  measures  may  have  to  be 
considered as a complement.17 The future will tell and, following Voltaire, I will not insult the 
future by trying to predict it. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
16   Eichengreen, B. and Panizza, U. (2014) “A surplus of ambition: can Europe rely on large primary surpluses to 
solve its debt problem” NBER Working Paper 20316. 
17   For  the  latest  academic  effort  to  make  challenging  suggestions  and  for  the  references  to  several  other 
proposals, see Corsetti, G, L. Feld, P. Lane, L. Reichlin, D. Vayanos and B. Weder di Mauro, (2015) "A new 
start for the Eurozone: dealing with debt” The European Council of Economic Experts, CEPR. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
