  Christian Noyer: Views on the Capital Markets Union project 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Paris  Europlace  International 
Financial Forum, Paris, 9 July 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure to be here today at the Paris Europlace International Forum and I am 
particularly thrilled to exchange views on the Capital  Markets Union project with one of its 
major architects, Olivier Guersent. 
This  project  indeed  echoes  many  concerns  tackled  at  the  Central  bank  level,  in  particular 
how to achieve a better balance in the funding structure of the economy, and improve access 
to funding for businesses, notably SMEs and infrastructures, while ensuring financial stability. 
Although this initiative was announced only a year ago, it has soon become topical with the 
public consultation launched in February by the European Commission. 
The  Banque  de  France  was  committed  to  answering  this  public  consultation,  which 
constitutes a milestone in the construction of a Capital Markets Union. Let me briefly share 
with you our vision. 
I  welcome  and  support  the  CMU  initiative  as  a  promising  avenue  for  growth.  However,  I 
believe  that  three  major  pre-requisites  have  to  be  met  in  order  to  make  it  a  successful 
endeavor: (i) a clearly defined framework focused on a limited set of operational deliverables, 
(ii)  the  right  articulation  between  market-based  financing  and  bank  financing,  (iii)  the 
necessity to ensure financial stability in the long run. 
(i) First, a Capital Markets Union should be structured along a clearly defined and 
articulated framework and focused on a limited set of operational deliverables. 
As an overall priority, we believe that the initiative should seek to promote equity instead of 
debt  financing  for  long-term  financing.  Equity  financing  is  crucial  for  firms  to  grow  and 
operate  over  the  long  run,  all  the  more  since  we  must  pay  attention  to  the  high  level  of 
indebtedness in Europe with respect to both the public and private sectors, including SME 
borrowers.  The  current  ratios  of  debt-to-income  are  indeed  to  be  adjusted  to  a  more 
sustainable path. 
Notwithstanding  this  primary  objective,  debt  instruments  remain  an  indispensable  funding 
tool. As far as operational deliverables are concerned, we share the view of the European 
Commission  that  the  development  of  both  Simple,  Transparent  and  Standardized  (STS) 
securitization and Private Placements is achievable in the short to medium run. 2 
Securitization is indeed a useful tool to help fund the economy, as a means to free regulatory 
capital and to create liquid assets, particularly in the context of tightened capital requirements 
for banks. The CMU could for instance promote initiatives such as that carried out in France, 
where banks, with the support of the Banque de France, have taken steps to monetize their 
pools of credit claims. Banks now have the option of structuring these loans into marketable 
debt securities which are issued by a securitization vehicle (called Euro Secured Note Issuer 
or ESNI), in order to raise funds over the medium term. 
Regarding  private  placements,  market-led  initiatives  have  already  allowed  the  effective 
development  of  European  common  standards.  The  French  financial  industry  has  been 
particularly active in this field, with the development of a Charter for Euro Private Placement 
for  France  in  2014.  This  Charter  has  been  re-used  by  the  International  Capital  Market 
Association  (ICMA)  to  elaborate  a  market  guide  on  common  market  standards  and  best 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  practices.  These  initiatives  could  leverage  on  a  common  European  definition  and 
classification of SMEs to develop a Pan-European Private Placements market. 
(ii) Second, market-based financing should be seen as a complement to, not as a 
substitute for, bank-based financing. 
It is essential to foster the development of market-based financing as a complement to bank-
based financing. Although this process has already started, the speed and extent of the shift 
differ  across  countries  and  sectors.  Even  though  a  rebalancing  of  the  European  economy 
financing mix is a desirable outcome as it diversifies the available sources of funding, banks 
will still have a major role to play. 
Some  segments  of  the  economy,  namely  SMEs  and  infrastructures,  heavily  rely  on  bank-
financing, due to the existence of high fixed costs and significant information asymmetries. 
Banks are indeed better equipped to assess the credit-worthiness of such counterparties or 
projects. 
Having  said  that,  clear  and  transparent  information  on  credit  risk  is  a  prerequisite  to  the 
recourse to any source of funding, be it intermediated or not. The CMU action plan should 
cater  for  initiatives  promoting  private  sector  solutions,  such  as  a  broader  use  of  existing 
rating tools. 
Investors  need  also  to  access  clear,  comparable  and  comprehensive  accounting  reporting 
which are currently lacking for most SMEs in Europe. Because accounting rules are the basis 
of  financial  information,  a  Capital  Markets  Union  cannot  be  effective  with  28  different 
accounting  systems.  This  is  all  the  more  relevant  in  the  Banking  Union,  where  banks 
supervised  by  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  are  still  subject  to  different 
accounting  systems.  In  this  area,  progress  is  highly  desirable  and  as  a  first  step,  I  would 
support  an  initiative  aiming  to  assess  the  quality  and  degree  of  comparability  of  national 
accounting standards and to promote further convergence. 
(iii) Third, it remains necessary to ensure financial stability in the long run. 
The  shift  towards  more  market-based  financing  would  entail  several  implications  from  a 
financial stability perspective. 
The  development  of  alternative  sources  of  funding,  outside  the  banking  system,  brings  a 
necessary diversification. Yet the risks associated with disintermediation are clear, notably a 
limited assessment 3 
of risks by investors or less ability to address difficult situations and gaps in supervision. In 
parallel,  re-intermediation  by  non-banks  raises  level-playing  field  questions  linked  with 
uneven regulation and supervision across sectors and countries. 
The objectives of the Capital Markets Union should serve as a backbone to the regulatory 
efforts made at the European level. Before adopting new pieces of legislation, it is of utmost 
importance to thoroughly examine their impact. Even though the analysis of the cumulative 
impact and the interactions between regulations is still in its early days, vigilance is required 
to  ensure  that  the  implementation  of  reforms  does  not  result  in  a  reduction  of  financial 
activities,  such  as  market  making  that  are  vital  for  preserving  market  liquidity,  financing 
investments and firms and ultimately the real economy. 
The  foreseen  banking  structures  reform  and  European  Financial  Transactions  Tax  (EFTT) 
are cases in point. In both projects, an appropriate approach should strike the right balance 
between  limiting  risks  associated  with  trading  activities  and  the  need  to  preserve  financial 
activities that are useful if not essential to the development of the real economy. Doing so 
would be fully compliant with the overarching objectives of the Capital Markets Union. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Having  better  integrated  markets  within  the  European  Union  (EU)  would  also  mean  the 
emergence  of  more  reciprocity  issues  as  regards  macroprudential  policies.  At  the  macro 
level, authorities should then closely review the potential additional vulnerabilities and risks 
attached to the CMU both at the domestic level and on a cross-border basis. Authorities will 
also  have  to  strengthen  their  analytical  framework  and  possibly  complement  their 
macroprudential instruments which are mainly bank-based at the current juncture. 
I  will  conclude  with  some  remarks  regarding  longer  term  work,  namely  how  to  harmonize 
further domestic legal regimes and the institutional architecture. 
The Commission’s green paper has identified some areas for longer term work, including the 
need  for  further  harmonization  of  insolvency  regimes,  securities  laws  and  tax  regimes. 
Achieving such goals would imply a  very complex and politically sensitive process. This is 
why,  as  a  first  and  more  realistic  step,  we  suggest  starting  by  a  stock-taking  exercise 
whereby  investors  would  have  a  clearer  view  of  divergences  and  potential  discrepancies 
between the various EU legislations. It is also worth noting that in the field of financial market 
infrastructures,  Eurosystem  initiatives  have  turned  out  to  be  powerful  catalysts  for 
harmonization.  For  instance,  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  the  standardization  of 
corporate  actions  through  the  Target2-Securities  project  without  having  to  adjust  the 
respective legal frameworks. 
Finally,  and  I  know  this  is  a  topic  where  Olivier  will  be  happy  to  pick  up,  more  regulatory 
convergence can be achieved without changing the current institutional architecture but via 
increased  cooperation  between  European  Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs)  and  national 
authorities. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
