  Peter Praet: Monetary policy lessons from the financial crisis – some 
remarks 
Dinner speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  SNB  Research  Conference,  organised  by  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Zurich, 
24 September 2015. 
 It is a pleasure for me to share with you some thoughts on the topic of this conference. Let 
me start with a word of caution. I think we are not yet in a position to draw firm lessons. The 
final  verdict  on  many  aspects  of  the  crisis  and  the  way  policy-makers,  including  central 
bankers,  reacted  to  it  –  both  globally  and  in  their  respective  jurisdictions  –  is  still  out. 
Therefore,  somewhat  less  ambitiously,  please  allow  me  to  offer  some  remarks  on  the 
conference topic. 
Based  on  my  own  experience,  the  overarching  challenge  that  was  faced  by  major  central 
banks  in  terms  of  their  response  to  the  recent  financial  crisis  can  be  captured  with  two 
insights. 
First, when the crisis intensified at a global level, we faced a trade-off we had not seen for a 
very long time, namely how to prevent the meltdown of the financial system without causing 
undue  harm  to  the  incentive  constraints  that  are  of  vital  importance  for  the  functioning  of 
market-based  economies.  The  pre-crisis  macroeconomic  debate  had  spent  considerable 
time  and  effort  explaining  that  negative  supply  side  shocks  could  present  central  bankers 
with  a  very  difficult  decision:  whether  to  stabilise  inflation  at  the  cost  of  slowing  growth 
further,  or  be  more  patient  at  bringing  inflation  back  to  target  at  the  cost  of  destabilising 
inflation expectations. We thought that a situation like this was the worst scenario for central 
bankers.  Therefore,  when  we  finally  faced  the  post-Lehman  Brothers  meltdown  and  the 
different – and far more serious – decision of handling panic against preserving incentives, 
the  required  experience  on  how  to  deal  with  it  had,  to  some  extent,  been  lost.  We  could 
consult  history  books  –  the  recurrent  financial  crises  of  the  19th  century  were  regularly 
haunting central bankers – but not macroeconomic textbooks. 
Second, while a global meltdown had successfully been prevented, a second type of trade-
off emerged, which is typical for balance sheet recessions.1 What essentially had happened 
is that banks, emerging painfully from a liquidity crisis, had started to deleverage actively in 
an  attempt  to  structurally  reduce  liquidity  needs  by  shedding  excess  exposures.  The 
deleveraging was an additional downside force contributing to the slump. In this situation, a 
central  banker  is  again  torn  between  two  priorities.  You  want  banks  to  reduce  excess 
exposures,  because  this  is  a  precondition  for  the  economy  to  return  to  healthy  growth.  In 
other words, you would like banks to deleverage in an orderly way. At the same time, you 
face  the  danger  that,  at  the  aggregate  level,  any  type  of  credit  contraction  will  undermine 
demand severely, and a deeper contraction will make it difficult or impossible for the central 
bank to deliver on its price stability mandate. 
True, you can also argue that central banks have some leeway – within their mandate – to 
facilitate the needed adjustments. For example, the time horizon for normalising inflation is 
generally not set in calendar time, and is often made conditional on shocks. This allows the 
central bank to accept more disinflation – and for longer – during the transition than it would 
tolerate in different balance sheet conditions. But there is a limit to this. The reason central 
banks  have  been  given  mandates  that  are  expressed  in  terms  of  numerical  objectives  for 
                                                
1   For  details,  see  the  speech  entitled  Monetary  policy  and  balance  sheet  adjustment  delivered  at  the  ECB 
Forum on Central Banking in Sintra on 27 May 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
inflation is because legislatures realised that central banks’ discretion had to be constrained. 
Their reaction functions had to be made predictable within a horizon which is realistic and, at 
the same time, verifiable by electorates. 
So, what is the role of monetary policy in this scenario? Maintaining a very accommodative 
policy  stance  for  too  long  certainly  carries  significant  risks.  Incentives  for  timely  balance 
sheet repair may be undermined and new imbalances may ultimately emerge. Still, central 
banks  will  have  to  remain  true  to  their  mandates  of  ensuring  price  stability.  This  mandate 
should  be  interpreted  as  a  symmetric  mandate.  Too  low  inflation,  or  even  deflation,  for  a 
prolonged period of time cannot be seen as consistent with price stability. 
This is the overarching challenge, as I see it, and I will come back to some of the elements 
involved in more detail. I will now turn to three specific remarks of global relevance, before I 
make two concluding observations that are specific to the euro area. 
General remarks 
A. 
At  a  global  level,  the financial  crisis  created  an  environment  in  which  many  central  banks 
resorted  to  unconventional  measures  because  the  conventional  instrument,  the  short-term 
policy  rate,  had  become  constrained  by  the  lower  bound.  In  the  jargon  of  papers  written 
before the crisis, it is simple to say what happened: many central banks hit the famous zero 
lower bound (ZLB). The euro area, as I will mention at the end, reached the lower bound 
through a different avenue. And the end point of that journey, as you know, was not zero, but 
a negative point. 
Remark 1: The ZLB constraint has turned out to be more binding than previously thought. 
What was the pre-crisis consensus? 
As  concerns  the  United  States,  let  me  quote  from  the  paper  entitled  “Have  We 
Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?”, written by John 
Williams  and  co-authors  working  for  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System.2  The  paper  documents  predictions  from  the  Fed’s  FRB/US  model  (a  large-scale 
macroeconometric model) for the frequency and duration of ZLB episodes. The key finding is 
that, “if monetary policy followed the prescriptions of the standard Taylor (1993) rule with an 
inflation target of 2 percent, the federal funds rate would be near zero about 5 percent of the 
time and the “typical” ZLB episode would last four quarters”. Moreover, “the ZLB would have 
relatively minor effects on macroeconomic performance under these policy assumptions.” 
With regard to the euro area, you may recall that zero lower bound considerations were a 
relevant concern for the ECB’s strategy review in 2003. At that time, the Governing Council 
clarified that, within the ECB’s definition of price stability of positive inflation rates below 2%, 
it would aim to maintain inflation rates “below, but close to, 2%” over the medium term. This 
clarification was seen to offer a safety margin away from zero nominal interest rates and zero 
or negative inflation rates. In this spirit, the overview of the background studies concluded 
that “most available studies indicate that the likelihood [of hitting the ZLB] decreases to very 
low levels when the objective of the central bank is to set an inflation rate above 1%”.3 
These quotes describe the view which prevailed prior to the crisis. But today, for the United 
States,  it  is  nearly  seven  years  ago  that  the  bound  was  reached.  And  for  the  euro  area, 
seven  years  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  we  are  still  struggling  with  headline 
inflation near zero. Most likely, it will still take some time before the Governing Council’s aim 
                                                
2   Chung, H., Laforte, J.-P., Reifschneider, D. and Williams, J.C., “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and 
Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44, 2012, pp. 47–82. 
3   Background  Studies  for  the  ECB’s  Evaluation  of  its  Monetary  Policy  Strategy,  European  Central  Bank, 
November 2003. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
of levels below but close to 2% is reached. Current ECB staff projections foresee inflation at 
1.7% by the end of our projection horizon, 2017. 
So, what was overlooked in pre-crisis times? Going beyond the fact that the crisis caught us 
“culturally unprepared” as I tried to say before, the answer is a combination of factors. At a 
deeper level, models had been shaped too much by the Great Moderation period. They were 
lacking  structural  relationships,  propagation  mechanisms  and  shocks  that  have  become 
globally relevant since the onset of the crisis. One example may suffice to make the point: 
the likelihood of ZLB events depends strongly on what you assume for the equilibrium real 
rate. A level of 2%, an assumption often made in pre-crisis models, is far from “innocent”: If 
you  estimate  the  frequency  of  lower  bound  hits  by  shocking  a  model  whose  steady  state 
nominal interest rate is 4%, because the real rate of equilibrium is assumed to be 2% and 2% 
is steady state inflation, the occurrences of zero or negative interest rates will be much fewer 
than if you start from a steady state of 3% (2% inflation and 1% natural rate). With hindsight, 
it seems safe to point out that models were by and large lacking features like a non-trivial 
financial  side,  sufficient  consideration  of  demographic  developments  and  deep  global 
linkages. 
In sum, it seems that it was not only the general design of the mainstream pre-crisis models 
that made them inadequate for interpreting the crisis, but also the fact that they relied on data 
mostly drawn from the time of the Great Moderation. 
Remark  2:  At  the  lower  bound,  monetary  policy  has  remained  effective  via  non-standard 
measures. 
Before the crisis, central bankers were aware that non-standard monetary policies would be 
required  when  the  main  policy  rate  reached  the  zero  lower  bound.  However,  the 
effectiveness  of  these  policies  was  not  taken  as  given.  Prominent  lines  of  research,  for 
example, had been debating the irrelevance of central bank asset purchases.4 Today, with 
the benefit of several years of experience of implementing such policies, central banks have 
shown these policies to be effective. They have demonstrated that monetary policy has the 
necessary toolkit to influence the yield curve along different horizons, including the use of 
forward guidance. 
Indeed,  this  capability  acts  as  a  counterargument  to  the  proposal  that  the  ZLB  restriction 
should be overcome via the adoption of a higher inflation target. It seems that the hurdle for 
this suggestion has become even higher. A shift to a higher inflation target would not only 
raise  significant  credibility  issues  ‒  we  should  also  remember  that  prevailing  definitions  of 
price  stability  have  a  welfare  foundation.5  Everything  else  being  equal,  higher  inflation 
objectives  inevitably  come  together  with  distortions  that  are  harmful  from  a  welfare 
perspective. 
Meanwhile, we are still furthering our understanding of the many features which characterise 
non-standard measures. Empirically, estimates of the effects of such measures on activity 
and inflation vary sizeably across studies. And inflation remains below central banks’ targets 
in many jurisdictions. At a conceptual level, the discussion on shadow rate measures shows 
how difficult it is to find a metric which makes the various dimensions of large-scale asset 
purchases  comparable  with  ordinary  rate  cuts.  We  all  grew  accustomed  to  measuring  the 
stance through the Taylor rules. But when a central bank intervenes on the long end of the 
curve,  the  stimulus  that  is  injected  through  those  interventions  escapes  the  simple  Taylor 
metric,  which  is  centred  on  the  short  end  where  the  lower  bound  binds. The  shadow  rate 
                                                
4   Eggertsson, G. and Woodford, M., The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy, Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, 2003, 1, pp. 139–211. 
5   Schmitt-Grohe, S. and Uribe, M. Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy under Sticky Prices, Journal of Economic 
Theory, 2004, 114, pp. 198–230. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
attempts  to  re-establish  the  status  of  the  short-term  interest  rate  as  a  signal  of  monetary 
conditions  by  including  information  on  how  unconventional  policies  alter  broader  financing 
conditions. The  idea  is  very  appealing.  But  we  need  to  test  these  new  measures  –  which 
yield very disperse measures of the stance – before we can use them in policy work. The 
potential costs and side-effects from shifting the long end of the yield curve are also a matter 
of controversy. For example, the profession needs a better understanding of the distributional 
implications  of  quantitative  easing  (QE),  although  it  seems  clear  that  policy  inaction  in  an 
environment of low growth and high unemployment also has distributional consequences. 
In  sum,  we  have  seen  that  unconventional  measures  are  effective  in  terms  of  arresting 
disinflation, preventing fears of a slide into deflation and supporting aggregate demand. But it 
is  fair  to  say  that  we  need  to  understand  more  about  their  transmission  in  order  to  see 
whether QE can be retained as an instrument that, if not conventional, can play a valuable 
and reliable role in the toolbox to which central banks can make recourse. 
Remark 3: ZLB and non-conventional policies pose extra challenges vis-à-vis normalisation. 
Looking ahead, when the monetary policy tightening cycle eventually commences, it is very 
likely  to  be  different  and  more  challenging  than  in  previous  cycles.  Just  try  to  picture  the 
recent history of policy rates for some major central banks in a chart. That chart would look 
odd on both the y-axis and the x-axis: in some major economies, zero has featured for longer 
than any other value of the policy rate before. This makes some of us think that the non-
linearity imparted by the lower bound and generally thought to apply to the policy rate on the 
way down may exert, for different reasons, an impact also on the way out of the lower bound. 
The economy may have just gotten too used to that number. For one thing, rate increases 
will have to be carefully aligned with the normalisation of central bank balance sheets. There 
will  be  some  division  of  tasks  between  instruments  to  be  thought  through  and  organised: 
what portion of accommodation can be removed  – quite conventionally  – by raising short-
term rates, and what portion by active management of portfolios, i.e. by applying controlled 
pressure on long-term rates. The profile and evolution of short-term rates and the shape of 
the term structure will probably look different than in previous normalisation cycles. 
The ECB is a long way from these challenges, but other central banks are confronting these 
as I speak. 
Euro-area specific remarks 
B. 
In respect of the euro area, these general remarks require some modification. For brevity, let 
me focus on two aspects. 
Remark 4: The ECB hit the lower bound later than many other central banks, and when it did 
it was not the zero lower bound, but a negative lower bound. Similarly, it resorted at a late 
stage to large-scale asset purchases. 
It  stands  out that the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  became  distinctly  unconventional  at  an  early 
stage  –  not  least  with  the  adoption  of  fixed-rate  full  allotment  tenders  in  its  refinancing 
operations  back  in  2008,  and  with  short  incursions  into  this  unknown  territory  already  in 
2007. Moreover, this practice was later expanded to longer horizons, when policy rates still 
stood  at  firmly  positive  levels.  This  approach  was  naturally  developed  in  view  of  the 
predominantly bank-based nature of the euro area financial system. It led to a rather passive 
mode of liquidity injection, very much in the tradition of the lender-of-last-resort function of a 
central  bank.  This  very  important  tradition  owes  much  to  Henry  Thornton  and  Walter 
Bagehot. But you can read Bagehot without knowing what the ZLB is and how it affects the 
ability  of  a  central  bank  to  provide  stimulus  under  conditions  of  insufficient  aggregate 
demand. The ECB adopted a more active control of balance sheet developments only at a 
much  later  stage,  in  the  course  of  last  year,  ultimately  leading  to  the  adoption  of  the 
expanded asset purchase programme (APP). Through the APP, via its reliance on outright 
purchases, the ECB regained a more direct control over the size of the balance sheet. And it 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
was in this context that short-term rates effectively had to reach a lower bound configuration. 
I think there is little disagreement that, in terms of stimulating demand, this is a precondition 
for realising the maximum impact of large-scale purchases of securities of various types and 
maturities via rebalancing and signalling effects. 
Let me briefly elaborate on why I said that short-term rates “effectively” had to reach a lower 
bound configuration. The pre-crisis view, with its focus on the “zero” lower bound created a 
misleading label. Given that the interest rate on sight deposits held with the Swiss National 
Bank (SNB) is currently standing at minus 75 basis points, we can rule out that the constraint 
binds strictly at zero. In the euro area, the interest rate on the deposit facility stands at minus 
20 basis points. We have got used to the fact that money market rates (as well as a good 
range of other interest rates) can be negative. So, one thing we have surely learned is that 
“zero is rather something minus”. In this particular sense, the “zero” lower bound has turned 
out to be less binding than previously thought. 
In the euro area, negative rates have been powerful in propagating the policy stimulus for 
two reasons.6 First, in terms of available policy instruments, negative rates can, to a certain 
extent, be seen as a substitute for quantitative interventions. Bringing the overnight interest 
rate to a negative level already in June last year de facto meant that we started generating 
effects – to a certain degree – that one expects to see under quantitative policies. Second, 
the  negative  rate  policy  complements  the  channels  through  which  the  APP  operates.  A 
negative rate on bank reserves is an inducement for banks to lend money balances on and 
to avoid the tax that would otherwise be paid on them. This should lead to an increase in the 
velocity of circulation of cash reserves, which is another way to trigger an acceleration in the 
portfolio rebalancing effect that is a key component in the transmission of asset purchases to 
the real economy. 
Remark  5:  Going  forward,  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  will  improve  with  a  more 
complete European Monetary Union. 
Has  the  just  described  special  sequencing  of  the  ECB’s  unconventional  monetary  policy 
measures been appropriate? To answer this question, we should recall that the euro  area 
has its own distinct characteristics. And, as a currency union, it is in many ways incomplete. 
In the language of the “Five Presidents’ Report”, “Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU) today is like a house that was built over decades but only partially finished. It is now 
high time to reinforce its foundations and turn it into what EMU was meant to be”. 
This diagnosis explains why, looking back, measures of first resort in other jurisdictions have 
been measures of last resort in the euro area. In particular, it is clear that, in the euro area, 
central  bank  purchases  of  sovereign  debt  raise  additional  questions  which  are  quasi-non-
issues in consolidated nation states. And, going forward, this diagnosis also makes it clear 
why the euro area faces extra challenges. We have to find the right balance in what Markus 
Brunnermeier  recently  described  as  the  “stimulus  versus  reform  debate”  at  the  European 
Economic Association conference in Mannheim.7 
As I said on the same occasion, in a similar spirit, we need to bring together two different 
macroeconomic traditions. 
• 
The  “macroeconomic”  tradition,  by  which  I  pretty  much  mean  the  British  and 
“saltwater  American”  tradition  of  macroeconomics,  with  its  solid  emphasis  on 
demand  management. It  correctly  identifies  the need  to  provide  stimulus  but  may 
have a tendency to overlook incentives and institutions. Here, a focus on “demand 
                                                
6   See my speech on Price stability: a sinking will-o’-the-wisp? at the IMF Spring Meetings Seminar, Washington, 
16 April 2015. 
7   His slides are available via http://www.eeassoc.org/index.php?site=EEA2015&page=267&trsz=239 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
 
management” may lead to losing sight of the longer term and the incentives that are 
put in place. 
The  “supply-side”  tradition,  in  all  of  its  incarnations,  including  the  “freshwater 
American”  real  business  cycle  scholars  and  the  older  –  somewhat  forgotten  – 
continental  European  “institutional  school”,  which  identifies  the  need  for  structural 
policies  and  structural  reforms  as  a  precondition  for  spurring  enduring  growth.  It 
rightly  draws  attention  to  the  power  of  institutions  in  reconciling  the  economic 
incentives of different actors – private agents or governments. But it may downplay 
the  harm  that  fluctuations  in  demand  and  incomes  could  potentially  cause  to 
economies.  Also,  the  institutionalists  may  have  a  tendency  to  worship  the  rule  of 
current law. Thus, it may fail to see the shortcomings of the legal framework in place 
in  terms  of  preventing  the  economy  from  spiralling  off  to  bad  equilibria  with  no 
prospect of return. 
A synthesis of these traditions is what we need for the euro area. One can call this “dynamic 
institutionalism”. Ideally, it should take the optimisation framework of macroeconomics and 
apply  it  to  institutional  design.  Such  an  approach  can  make  an  important  contribution  to 
charting  out  the  transition  to  new  steady  states  –  as  identified,  for  example,  by  the  Five 
Presidents’ report. It should do this in a way that respects the unique multinational nature of 
monetary  union  and  upholds  and  preserves  the  mutual  responsibility  that  each  nation  is 
expected to have vis-à-vis all the others. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
