  Yves Mersch: Ways towards more dynamic growth 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the DZ BANK Kapitalmarktkonferenz 2015, Frankfurt am Main, 14 July 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Today we are considering “Ways towards more dynamic growth”. 
As you have invited me in my capacity as a member of the Executive Board of the ECB, I’d 
like to start off with the role of monetary policy. The effectiveness of our monetary policy also 
depends,  however,  on  decisions  in  other  policy  areas.  I  will  thus  cover  reforms  both  at 
Member State level and European level a little later. 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  is  meeting  this  week  to  discuss  euro  area  monetary 
policy.  The  result  will  be  a  joint  decision  which  I  cannot,  nor may  not,  pre-empt. We  have 
agreed that it is our duty to remain silent in respect of monetary policy in the week before the 
monetary policy meetings of the Governing Council. If I say something today about previous 
monetary policy decisions or point to theoretical relationships, it should not be interpreted as 
a sign of how we shall decide the day after tomorrow. 
The ECB’s monetary policy is appropriate and effective 
In view of sluggish lending, growing uncertainty about the recovery and the ongoing cloudy 
outlook for inflation we agreed on a series of monetary policy measures last summer: 
1. 
2. 
We lowered the key interest rates; 
We  shaped  the  longer-term  refinancing  operations  so  that  they  offer  banks  an 
incentive to grant more loans to the real economy; and 
We started a new programme for the purchase of covered bonds and asset-backed 
securities (ABS). 
3. 
First  of  all,  our  loose  monetary  policy  last  year  led  to  a  bottoming-out  of  the  still  negative 
lending by banks in the euro area amid ongoing gloomy growth prospects. 
However, the inflation rate continued to fall and on an ever broader basis, which means that 
the decline was not only attributable to the fall in the price of oil. What’s more, the inflation 
outlook  worsened  because  of  flagging  demand  and  continued  uncertainty  about  economic 
growth. That was reflected particularly in the market’s inflation expectations. 
The  expectations  threatened  to  become  uncoupled  from  our  medium-term  objective  –  an 
inflation rate of below but close to 2%. 
In  these  circumstances  we  had  to  react  decisively.  A  central  bank  must  act  boldly  before 
expectations of a further fall in the inflation rate become a self-fulfilling prophecy. 
We have done exactly that: in January the Governing Council of the ECB decided to expand 
our  existing  purchase  programme  of  covered  bonds  and  ABS  by  including  a  wide-ranging 
purchase programme for public sector securities. 
The decision was not only necessary. It was also expedient: we were able to bring to an end 
the fall in medium and long-term inflation expectations. Expectations have in fact now risen 
again. Our experts are forecasting an inflation rate of on average 0.3% this year, 1.5% next 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
year and 1.8% in 2017.1 Lending is steadily recovering. And not only because interest rates 
are low, but also because companies’ order books are better and the mood in the economy 
is improving. We are thus seeing a cognitive turnaround as well, a positive upwards spiral, to 
which  our  monetary  policy  is  contributing.  Incidentally  that’s  the  case  here  in  Germany  as 
well. And that applies despite the unintended – and undenied – side effects of our monetary 
policy stance. These are all positive signals. But we haven’t reached our goal. According to 
Eurostat’s flash estimate the inflation rate in the euro area in June fell to 0.2%. 
Our forecast that the inflation rate over the medium term will rise to just under 2% is based 
on the assumption that we shall complete our purchase programme. We intend to continue 
our purchases until September 2016 and to maintain the programme in any case as long as 
inflation has adjusted in a sustainable way. For we have only fulfilled our mandate when we 
can  clearly  show  that  the  inflation  rate  has  levelled  off  in  a  sustainable  way  near  to  our 
definition of price stability. 
Structural reforms are vital 
Yet  we  cannot  conceive  of  monetary  policy  as  being  isolated  from  other  policy  areas.  In 
short, the more the structural conditions in the Member States vary, the more difficult it is to 
take care of price stability in the whole of the euro area with a single monetary policy. 
That’s why we don’t tire of talking about structural reforms. This term occurs in around one-
third of all the published speeches of the Executive Board members. By way of comparison, 
it occurs in only around 2% of speeches given by the Federal Reserve Bank Presidents.2 
With our monetary policy we can support economic growth. But it will only have its full effect 
if  the  governments  of  the  euro  area  countries  carry  out  sensible  reforms  to  improve  their 
competitiveness and thus create conditions for sustainable growth. Only when the structural 
framework  conditions  permit  profitable  economic  activity  will  businesses  make  full  use  of 
improved funding conditions. 
It would therefore be naïve to believe that economic measures alone – including monetary 
policy – could lead to a lasting return to stability and growth. 
Structural reforms are also necessary in order to counter any possible future shocks more 
effectively. More flexible labour and product markets increase the resilience of countries in 
which the adjustments are also made via prices. That means, for instance, that more flexible 
wages lessen the adjustments needed in the labour market in an economic downturn. The 
risks  of  long-term  unemployment  are reduced  in  this  way  and  an  economy  recovery  takes 
place  more  quickly.  Above  all,  in  a  monetary  union  like  that  of  the  euro  area  –  in  which 
monetary policy cannot react to country-specific developments – such adjustments are key. 
The structural reforms that make sense for individual Member States to implement depend 
on the respective national factors. It is up to the elected governments to decide. 
As  a  central  bank  we  only  have  an  interest  in  each  country  successfully  carrying  out  the 
respective necessary structural reforms. And that is certainly possible. For instance, Spain 
carried out a comprehensive reform package in 2012 and 2013. And it did so in a situation in 
which a quarter of the population was unemployed. Spain is now one of the countries in the 
euro area with the strongest growth. 
                                                
1   ECB 
2015 
June 
Eurosystem 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/eurosystemstaffprojections201506.en.pdf. 
staff  macroeconomic 
projections 
for 
the 
euro 
area, 
2   Structural  reforms,  inflation  and  monetary  policy,  introductory  speech  by  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the 
the  ECB  Forum  on  Central  Banking,  Sintra,  22  May  2015 
European  Central  Bank,  at 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp150522.en.html. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, I see a need for reforms in all countries of the euro area – even those which are 
currently  comparatively  well  positioned.  Now  is  not  the  time  to  rest  on  the  successes  of 
previous reforms, let alone to go back on ambitious reforms. 
An  economy  which  is  short  of  skilled  labour,  in  which  whole  regions  are  shrinking  and 
ageing,  which  does  not  overhaul  its  bridges  and  roads  is  living  on  its  reserves.  When  a 
society  uses  up  its  wealth,  it  cannot  credibly  claim  to  want  to  grow  dynamically  or  even 
sustainably. A society in which the number of over 80-year-olds is set to rise by almost 50% 
in the next 15 years runs the risk of losing its will to reform and thus its capacity to integrate. 
Then there’s a tendency to protect vested rights and to acquire the conservatism of a closed 
society. 
It’s precisely for that reason that governments in Europe should not only call for structural 
reforms  elsewhere  but  also,  and  above  all,  in  their  own  countries  in  order  to  create  a 
favourable economic climate – then the whole of the union will benefit. Our economies have 
been linked much too tightly for a long time for us to be able to conceive of the economic and 
fiscal policies of the individual countries as being completely independent of each other. The 
euro area is not a loose association of independent states but a monetary union. 
Reform of the monetary union is necessary 
Europe’s  heads  of  state  and  government  made  a  conscious  decision  to  establish  such  a 
monetary union instead of just simply adopting a system of fixed exchange rates. Now EMU 
must live up to this name. 
Spurred  on  by  the  effects  of  the  crisis,  some  progress  has  already  been  made.  The  euro 
area should now be subject to stricter budgetary rules and the economic policies of individual 
Member States better coordinated. 
We have stricter supervisory rules for the financial sector at both European and global level. 
Naturally  this  also  affects  the  financing  environment.  For  example,  the  new  liquidity 
requirements  mean  that  some  banks  will  have  to  rethink  their traditional  business  models, 
which can also have an effect on companies’ financing situations. 
With  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism 
(SRM),  we  have  finally  taken  a  clear  step  towards  integration  on  the  way  to  a  European 
banking union. 
However,  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  if  we  really  want  to  live  in  a  stable  and  prosperous 
union we must continue in an ambitious way. This is why the “five presidents” (Jean-Claude 
Juncker, President of the European Commission, Donald Tusk, President of the European 
Council,  Jeroen  Dijsselbloem,  President  of  the  Eurogroup,  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the 
European Central Bank and Martin Schulz, President of the European Parliament) produced 
a report which presents concrete, short-term measures – i.e. ones that can be implemented 
without treaty change – as well as longer-term ideas about how the monetary union should 
work in the future. 
I would like to pick out two points from this report today which I find particularly important. 
First,  the  five  presidents  argue  the  case  for  completing  the  banking  union.  A  completed 
banking union will sustainably improve financing conditions for companies and increase the 
resilience of the European financial sector. 
This requires  reaching  a  quick  agreement  on  bridge financing for the resolution fund. One 
option would be a line of credit from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). It would have 
to  be  designed  in  a  budget-neutral  way.  This  means  that  advance  payments  from  public 
authorities would be repaid through appropriate levies on the financial sector over the course 
of time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  This  would  help  loosen  the  close  connection  between  sovereigns  and  their  banks.  If  it 
succeeds, it will noticeably relieve the pressure on monetary policy. 
Second, the five presidents are in favour of sharing more sovereignty in economic and fiscal 
policy  over  the  long  term.  The  absolute  prerequisite  for  this,  however,  is  that  the 
convergence  mechanisms  of  the  monetary  union  work  better  in  the  future.  Those  who 
deviate from this must be stopped earlier and more firmly. 
If this succeeds in stabilising the euro area in such a way that it becomes more resilient, then 
common standards and decisions in fiscal policy matters are not just conceivable, but also 
necessary  to  a  certain  extent.  It  is  not  about  the  complete  centralisation  of  all  aspects  of 
Member  States’  revenue  and  expenditure  policies.  But  a  genuine  monetary  union  only 
functions smoothly if certain decisions are made jointly. A euro area-wide treasury could – at 
some point – provide the framework for this. 
These are ambitious suggestions. They cannot be realised overnight because they must be 
borne by our democracies. But they show the direction in which the monetary union should 
develop in the medium to long term. And we can and should already be taking the first steps 
in this direction now. 
It  is  now  up  to  the  European  heads  of  state  and  government  to  consider  the  proposals, 
further substantiate the longer-term ideas and implement them in the interests of a deepened 
Economic and Monetary Union. 
necessary, 
appropriate and 
they are effective. 
Final thoughts 
The euro area economy is recovering slowly but steadily, thanks in part to our most recent 
monetary policy measures. These measures were 
1. 
2. 
3. 
I am confident that the economic recovery will continue to make progress. 
Especially in a monetary union, neither individual policy areas nor the different political and 
decision-making  levels  should  allow  themselves  to  think  in  isolation  from  each  other.  The 
well-being of each individual Member State depends not just on the situation in each country, 
but also on the rest of the union. The crisis has demonstrated this all too clearly, and policy-
makers  have  reacted.  The  institutional  structure  of  the  monetary  union  is  significantly 
stronger. In the meantime, however, the enthusiasm for reform has clearly weakened. The 
five  presidents’  report  should  be  reason  enough  to  bring  back  more  dynamism  into  the 
discussion about the further integration of the monetary union. 
We will not be able to complete Europe’s integration project today. Recent experience has 
made  this  clear:  the  convergence  process  is  undermined  if  the  claims  to  sovereignty  of 
Member States gloss over their individual responsibility and even if compliance with agreed 
rules, which are in their own long-term interest, is refused. 
Only if all members of the monetary union agree on a common way forward can we take the 
next steps in the right direction today – steps to more dynamic growth, greater prosperity and 
more stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
