  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Progress and advancement of Islamic finance 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the Islamic Economy Award 2014, Dubai, 14 January 2015. 
 It  is  my  very  great  honour  to  receive  the  Lifetime  Achievement  Award  for  the  global 
development  of  Islamic  finance  conferred  under  the  patronage  of  His  Highness  Sheikh 
Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum. I am most humbled to receive this award. It has been 
my  privilege  to  contribute  to  the  international  efforts  to  create  the  foundations  for  a 
sustainable and resilient Islamic financial system in the global financial system. This recent 
decade  has  been  highly  challenging  for  the  world  of  finance,  yet  the  experience  of 
confronting  the  challenges  has  been  tremendously  fulfilling.  The  overall  progress  and 
advancement of Islamic finance has continued to be accompanied by growth, dynamism and 
stability. 
Islamic  finance  brings  immense  benefits  to  the  overall  economy.  It  is  a  form  of  financial 
intermediation  that  is  well  anchored  to  the  real  economy. With  its  internationalisation,  that 
began  at  the  turn  of  the  millennium,  it  now  serves  to  enhance  and  strengthen  the 
interlinkages between economies, facilitating international trade and cross border investment 
activities. This trend has marked the beginning of intensified collective efforts to enhance the 
Islamic financial infrastructure to create a robust and resilient global Islamic financial system. 
The  focus  has  gradually  shifted  from  strengthening  intermediaries  in  the  domestic  Islamic 
financial  industry  to  fortifying  the  regulatory,  supervisory,  Shariah  and  liquidity  framework 
necessary  for  such  a  robust  financial  system.  This  has  involved  greater  international 
cooperation and collaboration in this new environment. A further development has been the 
evolution  of  the  domestic  Islamic  financial  markets  into  international  markets.  This  has 
manifested  itself  in  the  form  of  foreign  participation  in  raising  funds  and  in  investment 
activities in these markets, thus generating increased cross border financial flows. This has 
drawn participation from both emerging and the developed world in Islamic and non-Islamic 
countries.  Going  forward,  the  Islamic  financial  system  is  envisaged  to  have  an  increasing 
important  role  in  connecting  the  world  economies  –  through  the  strengthening  of  financial 
linkages, it will in turn facilitate increased international trade and investment activities. 
This  internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance  will  require  the  intensification  of  international 
collective  efforts  to  establish  the  international  Islamic  financial  architecture,  and  the 
development of mechanisms for more effective cross-border liquidity management. Central 
to achieving this next thrust of development is to develop a high caliber and competent talent 
base to cultivate financial innovation. Therein lies the investment needed in human capital 
development to support the industry. 
While  Malaysia’s  own  experience  and  aspirations  is  to  evolve  into  an  international  Islamic 
financial centre, we also continue to promote a more inclusive financial system to support a 
more  balanced  growth.  On  the  international  front,  the  aim  is  to  enhance  our  international 
connectivity and thus establish greater economic linkages with other economies. In Dubai, 
the efforts by the authorities to create the Islamic economy initiative to further enhance the 
inter-linkages  with  other  Islamic  financial  centres  is  also  a  step  towards  strengthening  the 
international economic connectivity especially between our regions. The efforts will not only 
enhance Islamic finance as an effective financial intermediary but also as a binding force for 
the other segments of the Islamic economy, including with other parts of the world. 
Our  collective  efforts  in  developing  Islamic  finance  will  provide  an  important  platform  to 
unlock the potential opportunities that lie therein to benefit every segment of the society and 
the  business  community  that  now  extends  beyond  our  domestic  borders.  In  this  highly 
dynamic  and  rapidly  changing  world  environment,  efforts  will  need  to  be  unrelenting  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  developing further the enabling infrastructure, the foundations for stability and enhancing the 
internal  capability.  And  with  the  greater  international  linkages,  the  greater  will  be  the 
importance of working collectively for the common goals we aspire and for which the benefits 
will be mutually reinforcing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
