  Haruhiko Kuroda: Crude oil prices and price stability 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan National Press 
Club, Tokyo, 27 February 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Introduction 
Today, I am very pleased to appear before the venerable Japan National Press Club. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  carrying  out  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing 
(QQE) to achieve a price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time 
horizon of about two years. Amid this, Japan’s economy has continued its moderate recovery 
trend,  with  prices  rising  accompanying  the  increase  in  corporate  profits  and  employee 
income. However, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) has 
slowed  recently,  reflecting the  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  since  last  summer. In 
that situation, some opine that the Bank should take some time to achieve the price stability 
target of 2 percent while others think that 2% inflation is hard for the Bank to achieve in the 
first place. 
Today,  I  will  first  briefly  discuss  the  current  situation  of  and  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy. 
Then I will explain the recent conduct of monetary policy, mainly the thinking behind the price 
stability target and policy responses to the decline in crude oil prices. 
The current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
I. 
To  start  with,  let  me  talk  about  the  current  situation  of  and  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy. 
Japan’s  economy  has  continued  its  moderate  recovery  trend.  Regarding  the  outlook,  it  is 
likely  to  continue growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential given  that  exports  are  expected to 
increase moderately and that domestic demand is likely to remain firm. Positive effects from 
the decline in crude oil prices and the government’s stimulus package that was formulated at 
the end of last year are likely to boost such favorable developments. According to the Bank’s 
interim assessment in January of the October 2014 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
(hereafter the Outlook Report), the Policy Board members’ forecasts of the real GDP growth 
rate was minus 0.5 percent for fiscal 2014, but 2.1 percent for fiscal 2015, and 1.6 percent for 
fiscal 2016 (Chart 1). 
I  will  discuss  the following two  key  points  in  some  detail. The first  one is  developments  in 
exports  and  production  in  the corporate  sector, and  the  second  is  developments  in  wages 
and private consumption in the household sector. 
Corporate sector: developments in exports and production 
Exports,  which  had  been  more  or  less  flat  for  a  long  period  despite  the  correction  in  the 
excessive appreciation of the yen, have finally been picking up recently (Chart 2). Looking at 
the  developments  by  region,  exports  to  the  United  States  registered  a  sizeable  increase, 
since capital goods and parts have increased in reflection of the recovery there in business 
fixed  investment.  Exports  to  Asia  have  also  increased,  mainly  in  IT-related  goods  and  in 
capital goods and parts. 
With regard to the outlook, overseas economies, mainly advanced economies, are expected 
to  continue  recovering  moderately,  boosted  partly  by  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices. 
According to the World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update published last month by the IMF, 
global growth, after registering 3.3 percent for 2014, is projected at 3.5 and 3.7 percent for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  2015 and 2016, respectively. As a whole, it is expected to increase gradually, albeit with a 
downward revision relative to the October 2014 WEO (Chart 3). 
Looking somewhat closely at the developments in overseas economies by region, the U.S. 
economy  is  likely  to  be  a  driving  force  for  global  growth  for  the  time  being.  Against  the 
backdrop of a faster pace of increase in employment and a substantial decline in gasoline 
prices, private consumption has seen a firm increase. Since the firmness in the household 
sector  has  been  feeding  through  to  the  corporate  sector,  the  economy  is  expected  to 
continue  to  recover  solidly,  led  mainly  by  private  demand.  As  for  the  European  economy, 
momentum  for  the  recovery  has  remained  weak.  Nevertheless,  private  consumption  has 
been recovering steadily, albeit moderately, due in part to positive effects of the decline in 
crude oil prices, and exports have shown signs of picking up thanks to such effects as those 
of the depreciation of the euro. Against the background of those factors, a further slowdown 
in the economy has been staved off. Going forward, the European economy is expected to 
continue  its  recovery,  albeit  at  a  gradual  pace,  since  effects  of  the  successive  monetary 
easing measures by the European Central Bank (ECB), such as the start to a purchasing of 
bonds issued by euro area central governments, are expected to underpin the recovery. The 
Chinese  economy  has  been  growing  at  a  somewhat  slower  pace,  but  is  likely  to  continue 
with generally stable growth underpinned by moderate improvement in external demand and 
the  authorities’  measures  to  support  economic  activity.  Emerging  economies  apart  from 
China and commodity-exporting economies as a whole have continued to lose pace, but their 
pace of growth is likely to pick up gradually as the recovery in advanced economies exerts 
positive effects. 
Taking the above into consideration, Japan’s exports are expected to increase moderately, 
as  overseas  economies  continue  to  see  moderate  recovery,  mainly  advanced  economies. 
That said, due attention needs to be paid to various uncertainties such as the outcome of the 
debt  problem  in  Europe,  including  the  developments  in  Greece,  developments  in  the 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies facing structural issues or political instability, 
and geopolitical risks. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  the  pick-up  in  exports  and  resilience  in  private  consumption  as  a 
whole, about which I will discuss in more detail next, production has been picking up due to 
the progress in inventory adjustments. Corporate profits have continued to improve, with the 
ratio of current profits to sales for major firms exceeding the level prior to the global financial 
crisis (Chart 4). In that situation, firms have maintained their positive stance in their business 
plans,  and  fixed  investment  is  planned  to  be  increased  steadily  following  last  fiscal  year. 
Some firms have increased their share of domestic investment for this fiscal year, and it has 
been noticeable in media reports recently that firms that relocated production sites overseas 
amid the phase of the appreciation of the yen have started to attach importance to domestic 
production.  Going  forward,  against  the  backdrop  of  a  moderate  recovery  trend  in  the 
economy,  an  increase  in  exports,  and  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices,  corporate  profits  are 
likely  to  continue  improving  and  business  fixed  investment  is  projected  to  continue  on  a 
moderate increasing trend. 
Household sector: Developments in wages and private consumption 
Turning to the household sector, firms’ positive stance has led to a tightening in labor market 
conditions and, accordingly, an improvement in the employment and income situation. With 
regard to firms’ views on employment, even amid the sluggish economic recovery until last 
summer, the degree of labor shortage has risen further (Chart 5). In this situation, total cash 
earnings have risen moderately, albeit with fluctuations since last spring. Last year, the year-
on-year rate of increase in scheduled cash earnings was positive, reflecting the revival of an 
increase  in  base  pay  at  many  firms,  which  had  been  lost  for  many  years.  This  winter’s 
bonuses  also  increased  solidly.  On  the  back  of  the  rises  in  total  cash  earnings  and  the 
number  of  employees,  employee  income  has  been  rising  moderately.  Private  consumption 
as  a  whole  has  remained  resilient  against  the  background  of  steady  improvement  in  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  employment  and  income  situation.  Sales  of  durable  consumer  goods  such  as  household 
electrical  appliances,  which  had  been  affected  by  the  decline  in  demand  after  the 
consumption tax hike for a protracted period, have been on an improving trend since early 
autumn.  Going  forward,  private  consumption  is  expected  to  remain  resilient  with  the 
employment and income situation continuing to improve steadily. 
As  I  have  explained  so  far,  with  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  likely  to  be 
maintained  steadily  in  both  the  household  and  corporate  sectors,  Japan’s  economy  is 
expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential. 
The price stability target and quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
II. 
Next, I would like to talk about monetary policy. To start with, I will explain the thinking behind 
targets for price stability in some depth, referring to examples of such targets in other major 
economies. 
Thinking behind targets for price stability 
A. 
Many central banks including the Bank of Japan have been implementing monetary policy, 
aiming to achieve an inflation rate of around 2 percent (Chart 6). For example, central banks 
in  such  countries  as  Japan,  the  United  Kingdom,  Canada,  and  New  Zealand  have  set 
2 percent  inflation  as  a  target,  and  in  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  set  a 
longer-run  goal  for  inflation  at  the  same  rate.  In  the  euro  area,  the  ECB  has  presented  a 
quantitative definition of price stability and expressed it in a numerical way, which is below, 
but close to, 2 percent. While there are various ways of how this is expressed, conducting 
monetary policy that aims at around 2 percent inflation has become a global standard. 
Looking at developments in the CPI in these economies, even in the United States and the 
United  Kingdom,  where  CPI  inflation  has  been  considered  stable  at  the  rate  of  around 
2 percent,  the  rate  has  been  moving  in  a  rather  wide  range  depending  on  the  situation 
(Chart 7).  In  reality,  the  inflation  rates  in  those  economies  have  been  centered  at  around 
2 percent on average in the medium term. In other words, the inflation rate may move up and 
down  according  to  cyclical  factors  such  as  the  business  cycle,  fluctuations  in  commodity 
prices,  and  other  factors.  In  such  an  environment,  central  banks  have  been  conducting 
monetary policy to achieve the target level of inflation on average in the medium term, which 
often is equated with being over the business cycle. For example, during a press conference 
in  January  2012  when  the  Federal  Reserve  announced  its  decision  to  adopt  a  longer-run 
goal for inflation at the rate of 2 percent, then-Chairman Bernanke said the following as part 
of his answer to a question: “‘medium term’ – which is, these targets are all medium term – is 
a flexible concept.” The Reserve Bank of Australia specifies that “the appropriate target for 
monetary policy in Australia is to achieve an inflation rate of 2–3 percent, on average, over 
the  cycle.”  In  the  case  of  New  Zealand  around  the  middle  of  the  1990s,  when  the  central 
bank was strictly pursuing a target for price stability, its Policy Targets Agreement with the 
Minister of Finance included escape clauses, so to speak, or a range of events that would 
allow the central bank governor to be exempted from being held responsible for deviations 
from  the  target; for  example,  “shifts  in  the  aggregate  price  level  as  a  result  of  exceptional 
movements  in  the  prices  of  commodities  traded  in  world  markets”  and  “a  natural  disaster 
affecting a major part of the economy.” 
In this way, each country views that the 2 percent inflation rate will be achieved on average 
over the business cycle. In line with this, what each central bank attaches importance to in 
conducting monetary policy are developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
This is because, if the medium- to long-term inflation expectations are anchored at around 
2 percent  –  in  other  words,  if  firms  and  households  act  on  the  assumption  that  prices  will 
increase by about 2 percent – it is likely that the target for price stability will be achieved on 
average in the medium term even if the inflation rate deviates from the target level as a result 
of being affected by the business cycle or temporary factors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  This  view  on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  was  reflected  well  in  the  different  responses 
taken by the Federal Reserve and the ECB to the substantial decline in crude oil prices since 
last summer. In general, a decline in crude oil prices exerts downward pressure on prices in 
the short term, but year-on-year effects will dissipate going forward. Moreover, from a longer-
term  perspective,  the  decline  induces  a  positive  effect  of  increasing  the  real  purchasing 
power in an oil-importing country, and will eventually push up prices. Therefore, if firms’ and 
households’  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  anchored  at  the  target  level, 
which central banks aim to achieve, and the general public perceives that prices will revert to 
2 percent sooner or later even if they fall temporarily, monetary policy responses are judged 
unnecessary  since  trend  inflation  is  unchanged.  In  fact,  the  Federal  Reserve  maintains  its 
policy  stance  of  starting  a  liftoff  of  the  federal  funds  rate  even  in  a  situation  where  the 
headline CPI inflation clearly is declining in reflection of the effects of falling crude oil prices. 
As the background to this, the January Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) statement 
illustrated  a  view  that  “survey-based  measures  of  longer-term  inflation  expectations  have 
remained stable” and that, as for the outlook for prices, “[i]nflation is anticipated to decline 
further  in  the  near  term,  but  the  Committee  expects  inflation  to  rise  gradually  toward 
2 percent  over  the  medium  term  as  the  labor  market  improves  further  and  the  transitory 
effects of lower energy prices and other factors dissipate.” As for Europe, the ECB recently 
decided an additional easing measure that includes a start to the purchasing of bonds issued 
by euro area central governments. As the background to this, President Draghi pointed out 
that  the  weak  headline  inflation  dominantly  driven  by  the  fall  in  oil  prices  could  adversely 
affect  medium-term  price  developments  through  the  second-round  effects  on  wage  and 
price-setting. As a matter of fact, in Europe, in a situation where the momentum of economic 
recovery  is  weak, the  inflation  rates  have  declined  to  a  negative  figure for  the first  time  in 
about  5  years  due  to  the  effects  of  the  fall  in  crude  oil  prices,  and  some  indicators  have 
started  to  suggest  a  decline  in  the  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  Therefore, 
Europe is faced with a situation in which the public’s perception that prices will increase by 
about 2 percent might be impaired, or in other words, a situation in which there is a risk that 
2 percent  inflation  expectations  might  become  de-anchored.  The  easing  by  the  ECB  was 
made in response to such risk. 
B. 
The reason for aiming at achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the 
earliest possible time 
What I have outlined so far is the standard view on the target for price stability. The Bank’s 
price stability target is basically in line with that view. 
Nevertheless,  the  situation  in  Japan,  on  the  basis  of  which  monetary  policy  should  be 
discussed, greatly differs from that in the United States and Europe. The challenge for the 
United States and Europe, on the one hand, is how to maintain inflation expectations, which 
already have been anchored at around 2 percent. On the other hand, the issue for Japan is 
to  deliberately  raise  inflation  expectations  –  which  had  been  considerably  below  2  percent 
during the years of deflation – through monetary policy. 
Looking  at  the  situation in  Japan,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  had  been  in 
negative territory or slightly above zero since the second half of the 1990s up until before the 
introduction of QQE. In other words, over the business cycle, it has been at around 0 percent 
on average. Amid protracted deflation over this long period, medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations  declined,  and  consequently,  a  sense  that  prices  would  not  increase  became 
entrenched.  Under  these  circumstances, firms’  incentives  to  launch  new  initiatives  through 
investing in business facilities and in research and development became reduced, because 
the holding of cash or deposits became a relatively better investment strategy. Thus, Japan’s 
economy was deprived of vitality and this generated a vicious cycle in which the low vitality 
made it more difficult to overcome deflation. In order to escape from such a situation, it has 
become  necessary  to  pursue  a  policy  that  quickly  and  drastically  changes  firms’  and 
households’  mindset  that  prices  will  not  increase.  To  that  end,  what  was  introduced  as  a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  prescription  was  QQE.  This  policy  aims  at  creating  an  economic  situation  where  prices 
increase at around 2 percent on average, as is the case with the United States and Europe, 
by  raising  people’s  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  to  around  2  percent  and 
re-anchoring these expectations at that level. 
The  mechanism  of  QQE  is  expected  to  be  as  follows:  first,  inflation  expectations  will  be 
raised through a clear commitment and through a large-scale monetary easing to underpin 
the  commitment;  second,  concurrently,  downward  pressure  will  be  put  on  nominal  interest 
rates  through  massive  purchases  of  government  bonds,  thereby  decreasing  real  interest 
rates  and  stimulating  private  demand  such  as  business  fixed  investment.  Namely,  to  start 
this  mechanism,  the  Bank  aimed  at  first  igniting  inflation  expectations.  Raising  inflation 
expectations  by  changing  people’s  deflationary  mindset  is  itself  an  aim  of  overcoming 
deflation, and at the same time the key to implementing the mechanism of QQE. 
Considering  the  unique  situation  facing  Japan  and  the  prescription  for  it,  importance  is 
attached to a “time frame” during which the target should be achieved, compared with the 
target for price stability in other countries. If the Bank had simply stated that it would achieve 
2  percent  inflation  at  some  point  in  the  future  and  that  it  therefore  expects  firms  and 
households to change their actions, would those entities, which had experienced deflation for 
a long time, change their actions in belief of such a vague promise? I doubt it. It is because 
the Bank presented a time frame of achieving the price stability target at the earliest possible 
time  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years,  and  made  a  clear  commitment  that  it  will  do 
whatever  is  necessary  to  achieve  that  target  that  the  perception  of  inflation  by  firms  and 
households started to change and the mechanism of QQE started to operate. 
This is why the Bank adheres to achieving 2 percent inflation “at the earliest possible time.” 
After the inflation expectations are anchored at 2 percent, as in the case of the United States, 
pushing  back  the  inflation  rate  to  2  percent  can  be  achieved  in  a  more  relaxed  manner. 
However, to raise inflation expectations to 2 percent, it is necessary to have strong enough 
levels of speed and momentum to change people’s expectations. Deflationary equilibrium is 
a steady state, so there is gravity that pulls prices to the equilibrium. This is why deflation has 
been  protracted  for  15  years  in  Japan  despite  the  cyclical  economic  fluctuations  and 
monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  measures.  In  order  to  escape  from  deflationary  equilibrium, 
tremendous velocity is needed, just like when a spacecraft moves away from Earth’s strong 
gravitation.  It  requires  greater  power  than  that  of  a  satellite  that  moves  in  a  stable  orbit. 
Reaching orbit at an altitude of 1 percent, for example, which is lower than that for satellites 
of other countries, is not enough. This is because satellites at a low altitude can be pulled 
back by gravity. An altitude of 2 percent is a global standard employed by each country, and 
this  level  is  set  in  view  of  experiences  of  monetary  policy  around  the  globe;  namely,  an 
upward  bias  of  the  CPI,  which  indicates  inflation  higher  than  the  true  inflation  rate,  and  a 
buffer at a level that prevents falling into deflation. 
In sum, the Bank’s price stability target as a framework is no different from the targets for 
price  stability  employed  in  other  economies.  What  is  distinctive  in  Japan’s  case  is  that  a 
stronger-than-usual  measure  is  necessary  in  the  phase  of  escaping  from  the  deflationary 
equilibrium. The crux of QQE is to realize a rise in inflation expectations (or conversion of 
deflationary mindset) with sufficient speed and momentum through the Bank’s commitment 
to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time and through a 
monetary easing measure of an unprecedented scale. 
Assessing trend inflation 
C. 
For  these  reasons,  the  Bank  aims  at  achieving  the  2  percent  inflation  rate  at  the  earliest 
possible  time.  In  this  regard,  we  occasionally  are  asked  which  price  index  we  use  as  a 
guideline for arriving at that figure. The Bank, as many other central banks do, defines the 
price  stability  target  as  the  headline  CPI.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  achieving 
2 percent  temporarily  will  not  suffice.  The  Bank  aims  at  maintaining  the  inflation  rate  at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  2 percent in a stable manner. Therefore, it is necessary to judge trend inflation by identifying 
factors that are prone to fluctuate in the short term – such as commodity prices, including 
crude  oil  prices,  and  prices  of  fresh  food  –  from  developments  in  the  CPI  for  all  items.  In 
doing so, it should be noted that each price index has both advantages and disadvantages, 
and there is no single index that appropriately reflects trend inflation for any given economic 
situation. The Bank has been assessing the CPI from various aspects, including that for all 
items less fresh food, that for all items less food and energy, the trimmed mean CPI, and the 
ratio  of  increasing  and  decreasing  items.  On  this  basis,  the  Bank’s  outlook  for  inflation 
presented  in  the Outlook  Report  and  its  interim  assessment  refers  to the  CPI for  all  items 
less fresh food, which has reflected trend inflation relatively well. Even so, as in the recent 
case of crude oil prices changing substantially, a problem arises that the outlook for inflation 
depends considerably on the assumption for the future path of crude oil prices. Against this 
background, in the January interim assessment, the Bank disclosed an assumption for the 
future path of crude oil prices, which was shared by all the Policy Board members in making 
their  forecasts,  as  well  as  the  contribution  of  energy  items  to  the  CPI  based  on  this 
assumption,  in  an  attempt  to  communicate  the  Bank’s  assessment  of  trend  inflation  more 
clearly. 
In order to grasp trend inflation, a comprehensive assessment – based on examinations of 
various  price  indices,  as  well  as  the  output  gap  and  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations  and  economic  developments  behind  them  –  is  necessary.  Moreover,  as  for 
inflation expectations, it is important not only to monitor market-based indicators and surveys 
of  firms,  households,  and  economists,  but  also  to  analyze  changes  in  the  inflation  rate 
perceived by the general public by examining firms’ and households’ actions, such as wage 
negotiations  and  firms’  price-settings.  This  is  because  thoughts  and  actions  by  firms  and 
households,  not  by  traders  in  financial  markets,  actually  influence  economic  and  price 
developments. 
Outlook for prices and monetary policy management 
D. 
To conclude my speech, I would like to talk about the developments in prices and monetary 
policy management on the basis of the view on prices I have mentioned thus far. 
The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items less fresh food for April 2014 had 
improved to 1.5 percent excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, but its rate 
of increase slowed against the background of a substantial decline in crude oil prices since 
the  summer,  and  the  latest  figure  for  the  rate  in  January  is  0.2  percent  (Chart  8).  In  this 
situation,  the  Bank  decided  in  October  last  year  to  expand  QQE  (the  so-called  additional 
easing). This decision was not made to respond to the decline in crude oil prices itself. It was 
made  out  of  concern  over  a  risk  that  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  affects  inflation 
expectations  through  sluggish  growth  in  the  inflation  rates,  thereby  delaying  conversion  of 
the deflationary mindset. As I mentioned earlier, a rise in inflation expectations is the start of 
the  mechanism  of  QQE,  and  is  also  the  key  to  its  successful  implementation.  If  people 
consider that the Bank is not serious about achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the earliest possible time, QQE, which has been exerting intended effects so far, would not 
function properly anymore. Actually, the large reaction by markets after the additional easing 
suggests  that  the  Bank’s  determination  may  have  been  questioned  earlier.  In  any  case, 
however, I believe such doubt was cleared after the easing. 
Crude oil prices have been declining further even after October last year, but conversion of 
the  deflationary  mindset  is  proceeding  steadily.  Of  the  indices  relating  to  inflation 
expectations, although market-based indicators such as the break-even inflation rates have 
declined in line with those in the United States and Europe, medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations  have  been  maintained  according  to  the  results  of  surveys  of  economists.  In 
terms of corporate behavior, negotiations between management and labor over a base pay 
increase seem to have progressed, and base pay is likely to rise for the second consecutive 
year this spring. We judge that, at the moment, manifestation of a risk that conversion of the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  deflationary  mindset  might  be  delayed  has  been  prevented  due  to  the  easing  measure  in 
October. 
The output gap, which is another determinant of trend inflation, has been improving mainly 
on  the  labor front,  as  seen  in  the fact that the unemployment  rate  has declined  to  around 
3.5 percent, and is likely to follow an improving trend with the economy expected to continue 
growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential.  In  this  sense,  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  is  a 
supporting factor. Therefore, trend inflation rates are expected to rise steadily going forward 
and, as the effects of the decline in crude oil prices on a year-on-year basis dissipate, the 
2 percent CPI inflation is likely to be achieved. The timing of this could be either earlier or 
later to some extent, depending on future developments in crude oil prices; however, based 
on the assumption that crude oil prices are expected to rise moderately from the recent level, 
the CPI is likely to reach 2 percent in or around fiscal 2015 (Chart 1). Needless to say, the 
Bank  maintains  its  policy  stance  that  it  will  make  adjustments  as  necessary  without 
hesitation, when there are changes in trend inflation, in order to achieve the price stability 
target at the earliest possible time. The Bank will not respond to developments in crude oil 
prices themselves, but in conducting monetary policy, it will closely monitor how they affect 
inflation expectations – or, in other words, whether conversion of the deflationary mindset will 
nevertheless proceed. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
   8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
