  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Working together towards a stronger economy 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Security  Bank  Economic  Forum  “Economic  & 
Business Forecast 2015”, Makati City, 30 January 2015. 
 The  presentation  this  afternoon  will  start  with  a  discussion  on  the  global  economic  and 
financial developments and their possible implications for the Philippine economy. Then we 
will look at the growth experience of the Philippine economy and the underlying factors that 
form the bases for the economy’s resilience. 
A look back to 2014 
I was looking at the new logo of Security Bank. It shows two halves – just like the yin and the 
yang.  Two  parts  working  and  coming  together.  It’s  an  interesting  depiction  although  of 
course, on the “hard-court” (as in the basketball, or even in volleyball courts), it would be a 
stretch  to  say  that  the  Greens  would  be  above  the  Blues  for  long  periods.  I  must  have  a 
conversation with Abet about his choice of corporate colors. The old Security Bank color was 
already the perfect one – Blue! 
But seriously, two things coming together and being integral parts of each other. These are 
very similar to the themes that pervaded our global operating environment in 2014. 
In  2014,  there  were  two  themes  that  dominated  the  global  operating  environment  – 
1) uneven global growth and 2) divergent monetary policies in advanced economies. As the 
US economic growth continued to gain traction and the US Fed subsequently ended its asset 
purchase program in October last year, markets began to interpret the Fed’s statements to 
mean that it would begin “lift off” (or raise the Fed Funds target rate) sometime this year. In 
contrast, EU and Japan remained barely able to eke out growth. By the ECB’s and the BOJ’s 
own  pronouncements,  they  were  willing  to  further  expand  easy  monetary  conditions  to 
stimulate  growth  in  their  jurisdictions.  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  even  pledged  to  do 
“whatever it takes”. So, in one part of the globe, you had the Fed poised to tighten monetary 
conditions, and in another, you had the ECB and BOJ committing to provide more liquidity as 
needed. 
This combination ushered the shift in market sentiment – capital flowed out of EME assets 
(the long-standing darling of investors) toward US financial assets. This resulted in a strong 
appreciation of the US dollar. While this was happening, oil prices began to tumble. By year 
end, Brent had lost half its value, dropping from a high $115/bbl to $55/bbl. 
How  did  the  Philippines  fare  in  all  of  these?  Well,  the  Philippines  stood  its  ground.  We 
continued  to  show  healthy  growth  in  a  low  inflation  environment.  The  fourth  quarter  GDP 
number was released yesterday and it showed  the underlying strength of the economy. In 
Q4, the economy grew 6.9 percent, faster than the 6.3 pct in the same quarter in 2013 and 
5.3  pct  in  Q3  of  2014.  For  full-year  2014,  GDP  grew  by  6.1  pct.  On  a  full-year  basis,  the 
Philippines ranked second among selected Asian economies, next to China’s 7.4 pct. 
In the meantime, with the right monetary policy settings and some help from lower oil prices, 
full-year inflation tipped at 4.1 pct, marking 2014 as the 6th consecutive year that inflation 
has been kept within the government’s target range. 
This  robust  performance  was  supported  by  a  sound  banking  system  that  continued  to  be 
profitable,  well-capitalized  and  able  to  intermediate  funds  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the 
economy,  while  maintaining  good  credit  standards.  In  addition,  the  country  continued  to 
sustain surpluses in its current account, enabling us to keep our GIR at about $80B at end 
2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The outlook for 2015 
Ladies and gentlemen, clearly, we have entered 2015 – as we did in 2014 -from a position of 
relative strength. Can we expect this strength to be sustained throughout 2015? My answer 
to this question is a YES. 
Shortly,  I  will  provide  you  four  reasons  why.  But  before  that,  let  me  give  you  some 
perspective by walking you through the operating environment that we see for 2015. 
The  global  themes  coming  into  2015  were  rather  clear  –  uneven  growth  and  divergent 
monetary policies and a strong USD arising from this combination. This was so until oil prices 
began to drop – like falling knives – as one analyst put it. It is notable that no one has yet, 
very definitively called the oil price decline as being “overdone”. Although the IMF forecasts 
as of 6 January 2015 show an uptick in oil prices in the second half of this year. 
The  steep  decline  in  oil  prices  has  complicated  the  market  appreciation  of  the  outlook  for 
monetary policy in 2015. Some analysts say, the Fed would be hard-pressed to hike rates by 
any significant measure (as in June this year) if oil prices continue to drop because inflation 
in the US will be soft. 
In  addition,  low  oil  prices  increase  the  risk  of  deflation  in  the  EU  and  Japan,  raising  the 
likelihood that more easing measures would be put in place. 
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, whereas markets used to have the confidence in the 
trend  of  monetary  policies,  this  new  uncertainty  from  oil  price  movements  is  now  seen  to 
heighten  volatility  in  financial  markets  by  unsettling  investor  risk  appetite  and  unseating 
inflation expectations. 
Further,  a  continued  decline  in  oil  price  could  also  change  the  balance  of  global  growth 
prospects. There will be winners and losers if low oil prices persist. While the decline in oil is 
a dampener to inflation and could raise purchasing power for oil importers, it could also result 
in  a  loss  of  revenues  for  oil  producers  and  lead  to  weak  aggregate  demand.  With  overall 
global  growth  still  fragile,  the  significant  drop  and  the  weak  prospects  in  oil  prices  have 
gotten more analysts discussing the risk of deflation in recent weeks. 
The Philippines in focus: 
How  do  we  see  all  these  impacting  the  Philippines?  For  us,  low  oil  prices  represent 
disinflation pressures. Fuel and fuel-related items account for nearly 9 pct of our CPI basket. 
We have also seen transport fares being adjusted downward. In addition, the fall in oil prices 
could benefit us through an increase in household real income as well as the lower cost of 
production. 
I have been asked whether we are worried about deflation (due to the substantial decline in 
oil  prices).  Well,  deflation  effects  in  the  AEs  can  spillover  to  our  economy  through  lower 
trade. However, trade as a percentage of GDP is still relatively lower than those of our peers 
in the region.1 So the risk here is probably only of a relatively small magnitude. 
As  for  deflation  materializing  in  the  Philippines,  the  risk  is  not  significant.  For  one,  our 
demand conditions are firm. Services and industry remain strong. And on the demand side, 
consumption  is  seen  remaining  robust.  We  heard  Sec.  Balisacan  say  yesterday  that  “the 
worst  is  over  on  underspending”  and  that  the  government  is  committed  to  ramping  up 
spending.  There  are  other  factors  that  lead  us  to  say  that  deflation  is  remote  –  or  that 
                                                
1  Note: Trade value (exports plus imports) relative to GDP is low for the Philippines as compared to most of our 
regional peers. Average (2005–2012): Philippines – 52.2; Malaysia – 144.6; Singapore – 290.6; Thailand – 
123.6; Indonesia – 44.3; Taiwan (PRC) – 118.7; South Korea – 84.6. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inflation would remain positive. These are wage rigidities and the upside risks from pending 
petitions for utility rate adjustments (electricity) and potential power shortages. 
Given this scenario, what would the monetary response of the BSP be? Our initial projections 
using lower oil prices show that inflation would still be within the target range for 2015, which 
is  now  lower  at  2–4  percent  compared  to  the  previous  year’s  target  of  3–5  percent. 
Indications  of  easing  inflationary  pressures  owing  in  part  to  the  decline  in  international  oil 
prices  as  well  as  signs  of  robust  domestic  economic  growth  allow  the  BSP  some  room  to 
maintain its current monetary policy stance. Even so, we do not pre-commit to a set course 
of action. As I have always said, the stance of monetary policy will remain data-dependent. 
One thing we keep in the back of our minds is that prices can reverse and often very quickly. 
If you have been in this market long enough – as I believe some in the audience have – you 
know that markets tend to get ahead of themselves. So, we continue to watch developments 
in the oil market carefully and how these affect inflation and growth dynamics, to see if there 
is any need to make adjustments in the stance of policy. 
While volatilities in oil prices have complicated the balance of growth prospects, there are the 
other underlying other risks that we see in the horizon. These include a bumpy growth path 
for China, delays in the needed structural reforms in the EU and Japan, and geopolitical risks 
that could arise from a worsening of the situation in Russia or the Middle East – all of which 
can heighten financial market volatilities. 
Can we remain steadfast in 2015? 
Going  back  to  the  earlier  question  of  whether  we  will  be  able  to  sustain  our  position  of 
strength in 2015. Let me share that, in the areas under the purview of the BSP, we believe 
we will be able to withstand headwinds in the global economy. And I have four reasons. 
One, our monetary policy is focused. While we are mindful of developments externally, we 
will  always  adjust  policy  in  consideration  of  domestic  demand  and  supply  dynamics  as 
reflected in our forecasted inflation path. The focus has served us well throughout the period 
of the Great Moderation through the Global Financial Crisis and in the aftermath of the GFC. 
So  you  should  not  expect  that  we  will  necessarily  move  in  synch  with  and  in  the  same 
magnitude as the Fed or other central banks. 
Two, we have maintained a strong external position. We expect current account surplus to 
be sustained by remittances, receipts from the tourism and BPO industries. We will continue 
with  our  policy  of  a  market-determined  exchange  rate,  while  allowing  for  some  scope  for 
official action given that the exchange rate can be an effective tool for absorbing shocks from 
external sources. 
Three, we have a sound, stable and liquid banking system. The Philippine banking system is 
the  only  one,  out  of  the  69  jurisdiction  that  it  rates,  which  Moody’s  judged  as  having  a 
positive  outlook.  This  sound  performance  of 
to  progressive 
implementation of deep reforms and prudent risk-taking activities of banks despite the ample 
liquidity in the global economy. 
Over  the  years  we  pursued  reforms  to  enable  our  banks  to  respond  to  the  evolving 
requirements of their stakeholders, just as it has to adapt to a changing market environment. 
We do not anticipate a specific market scenario. Rather, we want our banks to be in a strong 
position regardless of how markets swing or stakeholder needs evolve. In effect, we envision 
a  banking  community  that  is  not  just  resilient  but  one  that  is  fundamentally  responsive  to 
stakeholder needs and where banks act responsibly. 
So in 2014, for instance, we raised the minimum required level of bank capital, recognizing 
that the new normal of banking treats conventional risks more aggressively while constantly 
identifying newer forms of risks. We also achieved fairly significant milestones, for example, 
the  banks  was  due 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  in  re-writing  our  credit risk framework,  in  crafting  the  implementing guidelines  for  Republic 
Act 10641 and introducing a Financial Consumer Protection Framework. 
Four, we are unrelenting in our commitment towards a more inclusive financial market and 
an empowered economic and financial consumer. This is not just about providing access but 
having  the  wherewithal  to  make  markets  where  there  are  none  yet,  investing  in  the future 
rather than be content with the limitations of today. 
Our commitment 
Going forward, the BSP will remain on the lookout for potential risks to price and financial 
stability. We will be vigilant to be able to provide timely and calibrated responses to unfolding 
events. 
But just as in the Security Bank logo, you have the yin and the yang, the BSP needs your 
partnership.  For  only  as  we  come  together  and  work  towards  the  same  goal,  can  we 
preserve  what  we  have  achieved  and  ensure  that  our  economy  sustains  its  position  of 
strength. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
