 Mario Draghi: Interview in Die Zeit 
 Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  Die  Zeit, 
conducted by Mr Giovanni di Lorenzo on 17 December 2014, published on 15 January 2015. 
 You  have  a  clear-cut  reputation.  Luca  di  Montezemolo,  the  former  CEO  of  FIAT  and 
Ferrari who attended the same school as you in Rome, said that you were always the 
most competent and serious one – Mario, the prize pupil. 
He exaggerates. I’ve never regarded myself as the best. Most certainly not. I went to school 
because I was sent there. 
But  you  may  have  felt  the  burden  of  responsibility  more  than  others:  you  lost  your 
father at the age of fifteen, and your mother passed away only a little later. You were 
suddenly a very young head of family. 
I can remember when, as a 16-year-old, I came back from holidays at the sea with a friend. 
He  went  home  and  could  do  what  he  liked.  I,  by  contrast,  was  confronted  with  a  stack  of 
letters that I had to deal with, bills that had to be paid. But young people do not reflect on 
what they have to deal with and how they should do so. They simply get on with it. That is 
important,  that  is  what  prevents  them  from  becoming  depressed  even  in  adverse 
circumstances. 
They  perhaps  also  understand  at  an  early  stage  what  they  must  do  to  survive,  for 
example, work hard. 
Belief in hard work was something that my parents taught us. My father used to say that work 
is the most important element in any person’s life. 
That sounds very much like a German virtue. 
There are lots of people who work hard everywhere in the world. But possibly he might have 
been influenced by his knowledge of German culture. His German was almost as good as his 
Italian. In the 1930s, while responsible for the financing of energy projects at the Institute for 
Industrial Reconstruction (IRI), he travelled a great deal to Germany to see what was being 
done there in this field. In fact it was not uncommon at that time – he was born in 1895 and 
married  late,  aged  52  –  even  for  middle  class  families  to  be  educated  with  the  sense  of 
belonging to a European culture that would extend beyond the national borders. 
What else did he leave you? 
The importance of following your convictions with consistent action and with courage if need 
be.  He  once  told  me  that  there  was  a  monument  in  a  city  square  in  Germany  with  an 
inscription that read more or less as follows: if you have lost money, you have lost nothing, 
for you can get it back with a good business deal. If you have lost your honour, you have lost 
much, but you can regain it through a heroic deed. If you have lost courage, however, you 
have lost everything. 
You were born in 1947. Were you ever tempted to join the protest movement of 1968? 
I had sympathy for some of issues raised, I shared the critical stance towards a culture that 
we  regarded  at  the  time  as  obsolete,  but  I  was  a  marginal  participant  to  the  protest 
movement. Typical of that generation was a mixture of criticism and self-confidence, given 
that the world was experiencing growth... 
...there were many opportunities available to you... 
... Indeed. I can remember that most of my university classmates and I got many job offers 
after  graduation.  They  were  forwarded  to  us  directly  from  the  university  secretariat.  At  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  same time, we were angry that our institutions, our universities and our country were unable 
to function better, to address inequalities, to satisfy our desire for change. 
Did you sympathise with any political grouping? 
No. My convictions were along what you would call today ideas of liberal socialism, not really 
suited for extremist groups. 
No open rebellion, no long hair? 
My  hair  was  quite long,  but  not  very  long.  And,  that  aside,  I  did  not have  parents  whom  I 
might have rebelled against. 
People close to you say that the period that really shaped Mario Draghi was that as 
from 1971, the five years he spent in the United States. Is that so? 
That is correct. You asked me earlier whether there was a specific moment when I realised 
what work meant. Well, in the United States, I learnt what hard work is and how much there 
is to do. 
Namely? 
Initially I was admitted at MIT as a special student, that is on a temporary basis. To become 
a regular student, I had to convince my professors I was worth keeping. There I learned that 
incentives  can  work  wonders.  My  scholarship  covered  the  rental  costs  and  tuition  fees  for 
only the first two years. I had to work to pay for everything else. Fortunately MIT helped by 
giving its students teaching assignments and paying for them. Later, when my daughter was 
born, I got a job with a computer company some 40 miles from Boston. The typical day was 
made up of attending classes, studying for exams and later writing the dissertation, fulfilling 
teaching  assignments  and  working  at  the  computer  company.  It  was  not  impossible  but  it 
was a very long day, sometimes as long as 18 hours. That would have taught anybody what 
hard work is. 
Looking back, this institute has become something of a legend. You studied together 
with  Paul  Krugman,  a  subsequent  winner  of  the  Nobel  Prize,  and  Ben  Bernanke, 
President  of  the  US  central  bank  until  early  2014.  And  then  there  are  the  renowned 
professors ... 
...  I  once  counted  them  –  there  are  five  Nobel  laureates  among  my  professors:  Paul 
Samuelson, Bob Solow ... 
... who also supervised your doctoral thesis ... 
... yes, as well as Franco Modigliani, and then there are Peter Diamond and Bob Engle. 
Were you aware of the fact that you were part of an elite group? 
Oh yes. MIT accepted only very few students, 20 to 25 per year. But it was a very special 
elite, one in which you had to earn a place every day. 
Would you say that you also gained something of an American mindset there? 
Of course such an intense and extraordinary experience leaves a legacy that helped to forge 
my personality today – as a true European. 
But what was it like at the time? 
Well, during those years I felt like I was maturing professionally in a very open environment, 
one in which you are assessed in terms of your capabilities – a place where you are what 
you do. 
Thus nobody ever asked about your origins. 
Nobody, and in the United States, that, generally, remains the case to this day. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Did you ever feel homesick? 
I certainly did miss Italy a little, but the 1970s were not really pleasant in my country. There 
was terrorism, an inflation rate that reached 20% ... 
Didn’t that inflation erode what your father left as inheritance? 
What we inherited was not very large, but enough for his three children to study. The first 
time I returned to Italy in 1976 I found that the equivalent of a few hundred euros was all that 
remained  of  our  inheritance.  This  was  because  the  family  court  judge  had  instructed  the 
guardian of my two younger siblings to invest the money in fixed-interest Treasury bills. And 
that made all the money disappear into thin air. 
So you should actually understand why people in Germany are so afraid of inflation. 
That is precisely the point: in Germany, some people say of me – ah, that Italian, he is sure 
to  fuel  inflation  in  the  German  economy!  And  I  explain  to  them  that  their  experience  of 
inflation dates back to the 1920s, while mine is far more recent. Those were difficult years. 
When  we  returned  to  Italy  we  went  to  Trento  because  it  was  there  that  I  found  my  first 
university teaching post. 
Trento was a political hotspot at the time, a stronghold of the extreme left. 
It certainly was a very left wing university, to the extent that a small number of students from 
there  later  became  violent  terrorists.  I  was  supposed  to  teach  students  how  a  capitalist 
economy works, which was what I learned at MIT. 
How did you do that? 
Certainly it was not easy but for a teacher it was also rewarding. 
Did those students of sociology ever protest against you? 
No, but there is a story in this context that is quite amusing. I held a seminar on a text written, 
I  believe,  by  Paul  Samuelson,  on  capitalism,  and  explaining  some  of  the  differences  to 
Marxist economics. When the time for the exams approached, students came to me with the 
following suggestion: “Professor, we want to take a group examination.” I asked them what 
that was. I didn’t have a clue, given that I had been in the United States for years. “Well, it 
works  like  this,”  they  told  me,  “You  ask  us  a  question  and  one  of  us will  answer it  for  the 
whole group.” So I looked at them and said, “Okay, we’ll do it like this: if that student answers 
the question correctly, the whole group will pass the examination. But if he can’t, the whole 
group fails.” The student who was asked did not come up with the correct answer, so the 
whole group failed. The same thing then happened a few more times, with the group involved 
becoming  smaller  each  time  and  the  students  finally  deciding  to  sit  the  examinations  as 
individuals. 
When you explained the capitalist system to your students, you presumably tried to 
highlight the advantages that this system has, and probably did so out of conviction ... 
... yes, indeed! 
Has this conviction diminished over the past years and decades? 
I share a view of society in which individual incentives are regarded as important and rules 
are  deemed  to  be  indispensable  for  a  proper  functioning  of  markets.  That  is  my  cultural 
background, so to speak, and my views on these issues have never changed. 
What has proved to  be most disappointing to you about the capitalist system since 
your student days? 
Well, quite a number of issues can be mentioned in this respect. One of the disappointments 
is the latest financial crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  The crisis of 2008? 
Yes, indeed. And then there is, how shall I put it, that predatory instability ... 
What do you understand by predatory? 
You know the saying “the winner takes it all.” I do not regard that as being always right and 
proper  especially  in  environments  where  social  mobility  is  limited  –  often  the  winners  who 
take it all are the same people. Beyond any ethical consideration, this is bound to generate 
instability. 
And the 2008 crisis what does the former Goldman Sachs top manager say: couldn’t 
the experts have predicted it? 
Yes,  pretty  much,  though  of  course  neither  precisely  nor  in  its  devastating  extent.  It  could 
have  been  foreseen  a  few  years  before  it  happened,  and  it  was  foreseen  by  some 
economists  like  Bob  Shiller,  the  2013  Nobel  Prize  Winner,  or  Ragu  Rajan,  the  current 
governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  The  protagonists  themselves  knew  that  things 
couldn’t go on like they were. The financial sector overshot the mark. There was a reduction 
in  the  quality  of  loans,  just  think  of  subprime  lending  in  the  US,  in  standards,  checks, 
oversight of lending – there were enough signs. Furthermore, in the early 2000s several rules 
which certainly would have been helpful in mitigating the crisis were revoked. Since then, a 
lot has been done to reinforce those rules and regulations. 
Do you sometimes think that you are the public person that in Germany is the least 
understood? 
I think that’s true... 
Whose fault is this lack of understanding: Germany’s or Mario Draghi’s? 
My position is actually quite simple: we have the mandate to guarantee price stability. The 
ECB was established in the tradition of the Bundesbank. But there is a big difference, as the 
ECB is not responsible for just one country, but 19. The instruments that it has to fulfil this 
mandate  are  different.  That  is,  I  would  say,  the  message  that  some  in  Germany  must 
understand.  The  mandate  hasn’t  changed,  but  time  and  circumstances  have.  That’s 
important. And yes, you are probably right: some people do not want to understand me on 
that. 
People here in Germany wonder how the countries that have not budgeted well and 
have for decades failed to reform can be rewarded with loans and low interest rates. 
And are thus getting the countries that have worked hard and made sacrifices to pay 
for it? 
It’s not true. So far, thanks also to the strict monitoring by the governments of these hard-
working countries, they have not paid much if anything. But also the European institutions 
played a role. The ECB has thus far not made any losses and each year, it distributes billions 
in profits to its members and among them to the Bundesbank, which passes these profits on 
to the Ministry of Finance, and so to the people of Germany. What is more, they benefit from 
the fact that public and private credit are unusually cheap. And consider also the TARGET 2 
balances ... 
... i.e. the claims and liabilities that the national central banks in the euro area have 
vis-à-vis the European Central Bank and which indicate the extent to which lending via 
the ECB is being taken up ... 
... and which some people claim is money for which Germans would be liable in the event of 
losses.  People  who  make  much  of  this  argument  forget  to  say  that  these  TARGET  2 
balances have fallen by half since July 2012. What does this mean? It means that less is 
being  borrowed  from  the  central  bank,  it  means  that  confidence  is  growing  in  the  system. 
Private  money  is  coming  into  circulation  again,  and  it  is  being  invested  in  other  countries. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The lesson is clear. Anything that strengthens confidence in the euro is also beneficial for the 
German tax payer. 
But the most pain is caused by the low interest rates, which you said in Handelsblatt 
two weeks ago will stay low. 
One  must  make  a  distinction  here:  there  are  interest  rates  that  we  set  with  our  monetary 
policy, and there are interest rates on long-term securities set by the markets. The latter are 
more directly relevant for savers. The fact that our key policy rates are low and expected to 
stay low for quite some time surely has an impact on long-term interest rates. But there are 
two more fundamental reasons why those rates are low: first, because the whole world and 
above all the euro area is bringing its money to Germany and investing it in these securities 
so interest rates fall. Germany acts as a safe haven in times of crisis. As confidence returns, 
this  should  be  less  the  case.  And  second,  because  expected  inflation  and  the  long-term 
growth forecast for the economy are both unfortunately very low. As our policy brings back 
inflation to close to 2% and growth picks up, more normal levels of interest rates will return. 
This explanation lets the ECB off the hook. 
Draghi: Let me be clear: central bank policy is not about punishing German savers, and it is 
not about rewarding weak countries. The European Central Bank’s mandate is to achieve an 
inflation rate of just below 2% for the euro area as a whole. To fulfil that at this time, it must 
keep  interest  rates  low  and  must  work  towards  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  which 
accompanies growth. That’s the point, not punishment or rewards. But sometimes it is hard 
to explain this to everyone in Germany, including in discussions with some politicians... 
What are they saying to you? 
They say: in that way you are removing their incentive to push through reforms. 
And isn’t that true? Italy and France are two examples. 
Our job is not and cannot consist of taking on the reform tasks of individual governments – 
not least since we lack the democratic mandate to do so. Do you believe then that it would 
be better for German savers if we tried to raise interest rates? 
If you put it that way, the answer is obvious. 
The answer is no! 
Why? 
Because  we  would  then  create  deflation  and  recession.  Anybody  can  see  that  the  current 
economic  situation  calls  for  an  expansionary  monetary  policy.  If  monetary  policy  was 
restrictive, even more companies would go bankrupt. And then long-term interest rates – the 
interest rates that affect the savings of Germans and other Europeans – would fall further. 
But when the interest rate is near to zero and you want inflation at 2%, then this will 
consume even more of the assets that Germans want to save for their old age. 
But this reasoning is wrong! If inflation were to rise, we would have to raise rates again. 
Why do we need inflation anyway, even if it is very low? 
Yes, why? We’ve learnt this lesson from Japan. In Japan there wasn’t this 2% objective, and 
in  the  1990s  prices  began  to  fall.  The  problem  was  not  that  prices  were  falling,  but  that 
people thought that they would never rise again, they would keep falling further and further. 
So  they  stopped  buying  things,  because  they  thought  they  could  get  them  even  more 
cheaply  at  a  later  date.  Production  fell,  so  prices  fell  even  further,  and  so  the  economy 
became slower and slower. We are not in that situation, yet. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  That’s what we call deflation. 
Yes, what I described is a negative deflationary spiral. The only thing that counters this is the 
credibility of our inflation objective – the attainment of which requires the continuation of our 
expansionary monetary policy. 
But you have already given us this expansionary monetary policy! 
Our expansionary monetary policy has already contributed to a turnaround in the growth of 
loans  to  firms.  But  that  is  not  enough.  If  firms  don’t  increase  productivity,  they  will  not  be 
competitive. 
That means that countries and firms must introduce reforms. 
Right! Productivity must increase particularly in the so-called southern countries. There even 
before the crisis, many companies were no longer productive partly because they had not 
invested  in  new  technology,  partly  because  the  countries  as  a  whole  were  no  longer 
competitive. For many years easy credit conditions allowed them to import from the rest of 
the euro area while increasing their debt, both public and private. The crisis made it clear that 
growth is sustainable only if it is not accompanied by unsustainable debt levels. When this 
condition  is  not  satisfied  brief  periods  of  growth  are  followed  by  deep  recessions,  as  the 
recent  history  of  the  U.S.  and  of  some  euro  area  countries  shows.  That  is  why  our 
expansionary monetary policy must be accompanied by higher productivity. Those countries 
need to make structural reforms to make investment profitable. I have been saying this for 
years now: We are pulling our weight but the governments also have to do their bit. 
Are you telling me that is where your sphere of influence stops? 
Exactly, we can only provide access to funding, we can only remove one of the obstacles, 
and nothing else. 
So we now have credit with an interest rate close to zero. In addition to that, we now 
have the unbelievable blessing of falling oil prices that many countries are enjoying, 
which is not down to you though. Despite all this, the crisis countries are only making 
slow progress, if at all. Do you not sometimes have your own doubts as to whether 
your measures are truly working? 
You see, the falling oil prices are a good thing but to the extent that they have a negative 
impact on people’s inflation expectations not a good thing at all. The danger is that people 
may start believing that we will not go back to an inflation rate of 2% very soon, not even in 
five  years  and  this  by  itself  would  have  a  recessionary  effect.  Shall  I  show  you  what  the 
expectations’ curve for the inflation rate looks like? It is actually astonishing. 
Yes, please do. 
Look  at  this  (he  holds  out  a  piece  of  paper):  The  average  annual  inflation  rate  expected 
during the course of the following year used to stand at around 1.77% in the past; in 2013 it 
stood at 1.08% and now it is only 0.37%. 
In Germany? 
In Europe. Now, the figures for the future five-year period. In the past, the average inflation 
expected for the next five years was 2.31% and today it stands at 1.68%. Looking at a ten-
year period, it stood at 2.09% in the past and today it stands at 1.15%. That’s how it goes! 
And what does this mean, do you think? 
It means that the risk of deflation is still low but it is definitely higher that it was a year ago. 
You are more concerned about deflation than inflation then? 
Both  are  undesirable.  But  from  a  central  banker’s  perspective,  inflation  is  easier  to  tackle 
than  deflation.  Why?  When  there  is  inflation,  you  raise  the  interest  rates.  In  this  way,  the 
price of money increases, the volume of cash in the economy shrinks and the pressure on 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  prices and wages recedes. With deflation it is harder. We are now in a situation in which we 
should reduce the interest rate further, but that is no longer possible. At this point, we need to 
take  recourse  to  unconventional  measures,  meaning  we  need  to  change  the  size  and  the 
composition of the European Central Bank’s balance sheet 
Are you talking about the thousand billion that you want to spend over the next few 
years, predominantly by purchasing government bonds, and which is to be decided 
upon at the ECB over the next week. 
I  never  said  “thousand”,  but  as  guidance,  I  mentioned  the  balance  sheet  size  of  the 
European Central Bank at the beginning of 2012. 
There is huge criticism in Germany of the large-scale purchase of government bonds, 
also  from  political  parties.  Is  it  the  worst  response  that  you  have  had  thus  far  as 
President of the central bank? 
Possibly  the  three  months  after  my  speech  in  London  were  similar.  (What  is  meant  is 
Draghi’s commitment at an investors’ conference in July 2012, in which he said that he would 
“do  whatever  it  takes”  within  the  mandate  in  order  to  keep  the  euro,  which  led  to  a  lot  of 
protest in Germany.) 
And what do you think, will the majority be in favour of your plan? 
All  members  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  are  fully  committed  to  comply  with  our 
mandate. Of course there are differences on how it should be done, but it isn’t as if we had 
an endless number of options. 
Germany is the biggest lender of all the euro area countries, whilst Italy and the United 
States  are  amongst  those  countries  in  the  world  with  the  largest  debt.  Is  that  the 
reason for the differences, for the completely different opinions on monetary policy? 
It is a complex question better answered in an essay rather than in an interview. There are 
many  reasons  for  these  differences.  Some  of  them  are  cultural  and  find  their  roots  in  the 
different  histories  of  economic  thought.  Part  of  the  explanation  resides  in  the  spectacular 
success that the Bundesbank’s monetary policy had in the 70s. And another main reason is 
that such policy is the perfect complement to the fiscal discipline and the culture based on 
stability which are an integral part of the socio-economic foundations of this country. 
Many Germans fear, in particular, that the debtor countries will be unable to redeem 
their  loans.  The  options  available  in  such  cases  are  indeed  frightening:  state 
bankruptcy, the national central banks continue to print money, loans are prolonged in 
perpetuity, debt that we are burdening future generations with... 
In our currency union, such fears and the ensuing pressure are actually a further stimulus for 
debtor countries to undertake the structural reforms needed for growth and eventually pay 
back their loans. But be it should be clear that a break-up of the Union would not be in the 
interest of Germany. 
Which law states that all countries must remain in the euro area at any price? Is there 
really “no alternative”, as Angela Merkel claims? 
“No alternative”? 
That has become a dictum in Germany: in the discussions on whether to help Greece 
or not, Ms Merkel said that she had “no alternative” but to save the euro. This remark 
also then gave rise to the name of the “Alternative für Deutschland” movement. 
Our countries wanted the euro as a fundamental step of a process that should lead to greater 
and more significant unity in Europe. The euro is irreversible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
What would be so bad about Greece, a country where so many don’t want the euro, 
simply exiting? Would the EU not be able to cope with that quite well? 
Please  understand  that  I  would  not  like  to  comment  as  any  statement  could  be  used 
politically. To speculate about possible outcomes at this stage is pointless. 
That is less of an economic reasoning, and more of a political reasoning. 
It is both political and economic reasoning. You are asking me why I consider the euro to be 
irreversible? It is part of the Treaty. But, just imagine what would happen if the euro were to 
disappear, which was already a matter of speculation in 2012. If all countries were to start 
devaluing,  prices  would  no  longer  be  stable.  Would  the  countries  where  complaints  about 
reforms  and  fiscal  consolidation  are  the  loudest  be  better  off  exiting  the  euro  area?  They 
would  still  have  to  continue  with  their  reforms!  You  cannot  simply  keep  on  devaluing  a 
currency forever: It would simply lead to higher prices. 
You are considered in this country as someone who has a particular understanding of 
southern Europe. Do you sometimes find yourself having to defend Germany to the 
Italians? 
There  is  an  equally  large,  equally  irrational  prejudice  towards  Germany  as  there  is  in 
Germany towards Italy. It is the task of all of us, of all the European citizens to fight these 
prejudices and to behave so as not justify them. 
The prejudice is that Germany wants to bring Europe to heel? 
In Italy, but for this matter this happens in many other countries in the euro area, there is 
often a failure to understand that, within a currency union our policy decisions affect the other 
members, and we can no longer behave as though we were alone in the world. 
So what are you trying to explain to the Italians and other southern Europeans? 
We have given ourselves some common rules. They must be respected. If the rules are not 
respected, there is no trust. And without trust, people call into question the foundations for 
the common currency. 
Are you offended by the charge of being an agent of the southern countries? 
Yes. 
Have you come to accept this label? What are you doing to counter it? 
I don’t accept any labels, but I present facts. We are responsible for price stability. We are 
not  there  to  provide  advantages  for  one  country  or  another,  or  even  to  punish  German 
savers. I keep saying this, but ... 
... the message is difficult to get across? 
I  can  but  quote  Paul  Krugman:  “When  faith  meets  evidence,  evidence  doesn’t  stand  a 
chance”. This is everything other than helpful. The simplification of the discussion you see in 
many  places  is  in  fact  just  simplistic  and  leads  to  wrong  conclusions.  A  great  German 
economist,  Rudi  Dornbusch,  used  to  say:  “Complicated  questions  have  easy,  wrong, 
answers.” 
Would you describe Angela Merkel as a friend? 
“Friend” is not the right word in this context but I have a good working relationship with her as 
with other European leaders. 
Are you constantly in contact with her? 
Draghi: Insofar as this is compatible with the ECB’s independence. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Finance Minister Schäuble has said that cheap money should not be allowed to dent 
the reform zeal. 
I am pretty confident that we will manage to do what has to be done within the limits of our 
mandate. 
What about the reports speculating that you could become Italian President? Maybe 
this  speculation  has  also  to  do  with  the  reports  that  you  are  not  so  happy  to  be  in 
Frankfurt. Your predecessor, Jean-Claude Trichet, was almost always here and took 
care personally of every detail. 
Frankfurt has become the best site one can imagine from which to run the monetary policy 
for 19 countries, and now with the establishment of the single supervisory mechanism, can 
well  be  named  the  monetary  and  financial  policy  centre  of  Europe.  The  members  of  the 
ECB’s Executive Board are responsible for the areas of competence that I have assigned to 
them.  My  management  style  is  based  on  delegation  but  also  on  control  which  I  do  both 
personally and collegially with the Executive Board. I find that works well. 
At any rate, people say that you are in Italy as much as possible, or somewhere else ... 
I like to go to Italy, when the work in Frankfurt is done, and I must go everywhere else where 
my presence is needed. The ECB, as the name says, is a European institution, and it is the 
second largest central bank in the world. You cannot lead it solely out of Frankfurt. But the 
nickname “Mr Somewhere Else” has pursued me for 20 years! 
Since your time at the Italian Treasury? 
Yes,  I  had  a  thousand  things  to  do.  Sometimes  people  tried  to  find  me  and  could  not  so. 
They said: “Draghi is never there, he’s somewhere else!” 
What is actually so bad about being touted as the President of Italy? 
I do not wish to support any – I repeat, any – speculation of that nature. It is of course a great 
honour to be mentioned, but it is not my job. What is important is the job I am doing at the 
moment. I am happy to be able to do this job and I will continue to pursue it. 
Do you sometimes have the feeling that you are being used as a scapegoat – by both 
sides? 
If this is the price to be paid for a job well done, I am happy to pay it. But what is certain is 
that no one in Europe has ever won an election by invoking my name. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
