  G Padmanabhan: Emerging issues in cyber security in the financial 
sector 
Address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Bank of India, at the Sri Chithira 
Thirunal  Memorial  Lecture  Series,  organised  by 
the  State  Bank  of  Travancore, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 28 February 2015. 
 Assistance  in  the  preparation  of  this  address  rendered  by  S/  Shri  S  Ganeshkumar,  A  Madhavan,  Vaibhav 
Chaturvedi, Kashiap Balakrishnan, Smt Radha Somakumar and helpful comments from a number of colleagues is 
gratefully acknowledged. Errors, if any, are speaker’s own. 
the 
the  government  under  Sri  Chithira  Thirunal  and 
1. 
It is not often that one gets an opportunity to deliver the very first lecture of a series 
organised in memory of a person whom you have known and respected from the childhood. 
One  may  have  many  things  to  say  and  eulogise  about  the  Late  Highness  Sri  Chithira 
Thirunal, but I can claim to represent a family which knew him personally and many of his 
family members. Therefore, I am thankful to Mr Jeevandas Narayan, Managing Director of 
State Bank of Travancore for starting this lecture series and giving me the unique opportunity 
of delivering the first lecture. It is also appropriate that the bank has started this lecture series 
considering  the  association  of  the  Royal  family  with  the  setting  up  of  this  bank  which  has 
been  well  documented  by  Prof  A  Sreedhara  Menon  in  his  book,  “Triumph  and  Tragedy  in 
Travancore”.  The  predecessor  of today’s  State  Bank  of  Travancore,  Travancore  Bank  Ltd, 
started operations with a public issue of shares worth Rs 1 crore on October 8, 1945 which 
was  oversubscribed  by  two  and  a  half  times  the  same  day.  The  entire  process  was 
orchestrated  by 
inimitable 
C P Ramaswamy  Iyer.  Dr.  Ludwik  Aronson,  a  Polish  Jew,  whose  expertise  was  reportedly 
utilised  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  for  their  Foreign  Exchange  transactions  during  
1943–45, was appointed as the first General Manager of the bank. The rest as they say is 
history  and  even  today  the  bank  continues  to  be  the  biggest  influence  in  Kerala  with  the 
largest market share among banks and the mind-space among Keralites. 
I  chose  the  topic  of  cyber  security,  esoteric  to  many,  as  to  my  mind  this  area 
2. 
requires far more attention by the financial sector in India. Technology is quickly altering all 
elements  related  to  end-to-end  financial  transactions.  Infrastructures  that  support  this 
transformation are increasingly becoming ubiquitous as they ought to be, more sophisticated 
and  mobile.  More  importantly,  financial  transactions  are  increasingly  getting  processed  in 
real  time  with  lesser  human  intervention.  End  users  are  becoming  more  demanding  for 
faster, more efficient, easier and more secure means of carrying out their transactions. At the 
same time, the financial sector is facing ever-escalating threats from cyber criminals. In an 
interconnected  world,  although  all  organisations  are  targets  for  cyber  attacks,  financial 
institutions are more vulnerable than most others. The vulnerability arises out of two reasons. 
One is the nature of banking. Banks deal with money. Money is today stored and transferred 
in digital form. An attack on banks can help the perpetrator to gain funds, which makes them 
the prime target. As banks have to keep their systems open to the customers unlike other 
vulnerable systems like defence, they are in general easier targets. So security in banks is 
not just important. It is essential. More importantly, the financial sector is based on trust. A 
customer would be willing to park his money with a bank if he believes that it is safe. In the 
digital  world,  the  customer  trust  depends  on  the  strength  of  security,  or  more  precisely, 
perceived strength of security. This perception gets built on the experience of the customers. 
As more and more customers experience fraud – free transactions through digital channels, 
their trust in that bank is likely to be higher. Today, when the Indian financial sector is at a 
tipping  point  in  technology  adoption,  when  banks  are  going  in  for  a  revamp  of  CBS  from 
being  a  mere  transaction  enabled  system  to  a  more  modern  information  processing  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  decision support system, the sector can ill afford to ignore the cyber threats that are getting 
increasingly sophisticated, systematic, and as some say even state sponsored. 
IT security 
3. 
Before getting into specifics of cyber security issues, let me talk about IT security in 
general. IT security implies that the IT systems including data are held in a secure manner 
and  made  available  only  to  the  legitimate  users  of  the  system.  It  implies  protecting  the  IT 
systems, networks, programs and data bases, from damage, attack, or unauthorised access, 
so that resources are available for business transactions whenever required. 
4. 
The  security  issues  or  failures  can  be  broadly  discussed  under  two  segments-
unintended and intended. The unintended failures largely occur due to IT systems hardware 
failure,  application  systems  crashes,  non-availability  of  infra  resources  such  as  power, 
bandwidth  etc.  All  these  factors  could  completely  halt  the  business  process  with  all-round 
negative  fallouts.  To  address  the  unintended  failures,  an  institution  is  expected  to  take 
several steps such as adoption of Board-approved IT governance policies, establishing data 
centres, third party contracts, robust service level agreements, IS audit etc. As far as the risk 
of  unintended  failure  is  concerned,  the  IT  management  policy  framework  that  has  evolved 
over a period of time along with corporate governance has addressed the risk factors to a 
large extent. All these have come at a huge cost, but a definite resilience has been achieved. 
However the intended intrusions to disrupt business, misuse the information available at the 
institutional level and to perpetrate fraud at the customer level continue to be orchestrated 
largely by a sophisticated group of cyber criminals. 
Tackling cyber threats 
5. 
While  vulnerabilities  in  software  and  network  continue  to  be  the  target  of  cyber 
attackers and defending these resources remain the focus of every organisation, the weakest 
link  continues  to  be  the  user.  Data  breach  arising  from  phishing  attacks  and  social 
engineering  continues  to  be  on  the  rise.  No  doubt  banks  have  made  significant  efforts  to 
educate  the  user  on  safe  banking,  but  it  is  often  found  to  be  inadequate  in  the  face  of  a 
targeted  attack.  Social  media  provides  the  platform  required  for  an  attacker  to  mine 
information on an individual. This information is then used to make the user believe that he is 
communicating  with  a  legitimate  source.  With  easier  access  to  social  media  and  the 
tendency  to  share  personal  information,  the  number  of  users  that  are  exposed  to  such 
attacks will continue to increase. Internet of things is no longer just a catch phrase. Today, a 
typical Indian home has mobile phones, tablets, laptops, smart TVs and gaming devices all 
connected to the Internet and with each other. It is estimated that by 2020 there would be 
30 billion wireless devices connected to the Internet of things. Most of these devices have 
not been principally designed with security in mind. The issue that I am trying to flag is that 
as we acquire more and more modern electronic gadgets, there will be a large number of 
insecure devices that co-exist on the same network with more secure ones. Since in an inter-
connected world, security is as good as the weakest link, the criminals will attempt to exploit 
a less secure but trusted device to attack the critical and well protected resources. 
6. 
Mobile  devices  have  been  getting  more  powerful  every  year.  Smart  phones 
available  today  are  capable  of  carrying  out  all  the  functionalities  generally  done  on  a  PC. 
While there are efforts made to ensure that a PC is kept secure, a smart phone that does the 
same functionality does not receive similar attention. Mobile Banking has gained popularity in 
the last few years. In the coming years mobile devices are going to be increasingly used for 
transferring funds and for making payments. Mobile devices, if regular updating of security is 
given a go by, could well become an attractive and easy target for cyber criminals. 
7. 
Large  banks,  retail  establishments  and  restaurants  are  often  the  main  targets  of 
cyber attacks. In 2014, J.P. Morgan Chase & Co, the largest U.S. bank by assets conceded 
that  unknown  attackers  stole  about  76  million  customers’  contact  information  –  including 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  names, email addresses, phone numbers and addresses. It also affected about seven million 
of J.P. Morgan’s small-business customers. Mercifully, the hackers were reportedly unable to 
gather  detailed  information  on  accounts,  such  as  account  numbers,  passwords,  social 
security  numbers  or  dates  of  birth.  That  these  breaches  happened  even  to  banks  like 
JPMorgan Chase that spend billions of dollars to fund IT budgets and employ large teams of 
security analysts points to sophistication of cyber attacks. 
8. 
A survey conducted in the United States revealed that the cost of cyber crimes for 
the retail stores doubled between the years 2013 and 2014. Information of tens of millions of 
customers were stolen from retail stores Target, insurance company Anthem, formerly known 
as WellPoint, Anthem (ANTM) is the second-largest health insurer in the United States. In 
this context, FBI Director James Comey was quoted as stating “There are two kinds of big 
companies in the United States. There are those who’ve been hacked…and those who don’t 
know they’ve been hacked.” 
9. 
new, disturbing trends: 
• 
The latest Kaspersky Labs Report-Financial Cyberthreats in 2014- highlights certain 
Cybercriminals are becoming less interested in “mass” malicious attacks on users, 
preferring fewer, more “targeted” attacks. 
A shift in the cybercriminals’ focus – instead of attacking end-users, they started to 
pursue organisations that work with financial information and payment tools. 
 The recent uncovering of estimated $1 billion heist against several banks is a pointer to the 
above. As per the report, $1 billion has been stolen in the attacks, which started in 2013 and 
are still ongoing. The gang, dubbed as Carbanak, used computer viruses to infect company 
networks with malware including video surveillance, enabling it to see and record everything 
that happened on staff’s screens. In some cases it was then able to transfer money from the 
banks’  accounts  to  their  own,  or  even  able  to  tell  cash  machines  to  dispense  cash  at  a 
pre-determined time of the day. 
10. 
Another  concern  is  the  increasing  tendency  of  the  insiders  using  the  information 
they have about their organisation, against itself. Companies have no option but to trust their 
employees and provide them privileged access to systems. The Snowden incident in the US 
has clearly shown the amount of damage an insider can cause to an institution. It is easier 
for an insider to carry out a cyber-attack as he is already aware of all the security devices 
and procedures in place. An attack by an insider is often more difficult to identify and recover 
from.  Attacks  by  nation  states  –  cyber  war  –  wars  among  nations  are  increasingly  being 
fought in cyber space than on the battle field. Acts of cyber espionage are increasingly being 
reported and many nation states are suspected of being covertly involved. Cyber attackers 
that have the backing of the state have powerful systems and monetary resources at their 
disposal. 
Need for robust policies and practices 
11. 
As we have seen, any electronic system connected to a network can be potentially 
compromised.  The  best  preventive  solutions  have  been  found  inadequate  to  thwart  a 
sophisticated,  targeted  attack  by  a  motivated  attacker.  This  is  not  to  say  that  preventive 
solutions  do  not  serve  any  purpose.  Traditional  prevention  solutions  like  firewalls  and 
Intrusion prevention systems help prevent a large number of known attacks and should be a 
part of any network, however, they are becoming quite inadequate as attacks become more 
sophisticated. For instance, a new but disturbing feature is the advent of malafide attacks on 
computer  systems,  which  are  difficult  for  even  experts  to  identify.  Some  of  the  examples 
include  malware  which  get  attached  to  songs  (which  are  commonly  downloaded  from 
recognised sites),  or  as  links  on e-mail  messages.  The  malware  gets  itself  installed  in  the 
computer of the user and starts watching the actions of the user. Some of the malware have 
the  capability  to  read,  recognise  and  record  the  commands  and  actions  keyed  in  by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  accessing the kernel (which is at the heart) of the computer and gather information such as 
user  id  and  password  of  internet  banking  transactions.  Once  these  are  obtained,  the 
information is transmitted to the hacker who could simply log on to the bank’s site using safe 
(but compromised) credentials and siphon off money from an unsuspecting bank customer. 
By the time the customer realises this, the fraud is complete and most of the money is lost. 
There  are  reports  that  some  versions  of  the  malware  “wear”  disguises  and  have  the 
capability of capturing the key strokes entered in the key board using the user’s own camera 
on the computer! One approach towards ensuring that such attacks do not occur is to create 
a culture of selecting only those sites / addresses which we are very sure about as being 
safe and secure, which is commonly referred to as “white listing” of sites for granting access. 
12. 
Today,  tools  like  Security  Incident  and  Event  Management  (SIEM),  Network 
Behaviour  Anomaly  Detection  (NBAD),  Data  Leakage  Prevention  (DLP),  etc  are  available 
which provides deep visibility into operations and quickly detect a security breach. Besides, 
one approach being increasingly adopted by banks – apart from procuring tools and having 
rules – is following the age-old and time tested method of using analytics. We have all read 
about the advantages of Big Data and Big Data Analytics. While this is more often used for 
business development and customer behaviour analysis and customer preferences, there is 
scope of using this for mapping general customer behaviour patterns and whenever there is 
an exception or an outlier, the computer system could trigger a warning. For example, if a 
credit card holder has always been doing transactions in India, an SMS alert for confirmation 
could be sent when use of the card is noticed at let’s say Malaysia. Or, if a computer user 
always  browses  data  and  speeches  on  the  internet,  when  an  attempt  to  download  is 
performed, an alert seeking confirmation could be automatically generated. Thus, analysis of 
customer  behaviour  could  result  in  pattern  formation  based  on  which  exceptions  could  be 
highlighted by  the  computer  itself, with  little  or  no  human intervention.  This  may  of  course 
necessitate  some  investment  in  the  form  of  enhanced  human  resources  with  specialised 
skills.  There  are  financial  organisations  in  the  world  which  have  implemented  these 
approaches with remarkable success. 
13. 
What  lessons  do  we  draw  from  the  foregoing?  In  this  scenario,  it  is  important  to 
ensure that at the organisation level, the policy on cyber security clearly identifies different 
types of systems and data based on sensitiveness and criticality. It should set out the type of 
preventive measures required for each category, with critical systems having more stringent 
security. Cyber-attack is generally met with panic. A policy that clearly states the roles and 
responsibilities of each stake holder and the response that is required for each scenario will 
ensure that panic is replaced with decisive action. 
International efforts 
14. 
The  biggest  challenge  in  making  the  financial  sector  cyber  resilient  is  to  first 
acknowledge  the  complexities  and  interdependencies  and  then  to  proactively  address 
failures, adopt effective resilience techniques, and resolve problems through cooperation. In 
order to cope with the idiosyncrasies of cyber attacks and enabling services to resume, the 
financial  sector  has  to  follow  an  integrated  approach  based  on  the  adoption  of  a  cyber 
resilience  framework  developed  internally  or  adapted  from  a  more  generic  framework  – 
examples being: the NIST framework1 (February 2014); the World Economic Forum’s cyber 
resilience  approach,  (January  2014)2;  and  the  MITRE  framework  (2013)3.  However,  it  is 
equally  important  to  recognise  that  any  framework  would  not  provide  a  one-size-fits-all 
approach to managing cyber security risk for the financial institutions. 
                                                 
1   http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/upload/cybersecurity-framework-021214-final.pdf. 
2  http://reports.weforum.org/hyperconnected-world-2014/. 
3  http://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/publications/supply-chain-attack-framework-14–0228.pdf. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    Generally, cyber resilience frameworks aim to address three broad scenarios: 
• 
• 
Confidentiality breach, which involves confidential information being stolen. 
Availability breach, where the services provided are inaccessible or unusable upon 
demand by customers but where the systems per se are still intact. 
Integrity breach, which is the corruption of data or systems affecting the accuracy or 
completeness  of  the  information  and  processing  methods  (and  which  could  also 
impact  the  availability  of  services).  The  focus  of  the  majority  of  cyber  attacks 
continues  to  be  on  compromising  confidentiality  (eg  stealing  sensitive  data)  and 
degrading  system  availability  (eg  DDoS*  attacks).  An  integrated  approach  has  to 
address cyber threat holistically. 
15. 
Let me highlight a few international initiatives in this regard that could be instructive. 
Bank  for  International  Settlements  through  its  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market 
Infrastructures  has  setup  working  groups  and  task  forces  to  examine  the  issue  of  Cyber 
threats and have published reports on the subject to guide the industry in preparing polices 
to protect cyber resources. Based on these reports, I would like to flag a few key points that 
would need to be kept in mind while formulating a cyber security policy: 
• 
Having  multiple  sites  providing  for  effective  recovery  against  traditional  forms  of 
risks  however  is  mostly  ineffective  in  recovering  from  a  cyber  attack.  “Unintended 
consequence  of  resiliency”  (for  example  corruption  at  the  primary  site  gets 
replicated to the DR sites) makes them ineffective in case of a cyber attack. 
Systems  at  primary  and  DR  sites  are  generally  similar  in  architecture  and 
equipment. This constitutes a major risk as the vulnerability that exists at one site is 
there  at  all.  On  the  other  hand  heterogenic  systems  would  be  very  difficult  to 
manage. 
Periodic  Real  time,  scenario  based  simulations  is  necessary  to  rehearse  the 
management  of  a  cyber  security  incident.  The  scenarios  should  focus  on  cyber 
attacks  that  could  disrupt  the  normal  day-to-day  business  functions,  and  the 
processes  and  procedures  the  incident  response  team  utilise  to  address  a  cyber 
security incident. 
Business  staff  often  spots  a  problem  first,  not  the  IT  staff.  Business  staff  is 
potentially best placed to see parameters changing dramatically and/or bottlenecks 
occurring where they shouldn’t. A process for business staff to quickly escalate such 
anomalies to IT staff will help in quick detection. 
Services  of  personnel  with  expertise  in  cyber  forensics  should  be  utilised  to 
understand which systems have been compromised and to isolate them. 
“Buddy  Banking”  helps  where  operational  management  capability  as  well  as  the 
service itself is lost. “Buddy Banking” is where a second system or organisation is 
capable  of  taking  over  the  functionalities  of  the  affected  organisation  so  that  the 
service offered by the affected organisation continues to be available to its users. 
The  usage  of  RTGS  and  NEFT  as  a  backup  to  each  other  is  an  example  in  the 
Indian context. 
In  case  of  a  disaster,  communication  is  the  key.  Robust  communication  channels 
with all stake holders should be available. 
16. 
I  would  also  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  two  important  initiatives  undertaken  by 
Bank of England towards ensuring cyber resiliency. The first relates to prevention and the 
second, recovery. 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  CBEST testing framework 
17. 
Penetration  testing  services  as  they  are  currently  conducted  do  not  provide 
assurance  against  sophisticated  attacks  on  critical  assets.  This  is  because  testing  is  not 
done on critical assets because of the perceived associated risk and the testing is not done 
based  on  current  and  specific  threats.  Identifying  this  lacuna,  Bank  of  England  introduced 
CBEST.  CBEST  is  a  framework  that  brings  together  Cyber  intelligence  service  providers, 
penetration testing companies and financial Institutions to deliver customised, intelligence-led 
cyber  security  tests  in  a  controlled  environment.  The  tests  conducted  by  identified 
penetration testing companies replicate real world scenarios taking into account intelligence 
on  cyber  risks  provided  by  the  Cyber  intelligence  service  providers.  Further  the  tests  are 
conducted  on  critical  systems  and  essential  services.  This  ensures  that  the  critical 
infrastructures of financial institutions are tested with scenarios that are most relevant and 
which they are most likely to face in case of a real attack. 
Use of SWIFT-MIRS as a disaster recovery system for RTGS 
18. 
Unlike many other countries including India which maintain more than two sites for 
their RTGS system, the RTGS system in UK has two sites. BoE decided against investing in 
a fully operational third site as it was felt that the risk of losing both sites at once, though of 
critical impact, is very low probability. Further, in their perception, having a third site which 
replicates  the  technology  platform  of  the  first  and  second  sites  does  not  fully  address  all 
risks. A successful breach of one site would almost certainly lead to a breach of the second 
or  third  sites  if  they  were  exact  duplicates.  As  an  alternative,  BoE  considered  the  SWIFT 
MIRS  initiative.  The  SWIFT  Market  Infrastructure  Resilience  Service  (MIRS)  is  a  generic 
RTGS platform developed and hosted by SWIFT. The generic RTGS system could be used 
by Bank of England (or any central bank) in the event that all their sites are lost. The Bank 
would continue to run the business operation, while SWIFT technically operates MIRS. Apart 
from offering an additional contingency option, MIRS increases operational resilience in two 
key ways. First, it will be technically operated from outside the United Kingdom, so bringing 
greater  geographic  diversity  to  the  sites  hosting  the  infrastructure.  And  second,  MIRS 
achieves  technical  diversity  as  it  will  be  based  on  a  different  technology  platform.  This 
addresses  a  problem  common  in  contingency  arrangements  that  sites  share  software  and 
hardware configurations and so are susceptible to the same risks. 
The way forward 
19. 
The uncomfortable truth all of us need to come to terms with is that cyber crime is 
here  to  stay.  Crime  and  money  are  often  linked.  Hence  the  financial  sector  remains  most 
vulnerable  in  an  inter-connected  world.  While  what  has  been  discussed  thus  far  will  be 
instructive  to  increase  the  defences  and  agility  to  deal  with  cyber  criminals  and  attacks,  I 
have a few suggestions as we look ahead. 
Customer protection and legal framework 
20. 
Today, a customer can use, apart from paper based instruments, debit cards, credit 
cards,  automated  teller  machines,  mobile  phones,  points  of  sale  terminals  or  Internet  for 
undertaking financial transactions. Cyber fraud can be perpetrated through any of the above 
medium/device.  The  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Government  of  India  have  been  consistently 
making  efforts  over  several  years  to  encourage  electronic  banking  and  electronic  financial 
transactions to bring the economy out of cash based system. If the efforts have to bring in 
sustained  and  substantial  benefits,  then  the  system  has  to  be  made  robust  enough  for 
customers to have confidence in the system. For this to happen, the common person has to 
be safeguarded against any loss, as long as he has not been negligent, the onus of proving 
negligence being on the service provider. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In  this  regard,  it  is  my  considered  view  that  India  needs  a  statute  protecting  a 
21. 
common citizen against cyber fraud or cyber crime. A strong law, which protects a diligent 
customer  from  cyber  frauds  would  infuse  institutional  safeguard  to  a  common  person  and 
increase his confidence to use technology in financial transactions. 
22. 
Let me quote two well known US based cases to support my suggestion. Take for 
instance, the widely referred case of Patco Construction Co., Inc. v. People’s United Bank, 
684  F.3d  197,  (1st.  Cir.  July  3,  2012).  The  First  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  held  the  bank 
potentially liable for its corporate customer’s losses after hackers intruded into the computer 
systems,  stole  the  customer’s  bank  account  access  security  information,  and  used  that 
information for effecting unauthorised funds transfers from the customer’s account. In seven 
days, nearly $600,000 of fraudulent wire transfers were made from Patco’s account by the 
time  the  fraud  came  to  light.  The  Court  found  the  bank’s  security  procedures  were  not 
“commercially  reasonable”  under  Article  4A  of  Uniform  Commercial  Code.  Second,  The 
Electronic Funds Transfers Act of the U.S. Federal Government and the Regulation E of the 
Electronic  Funds  Transfers  adopted  by  the  Board  of  the  Federal  Reserve  serve  well  to 
protect the interest of the customer. The loss or liability for the customer is capped in case of 
card  or  the  electronic  transfers,  if  reported  within  a  specific  number  of  days  and  the  limit 
varies  depending  upon  the  customer’s  compliance  on  the  incidence  reporting.  This  gives 
Federal protection against cyber crime. 
23. 
One might argue that we already have RBI issued directives currently in place today 
to protect the customers’ interest. Besides, institutions such as BCSBI, set up by the Reserve 
Bank  has  also  been  very  active  in  setting  up  codes  for  protecting  the  customer  interest. 
These  are  largely  in  the  regulatory  domain  and  the  common  person  is  not  well  aware  of 
these nor are these seen as basic rights of the customers. The point that I am trying to flag is 
that a customer must be legally protected from suffering losses when he becomes a victim of 
the cyber crime as a matter of right rather than having to run from pillar to post to prove that 
he was not negligent. Today, for instance, if a debit card is fraudulently used causing loss to 
the customer, how long it takes for the customer to get the balance restored? I have come 
across instances -where even after fraud is proved- of banks waiting for insurance claim to 
be  settled  before  the  amount  is  restored  to  the  customer.  Is  this  fair?  How  is  a  customer 
concerned  about  the  insurance  arrangement  that  the  bank  has?  This  is  where  statutory 
protection  helps.  Can  this  protection  also  cover  issues  relating  to  cloud  computing  which 
could  give  a  push  for  this  cost  effective  technology  being  adopted  more  by  the  financial 
sector? 
Customer protection and insurance 
24. 
To  implement  the  kind  of  customer  protection  as  discussed  above,  it  is  important 
that  the  insurance  sector  also  responds.  Even  in  the  US,  the  companies  lament  that  the 
insurance  cover  does  not  give  adequate  financial  indemnity  to  losses  arising  out  of  cyber 
attacks. What is the Indian position? The traditional insurance products cover risks against 
losses arising from natural calamity, theft, crime etc but typically do not cover losses arising 
on  account  of  cyber  crimes  or  cyber  failures.  An  insurance  cover  against  cyber  crime  or 
cyber failure would mitigate the risk to a large extent. There can be First Party as well as 
Third Party Insurance Cover against the cyber crime or failure. The First Party Insurance can 
cover  losses  faced  directly  by  the  insurance  holder  including  personal  information  asset 
damage, including damage to the data, software, and a system failure due to cyber attack 
and post cyber attack crisis management expenses. The Third Party insurance can protect 
against claims for losses from another organisation or individuals affected by a cyber breach, 
including losses arising due to malware, virus etc. This can include network security liability, 
losses due to the theft and misuse of data, protecting against DOS attacks, liability costs due 
to internet publishing, including websites, e-mail, instant messaging, and chat rooms, crisis 
management expenses etc. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  Insurance cover is certainly an option worth looking at as part of risk management, 
25. 
but this poses several challenges to both the regulator and the insurance companies. There 
are several issues in arriving at an acceptable formula for insurance premium due to paucity 
of historical data. We need to have systematic data on the losses suffered in the past due to 
cyber attacks covering incident occurrences and incidence reporting, impact analysis, third 
party  damages  suffered  etc.  This  is  certainly  challenging  but  not  insurmountable.  I  am 
confident that if we can find a way in arriving at a practical risk mitigating insurance solution, 
it would certainly add to the push of digital economy. 
Cyber information analytics centre 
26. 
Different  institutions,  different  customers,  individually  or  collectively  undergo  the 
pains of cyber crime. To my mind, we need to collect all the data, collate the attacks, failures, 
measures to mitigate the security gaps, the losses suffered, the turnaround time for fixing the 
security  gap  and  analyse  them  in  order  to  guide  the  industry  participants  as  well  as 
customers. This would also over a period of time, reflect the number of attacks, volume and 
value  of  loss,  cost  of  correction  and  offer  a  wealth  of  information,  apart  from  sharing  the 
solutions for preventing known attacks. In particular, this effort would reduce the turnaround 
time for the sector as whole in bridging the security gap. IDRBT has started this effort last 
year. But a lot more needs to be shared to serve the full purpose of this important initiative. 
May I point out in this connection that when CIBIL was instituted to share credit and default 
status  of  the  account  holders,  there  was  lack  of  enthusiasm  from  the  banks  in  sharing 
information. But then, the regulator gave a push and today it has become a SOP (standard 
operating procedure) to check on CIBIL site. I would urge all the banks to proactively share 
information to IDRBT, which would help us to build a better response support system. We will 
not hesitate to walk the extra mile to make this happen. 
Challenge is expertise 
27. 
As we have seen, security is a function of four parameters – governance, policies, 
systems and awareness. Of these, the real challenge for the Indian financial system is the 
awareness.  There  are  two  kinds  of  awareness.  One  is  the  awareness  among  customers 
about the dos and donts in digital transactions. It may be required for banks to take upon 
continuous  awareness  campaign  among  all  customers  on  the  importance  of  information 
security  and  the  abundant  caution  to  be  exercised  by  them.  Internal  awareness  is  the 
awareness among employees of the bank about security. While it is necessary to increase 
the  overall  awareness  among  all  employees,  it  is  imperative  that  a  small  section  of 
employees are groomed to handle higher end security concerns, including digital forensics. 
Unless banks are able to have strong internal security teams, their position would be weak. 
Unlike other technology related activities, no organisation can afford to outsource its entire 
security.  Banks  have  to  take  up  measures  to  recruit  and  retain  the  right  talent.  More 
importantly, they should keep the security skills sets always alert and up to date in a world of 
constant threats by a more motivated group of skilled attackers. The challenge is that there is 
no readymade skill set in the market too. Banks have to build an entire banking security eco 
system themselves. 
Let me summarise what I have been trying to communicate: 
Cyber  threat  is  real  and  is  constantly  evolving.  No  organisation  is  immune  or  can 
claim to be fully secure against a cyber attack. 
Preventive measures are a must in this scenario. 
Where prevention fails, make up with quick detection and decisive response. 
Conclusion 
28. 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  v) 
iv) 
vi) 
Every  organisation  should  have  an  IT  Governance  Policy  as  a  subset  of  cyber 
security policy. The policy should identify key assets, the risks they are exposed to, 
prescribe mitigation measures, roles and responsibilities in case of a cyber incident 
and state the response required. 
Identify worst case scenarios and plan and practice the response in each case. This 
is challenging as one is facing a fast moving target. 
The aim should be to recover from a worst case scenario as set forth in the cyber 
security policy. 
Be an active participant in sharing information on cyber threats faced. 
Adopt  ISO  27001  which  is  internationally  recognised  best-practice  standard  for 
information security management. 
29. 
In conclusion, as Governor Raghuram Rajan warned in an internal communication, 
in today’s interconnected world, eternal vigilance is the price we have to pay not merely for 
the benefits of democracy as the old saying goes, but also to enjoy the benefits of a safe and 
secure financial system. 
30. 
Once again thank you for inviting me over and for your attention. 
vii) 
viii) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
