  Erkki Liikanen: Independence of monetary policy and the banking union 
Speech by  Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Lamfalussy Lecture 
Conference, organised by  Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central bank of Hungary), Budapest, 
2 February 2015. 
 One of the lasting lessons we have learned from the monetary policy experience of the last 
decades  is the  value  of the  independence  of central  banks. What  does this  independence 
mean today? Why should we have it? What are the current problems involved? 
The  modern  idea  of  central  bank  independence  was  born  from  the  lessons  learned  in  the 
fight against the high inflation of the 1970s and the 1980s. The Bundesbank became the role 
model which has not been forgotten. The supporting theory was later developed by the great 
economists of the day: Stanley Fischer, Kenneth Rogoff, Carl Walsh and others. 
The  fight  against  inflation  was  successful  and  the  lessons  learned  from  this  fight  inspired 
great  reforms  in  the  central  banks.  In  Europe,  those  lessons  inspired  the  writing  of  the 
statutes of the ECB. Securing central bank independence and preserving the hard-won price 
stability were key ingredients. 
Today’s  monetary  problems  are  very  different.  In  some  respects  they  are  almost  a  mirror 
image  of  the  problems  of  the  great  inflation  era.  But  I  am  convinced  that  central  bank 
independence is equally important in today’s environment. 
Still, it is interesting to think once more what exactly this independence means and what it 
requires in today’s different context. 
 In  research,  it  is  usual  to  distinguish  two  types  of  central  bank  independence:  goal 
independence and instrument independence. 
Just a few comments on goal independence. 
Goal  independence  would  mean  the  ability  of  the  central  bank  to  formulate  the  ultimate 
objectives of its policy. In democratic systems, goal independence is typically quite limited, 
and the objectives of central bank are given by elected bodies. This is how it should be. It 
gives the central bank’s activities the necessary democratic legitimacy. 
The  ECB  has  been  given  price  stability  as  its  primary  objective.  The  treaty  left  to  the 
Governing  Council  to  give  an  operational  definition  of  what  price  stability  means.  As  you 
know,  the  current  definition,  unchanged  since  2003,  is  that  inflation  should  be  “below  but 
close to two percent over the medium term”. 
The  words  “close  to”  were  added  to  the  ECB’s  definition  of  price  stability  in  2003,  after  a 
serious  and  thorough  consideration.  These  words  have  now  gained  increasing  weight,  as 
inflation in the euro area has been clearly below 2 per cent for quite some time. 
We have been forced to think carefully what the expressions “close to” and “over the medium 
term” mean. The Governing Council has remained committed to the definition of 2003, and 
with  a  good  reason.  The  definition  of  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  must  provide  a 
credible anchor to expectations. So we must follow it to the letter. 
Now on the other level of central bank independence, the instrument independence, before I 
return to price stability. 
Instrument independence means that the central bank has a great deal of freedom to use its 
monetary policy instruments in order to achieve its policy goals. Without such freedom, the 
ability of monetary policy to achieve its objectives would not be credible and the policy itself 
could become ineffective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Modern central banks have a very high degree of instrument independence since the 1990s. 
This  was  taken  for  granted,  and  remained  so,  as  long  as  the  main  instrument  was  the 
interest  rate.  Now,  after  the  central  bank  interest  rates  have  reached  their  lower  bound  – 
close  to  zero  –  monetary  policy  has  had  to  turn  to  other  means.  This  is  by  now  a  global 
phenomenon in the advanced countries. 
The use of “unconventional monetary policy tools” such as large-scale bond purchases has 
restarted the discussion of instrument independence. What can the central bank do under its 
instrument independence? For example, there have been some, however not many, critics 
claiming  that  the  ECB’s  bond  purchase  programmes  could  go  beyond  the  definition  of 
monetary policy. 
The ECB’s case for the legality of its various bond purchase programmes has been argued 
elsewhere  and  I  will  not  go  into  that  here.  I  just  want  to  reiterate  that  in  the  Governing 
Council, we all agreed that the Extended Asset Purchases Program decided on 22 January 
is a monetary policy tool. 
But instrument independence is not only about what the law allows the central bank to do. 
Independence  also  requires  that  the  environment  where  monetary  policy  operates  is  such 
that a successful monetary policy is possible and viable. And this is where it becomes really 
interesting and where the present very low inflation environment makes a difference. 
We usually distinguish two such threats to independence. They are called “fiscal dominance“, 
and “financial dominance”. 
 Fiscal  dominance  is  the  older  concept  of  the  two.  Fiscal  dominance  would  arise  if  the 
government financing constraint would become an overriding influence on monetary policy. 
The  idea  that  tight  monetary  policy  may  become  impossible  without  accompanying  fiscal 
adjustment was well understood when the blueprints for the EMU were being prepared. This 
is  why  the  Maastricht  treaty  had  its  fiscal  policy  clauses  and  also  why  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact was concluded. Also the famous prohibition of direct central bank credit to the 
government, and the institutional independence of the central banks, are in effect protections 
against fiscal dominance. 
Now we know that the fiscal framework as put in place before the start of the EMU was not 
strong enough to prevent fiscal problems from emerging. Some have been worried that fiscal 
dominance has taken hold when the central banks have used government bond purchases, 
both to stabilize the markets and to produce additional monetary stimulus with “Quantitative 
Easing”  when  the  interest  rate  instrument  has  already  been  used  to  the  maximum.  The 
Extended Asset Purchase Programme of the ECB announced in the week before last is an 
example. 
As  to  the  euro  area,  there  is  no  evidence  of  fiscal  dominance.  The  acid  test  for  fiscal 
dominance  is:  does  monetary  policy  break  its  price  stability  objective  for  the  sake  of 
maintaining the solvency of the government sector. This is not the case. The price stability 
objective has not been and will not be abandoned. 
The bond purchases of the Eurosystem are directed to make monetary policy more effective, 
not less. In particular, we want to move closer to our definition of price stability, and the bond 
purchases are contributing to that end. 
We  have  had  well  known  fiscal  problems  in  some  of  the  euro  area  countries.  Still,  the 
traditional symptom of fiscal dominance, accelerating inflation has not materialized, nor have 
inflation expectations risen. Inflation expectations remained well in line with the price stability 
objective until last summer, when they started to show signs of declining, not increasing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Does this mean that the risk of fiscal dominance has become obsolete? Certainly not. The 
idea that monetary policy should be able to concentrate on its primary objective is relevant 
also now. But it manifests itself in a slightly different way than in a high inflation environment. 
Solvency of governments is a self-evident condition for sustainable policies. But striving for 
our  definition  of  price  stability  now  requires  very  accommodative  monetary  policy,  which 
includes exceptionally low interest rates, and also bond purchases. There have been worries 
that such a policy could make it too easy for governments to engage in excessive deficits 
and fiscal irresponsibility. Is the ECB, for its part, making life too easy for governments which 
should continue their consolidation efforts? 
It may well be that the financing of government deficits is made easier by an accommodative 
monetary  policy.  But  the  primary  goal  of  monetary  policy  is  price  stability,  which  includes 
avoiding the threat of deflation. The responsibility for fiscal discipline is with the governments, 
and in the EU also with the Council and the Commission in their particular roles. 
Prudent fiscal policy and abiding by the fiscal rules is essential, but we cannot have a trade-
off between fiscal discipline and price stability. We can and must have both. The division of 
responsibilities between the ECB and the governments is clear, and each must do their part. 
We should  beware  of the  danger that  problems which  are fundamentally  political  could  be 
pushed  to  central  banks  to  solve.  A  division  of  responsibilities  between  appointed  officials 
and  elected  politicians  should  be  preserved.  That  division  of  responsibilities  is  one  of  the 
forms that the central bank’s instrument independence takes today. 
Monetary  policy  can  neither  micromanage  the  needed  structural  transformation  in  the  real 
sector of the economy nor solve excessive deficit problems of governments. 
In the euro area, the countries which have their public finances in order will benefit more from 
the accommodative policies of the ECB. The experience of the last years shows clearly that if 
there is any doubt about the long run solvency of a government, monetary policy will not be 
transmitted fully to that country’s private sector either. 
 Let  me  turn  next  to  consider  the  other  potential  threat  to  the  independence  of  monetary 
policy, the threat of financial dominance. 
Financial  dominance  means  the  possibility  that  the  condition  of  the  banking  system  could 
become  a  constraint,  or  dominant  influence,  on  monetary  policy.  The  idea  is  that  a  weak 
banking sector could force the central bank to pursue second- or third-best monetary policies 
in order to prevent a banking crisis. 
In  theory  it  is  easy  to  see  how  this  could  happen.  One  can  imagine  a  central  bank  which 
would  have  to  tighten  its  monetary  policy  for  price  stability  reasons,  but  is  prevented  from 
doing so for the fear that the value of the assets of the banking system would decrease and a 
financial crisis could ensue. 
Episodes  which  fit  that  kind  of  financial  dominance  have  been  observed,  in  the  past, 
especially  in  the  emerging  economies.  And  in  my  own  country,  the  severe  crisis  in  the 
banking system was one of the main reasons which forced a devaluation of the currency in 
1991. 
But looking at the more recent experience, this has not really been the case in the advanced 
economies. The bust in 2008 of the last credit boom did not lead monetary policy to tolerate 
a higher-than-mandated rate of inflation. Instead, in the large advanced economies at least, 
the  bursting  of  the  bubble  coincided  with  a  contraction  of  private  demand  and  a  deep 
recession. 
The negative effect of the crisis on economic activity actually reduced inflationary pressures. 
The  main  problem  has  since  then  been  how  to  prevent  the  deleveraging  process  from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  starting a deflationary spiral. In such conditions, monetary policy which eases the strain on 
the banking sector has at the same time supported price stability. 
Now,  almost  five  years  later,  do  we  have  a  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  financial 
stability?  By  conducting  a  monetary  policy  of  extremely  low  interest  rates,  combined  with 
exceptional  measures  such  as  bond  purchases,  are  we  stoking  asset  price  bubbles  and 
encouraging too risky lending practices by banks? 
Very low interest rates may encourage risk taking by the investors. This is actually one of the 
objectives. Our economies need more productive investments. 
The low interest rate environment will also affect bank lending. This is also desirable, and it is 
hoped that business lending to job-creating SMEs will be stimulated. 
However, we hear worries that the incentives could be too strong. This is based on the fear 
that  banks  will  finance  investments  which  are  too  risky,  or  the  stimulus  could  be  unduly 
concentrated on, say, the real estate sector. 
Of  course,  successful  monetary  policy  requires  a  stable  financial  system.  If  stability  is  not 
there,  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  can  hardly  work  smoothly.  This  is  one  of  the 
lessons of the financial crisis. 
 Here  we  see  how  the  problem  of  possible  financial  dominance  is  manifested  in  today’s 
economic  environment. Now  it  is  not the question  can  the  banking  system  endure  a  hard, 
disinflationary  monetary  policy.  We  must  pose  the  question  in  another  way:  how  can  we 
make sure that the banking system is able to operate prudently under a monetary policy that 
seeks  to  maintain  price  stability  “from  below”,  with  an  accommodative,  even  expansionary 
stance? 
There was a famous discussion on how monetary policy should relate to credit booms and 
asset prices in the Jackson Hole conference of 2007. At that time, the prevalent thinking in 
central banking circles was what it is better for monetary policy only to “clean” (up after the 
bursting of the possible bubbles) than to “lean” (against the wind). 
The  strategy  of  the  ECB  includes  the  so-called  second  pillar  of  monetary  analysis,  which 
focuses on signals from money supply and credit creation. This means we are committed to 
consider the sustainability of the developments in the banking sector and their compatibility 
with price stability. 
After  the  hard  lessons  we  learned  over  the  last  five  years,  the  case  for  benign  neglect  of 
asset  booms  and  only  picking  up  the  pieces  afterwards  is  not  very  attractive.  The  crisis 
experience  supports  rather  the  idea  that  financial  excesses  are  better  prevented  as  they 
happen than only managed after they have caused a recession. 
One option is leaning against the wind. That would mean taking the price stability objective in 
a more flexible way and paying more attention to asset prices in monetary policy formulation. 
But there are difficulties with that: 
One  difficulty  is  the  problem  of  detecting  the  credit  cycle  in  time,  and  correctly  timing  the 
monetary policy response. Another problem is that price stability might get too little attention. 
If  the  price  stability  objective  had  to  be  compromised  because  of  the  developments  in  the 
banks and in the financial markets, we would actually have a case of financial dominance. 
How can this be avoided? Naturally, it is the quality of commercial bank management and 
the  internal  incentives  built  into  the  banks’  management  systems  that  are  the  first  line  of 
defence. But we have also learned that prudent management practices need to be supported 
by good and effective regulation. 
This leads to my other main point today. In today’s environment, the effective independence 
of  monetary  policy  requires  good  regulation  which  ensures  that  the  banking  system  as  a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  whole  remains  stable  and  solid  through  the  interest  rate  cycle,  not  only  in  times  of  tight 
monetary policy but also in times of very accommodative monetary policy. 
Like the fiscal discipline of governments, which protects monetary policy from forms of fiscal 
dominance, effective banking regulation protects monetary policy from financial dominance. 
We can see how these prerequisites for independent monetary policy are as important for 
today’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  as  they  were  for  a  disinflationary  monetary  policy 
when the concept of independence was developed. 
 Fortunately, major progress has been achieved in the field of banking regulation, not least in 
the euro area with the banking union. 
There are three aspects of the developing banking regulation that I want to mention in this 
connection. 
First,  the  prudential  regulation  of  banks  is  now  stronger  and  more  uniform  than  before. 
Banks’ capital ratios have been strengthened a lot since the crisis, and the responsibility for 
supervision has been centralized at the ECB. This has already made banks more resilient in 
the face of any future shocks. 
The  new  bank  recovery  and  resolution  framework  is  also  part  of  the  banking  union.  Its 
purpose is to reduce the moral hazard problems which are linked to the problems of explicit 
or  implicit  government  guarantees  and  the  too-big-to-fail.  It  strengthens  the  incentives  for 
prudent risk management and the correct pricing of risks. It will make banks more resistant to 
the temptations which the low interest rate environment may entail. 
Second,  the  EU  and  the  member  states  are  now  implementing  new  macro-prudential 
instruments which are designed to improve the stability of the financial system as a whole. 
Macro-prudential  policies  are  very  closely  related  to  the  problem  of  ensuring  the 
independence of monetary policy from financial dominance. 
Especially interesting are those macro-prudential tools which can be adjusted according to 
the  situation  in  the  asset  markets  and  the  credit  markets.  Such  instruments  include,  in 
particular, the countercyclical capital requirements, as well as the adjustable restrictions on 
Loan-to-Value ratios. 
The  connection  between  macro-prudential  policy  and  monetary  policy  is  so  intimate  that 
central banks must be closely involved in macro-prudential analysis and decision making. In 
the  banking  union,  macro-prudential  policy  is  a  shared  competence  between  the  member 
state  authorities  and  the  ECB.  Member  states  can  react  to  national  developments  with 
national  measures,  and  the  ECB  has  an  option  to  require  additional  restrictive  measures 
where  it  deems  that  necessary.  The  national  component  is  important  and  valuable  since 
especially the real estate markets behave often differently in different countries. 
Third, while macro-prudential policy is important, it would benefit from the kinds of structural 
reforms  which  would  make  the  banking  system  more  resilient,  and  –  I  emphasise  –  less 
prone to unstable behaviour. 
By separating the most risky securities and derivative activities from deposit banking, the spill 
overs  from  deposit  protection  to  speculative  risk  taking  in  the  securities  markets  would  be 
prevented.  This  would  reduce  any  distorted  incentives  to  expand  trading  activities  in  the 
universal banking groups. Several European countries have already implemented legislation 
which seeks to separate some parts of the securities business from deposit banking. The EU 
level  proposals  are  under  discussion  between  the  Council  and  the  European  Parliament. I 
hope that a solution will emerge which ensures as level a playing field within the EU banking 
market as possible, while contributing to the resilience and stability of the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
