  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Acting together for financial inclusion 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Luzon Regional Consultation on the National Strategy 
for Financial Inclusion, Manila, 20 May 2015. 
 Today  is  a  milestone  in  our  process  of  crafting  a  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion 
(NSFI). This is important because our objective is to act and work together to improve the 
quality of life of millions of Filipinos. 
Ladies and gentlemen, you and I know that economic reforms and better governance have 
given momentum to our country’s economic growth that is now at levels regarded as among 
the fastest in Asia. 
However, we also need to ensure that across the country our people are able to identify, gain 
and prosper from opportunities that such development brings. We can achieve this through 
financial inclusion – where there is access to a wide range of financial products and services 
that  are  responsive  to  the  needs  of  all  Filipinos  and  supports  broad-based  and  inclusive 
growth. 
While  the  trickle-down  approach  to  spread  the  benefits  of  development  is  good,  it  is  not 
enough; we want to be more proactive. 
Among others, we want our people to save, invest and know personal finance management 
to  be  financially  secure  and  independent.  We  want  our  people  to  be  part  of  the  financial 
mainstream where they can access bank loans that will help them grow their own business. 
We want our people to have options other than informal lenders with prohibitive rates and 
onerous conditions. And we want our people to be able to protect themselves against scams 
and to know their rights as financial consumers. 
Working  on  financial  inclusion  is  one  clear  way  to  ensure  sustained  and  broad-based 
inclusive  growth,  a  principal  goal  of  our  Government.  And  so,  we  have  gathered  today  to 
discuss our draft National Strategy for Financial Inclusion or NSFI. 
You have been especially selected as key stakeholders to craft our way forward to achieve 
financial inclusion in the Philippines. This process of consultation is structured to give ample 
opportunity for you to articulate your insights as co-authors and implementing partners of our 
NSFI. 
This  is  the  first  in  a  series  of  regional  consultations.  Next  week,  we  will  have  similar 
consultations in Cebu and and in Davao. 
As we go thru the workshops for the rest of the day, let us keep in mind the Filipino public 
who we want to serve and the challenges before us. Among others: 
• 
About  12  percent  of  our  1,634  cities  and  municipalities  of  remain  unserved  by 
authorized financial service providers while 36 percent have no banks at all ; 
Only 4 out of 10 Filipino adults set aside money to save, and 68 percent of them 
keep their savings at home ; 
47 percent of Filipino adults borrow, but mostly from sources like family and friends 
(62 percent) and informal lenders (10 percent) ; 
Only  39  percent  of  households  receiving  Overseas  Filipino  remittances  allocate  a 
portion to savings ; and 
Insurance penetration is only 1.8 percent . 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  With  your  inputs  and  support  to  the  NSFI  process  –we  look  forward  to  seeing  significant 
changes in these numbers. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  am  confident  that  our  NSFI  will  generate  positive  results…  for  a 
number  of  reasons:  first,  because  its  implementing  mechanism  is  inclusive;  second,  it 
ensures  interactive  engagement  among  stakeholders;  and  third,  it  promotes  synergy  of 
initiatives. 
The experience of other countries inspires us to have our own NSFI. In particular, the World 
Bank  has  noted  that  countries  which  have  national  strategies  for  financial  inclusion  have 
recorded higher average growth rates for financial access compared to others. 
I  have  been  repeatedly  asked  –  why  is  an  NSFI  important?  Well,  the  NSFI  provides  a 
platform  for  coordination  among  the  many  stakeholders  with  important  roles  in  financial 
inclusion.  It  provides  the  blueprint  useful  in  designing  and  implementing  financial  inclusion 
policies  and  programs  that  focus  on  four  areas:  (1)  policy,  regulation  and  supervision, 
(2) financial  education  and  consumer  protection,  (3)  advocacy  programs  and  (4)  data  and 
measurement. 
In  addition,  the  NSFI  fulfills  the  Philippine  Development  Plan  (PDP),  which  commits  to 
“establish  a  national  strategy  that  defines  financial  inclusion,  the  strategies  undertaken  to 
achieve it, and the accountabilities of all stakeholders”. It is the result of different agencies, 
with  varied  mandates,  working  together  because  of  a  shared  recognition  that  –  financial 
inclusion  is  essential  to  achieve  the  government’s  overarching  goal  of  inclusive  growth. 
These agencies include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
These agencies are involved, directly or indirectly, in promoting an inclusive financial system 
and  in  serving  unserved  and  underserved  markets.  As  participants  in  the  NSFI  crafting 
process,  these  agencies  commit  to  pursue  financial  inclusion  alongside  their  respective 
mandates. 
The BSP, as initiator of this process, is committed to make the NSFI a living, relevant and 
useful document for all stakeholders. Our commitment to financial inclusion began as early 
as  year  2000  when  we  mainstreamed  microfinance  as  a  banking  activity.  Since  then,  we 
have been fine-tuning policies and regulations to enable our supervised institutions to serve 
unconventional markets such as low-income households and microentrepreneurs. 
Experience  taught  us  that  such  markets,  like  regular  consumers,  can  be  provided  with 
suitable financial products and services by regular financial institutions. Hence in 2007, we 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) ; 
Commission on Filipinos Overseas (CFO) 
Cooperative Development Authority (CDA) 
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) 
Department of Education (Dep-Ed) 
Department of Finance (DOF) 
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) 
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) 
Insurance Commission (IC) 
National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) 
Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC) 
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) and 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  progressed our advocacy from microfinance to financial inclusion. The BSP was among the 
first central banks to create a unit dedicated to promoting financial inclusion. 
Our  agenda  has  since  expanded  because  of  the  conviction  that  financial  inclusion,  when 
done right, supports the BSP’s primary mandates of price and financial system stability. We 
have also put equal focus on consumer protection and financial education. 
In  2012,  the  BSP  institutionalized  financial  inclusion  as  a  corporate  objective  with  the 
creation of the Inclusive Finance Steering Committee (IFSC), which I chair. This Committee 
serves as a seamless mechanism for internal coordination and synergy of various inclusion-
related  initiatives  that  are  being  implemented  by  different  operating  units.  These  initiatives 
revolve around the same four areas that the NSFI focuses on. 
To institutions therefore who wish to support or promote financial inclusion, the NSFI serves 
as guide – the SONAR or GPS that ensures policy cohesion and coordination, and prevents 
duplication of initiatives. 
Sceptics  may  think that our  NSFI  is  merely  another  document. We  believe  NSFI  will  work 
thru  the  implementation  of  tactical  plans  that  form  the  acronym  SMART:  specific, 
measureable, achievable, realistic and time-bound. 
As per our timeline, by July this year, the heads of the agencies represented here today will 
sign  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  as  a  formal  commitment  to  the  NSFI  objectives, 
principles and tactical plans. 
Ladies and gentlemen. We realize that the 13 agencies that drafted this NSFI have limited 
mandates,  capacity  and  resources 
interventions 
contemplated  in  the  document.  We  are  confident  however  that  the  NSFI  can  be  fully 
implemented with ownership and support from a wide spectrum of public, private and even 
international stakeholders. I am glad therefore to see a good mix of institutions represented 
today. 
Together, let us ACT: Agree on a vision of financial inclusion, and align institutional, or even 
personal, objectives to this vision; Collaborate on the SMART tactical plans; and Take action 
to implement these plans. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  the  service  of  all  Filipinos,  let  us  make  financial  inclusion  and 
inclusive growth, a reality in our country. 
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat. Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas!  
the  many  possible 
implement 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
