  DeLisle Worrell: An overview of the financial landscape in Barbados 
Speech by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Domestic 
Financial Institutions Conference, Bridgetown, 11 November 2014. 
 Barbados has a sound and sophisticated financial system which provides an adequate range 
and variety of financial services for businesses and households, but there are a few gaps still 
to  be  filled.  The  main  impact  of  the  global  recession  on  our  financial  system  has  been  to 
reduce profitability among commercial banks, and to arrest the growth of insurance business. 
The  financial  landscape  is  changing  largely  because  of  changes  in  the  way  that  large 
companies manage their regional and international finance and payments arrangements. My 
remarks this morning will address these 3 issues. 
The  main  financial  providers  in  Barbados  are  the  banks-  by  far  the  largest  segment, 
insurance  companies,  credit  unions  and  finance  companies.  Between  them,  they  provide 
adequately  for  the  needs  of  households.  Banks  provide  mortgages,  short  term  consumer 
credit  and  payments  services.  Many  people  hold  savings  with  commercial  banks,  even 
though  savings  bonds  and  credit  union  shares  are  more  remunerative  alternatives.  Banks 
also provide for the working capital needs of established businesses, and contribute to the 
funding of projects for larger firms. All banks operating in Barbados are part of international 
banks headquartered in Canada and Trinidad. They therefore have strong backing. Banks' 
profitability  has  declined,  but  loan  write-offs  are  only  a  tiny  percentage  of  their  credit  and 
have not contributed much to the fall in profitability. 
Credit unions are the banks’ competition. Because of their mutual ownership, they are able to 
offer  lower  interest  spreads  than  the  banks,  between  what  members  earn  on their shares, 
and the interest they pay on borrowings. Credit unions currently offer most of the services 
banks offer, and there are no barriers in principle to prevent those credit unions which qualify 
from providing the remaining services in which they have expressed an interest. 
Insurance and pension funds cover the remainder of the financial services most businesses 
and households need. The insurance industry contracted with the exit of Clico, and there has 
been  little  recovery  since  then.  Insurance  and  pension  funds  look  for  investment  that  will 
yield a good return over the long run, and they are therefore a potential source of funding for 
capital  formation.  The  weakness  of  this  segment  is  the  limits  on  the  supply  of  long  term 
finance. What makes matters worse is a preference for investment in marketable securities 
rather  than  equity  participation  in  projects.  In  Barbados  there  is  a  scarcity  of  marketable 
corporate instruments available for purchase and sale on an ongoing basis. 
All  in  all,  our  financial  system  provides  a  range  of  services  that  pretty  much  satisfies  the 
needs  of  Barbadian  households  and  large  and  well  established  businesses.  However, 
venture capital is in short supply, and the fixed investment needs of small and medium sized 
enterprise  continue  to  be  a  challenge  for  us.  Our  session  this  afternoon  will  explore  this 
conundrum. 
Impact of the crisis 
The global recession which is dated from the September 15 2008 Lehman bankruptcy, had 
little effect on the Barbadian financial system, with the one important exception of Clico. As 
might  have  been  expected,  the  weakness  of  the  Barbadian  economy  resulted  in  late  and 
incomplete  debt  service  by  some  firms  and  households,  but  in  the  typical  case  a  workout 
arrangement was put in place. On the other hand, Government maintained its perfect service 
record, both for domestic and foreign debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Changes in business finance 
The  most  noticeable  changes  in  financial  transactions  in  recent  times  have  been  on  the 
foreign exchange market. The interbank market is now inactive, in contrast to the situation up 
to a decade ago, when daily interbank transactions of a modest size were the norm. Large 
customers  of  the  banks  have  corporate  treasuries  which  manage  their  transactions  and 
exposures  in  several  currencies,  matching  exposures  by  currency  so  as  to  minimise  net 
exposure in foreign exchange, and reduce the transactions costs of currency conversion. We 
have looked into this phenomenon at this conference in years past, and when we meet with 
banks we invariably discuss how the market is evolving. Some businesses appear to have 
achieved  a  degree  of  independence  of  their  bankers,  with  respect  to  foreign  currency 
receipts and payments. In so far as this facilitates payment of imports out of private firms' 
foreign earnings, there is no problem with that arrangement. 
Our programme today includes an update on the financial system, a presentation on cyber 
security, investment options for insurance companies, the view from the credit union sector, 
a new look at banking subsidiaries, and a panel on equity finance. It is a varied menu, and 
one that is certain to be instructive. We expect to have a productive day. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
