   Agus D W Martowardojo: Strengthening financial system stability amidst 
global and domestic challenges 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Agus  D  W  Martowardojo,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the 
discussion and launching of the Financial Stability Study book, Jakarta, 8 May 2015. 
 The honorable: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Former Governors of Bank Indonesia, 
Members of the Board of Governors of Bank Indonesia, 
Heads of State Ministries and Institutions, 
Members of Bank Indonesia Supervisory Board, 
Representatives  of  businesses, 
associations, 
Representatives of research institutes, observers, and academicians, 
Heads of national banks, 
Speakers and moderators, 
Distinguished invitees and ladies and gentlemen, 
industrial  associations,  and  banking 
Assalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh,  
This FSS book reflects the dynamics in the second semester of 2014 and is a part of 
Indonesia’s  routine  publications 
transparency  and  accountability  of 
Good morning and may God bless us all, 
1.  
First of all, let us praise God the Almighty for all blessings so that we are given the 
opportunity  and  good  health  to  attend  this  event.  Insya  Allah,  we  will  follow  a  discussion 
themed  “Strengthening  Financial  System  Stability  amidst  Global  and  Domestic 
Challenges” and launching of Financial Stability Study Book No. 24, March 2015. 
2. 
Bank 
implementation of Bank Indonesia’s duties in macroprudential field. 
3. 
In general, the book’s contents are the results of Bank Indonesia’s monitoring and 
analysis  of  the  development  and  dynamics  covering  our  financial  system.  This  includes 
description of assessment of potential risks and financial imbalance in financial institutions, 
financial markets, financial infrastructures, and corporations as well as households. 
4. 
We expect such monitoring and analysis results may help the community and other 
stakeholders  understand  macroprudential  policies  adopted  by  Bank  Indonesia  to  maintain 
and sustain financial system stability. 
to  meet 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We just left 2014, a year full of challenges for Indonesia’s economy. Many events to 
5. 
tell  on  how  Indonesia’s  economy  must  face  unfavorable  global  economic  dynamics  and 
domestic situations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   6. 
On the global level, we witness that global economic recovery is ongoing, but at an 
unexpected and unequal speed. Such dynamics transforming into global pressure become 
more apparent when world’s commodity prices keep decreasing due to weak global demand, 
primarily from China. The emerging markets are then influenced and may potentially suffer 
from rapid capital reversal, including Indonesia. 
Within  the  country,  we  also  observe  equally  enormous  pressures  against  the 
7. 
economy. Domestic economic growth slowdown is more intensified by vulnerabilities in the 
financial sector, such as increasing credit risks and rising private external debts exposed to 
exchange rate risks. 
8. 
In  addition,  many  issues  must  be  immediately  resolved  since  they  affect  financial 
system  stability.  Such  issues  among  others  are  (i)  frail  domestic  financial  market, 
(ii) segmented  Interbank  Money  Market,  (iii)  increase  in  short  term  high-cost  fund  in  the 
bank’s third party fund, and (iv) continued increase in property prices. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
9. 
Alhamdulillah, amidst global and domestic challenge dynamics, Indonesia’s financial 
system stability in the second semester of 2014 could be maintained in general as supported 
by  better  financial  market  performance.  It  is  in  line  with  the  increasing  global  financial 
performance and high foreign capital inflow to Indonesia in 2014 reaching Rp181.5 trillion. 
10. 
In addition, well maintained financial system condition is also supported by strong 
banking  condition.  It  is  among  others  reflected  from  bank’s  capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR) 
much higher than the minimum requirements, relatively high industrial liquidity, and relatively 
low  ratio  of  non-performing  loans.  Moreover,  more  efficient,  secure,  and  smooth  payment 
system condition also contributes to the maintained financial system condition. 
11. 
However, we must keep cautious of and observing different risks potentially arising 
against  the  financial  system.  We  certainly  do  not  wish  to  become  indifferent  to  various 
achievements supporting financial resilience in 2014. 
With  the  current  economic  and  financial  system  characteristics  of  Indonesia,  we 
12. 
note  sources  of  financial  vulnerability  and  imbalance  may  result  in  systemic  risks.  Such 
sources are apparent in at least 5 (five) areas. 
First, banking procyclicality behavior following financial cycle and increase in short 
13. 
term  high-cost  fund  in  the  bank’s  third  party  fund.  Second,  private  external  debt  growth 
partially unprotected by hedging. Third, continuous decrease in the world’s commodity prices 
affecting Indonesia’s exports, which still rely on natural resources commodities. 
Fourth,  continuous  uncertain  normalization  of  the  Fed’s  monetary  policies  and 
14. 
better US economy resulting in stronger US dollar. Fifth, continuous excessive increase in 
property prices resulting in intensifying credit risks and affecting inflation control efforts. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
15. 
Imbalance sources and their potentials to become systemic risks must be carefully 
anticipated  and  responded  in  an  effective  and  synergic  manner.  In  this  case,  coordination 
and collaboration of policies between authority and institutions under the Financial System 
Stability  Coordination  Forum,  namely  Ministry of  Finance,  Bank  Indonesia,  OJK,  and  LPS, 
become an inevitable necessity. 
16. 
As  a  macroprudential  authority,  in  maintaining  and  sustaining  financial  system 
stability, Bank Indonesia contributes by continuing various macroprudential policies adopted 
since the middle of 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   17. 
Such  macroprudential  policies  among  others  include  application  of  Secondary 
Reserve Requirement  (RR),  RR connected  with  the  Loan  to Deposit  Ratio  (LDR), Loan  to 
Value (LTV) policy, and financial market deepening as well as financial inclusion increase. In 
addition,  Bank  Indonesia  has  also  issued  policies  which  may  be  used  as  prudential 
guidelines in External Debt management by non-bank corporations. 
We need to inform you that such macroprudential policies are basically temporary 
18. 
and not cross-sectoral. The policies may be at any time reviewed, fine-tuned, and refined to 
maintain financial system balance and stability as the objective of macroprudential policies. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
19. 
Observing the financial system condition and pressures as well as challenges of the 
national  economy,  Bank  Indonesia’s  macroprudential  policy  direction  in  2015  will  focus  on 
efforts to: 
(i)  mitigate financial imbalance risks, 
(ii)  maintain liquidity adequacy and deepen financial market, and 
(iii)  boost quality credit growth in productive economy sectors to support economic 
capacity increase. 
20. 
Such  macroprudential  policy  direction  is  implemented  among  others  through 
preparation  of  national  and  regional  financial  balance  sheet,  application  of  bank  capital 
components  in  the  form  of  Countercyclical  Capital  Buffer  (CCB),  and  improvement  of 
RR-LDR provisions. 
21. 
Furthermore, macroprudential policy direction is implemented through the adoption 
of incentive/disincentive mechanism to boost quality MSME credit extension and strengthen 
the legal basis for Financial System Security Net (JPSK). 
22. 
One thing we need to emphasize is efforts to maintain and sustain financial system 
stability and resilience relate not only to conventional financial system. Bank Indonesia, OJK, 
and the Government must also seek to increase stability and resilience in sharia finance. It is 
conducted among others through development of sharia finance instruments, Sukuk market 
deepening, and enabling regulation formulation. 
23. 
We  must  also  be  alert  to  the  constellation  of  global  monetary  policies,  where 
divergence  occurs  in  monetary  policies  of  the  Fed  and  other  developed  countries,  which 
results in stronger US dollar. It will bring different challenges for us because Indonesia is at 
the  same  time  facing  current  transaction  balance  deficit  that  still  needs  to  be  controlled.  If 
improperly anticipated and responded, this condition will affect exchange rate stability, which 
will in turn influence financial system stability. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
24.  
Above is my introduction to the discussion and launching of Financial Stability Study 
No.  24,  March  2015.  We  expect  the  discussion  will  open  wider  horizons  of  Indonesia’s 
financial system and result in constructive and strategic thoughts to maintain financial system 
stability. 
25.  
Thank you. 
To conclude, may God bless and guide our steps. 
Wassalamu ‘alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
