  Javier Guzmán Calafell: Groundbreaking shifts in the international 
financial system 
Remarks by Mr Javier Guzmán Calafell, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, during the 
conference “Groundbreaking Shifts in the International Financial System”, organized by “The 
US-Korea  Institute  at  Johns  Hopkins  School  of  Advanced  International  Studies”  and  “The 
Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee”, Washington DC, 17 April 2015. 
 The views expressed in this document are strictly personal and do not necessarily coincide with those of Banco 
de México’s Board. 
I thank the organizers, and especially Marc Uzan, for the invitation to participate in this panel. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  been  a  painful  reminder  of  the  crucial  importance  of 
macrofinancial  linkages  for  financial  stability.  In  particular,  it  has  shown  how  interactions 
between the real and the financial sector can give rise to “procyclicality” and thus to systemic 
risk, especially through their impact on the value of assets and leverage. It has also become 
evident  after  the  crisis  that  common  risk  exposures  by  financial  institutions,  or  the 
interconnectedness  among  institutions  or  markets,  can  also  be  a  source  of  systemic  risk. 
Naturally, there may be a close relationship between both sources of systemic risks, and in 
fact they frequently arise simultaneously. 
The  international  community  has  made  a  major  effort  to  take  on  board  the  lessons  for 
financial stability deriving from the global financial crisis. Thus, new bank capital, liquidity and 
leverage  rules  have  been  introduced  under  Basel  III  to  reduce  procyclicality  and  cross-
sectional  systemic  risks;  special  measures  have  been  designed  for  systemically  important 
firms; stress tests are conducted to make sure that banks can continue to operate under very 
difficult  conditions;  accounting  standards  have  been  strengthened;  reforms  have  been 
introduced to address some of the risks related to the nonbank sector; new standards for the 
financial  infrastructure,  with  particular  attention  to  the  derivatives  markets  have  been 
developed;  and  in  general  a  macroprudential  approach  for  regulation  and  supervision  has 
been emphasized. 
The measures implemented after the crisis have contributed significantly to mitigate some of 
the  vulnerabilities  that  precipitated  it.  However,  the  challenges  arising  from  macrofinancial 
linkages  have  not  disappeared,  and  in  fact  a  number  of  new  risks  have  emerged.  Let  me 
touch briefly on some of these issues. 
In  the  first  place,  notwithstanding  the  efforts  made,  some  of  the  difficulties  that  surfaced 
during the crisis have not been fully tackled. 
• 
Balance sheet repair of the non-financial sector in advanced economies is a case in 
point.  A  combination  of  higher  financial  assets  and  lower  liabilities  has  led  to  a 
substantial  strengthening  of  household  balance  sheets  in  several  advanced 
economies,  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom  and  Japan,  among  them. 
However, progress in several countries in the euro area has lagged behind. And a 
similar  picture  emerges  if  the  focus  shifts  to  corporate  balance  sheets.  As  has 
recently been noted, “…at the global level, total non-financial debt is at a record high 
and seems to be still on the rise… A key question for policymakers is how far debt 
can rise before it becomes a drag on growth or poses a threat to financial stability”.1 
                                                
1  Caruana,  Jaime,  Second  BIS  Network  meeting  on  “Macroeconomics  and  global  financial  markets”,  Basel, 
10 March 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    The strengthening of bank balance sheets is another case worth noting. Today, in 
general, banks in the advanced economies are in a much stronger financial position 
than at the height of the global financial crisis. However, progress has been uneven 
across the different institutions. Furthermore, in the context of a new regulatory and 
economic environment, many of them are facing a decline in profitability. According 
to IMF figures, 80 percent of assets of the largest institutions have a return on equity 
that  does  not  cover  the  cost  of  capital  required  by  shareholders.2  Naturally,  this 
raises concerns about their capacity to sustain adequate levels of capital and meet 
credit demand. 
As I mentioned before, an ambitious agenda has been adopted by the international 
community  to  strengthen  the  framework  for  financial  sector  regulation  and 
supervision at the global level. While progress in this respect is remarkable, again, 
much  remains  to  be  done.  Beyond  issues  of  implementation,  this  includes,  for 
instance,  additional  efforts  to  address  the  challenges  linked  to  systemically 
important  banks, 
the 
reinforcement of regulation and supervision of shadow banking, and the application 
of new OTC derivative rules across borders, among others. In addition, we must not 
forget that financial markets are constantly innovating, and that it would be naïve to 
expect regulation and supervision to keep up with these changes. 
the  completion  of  some  key  accounting  standards, 
In the second place, the unconventional monetary policies (UMPs) implemented in several 
advanced  economies  as  a  response  to  the  crisis  have  had  thus  far  important  beneficial 
effects.  Nevertheless,  these  policies  have  also  given  rise  to  a  number  of  risks.  The  latter 
include  the  effects  of  UMPs  on  capital  flows  to  and  outflows  from  emerging  market 
economies  (EMEs),  and  the  related  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  challenges;  the 
implications  for  financial  stability  of  prolonged  periods  of  low  interest  rates;  the  potential 
impact on inflation of exceptionally easy monetary policies; the challenges for central banks 
resulting from the fundamental change in the size and composition of their balance sheets; 
and  of  course,  as  evidenced  by  recent  events,  the  difficulties  related  to  exit  from  UMPs. 
While a withdrawal of monetary stimulus resulting from the prospect of a sustained economic 
recovery should have beneficial medium- and long-term effects, this may be accompanied by 
substantial volatility in financial and foreign exchange markets, as shown by events in mid-
2013 and in recent weeks. I will return to this later on. 
Third, the sources of systemic risk have been changing from 2008 to date, also as a result of 
structural changes in international capital markets. 
• 
Shadow  banking  has  shown  a  substantial  expansion  in  recent  years.  The  key 
drivers  of  this  trend  are  well  known,  namely,  a  combination  of  low  interest  rates, 
weak supply of credit and tighter bank regulation. Shadow banking can play a useful 
role  by  contributing  to  lending,  allowing  better  risk  management,  and  increasing 
liquidity. However, as the global financial crisis has shown, it can also endanger the 
stability  of  the  financial  system.  The  challenge,  therefore,  is  to  benefit  adequately 
from its advantages while minimizing the accompanying risks, particularly in view of 
its  rapid  growth,  both  in  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies,  and  its 
interconnectedness  with  the  rest  of  the  financial  system.  Unfortunately,  despite 
efforts  under  way,  major  data  gaps  remain  and  a  proper  assessment  of  the 
implications of shadow banking for systemic risk is still missing. 
More  particularly,  the  share  of  the  nonbanking  sector  in  the  intermediation  of 
international  credit  has  risen  substantially  after  the  crisis.  The  case  of  the  asset 
management  industry  deserves  especial  attention,  given  the  risks  for  financial 
stability it raises. While this industry renders a number of advantages, at the same 
                                                 
2  See IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, October 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  time it is highly concentrated, both in terms of the number of managers involved and 
the  holdings  of  individual  securities  by  some  of  them.  In  addition,  this  kind  of 
investors may be more prone to herd behavior, and interconnectedness with the rest 
of the financial system is high. Given the potential for procyclical actions, the size of 
the asset management sector and the risk of liquidity problems, some analysts have 
noted that the usual indicators of vulnerability that were designed for previous crises 
(mostly bank-driven), will no longer be very useful.3 
What is the appropriate policy response to the challenges posed by macrofinancial linkages? 
In view of the far reaching effects of monetary policy, the dominant view is that it is essential 
to use an instrument with more direct effects and with a systemic perspective of the financial 
system. Consequently, the standard recommendation is to use macroprudential tools as the 
first line of defense. 
I share the view that macroprudential measures should have a prominent role in the pursuit 
of financial stability. But I am also convinced that we must be well aware of the limitations 
that we face in using these tools. 
To start with, despite the substantial increase in research on financial stability issues in the 
aftermath  of  the  crisis,  the  theoretical  foundations  for  macroprudential  policy  are  at  an 
incipient stage and still far from being able to provide the basis required to design integrated 
policy frameworks in this area. In addition, the interactions between macroprudential policies 
and  measures  in  other  fields,  particularly  monetary  policy,  should  be  carefully  considered; 
however, to date, they have not been sufficiently analyzed. Also, since recognition of the role 
that  macroprudential  policy  can  play  in  financial  stability  is  relatively  recent,  empirical 
evidence on the effectiveness of these instruments is scarce. Furthermore, it is indispensable 
to  establish  adequate  institutional  arrangements  for  the  design  and  implementation  of 
macroprudential  policies.  It  must  also  be  considered  that  macroprudential  policies  do  not 
affect activities not subject to traditional banking regulations, i.e. shadow banking is outside 
their reach. 
Therefore, it is difficult to expect that financial stability can rely on the use of macroprudential 
policy  alone.  All  the  contrary,  the  complexity  of  this  issue,  and  the  uncertainties  and 
limitations  that  surround  the  use  of  macroprudential  instruments,  imply  the  adoption  of  a 
comprehensive  approach  that  includes,  in  addition  to  the  latter,  traditional  monetary,  fiscal 
and microprudential tools. It is also important to bear in mind that although normally this will 
not be the first line of defense, there will probably be instances where monetary policy will 
need to respond directly to financial stability risks. In view of close inter-country links, and the 
consequent  global  risks,  international  cooperation,  be  it  through  bilateral  or  multilateral 
means,  based  on  either  a  preventive  or  a  crisis-response  approach,  will  frequently  be  an 
important component of the policy response. 
Clearly, the financial system will have a healthier development in efficient economies with a 
high potential for growth. Therefore, the relevance for financial stability of structural reform 
measures aimed at improving resource allocation and removing barriers to growth, deserves 
proper attention. 
From  an  emerging  market  perspective,  one  of 
for 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  in  the  near  future  relates  to  the  normalization  of 
monetary policy in the United States. The possibility of a relatively smooth adjustment to the 
increase in interest rates in this country cannot be discarded, especially if this takes place in 
the  context  of  a  sound  evolution  of  the  US  economy.  However,  taking  into  consideration 
previous  experiences,  it  is  very  well  possible  that  such  a  development  will  result  in  a 
the  most  evident  challenges 
                                                
3  See Hyun Song Shin, “The Second Phase of Global Liquidity and its Impact on Emerging Economies”, Asia 
Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November 4, 2013.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  reassessment  of  risk,  capital  outflows  from  emerging  market  economies,  and  in  general  a 
sharp increase in volatility in international financial markets. 
The normalization of monetary policy in the US is surrounded by a number of uncertainties. 
First  of  all,  although  the  first  increase  in  the  federal  funds  rate  is  widely  expected  to  take 
place  this  year,  the  specific  date,  as  well  as  the  pace  at  which  subsequent  increases  will 
occur, are far from clear. Second, it is not possible to anticipate to which extent this is going 
to  be  reflected  in  the  evolution  of  the  exchange  rate,  interest  rates  and  other  financial 
variables of the different economies. Third, there is also uncertainty as to when it will affect 
these variables; in particular, if markets were to adjust ahead of the interest rate increase, 
the  most  acute  period  of  turbulence  would  likely  happen  before  the  measure  is  actually 
implemented. 
I am convinced that the best course of action for EMEs is to assume that the increase in US 
interest rates is going to take place sooner rather than later, and to be ready to face wide 
swings in international financial markets. In other words, to prepare as fast as possible for a 
worst case scenario. 
In this respect, it is worth to note the following: a) the possibility of contagion among different 
EMEs  cannot  be  discarded;  b)  EMEs  absorb  nowadays  a  much  larger  share  of  outward 
portfolio  investment  from  advanced  economies  than  before  the  global  financial  crisis 
(according  to IMF  figures, fixed  income  allocations  of  advanced  economies  to  EMEs  grew 
from  4  percent  of  the  total  stock  of  their  outward  portfolio  investment  in  2002  to  almost 
10 percent  in  20124);  c)  in  many  EMEs  a  large  portion  of  public  securities  in  domestic 
currency is in the hands of foreign investors. This may increase the sensitivity of capital flows 
to  higher  foreign  interest  rates;  d)  liabilities  in  US  dollars  of  the  corporate  sector  in  many 
EMEs have swelled in recent years, thus increasing the possibility of unpleasant surprises in 
some  of  them;  and  e)  several  oil  and  commodity-exporting  countries  and  firms  have  been 
severely affected by falling asset valuations and rising credit risks.5 
What should be the response to the potential challenges resulting from the normalization of 
monetary policy in the United States? On the basis of my comments above, I would underline 
the  following:  a)  the  need  to  strengthen  economic  fundamentals  and  in  particular  address 
economic vulnerabilities in EMEs as soon as possible as a preventive measure; b) a timely 
and flexible reaction as needed of macroeconomic and financial stability policies to episodes 
of  volatility  in  the  financial  markets;  and  c)  a  cooperative  attitude  on  the  part  of  the 
international  community  to  support  these  efforts,  either  through  bilateral  (e.g.  currency 
swaps)  or  multilateral  arrangements  (e.g.  IMF  financing,  precautionary  or  otherwise),  with 
adequate coordination among them to avoid fragmentation. I would like to underline that the 
empirical evidence shows that markets do differentiate during episodes of uncertainty, and 
that EMEs with more solid fundamentals and availability of external financing have performed 
better and have been more resilient in recent episodes of volatility. 
Let me close my intervention by saying a few words about the weapons Mexico has at its 
disposal to confront the turmoil that may accompany the normalization of monetary policy in 
the United States. The first element I would underline is prudent monetary and fiscal policies. 
Suffice to say that the inflation rate is basically on target at present and that fiscal policy has 
been tightened preventively in 2015, with further budget cuts announced for 2016, to ensure 
a sustainable path for public finances in the face of a more difficult economic environment. 
Second,  international  reserves  stand  at  around  record  levels,  and  the  availability  of 
resources is reinforced by a 65 billion US dollar Flexible Credit Line with the IMF. Third, the 
flexible exchange rate regime has worked efficiently as a shock absorber, but at the same 
                                                
4 
5 
IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, Op.Cit. 
IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, April 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  time modest interventions in the foreign exchange market have been carried out to smooth 
volatility of the exchange rate, on the basis of pre-announced rules and without defending a 
particular level for the peso. Fourth, the banking system is well capitalized, highly liquid and 
profitable.  Fifth,  although  indebtedness  of  the  corporate  sector  has  increased  significantly, 
most  of  these  liabilities  have  fixed  interest  rates  and  long  periods  of  amortization,  and 
simulations show a relatively modest impact overall of an exchange rate adjustment, partly 
as a result of the hedging of foreign exchange risks. Finally, the Mexican government has 
embarked on a thorough process of structural reform, covering a wide array of sectors, that 
has  been  considered  by  the  OECD  as  the  most  ambitious  among  the  Organization’s 
members.  To  sum  up,  every  effort  has  been  made  to  navigate  as  smoothly  as  possible 
through the turbulent waters ahead. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
