  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Rural banks – portals of inclusiveness for Juan 
and Juana dela Cruz 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  62nd  Annual  National  Convention  and  General 
Membership  Meeting  of  the  Rural  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines,  Manila,  18  May 
2015. 
 Today, we gather to kick off your 62nd Annual National Convention and General Membership 
Meeting. You have set “New Vision, One Direction, Stronger Organization” as your theme for 
this  conference,  the  same  title  as  your  5-year  strategic  plan.  This  is  certainly  a  welcome 
initiative.  It  reflects  the  intent  of  the  RBAP  to  look  ahead,  define  your  strategic  path  and 
communally decide on the tactical actions needed to get you to your desired destination.  
The vision for rural development 
But to move forward and reach our destination, it will be useful to pause and also look back. 
For some, this suggestion may seem counterintuitive.  
Prudence dictates that in creating a vision of what you wish to become, it would be useful to 
revisit the purpose for which the rural banking system was set up in the first place.  
Republic  Act  7353  is  categorical  in  that  it  speaks  of  “the  establishment  of  a  rural  banking 
system designed to make needed credit available and readily accessible in the rural areas on 
reasonable terms.”  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  operative  words  here  are:  “needed  credit  that  is  accessible  on 
reasonable terms”. In the simplest of words, this is the vision of the rural banking system. It is 
quite straightforward. But it is a vision that has turned out to be quite elusive to fully realize. 
Shifting financial markets  
As we review the current markets we operate in, I would like us to consider two things. First, 
the  broader  and  larger  macroeconomic  picture,  and  second,  a  more  focused  view  of  the 
improvements in technology and how we can harness this to our advantage.  
The big picture and technology 
I  will  not  delve  into  the  macroeconomic  indicators  that  you  traditionally  hear  me  speak  of 
during  your  events.  Instead,  for  today,  what  I  would  like  us  to  appreciate  is  that  our 
constituents’  needs  are  changing.  And  these  changes  are  reflecting  rather  fundamental 
shifts. With 64 consecutive quarters of economic growth to-date, one should expect to find 
some structural improvements at the grassroots. Indeed, latest data seem to confirm such an 
improvement.  
In the Global Findex for 2014, the World Bank noted that the percentage of Filipino adults 
with  formal  accounts  increased  to  31.3%  from  the  26.6%  baseline  figure  in  2011.  These 
accounts refer to those held in banks, cooperatives or microfinance institutions or as mobile 
money. On the other hand, the percentage of the poorest 40% of Filipino adults who have a 
formal financial account stood at 17.8 percent in 2014, a rise of 7.1 percentage points from 
the  figure  in  2011.  These  are  not  small  improvements  especially  when  you  consider  that 
37 percent of our LGUs (604 out of 1,634) are still unserved by any bank.  
While banking reach and financial access continue to be fundamentally challenging because 
of  our  archipelagic  landscape,  the  BSP’s  innovations  in  banking  regulations  have  helped 
reduce this gap. We have augmented the presence of the 514 rural banks headquartered in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  our 17 regions by licensing other financial service providers (FSPs) such as e-money agents. 
With  the  operation  of  FSPs,  the  percentage  of  LGUs  that  remains  without  any  form  of 
financial access point falls from 37 percent to 13 percent.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  indeed,  economic  growth  is  being  reported  and  financial  access  is 
broadening.  Amidst  these  shifts,  every  financial  institution  is  looking  for  newer  frontiers  to 
explore.  The  following  simple  numbers  provide  richer  flavor  for  the  opportunities  that  lie 
ahead.  
At a gross domestic saving rate of 20.8% in inflation-adjusted terms for 2014, that translates 
to Php 1.49 trillion in real terms or Php 2.12 trillion in nominal savings that can be mobilized. 
That  is  2014  savings  alone,  quite  distinct  from  the  Php  1.80  trillion  in  2013  and  another 
Php 58 trillion the year before. And perhaps what is most telling is that the great bulk of this 
has been generated by half of the population since the other half is literally still in school.  
The bet really is that our future rests with the economic fate of our young population. They 
provide the demand that will drive consumer finance. And they represent the future where 
preferences are molded by technology and product choice.  
This brings me to my second point. The availability of technology at the retail level is rapidly 
changing  the  business  model  of  community  banking.  We  are  not  talking  only  about  more 
ATMs  and  e-banking  services.  Instead,  it  is  really  the  basic  fact  that  information  and 
communications  technology  is  now  relatively  affordable  and  is  scalable  to  make  your 
operations  more  efficient  and  reliable.  There’s  also  greater  capability  to  communicate 
through  long  distances  with  a  simple  email  or  social  media  posting  and  to  reduce 
dependency  on  physical  offices  to  reach  out  to  a  wider  customer  base  through  mobile 
banking technology. 
This means that the information technology frontier just keeps on extending and extending 
and  extending.  Your  options  on  rural  banking  then  become  largely  an  issue  of  how  you 
deliver banking products and services using the IT choices you have made. 
The competitive landscape of the rural banking market has also seen major shifts in recent 
times. From what was then nearly the exclusive domain of rural banks, we have now seen 
universal  and  commercial  banks  venturing  into  the  countryside,  in  part  because  of  the 
phenomenon of technology.  
Fundamental choices 
These  are  the  broad  strokes  of  change.  Sustained  economic  growth  that  is  becoming 
reflected in the consumers’ financial choices. Greater market competition – from both within 
and  without  as  we  have  become  more  open  to  foreign  ownership  of  our  banks.  Financial 
technology that is moving at the speed of light.  
Where  do  all  these  changes  leave  the  rural  banking  industry?  As  you  embark  on  your 
visioning exercise, each one of your members must make the hard choices in terms of the 
“scope” and the “scale” of your operations.  
A  rural  bank’s  fundamental  strength  is  its  familiarity  with  the  grassroots,  the  community  it 
serves.  But  as  the  market  evolves,  familiarity  –  even  as  it  is  an  advantage  –  may  not  be 
sufficient to guarantee the operational viability of a rural bank. As the local community being 
served grows, so must the rural bank which is invested into that community. But, even as I 
say this, the causality must go both ways. For the local community to grow faster, the rural 
bank must also continue to be the stimulus for the community. This is  at the very  ideal of 
what rural banking should be in the Philippines.  
There will always be a need for financial services and it is incumbent upon the RB to develop 
products and services that can address the requirements of its constituents. This is the issue 
of  “scope”  and  this  reflects  the  responsibility  of  banks  to  be  portals  of  economic 
improvement.  Financial  consumers  are  made  better-off  by  banks  because  financial  well-
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  being  is  improved  by  banking  products  and  services  which  then  also  translate  to 
improvements in the community.  
Then there is a question of “scale” so that the rural bank stands ready to grow – in size and 
core competencies – with the communities it serves. In the end, buzzwords like “right sizing” 
and “streamlining” need specific context. It seems obvious that there is no universal standard 
–  or  “magic  number”  that  is  out  there.  What  is  clear  though  is  that  as  you  make  your 
decisions on what you deem is the right size for you, you must continue to be guided by the 
BSP’s  regulations  on  the  appropriate  governance  structures  and  risk  management 
frameworks.  
In the process of determining the scale and scope of your operations, it is my hope that you 
will be able to deliver the needed financial services to your clients at reasonable terms – just 
as it has been envisioned in the Rural Banks Act.  
What the future brings 
Rural  banks  must  remember  that  you  are  yourselves  stakeholders  in  the  community.  You 
are, in effect, a financial consumer – as an institution and as individuals – in the community 
that your bank also operates as a financial provider. 
As I close, I want to inform you that the BSP has spearheaded the formulation of a national 
strategy for financial inclusion, the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI). We are 
set to launch this in July this year. It’s a multi-sectoral endeavor that sets out the coherent 
framework on how all our efforts, those of the public sector and the private sector, can be 
closely and systematically coordinated to bring about financial inclusion that leads to broad-
based  and  inclusive  growth.  Rural  banks  are  an  integral  part  of that  strategy.  It  is  a great 
opportunity. I urge you to closely engage with us on this grand endeavor. 
Friends, change is everywhere and perhaps none more so than in the present times. You 
talk of a “new vision” because we need to accept that there is a new normal in banking. It is 
still very much a business activity but one which is held to a very high social standard. This 
important  qualification  is  necessary  to  protect  the  financial  consumer  from  conflicts  of 
interest,  to  instill  corporate  governance  standards,  to  enforce  global  best  practices  for 
managing risks and ultimately, to sustain public trust. 
We have seen during the global crisis what a banking market becomes in jurisdictions where 
public trust becomes eroded. It would be an over-simplification to argue that their problems 
are  unique  and  could  not  arise  in  Asia  or  in  the  Philippines.  These  problems  have  not 
manifested themselves here because we took early steps to prevent the build-up in risk and 
we  continue  to  invest  in  a  regulatory  environment  that  nurtures  your  creativity  as  product 
providers while mitigating the ill effects of unwarranted risks. 
There is a need for “one direction” to strengthen commonality in purpose in addressing the 
challenges of the future. Yes, there is diversity in the different situations that invite different 
approaches. But those different approaches need to be anchored by common principles and 
shared aspirations.  
Finally,  a  strong  organization  is  always  a  must  and  a  stronger  organization  must  be 
responsive to the changing times, that new normal we approach with common purpose. 
We need to continue to be a value proposition to the financial consumer, especially those in 
the countryside. RBAP is certainly equipped to do just that under a new vision that accepts 
the new normal in banking, having one direction to approach the challenges with a common 
purpose,  having  a  stronger  organization  that  has  the  strength  and  agility  to  withstand  the 
uncertainties, and having the boldness and courage to innovate and re-invent. 
I  wish  all  of  you  well  for  this  national  convention  and  the  BSP  stands  ready  to  be  your 
continuing partner in rural development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
