  Andrew Bailey: Financial markets – identifying risks and appropriate 
responses 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  at  the  Bank  of  England,  at  Cambridge 
University, Cambridge, 15 May 2015. 
 Accompanying chart can be found at the end of the speech. 
The  views  expressed  in  this  lecture  are  my  own  and  not  those  of  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee  or  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority.  I  would  like  to  thank  Chris  Salmon,  Geoff  Coppins,  Rhys 
Phillips,  Jeremy  Harrison,  Sarah  Bailey,  David  Learmonth, Alina  Barnett,  Andrew  Hauser,  Lewis Webber,  Sam 
Knott, David Biegel, Simon Stockwell, Joseph Noss and Nicholas Vause for their comments. 
As the summer of 2015 approaches, it is sobering to think that we will be nearing the eighth 
anniversary of the start of the Global Financial Crisis. Incidentally, the end of this month will 
mark my 30th anniversary of working at the Bank of England. So it is even more sobering to 
realise that I have now spent a quarter of my career dealing with the Global Financial Crisis. 
Reflecting  on  this  fact  as  I  started  writing  this  speech,  I  must  admit  I  thought  about 
suggesting we all go for a drink now, but I decided I should press on.  
There is a commonly-held narrative about the financial crisis that the banks caused it, and 
the solution is more regulation of both an economy-wide (macro-prudential in the jargon) and 
firm specific (micro-prudential) type. But it isn’t that simple, and tonight I want to outline the 
role of financial markets and non-bank institutions (which sometimes go under the somewhat 
pejorative term of shadow banks)1 within the overall financial system and describe how, with 
sufficient resilience, they play a number of key roles in the financial system, including offering 
borrowers  alternatives  to  bank  lending.  Nevertheless,  I  also  want  to  explain  why  there  is 
significant  and  increasing  emphasis  on  the  risks  they  can  pose  to  financial  stability.  Put 
simply, it is quite often said that we are living in unprecedented times in the performance of 
financial markets. 
The simple narrative around banks is that they over-extended themselves (over-leveraged in 
terms  of  the  ratio  of  assets  to  capital  and  over-extended  in  terms  of  the  ratio  of  illiquid  to 
liquid assets) in the run-up to the crisis, and the resulting problems had two closely linked 
and malign effects: first, the crisis jeopardised the provision of those core financial services 
which banks provide and on which all of us depend; and second, by so doing – and being too 
big  or  complicated  to  deal  with  as  failed  companies  –  they  required  the  use  of  taxpayers’ 
money to bail them out. That’s the story, and it explains why the public policy actions taken 
both  immediately  after  the  crisis  (bail-outs)  and  the  subsequent  post-crisis  reforms  have 
been  directed  at  protecting  those  or  core  financial  services  and  seeking  to  ensure  that 
taxpayers’ money does not need to be put at risk.  
There is however more to the story than that. In the period between the early 1990s and the 
onset  of  the  crisis,  there  was  a  remarkable  and  unprecedented  evolution  of  the  financial 
system which involved a major expansion of activity. Banks moved from a traditional model 
of taking deposits and lending them out, to a model that involved far more the origination and 
distribution  of  loans  –  often  known  often  as  securitisation,  in  which  these  loans  were 
substantially distributed to shadow banks. These shadow banks thereby took on more of the 
traditional core bank functions of credit assessment and maturity transformation (the practice 
                                                
1   The  Financial  Stability  Board  has  defined  ‘shadow  banking’,  as  credit  creation  occurring  partly  or  wholly 
outside the banking system. In this lecture, I use the term ‘shadow banks’ in the looser sense of those entities 
in the non-bank financial system that might pose systemic risks in any form, collectively or individually.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of borrowing at shorter maturities than the maturities of the assets they held). And, they did 
so, like the banks, with weak levels of capital.  
But, it would be a mistake to portray shadow banks as bad. There is good evidence that in 
the twenty years before the crisis they emerged as a stabilising force (most notably in the 
US) because they were able to expand their provision of credit at times when traditional bank 
lending  underwent  cyclical  contractions  (Meeks  et  al  2014).  hat  said,  there  were  some 
troubling properties associated with the growth of shadow banking. For instance, quite a few 
were sponsored by banks as a means to reduce the amount of capital to be held against risk 
exposures. When the crisis hit, in a number of cases those banks found they had to stand 
behind their offshoots for contractual or reputational reasons, so the separation was illusory 
and led to greater leverage in the system. Another issue was that the originate and distribute 
model of securitisation was often opaque and led to insufficient genuine risk transfer away 
from the banking system, in ways that became very problematic when the crisis hit. Shadow 
banks, also neglected the funding side of their balance sheets, so that they came to depend 
upon using their assets as security to obtain funding, often from banks. This is quite different 
from the traditional model of deposit funded banking where the assets (loans) are not used 
as security for raising funds. However, it must be said that in the run-up to the crisis, banks 
too  came  to  depend  overly  on  such  secured funding. When the  crisis hit,  the  value  of the 
assets used as security for collateral fell, funding conditions tightened and in some instances 
were cut off.2 
These weaknesses meant that the counterbalancing behaviour of shadow banks vanished. 
Instead,  they  retracted  just  as  banks  did,  but  much  more  violently,  which  exacerbated  the 
magnitude of the crisis. The result was therefore greater volatility in financial markets, and a 
dramatic  increase  in  the  vulnerability  of  economies  to  financial  shocks.  This  contraction  in 
credit supply was thus a powerful channel through which the financial sector hit economies. 
The result was the largest contraction in real economic activity since the Great Depression. 
In the better times, securitisation and the shadow banking system appeared to have reduced 
the sensitivity of the aggregate supply of lending and thus the sensitivity of the real economy 
to transitions in bank funding conditions. But they did not do so at the point it would have 
been most valuable, during the global crisis. As Stanley Fischer has recently put it: “when 
non-banks  pulled  back,  other  parts  of  the  system  suffered.  When  non-banks  failed  other 
parts of the system failed.” (Fischer (2015)).  
The originate to distribute model created tradeable assets – the securities in securitisation. 
The  success  of  the  model  depended  on  there  being  liquid  secondary  markets  for  these 
securities. In its broadest sense, market liquidity refers to the ease with which one asset can 
be  traded  for  another,  and  thus  different  markets  can  be  more  or  less  liquid.  The  level  of 
liquidity  in  financial  markets  depends  on  among  other  things  the  amount  of  arbitrage  or 
market  making  capacity  and  whether  specialised  dealers  (market  makers)  will  step  in  as 
buyers or sellers in response to temporary imbalances in supply and demand (Fender and 
Lewrick 2015). In what appeared to be normal times before the crisis, there was abundant 
capacity  to  maintain  liquidity  in  markets,  supported  by  banks  and  shadow  banks  such  as 
hedge funds.  
But  during  the  crisis,  such  capacity  became  much  more  scarce  or  even  undeployed,  and 
market  liquidity  dried  up.  The  key  point  here  is  that  the  originate  to  distribute  approach 
depended on continuous liquidity in financial markets, and when that dried up in the crisis the 
effects were severe.  
I want to move on now to what has happened since the crisis. Financial market activity has 
grown rapidly. There are many statistics that could be quoted, so to choose one, over the last 
                                                
2   As Meeks, Nelson and Alessandri (2014) explain, securitisation involves debt-like structures which represent 
fixed, non–contingent claims on the cash flow of the assets in use, hence making shadow banking more 
vulnerable to fluctuations in asset prices.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15  years,  global  bond  markets  have  grown  from  around  $30  trillion  in  2000  to  nearly 
$90 trillion today. That is a lot, not least because in the middle of that 15 year period came 
the  global  financial  crisis.  Therefore,  when  it  comes  to  the  task  of  maintaining  market 
liquidity,  there  is  a  lot  more  to  hold  up.  Also,  the  broad  investment  or  asset  management 
sector  is  now  much  larger,  at  around  $75  trillion  at  end-2013.  Thus,  in  the  wake  of  the 
financial  crisis  there  has  been  a  substantial  increase  in  the  intermediation  of  credit  via 
financial markets rather than long-term on the balance sheets of banks, involving both the 
supply  of  new  credit  to borrowers  and the  absorption  of  assets coming out  of  the  banking 
system, as banks reduce their balance sheets.  
Over the same period, there has been a fundamental and rapid change in the microstructure 
of  financial  markets  –  the  organisation  of  how  they  work.  Electronic  platforms  are 
increasingly  used  in  a  number  of  major  financial  markets  (notably  equity  and  foreign 
exchange  markets).  As  part  of  that  change,  automated  trading  –  which  is  a  subset  of 
electronic trading using algorithms to determine trading decisions – has become common in 
those  markets.  And,  within  automated  trading,  there  has  been  growth  in  high  frequency 
trading  –  which  relies  on  speed  of  execution to  get  ahead  of  other market  players.3 While 
electronic  trading  has  contributed  to  increasing  market  efficiency  and  probably  reducing 
transaction costs, there are also risks that arise from trading strategies that are flawed, or 
where in constructing the strategy not all possible outcomes were considered, including the 
ability to trade large blocks.  
To  recap,  the  last  two  decades  have  seen  major  changes  in  the  financial  system.  These 
have, in turn, shaped the impact of the global financial crisis and its aftermath. I want now to 
look at the aftermath of that crisis and pick out several developments that are important for 
understanding current and future risks to financial stability.  
The first development concerns the overall pattern of activity in financial markets. While the 
size of global bond markets has grown rapidly, the evidence indicates that trading volumes in 
a number of markets have declined. Bond inventories held by primary dealers have likewise 
reduced, bid-ask spreads have risen in the corporate bond markets, and it has become more 
expensive to hedge named credit risk using derivatives. A key point here is that the balance 
sheets  of  dealers  active  in  these  markets  have  shrunk  markedly,  with  many  fewer  firms 
active in market-making.  
Markets have grown, but the capacity to maintain liquidity – as judged by the market–making 
capacity  of  the  major  banks  and  broker-dealers  –  has  declined.4  As  my  colleague  Chris 
Salmon  recently  put  it,  this  reduction  in  market making  capacity  has  been  associated  with 
increased concentration in many bond markets, as firms have become more discriminating 
about the markets they make, or the clients they serve. But this trend has gone hand-in-hand 
with a growth in assets under management, with important implications for the provision of 
liquidity by market makers in times of stress in those markets. (Salmon (2015)).  
The second post-crisis development is the natural consequence of the severity of the crisis 
and  its  impact  on  real  economies.  The  extraordinary  (by  historical  standards)  degree  of 
monetary  policy  easing  by  central  banks  was  followed  by  a  fall  in  volatility  in  financial 
markets. Markets appeared to come to take comfort from their own mantra of “low-for-long” 
                                                
3   High frequency trading is a subset of automated or algorithmic trading where the emphasis is more on the 
speed of execution than the complexity of the algorithm. Low frequency algorithms tend to be more complex 
mathematically,  with  less  emphasis  on  computational  time.  The  goal  to  reduce  execution  times  to  small 
fractions of a second is the subject of Michael Lewis’ book “Flash Boys” (Lewis (2014)).  
4   The finance literature emphasises that the performance of markets in financial assets is driven substantially by 
changes  in  the  wealth  of  the  marginal  investor,  which  is  the  market  maker  or  broker-dealer  (Nelson  et  al 
(2015)).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  rates which in turn incentivised a “search for yield” (to be clear, “low for long” has not been in 
the phraseology of central banks).  
Studies of the US Treasury market have indicated that the Federal Reserve’s programme of 
Quantitative Easing (QE) caused a reduction in the liquidity premium return for holding those 
bonds. Part of the effect of QE programmes is to improve market conditions for the targeted 
asset classes but also to see the trickle down to other asset classes as market conditions 
change more generally (Christensen et al (2013)). To be clear however, QE asset purchase 
operations were not designed to tackle a liquidity problem in the financial system. Rather, the 
impact on liquidity was one of the channels through which QE has affected the real economy 
and thus has had its intended effect in monetary policy terms. While estimates of the impact 
of QE are inherently uncertain, one of the desired outcomes of central bank asset purchases 
is to lower yields thus affecting longer term interest rates and creating a positive economic 
effect. In doing so, QE can improve the functioning of financial markets by reducing liquidity 
premia.  
The third post-crisis development is the impact of the growth of automated trading in financial 
markets, and the challenges this poses for maintaining continuous market and liquidity. Over 
the last year volatility in many financial markets has picked up from a low base and we have 
seen  some  acute  but  short-lived  incidents  of  extreme  volatility  and  impaired  liquidity  in 
secondary  markets. On  15  October  last  year  there  was  unprecedented  volatility  in  the  US 
Treasury  market,  and  on  15  January  this  year  there  was  substantial  volatility  in  the  Swiss 
Franc  exchange  rate  following  the  unexpected  decision  by  the  Swiss  National  Bank  to 
remove  its  Europe/Swiss  Franc  floor.  Now,  central  banks  are  known  for  their  powers  of 
understatement,  so  what  do  I  mean  by  words  like  “unprecedented”  and  “substantial”.  On 
15 October, 10 year US Treasury yields moved intra-day by around 8 standard deviations of 
preceding daily changes. On 15 January, the Swiss Franc moved by more than 30 standard 
deviations. For rough scale, an 8 standard deviation move should happen once every three 
billion years or so for normally distributed data.  
You may at this point recall the saying popularised by Mark Twain, about “lies, damned lies 
and statistics”. I think I can be reasonably confident in saying that the fact of these events 
happening does not mean that we should expect low volatility in financial markets for at least 
the next three billion years.  
I am not going to spend time discussing the causes of these events; suffice to say that there 
was  news  of  an  unexpected  sort,  and  the  size  of  the  resulting  moves  points  to  greater 
sensitivity in the response of markets. The ability of markets to trade without triggering major 
price moves was limited. That said, by the end of both days, volatility had reduced, prices 
had  retraced  a  portion  of  their  peak  intra-day  moves  and  liquidity  returned.  This  quick 
stabilisation helped to limit contagion to other markets, and thus wider effects on the stability 
of the financial system. Should we therefore be concerned? My answer to that is we should 
certainly be keenly interested. I agree with the conclusion of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York that understanding the manner in which the evolving market structure is affecting 
market liquidity, efficiency and pricing is highly important (Potter (2015)). This conclusion has 
been reinforced in the recent publication of the Senior Supervisors Group (SSG) in which the 
PRA  participates  (Senior  Supervisors  Group  (2015)).  The  SSG  has  concluded  that  “key 
supervisory  concerns  centre  on  whether the  risks  associated  with  algorithmic  trading  have 
outpaced  control  improvements.  The  extent  to  which  algorithmic  trading  activity,  including 
HFT, is adequately captured in banks’ risk management frameworks, and whether standard 
risk management tools are effective for monitoring the risks associated with this activity, are 
areas of inquiry that all supervisors need to explore”. 
As supervisors of almost all of the world’s major trading banks – through their operations in 
London – we can provide some helpful assessment of these events. We have observed that 
the  balance  between  aggregate  buy  and  sell  orders  submitted  to  banks’  electronic  trading 
systems  can  shift  instantaneously,  and  sometimes  violently,  upon  this  type  of  occurrence. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  impact  is  often  exacerbated  by  the  simultaneous  reduction  in  order  book  depth  on 
organised multilateral electronic trading venues. The electronic trading contribution was more 
evident  on  15  January,  as  a  foreign  currency  market  event  than  the  15  October  (a  bond 
market event), reflecting the different patterns of trading in these markets. 
On  the  15  January,  the  ability  of  banks’  e-trading  systems  to  hedge  positions  consistently 
through automatic risk management broke down as the necessary reference prices became 
discontinuous and unreliable. The algorithms of automatic trading have rules embedded in 
their code such that quotes are immediately pulled if there is a severe market liquidity event. 
Moreover,  the  algorithms  often  have  automatic  rules  that  activate  circuit  breakers  or  so-
called “kill switches” should the aggregate notional risk on a firm’s book exceed programmed 
limits.  On 15  January,  the  algorithms  acted quickly  to  pull  the  so-called  “streaming  prices” 
when liquidity in the reference market for these prices dried up. Where this did not happen 
simultaneously,  it  resulted  in  large  open  positions  being  accumulated  by  the  banks,  quite 
literally within seconds, as an overwhelming balance of client sell orders were automatically 
executed. Once pre-determined risk accumulation limits had been breached the algorithms 
instantaneously shut down. Whilst each algorithm, operating independently, may well have 
been quite prudently calibrated to protect the bank from building an exposure that exceeded 
its risk appetite, collectively, the impact on market liquidity was akin, albeit temporarily, to a 
cascading failure across a power grid.  
As  a  consequence,  the  foreign  exchange  market  reverted  to  human  voice  orders  as  the 
substitute  for  automated  trading.  There  were  therefore  outcomes  that  appear  not  to  have 
been  expected.  So,  at  the  risk  of  quoting  Shakespeare  inappropriately,  all  was  well  that 
ended  (reasonably)  well,  but  the  risk  that  this  would  not  be  the  outcome  is  too  great  to 
ignore.  
In summary, there is good evidence that financial market conditions have evolved in  ways 
that reduce the likelihood of continuous market liquidity in all states. One element of this is 
the response of regulators to the financial crisis (to which I will return later), while the other is 
a  product  of the rapid  development  of  technology  and  trading  strategies.  The  effects  have 
probably  been  offset  to  some  degree  by  beneficial  influences  from  central  bank  monetary 
policy actions which have increased market liquidity. Measures of risk that reflect the overall 
demand  for  and  supply  of  financial  assets,  including  liquidity  risk  premia,  remain  low  by 
historical standards, notwithstanding recent events. In part, this likely reflects the continued 
intended effects of monetary policy setting and the communication of policy looking forward. 
This has, as intended, provided an incentive for risk-taking by investors, and thus the market 
environment has been conducive to the so-called “search for yield”. 
But,  as  described,  underlying  conditions  in  financial  markets  suggest  that  the  current 
situation  could  be  fragile.5  Shocks  that  might  prompt  large-scale  asset  disposals  are  of 
particular  concern.  The  global  asset  management  industry  is  both  large  in  size  in  its  own 
right and relative to the size of the commercial banking system.  
A key issue is the degree to which asset managers (or shadow banks) typically offer short-
term  redemptions  against  potentially  illiquid  assets.  This  capacity  to  realise  assets  without 
unwanted  disturbance  to  financial  markets  is  therefore  critical  and  is  shaping  the  work  of 
authorities.  The  risk  is  inherently  global  in  nature,  thereby  suggesting  that  internationally–
coordinated policy action is the preferred outcome where necessary. In the rest of my time, I 
will describe the work that is being done on policy responses.  
First, I want to challenge the argument that the issue derives from the re-regulation of the 
capital  and  liquidity  positions  of  banks  that  have  in  the  past  acted  as  market-makers,  and 
                                                
5   For  more  on  this  see  the  Bank  of  England  Financial  Stability  Report,  December  2014,  “Box  4  –  Drives  of 
market liquidity” pages 54–56.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  thus marginal investors. This argument has a number of strands: capital and funding costs 
for dealer inventories in banks and broker-dealers have increased; the cost of hedging with 
single name credit default swaps has risen, causing availability to drop; proprietary trading 
restrictions (e.g. the Volcker Rule in the US) limit market making (it is too hard to distinguish 
prop  trading  from  market  making);  and  increased  trade  transparency  requirements  restrict 
market liquidity. (Morgan Stanley/Oliver Wyman (2015)) 
If  we  look  at  the  US  as  the  prime  example,  the  evidence  indicates  that  the  big  run-up  in 
inventories  of  fixed  income  securities  held  by  the  primary  dealers  occurred  from  around 
2003-04 onwards, reached a peak in 2008, and has then settled back to around the 2002 
level over the last two years, or so.  
Looked  at  in  this  light,  the  increase  in  inventory  capacity  in  the  dealer  community  was 
ephemeral,  reflecting  the  underpricing  of  risk,  a  weak  capital  regime  and  the  subsidy 
provided  to  the  major  banks  by  implicit  government  guarantees.  Dealers  de-risked  their 
balance  sheets  rapidly  as  the  crisis  hit,  and  this  reminds  us  that  their  capacity  and 
willingness to stand in the way of major market moves (akin to catching a falling knife) was 
always constrained.6 And all of this happened before any new regulations were put in place.  
Last  on  this  point,  it  is  worth  recalling  the  background  to  the  large  increase  in  inventories 
from around 2002/04. Here, regulation does appear to have played a role, and not a good 
one. The first amendment to the Basel I capital standard came in the mid 1990s in the form 
of  the  so-called  Market  Risk  Amendment.  It  enabled  a  substantial  reduction  in  the  capital 
held against trading book assets such as inventories, to a level that could be less than 1% of 
those assets. To illustrate this point, here is a quote from the FSA’s report into the failure of 
RBS. 
“The  capital  regime  was  more  deficient,  moreover,  in  respect  of  the  trading  books  of  the 
banks  …..  the  acquisition  of  ABN  AMRO  meant  that  RBS’s  trading  book  assets  almost 
doubled between end 2006 and end 2007. The low risk weights assigned to trading assets 
suggested  that  only  £2.3  billion  of  core  tier  1  capital  was  held  to  cover  potential  trading 
losses  which  might  result  from  assets  carried  at  around  £470  billion  on  the  firm’s  balance 
sheet.  
In fact, in 2008 losses of £12.2 billion arose in the credit trading area along (a subset of total 
trading  book  assets).  A  regime  which  inadequately  evaluated  trading  book  risks  was, 
therefore, fundamental to RBS’s failure.” (FSA (2011)).  
I do not doubt that the reversal of this capital treatment of trading books has had an impact 
on dealer inventory levels by increasing the capital intensity. But I don’t accept that the fairly 
ephemeral position that emerged shortly before the crisis was fit for purpose or sustainable.  
What  are  we  therefore  doing  about  the  fragility  of  market  liquidity  and  the  risks  to  both 
financial stability and the state of the real economy that arise from it? First, we are working 
hard to understand better these risks and how they could manifest themselves. As the Bank 
of  England’s  Financial  Policy  Committee  stated  at  the  end  of  March,  our  concern  is  that 
investment allocations and the pricing of some securities “may presume that asset sales can 
be performed in an environment of continuous market liquidity.” (FPC (2015)).  
We  are:  gathering  better  data  and  thus  building  a  greater  understanding  of  the  channels 
through which market liquidity can affect financial stability and economic activity; establishing 
a better understanding of how asset managers form their strategies for managing liquidity in 
their funds  in  normal  and  stressed  conditions  (taking  into  account  any  increase  that  might 
                                                
6   Fender and Lewrick (2015) note that “when market volatility rises, standard risk assessment models will signal 
a market-maker inventory has become riskier. That may prompt the market-maker to further trim its holdings. 
In turn, bid-ask spreads may widen, which could ultimately provide additional volatility and diminish liquidity 
further”.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  have occurred in the correlations between various market participants’ trading activities, such 
as  the  use  of  passive  investment  strategies);  and  deepening  our  knowledge  of  the 
contributors  to  greater  fragility  of  market  liquidity.  The  FPC  has  asked  for  a  full  report  on 
these issues when it meets in September and an interim report in June.  
Globally, the Financial Stability Board also has set priorities for its work, with which we are 
fully  engaged.  The  intention  is  to  understand  and  address  vulnerabilities  in  capital  market 
and asset management activities, focussing on both near-term risk channels and the options 
that  currently  exist  to  address  them,  the  longer-term  development  of  these  markets  and 
whether  additional  policy  tools  should  be  applied  to  asset  managers  according  to  the 
activities they undertake, with the aim of mitigating systemic risks. 
The PRA, as the UK’s prudential supervisor of major trading firms, will continue to develop its 
capacity to assess algorithmic or automated trading, including the governance and controls 
around  the  introduction  and  maintenance  of  trading  algorithms,  and  the  potential  system-
wide  impact  of  crowded  positions  and  market  liquidity.  We  will  assess  the  adequacy  of 
existing risk measurement and management practices in capturing exposures from the large 
volume  of  intraday  trading  instigated  by  these  algorithms. We  will  continue  to  develop  our 
assessment  of  whether  trading  controls  deployed  around  algorithmic  trading  are  fit  for 
purpose, and in doing so we will no doubt capture insights on the role of market making on 
electronic platforms. This is all part of our task of supervising firms’ trading books. It should 
be assisted by the introduction of MIFID2 (the Markets and Financial Instruments Directive) 
in Europe, which  will impose rules on algorithms and high frequency trading, including the 
introduction  of  circuit  breakers,  minimum  tick  sizes  and  maximum  order-to-trade  ratios, 
thereby seeking to improve the stability of markets.  
It might be possible to conclude that it is all work to understand the problem rather than fix it. 
Not so, and I want to end by summarising six areas where action is already under way to 
reduce impediments to the development of diverse and sustainable market based finance.  
First, maintaining the stability of the financial system means that we have to keep a close 
watch on how risks that can appear in financial markets and the non-bank financial system 
may  wash  back  into  and  affect  the  critical  functions  performed  by  banks;  in  other  words 
destabilise the core of the system. In order to enhance our protection against this risk, in this 
year’s Bank of England concurrent stress test, we are taking a substantial step to enhance 
the  coverage  of  market  risks.  Our  new  approach  to  stress  testing  trading  activities  will 
capture how fast banks could unwind or hedge their trading positions in the stress scenario. 
This means positions that are less liquid under stress conditions will receive larger shocks. 
And,  we  have  developed  a  new  approach  to  stressing  counterparty  credit  risk,  which 
focusses  on  capturing  losses  from  exposures  that  would  become  large  under  the  stress 
scenario and for counterparties that would be most vulnerable in the stress scenario. 
Second, the Bank of England, working with the FCA and HM Treasury has set up the Fair 
and Effective Markets Review to restore trust and confidence in the fixed income, currency 
and commodity (FICC) markets in the wake of the serious wave of misconduct seen since 
the height of the financial crisis. The Review is taking a fundamental look at the root causes 
of these abuses, the steps that have already been taken by firms and regulators to put things 
right,  and  what  more  is  needed  to  deliver  less  vulnerable  market  structures  and  raise 
standards of behaviour in future. The Review will publish its recommendations in June 2015. 
Out of this assessment, and based on consultations to date, will I believe come priorities on 
market  structure  “standards”  and  transparency,  effective  competition,  professional  culture 
within  firms  and  effective,  pre-emptive  supervision  which  reduces  the  drama  of  ex-post 
enforcement.  
The third area of action concerns initiatives to improve the functioning of markets to support 
activity in real economies. Resilient market-based financing will help to support sustainable 
economic  growth.  The  aim  behind  the  European  Commission  initiative  on  Capital  Markets 
Union  is  to  strengthen  markets  in  the  EU  to  support  growth  and  stability,  and  sustainable 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
progress on this front will be welcome.7 Likewise, sound securitisation is a goal of the wider 
financial  reform  programme.  The  Bank  of  England  and  the  ECB  have  published  a 
consultation paper to identify simple, transparent and comparable securitisation techniques, 
the use of which should be encouraged. This work is now being taken forward in international 
policymaking bodies.  
The  fourth  area  of  activity  involves  so-called  securities  financing  transactions  (SFTs) 
including  securities  lending  and  repurchase  (repo)  agreements.  These  can  have  the 
beneficial  effects  of  supporting  price  discovery  in  financial  markets  and  secondary  market 
liquidity, and are important as part of market-making activities by financial firms, as well as 
their investment and risk management activities. But, as we witnessed in the crisis, they can 
also  be  a  source  of  excessive  leverage  and  mismatches  in  liquidity  positions.  As  a 
consequence, some of these markets shrank rapidly as the crisis took hold. The Financial 
Stability Board has taken steps to introduce haircuts on SFTs that are not centrally cleared, 
with  the  aim  of  preventing  excessive  leverage  becoming  available  to  shadow  banks  in  a 
boom, thereby reducing the procycliality of that leverage. The haircuts set an upper limit on 
the  amount  that  banks  and  broker-dealers  can  lend  against  securities  of  different  credit 
quality.  
The  fifth  area  concerns  the  risk  of  asset  managers  offering  short-term  redemptions  to 
investors  against  potentially  illiquid  securities.  The  proportion  of  assets  held  in  such 
structures  has  increased  over  the  past  decade.  Given  more  fragile  underlying  market 
liquidity, for the reasons I have described, stressed disposals of assets might be harder to 
accommodate  in  an  orderly  fashion.  The  international  securities  regulatory  body  IOSCO, 
issued  recommendations  in  2012  that  provide  a  basis  for  Common  Standards  for  Money 
Market Funds (MMFs) across jurisdictions, in particular seeking to ensure that MMFs are not 
susceptible to the risk of runs (in the way that banks can be). More broadly, work continues 
on putting into practice appropriate policies and standards to prevent the risk of disorderly 
sales of assets in the face of investor withdrawals. Potential responses (and at this stage we 
are looking at options in an open way) are to require funds to hold larger liquid asset buffers 
to facilitate orderly redemption payments to investors, to apply more stringent leverage limits 
where  appropriate,  and  to  require  that  the  redemption  terms  offered  to  investors  take 
sufficient  account  of  the  risk  that  secondary  market  liquidity  in  the  assets  they  hold  could 
become  impaired.  These  are  possibilities,  but  at  this  stage  very  much  not  policies  for  the 
reason that a lot more work is need to properly assess them.  
Last,  central  banks  can  back-stop  market  liquidity  by  acting  as  market  makers  of  the  last 
resort. The Bank of England had described in its so-called Red Book how it could act in such 
a way in exceptional circumstances. Here too, there is a lot more to be done to consider the 
circumstances in which this tool could be used. 
Conclusion 
The  rapid  trend  towards  greater  use  of  market-based  financing  is  one  that  should  be 
welcomed.  But,  it  is  important  that  accompanying  risks  to  financial  stability  are  well 
understood and managed. Credit creation since the financial crisis has been heavily reliant 
on market based finance in the UK and internationally. We have to be alert to, and ready to 
handle the risks and consequences of any reversal in market conditions. Recent incidents of 
market volatility act as a reminder that it can disappear very quickly in more normal as well 
as stressed times. Moreover the business models of the broker-dealers that act as market 
makers are changing in response to the financial crisis and they are becoming reluctant to 
absorb large positions. In my view those changes are inevitable, because the pre-crisis state 
                                                
7  Financial Stability Paper No 33 – February 2015 “A European Capital Markets Union: implications for growth 
and stability”.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of  affairs  was  ephemeral  and  unsustainable.  But  the  impact  of  the  change  is  of  course 
important  for  both  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  because  it  affects  the  supply  of 
credit  to  the  economy  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  My  assessment  is  that  in 
terms of understanding the risks and framing possible mitigating actions, we will fare better if 
we start by focussing on the activities that create such market risk, and then as appropriate 
move on to the entities that house those activities.  
The policy response from the authorities is by nature an activity that needs to be carried out 
through  close  international  co-ordination.  The  Bank  of  England  is  committed  to  playing  its 
part, consistent with the major presence of financial market activity in the UK, alongside and 
as a part of the work of the G20 under the auspices of the Financial Stability Board.  
of 
BIS 
2015. 
March 
Review, 
Quarterly 
instruments”, 
24th  March 
the  Meeting, 
References 
Jens  H.  E.  Christensen  and  James  M.  Gillan  “Does  Quantitative  Easing  Affect  Market 
Liquidity”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper 2013-26.  
Ingo  Fender  and  Uif  Lewrick  “Shifting  tides  –  market  liquidity  and  market-making  in  fixed 
income 
2015 
http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1503i.pdf 
Financial  Policy  Committee:  Record 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/Records/fpc/2015/apr.aspx 
The  Financial  Services  Authority,  “The  Failure  of  the  Royal  Bank  of  Scotland:  Financial 
Services Authority Board Report, December 2011.  
Stanley Fischer, “The Importance of the Nonbank Financial Sector” speech at the “Debt and 
Financial Stability – Regulatory Challenges” Conference, the Bundesbank and the German 
Ministry of Finance, Frankfurt 27 March 2015.  
Grace Xing Hu, Jun Pan and Jiang Wang “Noise as Information for Illiquidity”. The Journal of 
Finance, XXVIII, No 6 December 2013.   
Michael  Joyce,  David  Miles,  Andrew  Scott  and  Dimitri  Vayanos  “Quantitative  Easing  and 
unconventional Monetary Policy – An Introduction”. The Economist Journal, 122, November 
2012.  
Michael Lewis “Flash Boys, A Wall Street Revolt”. W.W. Norton and Co, 2014  
Roland  Meeks,  Benjamin  D  Nelson  and  Piergiorio  Alessandri  “Shadow  banks  and 
macroeconomic 
instability”  Bank  of  England  Working  Paper  No  487  –  2014. 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Pages/workingpapers/2014/wp487.aspx 
Morgan Stanley and Oliver Wyman, “Wholesale and Investment Banking Outlook, Liquidity 
Conundrum: Shifting risks, what it means, March 2015. 
Benjamin Nelson, Gabor Pinter and Konstantinos Theodoridis “Do contractionary monetary 
policy stocks expand shadow banking?” Bank of England Working Paper 521, January 2015. 
Adrian,  T.  E.  Eutula  and  J  Muir,  “Financial  Intermediaries  and  the  cross-section  of  Asset 
Returns”. The Journal of Finance 2014  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Pages/workingpapers/2015/wp521.aspx 
Simon Potter “Challenges posed by the Evolution of the Treasury Market”. Remarks at the 
2015 Primary Dealer meeting, New York City. 
Chris Salmon “Financial Market Volatility and Liquidity – a cautionary note. Speech given at 
the  National  Asset  Liability  Management  Europe  Symposium,  13  March  2015. 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/809.aspx. 
Senior  Supervisory  Group, 
http://www.ny.frb.org/newsevents/news/banking/2015/SSG-algorithmic-trading-2015.pdf. 
“Algorithmic  Trading  Briefing 
note”  April 
2015 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 US Primary Dealers’ corporate bond inventories  
 Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as reproduced in the Bank of England Financial Stability Report – December 2014.  
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
