  Yannis Stournaras: Openness to trade and economic growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  London 
Conference at Chatham House, London, 2 June 2015. 
 The success and popular support for any government depends to a large extent on its 
ability  to  deliver  economic  prosperity.  Yet  tensions  are  rising  between  national 
interests  that  governments  are  elected  to  defend  and  economic  integration  that  the 
global economy demands and which a successful economy requires. 
1.  Can  governments  sustain  the  past  consensus  that  free-trade  agreements  and 
inward  investment  deliver  economic  growth  in  the  aggregate  even  if  they  can 
exacerbate inequality in the short-term? 
There  are  several  benefits  to  international  trade,  including  the  ability  to  use  comparative 
advantage,  the  removal  of  domestic  monopoly  positions  and  provision  of  competition  for 
producers, and diffusion of innovation and know-how to domestic companies. Moreover, as 
recent  economic  history  and  the  development  of  global  value  chains  have  shown,  greater 
openness to trade is usually associated with faster economic growth. Furthermore, openness 
itself  induces  governments  to  adapt  their  policies  and  institutions  to  best  international 
practices so that they become more export and business friendly. This facilitates inward FDI 
which  can  further  boost  growth  prospects  through  various  channels,  i.e.,  by  improving 
competition, innovation etc. 
Of  course,  trade  liberalization,  outsourcing  and  the  globalization  trend  observed  in  past 
decades might have widened inequality. Let me refer to two possible channels. First, if the 
biggest  share  of  low-income  workers  is  employed  in  low  productivity  firms  that  face  tough 
import competition, then international trade could increase income inequality by lowering the 
relative  earning  of  low-income  workers.  This  can  happen  because  growth  may  be 
concentrated  in  labor  intensive  sectors  with  low  efficiency  of  labor  and,  consequently,  low 
relative wages. Second, outsourcing usually implies the reallocation of low skill activities from 
high to low income countries. However, these activities are usually high skill in the context of 
the  skill  distribution  of  the  low  income  country.  Therefore,  outsourcing  can  make  labour 
demand  more  skill  intensive  in  both  rich  and  poor  countries,  leading  to  increasing  income 
inequality. 
Nevertheless,  the  growth  dividend  from  the  greater  openness  to  trade  can  and  should  be 
used in a way that addresses income inequality and poverty. One such way is to promote 
policies  that  facilitate  the  accumulation  of  human  capital,  i.e.  increase  tertiary  educational 
attainment, while another possible option is to consider targeted cash transfers to those in 
need. 
On Greece 
One of the goals of the reform program that is implemented in Greece since 2010, besides 
correcting  fiscal  imbalances,  is  the  improvement  in  competitiveness,  the  re-orientation  of 
economic  activity  towards  exports  of  goods  and  services  and  the  improvement  in  the 
institutional  framework  and  business  environment  in  order  to  attract  FDI  and  to  boost  the 
long term prospects of the Greek economy. 
Despite  delays  and  mixed  signals  occasionally  provided  by  domestic  policy  makers,  there 
has been significant progress in terms of the export performance in recent years. 
• 
For  example,  nominal  exports  of  goods  and  services  increased  by  29.4%  in 
cumulative  terms  from  2009  to  2014  (while  imports  declined  by  12.4%).  This 
development reflects the significant rise in exports of goods (54% in nominal terms; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    31%  in  real  terms)  which  increased  in  line  with  our  Euro  Area  peers,  while  the 
performance  of  services  was  rather  sluggish  (on  account  of  global  factors  that 
affected  the  shipping  sector  until  late  2013  and  uncertainty  that  impacted  tourism 
until mid-2012). 
Net  exports  have  been  positively  contributing  to  economic  growth  in  the  period 
2010–2014 and are expected to continue so in the coming years. 
Moreover, the share of total exports to GDP has increased from less than 20% in 
2009  to  more  than  30%  in  2014  and  Greece’s  export  share  in  global  trade  has 
increased by 30% over the same period. However, exports as a share of GDP are 
still low compared to the European average of 44%. 
2.  Are  current  sovereign  debt  levels  unsustainable?  How  can  these  be  addressed 
whilst  maintaining  the  support  of  national  populations,  and  who  should  bear  the 
burden? 
It is true that most advanced countries have seen their government debt to GDP ratios rising 
during  the  global  financial  crisis.  This  reflected  their  efforts  to  address  financial  sector 
vulnerabilities and to take discretionary action or let automatic stabilizers operate in order to 
contain the effects of declining economic activity during the great recession. However, most 
of the countries, including Greece, initiated fiscal adjustment programmes in order to correct 
fiscal imbalances and to address the debt overhang problem. In fact, Greece has done one 
of  the  biggest  fiscal  consolidations  among  developed  economies  during  peacetime  with 
cyclically adjusted deficts declining by more than 16% of GDP within four years. 
Although  rising  debt-to-GDP  ratios  are  and  should  be  a  cause  of  concern  for  all  countries 
because  they  can  undermine  economic  growth,  economic  history  and  recent  research  (by 
the OECD, the BIS, and the IMF) suggest that the debt intolerance thresholds are state and 
country dependent. However, if this threshold is reached, countries immediately lose market 
confidence, face rising borrowing costs and explosive debt dynamics and consequently fiscal 
policy destabilizes (instead of stabilizing) the economy. 
As  has  been  shown  e.g.,  by  the  OECD,  for  higher-income  countries,  the  debt  threshold 
ranges from 70 to 90% of GDP, while for emerging economies the debt threshold is even 
lower at 30 to 50% debt of GDP, as they are exposed to capital flow reversals. 
Hence,  countries 
fiscal 
consolidation programmes, whose objectives should be clearly and openly communicated to 
the public. However, governments which apply austerity programs loose political capital. This 
is because fiscal consolidations hurt growth and deepen the recession, hence reducing living 
standards.  Recent  evidence  and  international  research  have  shown  that  governments  are 
more likely to succeed and maintain the support of the population when consolidations are 
introduced in the aftermath of an election, and when the party in office has a clear and strong 
mandate to reform. Therefore, governments with fresh political capital like the current one in 
Greece have a better chance in succeeding. 
At the same time fiscal consolidation programs should aim at increasing the efficiency and 
effectiveness  of  spending  (e.g.  ,health  and  education  spending  and  spending  on  social 
policies) and eliminating distortions in taxation (broaden the tax base, cut expenditures rather 
than increase labour taxes, and increase property and environmental taxes). 
The use of certain fiscal instruments could have beneficial effects on equity leading to fair-
burden sharing and maintaining the support of the electorate. For example, 
• 
• 
better targeting social benefits could have beneficial effects on equity. 
Increases in effective retirement age would improve equity and lower inequality. 
fiscal  challenges  should  design  credible  multiannual 
facing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The reduction in tax exemption and tax credits will broaden the tax base and along 
with a more progressive income tax scale will exert a positive effect on equity and 
lower inequality. 
Higher wealth and property taxes, if based on a progressive scale, will also lower 
inequality. 
 Finally, it is essential to improve the institutional setting by improving budgetary procedures, 
introducing  fiscal  rules  and  independent  fiscal  councils  and  improving  medium  term  fiscal 
planning.  All  these  actions  will  enhance  transparency,  improve  accountability  and  fiscal 
planning  and  will  contribute  to  better  spending  control  and  improve  the  probability  of 
successful fiscal consolidation. 
A better exploitation of government fixed assets through a targeted privatization programme 
and the adoption of growth promoting structural reforms will also facilitate the reduction of 
high debt ratios without increasing inequality. 
On Greek debt 
Last but not least, let me now refer to the case of Greece. The outstanding total amount of 
the  Greek  general  government  debt  by  end-April  2015  is  €313  billion  and  the  debt-to-gdp 
ratio is estimated at 172%. However, a few points are worth highlighting. 
• 
Nearly 80% of Greece’s general government debt is held by the official sector, i.e. 
bilateral loans by EU countries under the GLF, IMF loans and EFSF loans, as well 
as debt securities held by the ECB and NCBs. 
Greek  debt  is  benefiting  from  very  low  interest rates  currently  and  quite  extended 
maturities on GLF and EFSF loans. While Greece benefits also from the deferral of 
principal payments on GLF and EFSF loans by 10 years and a 10-year grace period 
for interest payments on most EFSF loans. 
In addition, Greece has been receiving the profits made by the ECB and NCBs on 
their Greek government bond holdings (SMP and ANFA). 
As a consequence of these actions, the average maturity of the Greek government 
debt  has  increased  from  6.3  years  in  2011  to  about  16.5  years  by  end  2014  and 
debt  servicing  costs  have  decreased  to  levels  comparable  with  other  southern 
European countries, while the actual debt servicing cost on a cash basis is much 
lower, i.e. about 1.7% of GDP if one takes into account that the interest paid to the 
ECB and euro-area national central banks (NCBs) is returned to Greece and interest 
payments on EFSF loans are deferred until 2022. 
Therefore, in view of the existing favourable debt servicing arrangements, the stock 
of  debt  need  not  pose  such  a  big  concern,  conditional  on  there  being  a  credible 
commitment to the reform program that will be agreed with our EU partners. 
Of  course,  the  timeline  of  the  schedule  of  the  debt’s  repayments  and  interest 
payments  may  pose  challenges  in  future  years.  In  particular,  while  official  loans 
have been supplied with low interest rates, there is a ‘hill effect’ from 2022 onwards, 
i.e.,  by  the  time  that  interest  payments  rise  significantly  due  to  the  beginning  of 
repayment of deferred interest for EFSF loans. 
Taking  into  account  that  Greece  will  have  to  refinance  maturing  debt  at  higher 
market  rates  over  the  next  few  years,  the  interest-to-GDP  ratio  is  projected  to 
increase  significantly  from  2022  onwards  to  likely  6%  of  GDP  under  reasonable 
interest rate scenarios. This will impose significant challenges to debt sustainability 
looking forward. 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
     Hence, smoothing interest payments over time (in particular over the period 2022–
2030), along the lines of the Eurogroup decision of 27 November 2012, will provide 
significant positive effects on growth and improve debt dynamics without imposing 
costs to creditors. 
Research at the Bank of Greece suggests that smoothing the interest-to-GDP ratio 
over  the  critical  period  of  2022–2030  by  gradually  removing  interest  payments  to 
future years may have a significant positive impact on growth of the economy and 
lead to a faster reduction of the debt-to-GDP ratio to sustainable levels by 2035. 
In  the  short  term,  i.e.  over  the  period  2015–2022,  if  a  swap  of  IMF  loans  (which 
come at a higher cost) with ESM loans (which come at a low cost and have a much 
longer duration) could occur, this would have improved debt dynamic considerably. 
for men it is projected to be 84.9 year in 2060 from 78.0 in 2013, while 
for women it is 89.0 years in 2060 from 83.3 in 2013. 
3. Can ageing societies overcome the risks of stagnating economic growth? How will 
their governments bridge the generational gap without alienating either the young or 
the old? 
Advanced  economies  face  increasing  age  related  challenges.  The  decline  in  fertility  rates 
and the increases in life expectancy have increased the share of old-age in total population. 
In the future the challenges will become more pressing – for example in the case of Greece, 
according  to  the  2015  Ageing  Report  of  the  European  Commission,  the  share  of  elderly 
population (65 and over) as a % of total population is expected to increase from 20.3% in 
2013 to 33.0% in 2060. While the share of very elderly population (80 and over) as a % total 
population is projected to increase from 5.8% in 2013 to 15.3% in 2060. This trend reflects 
increased life expectancy; 
• 
• 
The fertility rate is projected to only marginally increase to 1.58 in 2060 from the very low of 
1.34 in 2013. 
Given that labor supply and savings are higher among working age adults than among those 
aged 65 or above, it can be expected that a country with a large cohort of elderly is likely to 
experience  slower  growth  than  one  with  a  lower  elderly  share.  Nevertheless,  future 
behavioral changes cannot be excluded – for example, individuals might decide to increase 
saving over their working-life in view of the projected increase in life expectancy. 
Ageing  societies  are  expected  to  face  mounting  health  and  pension  spending  pressures 
putting at risk public finances which, in turn, will further reduce future growth prospects. 
There are various policy options to address the ageing related future growth challenges. First 
and foremost, it is important to fully utilize the labour input by taking actions to increase the 
employment rate. A low employment rate implies that a significant part of the working age 
population is either unemployed or inactive (outside the workforce). For example in Greece 
(according  to  the  2015  Ageing  Report)  the  employment  rate  (for  the  age  group  of  15–64 
years old) was 48.7% in 2013 on account of very high unemployment (about 28% for ages 
15–64) and low labour force participation, in particular, for the age group 55–64 (42.4%). 
Therefore action should be taken to 
• 
First, address the very high unemployment because it can have severe long term 
repercussions, though the hysteresis effects, as it can induce people to drop out of 
the labour force. At the same time, long term unemployment leads to human capital 
erosion and a fall in potential growth – translating a cyclical problem into a structural 
one. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Second,  action  should  be  taken  to  raise  the  currently  low  participation  rate  by 
females and older individuals. 
 For  example  countries  facing  these  challenges  should  adopt  policies  that  discourage  age 
and  sex  discrimination  by  employers,  promote  life-long  learning  and  education,  allow  for 
more flexible work arrangements for older workers and women, and increase state-funded 
child care provisions. 
Furthermore,  policy  makers  should  also  consider  increasing  the  statutory  retirement  age 
when this is low by international standards. Alternatively, an already high statutory retirement 
age might have to be made binding by limiting the early retirement schemes. In addition, a 
life expectancy component could be build into the social security system. 
Finally, migration policies might have to be reconsidered as a whole in Europe in view of the 
future demographic pressures. 
Besides  the  abovementioned  policies  aiming  at  better  utilizing  the  labour  input,  additional 
policies  should  be  put  forward  such  as  increasing  infrastructure  investment,  facilitating 
business investment and adopting reforms that can permanently boost the level of potential 
output and its growth rate in the medium term. For example 
• 
adopt  product  market  reforms,  put  greater  emphasis  on  innovation,  R&D  and 
education, 
facilitate  the  use  of  high-skill  labour  as  well  as  ICT  in  order  to  boost  labor 
productivity etc. 
 Overall, ageing and shrinking working age population makes it even more pressing to boost 
innovation and productivity gains as a source of future growth. 
On Greek pension reform 
In the case of Greece, a very ambitious pension reform was introduced in successive waves 
in the years 2010–2014. The reform increased the statutory retirement age to 67 years and 
the minimum age for retirement to 62 years, strengthened the link between contributions and 
benefits  to  provide  stronger  incentives  for  labour  force  participation,  applied  a  uniform 
pension calculation method among all pension schemes, reduced the generosity of benefits 
and enforced stricter eligibility conditions for those receiving invalidity pensions, while it also 
introduced  a  life  expectancy  component  from  2021  onwards  (to  be  adjusted  every  three 
years). 
In  view  of  the  adopted  reforms  (according  to  the  2015  Ageing  Report  of  the  European 
Commission) the public pension expenditure is projected to decline until 2060 by about 1.9% 
of GDP (the 5th best performance in the EU). While the participation rate of older individual 
(5564)  is  projected  to  increase  from  42.4%  in  2013  to  78.0  in  2060,  raising  the  overall 
employment rate to 69.8% in 2060 from 48.7% in 2013. 
Nevertheless, the phasing out period of favorable retirement provisions for those with mature 
pension rights before the introduction of the reform and the remaining pockets of exemptions 
from general pension rules still create pressures in the social security system. 
4. Can countries count on technological advances to deliver new routes to economic 
growth and social inclusion? 
Technological advances and innovation have not run their course and will continue boosting 
future productivity growth. 
The so-called pessimistic view holds that the recent slowdown in productivity is a permanent 
phenomenon  because  the  types  of  innovation  that  took  place  in  the  first  half  of  the  20th 
century  (e.g.  electrification,  internal  combustion  engine  etc)  are  far  more  important  than 
those  that  took  place  latter  (e.g.  ICT  revolution)  and  those  that  will  occur  in  the  future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Nevertheless, as correctly pointed out by the optimists the underlying rate of technological 
progress has not slowed and the ICT revolution will continue transforming the firms operating 
at  the  technological  frontier.  Moreover,  big  payoffs  from  general  purpose  technologies  are 
fully  realized  only  if  organizational  structures  are  re-organized  to  benefit  from  new 
technologies,  while  in  many  cases  innovation  arises  from  combination  of  previous 
innovations. 
Recent empirical work conducted by the OECD and focusing on the globally most productive 
firms has shown that productivity growth at the global frontier has been robust despite the 
slowdown  in  average  productivity  growth.  For  example,  labour  productivity  at  the  global 
frontier increased at an average annual rate of 3 ½ % in the manufacturing sector over the 
2000s,  compared  to  an  average  growth  in  labour  productivity  of  just  ½%  for  non  frontier 
firms. 
Nevertheless,  technological  advances  (along-side  with  increased  competition  due  to 
globalization) tend to raise income inequality as they benefit high-skilled workers more than 
other. This development could persist if it results to skill-biased technological change and to 
the extent that tertiary education attainment does not keep pace with technological progress. 
Therefore, in order for all actors of the economy to benefit from the technological advances 
at the global frontier policies should aim at: 
• 
Fostering innovation at the frontier by improving public funding and the organization 
of basic research, as well as 
Properly  designing  innovation  policies  that  they  do  not  excessively  favour  applied 
versus basic research. 
Facilitating  the  diffusion  of  new  technologies  to  non  frontier  firms  through  trade 
openness, participation in global value chains and the international mobility of skilled 
workers. 
Creating a market environment where more productive firms are allowed to thrive by 
promoting well-functioning product, labour and capital markets, so that they facilitate 
the penetration of new and existing technologies. 
Improving  skills  through  human  capital  investment  (tertiary  education,  training, 
reduce  school  drop  outs  etc) 
improve  employment 
opportunities  and  enhance  social  inclusion.  Finally,  the  growth  dividend  from 
technological innovation can also be distributed with targeted cash transfers to those 
facing the risk of poverty. 
to  reduce 
inequality, 
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
