  Alexandre A Tombini: Central banking – the next 50 years 
Introductory remarks by Mr Alexandre A Tombini, Governor of the Central Bank of Brazil, at a 
panel  discussion  to  celebrate  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil,  Rio  de 
Janeiro, 10 June 2015. 
 Today’s panel discussion is part of a series of events to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the 
Banco Central do Brasil. Other events in the series have looked backward. Today we’d like 
to  take  advantage  of  the  collective  wisdom  and  experience  of  our  distinguished  guests  to 
look forward: what can we expect in the next 50 years of central banking? 
This  is  an  ambitious  question,  but  an  appropriate  one  as  the  art  and  science  of  central 
banking  is  currently  in  flux,  and  the  outcomes  of  today’s  policy  debates  and  institutional 
innovations will shape central banking for many years to come. 
The global financial crisis has had a major impact on how we think about central banking. 
Before the crisis, there were, naturally, a number of unanswered questions and challenging 
issues for central banking, but the prevalent view was that the major pillars of the field were 
largely settled. In a growing number of countries, the operational regime for monetary policy 
was inflation targeting; monetary and financial stability objectives could be safely addressed 
separately;  and  floating  exchange  rates,  coupled  with  robust  international  reserves  and 
access  to  multilateral  funding  facilities,  were  often  seen  as  sufficient  to  protect  financial 
stability from excessive international capital flow volatility. Naturally, macroeconomic stability 
was and still is a necessary condition for the framework to operate properly. 
The  crisis  has  led  to  a  reexamination  of  some  issues  we  thought  were  settled  and  to  the 
emergence of some new questions. Even though Brazil was not at the epicenter of the crisis, 
we  were affected by the crisis itself and by the policies that were put in place in its wake. 
Furthermore, we have been actively participating in the international central banking debate 
in order to offer our views and to learn from the experience of others. 
 In my opening remarks, I will focus on three topics that have provoked particularly intense 
debate and that I believe will shape central banking for some time to come. In each of these 
topics, the global financial crisis prompted a rethinking that is still underway, although some 
initial conclusions can already be drawn. 
First, maintaining financial stability was reemphasized as a core function of central banks. 
Central banks have always been concerned with financial stability, particularly through their 
lender-of-last-resort role. But in many jurisdictions, central banks progressively downgraded 
the importance of the financial stability goal in the post-war period. The supervision of banks 
was  progressively  split  off  from  central  banking,  and  a  gap  emerged  in  that,  in  some 
jurisdictions, nobody was tasked with looking at the vulnerabilities in the system as a whole. 
This is less true for emerging markets, including Brazil, where central banks tended to keep a 
strong focus on financial stability even before the global financial crisis. In part, this reflects 
the fact that financial  crises  were  relatively  more  common  in  emerging markets  in the  late 
20th century. 
There was also an old and important academic and monetary policy debate in the decade 
leading up to the crisis on whether we should lean against a financial bubble or clean up after 
it has burst. However, the lack of consensus on this issue resulted, in practice, in a mostly 
laissez-faire policy stance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Today, I think it is safe to say that there is general agreement that proactively maintaining 
financial  stability,  by  taking  appropriate  action  against  the  buildup  of  vulnerabilities,  is  a 
proper goal for central banks. The high cost of “cleaning up” after the global financial crisis 
will serve as a reminder against excessive complacency for some time to come. 
The  current  debate  is  about  the  policy  tools  for  the  goal  of  maintaining  financial  stability. 
Macroprudential policy is widely seen as the first line of defense against systemic risk, but 
there  is  still  uncertainty  about  its  effectiveness.  There  is  also  disagreement  on  whether 
monetary policy should take financial stability considerations into account at all. 
On this latter issue – the use of monetary policy to deflate potential financial bubbles – there 
are  two  views.  One  is  that  monetary  policy  is  likely  to  be  particularly  effective  because  it 
affects  all  financial  markets.  Another  view,  that  has  been  stated  most  forcefully  by  Lars 
Svensson,  is  that  monetary  policy  is  an  inefficient  and  potentially  even  harmful  tool  for 
financial stability, since it is too unfocused and may have counterproductive macroeconomic 
effects. 
This is far from a theoretical matter: there is currently a lively debate on whether the current 
low  interest  rates  in  major  jurisdictions  are  leading  to  “search-for-yield”  behavior  in  certain 
financial  market  segments,  potentially  threatening  financial  stability,  and  whether  this 
provides an additional motivation for normalizing monetary policy sooner rather than later. 
The  view  that  seems  to  be  gaining  strength,  and  to  which  I  subscribe,  is  to  use 
macroprudential policy to maintain financial stability and allow monetary policy to focus on 
price stability. 
However,  the  definitive  answer  to  this  question  will  depend  on  the  progress  in  the 
development  of  macroprudential  policy  tools  and  frameworks.  Despite  some  positive 
experiences,  including  in  Brazil,  macroprudential  tools  are  still  insufficiently  tested  and  the 
theoretical  literature  is  in  its  infancy.  The  degree  of  success  in  using  these  tools  will  help 
determine  whether  there  is  a  role  for  monetary  policy  in  helping  to  achieve  the  financial 
stability goal. 
A second issue that has been the subject of considerable debate is the nature of monetary 
policy regimes. Before the crisis, there was a strong consensus on inflation targeting (or IT) 
as the most adequate monetary policy regime, due to its flexibility and transparency. 
After  the  crisis  began, major  central  banks  were  soon forced to  lower  interest rates  to the 
effective zero lower bound. Or so we thought at the time: some central banks are now testing 
the bound by bringing interest rates further and further below zero. Even so, it is clear that 
there must be some effective lower bound on interest rates. Furthermore, negative rates, if 
maintained  over  a  significant  period  of  time,  may  result  in  financial  market  distortions;  for 
example by causing lasting damage to the money market fund business model. 
Central  banks  responded  to  this  new  challenge  through  a  variety  of  unconventional 
measures which included what is known now as quantitative easing (or QE). However, there 
is  still  no  full  agreement  about  the  effectiveness  and  the  collateral  effects  of  these 
unconventional policies. (I will speak about some of its side-effects a bit later). 
Even  before  the  debate  about  the  limits  of  IT  frameworks  at  a  zero-lower  bound,  many 
economists, particularly in academia, proposed innovative monetary policy regimes such as 
price-level or even nominal GDP targeting. These regimes were seen as more powerful in 
the zero lower bound because they would effectively require central banks to make up for 
periods of below-target inflation or nominal GDP growth by keeping rates lower than required 
under IT after the economy recovers. Since monetary policy primarily affects the economy 
through  long-term  real  interest  rates,  and  therefore  through  agents’  expectations  for  the 
future paths of the policy rate and of inflation, the end result would be more accommodative 
policy during the downturn than recommended under the IT regime. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A  more  modest  proposal  was  to  keep  the  IT  regime,  but  increase  the  targeted  level  of 
inflation. The crisis and the bubbly period that preceded it convinced many that the modern 
macroeconomy is more prone to shocks that previously believed, and therefore the 2% target 
level that prevailed in mature economies before the crisis was perhaps too low to keep the 
economy from repeatedly hitting the zero lower bound. 
My  take  on  this  debate  is  that,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  inflation  targeting  emerged  even 
stronger  from  the  crisis.  No  major  central  banks  abandoned  inflation  targeting,  and  some 
central banks that were not inflation-targeters adopted elements of the framework. 
There are several reasons for the resilience of the IT regime: 
• 
Central banks found that inflation targets were actually helpful in explaining the need 
and the room for unconventional policy measures to the general public. 
Furthermore, inflation targets helped anchor inflation expectations, keeping deflation 
at bay despite the large output gaps prevalent at the height of the crisis. 
The  proposed  new  monetary  policy  regimes  suffer  from  a  number  of  practical 
deficiencies. They are too complex for the general public to understand and follow. 
And nominal GDP targeting relies too heavily on an unobserved variable, potential 
GDP growth. 
Finally, changing the regime, or even just raising the inflation target, in the middle of 
a crisis risked damaging the credibility that central banks have gained under the IT 
regime. 
   However, if the secular stagnation hypothesis that has been revived by Larry Summers and 
Paul Krugman is to be believed, this debate may be far from over. The argument is that there 
may be a tendency for a chronic excess of savings relative to investment, for various reasons 
including  slower  population  growth  and  a  less  capital-intensive  economy.  If  so,  real 
equilibrium interest rates  will be  lower than in the past and the zero-lower-bound will be  a 
recurrently binding constraint. 
I  am  still  unconvinced  by  this  hypothesis,  however.  As  has  been  pointed  out  by  Ben 
Bernanke,  the  secular  stagnation  arguments  tend  to  ignore  the  global  nature  of  today’s 
economy. As long as there are profitable investment opportunities somewhere in the world, 
capital  will  tend  to  flow  from  economies  with  excessive  savings  to  those  with  excessive 
investment  demand.  The  resulting  exchange  rate  depreciation  would  increase  aggregate 
demand and therefore neutral interest rates in the economies with excessive savings. 
And  indeed,  there  are  abundant  high-return,  capital-intensive  investment  opportunities  in 
many emerging economies including Brazil, particularly in infrastructure. 
However, if the hypothesis does turn out to be realistic, the zero lower bound will recur, and 
the  shortcomings  of  the  inflation  targeting  regime  under  those  conditions  may  lead  to  a 
renewed search for alternatives. 
The third and final issue I will address today is how to deal with capital flows. Of course, the 
potential for  destabilizing  capital flows  was  well  understood  even  before  the  crisis.  In fact, 
after  the  various  financial  crises  of  the  1990’s,  emerging  markets  began  to  accumulate 
international reserves in order to build a buffer of foreign exchange liquidity. The combination 
of floating exchange rates and robust foreign reserves, it was hoped, would be sufficient to 
protect economies and financial systems from destabilizing capital flows. 
The  resort  to  unconventional  monetary  policies  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis 
resulted  in  an  unprecedented  level  of  global  liquidity.  Emerging  markets  were  buffeted  by 
unusually intense and volatile capital flows. 
Exchange rate appreciation and FX market intervention were insufficient to maintain financial 
stability. The policy response in many emerging markets included macroprudential policies to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  that  a  multipronged  approach, 
is  currently  widespread  agreement 
dampen the effects of capital inflows on domestic credit and capital markets. These policies 
included both measures that aimed at domestic markets and measures that directly targeted 
capital inflows. 
There 
including 
macroeconomic, structural, and macroprudential policies may be necessary in order to deal 
with  capital  flow  surges.  More  recently,  academia,  central  bank  researchers  and  the  IMF 
have  endorsed  a  judicious  combination  of  capital  flow  management  measures  with  strong 
macroeconomic policies, including using exchange rate flexibility as the first shock absorber. 
However,  these  measures  have  costs,  including  market  distortions,  administrative  burden, 
and negative market reactions. 
Furthermore,  there  are  still  a  number  of  open  questions.  What  combination  of  policy 
instruments should recipient countries use in order to minimize costs? To what extent should 
the  burden  of  adjustment  also  be  on  source  countries?  Is  it  possible  to  improve  on  the 
decentralized outcome through international policy cooperation? 
I am still unconvinced that there is room for much greater international policy coordination – 
central  banks  have  domestic,  not global  mandates.  However,  it  seems to  me  that there  is 
some scope for cooperation at least in identifying potential cross-border and financial stability 
risks and adopting, when necessary, targeted macroprudential policies – either in recipient or 
in  source  countries  –  in  order  to  prevent  capital  flows  from  fueling  unsustainable  financial 
bubbles. 
 I’ve  raised  a  number  of  open  issues  in  central  banking  that  I  believe  will  shape  central 
banking for some time to come: 
• 
Financial stability is once again a core function of central banks, but macroprudential 
policies  and  frameworks  are  still  in  their  infancy,  and  a  proper  role  of  monetary 
policy in ensuring financial stability is still under discussion. 
Inflation  targeting  remains  the  dominant  monetary  policy  regime,  but  if  growth 
skeptics are correct and the zero-lower-bound recurs, there will be renewed calls for 
moving  to  innovative  regimes  or  at  least  higher  inflation  targets  in  mature 
economies. 
A laissez-faire approach to capital flows is off the table. There is still disagreement, 
however, on how to deal with flows, on who bears the burden of adjustment, and on 
the scope for global policy cooperation. 
  However, there is perhaps a deeper lesson to be drawn from the global financial crisis. The 
crisis came largely as a surprise; not because we did not see the bubbles forming, but rather 
because  the  central  banking  community  as  a  whole  failed  to  fully  take  into  account  the 
vulnerabilities  resulting  from  the  growth  of  the  shadow  banking  sector,  the  opacity  of  the 
novel  financial  instruments  that  helped  fuel  the  bubble,  and  the  complex  domestic  and 
international linkages between different financial sector intermediaries. 
A fundamental lesson to be drawn from the global financial crisis is the need to develop an 
integrated, forward-looking approach to central banking that brings together: 
• 
Comprehensive, granular (and perhaps “real time”) financial sector surveillance that 
focuses  on  identifying  systemic  risk  and  develops  adequate  market  infrastructure 
and reporting systems; 
Market intelligence that captures short, medium and long-term trends in the financial 
system,  including,  for  example,  the  potential  impacts  of  the  rapid  evolution  of 
electronic trading platforms and algorithmic investment strategies; and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 4 
   Research  and  analysis  that  spans  monetary,  exchange  rate,  and  macroprudential 
policies. 
 We have  made  some  progress  in  this  direction here  at the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil,  but  we 
expect to continue to develop this integrated approach to central banking for some years to 
come. Hosting discussions like this one we are having today is part of this process, so I’m 
looking  forward  to  hear  from  our  panelists,  which  do  not  require  any  introduction.  But 
nevertheless let me say a few words to introduce them to you. 
Our  first  panelist  is  Jacob  Frenkel.  Dr.  Frenkel  taught  international  economics  at  the 
University of Chicago before serving as Governor of the Bank of Israel between 1991 and 
2000. He then moved to the private sector, where he is currently the Chairman of JPMorgan 
Chase International and he also serves as Chairman of the Board of Trustees for the Group 
of Thirty. 
I’d also like to introduce Jean Claude Trichet. Mr. Trichet had a long and successful career in 
the  public  sector  where  he  was  assigned  to  various  posts  in  the  French  government, 
including  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France.  In  2003  he  was  appointed  President  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  in  which  capacity  he  served  for  eight  years.  He  is  currently  the 
Chairman and CEO of the Group of Thirty. 
Our third panelist is Axel Weber. After a distinguished career in academia, Dr. Weber was 
president  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  between  2004  and  2011.  After  leaving  the 
Bundesbank, he was a Visiting Professor at the Booth School of Business at the University of 
Chicago. He is currently Chairman of the Board at UBS. 
I  have  enjoyed  throughout  these  many  years,  in  a  variety  of  forums  and  debates  their 
always-to-the-point  sharp  remarks  and  so  I  hope  that  we  can  today  benefit  from  their 
thoughts, thank you for being here Jacob, Jean-Claude and Axel. 
Ms. Adriana Arai will moderate the discussion. Ms. Arai joined Bloomberg News in 2004, and 
currently is executive editor for local language content and chair of the Bloomberg São Paulo 
Office Committee. Previously, she worked for Dow Jones Newswires in São Paulo, Brasília 
and London. 
Adriana, the floor is yours. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
