  Jens Weidmann: Welcome remarks – Bundesbank conference on debt 
and financial stability 
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
Bundesbank conference on debt and financial stability, Frankfurt am Main, 27 March 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  welcome  you  all  to  the  Bundesbank  conference  on  debt  and  financial  stability.  It  is  a 
pleasure to have you here. 
The financial crisis and the euro-area sovereign debt crisis have certainly tainted the notion 
of debt. Listening to some of the discussions on the economic effects of debt, one could get 
the impression that debt is shorthand for “destroying economies big time”. 
And certainly, the notion that debt can be dangerous cannot be dismissed. Leverage does 
seem to be a crucial ingredient for financial crises – what matters most for financial stability 
may not be the size of a bubble, but how it was funded. 
Seminal work by Kiyotaki and Moore1 as well as by Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist2 in the 
1990s has shed light on how credit can amplify shocks to the economy. In a downturn, the 
deteriorating balance sheets of borrowers and lenders constrict new lending, which in turn 
curtails investment and hence worsens the downturn. 
So, too much debt can be dangerous. But it remains equally true that debt is indispensable. It 
allows  someone  with  an  idea  but  without  capital  to  follow  through  on  that  idea,  thereby 
enabling wealth creation that otherwise would not have happened. Many studies show that 
financial development and growth go hand in hand.3 
Doing away with debt is not an option. Rather, debt, like so many other economic issues, is 
not a question of “yes” or “no”, but a question of “how” and “how much” – a Goldilocks issue. 
Or,  as  former  BIS  chief  economist  Stephen  Cecchetti  and  his  colleagues  Madhusudan 
Mohanty  and  Fabrizio  Zampolli  put  it:  “Debt  is  a  two-edged  sword.  Used  wisely  and  in 
moderation, it clearly improves welfare. But, when it is used imprudently and in excess, the 
result can be disaster.” 
The  question  then  naturally  arises:  How  much  is  “just  right”,  to  say  it  in  the  words  of 
Goldilocks?  Cecchetti,  Mohanty  and  Zampolli4  come  up  with  concrete  numbers.  They  find 
that  when  household  debt  goes  beyond  85%  of  GDP,  it  becomes  a  drag  on  growth.  The 
same  threshold  applies  to  government  debt,  while  the  figure  for  corporate  debt  is  slightly 
higher at 90%. 
According to these estimates, in the euro area we are already in the danger zone – at least 
with  regard  to  public  debt  standing  at  91%  and  corporate  debt  at  105%.  Household  debt 
currently  stands  at  62%.  Some  caveats  are  in  order  here,  though.  Correlation  does  not 
necessarily equal causation. Does debt slow growth, or does a slowdown in growth cause 
                                                
1   N Kiyotaki and J Moore (1997). “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy 105 (2), 211–248. 
2   B Bernanke, M Gertler and S Gilchrist (1996). “The Financial Accelerator and the Flight to Quality”, Review of 
Economics and Statistics 78 (1): 1–15. 
3   R Levine (2005): “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence”, in P Aghion and S N Durlauf (eds), Handbook 
of Economic Growth Vol. 1 Part A, Chapter 12, pp 865–934. 
4   S G Cecchetti, M Mohanty and F Zampolli (2011). “The real Effects of Debt.” BIS Working Papers No 352. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
the debt-GDP ratio to rise? The policy  implications would be different, depending on  what 
really drives what. 
And  identifying  turning  points  in  econometric  models  is  a  notoriously  tricky  business.  The 
thresholds  presented  by  the  BIS  researchers  should  probably  not  be  taken  as  precise 
estimates of when growth falls of a cliff, but rather as one more piece of a growing body of 
evidence that too much debt can be as harmful to growth as too little. 
This growth slowdown can either take the form of a gradual tectonic shift, as high levels of 
debt weigh on new investment. Or it can take the form of an explosive eruption, as we have 
witnessed during the global financial crisis. And while both forms raise serious questions for 
policymakers,  it  is  mainly  the  latter  that  today’s  conference  will  address,  since  financial 
stability is part of the central banks’ remit. 
For the reasons I have just outlined, it would probably be a futile undertaking to try to pinpoint 
exactly when debt starts subtracting from rather than adding to economic welfare. In the end, 
the amount and the form of financial intermediation has to be determined by market forces. It 
is  therefore  all  the  more  important  that  this  market  process  functions  as  efficiently  as 
possible. 
And  this  is  where  the  regulators  come  in.  It  is  our  job  to  make  sure  that  the  regulatory 
treatment of debt does not give rise to incentives that endanger financial stability. And it is 
our  job  to  make  sure  that,  if  things  still  go  wrong,  the  financial  sector  can  still  deliver  its 
important services to the real economy. 
As the financial crisis and the euro-area sovereign debt crisis have shown, there is ample 
room  for  improvement  here.  In  particular,  we  need  to  ensure  that  all  actors  bear  the 
responsibility for their respective decisions. 
To me, three issues are of special relevance in this regard: the question of bail-in vs. bail-out, 
the regulatory treatment of sovereign debt, and the tax preference of debt over equity. 
Bail-in vs. bail-out 
2. 
Let me start with a question that has been debated heatedly since the crisis broke out: the 
issue of bail-in vs. bail-out. 
The financial sector is unique in that a malfunctioning of this sector impairs the functioning of 
all  other  sectors  of  the  economy.  And  the  crisis  has  served  as  a  stark  reminder  that  a 
malfunctioning  cannot  be  ruled  out.  Some  form  of  protection  is  therefore  called  for  – 
otherwise, innocent bystanders in the real economy will inevitably get hurt. 
Depending  on  the  kind  of  malfunctioning,  the  central  bank  might  be  able  to  provide  the 
protection. If the issue is a temporary dry-up of liquidity, it can act as a lender of last resort 
and supply the necessary funding – on an interim basis. 
But if the issue is one of solvency, then the central bank has no role to play, as taxpayers’ 
money might be ultimately at stake. Rather, it is then for politicians to decide whether to let a 
bank fail or not. 
Providing insurance in the form of a bail-out comes with obvious moral hazard problems. If 
banks know that they are too big to fail, they are tempted to make the most of this insurance 
and take on excessive risks, at the expense of society at large. As the Bank of England’s 
Chief Economist Andy Haldane put it: “Only in banking do control rights and incentive wrongs 
combine so uncomfortably.” 
Instead of the public providing cost-free insurance for banks, the onus is on banks to insure 
themselves against failure. Only then are risk and reward aligned in a way that serves the 
public good. Or, as my predecessor Axel Weber likes to say: “We need to put the market 
back into the financial markets.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Two aspects are crucial here: the loss-absorbing capacity of banks – that is, their capital – 
and their resolvability. 
With regard to capital, a lot has already been done. Basel III has increased considerably the 
demands for both: the quantity and the quality of bank capital. But will that be enough? 
Second, the capital rules that are binding as of today are risk-weighted. As a general rule, 
this  makes  sense:  otherwise,  banks  have  an  incentive  to  invest  in  the  riskiest  assets.  But 
risk-weighting also means that there are potentially two ways in which sufficiently high capital 
ratios may come about: high equity or low risk weights. If meeting the requirements is based 
on the latter, the capital buffer might prove to be a mirage when push comes to shove. 
This is why we have to supplement the risk-weighted approach with an unweighted capital 
ratio: the leverage ratio. From this year on, banks are required to disclose the leverage ratio. 
But  transparency  alone  is  not  enough.  Now,  we  need  to  make  sure  that  after  a  final 
calibration, the leverage ratio becomes a binding Pillar 1 requirement by 2018. 
But capital shields against losses only up to a point. And in any case, if the business model is 
no longer viable, the bank must be allowed to fail – otherwise, incentives are stunted for bank 
managers to exercise prudence and to improve efficiency. 
Regarding  the  development  of  resolution  regimes,  progress  has  been  made,  although  in 
some  countries  more  so  than  in  others.  One  crucial  issue  still  needs  to  be  resolved:  the 
establishment  of  a  common  standard  for  bail-inable  capital,  the  so-called  Total  Loss 
Absorbing Capacity, or TLAC. 
Here, it is imperative that this insurance can really be called upon when needed. And this 
means that a bank should be discouraged from holding the bail-in debt of another bank, as in 
the  event  of  a  system-wide  financial  crisis,  the  insurance  has  to  be  provided  by  less-
leveraged market participants. Otherwise, the crisis might be spread instead of contained. 
The treatment of sovereign debt 
3. 
The importance of realigning risk and return has come to the fore with regard to yet another 
issue: the regulatory treatment of sovereign debt, which is the second financial stability facet 
of debt I would like to touch upon. 
Currently, the proposal to end the preferential treatment of sovereign debt is being dealt with 
in the same way as physical exercise is. Everybody agrees it’s a good thing in theory. But in 
practice, it’s very hard to get off the couch. 
Hence, as of now, sovereign debt denominated in an advanced country’s own currency is still 
considered risk-free. Danièle Nouy recently grasped the nettle and pointed out: “Sovereigns 
are not risk-free assets. That has been demonstrated, so now we have to react.” 
I  wholeheartedly  concur  and  have  repeatedly  asked  to  put  this  issue  on  the  regulatory 
agenda. Sovereign debt needs to be backed by capital, and exposure to a single sovereign 
must be capped, just as is the case for any private debtor. 
I  welcome  that  the  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign  debt  is  now  being  discussed  by  the 
Basel Committee. But if these discussions fail to produce an agreement, we need to move 
forward  with  a  European  solution.  In  contrast  to  other  jurisdictions,  the  Eurosystem  is  for 
good reasons forbidden to act as lender of last resort for governments. The risk profile of 
euro-area sovereign debt is therefore different. 
The tax deductibility of interest 
4. 
As Benjamin Franklin famously said, nothing is certain except death and taxes. But actually, 
this timeless quip does not apply to debt. Interest expenses are tax-deductible, while equity 
disbursements are not. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
How  sensitive  are  banks  to  this  difference  in  tax  treatment?  A  study5  by  IMF  economists 
suggests that they are as sensitive as any other firm. What does this imply for the leverage of 
banks? 
The  IMF  economists  estimate  that  abolishing  the  preferential  tax  treatment  of  debt  would 
raise  average  unweighted  bank  equity  by  2.2  to  4.2  percentage  points.  Even  though  the 
authors caution that the effect is likely to be lower for the biggest banks, these numbers are 
sizable by any measure, especially considering that the proposed Basel III leverage ratio is 
3%. 
Doing away with the preferential tax treatment of debt could therefore provide a major boon 
for financial stability. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen, debt  is  like  oxygen:  indispensable for  economic  life,  but  when  you 
overdose on it, you first get high, and then you faint. 
Air quality regulation has made great strides over the last decades, at least in the advanced 
countries. I hope we can replicate this regulatory progress with regard to debt as well. And I 
am confident that today’s conference will contribute to this process. 
                                                
5   R A de Mooij, M Keen and M Oriharai (2013). “Taxation, Bank Leverage, and Financial Crises”. IMF Working 
Paper No. 13/48. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
