  Daniel Mminele: The globalised nature of central banking 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
INSEAD Alumni Association Dialogue, Pretoria, 28 May 2015. 
 Introduction 
Good evening, and welcome to the South African Reserve Bank. 
INSEAD is internationally recognised for excellence in business education. It is not only one 
of the largest business schools in the world; INSEAD also has a strong tradition of promoting 
diversity, with close on 90 different nationalities being represented in each annual intake. I 
gather that the South African Alumni Association has 580 members who have attended both 
MBA and executive level courses at INSEAD. 
It is a pleasure to host and participate in this Dialogue with you this evening, particularly in 
light of the fact that many of you are in senior and executive positions in large companies 
and hence are important stakeholders in addressing the challenges confronting our country 
today.  
The world has become increasingly globalised. This is clearly evident in economic indicators 
on  capital  movements  and  foreign  direct  investments,  international  trade,  technology 
transfers,  and  the  expansion  of  cross-border  activity  of  multinational  firms.  Thus,  global 
considerations  are  always  on  the  radar  screen  of  policymakers,  especially  those  in  small 
open economies like South Africa. In the case of monetary policy, factors such as oil price 
developments,  capital  flows,  global  inflation  trends,  and  exchange-rate  developments  are 
some of the considerations that have a bearing on policy stance determination. 
However, knowing that many of you would have read our MPC statement of last week, my 
remarks  today  will  not  focus  on  policy,  at  least  not  directly.  I  would  rather  like  to  use  this 
opportunity to talk about the globalised nature of central banking. In essence, my remarks 
will focus on how the financial crisis of 2007/08 as well as the role of international forums 
(such as the G-20, the International Monetary Fund, and BRICS) in responding to the crisis, 
have impacted on the work of central banks. This will also provide the opportunity for me to 
share  with  you  the  involvement  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  in  these  international 
forums, which complements the interest-rate setting mandate of the Bank. 
Monetary policy before and after the crisis 
Much has been written about how globalisation might impact on the work of central banks 
and whether it weakens the effectiveness of domestic monetary policy.  
Some  have  argued  that  globalisation  does  indeed  dilute  monetary  policy’s  effectiveness 
through  its  impact  on  the  structure  and  functioning  of  markets,  while  it  also  pitches  global 
factors as more prominent drivers of domestic outcomes. 
Others  have  pointed  to  the  benefits  emanating  from  risk-sharing  and  reduced  volatility  in 
financial  markets,  as  globalisation,  helps  to  increase  liquidity  in  financial  markets,  for 
example. 
As  with  everything,  one  could  argue  equally  for  both  sides  on  the  costs  and  benefits  of 
globalisation, but, needless to say, impacts will differ across countries and regions depending 
on, among others, the level of development of their financial markets, the openness of their 
economies,  and the  credibility  of  their  monetary  and fiscal  authorities. Of  importance for  a 
policymaker  is  understanding  the  influences  and  risks  associated  with  globalisation  and 
ensuring 
formulation  and 
that 
implementation. 
the  risks  are  adequately  accounted 
in  policy 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Lucas Papademos, a former Vice-President of the European Central Bank, has argued that 
globalisation  in  general  does  not  fundamentally  undermine  the  effectiveness  of  monetary 
policy  in  preserving  price  stability.  He  has  acknowledged  the  positive  effects  of  financial 
globalisation on the efficiency of financial markets, on global risk-sharing and, ultimately, on 
economic growth worldwide, but he has also admitted that the global financial crisis revealed 
a number of weaknesses in the globalised financial system, where tensions in one segment 
of the market in one country can rapidly spread across other markets and countries.1 
The global financial crisis certainly elevated the subject of globalisation and its impact on the 
world of central banking. We now have first-hand knowledge of how financial globalisation in 
particular can alter the monetary policy landscape and influence the nature and magnitude of 
spillovers  and  spillbacks.  Certainly,  the  world  of  central  banking  has  undergone  dramatic 
changes since 2007: unprecedented reductions in policy rates to the zero lower bound and 
beyond,  and  the  utilisation  of  balance-sheet  policies  in  non-traditional  ways,  which  have 
become  the  norm  in  some  advanced  economies.  These  actions  had  repercussions  for 
financial  markets  through  increased  capital  flows,  among  others,  with  emerging  markets 
bearing the brunt of these developments. 
We  are  now  being  reminded  that  emerging  markets  should  prepare  themselves  for  the 
possibility of further market dislocations given the prevailing environment of divergent policy 
settings, with the Fed and the UK on paths of monetary policy tightening while the euro area 
and Japan are likely to maintain a loose policy stance for the immediate future. 
Besides  influencing  monetary  policy,  the  crisis  also  revealed  that  central  banks  could  no 
longer see themselves purely as overseers of monetary policy but that this mandate had to 
be broadened to explicitly include financial stability. As the Bank for International Settlements 
has  put  it,  “the  global  financial  crisis  has  shaken  the  foundations  of  the  deceptively 
comfortable pre-crisis central banking world”.2 
The  conventional  wisdom  which  held  prior  to  the  crisis  has  proved  inadequate.  It  is  now 
generally  accepted  that  price  stability  alone  is  insufficient  for  macroeconomic  stability.  In 
addition,  we  now  know  that  there  is  no  neat  separation  between  monetary  and  financial 
stability functions, and that if each central bank looks after its own economy, this does not 
automatically  lead  to  an  appropriate  global  monetary  stance.  Further,  interest-rate  policy 
alone  is  not  enough.  The  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  needs  to  go 
beyond  a  microprudential  perspective  towards  a  macroprudential  orientation,  with  central 
banks playing a key role in this process. 
It was the financial crisis which brought to the fore the need for greater global cooperation, 
not  only  among  advanced  economies  but  also  in  emerging-market  economies  who  would 
prove  to  be  the  drivers  of  global  growth  during  the  crisis.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  the 
prominence of the G-20 was raised to that of a Leaders’ Summit in 2009. There was clear 
recognition that there needed to be greater inclusivity to effectively mitigate the damage of 
the financial crisis, which had clearly highlighted the vulnerability and the interlinkages of the 
global financial system. 
The international response 
Let me now turn to the work undertaken by the international forums in which the Bank is an 
active  participant  (including  the  G-20,  BRICS,  and  the  Bank for  International  Settlements), 
                                                
1  Globalisation  and  central  bank  policies,  a  speech  by  Lucas  Papademos  at  the  Bridge  Forum  Dialogue, 
22 January 2008. 
2  BIS Working Papers No. 353, Central banking post-crisis: what compass for uncharted waters? by Claudio 
Borio. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  with the objective of ensuring that outcomes reached are in the best interest of not only the 
global economy but also emerging markets, South Africa, and the region. 
Since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  the  G-20  assumed  a  leading  role  in  trying  to  address  the 
consequences  thereof  in  an  effort  to  reduce  the  negative  repercussions  for  the  global 
economy. This entailed, inter alia, the G-20 taking the lead in addressing the shortcomings of 
the  global  financial  system,  enhancing  financial  safety  nets,  and,  together  with  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  ensuring  a  more  sound  and  stable  financial  and 
regulatory framework. 
The  G-20  played  a  prominent  role  in  shaping  the  elements  of  the  work  programme  of the 
International Monetary Fund, or the IMF. Let me highlight some of the initiatives that the IMF 
undertook in response to requests from the G-20. 
Firstly, the IMF’s lending capacity was boosted to ensure that it would comfortably meet the 
ever-increasing  financing  needs  of  countries  hit  by  the  global  financial  crisis,  thereby 
strengthening  global  economic  and  financial  stability.  The  G-20  agreed  in  April  2009  to 
increase  the  borrowed  resources  available  to  the  IMF  by  up  to  US$750  billion,  tripling  the 
total pre-crisis lending resources of about US$250 billion. In April 2010, the IMF Executive 
Board adopted a proposal on an expanded and more flexible New Arrangements to Borrow, 
or NAB, under which the NAB grew to approximately US$560 billion. This included 13 new 
participating countries and institutions, including a number of emerging-market countries that 
made  significant  contributions  to  this  large  expansion.  In  April  2012,  the  International 
Monetary and Financial Committee3 (IMFC) and the G-20 Finance Ministers and Governors 
jointly  agreed  to  further  enhance  the  IMF’s  resources  through  a  new  round  of  bilateral 
borrowing.  This  round  included  35  agreements  totalling  US$385  billion.  South  Africa 
participated in all these initiatives and contributed US$2 billion to the 2012 initiative. 
The  IMF,  together  with  the  G-20,  revamped  its  lending  framework  to  provide  greater 
emphasis on crisis prevention tools. For example, the Flexible Credit Line was introduced in 
April  2009  and  enhanced  in  August  2010  as  a  lending  tool  and  form  of  insurance  for 
countries with very strong fundamentals; qualified countries can have upfront, large access 
to IMF resources, with no ongoing conditions given the strength of their policy frameworks. 
The  Precautionary  and  Liquidity  Line  was  also  designed  to  meet  the  liquidity  needs  of 
member  countries  with  sound  economic 
remaining 
vulnerabilities. 
In  an  attempt  to  strengthen  its  credibility  and  legitimacy,  the  IMF  undertook  to  reform  its 
governance  structure  and,  in  April  2008  and  November  2010,  agreed  on  wide-ranging 
governance  reforms  to  reflect  the  increasing  importance  of  emerging-market  countries. 
However,  the  latter  reforms  have  unfortunately  not  been  implemented  yet  and  continue  to 
await ratification by the US. Nonetheless, the 14th General Review of Quotas will double the 
IMF’s permanent resources to US$656 billion. 
In  recent  years,  the  IMF  has  undertaken  major  initiatives  to  strengthen  surveillance  to 
respond to a more globalised and interconnected world. These initiatives include revamping 
the  legal  framework  for  surveillance  to  cover  spillovers,  a  greater  analysis  of  risks  and 
financial systems, stepping up assessments of members’ external positions, and responding 
more promptly to concerns of member countries. 
All these changes were introduced with input from the G-20, and South Africa, as a member 
of the G-20, actively participated in these discussions and decisions. 
fundamentals  but  with  some 
                                                
3  The  IMF  Board  of  Governors  is  advised  by  two  ministerial  committees:  the  International  Monetary  and 
Financial Committee (IMFC) and the Development Committee. The IMFC has 24 members, drawn from the 
pool  of  187  governors  of  the  IMF.  The  IMFC  discusses  matters  of  common  concern  affecting  the  global 
economy and advises the IMF on the direction of its work. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In the area of financial regulation, the G-20 has worked closely with the Basel Committee on 
Banking  Supervision  and  other  standard-setting  bodies  to  agree  on  and  implement  key 
regulatory  reforms,  including  ensuring  resilient  financial  institutions,  ending  the  “too-big-to-
fail”  approach,  addressing  shadow-banking  risks,  and  making  over-the-counter  derivative 
markets  safer.  Basel  III  was  endorsed  by  the  G-20  in  November  2010.  The  task  of 
developing  new  standards  was  complex  and  time-consuming,  requiring  cross-border 
cooperation to ensure consistency on a multitude of issues between central banks, ministries 
of  finance,  regulators  and  supervisors,  international  organisations,  and  financial  standard-
setting bodies. While the Basle III rules have been agreed upon, the next phase of a timely, 
full, and consistent implementation is just as important to ensure level playing fields between 
jurisdictions  and  financial  institutions  and  to  address  any  unintended  consequences  of  the 
reforms. Due to the globalised nature of the financial system, it will be important to continue 
analysing  the  effects  of  individual  jurisdictions’  policies  on  each  other  to  understand  the 
positive and negative spillovers.  
The participation of the South African Reserve Bank 
The Bank has a particular role to play in ensuring the stability and resilience of South African 
financial institutions and markets, thus contributing to and promoting globally stable financial 
systems. The Bank fulfils this responsibility on an international, regional, and domestic level. 
Similarly  to  many  other  jurisdictions,  South  Africa  is  also  reforming  its  domestic  financial 
regulatory  architecture  and  arrangements.  In  addition  to  regulating  and  supervising  the 
banking  sector  and  overseeing  the  national  payment  system,  under  the  proposed  Twin 
Peaks model of regulation the Bank will also be responsible for the prudential regulation of 
the  insurance  sector  and  other  types  of  financial  market  infrastructures,  and  will  fulfil  the 
function of the resolution authority. While the Bank readies itself to take on more regulatory 
responsibilities  on  the  insurance  side,  South  Africa,  through  its  current  supervisor,  the 
Financial Services Board, is already a respected partner in the International Association of 
Insurance Supervisors, having been one of the seven co-founders in 1994. 
Financial  regulatory  standard-setting  bodies  such  as  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision have expanded their governance structures to be 
more representative and to reflect the globalised nature of the financial system. This includes 
considering the particular role of central banks as direct financial supervisory authorities, or 
where they act in an advisory role to their governments. As mentioned earlier, the Bank is 
actively engaged in the activities of international financial standard-setting bodies as well as 
the activities of the G-20 forum and the IMF. To name but two examples, in 2009 the Bank 
formally joined the membership of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and of the 
Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (formerly  known  as  the  CPSS:  the 
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems). Through National Treasury, South Africa 
has been a plenary member of the Financial Stability Board since 2010, and in early 2015 
was allocated a second seat along with five other emerging-market countries at the plenary 
table.  The  Bank  has  assumed  the  position  of  an  additional  plenary  member  and,  together 
with National Treasury, can use this opportunity to influence the agenda to focus on issues 
that  especially  affect  emerging  markets.  It  should,  however,  be  clear  that  even  before  the 
Bank  formally  became  a  member  of  the  above-mentioned  bodies,  it  continuously  followed 
and,  where  appropriate,  aligned  its  own  policies  and  procedures  with  the  guidance  and 
principles issued by these international standard-setting bodies. 
South  Africa’s  membership  of  these  international  standard-setting  bodies  is  accompanied 
with  the  requirement  that  we  comply  with  the  standards  developed  by  these  bodies.  This 
compliance process includes annual IMF Article IV consultations, IMF / World Bank Financial 
System  Stability  Assessments  (FSSAs)  and  Reports  on  Observance  of  Standards  and 
Codes  (ROSCs),  peer  reviews  by  other  G-20  member  countries  on  our  Framework  for 
Economic Growth, Financial Stability Board country peer reviews, and the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision  process to determine the adoption of Basel III capital and liquidity 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  standards for banks through the Regulatory Consistency Assessment Programme (RCAP). 
The Financial Stability Board released its review on South Africa in 2013, the IMF completed 
an FSSA and three ROSCs in 2014, and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has 
almost completed its RCAP on capital and liquidity compliance. 
In  the  G-20  forum,  there  is  much  discussion,  analysis,  and  sharing  of  views  on  monetary 
policy  spillovers,  particularly  in  the  current  environment  of  increasingly  divergent  monetary 
policies by some of the advanced countries. Other topics that have received attention within 
the  G-20  context  have  included  oil  price  developments,  investment  spending,  and  tax 
reforms. These issues are discussed at ministerial and governor level, and these discussions 
certainly help in creating greater awareness of policy actions and a better understanding of 
the spillover and spillback effects that countries could be subjected to. The overarching focus 
of  discussion  at  the  G-20  more  recently  has  been  how  individual  member  countries  can 
devise growth strategies which would contribute to the objective of increasing global growth 
by  an  additional  2  per  cent  over  the  next  five  years.  These  strategies  are  continuously 
evaluated to ensure that they remain applicable and implementable, and they are also peer-
reviewed to ensure that countries adhere to their commitments. 
In addition to our involvement in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Governor 
attends the bimonthly meetings of the Bank for International Settlements, which provides a 
forum  for  governors  and  senior  officials  to  share  country  experiences  and  to  discuss  the 
outlook  for  the  global  economy  and  financial  markets.  The  Bank  also  participates  in  the 
Meeting  of  Governors  from  major  emerging-market  economies.  In  today’s  interconnected 
world,  having  such  a  forum  to  discuss  issues  and  challenges  specific  to  emerging-market 
economies  is  extremely  valuable.  Furthermore,  in  many  instances,  the  Bank  is  the  only 
representative from the continent and is thus able to provide an African perspective on some 
of the economic challenges confronting the global economy.  
The Bank’s interactions are not limited to international bodies but include regional bodies and 
less  formal  but  equally  important  engagements,  such  as  with  home-  and  host-country 
supervisors  through  supervisory  colleges  and  crisis  management  groups.  To  promote 
regional financial integration, the Bank is fully supportive of and active on committees such 
as  the  Association  of  African  Central  Banks,  the  SADC  Committee  for  Central  Bank 
Governors  (CCBG),  the  Community  of  African  Banking  Supervisors  (CABS),  and  the 
Financial Stability Board’s Regional Consultative Group for sub-Saharan Africa. The work of 
these important committees contributes towards the development and implementation of an 
effective  financial  sector  regulatory  framework  in  Africa,  and  promotes  growth  and 
development on the continent. 
Being in the privileged position of participating in the development of international standards 
and principles brings with it certain responsibilities. Those who participate in international and 
regional financial standard-setting bodies have the obligation to play a proactive role, to use 
our  strengthened  voice,  to  be  ready  to  take  constructive  positions  on  the  various  reforms, 
and to consider the views of those countries who do not sit at the table. The Bank is fully 
committed to fulfilling this responsibility in all its engagements. 
As you are aware, South Africa is also part of the BRICS grouping of countries. We meet 
ahead  of  G-20  meetings  to  exchange  views  on  issues  affecting  the  global  economy.  In 
addition,  these  countries  have  committed  themselves  to  supporting  one  another  and 
undertaking collaborative initiatives that will benefit BRICS as a group. In this regard, BRICS 
has  agreed  to  the  establishment  of  the  Contingent  Reserve  Arrangement  (CRA),  which 
BRICS  leaders  agreed  to  in  July  2014.  The  CRA  is  a  self-managed  arrangement,  the 
purpose of which is to serve as a financial safety net, complementing existing international 
monetary  and financial  arrangements. The  initial  size  of  the  CRA  is  US$100  billion;  South 
Africa contributes US$5 billion and is eligible to receive US$10 billion in support. The CRA is 
made up of swap arrangements between the BRICS countries and will be used to forestall 
short-term balance-of-payments pressures, provide mutual support, and strengthen financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  stability. The CRA is beneficial to South Africa as it adds a layer of financial support in times 
of  crises.  Currently,  the  BRICS  central  banks  are  negotiating  the  Inter  Central  Bank 
Agreement which operationalises the CRA; this is set to be finalised before the next BRICS 
Summit in Russia in July 2015. 
Conclusion 
The recent crisis has highlighted the importance of effective cooperation and coordination by 
central  banks  as  well  as  the  benefits  of  improved  information-sharing  between  financial 
supervisors and central banks. The experiences of the past few years have highlighted the 
need  to  deepen  our  understanding  of  how  globalisation  affects  both  monetary  policy  and 
financial  stability.  This,  in  turn,  facilitates  a  better  assessment  of  the  potential  systemic 
implications  of  financial  shocks,  which  should  assist  policymakers  in  addressing  market 
tensions faced by individual institutions. 
Through forums such as the G-20, the IMF, and BRICS, much work has been undertaken to 
strengthen  the  global  economy  and  the  global  financial  system,  and  to  better  identify, 
understand, and manage risks.  
South  Africa  and  the  Bank,  as  an  active  participant  in  these  international  forums,  always 
strive  to  ensure  that  the  interests  of  the  country  and  of  the  continent  are  represented  in 
discussions on the global economy. 
Allow me, in closing, to leave you with a plea. You have all been privileged to attend one of 
the world’s leading business schools and have come back equipped to assume the important 
roles  you  occupy  in  your  respective  companies.  With  the  release  of  the  most  recent 
unemployment  figures  earlier  this  week,  which  in  no  small  measure  have  to  do  with 
education and skills levels, I would encourage you, if you are not already doing so, to get 
involved  in  coaching  and  mentorship  programmes  to  share  your  insights,  expertise,  and 
experiences. We celebrated Africa Day on Monday. With the vast potential and opportunities 
that our continent offers, which need good business leadership to partner with governments 
and the public sector, would it not be nice to add, somewhere in the near future, an African 
INSEAD campus to the locations in Europe, Asia, and the Middle East? 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
