  R Gandhi: Problem loan management & MSME financing 
Valedictory  speech  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  a 
workshop  organised  by  CRISIL  (The  Credit  Rating  Information  Services  of  India  Ltd.)  on 
“Credit Risk and Problem Loan Management”, Goa, 30 January 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Mr A K Choudhary and Mr Nethaji B are gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
I am very glad to be talking to you on a subject which is very contemporary and very 
critical for the economy. Both the Government of India and the Reserve Bank have long been 
convinced  of  the  contribution,  and  of  the  enormous  potential,  of  the  SME  sector  to  the 
economic  growth,  employment  and  income  generation  for  vast  masses  of  the  country. 
Recent  Government  pronouncements  about  “Make  in  India”  are  fundamentally  based  on 
these  convictions.  Therefore,  detailed  discussions  and  debate  on  the  ways,  procedure, 
precautions and follow-up on SME financing are very apt and timely. I appreciate the efforts 
of CRISIL and others in this regard. I understand that in this workshop you all had discussed 
about SME Loan Life Cycle Management, Credit Scoring as a technique for credit appraisal, 
strategies and tools to monitor SME loans and handle problem SME loans, including building 
early warning systems, etc. I am sure all of you have been benefited by these discussions. 
Let me dwell a bit more on the problem loan management, as currently it is a serious issue 
for the banking sector. 
Asset quality 
2.  
Asset quality is an important parameter to measure the health of the banks. In the 
last twenty years or so, the Gross Non-Performing Asset Ratio as well Net Non-Performing 
Asset Ratio of Indian banks have been showing a declining trend due to many factors, and 
very significantly due to the sustained improvements in the credit risk management practices 
adopted by the banks. The gross non-performing assets (NPAs), in percentage terms, have 
declined steadily from 15.70% at end March 1997 to 2.35% at end March 2011. However, 
asset quality of the banking system has suffered significant deterioration in the recent years. 
NPAs expressed in terms of Gross NPA Ratio increased to 4.11% at the end of March 2014. 
During the period, the ‘restructured but standard loans’ (restructured in terms of regulatory 
dispensation  provided  to  banks  for  supporting  viable  accounts  facing  temporary  difficulties 
and in line with public policy imperatives) as a % of gross advances increased considerably 
from 1.14% in March 2008 to 5.87% in March 2014. There has been further deterioration in 
asset  quality  during  March  to  September  2014  and  the  GNPA  ratio  and  restructured 
advances ratio increased to 4.54% and 6.13% respectively at the end of September 2014. As 
such,  the  overall  stressed  advances  (NPAs  +  Restructured  advances)  remained  high  with 
considerable increase in the recent period working out to 10.67% for the banking system as 
at  the  end  of  September  2014.  In  terms  of  value,  with  Gross  NPAs  at  ₹2798  billion  and 
Restructured standard advances at ₹3780 billion, the total stressed advances amounted to 
₹6578 billion at the end of September 2014. 
Stressed sectors 
Based  on  the  levels  of  stress  in  different  sub-sectors,  it  was  observed  that 
3.  
(i) ‘infrastructure’ (ii) ‘Iron and Steel’ (iii) Textiles (iv) Mining (including Coal) and (v) Aviation 
services had significantly higher level of stress and thus these sub-sectors / segments could 
be taken as ‘stressed’ sectors in the current scenario. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Macro-stress tests 
4.  
Macro-stress  tests  are  conducted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  ascertain  the 
resilience of banks against macroeconomic shocks. The results of this analysis presented in 
the Financial Stability Report-December 2014, suggest that under the baseline scenario, the 
GNPA ratio is expected to be around 4.0% of total advances as at the end of March 2016. 
However, if the macroeconomic conditions deteriorate, the GNPA ratio may increase to 6.3% 
under severe stress scenario by March 2016. 
Drivers for deterioration in asset quality 
5.  
Theoretically speaking, there could be various factors which may cause a good loan 
to turn into a problem loan. Some of the external reasons could be economic recession, non-
payment  in  other  countries,  inputs  /  power  shortage,  price  escalation,  accidents  /  natural 
calamities,  and  changes  in  government  policies  in  excise  /  import  duties,  pollution  control 
norms,  delay  in  disbursal  of  loans  by  lenders,  etc.  Internal  reasons  for  loan  accounts 
becoming  problem  loans  could  be  diversion  of  funds  for  expansion  /  diversification  / 
modernization / for taking up new projects, for helping / promoting associate concerns, time / 
cost  overrun  during  the  project  implementation  stage,  business  (product,  marketing,  etc.) 
failure, inefficient management, strained labour relations, inappropriate technology / technical 
problems, and product obsolescence, etc. 
6.  
The  current  deterioration  in  the  asset  quality  of  Indian  banks  could  mainly  be 
attributed  to  domestic  and  global  economic  slowdown,  delays  in  statutory  and  other 
approvals,  especially  for  projects  under  implementation,  relatively  aggressive  lending 
practices  during  upturn  (2003–08),  as  evidenced  from  high  corporate  leverage,  risk 
concentration,  especially  to  large  greenfield  projects,  and  of  course,  lax  risk  management 
systems of banks, etc. 
NPA management 
7.  
Managing  NPAs  has  a  lot  to  do  with  managing  productive  assets  and  ensuring 
effective corporate governance. Management of NPAs begins with the realisation of benefits 
that  accrue in  running  a  quality  advances  portfolio  and  warrants  a  better  understanding  of 
risks  in  lending.  The  Board  of  Directors  has  to  decide  a  strategy  on  NPA  management 
keeping  in  view  the  regulatory  norms,  the  business  environment,  the  asset  profile,  the 
available  resources,  etc.  The  strategy  should  be  reflected  in  Board  approved  policies  and 
procedures to monitor implementation. 
The essential components of sound NPA management are: 
8.  
Prevention of NPAs through prudent underwriting 
(i) 
Effective early alert system 
(ii) 
Quick and effective remedial measures to prevent slippage 
(iii) 
Faster resolution of post slippage 
(iv) 
9.  
A  multi-pronged  strategy  of  preventing  slippage  of  standard  assets  into  NPA 
category and reducing NPAs through cash recovery, up gradation, compromise, legal means 
etc., is called for. 
Restructuring 
10.  
Generally,  stress  in  borrowal  accounts  is  more  likely  to  be  resolved  in  terms  of 
recovery if the company is in operation. For this to be effective there must be a system of 
identifying the weakness in accounts at an early stage. Banks should put in place an ‘Early 
Alert’ system that captures early warning signals in respect of accounts showing first signs of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  weakness. This would help the banks to take remedial measures and prevent the account 
from becoming NPA. Banks may restructure / reschedule the accounts of viable entities and 
assist the entity to tide over the temporary difficulties faced by them. 
11.  
Once  a  weak  account  is  identified,  the  bank  needs  to  consider  various  corrective 
actions.  One  of  the  corrective  options  is  restructuring.  In  spite  of  their  best  efforts  and 
intentions,  sometimes  borrowers  find  themselves  in  financial  difficulty  because  of  factors 
beyond  their  control  and  also  due  to  certain  internal  reasons.  For  the  revival  of  the  viable 
entities  as  well  as  for  the  safety  of  the  money  lent  by  the  banks,  timely  support  through 
restructuring in genuine cases is called for. The objective of restructuring is to preserve the 
value of viable entities that are affected by certain internal and external factors and minimize 
the  losses  to  the  creditors  and  other  stakeholders.  We  already  have  a  detailed  regulatory 
prescription,  separately  for  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  mechanism  for  consortium 
advances and standalone restructuring by individual banks. 
12.  
The  objective  of  the  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  (CDR)  framework  is  to  ensure 
timely  and  transparent  mechanism  for  restructuring  the  corporate  debts  of  viable  entities 
facing  problems,  outside  the  purview  of  BIFR,  DRT  and  other  legal  proceedings,  for  the 
benefit  of  all  concerned.  In  particular,  the  framework  aims  at  preserving  viable  corporates 
that  are  affected  by  certain  internal  and  external  factors  and  minimize  the  losses  to  the 
creditors  and  other  stakeholders 
through  an  orderly  and  coordinated  restructuring 
programme. The CDR Mechanism has been designed to facilitate restructuring of advances 
of borrowers enjoying credit facilities from more than one bank / Financial Institution (FI) in a 
coordinated manner. 
Framework for revitalising distressed assets 
13.  
The Reserve Bank of India has released in early 2014 a Framework for Revitalising 
Distressed Assets in the Economy. The Framework outlines a corrective action plan that will 
incentivise early identification of problem cases, timely restructuring of accounts which are 
considered to be viable, and taking prompt steps by banks for recovery or sale of unviable 
accounts. The main features of the Framework are: 
(i) 
Recovery 
Central Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC) has been set up by RBI 
to  collect,  store  and  disseminate  credit  information  with  the  reporting  entities  in 
respect  of  borrowers  enjoying  aggregate  exposure  (funded  +  non  funded)  of 
₹50 million and above. 
Early  formation  of  a  lenders’  committee  (Joint  Lenders  Forum)  with  timelines  to 
agree to a plan for resolution; mandatory beyond the exposure of ₹1000 million and 
above. The Corrective Action Plan may include any one of the following: 
a)  Rectification 
b)  Restructuring 
c) 
Incentive and disincentive structure for lenders to take corrective actions in a timely 
manner 
Incentives for lenders to agree collectively and quickly to a plan: better regulatory 
treatment  of  stressed  assets  if  a  resolution  plan  is  underway,  accelerated 
provisioning if no agreement can be reached. 
Improvement in current restructuring process: Independent evaluation of large value 
restructurings mandated, with a focus on viable plans and a fair sharing of losses 
(and future possible upside) between promoters and creditors. 
More expensive future borrowing for borrowers who do not co-operate with lenders 
in resolution. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Support to viable but stressed Accounts 
14.  
Despite the best efforts by banks, slippages do occur. Once an account slips into 
NPA category, then the focus should shift to upgradation. At this juncture, it is important to 
understand  that  the  Reserve  Bank  has  not  barred  banks  from  sanctioning  need  based 
additional  finance  to  borrowers  whose  accounts  are  classified  as  NPAs.  On  the  contrary, 
Reserve  Bank’s  extant  guidelines  envisage  a  situation  where  banks  may  need  to  sanction 
additional finance to borrowers under stress to revive / rehabilitate the borrower and to preserve 
the economic value of the asset. Mere classification of an account as NPA need not result in 
withdrawal of support to viable borrowal accounts. However, while considering their support to 
accounts under stress, banks should make proper distinction between wilful-defaulters / non-
cooperative  /  unscrupulous  borrowers  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  borrowers 
defaulting on their debt obligations due to circumstances beyond their control. 
Sale of NPAs 
15.  
In the event of failure of the above mentioned measures, banks could resort to filing 
suits  with  Debt  Recovery  Tribunals  or  invoke  the  provisions  of  the  Securitisation  and 
Reconstruction  of  Financial  Assets  and  Enforcement  of  Security  Interest  Act,  2002.  Banks 
may also sell their NPAs to asset reconstruction companies. The RBI has granted Certificate 
of  Registration  (CoR)  to  14  ARCs  so  far.  In  addition  to  asset  reconstruction  companies, 
banks may also explore selling the NPAs to other banks, non-banking finance companies or 
other  financial  institutions,  who  have  the  requisite  skills  to  resolve  the  NPAs  efficiently.  In 
February  2014,  regulations  on  sale  of  stressed  accounts  have  been  amended  to  facilitate 
emergence of a market for distressed assets. 
Recovery channels 
16.  
Despite  various  corrective  measures,  if  upgradation  is  not  proving  to  be  possible 
due to unviable nature of the borrowers’ business, the bank should take steps to recover the 
loans through any of the recovery options available to them. Among the various channels, 
the amount of NPAs recovered under the SARFAESI Act, 2002 formed almost 80% of the 
total amount of NPAs recovered in 2013–14. The SARFAESI Act has, thus, been the most 
important means of recovery of NPAs. 
NPAs of SCBs Recovered through Various Channels 
(Amount in ₹ Billion) 
Recovery Channel 
Year  No. 
Particulars 
2012-
13 
2013-
14 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
No. of cases referred 
Amount involved 
Amount recovered* 
3 as per cent of 2 
No. of cases referred 
Amount involved 
Amount recovered* 
3 as per cent of 2 
Lok 
Adalats 
8,40,691 
66 
4 
6.1 
16,36,957 
232 
14 
6.2 
DRTs 
SARFAESI 
Act 
13,408 
310 
44 
14.1 
28,258 
553 
53 
9.5 
1,90,537 
681 
185 
27.1 
1,94,707 
946 
244 
25.8 
Total 
10,44,636 
1,058 
232 
21.9 
18,59,922 
1,731 
311 
18 
Notes  :  1.  *:  Refers  to  amount  recovered  during  the  given  year,  which  could  be  with  reference  to  cases 
referred during the given year as well as during the earlier years.     2. DRTs: Debt Recovery Tribunals. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  However,  the  present  legal  system  is  unable  to  cope  with  the  mammoth  task, 
17.  
considering  the  ever  increasing  number  of  suits  and  the  limited  infrastructure  available  at 
DRTs  /  courts.  Further,  there  are  various  issues  relating  to  DRT  and  SARFAESI,  which 
needs  to  be  strengthened  to  make  these  channels  more  efficient  and  effective.  They  are 
being examined at various levels. 
18.  
the borrower to optimise its recovery in present value term. 
Banks also explore entering into a compromise settlement / one time settlement with 
As this workshop was meant to specifically discuss SME financing, let me share a 
MSME financing 
19.  
few thoughts on this matter. 
20.  
As  I  mentioned  in  the  beginning,  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSMEs) 
play  a  major  role  in  economic  development,  particularly  in  emerging  countries.  There  is 
heightened  attention  by  the  international  community  on  MSME  sector.  This  is  primarily 
because of the critical importance of job creation in the recovery cycle following the recent 
financial crisis, and the MSME’s potentials in that respect. 
21.  
Yet,  lack  of  access  to  finance  is  a  major  obstacle  to  their  growth.  Although  the 
situation can differ among countries and individual businesses, the financing gap for SMEs in 
the  developing  country  has  a  few  well-accepted  causes.  These  include  Information 
asymmetries,  higher  risks,  Sizeable  transaction  costs  and  a  lack  of  adequate  collateral. 
These factors can be exacerbated by institutional factors within a country. Finally, there are a 
number of “demand side” considerations that deserve more attention. 
22.  
The  following  three  factors  play  a  considerable  role  in  perpetuating  the  MSME 
financing gap – The poor quality of projects seeking funding, the inability of MSMEs to make 
the best possible use of available resources of funding and the negative attitude displayed by 
MSMEs towards equity financing. 
23.  
Unfortunately,  there  is  no  authentic data  available  about  the  SME  financing  gaps. 
The  informal  segment  within  the  SME  sector  is  so  vast  and,  by  definition,  no  authentic 
information about them is available. However, various data sources and studies indicate that 
most of the small firms rely on internal financing and informal sources. 
24.  
A study by the IFC and McKinsey and Company (McKinsey) suggests that there are 
close to 365–445 million micro, small, and medium enterprises in emerging markets of which 
25–30 million are formal SMEs and 55–70 million are formal micro enterprises, while the rest 
(285–345 million) are informal enterprises. According to the same study, close to 45 to 55% 
of the formal SMEs (11–17 million) in the emerging markets do not have access to formal 
institutional loans or overdrafts despite a need for one. The finance gap is far bigger when 
considering the micro and informal enterprises; 65–72% of all MSMEs (240–315 million) in 
emerging  markets  lack  access  to  credit.  The  size  of  the  finance  gap  varies  widely  across 
regions  and  is particularly  daunting  in  Asia  and  Africa.  Some  studies about  SMEs  in  India 
have reported that as high as 93% of their financing needs are met by internal and informal 
sources. 
25.  
In order to scale up the best practices in SME Finance, the G-20 SME Finance Sub-
Group  executed  a  global  SME  Finance  stocktaking  exercise  with  various  SME  finance 
models. This exercise entailed the collection of 164 SME finance models spanning across a 
broad  spectrum  of  interventions,  including:  (i)  legal  and  regulatory  framework;  (ii)  financial 
information infrastructure; (iii) public support schemes; and (iv) private sector initiatives. The 
stocktaking  exercise  confirms  the  rise  in  various  parts  of  the  world  of  specific  business 
models  aimed  at  providing  financial  services  to  SMEs  in  a  cost-effective  manner.  From 
microfinance  up-scaling  to  bank  down-scaling,  including  community  banks,  these  models 
share common characteristics: they reduce cost to serve through intensive use of technology 
and  /  or  the  adoption  of  cost-effective  client-relationship  models;  they  combine  offering  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  savings, transactional, and credit products, with a view to increase generated income; they 
use advanced risk management technology to maximize the risk / reward balance; and, they 
achieve strong focus on the small and / or medium enterprise segment, to help implement 
excellent execution capabilities in the above areas. 
26.  
Hence, the key challenge is to support banks in extending credit facilities to SMEs. It 
will be a greater challenge to reach informal SMEs. This is due to SME intrinsic weaknesses, 
flaws  in  delivery  models  and,  most  importantly,  lingering  deficiencies  in  the  enabling 
environment for financial services: i.e. the financial infra-structure covering accounting and 
auditing standards, credit reporting systems, and collateral and insolvency regimes. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Some other ideas 
27.  
In this workshop, you all had detailed deliberations on how to assess credit needs of 
an SME, how to monitor the relationship and what new techniques you can adopt for this. Let 
me give you a flavour of ideas beyond this: 
(i) 
Reaching informal businesses will have to be built on microfinance approaches. It all 
has  to  start  with  account  relationship.  The  financial  inclusion  programmes  like 
PMJDY  will  facilitate  key  information  inputs  to  banks  about  the  existence  of  the 
MSMEs, whether in formal and in informal segments. Banks should leverage these 
data  and  information  feeds  to  identify  potential  MSMEs  for  suitable  financing 
opportunities. 
Banks will also need to develop ingenious and innovative products suitable for the 
MSMEs. I strongly believe that this aspect needs to be grounded more at the grass 
root  level.  Based  on  broad  parameters  given  by  their  central  /  head  offices,  the 
actual packaging of the products and services will have to happen closer to the field. 
Key elements of such packaging will have to include Risk-sharing facilities. 
Banks will also have to play a much larger role than being the financiers. MSMEs 
often  lack  management  skills,  tools,  governance  and  financial  planning  expertise. 
Banks will have to help these entrepreneurs leverage the RSETI like institutions to 
fill the gaps. 
Another major weakness that inhibits the growth of this sector is the lack of good 
records management by the MSMEs; this often results in poor credit ratings and a 
perception of risky business. Some innovative solutions using cloud computing have 
been tried successfully in some countries like Ghana. Perhaps this can be studied 
and adapted for Indian environment. 
28.  
These  interventions  need  to  be  accompanied  by  enhancements  to  the  enabling 
environment  for  MSME  lending,  such  as  improved  credit  bureaus,  and  collateral  and 
insolvency regimes. For the success of effective SME financing models, it is imperative that 
suitable  supporting  environment  for  the  financial  sector  is  in  place.  In  particular,  financial 
information and the ability to enforce collateral are seen as critical necessities. Weaknesses 
in  these  areas  appear  to  impede  more  aggressive  financial  services  growth  in  developing 
markets. 
29.  
We are very aware of these requirements and have taken several measures in that 
direction.  Our  recent  guidelines,  based  on  Aditya  Puri  Committee  recommendations, 
envisage  that  credit  information  now  will  flow  to  all  credit  bureaus  simultaneously  and 
therefore the financial entities can have a holistic view about any prospective borrower at one 
go.  As  regards  collateral  registry,  steps  have  been  initiated  in  this  direction.  The  Central 
Registry of Securitisations, Asset Reconstruction and Security Interest of India (CERSAI) has 
come on the scene for registering security interests over property. Other types of registry and 
inter-linking registries are also being debated. As regards insolvency, especially for MSMEs, 
as announced in the last Budget, a Committee is working out an insolvency framework. 
(iv) 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Public  support  schemes  (funded  facilities,  guarantee  schemes,  and  state  banks) 
30.  
represent the large majority of the collected models. India has also adopted these strategies. 
CGTSME, MSME lending as a priority sector lending for banks etc measures have been in 
line with this thought. 
31.  
Although  MSME  financing  and  microfinance  models  have  started  yielding  desired 
results,  equity  financing  remains  a  challenge.  Given  that  banking  and  lending  services 
represent the bulk of SME financing in the developing world, especially for small firms, equity 
financing presents an opportunity for the development of a complementary financial product. 
Conclusion 
32.  
To  conclude,  let  me  emphasize  that  increasing  access  to  finance  can  only  be 
successful if qualitative aspects are taken into account. Adhering to principles of responsible 
finance and the G-20 principles on innovative financial inclusion can serve this purpose. It 
should also be noted that although financial access is critical for MSME growth, expansion of 
financial  access  should  not  be  achieved  at  the  cost  of  financial  stability.  Appropriate 
prudential measures need to be exercised while offering finance to MSMEs, in order to avoid 
the potential pitfalls stemming from excessive credit. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
