  William C Dudley: The regional economic outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’s  Economic  Press 
Briefing, New York City, 26 August 2015. 
 Good  morning  and  welcome  to the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’s  Economic  Press 
Briefing.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  with  you  today  about  economic 
conditions in our District. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not those 
of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
Tracking economic conditions in our region is an important part of our work here at the New 
York  Fed.  We  need  to  understand  how  the  diverse  economies  in  our  District  are 
performing—from  the  metropolis  of  New  York  City  and  its  surrounding  areas,  to  rural 
communities in upstate New York and the tropical island of Puerto Rico. I take all of this to 
the  table  when  the  FOMC  discusses  business  and  economic  conditions  and  trends.  In 
addition, we provide our regional analysis to the public so that everyone can benefit from our 
work. At today’s briefing, we will share some of this work with you. 
As president of the New York Fed, I believe it is essential to listen firsthand to a broad set of 
businesses and people in the communities we serve to get as comprehensive a picture as 
possible of how our region is doing. To accomplish this, we have a team dedicated to going 
out  into  the  region  to  gather  economic  intelligence  and  to  help  our  communities  develop 
programs  to  support  local  economic  development.  Let  me  speak  a  little  further  about  our 
work  analyzing  local  economic  conditions  and  how  we  use  this  work  to  help  our 
stakeholders. 
We have developed a number of analytical tools to track the regional economy. To get the 
most  up-to-date  read  on  economic  conditions  in  our  District  as  possible,  we  conduct  two 
monthly business surveys. Our Empire State Manufacturing Survey gives a real-time read on 
manufacturing conditions in New York State, while our Business Leaders Survey allows us to 
track  economic  activity  across  the  tri-state  region  in  the  broader  services  sector. We  also 
conduct  regular  polls  of  small  businesses  in  our  area  to  better  understand  their  evolving 
situation  and  needs.  In  addition,  we  publish  monthly  indexes  of  economic  activity  for  New 
York  State,  New  York  City  and  New  Jersey.  We  also  monitor  the  financial  health  of 
households through our quarterly Household Debt and Credit Report and track the state of 
school finances in our region. 
But  economic  data  can  only  tell  you  so  much.  It  is  also  imperative  that  we  engage  with 
people in our region to see the broader picture behind the facts and figures. To this end, I 
regularly  travel  to  various  parts  of  our  District  to  hear  firsthand  about  local  economic 
conditions and to get a sense of the issues and concerns facing businesses and residents. 
Just  two  weeks  ago  I  visited  Rochester  and  Buffalo.  One  thing  I  tend  to  focus  on  in  my 
meetings, more generally, is what hurdles businesses and households are facing that might 
be  holding  back  growth.  When  we  identify  issues  of  concern,  we  factor  those  in  to  our 
decision-making and explore what we can do proactively to address these issues. This might 
include  providing  data  and  information  that  can  assist  others  in  tackling  the  underlying 
problems,  or  in  convening  stakeholders  to  discuss  potential  solutions  and  the  best  way 
forward. 
Recently, two themes have emerged from our community visits that warrant special attention. 
The  first  is  in  the  arena  of  workforce  development.  Employers  often  have  difficulty  finding 
potential  employees  with  the  specific  skills  they  need,  and  workers  often  lack  the  specific 
skills employers are looking for. Workforce development aims to bridge this gap. Good jobs 
increasingly  require  higher  levels  of  skill  and  education,  and  a  skilled  workforce  that  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  matched to the needs of employers is also necessary for an economy to grow and prosper. 
That is why I believe workforce development is so important for the long-term health of the 
economy. 
Our outreach group regularly engages with community leaders to help them take action to 
address  workforce  development  needs  and  skill  gaps.  In  fact,  in  Rochester,  our  team  is 
partnering with several educational and community organizations to promote local workforce 
development programs. As in many places around the region, employers in Rochester are 
having difficulty finding workers to fill a number of middle-skill jobs, like nurses, automotive 
technicians and computer-controlled machine operators. Out of this partnership, we launched 
a pilot project challenging college students to create a short video profiling middle-skill jobs 
that are available in the area in order to drum up interest in opportunities many people may 
not even know exist. 
Access to credit for small businesses is another important issue we’ve focused on in recent 
years.  Our  outreach  group  conducts  a  bi-annual  poll  of  small  businesses  in  our  region  to 
better understand their credit needs and access to credit. The results consistently show that 
gaining access to credit is one of the top growth challenges for small businesses. In my visits 
across the District, I have heard small business owners voice similar concerns. 
In  response,  we’ve  helped  bring  small  businesses  together  with  lenders  to  help  smooth 
access  to  credit.  Over  the  past  year  we  have  conducted  ten  access-to-credit  events—
workshops,  clinics  and  conferences—for  companies  interested  in  learning  about  traditional 
and  alternative  sources  of  financing.  We  partnered  with  local  and  national  government 
agencies,  small  business  development  centers  and  local  nonprofit  organizations  to  hold 
these events throughout the District. 
One  such  workshop  was  held  recently  in  Queens.  The  Queens  Economic  Development 
Corporation and the Queens Chamber of Commerce, with support from the New York Fed’s 
Asian  Professional  Network  Alliance,  co-sponsored  a  resource  clinic  for  small  businesses. 
The  clinic  offered  an  opportunity  for  attendees  to  receive  one-on-one  advice  from  several 
non-profit  organizations  on  a  wide  range  of  topics,  including  which  types  of  financing  are 
most appropriate for their needs, what lenders look for in potential borrowers, alternatives to 
traditional bank loans and tips on improving their chances for success. 
These  are  just  a  few  examples  of  the  activities  that  reflect  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  the 
region. Let me turn now to the subject matter of today’s briefing: the economic outlook for the 
regional economy. 
There is a lot of good news to share. Many parts of the region have bounced back quite well 
from the Great Recession, and now have more jobs than before the downturn. New York City 
really  stands  out  in  this  regard.  While  the  Great  Recession  was  the  deepest  and  longest 
recession in modern history for the nation as a whole, New York City bucked that trend to a 
surprising degree, and did it with little help from Wall Street. As we will discuss later in the 
briefing,  one  of  New  York  City’s  strongest  sectors  has  been  technology.  In  this  recovery, 
employment in the city’s tech sector has added nearly 50,000 jobs, many of which pay well. 
The growth of the so-called Silicon Alley has not only helped the city bounce back from the 
recession, but, I believe, is a key for the city moving forward. When I visited Brooklyn late last 
year, I saw firsthand how technology is spurring economic activity, directly and indirectly. For 
example,  Etsy,  the  popular  e-commerce  website,  which  in  many  ways  resembles  a  retail 
company, relies on technology to underpin its business model. 
But it’s not just New York City that is growing nicely. Employment levels on Long Island and 
in  parts  of  upstate  New  York—most  notably  the  Albany,  Buffalo  and  Rochester  metro 
areas—have also climbed and are at or near record highs. During my recent trip to upstate 
New  York,  I  saw  first-hand  some  of  the  positive  developments  in  Rochester  and  Buffalo. 
After  undergoing  a  prolonged  period  of  economic 
transformation  and  reinvention, 
Rochester’s  economy  is  now  more  diverse  and  dynamic  than  ever  before.  Meanwhile,  the 
growth  in  Buffalo  was  striking.  The  numbers  show  a  dramatic  uptick  in  construction 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  employment,  and  the  visual  evidence  of  development  was  widespread.  I  was  especially 
impressed with the downtown and waterfront areas, as well as the new SolarCity factory—all 
of which looked dramatically different than when I visited the area less than two years ago. 
Both of these places are well positioned for future success. 
On the other hand, the employment recovery has been slow to take hold in both Northern 
New Jersey and the Lower Hudson Valley, where jobs are still not back to their pre-recession 
peak despite employment growing steadily. For Northern New Jersey, this lag is due, in part, 
to a stall in the growth of jobs in professional and business services. But the education and 
health sectors continue to add jobs, and construction employment is seeing a rebound. I also 
saw a number of bright spots on my visit to the area a few months ago. One was Jersey City, 
which is leveraging its proximity to New York City to attract residents and jobs. Another was 
Newark, where I saw signs of downtown development, including Teacher’s Village, a mixed-
use community of teachers with new schools, housing and retail businesses. 
But pockets of weakness remain. For example, in upstate New York, Binghamton has had no 
meaningful rebound in employment. Although the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico remain 
in a deep economic slump, employment appears to have steadied in both places in recent 
months.  However,  Puerto  Rico’s  weak  economy  coupled  with  a  fiscal  crisis  means  its 
economic outlook remains uncertain as it struggles to address its unique set of problems. 
Now, I’d like to turn things over to one of our regional economists, Jim Orr, who will provide a 
more detailed presentation of economic conditions across our region. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
