  Peter Praet: The APP impact on the economy and bond markets 
Intervention  by  Mr  Peter  Praet,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  at  the  annual  dinner  of  the  ECB’s  Bond  Market  Contact  Group,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
30 June 2015. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  the  annual  dinner  of  the  Bond  Market  Contact 
Group (BMCG), also on behalf of my colleagues of the Executive Board. 1 
We  regard  the  BMCG  as  a  forum  to  improve  our  dialogue  with  the  financial  market 
community on bond market-related issues. Understanding bond markets is obviously key for 
us, and even more so as bond purchases have become a central part of our non-standard 
measures.  The  broad  composition  of  the  group  has  proved  useful  for  understanding  the 
implications of our actions and other market developments for all bond market participants. In 
remarks today I would like to briefly assess the current economic situation before addressing 
a few salient points about the ECB’s expanded Asset Purchase Programme (APP). 
So  far  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  remains  on  track  and,  importantly,  we  are 
seeing  evidence  that  it  is  starting  to  broaden.  Real  GDP  rose  by  0.4%  q-o-q  in  the  first 
quarter  of  2015,  with  domestic  demand  continuing  to  be  the  main  driver  behind  output 
growth. While growth has been mainly supported by private consumption in recent quarters, 
there are encouraging signs that private investment is picking up as well. The latest survey 
results, though showing some signs of stabilisation, remain consistent with continued growth 
in the second quarter at around the same rate as in the first quarter. 
A number of factors are underpinning the recovery in activity. First, the earlier fall in oil prices 
is  contributing  to  higher  real  disposable  incomes  and  corporate  profitability.  Second,  the 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance, 
to 
improvements in financial conditions and credit supply conditions. Third, euro area activity is 
expected to be increasingly supported by the past depreciation of the euro and the gradual 
strengthening  of  external  demand.  These  three  factors  mean  that,  while  remaining  on  the 
downside, the risks surrounding the economic outlook have become more balanced.  
It is nonetheless clear that monetary policy and external factors cannot alone be the basis for 
a lasting recovery. I see two risks in particular to a stronger, structural recovery. The first is 
that  pessimism  among  firms  about  future  growth  prospects  continues  to  weigh  on 
investment.  5  years  ahead  growth  expectations  among  forecasters  have  been  falling 
continuously  since  2001,  from  around  2.7%  then  to  1.4%  today,  which  may  have  sapped 
“animal spirits”. The second is the persistence of a debt overhang in parts of the euro area 
which acts as a major drag on firm and household spending. In both cases structural reforms 
come to the fore, as lifting expectations of trend growth is key to reduce uncertainty about the 
outlook and deleverage private sector balance sheets.  
This  context  of  a  firming  recovery  underpins  our  expectation  for  inflation  to  steadily  return 
towards our objective. Since the trough in January, headline inflation for the euro area has 
followed a generally upward trajectory as the negative contributions from energy prices have 
declined. Though Eurostat’s flash estimate for euro area HICP in June came in at 0.2% – 0.1 
percentage points lower than for May – this slight decrease largely reflects calendar effects 
and  does  not  affect  our  baseline  forecast.  We  still  expect  inflation  to  remain  low  in  the 
months  ahead  before  accelerating  later  this  year,  in  part  on  account  of  base  effects 
associated with the fall in oil prices in late 2014. Thereafter, inflation is expected to gradually 
converge towards levels closer to but still below 2%. 
the  expanded  APP,  has 
including 
led 
                                                
1 I would like to thank Beatriz Sotomayor Aparicio for her contributions to this speech. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  That outlook is of course contingent on the full implementation of our APP. As of 26 June 
2015 the ECB had purchased EUR 297.1 bn under the entire APP, including EUR 193.9 bn 
under  the  Public  Sector  Purchase  Programme  (PSPP),  EUR  94.6  bn  under  the  Covered 
Bond  Purchase  Programme  (CBPP3)  and  EUR  8.6  bn  under  the  Asset-Backed  Securities 
Purchase  Programme  (ABSPP).  Accordingly,  the  ECB’s  balance  sheet  has  expanded  by 
EUR  527  bn  to  EUR  2,539.5  bn  since  end-September  2014,  mainly  due  to  the  asset 
purchases and the four TLTROs.  
For the PSPP we have been able to achieve all operational targets (i.e. announced quantities 
and parameters of the asset allocation) and purchases have by and large not been disruptive 
to market functioning. Since mid-April, however, volatility has risen markedly, reversing the 
initial  downward  impact  of  the  PSPP  on  sovereign  bond  yields.  GDP-weighted  euro  area 
sovereign yields are now roughly half a percentage point higher than the level reached on 
the day of the PSPP announcement. But we need to be patient in assessing the significance 
of these developments. Such a reversal of the downward trend in sovereign yields following 
a QE announcement is common to other jurisdictions which undertook similar policies in the 
past.  
Our purchases of private assets have also proceeded relatively well. The CBPP3 has had a 
strong downward impact on covered bonds spreads, which reached the tightest levels in the 
last five years at the start of June this year. And though from mid-April yields have increased 
in line with other fixed income assets, they have done so to a lesser extent. As a result, the 
attractiveness of covered bonds has declined compared to government bonds, contributing 
to an increase in the amount of offers available for CBPP3 purchases. This has helped the 
smooth implementation of the programme thus far.  
In terms of ABS, while the announcement and start of ABSPP led to a general compression 
of  spreads  across  all  euro  area  countries,  since  mid-April  the  spreads  of  more  stressed 
jurisdictions  have  widened  and  moved  above  the  levels  prevailing  at  the  start  of  the 
programme. Even so, we understand that the ABSPP is seen as providing the asset class 
with a credibility boost, which should in turn contribute to revitalising simple and transparent 
securitisation and reducing its stigma among investors – a key objective of the programme. 
We  have  also  recently  had  some  encouraging  re-openings  of  public  issuance  across  a 
broader set of euro area countries, which could invite other issuers to follow up. 
What  ultimately  matters  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective,  however,  is  not  how  well  we 
achieve  our  operational targets  but  how  much  our  interventions  are  reflected  in  a  reduced 
cost of borrowing for firms and households. Here we see a positive impact from the APP on 
both the bank and market finance. The cost of market-based debt has followed a downward 
trend since end-2011 and stabilised at historically low levels in February-April 2015, before 
rising  again  somewhat  in  May  (+16  bp)  and  June  (+20  bp).  Market-based  financing  flows 
have  nevertheless  continued  to  increase  in  recent  months,  implying  that  the  lower  cost  of 
market-based finance has had an important “first order” monetary policy effect.  
On  the  bank  side,  the  APP  seems  to  have  been  effective  in  further  reducing  wholesale 
funding costs, as portfolio rebalance effects have led to a compression of, for example, bank 
bond yields. Consequently, while the cost of borrowing from banks for households and firms 
has been declining since mid-2014, the pace of the decline has increased in recent months. 
In April, the composite bank lending rates for households for house purchase and for non-
financial corporations stood at 2.25 and 2.30%, respectively 61 and 49 bps below the values 
observed in June 2014. These developments reflect both the effect of the APP and of the 
previous measures taken in the summer of last year. 
While it may be too early to see a clear upward effect in terms of quantities, there are several 
signs that the APP is also contributing to an easing of credit constraints in the euro area. For 
instance, according to the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) banks have indicated that they intend 
to react to APP purchases primarily by granting loans. In addition, banks in the survey expect 
capital  gains  and  a  slight  improvement  in  their  capital  ratios  from  the  APP  which  could 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  support an expansion of lending, notwithstanding their expectations of a negative impact of 
the programme on net interest margins and overall profitability (due to sharp flattening of the 
term structure in a QE environment).  
It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  banks’  expectations  that  the  APP  will  negatively  impact 
profitability  do  not  seem  to  be  aligned  with  either  market  evaluations  or  our  own  internal 
appraisals. Market studies suggest that, on average, monetary policy news that is expected 
to lead to a flattening of the yield curve causes an increase, rather than a decline, in banks’ 
share prices. This is confirmed by estimates of the impact of the APP on banks’ profit and 
loss accounts and their solvency situation performed by ECB staff. The overall effect on bank 
capital  is  found  to  be  positive,  as  capital  gains  on  securities  held,  lower  funding  costs, 
improved credit quality and higher intermediation volumes outweigh the negative impact of 
the flattening of the term structure on net interest income. 
In sum, it is fair to conclude that, thus far, the APP has been producing its intended aim of 
easing of monetary and financial conditions, including in the context of heightened volatility 
since mid-April. The very short end of the curve – because of expanding surpluses of liquidity 
–  has  remained  well-anchored  around  levels  that  are  broadly  in  line  with  our  forward 
guidance over those horizons. We note however that the expected policy rate path implied by 
markets has shifted up and steepened noticeably in a context of market re-pricing. Still, at 
present we judge that the recent strong fluctuations in financial markets have not materially 
altered  money  and  credit  dynamics,  but  close  monitoring  and  continuous  assessment  are 
warranted from a monetary policy perspective.  
Moreover, to ensure sufficient predictability for markets and citizens about our future policy, 
we have provided communication on our reaction function. We have underlined that the APP 
is intended to run until the end of September 2016 and, in any case, until we see a sustained 
adjustment in the path of inflation. Our monetary policy stimulus will stay in place as long as 
needed to deliver our mandate on a truly sustained basis.  
In  addition,  we  have  broadened  and  refined  our  arsenal  of  instruments  during  the  crisis 
years, and we have tested many of these instruments. Building on our past record, the public 
knows  that  the  ECB  is  determined  to  respond  to  disruptions  in  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism that would affect our price stability objective. Such disruptions could include an 
undesirable  tightening  of  financing  conditions  or  a  renewed  surge  in  macroeconomic 
uncertainty,  with  downside  risks  to  inflation.  In  that  case,  we  would  make  full  use  of  the 
flexibility afforded by the measures already in place and activate other policy instruments if 
necessary.  
We are not only willing to act, but capable of doing so. The recent ruling by the European 
Court  of  Justice,  while  finding  that  OMTs  fall  within  the  scope  of  the  ECB’s  mandate  of 
maintaining  price  stability,  also  stated  clearly  that  the  ECB  must  be  allowed  “broad 
discretion” when preparing and implementing its monetary policy.  
In short, we have the tools available, if needed, to ensure the appropriate monetary policy 
stance  for  the  whole  euro  area,  and  to  react  to  specific  impairments  in  the  transmission 
mechanism – if, as was the case in the past, such impairments were judged to undermine 
the recovery and slow the process by which we anticipate inflation to return to levels closer to 
2%.  
Stability cannot however be provided by monetary policy alone. All policymakers have to play 
their  role 
their 
responsibilities  domestically  and  by  fundamentally  strengthening  the  euro  area’s  common 
institutions. 
improving  the  functioning  of  monetary  union,  both  by  meeting 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
