   William C Dudley: Remarks at the CPMI’s 25th Anniversary Conference 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure’s 25th 
Anniversary Conference, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 30 June 2015. 
 We have three distinguished panelists in this opening session – Claudio Borio, the head of the 
Monetary and Economic Department at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), William 
Coen, the Secretary General of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and 
Masa Kono, who is currently the Vice-Minister of International Affairs at the Japan Financial 
Services  Agency  and  who  earlier  chaired  the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions  (IOSCO)  during  the  development  of  the  Principles  for  Financial  Market 
Infrastructures (PFMI). They  will  offer  their thoughts  on  how  the  role  of  the  Committee  on 
Payments and Market Infrastructure (CPMI) has changed and is likely to continue to evolve in 
its task of setting and helping implement global financial, operational and risk standards for the 
world’s key financial market infrastructures (FMI). 
Before I turn to our panelists, let me offer some brief comments on the evolution of the CPMI. 
As I see it, there have been three broad complementary trends that have been important in 
influencing the evolution of the CPMI and have contributed to its increased importance over 
time. As always, what I have to say represents my own views and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.1 
The first trend has been the development of a global financial system. This has increased 
financial  system  interdependencies  and,  hence,  the  importance  of  harmonizing  standards 
across  national  regulatory  regimes. It  also  has made  it more  important  to  avoid  regulatory 
arbitrage  and  race  to  the  bottom  types  of  behavior  that  could  weaken  the  resiliency  and 
robustness of the global financial market infrastructure. 
The second trend is the increasing importance of FMIs within the financial system. As trading 
across a more complex array of instruments and products proliferates, and as more trades are 
centrally cleared, well-managed FMIs play an increasingly important role within the financial 
system. 
The third trend stems directly from the first two. With the global financial system becoming 
more  prominent  and  FMIs  playing  a  bigger  role  within  this  global  financial  system,  it  has 
become ever more essential that major FMIs operate safely. When run well, they mitigate risk. 
But, run poorly, they could be a source of contagion and risk propagation throughout the global 
financial system. This means that the CPMI’s work has become much more critical in ensuring 
a safe and sound global financial system. 
The growing influence of the CPMI can be seen in its success in staying ahead of these trends. 
It was the CPMI’s analysis and standard-setting that led to the adoption of payment systems 
that provide “real-time gross settlement with intraday finality,” securities settlement systems 
that ensure “delivery versus payment,” and foreign exchange settlement systems that ensure 
“payment versus payment.” This fundamental evolution of systemically important payment and 
settlement  systems  was  instrumental  in  mitigating  significant  sources  of  systemic  risk  and 
laying a solid foundation to support the increasingly global financial system. 
In  parallel,  it  was  the  CPMI  that  first  defined  the  concept  and  processes  of  “central  bank 
oversight of payment and settlement systems” and implemented the associated principles for 
“central bank cooperation.” This also supported many central banks and securities regulators 
in  their  efforts  to  gain  explicit  legal  responsibility  and  power  to  apply  standards  aimed  at 
promoting broader “financial stability” and containing “systemic risk.” Title VIII of the Dodd-
Frank Act in the United States is a good example of this. This means that many authorities 
now have greater capacity and responsibility to apply and enforce the PFMI as requirements, 
where previously a number of regulators were constrained to treating earlier standards merely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
as “recommendations.” Taken together, we have made considerable progress in terms of the 
global regulatory regime to reflect the growing importance of FMIs and central counterparties 
(CCPs) within the financial system. 
Let me briefly list a few of the accomplishments of the PFMI: 
• 
They are now being globally adopted and implemented as mandatory, and the specific 
requirements themselves have been raised substantially. For example, there is a new, 
explicit liquidity standard to ensure that payments are made on time and in the right 
currency, and the cover 2 requirement for complex CCPs is much tougher than what 
came before it. 
They also provide greater detail and scope, including more detailed guidance with 
respect to CCPs and trade repositories (TRs). 
They are underpinned by a detailed disclosure framework, an agreed assessment 
methodology and a rigorous monitoring program to both promote consistency in how 
authorities  have  adopted  and  implemented  the  PFMI  as  well  as,  importantly,  to 
promote consistency in outcomes. 
They  provide  greater  harmonization  to  avoid  regulatory  arbitrage  and  race  to  the 
bottom behaviors. 
They  include  requirements  and  guidance  for  FMIs  to  implement  their  own  viable 
recovery and orderly wind-down plans. 
    As I see it, great progress has been made, but there is more work to do in a number of areas: 
• 
• 
Greater harmonization and better cross-border mutual recognition practices; 
CCP recovery and resilience as well as coordination with other authorities to ensure 
incentives are aligned; 
Appropriate incentives for CCPs so that the profit motive does not conflict with having 
a safe system that can absorb large shocks without destabilizing the financial system; 
and 
Availability of data in TRs on a cross-border basis to facilitate the development of a 
more complete picture of market activities and emerging risks. 
  I am very fortunate to have had the opportunity to chair the Committee during the period in 
which the PFMI were created. I recognize that this was just an initial step in the process, but it 
was an essential first step. Subsequent CPMI committees, under the leadership of Paul Tucker 
and Benoit Coeure, have been working with the other Basel Committees, the Financial Stability 
Board (FSB), IOSCO and individual country regulators to continue to take this effort forward. 
We have placed a lot of financial stability eggs in the FMI basket. It is important that we monitor 
and oversee that basket carefully. 
I would now like to turn the floor over to our first panelist, Claudio Borio. Claudio, the floor is 
yours, you have 10 minutes. 
1 Shari Bower, Caren Cox, Alex Merle-Huet, John Rutigliano, Johanna Schwab, Larry Sweet 
and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
