  Erkki Liikanen: The role of analysis in macroprudential policy 
Speech by  Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the RiskLab/BoF/ESRB 
Conference on Systemic Risk Analytics, Helsinki, 24 September 2015. 
Original presentation is on the Bank of Finland’s website: Slides (PDF). 
 Systemic risks – learning the hard way 
1. 
[Slide 1] 
[Slide 2] 
The concept of systemic risks has received much more weight after the global financial crisis. 
Before  the  crisis,  the  term  was  mainly  used  within  the  Financial  Stability  Departments  of 
central banks and among a limited number of banking and finance researchers. 
The concept was mainly used in microeconomic models of banking, and  was almost non-
existent  in  macroeconomic  models.  As  a  result,  a  structured  dialogue  between  the  two 
modelling worlds in this respect was largely missing. 
This was also reflected in policy discussions. Before the crisis, there were justified concerns 
about  potential  risks related  to  some  micro  level  phenomena  –  such  as  securitization  and 
credit  risk  transfer  –  and  macro  level  phenomena  –  such  as  current  account  imbalances. 
However,  an  analysis  combining  these  potentially  interrelated  phenomena  in  a  unified 
framework was missing. 
Moreover, in banks’ risk management models and new regulatory models that mimic them 
(the Basel II framework, in particular) the prevailing paradigm was based on the assumptions 
of market efficiency and complete markets. These models were not sufficiently informed by 
economics of asymmetric information and incomplete markets. 
As a consequence of these and other shortcomings, many severe incentive problems which 
can  undermine  market  efficiency  and  may  help  fuel  bubbles  were  not  taken  seriously 
enough.  Partly  as  a  result  of  that,  the  global  financial  crisis  took  almost  all  researchers, 
financial institutions and policy-makers by surprise. 
Complex world 
[Slide 3] 
How can we improve our understanding of the risks and vulnerabilities that cause financial 
crises? 
One  of  the  key  tasks  is  to  better  incorporate  systemic  risks  in  economic  models. 
Unfortunately, an inconvenient fact is that modelling systemic risks that reflect complexity of 
the real world does not make models any simpler. 
This is because systemic risks are not linear by nature. 
For example, if private sector debt relative to GDP increases substantially but still remains 
below its trend, systemic risk may not increase much. But if the ratio keeps rising above its 
trend level, systemic risk might shoot up at some point.1 
                                                
1   Cf.,  e.g.,  Jokivuolle,  E.,  J.  Pesola,  and  M.  Virén  (2015): Why  is  credit-to-GDP  a  good  measure  for  setting 
countercyclical capital buffers? Journal of Financial Stability 18, June 2015, pp. 117–126. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The shooting up of systemic risk in this example happens when the vulnerability of firms and 
households to external shocks enters a critical zone. As debts grow, more and more firms 
and  households  would  experience  financial  distress  if  the  economy  turns  down.  Financial 
distress  may  feed  back  negatively  to  the  economy  if  consumption  and  investment  are 
reduced. 
At  worst,  firm  and  household  defaults  cause  substantial  losses  to  financiers,  especially 
banks. If banks have also had too little capital and too much debt, especially short-term debt, 
banks may not be able to absorb the losses without cutting back their lending. This adds a 
further and potentially dangerous negative feedback to the economy. 
Macroeconomic  models  are  now  taking  steps  to  incorporate  such  effects.  But  more  work 
needs to be done. 
Another source of complexity in the real world are the networks of banks and banks´ bilateral 
exposures.  The  network  and  contagion  effects  are  difficult  to  analyze  due,  inter  alia,  to 
imperfect information about counterparty balance sheets.2 
After the crisis, more attention has been paid on the network analysis. I am certain that the 
presentations of this Conference related to networks and contagion will give us many new 
insights. 
Complex risks – complex rules? 
[Slide 4] 
If  systemic  risks  are  complex,  does  this  imply  that  we  need  complex  regulatory  rules  to 
combat them? Not necessarily. 
While economic models missed some important complexities of the real  world prior to the 
crisis,  the  regulation  of  finance,  particularly  banks’  risk-based  capital  requirements,  had 
grown perhaps too complex. 
Complex regulation together with its heterogeneous implementation left financial institutions 
with  plenty  of  room  for  regulatory  arbitrage  and  even  manipulation  of  their  regulatory  and 
accounting  information.  This  is  somewhat  ironic,  because  the  increasing  complexity  of 
regulation  was  largely  motivated  by  the  need  to  reduce  incentive  problems  which  were 
created by the “flat”, non-risk-based capital requirements of the earlier (Basel I) framework. 
After the crisis, simpler and more robust regulatory rules have been developed to back up 
the  more  complex  rules.  The  forthcoming  leverage  ratio  requirement  and  the  Basel 
Committee´s proposals for the new simple capital floors for banks´ internal risk-based capital 
requirements are examples of that approach. 
Such  safeguards  provide  protection  against  collective  model  risks,  such  as 
mismeasurement of subprime mortgage risks which turned into a systemic problem. 
the 
Macroprudential analysis: a policy-maker’s view 
II. 
[Slide 5] 
Economic research has a key role in the design of better regulation. Research can inform 
regulators  in  their  search  for  the  right  balance  between  robustness  and  sophistication  of 
regulatory rules. We also need high quality cost-benefit and impact analyses of regulation in 
order to assess the effects of regulation on financial institutions and markets, and, ultimately, 
on the real economy. 
                                                
2   A  recent  example  of  the  use of  network analysis  is  Toivanen,  M.  (2015):  Essays  on  Credit  Contagion  and 
Shocks in Banking. Doctoral dissertation, University of Vaasa. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In  addition  to  the  traditional  financial  regulatory  rules  we  should  think  of  safeguarding 
financial stability with macroprudential policy more generally. In this more holistic approach 
the role of analysis and research is, if possible, even more important than in the design of the 
traditional microprudential regulatory rules. 
When talking about macroprudential policy, some observers have yet found it useful to make 
a  distinction  between  it  and  regulation.  Paul  Tucker, for  instance,  defines  macroprudential 
policy as “dynamically adjusted financial regulation”. 
Given  that  definition,  one  could  argue  that  a  well-designed  and  stringently  implemented 
financial regulation is the first line of defense against systemic risks. Macroprudential policy – 
that is, the dynamic adjustment of regulation – is the important second line of defense.3 
High-quality analysis reduces the inaction bias 
[Slide 6] 
Most  economists  and  policy-makers  seem  to  agree  that  the  key  objective  of  the 
macroprudential  policy  is  to  provide  additional  resilience  to  financial  institutions  and  the 
financial system against cyclical and structural systemic risks and vulnerabilities. 
But that is not sufficient. We also need macroprudential policies that can effectively restrain 
an  excessive  build-up  of  leverage  and  growth  in  household  and  corporate  borrowing  and 
thus dampen the credit and financial cycles. In the euro area, this need is particularly acute, 
as  the  economic  cycles  are  currently  diverging  across  countries  and  as  the  key  monetary 
policy rates will stay low for a prolonged period of time. 
To prevent or at least dampen potentially destructive financial booms, the authorities must be 
able  to  take  early  macroprudential  actions.  To  do  that,  the  role  of  reliable  early  warning 
indicators  is  critical.  I  welcome  the  strong  emphasis  of  this  Conference  on  early  warning 
indicators and models. 
The  most  effective  tools  for  dampening  credit  cycles  seem  to  be  the  so-called  borrower-
based  instruments,  such  as  caps  on  borrowers´  loan-to-value  (LTV),  loan-to-income  (LTI) 
and debt-service-to-income (DSTI) ratios. 
Fixed caps on these ratios, applied in many countries, are certainly useful. But ideally, the 
macroprudential  authorities  should  have  powers  to  adjust  these  ratios,  if  necessary,  in  a 
counter-cyclical fashion. 
Of  course,  that  will  be  challenging:  a  discretionary  use  of  borrower-based  instruments  is 
politically highly sensitive, which may lead to an inaction bias. 
High-quality  analysis  and  research  can  help  the  policy-maker  to  overcome  this  bias: 
politically  sensitive  decisions  can  only  be  based  on  sound  indicator-  and  model-based 
macroprudential  analysis.  The  more  confident  the  policy-makers  are  on  the  quality  of 
analyses,  the  easier  it  is  for  them  to  decide  (i)  when  to  deploy  macroprudential  tools, 
(ii) which tools to use and (ii) how to calibrate them. 
High-quality  analysis  and  research  will  also  help  policy-makers  to  assess  the  impact  of 
different macroprudential measures on lending, asset prices and economic activity. 
                                                
3   For a similar view, see e.g. Blanchard (2015) Ten takeaways from the “Rethinking Macro Policy: Progress or 
Confusion?” http://www.voxeu.org/article/rethinking-macroeconomic-policy-introduction. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In 
the  ECB. 
this  environment, 
there  are  also  special  needs 
Macroprudential policies in the euro area 
[Slide 7] 
Let  me  now  briefly  discuss  macroprudential  policies  in  the  euro  area,  where  the 
macroprudential framework is special with complementary roles for national macroprudential 
authorities  and 
for 
macroprudential analysis and research. 
In the euro area, as elsewhere, national authorities bear the main responsibility for national 
macroprudential  policies.  They  are  always  in  the  best  position  to  detect  country-specific 
systemic risks and to take appropriate measures to address them. 
These  national  policies  are  organized  differently  in  different  countries.  In  Finland,  for 
example, the designated macroprudential authority is the financial supervisor, the FIN-FSA. 
In many euro area countries, however, the national macroprudential authority is the central 
bank or a council of domestic authorities. 
In November last year, the ECB took over the responsibility of supervising banks in the euro 
area.  It  is  less  well-known  that  at  the  same  time  the  ECB  became  the  ultimate 
macroprudential decision-maker in the Banking Union. More specifically, the ECB can apply 
higher  requirements  for  specific  macroprudential  tools  than  proposed  by  the  designated 
national  macroprudential  authorities,  if  it  deems that the  suggested  national  measures  are 
inadequate. 
In  the  euro  area,  the  role  of  national  macroprudential  policies  is  particularly  important  in 
general and also at the current juncture. There are several reasons for that: 
First,  the  absence  of  national  monetary  policies  puts  heightened  demands  on 
national macroprudential policies in reducing domestic systemic risks. 
Second, as the financial systems in the euro area countries are highly integrated, 
different  macroprudential  risks  and  problems  can  easily  and  rapidly  spread 
across borders. 
Third, the current accommodative monetary policies of the ECB and other central 
banks can have some unintended side effects on the financial system, which, if 
regarded serious, need to be addressed by macroprudential policies. 
In this framework, there is a special need for analysis and research at least on the following 
topics: 
How  big  are  the  macroprudential  risks  related  to  strong  interconnectedness 
between euro area financial institutions and markets? 
How important are the cross-border spillovers of national macroprudential actions 
(and inactions)? 
How to reduce the potential inaction bias of national macroprudential policies? 
What are the biggest macroprudential risks related to the current low interest rate 
environment? What, if any, macroprudential measures should the policy-makers 
use to reduce those potential risks? 
I  challenge  the  research  community  to  address  these  issues  in  addition  to  the  important 
topics covered in this Conference. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Learning the lessons while not fighting the last war 
III. 
[Slide 8] 
In recent years, and rightly so, much of the regulatory reform and research agenda has been 
shaped by the experiences of the global financial crisis of 2007–2009. But the regulatory and 
academic communities should not end up looking at the rear view mirror for too long. 
I want to highlight three recent phenomena which call for increased attention. 
The first is the recent shift of credit intermediation away from the banking sector to the debt 
securities market. In many ways, this is a welcome development, especially in Europe with 
its heavy dependence on banks. Some recent studies suggest that excessively large banking 
sectors can be associated not only with lower economic growth but also with higher systemic 
risk.4 In addition, excessive reliance of European SME´s on bank finance has been one of 
the  reasons  for  the  European  Commission  to  launch  its  plan  for  the  European  Capital 
Markets Union. 
But, as asked by Jaime Caruana in his recent speech, “Is a market-driven boom more or less 
risky than a bank-driven boom?”5 We do not know for sure, but we should try to find out. 
Second, banking-like activities are again shifting to the so called shadow banking sector, and 
thereby potentially outside the perimeter of regulatory rules. This may imply new threats to 
financial stability, with which macroprudential policy may have to have tools to deal. 
The  third  issue  which  deserves  close  attention  is  the  effects  of  digitalization  on  banking, 
which are likely to be wide-ranging. I believe we have some understanding of the potential 
benefits of digitalization, but we need to know more about the risks. 
Conclusions 
IV. 
[Slide 9] 
Let me conclude. A better understanding of systemic risks – to which this Conference also 
contributes – can help policy-makers in designing better regulation and in conducting timely 
and effective macroprudential policy more generally. 
With regard to the more static form of regulatory rules, research could guide regulators to 
find  a  right  balance  between  simplicity  and  comprehensiveness.  With  regard 
to 
macroprudential policy which requires discretionary decisions, reliable analysis and research 
can help policy-makers to avoid the pitfalls of excessive passivity. 
However,  we  should  remain  humble. To  complement  quantitative  analysis,  we  continue  to 
need sound expert judgment. Weak signals of risks and potential crises have to be given due 
consideration.  Grass  root  level  experts  and  their  experience  should  be  valued,  and  they 
should be encouraged to speak out. What is particularly needed is expert ability to imagine 
unlikely but possible scenarios which present big threats to financial stability. 
Perhaps more human resources should be allocated to conduct such thought experiments on 
a regular basis. The results of such experiments should be regularly exposed to a discussion 
by top management to avoid the dangers of group thinking. 
I thank you for your attention! 
                                                
4   See eg. Langfield and Pagano (2015) Bank bias in Europe: effects on systemic risk and growth. ECB Working 
Paper, No. 1797. 
5   Jaime Caruana (2014) Macroprudential policy: opportunities and challenges. Abu Dhabi, 9 December 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
