  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Talent management – sustaining dynamic 
economic growth and development in Malaysia 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  HR  Knowledge  Bazaar,  organised  by  the  Asian 
Institute of Chartered Bankers, Kuala Lumpur, 22 April 2015. 
 Thank  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  at  this  HR  Knowledge  Bazaar  2015, 
organised by the Asian Institute of Chartered Bankers (AICB). 
The  theme  chosen  for  this  conference  “Talent  Management  2020  for  Superior  Business 
Performance” is both timely and relevant in sustaining the dynamism of our economic growth 
and development. It rightly accords the recognition that talent management is the key factor 
in determining the health and prospect of a particular business. 
I will touch on a number of issues which to my mind have significance to the topics that the 
conference will deliberate. 
Retaining top talent will be increasingly challenging as the economy expands, and demand 
for talent will come from many sectors. With the ASEAN economy expected to grow steadily 
over the next decade following enhanced economic and financial integration, the competition 
for talent will intensify. For ready-made talent, in particular, the competition will be fierce and 
will be compounded by the fact that mobility for this group is high. While mobility presents an 
opportunity  for  career  advancement  at  the  individual  level,  at  the  macro  level,  it  could 
potentially and adversely impact the economy, if not managed appropriately. So it is critical 
that we are able to devise a strategy that could continuously retain and develop talent. 
While  the  supply  of  talent  is  abundant,  the  supply  of  top  talent  is  scarce.  The  so-called 
“Talent Paradox”, where we find ourselves with a large pool of talent in the market, but have 
difficulty  in  finding  competent  talent,  particularly  in  the  more  specialised  areas  is  a  reality, 
requiring  a  solution.  In  the  context  of  organisational  learning  and  development,  I  wonder 
whether we have been effective in equipping our employees with the needed competencies 
or  proficiencies  in  our  learning  interventions,  where  teaching  approaches  such  as  case 
studies,  experiential  learning  and  reflective  practices  are  common  pedagogies  applied  to 
strengthen our developmental curriculum. This I believe requires profound pondering. 
Most of the problems we face in the 21st century, would likely require unique and creative 
solutions, especially if we want to position ourselves in that elite position where possessing 
the competitive edge is an imperative. Matthew E May, the author of “In Pursuit of Elegance” 
wrote about “Design Thinking”, a concept that requires an approach to solving problems far 
beyond  the  traditional  way  of  problem  solving.  Great  design  is  a  result  of  a  clear  and 
thorough  understanding  of  the  user,  competing  resolution  of  competing  tensions,  multi-
disciplinary collaboration, rapid experimentation via prototypes with continuous modification 
and enhancement of ideas and solutions. I thought it is quite apt to extract the idea from the 
book to describe the current and future challenges face by the financial services industry. 
Devising  21st  century  solutions  would  require  re-doing  and  re-thinking  of  the  nature  of 
learning  and  development.  One  perspective  is  to  amalgamate  the  disciplinary  areas  of 
research, teaching and industry collaboration or engagement. These areas once aligned that 
reinforces  each  discipline,  creating  a  virtuous  cycle  that  creates  a  structure  that  produces 
employable and productive employees of high quality. Research must be applied-based and 
relevant  to  the  present and future  needs  of the  industry. Teaching  ought  to  give focus  on 
critical and creative thinking because these skills would equip a person with the necessary 
ability to enable innovative solutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Teaching also ought to focus on the development of skill sets that create an aptitude that 
could  push  the  boundary  of  knowledge  and  ideas.  Industry  collaboration  and  engagement 
are  equally  important.  The  concept  of  action  learning,  where  industry  and  the  world  of 
academia  could  interface,  gives  the  opportunity  to  students  and  teachers  to  solve  real 
business  issues  in  the  work  environment.  Action  learning  leads  to  mutual  benefits  to  all 
parties  ~  For  the  industry,  both  in  terms  of  costs  efficiency  and  freshness  of  ideas  and 
solutions,  and for faculty  and  students,  acquisition  of knowledge  that  is  contemporary  and 
“future relevant”. 
Bank Negara Malaysia has over the years done its own “Design Thinking”. Over the last few 
years  we  had  designed  a  human  capital  developmental  map  that  creates  an  environment 
conducive  for  the  supply  for  a  healthy  talent  pipeline  from  the  entry  to  the  senior  levels 
positioning. Last year, saw the introduction of three strategic initiatives that aspire to drive 
and  support  the  transformation  of  our  talent  development  infrastructure  in  an  impactful 
manner. The criticality of these initiatives is obvious given that the financial services industry 
employs close to 150,000 people and requires approximately 73,000 new hires over the next 
10 years. Let me elaborate a bit on these initiatives. 
First,  is  the  establishment  of  the  Financial  Services  Talent  Council.  In  July  2014,  Bank 
Negara Malaysia established the Council with the aim of setting the strategic direction of the 
financial sector talent development. This initiative is one of the proposals envisaged under 
the  Financial  Sector  Blueprint  2011–2020  which  brings  together  individuals  with  expertise 
and experience across the financial services industry and academia. The Council is tasked 
with  the  responsibility  to  work  closely  with  the  industry,  training  providers  and  relevant 
stakeholders, to formulate strategies to further develop, attract, retain and deploy domestic 
and international talents to meet the demand of the financial services industry. 
Second, is our commitment to bring the industry to greater heights of professionalism and 
ethics.  And  with  the  support  of  the  Securities  Commission  and  industry,  the  Financial 
Services Professional Board was established. This industry-led entity, comprising prominent 
individuals with diverse global experience is responsible to spearhead strategic undertakings 
to develop professional standards and ethical behaviour within the financial services industry. 
In  this  respect,  the  Board  aspires  to  set  new  benchmarks  in  professionalism  and  ethical 
behaviour via advocacy. 
Third,  is  to  raise  the  quality  of  learning  programs  offered  to  financial  practitioners  in  the 
country.  This  task  was  given  to  the  Financial  Accreditation  Agency.  The  FAA  has 
successfully  launched  the  Finance  Qualification  Structure  and  FAA  Learning  Standards  in 
September  2014.  The  Learning  Standards  will  promote  minimum  standards  in  designing, 
developing and delivering learning programs. The Finance Qualification Structure will help to 
map professional qualification into a single framework that employers can use to compare 
and account for an employee’s prior learning. Ultimately, it will create seamless mobility for 
financial services practitioners to move across the industry within the financial sector. 
Another  initiative  conceptualised  in  2014  and  will  be  introduced  in  2015  is  the  Financial 
Institutions  Directors’  Education  programme  in  Islamic  Finance  and  Shariah  Leaders 
Education Programme. These learning interventions are specifically designed to broaden the 
perspective of directors and shariah scholars on emerging opportunities in Islamic Finance, 
while equipping them with the necessary technical knowledge and skill sets. Offered at the 
ICLIFLeadership  and  Governance  Centre,  the  programs  will  deploy  proven  learning 
methodologies and approaches. 
The  industry  has  also  done  their  part  in  transforming  the  financial  services  education 
landscape. The AICB and the Asian Banking School, the newly established entities created 
as a result from IBBM’s transformation in 2014, are committed to creating a greater brand 
identity through the offering of industry-focused professional examinations, qualifications and 
awards which are in tune with the evolving landscape of the financial sector. Of significance 
is the Chartered Banker Qualification. This designation will be the Gold Standard in banking 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
qualification and recognition. It will be jointly awarded with the Chartered Institute of Bankers. 
This award, I am confident, will be the catalyst that significantly elevates professionalism in 
the banking industry. 
I am most inspired by the theme of this year’s conference. It is pragmatic, realistic and aptly 
sums  up  the  importance  of  talent  management  as  we  steer  through  the  evolving  financial 
landscape.  Topics  such  as  “Asia  2.0:  Leading  the  Next  Wave  of  Growth”  and  “Global 
Workforce  Strategies  CEOs  Deploy  to  Achieve  Leading  Business  Result”  would  be 
significant  especially  for  HR  practitioners  managing  multinational  companies  in  Asia. 
Besides, topics such as “Are Our Graduates Employable?” will also be an interesting meeting 
point for HR practitioners and educators. 
I wish you an insightful and productive discussion. I trust that today’s conference is merely 
another step in the journey of intellectual quest that will continue long after this conference 
has ended. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
