  James McAndrews: Credit growth and economic activity after the Great 
Recession 
Remarks by Mr James McAndrews, Executive Vice President and Director of Research of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Economic Press Briefing on Student Loans, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 16 February 2015. 
 Accompanying tables and figures can be found at the end of the speech. 
Good morning and let me welcome you to our press briefing focusing on developments in the 
student  loan  market.  My  remarks  will  concentrate  on  the  role  of  credit  markets  more 
generally  during  this  economic  expansion.  As  a  reminder,  these  remarks  reflect  my  own 
views, and not those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or of the Federal Reserve 
System. 
First, let me say a few words on the current economic outlook. Real GDP grew 2.4 percent 
over  the  course  of  2014.  As  New  York  Fed  President  Dudley  noted  earlier  this  month, 
despite what appears to be a soft first quarter, we expect that real GDP growth will continue 
over the next couple of years at a similar rate, supported by solid underlying fundamentals 
and  accommodative  financial  conditions.  Unemployment  should  continue  to  decline  and 
approach 5 percent by late this year. Because of the recent sharp fall in oil prices and the 
appreciation  of  the  dollar,  inflation  will  be  very  low  over  the  coming  months.  However,  as 
these temporary factors dissipate, economic slack declines further and inflation expectations 
remain stable, inflation should slowly move up toward the Federal Open Market Committee’s 
longer-run objective of 2 percent. 
Using  data  from  the  National  Income  and  Product  Accounts,  this  expansion  so  far  has 
exhibited unusual features compared to previous long expansions. Most notably, the pace of 
growth  during  the  early  years  of  this  expansion  was  well  below  that  of  the  early  years  in 
previous long cycles (Table 1). Among the factors for the slower growth were unusually low 
contributions from residential investment and from nondurables and services consumption. In 
contrast,  the  contribution  from  durables  consumption,  particularly  for  motor  vehicles,  was 
similar to that observed in previous expansions. Even though real GDP growth has picked up 
some in the past two years, these patterns are still evident (Table 2). 
The slow growth during the current expansion, what we might call the long shallow recovery, 
is likely a result of a confluence of many factors including constrained monetary and fiscal 
policies, demographic factors and economic and financial developments abroad. 
Today,  I’d  like  to  consider  developments  in  credit  markets  in  the  context  of  this  shallow 
recovery.  Credit  availability  is  a  crucial  ingredient  in  any  advanced  economy’s  recipe  for 
economic growth because credit can support investment in productive enterprises and can 
smooth household spending from fluctuations in income. Credit is the means through which 
financial assets accumulated by savers can earn returns by being put to productive uses. 
Based on data from the Financial Accounts of the United States (Flow of Funds), real credit 
(that  is,  credit  after  taking  into  account  the  effects  of  inflation)  to  both  corporations  and 
households  in  prior  recoveries  generally  started  to  grow  fairly  quickly  after  the  end  of  the 
recession. By contrast, in the most recent recovery the real credit outstanding of businesses 
(corporations  and  non-corporations)  declined  for  about  two  years  after  the  end  of  the 
recession. And only recently – more than five years after the end of the recession – has it 
attained  pre-recession  levels  (Figure  1).  More  dramatically,  real  credit  to  households 
continued to decline for about four years and, while it has finally begun to expand, is still well 
below its pre-recession levels (Figure 2). 
These different patterns of credit growth partly reflect the weak state of the banking sector 
following the financial crisis. The U.S. banking sector experienced record losses in the Great 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Recession that impaired a significant portion of banks’ capital and triggered many failures. 
These  losses  would  have  been  even  higher  had  it  not  been  for  the  liquidity  and  solvency 
support  from  the  official  sector  –  including  the  U.S.  Treasury,  the  FDIC  and  the  Federal 
Reserve. Sorting banks by the losses incurred during a recession relative to equity capital at 
the beginning of the recession, it is clear that the U.S. banking industry across this spectrum 
was much more adversely affected in the latest recession than in the two prior recessions 
(Figure 3). The legacy of those losses has likely limited the banking sector’s ability to extend 
new  loans  during  this  expansion,  as  banks  acted  in  a  highly  precautionary  way  to  accrue 
capital that had been depleted as well as to add to their previous capital levels. 
The need for banks to repair their balance sheets following the financial crisis contributed to 
the  far  slower  growth  of  outstanding  bank  loans  during  this  expansion  when  compared  to 
previous  long  expansions.  Real  outstanding  loans  to  businesses,  which  are  dominated  by 
bank  loans,  declined  more  in  this  recovery  than  in  previous  recoveries  (Figure  4).  On  the 
household  side,  real  outstanding  residential  mortgages,  which  are  largely  originated  by 
banks,  have  declined  through  most  of  this  expansion  while  they  grew  steadily  in  previous 
expansions  (Figure  5).  Consumer  credit  has  risen  at  a  modest  rate  in  this  recovery  – 
comparable to that of the last cycle (Figure 6). This category includes auto loans, credit cards 
and other consumer debts that are mainly originated by banks. But it also includes student 
loans  where  the  federal  government  is  the  dominant  lender.  Student  loans  have  risen 
robustly during this expansion, and have driven much of the rise of overall consumer credit. 
We will have much more to say about them later in today’s briefing. 
The  U.S.  financial  system  relies  more  heavily  on  capital  markets  than  other  advanced 
economies. Bonds and other negotiable debt instruments are an important source of funding 
to  credit-worthy  corporations.  Indeed,  the  growth  rate  of real  nonfinancial  corporate  bonds 
outstanding during this expansion has been roughly similar to that of previous expansions 
(Figure  7).  A  similar  pattern  is  evident  in  the  commercial  paper  market  (Figure  8). 
Notwithstanding the robust performance of debt markets during this expansion, the sharper 
decline  in  outstanding  bank  loans  to  businesses  that  I  mentioned  earlier  was  likely  a 
contributing factor to the slower economic recovery we have observed this time around. 
These developments appear to have had adverse consequences on the cost and availability 
of  credit  for  bank-dependent  borrowers.  Also,  in  the  early  years  of  this  recovery,  bank-
dependent firms appear to have deleveraged more and invested less than firms with access 
to capital markets. So, the impairment of banks’ ability to extend credit still has the potential 
to hinder investment and adversely affect the overall economy. 
We see similar correlations when it comes to lending to households. The expansion in auto 
lending that commenced in 2010 coincided with a recovery in auto sales, which have now 
essentially regained the ground they lost during the recession. Until recent quarters, overall 
consumption growth has been slow, consistent with a pattern of slow growth in credit card 
balances. The most obvious case is mortgages where – after a massive tightening from 2007 
to early 2010 – underwriting standards remain very tight. This tightness, especially for non-
prime borrowers, has likely been a factor behind a persistently sluggish housing market that 
has held back this recovery relative to earlier ones. 
Overall, these patterns of credit growth support the idea that the weakness of banks at the 
end of the Great Recession has been a contributing factor to the slow recovery of the U.S. 
economy since the recession. These patterns are consistent with evidence provided in the 
work of Carmen Reinhardt and Kenneth Rogoff, and in that of Christina and David Romer, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
indicating  that  the  severity  of  recessions  and  strength  of  the  subsequent  recovery  are 
associated with the amount of financial distress experienced in a financial crisis.1  
There  is  also  a  strong  likelihood  that  decreased  credit  demand  –  for  example,  from 
households whose homes fell in value below what they still owed on the mortgage – also has 
played a part in the slow growth of credit in this expansion, as has been expressed in the 
work of Atif Mian and Amir Sufi.2 Nevertheless, the patterns that I have reviewed here point 
to an adverse impact from a relatively weak banking sector on credit supply. However, it also 
suggests that the recent improvement in banks’ financial condition should provide support to 
credit growth going forward, which in turn would provide support to the economic growth we 
project over the medium term. 
As I noted earlier, one area where credit has flowed freely is student lending. Of course, an 
important factor distinguishing student loans from other forms of household debt is the fact 
that banks are far less important players and the federal government is instead the dominant 
lender. But this is just one factor that makes student loans unique, and I will now ask my 
colleagues to provide some more details on this important and fascinating market. 
                                                
1   Christina  D.  Romer  and  David  H.  Romer,  “New  Evidence  on  the  Impact  of  Financial  Crises  in  Advanced 
Countries,” NBER Working Paper No. 21021, March 2015; and Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 
This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009. 
2   Atif Mian and Amir Sufi, House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great Recession, and How We Can 
Prevent It from Happening Again, University of Chicago Press, 2014; and a number of scholarly articles. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  4 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5 
   6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
