  Njuguna Ndung’u: Kenya’s financial markets and payment systems 
developments 
Remarks  by  Professor  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
launch of the Funds Settlement System for Equities and Corporate Bonds through KEPSS, 
Nairobi, 27 January 2015. 
 Ms. Rose Mambo, Chief Executive, Central Depository & Settlement Corporation; 
Mr. Paul Muthaura, Ag. Chief Executive, Capital Markets Authority; 
Mr. Andrew Wachira, Acting Chief Executive, Nairobi Securities Exchange; 
Chief Executives of the Central Depository Agents; 
Chief Executive, Kenya Bankers Association; 
CEOs of Commercial Banks here present; 
Chief Executive, Kenya Association of Stockbrokers & Investment Banks; 
Distinguished Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am pleased to join you today on this auspicious occasion to launch the Settlement System 
for Equities and Corporate Bonds through the Real Time Gross Settlement platform of the 
Central Bank of Kenya, commonly referred to as KEPSS. At the outset, I congratulate the 
technical teams from the CDSC, CMA and CBK that ensured the success of this process. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: We are gathered here today to celebrate another milestone in the 
development of Kenya’s financial markets and the developments in the payment systems. As 
you  are  all  aware,  the  financial  landscape  has  changed  considerably  in  Kenya  and  the 
countries  in the  region. For  the region  to  attract foreign  investors and  deepen  its  markets, 
there is need to enhance our financial markets systems and processes to meet international 
standards. In this regard, I wish to recognize the East African Community (EAC) Financial 
Sector Development Regionalization Project (FSDRP), for spearheading an assessment of 
EAC Partner States’ compliance to the International Organization of Securities Commissions 
(IOSCO)  objectives  and  principles  of  securities  regulation,  particularly  Principle  38  on 
clearing and settlement. 
The  project  assessed  the  levels  of  development  of  the  securities  markets  payments  and 
settlement  system  as  well  as  existing  capacity  to  comply  with  principle  38,  and  developed 
action  plans  for  compliance  with  the  principle  of  Delivery  Versus  Payment  (DvP)  that 
formed the basis for the current developments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Kenya’s development blueprint, Vision 2030, envisages a financial 
sector that is vibrant and globally competitive in driving high levels of savings and financing 
the country’s investment needs. To achieve this goal, the Clearing and Settlement systems 
should  be  subject  to  regulatory  and  supervisory  requirements  that  are  designed  to  ensure 
that they are fair, effective and efficient while reducing credit, settlement and the possibility of 
systemic risk. This partnership between CDSC, CMA and CBK is not only an opportunity for 
CDSC to meet the needs of its customers but also contributes in addressing systemic risks in 
the settlement of securities. But it is also important that the payment and settlement system 
and the infrastructure that accompanies it is the driving force in financial markets today. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: We implemented a Real Time Gross Settlement System in 2005, a 
development  that  significantly  enhanced  efficiency  in  the  settlement  of  payments  to  “Real 
Time” basis. In addition, one of the greatest payments innovations of our time is the mobile 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  phone  money  revolution;  Kenya  was  the  first  country  in  Africa  to  introduce  Mobile  Money 
Financial  Services.  We  later  introduced  the  Cheque  Truncation  System  in  the  clearing  of 
cheques,  reducing  the  clearing  cycle  from  T+7  to  T+1.  Today  we  witness  yet  another 
momentous milestone where equities and corporate bonds traded at the Nairobi Securities 
Exchange  (NSE)  will  henceforth  be  settled  through  KEPSS  at  the  Central  Bank.  This 
landmark  accomplishment  is  one  that  is  fraught  with  immediate  and  future  benefits  that  I 
shall allude to shortly. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: KEPSS is a systemically important payment and settlement system 
drawing  participation  from  41  local  commercial  banks.  The  modernization  of  KEPSS  has 
incorporated regional payment systems – the East African Payment System (EAPS) for EAC 
and  the  Regional  Electronic  Payment  and  Settlement  System  (REPSS)  for  COMESA 
countries. Indeed, it is a very secure payment system that delivers financial settlements in 
real time using SWIFT as the message carrier. During the year 2014, KEPSS successfully 
settled 2.5 million transactions valued at Ksh.25.6 trillion; which is to say it clears more than 
10,000 transactions worth over Ksh.100 billion on a daily basis. These figures in themselves 
tell  the  story  of  success  and  so  more  enhancement  will  provide  the  platform  for  more 
success. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The Central Bank has expended substantial amounts of time and 
energy developing the building blocks and enabling environment for clearing and settlement 
of transactions to flow freely. The KEPSS platform will allow local, intra-regional and inter-
regional trade to progress efficiently and cost effectively. I am happy to note that CDSC will 
be  joining  this  settlement  community,  a  development  that  presents  an  opportunity  for 
expanding the scope and reach of KEPSS. Let me reiterate that KEPSS simplifies payment 
processes as well as enabling cross border payment and transfer of value within the region 
in an easier, safer and more efficient way. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: In a new system and a new way of doing business, better is always 
resisted – we went through the same motion with the cheque truncation system. I challenge 
the Central Depository Agents to impress upon their clients the immense benefits accruing 
from the use of the KEPSS for settlement of NSE transactions. These benefits include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Today’s  launch  therefore  marks  another  milestone  in  revolutionising  the  payments 
ecosystem in Kenya and in particular in the Securities Exchange market. The system 
successfully went live on 15th January with the settlement of transactions concluded 
at the Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE) being executed through the Central Bank’s 
KEPSS  system.  Therefore,  as  we  celebrate  with  the  CDSC,  CMA,  NSE  and  indeed  the 
entire capital markets fraternity, we are also affirming the potential for more innovativeness 
and enhancement of safety and efficiency through collaborations and innovation in payment 
and settlement systems. In doing so, we shall play our role in enabling the attainment of the 
national economic goals envisaged under Vision 2030. 
Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Let  me  conclude  my  remarks  by 
emphasising the important role that an efficient settlements system plays in enhancing the 
deepening  of  capital  markets.  As  Kenya  aspires  to  become  a  regional  and  international 
financial  centre,  the  centrality  of  efficient  payments  and  settlements  system  cannot  be 
gainsaid. The model we are about to launch is one more step towards achieving that goal. 
Thank you 
Enhanced efficiency in the settlement process and risk control mechanisms; 
Enhanced safety through use of the SWIFT infrastructure; 
Increased accessibility through commercial banks; 
Improved investor confidence leading to increased activities at the NSE; 
An efficient audit trail. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
