  Øystein Olsen: Managing Norway’s oil wealth 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at 
FeBAF, the Italian Banking, Insurance and Finance Federation, Rome, 14 April 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found on Norges Bank’s website: Charts (PDF). 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Introduction 
First,  let  me  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  here  at  FeBAF  –  the  Italian  finance 
federation. 
Norwegians love Italy for its food and wine, its architecture, its great cities and breath-taking 
scenery.  Italy  is  blessed  with  both  natural  and  cultural  assets  that  have  been  refined  and 
managed by the Italian people for hundreds of years. 
Norway is not known for its wine, but I think it is safe to say that we have been more than 
lucky in terms of natural resources. The management of Norway’s currently most important 
natural resource – petroleum – is the topic of my speech today. 
Over  the  past  two  decades,  Norway  has  transformed  oil  and  gas  resources  into  financial 
wealth. Oil revenues are invested abroad through a sovereign wealth fund – the Government 
Pension  Fund  Global,  or  the  oil  fund  for  short  –  which  is  managed  by  the  central  bank  of 
Norway. 
My  speech  today  is  intended  to  shed  some  light  on  how  Norway’s  petroleum  wealth  has 
been managed. I will seek to explain how we see ourselves as a global financial investor. I 
will also elaborate on the main elements of our investment strategy. 
Historical background 
Chart: GDP per capita in Norway, 1970–2015. Indexed to OECD 
To put the Norwegian economy and our wealth position into some perspective, let me start 
by going back in time. When the first oil was brought to the surface in 1971, income levels in 
Norway  were  low  compared  with  other  western  countries.  The  picture  has  reversed  since 
then. We have gradually caught up to the wealthiest nations. Measured by GDP per capita, 
Norway now ranks close to the top. 
Even  excluding  the  oil  sector,  Norway’s  mainland  economy  has  shown  relatively  robust 
developments. But there is no doubt that the extraction of oil and gas has played a major 
role. Given the high oil prices of the past fifteen years in particular, a booming oil industry has 
been an important driver of economic growth. Last year, the petroleum sector accounted for 
more than 50 percent of our exports, and more than 20 percent of GDP. 
Chart: Business investment 
The  high  oil  prices  of  recent  years  have  spurred  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  to 
record-high  levels.  The  level  of  investment  in  this  sector  in  2014  was  as  high  as  total 
investment in domestic non-oil industries. The positive spillovers to the oil service industry 
and  other  business  sectors  have  been  substantial,  in  particular  through  the  past  decade. 
Norwegian employment has remained high and unemployment low, even when the financial 
crisis hit in 2008. It is estimated that 1 out of 9 jobs in Norway are linked to the oil industry. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Fiscal rule 
It  was  established  at  an  early  stage  that  Norway’s  oil  and  gas  resources  belong  to  the 
Norwegian  people.  The  tax  system  for  the  petroleum  industry  was  designed  to  make  sure 
that  the  bulk  of  the  large  revenues,  the  economic  rent  from  the  petroleum  sector,  would 
accrue to the state. Petroleum companies pay a surtax of 51 percent of profits, on top of the 
normal corporate tax rate of 27 percent. The government also has direct ownership shares in 
the most profitable oil fields. 
However, policymakers’ handling of Norway’s newly discovered petroleum wealth got off to a 
rather bumpy start. During the first 25 years of oil production, Norway experienced two deep 
recessions.  Both  downturns  were  rooted  in  hugely  optimistic  income  expectations.  In  the 
1970s, the public sector was the big spender, and the government had to tighten policy later 
on. In the 1980s, a credit-fuelled consumption boom in the private sector led to necessary 
cut-backs after the oil price plunge in 1986. 
These two episodes of turbulence made clear how vulnerable a small open economy is to 
terms  of  trade  disturbances,  as  well  as  to  short-termism  and  exuberant  expectations.  To 
prevent  the  same  mistakes  from  being  made  again,  fiscal  institutions  were  set  up  in  the 
1990s. Among the most important of these are the oil fund and the fiscal rule. 
Chart: The fund mechanism 
The Norwegian parliament passed the act relating to the oil fund in 1990. Under the act, the 
net  fiscal  surplus,  including  oil  revenues,  is  transferred  to  the  fund,  and  invested  in 
international markets. A main purpose of the fund mechanism is to make the actual spending 
of oil revenues transparent. 
Towards the end of the 1990s, inflows to the oil fund increased, and there were expectations 
of considerable petroleum revenues in the future. There was increasing political pressure to 
spend more. In a climate of high inflows and even higher expectations, it was demanding to 
restrain fiscal spending. At the same time, it was clear that future pension obligations would 
be substantial. 
Economic policy guidelines were clarified in 2001 through the introduction of the fiscal rule. 
Under  these  guidelines,  government  spending  of  oil  revenues  –  measured  by  the  non-oil 
budget deficit – is limited to the expected real return on the fund – estimated at 4 percent 
annually.  The  idea  is  to  leave  the  capital  in  the  fund  untouched,  saving  it  for  future 
generations. 
Chart: A growing fund 
The  fiscal  institutions  that  were  established  proved  to  be  well  suited  to  managing  the 
revenues from the petroleum industry. Even though most of the income was to be saved, the 
fiscal rule provided for a gradual but sustainable increase in petroleum revenue spending. 
Fiscal policy was not set on autopilot. The guidelines provided for countercyclical fiscal policy 
in the short term, around the longer term path. In particular, the fund provided fiscal leeway 
during the economic setback in 2008 and 2009. 
Fund governance 
Let me now turn to the actual management of the fund. 
Chart: A fund owned by the Norwegian people 
The  Ministry  of  Finance  holds  the  political  responsibility  for  the  oil  fund.  The  overall 
management principles and strategy are anchored in the Norwegian parliament, to which the 
Ministry reports at regular intervals. 
The  operational  management  of  the  fund  is  fully  delegated  to  Norges  Bank.  Our  task  as 
manager of the fund is strictly commercial: to maximise returns within the guidelines defined 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
by  the  government.  This  structure  ensures  that  the  fund  is  not  used  as  a  foreign  policy 
instrument. 
Investment 
Management, a separate division within the central bank. Norges Bank reports on risk and 
return  to  the  Ministry,  and  we  also  provide  advice  to  the  government  on  the  investment 
strategy. 
investment  decisions  are  made  by  Norges  Bank 
Individual 
The investment strategy 
Our  management  objective  is  to  achieve  the  highest  possible  long-term  return,  with  an 
acceptable level of risk. The investment strategy is developed by keeping in mind the fund’s 
objective  as  well  as  its  key  characteristics:  its  size  and  its  long-term  horizon.  Let  me 
elaborate on some important aspects. 
The  fund’s  purpose  is  to  support  long-term  considerations  in  the  spending  of  government 
petroleum revenues. Both current and future generations should benefit from the petroleum 
resources.  Hence,  the  fund  itself  has  a  long-term  investment  perspective.  This  has 
fundamental implications for the investment strategy. 
Historically,  real  assets  like  equities  have  yielded  more  than  nominal  assets  like  bonds. 
Equities  have  also  proved  to  be  more  risky.  However,  the  short-term  variations  in  equity 
prices  largely  stem  from  changing  discount  factors  or  risk  appetite,  not  from  variations  in 
income forecasts for the companies.1 With the fund’s long-term perspective, such changes in 
risk premiums are of minor importance. Thus, the fund has ample capacity to bear this risk. 
Sixty percent of the fund capital is invested in listed equities. 
Recently, a new asset class was introduced – real estate. This improves the fund’s balance 
between risk and return. According to the fund’s management mandate, up to five percent of 
the fund is to be invested in real estate. Real estate investments are currently concentrated 
on  10  global  cities  in  Europe  and  the  US,  but  a  large  chunk  is  also  invested  in  logistics 
property in various countries, including Italy. Property in major Asian cities may be included 
in the fund’s assets this year. 
The  fund’s  second-largest  asset  class  is  bonds  or  fixed  income.  The  purpose  of  the  fixed 
income portfolio is to protect the value of the fund from heavy losses when the stock market 
falls,  and  to  provide  liquidity.  The  strategic  bond  weight  is  currently  35  percent.  Seventy 
percent of the fixed income portfolio is invested in government bonds in developed markets. 
These investments are distributed across countries on a GDP-weighted basis. 
Chart: A countercyclical investor 
The  long-term  horizon  puts  the  fund  in  a  position  to  be  a  countercyclical  investor  on  a 
systematic  basis.  This  is  done  through  rebalancing  the  share  of  the  portfolio  allocated  to 
equities.  According  to  the  rebalancing  rule,  when  the  equity  share  increases  to  more  than 
64 percent of the fund, we sell equities and buy bonds. Conversely, when the equity share 
falls below 56 percent, we sell bonds and buy equities. 
This strategy has proved to be profitable for the fund, and has increased the average annual 
return by about 0.5 percentage point.2 
Chart: International real interest rates 
So far, the fund has earned an overall annual real return – after inflation and management 
costs – of 3.8 percent. The cumulative return on the fund in money terms is equivalent to 
                                                 
1   John H. Cochrane (2011): “Discount rates”, The Journal of Finance 66 (4), 1047–1108. 
2   For an analysis of the impact of rebalancing, please see Norges Bank (2012): The history of the rebalancing of 
the fund, Discussion Note 4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
more than a third of the fund’s total capital at the end of 2014. Going forward, the returns are 
likely to be lower. 
The  starting  point  for  calculating  the  expected  rate  of  return  on  the  portfolio  is  the  real 
interest  rate  on  high-grade  government  bonds.  In  recent  years,  bond  yields  in  real  terms 
have been close to zero. Low bond yields reflect global economic conditions: Governments, 
businesses and households are seeking to save more, while demand for safe investments 
has  increased.  Substantial  asset  purchases  by  central  banks  are  pushing  in  the  same 
direction. Low yields may also reflect modest expectations of economic growth further ahead. 
Historically, equities have yielded higher returns than bonds. We also expect that to be the 
case ahead. Still, it is doubtful that equity prices will continue to rise at the same pace as in 
recent years. Weak or moderate growth in the real economy will feed through to the return on 
equities. 
The share allocated to real assets has increased gradually after equities were first introduced 
in  1998.  Soon,  almost  two-thirds  of  the  fund  will  be  invested  in  real  assets.  As  we  gain 
experience in real estate investing, it may be natural to invest in other types of real assets, or 
increase  the  equity  allocation  further.  In  the  long  run,  a  bond  allocation  of  20–25  percent 
should suffice to maintain the fund’s needed hedge against fluctuations in equity prices and 
execute the rebalancing strategy. 
Chart: Global investments 
Another of the fund’s characteristics, which in particular has an effect on risk management, is 
its large size. A main tool to manage the risk faced by the fund is diversification. With a fund 
of  this  size,  we  have  ample  opportunities  to  diversify.  Stocks  in  different  companies  in  a 
variety of sectors, loans to governments and corporations, and real estate investments in a 
number  of  global  cities  are  all  parts  of  the  portfolio.  At  the  end  of  2014,  the  fund  had 
investments in securities from almost 10 000 issuers in 75 countries. The fund is a global 
investor. 
Prices in financial markets carry information about the risk and return prospects of different 
assets, and the markets are fairly efficient most of the time. Hence, a natural starting point for 
the  allocation  across  regions  is  the  size  of  the  different  financial  markets.  However,  the 
weights assigned by the fund to different geographical regions are the result of a trade-off 
between various considerations. 
The  fund  is  a  minority  shareholder  and  dependent  on  good  corporate  governance  and 
protection of our rights in legal systems. Regulatory conditions in investee countries must be 
relatively stable, and we must be reasonably sure that our investments are safe. 
From the start in 1998, a large share of the fund was allocated to Europe. At that time, the 
emphasis was on exchange rate risk related to the trade pattern of the Norwegian economy. 
As European countries are our most important trading partners, Europe was overweighted 
compared  with  market  weights.  Three  years  ago,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  concluded  that 
exchange risk had diminished, partly due to increased globalisation. Consequently the fund’s 
overweight  in  Europe  was  reduced.  At  the  same  time,  the  allocation  to  emerging  markets 
was increased. 
The  average  ownership  share  in  a  listed  European  company  is  now  around  2.5  percent, 
which  is  twice  the  ownership  share  on  other  continents.  Almost  2  percent  of  the  fund  is 
invested in Italy. 
The share invested in emerging markets is growing, as these markets develop. Over the past 
couple of years, we have started investing in Slovenia, Ghana and Mauritius, to provide three 
examples. At the end of 2014, 10 percent of the fund was invested in emerging markets. Still, 
close to 80 percent of the fund is invested in North America and Europe, where markets are 
largest and the most advanced. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Through the fund’s investments in equities and bonds, we seek to ensure broad exposure to 
global equity and bond markets. In the management mandate, the Ministry of Finance has 
defined public stock and bond indices, which are used to benchmark our performance. These 
benchmarks are based on the FTSE and Barclays indices. 
These indices are constructed to meet the needs of a typical investor. As pointed out earlier, 
the oil fund is not a typical or average investor. Rather, the fund has certain distinguishing 
characteristics. The investment strategy seeks to exploit these characteristics to improve the 
overall balance between risk and return. Our portfolio will therefore deviate from the index 
along a number of different dimensions: 
• 
First, the index providers adjust for so-called free float. The free float of a company 
represents the portion of a company’s shares that are readily available for trading. 
Shares owned by governments, employees and company founders are assumed not 
to  be  readily  available  for  trading.  In  the  free  float  adjustment,  these  shares  are 
removed by the index provider and the stock enters the index with a lower weight. In 
our  management  of  the  fund  we  use  a  different  starting  point  to  better  reflect  the 
relative economic importance of companies. 
Second, the duration in the fixed income index is determined by market dynamics. In 
the  current  low-rate  environment,  issuers  have  chosen  to  opt  for  longer  dated 
bonds. Over the past year, the average duration of our strategic reference index has 
increased  by  more  than  half  a  year.  In  our  management  of  the  fund,  we  have 
chosen not to lock in low yields for a prolonged period and the fund has a shorter 
duration than the index. 
Third,  the  index  providers  exclude  certain  countries  and  segments  in  the 
construction  of  the  indices  for  different  reasons.  As  a  result,  the  indices  do  not 
represent the full set of opportunities for an investor such as the fund. To give the 
fund  higher  exposure  to  global  economic  activity,  we  invest  in  some  emerging 
markets that are not included in the indices. 
Fourth,  as  specified  in  the  management  mandate  laid  down  by  the  Ministry  of 
Finance, we have established environment-related mandates. And as also specified 
in the mandate, we take account of differences in fiscal strength between countries 
in the composition of government bond investments. 
   Based  on  the  kind  of  systematic  adjustments  indicated  above,  a  tailor-made  operational 
portfolio has been constructed. This reference portfolio serves as a basis for more traditional 
selections  of  securities.  The  fund’s  largest  holdings  in  terms  of  ownership  share,  both  in 
equity  and  fixed  income,  are  based  on  our  own  analyses  of  investee  companies  and 
countries. 
Chart: External managers 
The large majority of the fund’s investment decisions are made within our own organisation. 
Still, we have always used external management companies in areas where developing in-
house capabilities has not been an efficient option. Most of the external mandates have in 
recent years been directed to specialists in specific sectors or countries. 
The fund is a long-term, responsible investor. The objective of our management is to achieve 
the  highest  possible  return  at  acceptable  risk  levels.  Norges  Bank’s  work  on  responsible 
investing underpins this objective. As a long-term investor, we are dependent upon healthy 
and sustainable developments in investee companies and markets. 
Our  work  with  responsible  investment  rests  on  three  pillars:  We  promote  international 
principles and standards, and express our expectations as an investor on certain issues. We 
exercise active ownership through voting and engagement with companies. And we integrate 
environmental,  social  and  governance  issues  into  the  investment  process  and  risk 
management. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Chart: Responsible investment I 
Promoting good industry standards is an effective way of safeguarding our investments and 
assets in the long term. Our efforts to promote high standards of corporate governance and 
sustainable business practices build on principles and guidelines developed by organisations 
such as the UN and the OECD. 
As a financial investor, the fund is affected by the regulation of financial markets. We engage 
with  regulators  and  participate  in  consultations  on  new  regulations.  We  support  the 
development of harmonised rules across markets. 
We  express  our  expectations  towards  the  companies  in  our  investment  portfolio  through 
published expectation documents and direct engagement. So far, we have established three 
focus areas: climate change, water management and children’s rights. The documents set 
out our expectations of how companies should manage risk in these areas. 
Chart: Responsible investment II 
The purpose of our interaction with investee companies is to support the companies in their 
creation of long-term value. 
One of the most important tools at our disposal for exercising ownership rights is voting. We 
vote at nearly every annual general meeting of the companies in our portfolio. 
As  mentioned,  equal  treatment  of  shareholders,  including  minority  shareholders,  is  of 
paramount  importance  to  us.  Shareholders  should  have  the  right  to  nominate  and  dismiss 
directors, file shareholder proposals at general meetings and approve significant changes to 
the capital structure of a company. 
Chart: Responsible investment III 
We  seek  to  identify,  assess  and  report  on  different  kinds  of  risks  to  future  returns  by 
analysing  environmental,  social  and  governance  issues.  The  aim  is  to  gain  greater  insight 
into companies and portfolio risks. We look at issues that could have a significant impact on 
an  individual  company  or  on  the  fund’s  overall  investments.  Risk  is  analysed  at  country, 
sector and company level. 
Negative external effects are likely to involve a cost for companies sooner or later, potentially 
through  taxes  or  regulations.  Based  on  our  assessment  of  such  risks,  we  may  choose  to 
divest from a company. On the other hand, we seek overweight in companies with positive 
external effects. 
All of these measures are part of our work on responsible investment. The aim is to establish 
a  unified  chain  of  tools  that  all  support  responsible  investment  as  an  integral  part  of  our 
management objective: the highest possible returns. 
Transparency 
A  fund  owned  by  the  government  must  be  highly  transparent,  not  only  to  the  Norwegian 
public but also in an international context. 
Transparency  and  disclosure  of  information  is  a  key  feature  of  the  fund.  All  investment 
principles and guidelines as well as strategic advice and second opinion reports are made 
public.  We  publish  quarterly  reports  on  fund  performance,  which  are  presented  at  press 
conferences. The fund’s annual report discloses a complete list of all the investments held at 
the  end  of  the  year,  and  also  provides  an  overview  of  corporate  governance  work.  Voting 
records from general meetings are published in real time. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Concluding remarks 
Let  me  conclude.  We  have  been  able  to  extract  a  large  share  of  Norway’s  petroleum 
resources at favourable prices, and we have transformed a portion of our petroleum wealth 
into financial assets. Norway’s oil production is now well past its peak. High oil prices may 
also be a thing of the past. 
The fund is invested exclusively in foreign assets. The return we achieve on our investments 
is  intimately  linked  to  global  economic  developments.  Current  growth  prospects  seem 
modest by historical standards, so future returns may also be lower. 
Although  the  fund  will  continue  to  provide  a  substantial  contribution  to  the  government 
budget, the fund capital as a share of GDP may be approaching the peak. The forces driving 
economic growth in Norway will therefore be more similar to those of other countries in the 
years ahead. Nevertheless, for Norges Bank, managing the fund in a profitable, responsible 
and transparent way will be an important task – hopefully for generations to come. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
