  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The development in mobile banking in 
Uganda 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
meeting  with  Parliamentary  Committee  on  Information  and  Communication  Technology, 
Kampala, 25 February 2015. 
 Mobile money 
Mobile money was introduced in Uganda in 2009. The business model involves a partnership 
between a mobile money operator and a commercial bank. The services offered have so far 
been restricted to domestic remittances, basic retail payments and money storage services. 
The  growth  in  mobile  banking  has  been  phenomenal.  As  of  December,  2014,  there  were 
over  18  million  registered  mobile  money  customers,  and  the  average  monthly  number  of 
transactions  in  the  last  quarter  was  46  million  while  the  average  monthly  value  of  the 
transactions  was  UGX  2.1  trillion.  Mobile  money  therefore  has  a  high  potential  to  foster 
financial inclusion in Uganda. 
Mobile money regulation 
Money  transmission  is  a  regulated  financial  institutions  business  under  the  Financial 
Institutions  Act,  2004  (FIA).  Therefore,  all  mobile  money  operators  have  to  get  clearance 
from the Central Bank before they launch their services: 
– 
If an operator is not a licensed financial institution, it must partner with a licensed 
financial institution. 
The licensed financial institution applies to the BoU for approval of the partnership 
with a mobile money operator to offer mobile money services. 
The financial institution must carry out a due diligence on the mobile money operator 
and must obtain proof of financial position, review the operator’s business plan, risk 
management  proposal,  technology  system  and  Anti  Money  Laundering  (AML)/ 
Countering the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) measures. 
There must be an agreement between the financial institution and the mobile money 
operator. This agreement provides for the establishment of an escrow account in the 
financial 
is  deposited  before  creation  of  e-value. 
Safeguarding customers’ virtual money which they purchase with cash from mobile 
money agents has been the BoU’s main concern. The BoU has only allowed mobile 
money  operations  when  this  is  done  in  partnership  with  a  supervised  financial 
institution.  Mobile  money  operators  have  to  hold,  in  an  escrow  account  in  their 
partner financial institution, the equivalent in value of all the mobile money that they 
have  sold  to  their  customers. This  means  that  the  mobile  phone  operators,  which 
are not licensed financial institutions, cannot themselves intermediate the funds that 
they have mobilised through the sale of mobile money. The parties must be able to 
reconcile the balances of the escrow account and the mobile money accounts. 
Once  approval  is  obtained,  mobile  money  is  treated  as  a  financial  institutions 
business regulated under the FIA. 
institution  where  money 
    In 2013, the BoU issued mobile money guidelines which stipulate the approval process for 
the mobile money services, as well as the roles and responsibilities of all parties involved. 
They  address  interoperability,  system  standards,  competition,  AML/CFT,  and  supervision. 
They also stipulate the safeguards to protect customers among which are: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
      Transactions must be real time and only carried out when the mobile money system 
is  up  and  running,  and  must  be  authenticated  by  customers’  PIN  numbers.  The 
customer  must  receive  confirmation  of  execution  of  the  transactions.  In  case  of 
sending  mobile  money,  the  sender  must  be  able  to  verify  the  recipient’s  name 
before completing the transaction. 
The customer obtains a copy of terms and conditions of the service at the time of 
registration and must be given a minimum of thirty days’ notice before any changes. 
An agent must clearly display the identity and a dedicated telephone contact of the 
mobile  money  operator,  the  unique  identification  number  of  the  agent,  charges, 
notice that no charges are levied at the agent location, and a notice that the agent 
does not carry out transactions on behalf of customers 
Complaints handling and consumer recourse mechanisms. 
Mobile money supervision 
BoU has the powers to supervise the mobile money services. However, the mobile money 
operator has the duty to supervise its agents to ensure that agents conduct the business in 
accordance with the mobile money guidelines. Periodic reports regarding the performance of 
the  mobile  money  services  are  submitted  to  the  BoU.  The  BoU  developed  a  compliance 
matrix  to  assess  the  level  of  compliance  and  is developing  supervision  procedures for the 
mobile money services. 
Collaboration with UCC 
The  mobile  money  platforms  ride  on  mobile  networks  and  this  called  for  regulatory 
collaboration with the Telecom regulator, the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). 
First  of  all  UCC  has  to  allow  telecos  to  provide  mobile  money  as  a  value  added  service. 
Secondly,  UCC  is  responsible  for  ensuring  network  availability  (network  system  uptime), 
which is necessary for mobile money services to run. UCC has also to ensure that there is no 
unfair competition, i.e. that telecos do not lock out, nor unfairly charge other mobile money 
service providers who wish to use their networks. As is standard practice, regulators enter 
into Memorandum of Understanding (MOUs) to mainly exchange regulatory information and 
also  provide  for  other  regulatory  issues  in  which  they  can  collaborate.  BoU  and  UCC  are 
discussing the essentials to be included in the MoU. 
Future developments 
We  envisage  that  mobile  money  will  become  an  integral  part  of  the  National  Payment 
System. The Bank of Uganda Act is being amended to include powers of the Central Bank to 
regulate and supervise the payment systems, and a National Payment Systems Legislation 
is being developed whereby payment service providers will be licensed by the Central Bank. 
Once  this  legislation  is  enacted,  payment  service  providers  will  be  directly  licensed  as 
payment operators. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
