  Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Thai economy – tapping the untapped 
opportunity 
Speech by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the inauguration 
of the RMB Clearing Bank in Thailand and 5th year celebration of the ICBC (Thai), Bangkok, 
22 April 2015. 
 1. Your Excellency Ambassador Ning Fukui, Chairman Jiang, Chairman Hu, Dr. Zhigang Li, 
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for the invitation to give a few remarks 
on  the  occasion  of  the  inauguration  of  ICBC  (Thai)  as  the  official  Renminbi  clearing  bank 
here in Thailand. 
2.  This  development  of  the  RMB  Clearing  Bank  in  Thailand  and  certainly  also  to 
celebrate  the  5th  Anniversary  of  ICBC  (Thai)  is  in  fact  the  result  of  the  long  and 
continued  ties  between  China  and  Thailand.  It  has  marked  another  important  step  in 
further development of our financial ties following the signing of the Renminbi – Thai Baht 
Bilateral Swap Agreement and the Memorandum of Understanding with the People’s Bank of 
China on the establishment of the Renminbi Clearing Arrangements in December 2014. 
3. Today, I was invited to talk about Thai economy. So I am pleased to have the opportunity 
to share with you some of my observations on the current state of the Thai economy. Let me 
humbly start from some of the challenges we are facing, the economy is currently reeling 
from  both  internal  and  external  headwinds.  Internally,  the  stagnant  technology  and  labour 
readiness has so far taken a toll on Thailand’s economic expansion. Also, the improvement 
of  domestic  consumption  and  investment  are  slow  due  to  a  cautious  private  sector’s 
confidence.  Externally,  Thai  economy  is  affected  by  the  current  uneven  recovery  of global 
economy which hinders Thai export growth. However, Thai economy is expected to recover 
up to 3.8% GDP growth this year from a mere 0.8% last year. Private consumption and the 
government expenditures will play key roles for 2015 outlook. 
4.  On  the  bright  side,  Thailand  has  been  riding  on  the  back  of  China’s  economic 
prosperity.  In  other  words,  the  regional  prospect  has  pinned  on  improvement  in  intra-
regional  trades  of  goods  and  services.  China’s  economic  figures  may  be  somewhat  lower 
than its historical average, as a result of the sluggish recovery of the global demand and the 
continued  structural  reform  in  China.  However,  China  growth  rate  is  still  at  a  satisfactorily 
high level. And China has yet remained an important engine in support of the growth of the 
Thai  export  sector.  For  the  past  few  years,  Thailand  has  become  one  of  the  most 
popular  destinations  among  Chinese  tourists,  thanks  to  popularity  of  the  ‘Lost  in 
Thailand’  movie.  Each  week,  hundreds  of  flights  between  Thailand  and  China  have  been 
landed  to  accommodate  the  increasing  interest  of  Chinese  visitors.  We  value  this 
considerably  as  it  not only  helps  boost  the tourism  and  services  sector  of the  Thai 
economy, but also tightens our cultural connections. 
5.  As  we  all  know,  Chinese  economy  has  become  a  necessary  ingredient  for  our 
secret recipe for the past decade. Since China has been an important economic partner of 
Thailand and the region. To further strengthen these flows of trades and investments, close 
financial cooperation is the key. The Renminbi / Baht Bilateral Swap Agreement (or BSA in 
short) and the establishment of the Renminbi Clearing Bank here in Bangkok are the great 
examples. 
6.  The  BSA  is  designed  to  be  a  backstop  liquidity  facility,  which  will  help  boost 
confidence of the private sector in using the local currency in trade and investment 
settlement. After the first signing of the BSA in 2010, the use of the Chinese Renminbi in 
trade  and  investment  settlement  between  Thailand  and  China  has  grown  remarkably.  The 
share of trade settlement in Renminbi quadruples between 2010 and 2014. As for investment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  settlement, the share climbs up dramatically from a mere 1% in 2010 to 14% in 2014. In spite 
of the rapid increases, the volumes are still small compared to other major currencies. 
7. The Renminbi Clearing bank is the next important step from the BSA. Its Renminbi 
settlement  mechanism  is  the  sequencing  plan  of  the  Renminbi  scalability.  I  could  see  its 
merit which fundamentally paves the way for further Renminbi internationalization as well as 
the role of Renminbi in global financial markets that will become increasingly prominent in the 
near future. 
8. There is, however, some room for improvement in order to realize the full economic 
benefits  between  Thailand  and  China.  With  this  regard,  we  need  to  further  promote 
financial cooperation and more trade and investment facility arrangements such as today’s 
initiative. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
9. I would like to emphasize that there are still untapped opportunities abound along 
the whole spectrum of exchanges and cooperation between Thailand and China. As to 
give  you  food  for  thought,  the  followings,  are  a  few  examples.  Firstly,  regional  supply 
chain  network.  Our  region  has  already  been  regarded  as  high  quality  and  cost-effective 
production bases. However, there is still gap to be filled and opportunity to be grasped. Since 
many economies in the region are not well integrated into the regional production networks. 
According  to the  latest World  Bank’s  Trading  Cross  Borders  indicator  which  measures  the 
time and cost of trading across borders, the newer member of ASEAN all score well below 
the ASEAN average. This is mainly due to the huge gaps in infrastructure. 
10. Here, we can narrow the gap by mobilizing our region’s abundant financial resources into 
infrastructure  investment.  In  this  regard,  China  plays  a  strategic  role  in  the  progression  of 
infrastructure development in our region. The improved infrastructure will allow regional 
economies  at  various  stages  of  development  to  participate  in  regional  production 
networks in line with their evolving comparative advantage. Infrastructure investment is 
costly but it is worth the expense. 
11. Secondly, research and technical development. Although China has emerged into the 
world centre stage in just recent decades, China is now a  world class technology lab who 
owns  the  broad  range  of  advanced  technologies.  These  range  from  the  “Maglev”  train  in 
Shanghai to the supercomputer “Tianhe-2” which is ranked as the world’s fastest computing 
system in 2014. Thailand, on the other hand, is currently facing technology bottleneck which 
has  taken  a  toll  on  Thailand’s  competitiveness  and  growth.  According  to  the  UNESCO, 
Thailand’s  combined  public  and  private  investment  in  research  and  development  (R&D)  is 
around 0.25 percent of GDP which falls behind China’s 1.7 percent. 
12.  Arrays  of  China  development  plans  are  coincided  with  Thailand’s  research 
interest. According to China’s Medium to Long-Term Plan for Development of Science and 
Technology  (2006  –  2020),  China’s  topics  of  strategic  research  include  (1)  agriculture 
science (2) green technology and (3) public health. These topics are in line with the agendas 
of Thailand’s National Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) Master Plan. This provides 
opportunities for joint scientific works based on common interests and medium-term visions. 
Thailand  could  leverage  on  China  experiences  and  knowhow  through  technology 
transfer.  In  this  light,  Thailand  could  step  ahead  at  the  faster  pace  to  achieve  her 
goals. This is yet another great complement to tap. 
13. Lastly, Thailand as gateway to ASEAN. Thailand is strategically positioned at the heart 
of  the  ASEAN  region  with  relatively  well-developed  infrastructure  as  reflected  in  the World 
Bank’s latest Logistics Performance Index. Thailand has, therefore, been a natural gateway 
that links extra-regional economies to ASEAN markets. Thailand has advantages to be a hub 
for  regional  headquarters  of  multinational  companies;  a  hub  for  logistics  and  distribution 
activities;  a  sourcing  hub  for  regional  markets;  and  a  financial  hub  for  regional  markets. 
However, to remain competitive as a regional hub is a challenging task. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
14.  To  remain  as  the  preferred  hub  and  entry  point  of  the  region,  we  perceive  an 
opportunity  for  investment  from  China  which  has  the  advantage  in  capital,  construction 
capacity  and  technology.  As  the  advantage  of  low  cost  factor  of  productions  is  rapidly 
declining, China is facing an urgent need to re-orient supply chains through Thailand to enter 
ASEAN and the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) in particular. China and Thailand should 
therefore make every effort to grasp this opportunity and construct win-win solutions for both 
sides. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
15. Let me conclude that China economic prosperity and advancement provides wide range 
of untapped opportunities for Thailand. They are right here where we are now, in our region. 
We should seize it and not miss it. And I am confident that so long as we work hand in hand 
with China, unite together, and embrace the merit of economic integration, the synergy of the 
two will surely give its fruit on the growing tree. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
