  Andreas Dombret: The euro area – where do we stand? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at Money Marketeers, New York City, 4 March 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at a Money Marketeers event today. I would like to give 
you a brief overview of the current situation in Germany and the euro area. I am particularly 
looking forward to discussing these issues with you and hearing your perspective. 
Mutual  exchange  is  essential  in  a  globalised  world  where  countries  are  no  longer  isolated 
islands  but  part  of  a  closely  interconnected  community.  The  global  financial  crisis  has 
highlighted how close these connections are and how quickly a problem in one corner of the 
world can spread around the globe. 
This truth applies all the more to countries sharing a common currency such as the member 
states  of  the  euro  area.  Back  in  1999,  11  European  countries  adopted  the  euro  as  their 
common currency. Today, the single currency is shared by 19 countries and more than 300 
million people, which in my eyes makes it a success story. 
That being said, it has not always been plain sailing. In the wake of the global financial crisis 
of 2008, the euro area slid into a financial crisis of its own. This was compounded in 2010 
when Greece entered into a sovereign debt crisis, triggering a sudden loss of confidence in 
other  member  states  which  eventually  brought  the  euro  area  to  the  brink  of  collapse. 
Extensive rescue packages by the governments along with non-standard measures taken by 
the ECB helped to calm the markets and prevented the crisis from escalating. 
To some commentators, the situation in the last weeks was not much different. Greece has 
again  captured  the  headlines.  With  the  decision  by  the  Eurogroup  to  prolong  the  existing 
rescue package for Greece for four months some kind of temporary calm was bought. 
Unrelated to Greece, the ECB gave the green light to non-standard measures as a means of 
addressing the risks associated with too prolonged a period of low inflation. 
To  obtain  a  clearer  picture,  let  us  take  a  tour  of  the  euro  area  to  see  where  we  stand  at 
present and where we are headed in the future. Unsurprisingly, I will begin by focussing on 
the growth prospects of the German economy, not only because this is my home country but 
also because it is the largest economy in the euro area. 
The German economy – in good shape but challenges ahead 
2. 
At  the  beginning  of  2015,  the  German  economy  remains  in  good  shape.  This  is  due  to  a 
number of factors. First, enterprises have brought their costs under control, their debt level is 
not  unreasonably  high,  and  they  have  an  attractive  range  of  products  to  offer  on  global 
markets.  Correspondingly,  exports  have  been  rising  quite  strongly.  Second,  the  German 
economy is being supported by domestic consumption, and – at least in the last quarter – by 
investment.  In  addition,  unemployment  is  low,  households  are  not  burdened  by  excessive 
debt and real wages are rising on account of low inflation. 
The German economy grew by 1.6% in real terms in 2014. However, the relative strength of 
the German economy at present should not obscure the fact that major challenges lie ahead 
and  that  this favourable  position  is  not  assured  in  the  long  run. In  particular,  unfavourable 
demographic trends will have an impact on future growth. The Bundesbank estimates that 
potential output is currently growing at a rate of 1% per year and will continue to do so until 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  end  of  the  decade.  Compared  to  the  1990s  and  2000s  this  is  a  truly  underwhelming 
figure. 
Looking ahead to the distant future, Germany will be near the bottom of the league table for 
growth  by  international  standards.  Studies  conducted  by  the  OECD  show  that,  by  2060, 
Germany  will  have  grown  at  the  slowest  rate  of  all  42  countries  surveyed,  primarily  as  a 
result of the demographics-driven decline in the number of hours worked. 
With an annual trend growth rate of just over 1% by 2060, the OECD predicts that Germany 
will  grow  only  half  as  quickly  as  the  United  States.  As  measured  per  capita,  however, 
Germany and the US are expected to grow at a similar pace, by 1.5% per year by 2060. 
So, what can Germany do to improve its growth prospects in the long run? One frequently 
voiced  proposal  these  days  is  that  Germany  should  step  up  its  investment  as  a  lever  for 
increasing its own growth potential as well as that of the euro area as a whole. 
Indeed, the total real investment ratio in Germany was markedly lower in the 2000s than in 
the 1990s. And it was also lower than in the rest of the euro area. 
Nevertheless, weaker investment in the last decade was largely the result of the construction 
boom in the late 1990s which followed German reunification. If construction is excluded from 
the investment ratio, Germany’s situation is no longer any different from the rest of the euro 
area. 
In addition, the construction boom witnessed in other euro-area countries also came to an 
abrupt end during the crisis, with the result that the ratio for the euro area excluding Germany 
has now returned to levels close to the German ratio. This effectively disproves claims that 
the German private sector is investing too little, be it by historical or international standards. 
In any case, it is not possible to increase private investment by decree. When it comes to 
private  investment  decisions,  expectations  pertaining  to  growth  and  income  are  of  pivotal 
importance. 
Against this backdrop, many commentators point to public investment, which can be directly 
influenced by the government. With regard to public investment, Germany lags well behind 
the rest of the euro area. However, this fact alone does not justify assertions that the state 
should invest more. 
Even  so,  public  net  investment  has  been  negative  for  some  time  now,  and  there  indeed 
seems  to  be  room  for  improvement.  Infrastructure  weaknesses  can  inhibit  growth 
considerably and there are certainly regional shortcomings in Germany. While a good public 
infrastructure is important, it does not require higher debt. 
Nevertheless,  Germany  has  a  good  infrastructure  on  the  whole.  According  to  the  Global 
Competiveness  Ranking  of  the  World  Economic  Forum,  only  six  countries  have  a  better 
infrastructure (the US is ranked 12th). 
The medium-term growth prospects of the German economy also depend, of course, on an 
improved economic outlook in the other euro-area countries. This brings me to the second 
part of my speech: the future of the monetary union. 
The euro area – structural reforms needed 
3. 
When  the  euro-area  crisis  began  five  years  ago,  many  people  referred  to  it  as  the  “euro 
crisis”.  However,  it  was  not  a  currency  crisis  but  a  cocktail  consisting  of  a  debt  crisis,  a 
banking crisis and a balance of payments crisis. While the underlying problems differ slightly 
between individual countries, the key to overcoming the crisis lies with the affected countries 
themselves. 
In  the  years  following  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  fiscal  and  economic  policies  in  some 
member  states  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  a  monetary  union.  These  countries 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It 
that 
is  becoming 
increasingly  clear 
the  efforts  are  bearing 
experienced strong capital inflows. Unfortunately, the lion’s share of this capital flowed into 
private or public consumption or into an oversized housing sector. 
On  the  back  of  heavily  exaggerated  growth  expectations,  a  decrease  in  competitiveness 
owing to generous wage settlements and insufficient financial regulation, sizable imbalances 
accumulated which then contributed to the crisis. 
Hence, to resolve the crisis it is the countries themselves that need to adjust. And it has been 
clear from the outset that the necessary reforms and adjustment measures require patience. 
In  the  meantime,  major  progress  has  been  made  as  most  of  the  crisis  countries  have 
managed to improve their public finances and to solve their structural problems. 
Current account deficits have largely been reduced and some countries are now running a 
surplus.  Price  competitiveness  in  the  crisis  countries  has  also  improved  significantly. 
Measured  in  terms  of  the  deflators  of  total  sales,  competitiveness  has  improved  by  6%  in 
Portugal, 9% in Spain and 14% in Greece. To some extent, these figures can be attributed to 
the depreciation of the euro. Nevertheless, the figures for the countries I have just mentioned 
are also positive when measured in terms of the euro area. 
Needless  to  say,  the  job  has  not  been  finished  yet.  Structural  reforms  have  been 
implemented,  but  more  needs  to  be  done.  Monetary  policy  measures  cannot  substitute 
structural reforms. The Eurosystem has done a lot to prevent the crisis from escalating but it 
cannot address the underlying problems of the crisis. 
Structural  reforms  are  the  best  way  to  generate  sustainable  economic  growth  and  create 
employment. 
fruit: 
unemployment rates seem to have peaked, and the economies are growing again. 
This  makes  it  all  the  more  important  for  the  achievements  not  to  be  compromised.  It 
therefore worries me that Greece might go backwards in terms of its reform agenda. 
Greece’s  newly  elected  government  objected  to  complying  with  the  financial  assistance 
agreements and intended to withdraw some of the reforms that had already been adopted. 
There were even brief calls for further debt relief. However, after intense negotiations among 
the  finance  ministers  of  the  euro  area,  the  Greek  government  settled  for  requesting  an 
extension  of  the  current  programme.  After  the  Greek  government  had  also  committed  to 
pushing  ahead  with  economic  and  fiscal  reforms,  the  finance  ministers  of  the  euro  area 
approved  a  four-month  extension  of  the  programme.  The  details  of  a  new  financial 
assistance programme need to be worked out by summer. 
Greece certainly needs further assistance from the rest of the euro area. However, further 
assistance can only be granted if Greece continues with its efforts to restore sound public 
finances and competitive economic structures. To regain investors’ trust, sustainability and 
competitiveness are necessary requirements. 
Suffice to say, it is not enough to correct misalignments solely at the national level, either in 
Greece  or  elsewhere  in  the  euro  area.  We  also  need  structural  reforms  at  the  European 
level. And here, a lot has been done since the crisis broke out. 
First,  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  were  tightened  and  a  fiscal  compact  was 
adopted in order to restore confidence in public finances. Second, a procedure for identifying 
macroeconomic imbalances at an early stage was established. And third, a crisis mechanism 
was set up to serve as a “firewall”, safeguarding the stability of the financial system in the 
euro area. 
In  addition  to  these  measures,  the  euro  area  took  a  major  step  toward  deeper  financial 
integration.  On  4  November  2014,  the  first  pillar  of  a  European  banking  union  was  put  in 
place. On that day, the ECB assumed responsibility for supervising the 123 largest banks in 
the euro area. Together, the banks concerned account for more than 85% of the aggregate 
balance sheet of the euro area’s banking sector, making the ECB one of the biggest banking 
supervisors in the world. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Taking banking supervision from the national level to the European level has three concrete 
benefits. 
First, European banking supervision allows banks in the entire euro area to be supervised in 
a uniform manner according to the same high standards. These harmonised standards will 
emerge  from  the  cross-border  sharing  of  experience,  noting  the  best  aspects  of  each 
national approach to banking supervision and adopting these for use at the European level. 
Second, European banking supervision makes it possible to effectively identify and manage 
cross-border problems. This is essential because large banks are usually active in more than 
one country. 
Third, taking banking supervision from the national to the European level will add a degree of 
separation between supervisors and the banks they supervise. This will prevent supervisors 
from handling their banks with kid-gloves out of national interest. 
As you can see, we have come to expect a lot from European banking supervision. And in 
2016,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  will  be  supplemented  by  a  European  resolution 
mechanism for banks. This will be the final step on the road to banking union and a major 
step forward in designing a better framework for the European monetary union. 
However, to make monetary union more stable, the EMU framework needs further reform, 
too.  The  primary  objective  should  be  to  increase  the  incentives  to  make  sound  and 
responsible decisions within the euro area. To this end, it is important to rebalance liability 
and control. 
Either we establish centralised rights to intervene in national fiscal policies or we strengthen 
the principle of individual national liability. 
As I do not see enough support for the great leap forward – either in the political sphere or 
among  electorates  –  I  do  not  expect  it  to  occur  in  the  foreseeable  future.  Therefore,  the 
principle of national liability needs to be underscored. Otherwise, the deficit bias of member 
states of the euro area will be strengthened, which is harmful to the stability of the currency 
union. 
Relying  on  fiscal  rules  alone  will  not  suffice  to  overcome  the  euro  area’s  vulnerability  to 
crises  once  and  for  all.  On  the  contrary,  additional  steps  are  needed  to  strengthen  the 
disciplining effect of capital markets on fiscal policy. In that sense, the principle of individual 
national  responsibility  ultimately  means  that  governments,  too,  must  be  allowed  to  fail 
financially. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Recent events could create the impression of the euro area being stuck in a time loop – it is 
a bit like “Groundhog Day”, but less funny. Nevertheless, it should be stressed that, in the 
past six years, we have made considerable headway in resolving the crisis and in putting the 
euro area back on a solid footing. We have achieved a great deal but much still remains to 
be done – both at the national and at the European level. 
If we are to overcome the multiple challenges that lay ahead, all the member states of the 
euro  area  will  need  to  work  together  in  a  spirit  of  cooperation  and  demonstrate  a  firm 
commitment to the common currency. On that basis, I am confident that the euro area will 
remain a stable and prosperous economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
