  Stephen S Poloz: Riding the commodity cycle – resources and the 
Canadian economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of the  Bank  of  Canada, to  Calgary  Economic 
Development, Calgary, Alberta, 21 September 2015. 
 I would like to thank Bahattin Buyuksahin, Brigitte Desroches, Kun Mo and Konrad Zmitrowicz for their help in 
preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
This isn’t the first time that a governor of the Bank of Canada has come to Calgary to talk 
about  commodities.  I  suspect  it  won’t  be  the  last.  It’s  an  obvious  discussion  topic  here  in 
Alberta,  where  resources  make  up  more  than  a  quarter  of  the  economy.  Of  course,  such 
riches aren’t unique to Alberta. Natural resources have been a big economic story for this 
country  since  the  time  of  European  contact.  Today,  Canada  is  the  only  major  exporter  of 
natural resources among the G-7 nations. Oil is just one part of the story – we are also a 
major  producer  and  exporter  of  coal  and  natural  gas,  base  and  precious  metals,  minerals 
such as potash, and agricultural and forest products. 
Because  Canada  has  been  endowed  with  such  a  wide  variety  of  resources,  we’ve  had  to 
learn how to deal with large swings in their prices. I don’t just mean the usual high degree of 
volatility common among many raw materials. I’m also referring to the long-term swings in 
prices that are often called “super cycles.” What’s important to remember is that these long-
term swings are driven by the fundamental economic laws of supply and demand, as well as 
the continuous technological progress that can affect both output and consumption. 
The pattern is familiar. A large and persistent increase in demand leads to sustained upward 
pressure on resource prices over a number of years. The higher prices act as an incentive to 
boost  supply,  and  companies  act  by,  for  example,  investing  in  new  capacity  and  finding 
methods  to  increase  efficiency.  While  high  prices  can  certainly  spur  research  and 
development,  technological  progress  has  been  a  constant  theme  in  natural  resource 
industries. Such advances uncover ways to raise output and lower production costs. And it’s 
because  of  this  progress  that  inflation-adjusted  commodity  prices  have  generally  been 
trending lower for 200 years. 
The investments that lead to increased output can take years, if not decades, to complete. 
But, over time, the higher output generated by those investments combines with stabilizing 
demand to bring about a period of downward pressure on prices. Faced with lower prices, 
companies  may  scale  back  investment  and  production.  Ultimately,  the  lower  prices  will 
encourage demand, and the reduced investment will crimp future supply, leading to higher 
prices. And producers will ride the price cycle all over again. 
Any  economy  that  relies  on  natural  resources  will  naturally  be  challenged  by  large 
movements in their prices. These shocks are more than just swings in national income; they 
also force businesses to make decisions about the way resources such as capital and labour 
are allocated. These decisions often lead to difficult adjustments, but they are necessary for 
maximizing our economy’s potential. 
While an abundance of raw materials may  complicate the management of companies and 
the  conduct  of  economic  policy,  it’s  far  better for  a  country  to  have  resources  than  not  to 
have  them.  Even  when  prices  are  falling,  as  they  have  been  recently,  our  endowment 
represents a store of value and a source of future riches. 
What I’ll do in the rest of my time today is talk about some of the global forces that have been 
driving recent swings in commodity prices and look at how they may evolve in the years to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
come.  Then,  to  emphasize  just  how  uncertain  the  outlook  can  be,  I’ll  talk  about  some 
alternative scenarios that could dramatically alter the future for producers. Finally, I’ll revisit 
some  of  the  lessons  that  policy-makers  and  business  leaders  can  apply  today  and  in  the 
future. 
Global forces at work 
Let’s take a look back at resource prices over the past 15 years or so. We saw a large and 
persistent increase in demand, sparked by rapid economic growth in emerging markets. In 
China,  the  world’s  most  populous  country,  economic  growth  averaged  about  10  per  cent 
annually between 2001 and 2011, a period that included the global financial crisis. 
Chinese  growth  has  meant  enormous  demand  and  rising  prices  for  many  of  Canada’s 
resources,  particularly  coal  and  oil,  as  well  as  base  metals  such  as  copper,  nickel  and 
aluminum.  As  millions  of  people  in  emerging  markets  left  rural  areas  for  cities,  demand 
increased for building materials such as the iron ore used in steel, and this supported prices. 
Although the financial crisis led to price declines, many raw materials rebounded sharply. By 
April 2011, the Bank of Canada’s commodity price index had reached its post-crisis peak. 
However,  rapid  growth  tends  to  moderate  as  an  expansion  matures.  Chinese  economic 
growth  has  eased  to  an  average  of  7.5  per  cent  since  2012,  as  authorities  have  tried  to 
engineer  a  more  sustainable  and  domestically  oriented  expansion.  Similarly,  India,  which 
saw annual GDP growth near 9 per cent from 2005 to 2010, has also moderated since 2012. 
While it’s true that these cooling growth rates have had an impact on prices, we shouldn’t 
forget that emerging markets are still an important source of demand. Indeed, since the start 
of  the  decade,  the  Chinese  economy,  now  the  world’s  second-largest,  has  more  than 
doubled in size when measured in current dollars. 
In terms of supply, we’ve also seen responses that are putting downward pressure on prices 
for metals and some energy goods. For example, the iron ore supply continues to expand 
despite lower prices, thanks to the impact of multi-year investments made when prices were 
higher. These investments led to expanded capacity in low-cost areas such as Australia and 
Brazil. 
Now let me say a few words about oil prices. This topic is obviously of great importance here 
in  Alberta  because  of  its  impact  on  employment  and  the  overall  economy.  But  it’s  also 
important  for  Canada  as  a  whole,  given  the  implications  for  national  income  and 
interprovincial trade, as well as the industry’s sizable influence on business investment. 
Why did oil prices fall so much? The main reason is that supply rose sharply, thanks primarily 
to technological advances in oil extraction everywhere. This includes the oil sands, tight oil 
and  the  Bakken  deposits.  Consider  in  particular  the  technological  progress  that  enabled 
producers  to tap tight  oil  reserves. Output from the  United  States  alone,  which  essentially 
didn’t  exist  before  2008,  reached  4.2  million  barrels  per  day  last  year.  That  increase  is 
roughly equivalent to all the oil that Canada produces in a year. 
Given  the  dramatic  drop  in  prices  over  the  past  year,  the  Bank  has  spent  a  lot  of  time 
speaking with business leaders to try to gauge precisely how they will react. At the start of 
the year, oil companies were saying that they intended to cut investment by about 30 per 
cent. Prices didn’t recover as much as was forecast at the time, so companies subsequently 
told us that they would cut their investment intentions by about 40 per cent. Currently, based 
on  discussions  I’ve  had  over  the  past  couple  of  weeks,  many  firms  are  still  revising  their 
longer-term expectations for oil prices. The Bank will continue to assess what the impact may 
be on their investment spending. 
What this means for the evolution of oil prices is very hard to say. The Bank’s usual practice 
is to assume for our projection that oil prices will remain stable and use our economic models 
to test alternative scenarios. I know many companies do the same. But that can be risky: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
because the vast majority of oil transactions are financial, rather than between producers and 
users, prices tend to be more volatile than the underlying fundamentals. 
Before I move on, let me emphasize a point. Lower prices for base metals and oil today do 
not  mean  that  long-term  investments,  which  may  take  years  to  complete  and  last  for 
decades, were somehow a mistake. Without those investments, we would never have been 
able  to  capitalize  on  the  higher  prices,  which  boosted  Canada’s  aggregate  income.  What 
matters  for  a  given  investment  is  how  prices  evolve  over  the  life  of  the  project,  which  is 
impossible to know when long-term investment decisions must be made. 
From the  end  of  2008  to  the  end  of  2010, the price  of copper tripled, while  oil  and  nickel 
prices more than doubled. If you believe in market forces, these movements represented a 
clear signal to invest and expand output. Those who were able to recognize the opportunity, 
make adjustments and exploit the higher prices were rewarded, and the increased income 
brought important benefits to Canada’s economy. 
Alternative scenarios and the need for flexibility 
Now let me spend some time talking about the future. The price cycle I’ve sketched out may 
appear to be fairly predictable. But history has repeatedly shown that new technologies can 
quickly upend assumptions about future demand and supply. 
For  example,  back  in  the  1970s,  there  were  predictions  that  the  world  would  run  out  of 
copper by the end of the century. The people who made that forecast did not foresee that 
copper wire, long a staple of communications infrastructure, would be replaced by fibre-optic 
cable, with its glass threads made from silica. This technology helped reduce the demand for 
copper, in essence extending its supply. 
Similarly,  digital  photography  had  a  dramatic  impact  on  the  photo-processing  industry. 
Twenty  years  ago,  the  idea  that  everyone  would  carry  around  telephones  that  were  also 
good-quality  cameras  was  ridiculous.  People  took  pictures  with  cameras  that  were  loaded 
with  film  and  took  the film  to  a  developer.  The  processing  consumed  a  lot  of  silver.  Back 
then, if you didn’t anticipate the emergence of digital photography, you might have expected 
this  source  of  demand  would  continue  indefinitely.  Instead,  according  to  the  Washington-
based  Silver  Institute,  the  use  of  silver  in  photography  peaked  in  1999  and  has  fallen  by 
almost 80 per cent since. 
It’s  these  sorts  of  technological  advances  that make  predictions  about future  demand  and 
supply so difficult. But it’s also these technological advances, combined with Canada’s many 
gifts of natural resources, that will generate the opportunities to secure our future prosperity. 
Our  goods  will  remain  in  demand;  we  will  continue  to  have  lumber for houses,  metals for 
industrial production and oil for use in plastics – and it’s hard to imagine that Canadian roads 
won’t continue to need new asphalt repairs. 
Further, it’s important to remember that Canada’s endowment is extremely diverse. While the 
cycles  for  base  metals  and  oil  have  turned  lower,  there  is  still  substantial  demand  that’s 
supporting  the  prices  of  many  agricultural  goods.  As  I  noted,  with  continued  growth  in 
emerging markets, their populations are becoming increasingly urbanized. In North America, 
82 per cent of the population lives in urban areas. That compares with 55 per cent in China, 
and just 30 per cent in other emerging markets such as India. 
This  trend  toward  urbanization  is  likely  to  continue. With  it  will  come  growing  demand  for 
goods  linked  to  household  consumption  –  particularly  agricultural  products.  Consider  the 
hundreds of millions of people who are climbing the income scale in India and China. Their 
changing diet implies much more than just stronger demand for traditional protein sources. It 
also  implies  demand  for  inputs  such  as  fertilizer,  animal  feed,  fish  feed,  oilseeds  and 
specialty  crops  such  as  lentils  and  chickpeas.  Indeed,  the  latest  traffic  figures  from  Port 
Metro Vancouver show sharp growth in shipments of wheat and specialty crops, and solid 
gains in meat, poultry and potash. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Canada  is  particularly  well  placed  to  tap  growing  demand  for  fish  and  other  seafood. 
Canadian seafood exports to China in the first half of the year grew by 11 per cent compared 
with  the  same  period  last  year. To  take  just  one  example,  60,000  lobsters  are flown from 
Halifax to Shanghai every week, aided by advances in shipping and production technology. 
Thanks in part to this demand, lobster prices have been rising sharply. 
In terms of aquaculture, however, there appears to be considerable growth potential. While 
mussel  farming  output  grew  by  about  35  per  cent  from  2009  to  2013,  farmed  salmon 
production  plateaued  over  that  period  at  about  100,000  tonnes  a  year.  Canada  has  more 
coastline  than  any  other  country  in  the  world.  Yet  the  volume  of  our  seafood  output  is 
dwarfed  by  countries  such  as  Norway,  which  produces  seven  times  as  much  as  Canada 
does. I’ll leave it to others to figure out how best to tap this potential resource. Rare earth 
minerals,  the  17  elements  used  in  high-tech  products  such  as  cell  phones  and  hybrid 
vehicles, represent another potential source of growth for Canadians over time. 
It’s  impossible  to  know  with  certainty  where  opportunities  will  emerge  30  years  from  now. 
What new technological advances lie just over the horizon? Consider, for example, the future 
of water desalination. Right now, the process of removing salt from sea water is too energy-
intensive  to  be  economically  feasible  on  a  large  scale.  But  perhaps  we  are  just  one 
technological breakthrough away from solving this problem. Imagine the impact if the chronic 
droughts  plaguing  western  North  America  and  Australia  could  be  eased  by  desalinated 
ocean water. 
The  point  of  this  exercise  is  to  emphasize  just  how  uncertain  the  future  is.  Businesses, 
consumers, governments – we must all plan for the future based on the best information we 
have.  At  the  same  time,  natural  uncertainty  requires  us  to  be  flexible  to  adapt  to 
circumstances that can change rapidly. 
In  concrete  terms,  this  means  business  leaders  must  be  aware  of  the  risks  involved  in 
resource  production,  manage  those  risks  as  best  as  they  can,  and  be  ready  to  react  to 
market  signals  and  seize  opportunities.  History  has  shown  that  the  companies  that  are 
nimble are the ones that are best poised to thrive over time. Policy-makers can help in these 
efforts by encouraging economic flexibility. This means allowing the necessary adjustments 
to take place and not frustrating flows of investment or labour from one region to another. 
Canada’s labour market showed impressive flexibility when oil prices were rising, as workers 
flocked to Alberta to fill demand. And, in our latest Business Outlook Survey, the Bank saw 
evidence  of  labour  shortages  easing  in  regions  where  some  interprovincial  workers  are 
returning from the oil patch. 
Policy lessons 
Before I conclude, let me say a few words about how monetary policy fits into the picture. 
There are lessons that we can take from previous price cycles. The most important of these 
is  the  value  of  our  monetary  policy  framework.  We  can’t  do  much  about  resource  price 
shocks.  But  our  policy  can  help  the  economy  adjust  to  them.  In  particular,  our  floating 
exchange rate helps absorb some of the impact of the price movements and sends signals 
that facilitate adjustments. 
Think  back  to  the  previous  decade.  From  2002  to  2012,  oil  prices  went  from  about 
US$25 per barrel to more than US$100 per barrel, leading to a jump in our national income. 
Over  the  same  period,  the  Canadian  dollar  appreciated  from  a  record  low  of  around 
62 cents U.S.  to  above  parity,  helping  to  reduce  the  inflationary  risks  that  came  with  the 
stronger growth and increased income. 
Similarly, over the past year, both oil prices and the Canadian dollar have fallen sharply. The 
floating currency is helping to reduce the disinflationary risks that have come with the cut in 
our  national  income.  Further,  allowing  the  currency  to  float  frees  the  Bank  of  Canada  to 
concentrate our single policy tool on our single target, which is inflation. If we tried to offset 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
these  currency  movements,  we  would  end  up  frustrating  the  natural  shifts  in  economic 
resources. 
By focusing on our mandate to keep inflation low, stable and predictable, the Bank has built 
up credibility, and Canadians have well-anchored inflation expectations, even in the face of 
large price swings. For example, when we have seen big moves in energy costs, such as the 
price of gasoline, there has been little evidence that consumers began to adjust their overall 
inflation expectations, either upward or downward. 
Why is this important? Since Canadians see our commitment to our target as credible, that 
makes it much easier for us to reach our mandated goal without needing big swings in output 
or interest rates. Those of you who can recall our experience with the oil price shock of the 
1970s will remember the subsequent effort required to bring inflation under control. Without a 
credible target and with unanchored expectations, inflation soared. Extremely high interest 
rates were needed to get price increases back under control. 
Another  point  to  remember  is  that  swings  in  commodity  prices  can  affect  the  normal 
relationship between the total inflation rate and the core measure of inflation that we use as 
an  operational  guide.  For  example,  total  inflation  is  currently  being  pushed  down  by  the 
impact  of  lower  energy  costs.  In  contrast,  core  inflation,  which  strips  out  the  most  volatile 
inflation  components,  is  facing  upward  pressure  because  recent  declines  in  the  exchange 
rate  are  boosting  the  prices  of  imported  goods.  However,  we  expect  these  to  be  one-off 
effects, and, as such, we would look through them. As we noted in our July Monetary Policy 
Report, when all the temporary factors are stripped out, the underlying trend in inflation in 
Canada is in the range of 1.5 per cent to 1.7 per cent, below our target of 2 per cent. 
Given these complications, the Bank is looking at how we measure core inflation as part of 
our regular review of our inflation-targeting regime. Next year, we will answer the question of 
whether  the  Bank  should  continue  to  focus  on  one  pre-eminent  measure  of  core  inflation 
and, if so, whether our current core measure will remain in that role. 
In our interest rate announcement earlier this month, the Bank noted that the resource sector 
is  continuing  to  adjust  to  lower  prices,  and  that  these  complex  adjustments  will  take 
considerable  time.  Our  inflation-targeting  regime  will  help  facilitate  these  adjustments. 
Canada has seen this movie before – we’ve managed it well in the past, and I’m confident 
we will continue to manage it well in the future. 
Conclusion 
It’s  time  to  conclude.  As  Albertans  know  well,  it  can  be  hard  to  ride  the  cycles  in  raw 
materials  prices.  But  resource  price  fluctuations  affect  all  countries,  whether  they  are 
consumers  or  producers.  Canada  is  fortunate  to  be  both,  and  we  shouldn’t  ignore  the 
resources that we have been blessed with. Natural resources bring opportunities. Over the 
years,  Canadians  have  used  our  endowment  to  build  a  prosperous  economy.  We  will 
continue to do so. And rather than resist market forces, Canadians should heed the signals 
sent  by  price  movements.  We’ve  adjusted  to  rising  prices;  we  can  adjust  to  falling  ones. 
These adjustments are never easy. They are often difficult and painful for affected individuals 
and their families. But they are necessary. 
For  our  part,  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  continue  to  promote  low,  stable  and  predictable 
inflation.  Doing  so  is  the  best  contribution  we  can  make  to  helping  promote  both  strong, 
steady economic growth and the flexibility needed to ease those adjustments and help our 
resource-rich country thrive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
