  Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 23 March 2015. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members of the ECON committee, 
Ladies and Gentleman, 
I  am  happy  to  be  back  to  this  committee  for  my  first  regular  hearing  at  the  European 
Parliament in the year 2015. A lot has happened since we last met in November last year. 
With  Lithuania,  the  euro  welcomed  its  19th  member.  On  22  January  we  announced  our 
intention  to  extend  our  asset  purchase  programmes  to  buying  public  sector  securities;  we 
started  the  purchases  on  March  9.  We  also  moved  to  a  new  building  which  we  officially 
inaugurated last week; we unveiled our new 20 euro banknote; and in a milestone towards 
even greater transparency of our decision-making procedures, we published on 19 February 
for the first time the accounts of a monetary policy meeting of the Governing Council of the 
ECB. I know this has always been a topic very dear to your committee. 
In the remainder of my remarks, I will explain some important aspects of the extended asset 
purchase  programme  and  present  a  first  assessment  of  its  effects.  I  will  then,  as  the 
coordinators have asked me to do, elaborate on the link between price stability and financial 
stability  and  will  speak  briefly  about  the  macroprudential  tools  the  ECB  has  now  at  its 
disposal. 
Economic outlook and monetary policy 
The  most  recent  data  and  survey  evidence  show  that  growth  is  gaining  momentum.  The 
basis for the economic recovery in the euro area has clearly strengthened. This is due to in 
particular  the  fall  in  oil  prices,  the  gradual  firming  of  external  demand,  easy  financing 
conditions  driven  by  our  accomodative  monetary  policy,  and  the  depreciation  of  the  euro. 
These  more  positive  developments  are  also  reflected  in  the  recent  ECB  staff  projections. 
Compared  with  the  projections  from  December,  the  outlook  for  2015  and  2016  has  been 
visibly revised upwards by 0.5 and 0.4 pp., respectively. 
We expect inflation in the euro area to remain very low or negative in  the months ahead, 
because the recent fall in oil prices will continue to influence the figures until later in the year. 
However,  inflation  rates  are  expected  to  start  increasing  gradually  towards  the  end  of  the 
year.  They  will  be  supported  by  aggregate  demand,  by  the  impact  of  the  lower  euro 
exchange rate and by the recovery of oil prices from their current troughs in the years ahead. 
The latest ECB staff projections foresee average inflation at 0.0% in 2015, rising to 1.5% in 
2016 and 1.8% in 2017. 
A key factor for a full recovery of the euro area economy and ensuring that inflation does not 
remain too low for too long will be the extra stimulus that the Governing Council decided to 
introduce in January under the ECB’s expanded asset purchase program. 
This  decision  was  premised  on  two  considerations.  First,  the  momentum  supporting  the 
economic recovery was viewed as too weak and fragile to give us sufficient confidence that 
inflation  would  return  to  levels  closer  to  2%  over  a  policy  relevant  medium-term  horizon. 
Second,  the  expansive  potential  of  the  monetary  policy  measures  that  had  been  decided 
between  June  and  October  was  seen  as  uncertain.  This  was  because  they  were  largely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
dependent on banks’ own decision to borrow Eurosystem funds and lend them on to their 
customers.  The  cumulative  uptake  under  the  first  two  targeted  long-term  refinancing 
operations  stood  at  around  €212.4  billion.  Therefore,  the  monetary  impulse  had  to  be 
reinforced  and  needed  to  be  quantitatively  more  predictable  and  controllable  to  put  the 
economy and the outlook for price stability on a firmer footing. 
On 9 March, we started purchasing public-sector securities as part of our expanded asset 
purchase  programme,  which  also  comprises  interventions  in  the  ABS  and  covered  bond 
markets.  Overall,  our  asset  purchases  will  amount  to  €60  billion  per  month.  The  pace  of 
purchases so far puts the overall program on track to reach a total of €60 billion in March. At 
this point in time we see no signs that there will not be enough bonds for us to purchase. 
Feedback  from  market  participants  so  far  suggests  that  implementation  has  been  very 
smooth and that market liquidity remains ample. 
Our interventions have accelerated a trend that had been evident since some time. A steady 
process of re-integration across financial markets and jurisdictions had been under way since 
the  summer  of  2012.  What  is  new  today,  however,  is  that  lower  interest  rates  in  capital 
markets are increasingly being transmitted through the entire financial intermediation chain. 
Lower funding costs for banks have started to influence the cost of borrowing for households 
and  companies.  As  bank  lending  rates  are  being  reduced,  new  investment  projects  – 
previously considered unprofitable – become attractive. 
In the short-run, this should sustain the demand for credit and investment. Indeed, the banks 
covered  in  our  Bank  Lending  Survey  confirm  that  the  easing  of  lending  conditions  is 
progressing hand-in-hand with a resurgent demand for credit to finance business investment. 
In the longer-term perspective, this will increase potential output. 
We intend to carry out our purchases at least until end-September 2016, and in any case 
until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation which is consistent with our aim of 
achieving  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  The  Governing 
Council will take a holistic perspective when assessing the path of inflation. It will evaluate 
the likelihood for inflation not only to converge to levels that are closer to 2%, but also to 
stabilize  around  those  levels  with  sufficient  confidence  thereafter.  When  doing  this 
assessment, the Governing Council will follow its monetary policy strategy and concentrate 
on inflation trends, looking through any surprise in measured inflation (in either direction) if 
judged to be transient and with no implications for the medium term outlook for price stability. 
The positive results of our new purchase programme should not distract other stakeholders 
from  delivering  their  contribution  to  put  the  economy  back  on  track.  Fiscal  policies  should 
support  economic  growth,  while  ensuring  debt  sustainability.  A  full  and  consistent 
implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact is key for confidence in our fiscal framework. 
Moreover, structural reforms should  be implemented promptly and with  determination. The 
combination  of  improved  economic  structures  and  sound  fiscal  policies  indeed  has  the 
potential to make our monetary policy more effective by encouraging economic actors to take 
advantage of improved financing conditions and increase investment. 
Price stability and financial stability 
Let me now turn, as suggested by the ECON coordinators, to the interaction between price 
stability and financial stability. 
Price stability is, as you know, the primary objective of the ECB and the Eurosystem. And 
achieving  price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  financial  stability.  Clearly,  unstable 
inflation developments can distort a wide variety of macroeconomic and financial fluctuations, 
to the extent that these distortions become harmful for the economy. For example, unstable 
inflation developments could complicate pricing of assets and blur the signals from relative 
asset price adjustments with detrimental effects on resource allocation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
However, price stability is not a sufficient condition of financial stability. The last crisis proved 
that  financial  stability  can  be  at  risk  even  at  times  when  price  stability  is  achieved.  And 
monetary  policy  decisions  also  affect  expectations  and  a  wide  range  of  asset  prices.  Our 
monetary  policy  measures  are  necessary  to  achieve  our  primary  objective  of  maintaining 
price stability. But we are nevertheless aware that they may have unintended side effects on 
the financial system. For example, asset prices may increase to levels that are not justified 
by fundamentals, while periods of low yields and volatility may invite excessive risk taking by 
financial investors. In turn, such developments can act as an amplifying mechanism for any 
eventual financial instability. 
At  the  same  time,  financial  stability  is  a  precondition  for  the  efficient  conduct  of  monetary 
policy.  To  be  successful  in  delivering  price  stability,  monetary  policy  relies  on  the 
effectiveness  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  In  this  context,  a  stable  and  non-
fragmented  financial  system  is  important  for  the  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
signals. 
We are monitoring closely any potential risks to euro area financial stability, including those 
from  excessive  risk  taking.  Currently  these  risks  are  contained.  And  should  they  emerge, 
macro-prudential  policy  would  be  best  suited  to  address  them.  Recently,  indeed  some 
national authorities in the euro area have decided to implement such measures that go in the 
direction of preventing financial stability risks from emerging at national level. 
Regarding  macro-prudential  oversight  of  banks  in  the  euro  area,  this  is  shared  between 
national  authorities  and  the  ECB.  The  ECB  may  top-up  specific  national  macro-prudential 
measures if it considers these insufficient to mitigate systemic risks. 
The ECB and the national authorities have at their disposal macro-prudential instruments for 
the banking sector, as provided in the Capital Requirements Directive and Regulation (CRD 
IV/CRR). These include capital buffers, such as the countercyclical capital buffer, systemic 
risk buffer and capital surcharges for systemic institutions. Additional measures may also be 
used to improve banks capital and liquidity position, limit their large exposures or increase 
capital requirements for certain asset classes, such as interbank and real estate exposures. 
To  make  the  most  effective  use  of  these  instruments  and  strengthen  the  stability  of  the 
financial system, the ECB and national authorities regularly exchange information on macro-
prudential  policies.  Processes  for  formal  notifications  to  the  ECB  by  national  authorities 
regarding  intended  measures  have  already  been  activated.  Overall,  the  ECB  will  help  to 
identify potential financial stability risks and foster a coordinated stance for macro-prudential 
policies among euro area Member States. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  I  have  always  very  much  valued  the  exchange  with  your 
house both as an exercise of our accountability obligations and as a source of inspiration. I 
am therefore very much looking forward to our debate and hope that we will now have time 
to discuss some of the matters for which time was too short at the plenary debate. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
