  William C Dudley: Fostering economic growth in the Bronx 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 17th Annual Bronx Bankers Breakfast, Bronx, New York 
City, 8 May 2015. 
 I am very pleased to have the opportunity to join you today at the 17th Annual Bronx Bankers 
Breakfast.  I  would  like  to  thank  Bronx  Borough  President  Ruben  Diaz,  Jr.,  the  Business 
Initiative Corporation of New York and the Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation 
for the opportunity to speak about the economic outlook for the Bronx. This is my second visit 
to the Bronx in the past five months. When I was here last December, I had the opportunity 
to hear from various community and business leaders about what they were seeing and the 
issues they were facing. Such visits are an important part of the New York Fed’s outreach 
efforts to keep  apprised  of key  developments  in  the  Second  District,  and  to  identify  areas 
where we should be directing our attention. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  focus  on  the  outlook  for  the  Bronx,  the  important  role  that 
community banks play in the local economy, as well as specific challenges facing local small 
businesses.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  small  businesses  play  a  vital  role  in  any 
economy,  so  fostering  economic  and  financial  conditions  that  allow  these  businesses  to 
flourish is important to the health of the local economy. In light of recent developments, I am 
optimistic  about  the  economic  prospects  for  the  Bronx  and  local  small  businesses.  I  also 
believe that community banks and community development organizations have an important 
role to play in paving the way forward. 
As  always,  my  comments  today  reflect  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the 
Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.1 
The economic outlook for the Bronx 
To appreciate where we are, we need to remember where we’ve been. Those of you who are 
long-time  Bronxites  know  that  starting  in  the  1950s,  but  especially  during  the  1970s,  the 
Bronx  endured  a  massive  economic  slump.  In  that  one  decade,  the  1970s,  the  borough’s 
population fell by 20 percent – and by even more in many well-established neighborhoods. 
As  people  moved  out  in  droves,  buildings  were  abandoned,  crime  increased  and  jobs 
vanished  –  all  in  a  vicious  cycle,  creating  an  atmosphere  of  despair.  Yet,  the  borough 
persevered and conditions began to stabilize and then to even improve a bit in the 1980s. 
Today,  while  there  is  still  much  progress  to  be  made,  the  Bronx  is  in  dramatically  better 
shape on many dimensions: its economy has been growing at a brisk pace, its population is 
on the rise, its housing stock is being rejuvenated and many businesses are thriving, creating 
strong job and income growth. This is particularly evident in neighborhoods like Hunts Point 
and  the  area  around  Yankee  Stadium,  down  to  the  Bronx  Terminal  Market  and  beyond. 
Between  2007  –  right  before  the  last  recession  –  and  last  year,  employment  grew  by 
10 percent in New York City, making it one of the best performing areas in the nation. In the 
Bronx, employment grew even faster, rising by more than 14 percent. 
While  job  creation  in  the  Bronx  has  been  quite  broad-based,  I  would  like  to  highlight  two 
particular  industries,  each  very  different  in  nature,  to  illustrate  the  diversity  of  Bronx’s 
economy. Both health services and wholesale food distribution have been flourishing here. 
These sectors, on average, pay relatively well and both have been contributing strongly to 
                                                
1   Jason Bram, Christopher Calabia, Tony Davis, Jacqueline Fenton, Claire Kramer Mills, Don Morgan, James 
Orr, Joseph Tracy and Luis Uranga assisted in preparing these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
overall job creation and to the borough’s economic resurgence. By health services, I don’t 
just mean hospitals and clinics serving the local population. For example, Montefiore Medical 
Center is a nationally-ranked institution in a variety of specialties as well as a highly regarded 
teaching hospital. Additionally, the Albert Einstein College of Medicine is a graduate medical 
school and clinical research facility. And, of course, the Hunts Point Food Distribution Center 
houses institutions such as the Fulton Fish Market, which moved here from lower Manhattan 
about a decade ago. 
But,  of  course,  these  aren’t  the  only  industries  driving  the  Bronx  economy.  Just  last 
November I visited OnForce Solar, an installer of solar heating systems located in the Port 
Morris section of the South Bronx. There has also been a great deal of retail development 
over  the  past  decade  –  most  notably,  perhaps,  the  Bronx  Terminal  Market  just  south  of 
Yankee Stadium. 
A little known fact is that, on average, jobs pay more in the Bronx than in any other of the five 
boroughs, except for Manhattan. And my regional economists assure me that it’s not just the 
Yankees that bring up the average, although they do make a difference. 
This, of course, is not to say that all is well in the Bronx. Its poverty rate and unemployment 
rate  are  both  roughly  twice  the  national  average,  and  higher  than  in  any  of  the  other 
boroughs.  While  crime  has  fallen  dramatically  over  the  past  two  decades,  it  also  remains 
higher  than  in  the  rest  of  the  city.  Debt  is  also  burdensome  for  many  Bronx  residents. 
Delinquency rates on household debt are relatively high, suggesting that many people are 
financially “distressed.” 
All this makes it especially important to maintain the economic momentum that is improving 
the  quality  of  life  in  the  Bronx.  Community  banks  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  this 
process. Bank lending can help businesses – especially new and small businesses – expand 
and  grow  jobs,  and  help  residents  invest  in  improving  their  homes,  neighborhoods  and 
communities.  Lending  to  small  businesses  and  entrepreneurs requires deep  knowledge  of 
local business conditions and potential borrowers, both of which community banks have a 
comparative  advantage  in  acquiring.  Former  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  in  a  2012  interview 
summarized  this  point  quite  well.  He  stated  that  “community  banks  have  the  capacity  to 
respond  with  greater  agility  to  lending  requests  than  their  national  competitors;  they  have 
more detailed knowledge of the needs of their customers and closer ties to the communities 
they serve.”2 
Given  this  critical  role  played  by  community  banks  for  localities  such  as  the  Bronx,  it  is 
important to ensure that the local banking sector remains vibrant. The financial crisis offers 
important lessons for community banks in this regard. 
Lessons for community banks from the financial crisis 
America’s banking system began with community banks, and today they continue to play a 
critical role in the financial system. However, the number of commercial bank charters has 
declined by 50 percent since 1985, with the recent financial crisis contributing to this decline. 
A total of 417 banks and thrifts failed between 2006 through 2011.3 Many community banks, 
though,  not  only  survived  but  also  thrived  during  the  crisis. Why? What  sets  those  banks 
apart from others that failed, or that survived but did not thrive? What were some common 
                                                
2   The Importance of Community Banking: A Conversation with Chairman Ben Bernanke, Community Banking 
Connections, Third Quarter 2012. 
3   The  Future  of  Community  Banks:  Lessons  Learned  from  Banks  That  Thrived  During  the  Recent  Financial 
Crisis  by  R.  Alton  Gilbert,  Andrew  P.  Meyer,  and  James W.  Fuchs  all  of  the  Federal Reserve  Bank  of  St. 
Louis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
characteristics  across  the  successful  banks?  These  characteristics  are  undoubtedly 
important and will be an essential element of success in the future. 
Some  factors  that  one  might  think  are  important  turn  out  not  to  be  critical  in  determining 
performance. For example, asset size was generally not a factor in performing well during, 
and following, the financial crisis. Community banks that thrived varied in asset size – from 
below $50 million, to as large as $10 billion in assets. Geography, though, did matter to a 
degree. By definition, community banks are not geographically diversified, so those located 
in states that were most severely affected by the financial crisis and the recession faced the 
largest challenges. However, there are examples of banks that performed well in Michigan 
despite the severe economic problems that Michigan experienced; and there are examples 
of  banks  that  floundered  in  Texas  despite  the  solid  economic  performance  that  Texas 
experienced.  Here  in  the  Second  District,  while  we  had  relatively  modest  declines  in  real 
estate values on average, some local areas saw house price declines as serious as in the 
worst hit states such as Arizona, California, Florida and Nevada. 
Recent  research  has  identified  several  characteristics  common  to  community  banks  that 
prospered  during  and  following  the  financial  crisis.4  First,  thriving  banks  exercised  a 
comparatively conservative growth strategy during good times, with a management culture 
that focused on long-term franchise value and not short-term profitability. Successful banks 
had  lower  concentrations  in  commercial  real  estate  lending  generally;  and  much  lower 
concentrations  in  construction  and  land  development  loans  specifically.  While  profitable 
during  the  boom,  these loan  categories  suffered  the  greatest  losses  as real  estate  values 
declined  and  the  recession  set  in.  As  the  boom  progressed,  the  more  conservative 
underwriting standards of successful banks led to declines in their market shares as other 
banks competed for business by relaxing their standards. However, successful banks were 
able to gain back this market share and then some after the bust due to the relative strength 
of  their  balance  sheets.  The  successful  community  banks  were  patient  and  conservative 
regarding 
returns,  not  necessarily 
“spectacular”  returns.  It  seems  that  their  managers  devised  their  business  plans  heeding 
Friar Lawrence’s advice to Romeo as he devised his courtship plan for Juliet: “Wisely and 
slow; they stumble that run fast.” 
Other noteworthy characteristics also identified in this research were an engaged board of 
directors,  talented  staff  who  were  familiar  with  the  community,  sound  senior  management 
oversight and thorough due diligence before offering a new product or service. The studies 
further cited successful community banks as having a strong and localized customer service 
focus – that is, avoiding the temptation to expand into new, less familiar areas and markets – 
and  high  community  visibility,  with  staff  members  heavily  involved  in  community  activities, 
which in turn, created customer relationships built on trust.5  
So what did we learn from the experience of community banks with the financial crisis? A 
foundation built on good risk management practices and intimate local knowledge helped the 
successful  banks to  thrive  during  one  of  this  country’s  most  difficult financial  periods.  The 
banks  that  prosper  in  the  future  will  likely  have  characteristics  similar  to  those  that 
outperformed during the financial crisis. It bears repeating that community banks are critical 
in keeping local economies vibrant and growing. Strong community banks are essential to 
the provision of credit to small businesses in their localities. 
investments  –  desiring  reasonable,  sustainable 
                                                
4   See  United  States  Government  Accountability  Office,  Financial  Institutions:  Causes  and  Consequences  of 
Recent  Community  Bank  Failures,  Statement  of  Lawrance  L.  Evans,  Jr.,  Director  Financial  Markets  and 
Community Investment, June 13, 2013. Also see Gilbert et al. (2013). 
5   St. Louis Federal Reserve Study Shows Community Bank Model Can Thrive in Good Times and in Bad. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Importance of small business lending 
It is often noted that small businesses contribute disproportionately to employment growth in 
their communities. When you dig a little deeper into this stylized fact, you discover that it is 
new small businesses that are responsible for this growth. Upon reflection, this makes sense 
given that, by definition, old small businesses are not growing. If they had been growing fast, 
they would no longer be small. A related fact is that the failure rate is quite high for new small 
businesses. Taken together, this implies that it is important to provide an environment that is 
conducive to new business formation. The more new businesses that are created, the more 
that have a chance of surviving and growing  into larger, prosperous members of the local 
economy. 
On  earlier  visits  in  the  District, I  heard  several  small  business  owners  voice  their  concern 
over their ability to access credit. Based on these conversations, I asked my research staff to 
investigate  the  degree  to  which  they  could  substantiate  with  data  whether  Bronx  small 
businesses  seem  credit-constrained  relative  to  other  boroughs  or  relative  to  other 
comparable  counties  across  the  country.  They  first  looked  at  the  share  of  small  business 
loan  amounts  made  in  each  borough  relative  to  the  share  of  small  businesses  located  in 
each borough, using data for 2013 (the latest available at the time). If small business credit is 
equally available, then we would expect to see ratios of approximately one for each borough. 
What the data show is that the ratio is well below one for the Bronx and Staten Island, with 
the Bronx being the lowest. This is consistent with what I heard during my last visit. 
Broadening the lens of the analysis, my staff then compared the Bronx to a random sample 
of comparable low income counties that were located in urban areas, again using data for 
2013. They looked at the ratio of the volume of small business lending per small business. 
The  ratio  for  the  Bronx  was  $9,900  as  compared  to  a  mean  ratio  of  $10,400  across  the 
sample of other counties. While lower by $500, this difference is not large. Taken together, 
the evidence suggests that while access to small business credit in the Bronx seems more 
constrained relative to Brooklyn, Manhattan and Queens, it is relatively consistent with what 
is typically available in lower income counties across the country. Of course, this may simply 
indicate that small businesses in lower income areas of the country are generally constrained 
in their credit access. 
Another way to investigate the question of credit constraints is to look for evidence that would 
reflect  the  consequences  of  these  constraints.  For  example,  more  constrained  access  to 
credit  might  result  in  a  slower  rate  of  new  business  formation.  My  staff  analyzed  small 
business starts between 2010 and 2013. For the Bronx, the number of small businesses per 
capita grew at a 12 percent rate over that period, double the average rate for the sample of 
50 lower income counties. This evidence can be viewed in multiple ways. My take is that, in 
general, it is difficult to prove or disprove the presence of credit constraints with the available 
data, especially at the county level. In the case of the Bronx, we found evidence both for and 
against the proposition. In either case, we take seriously the feedback from local businesses 
that they perceive access to credit to be a problem. The question then becomes what can be 
done to improve the situation going forward. 
Not  surprisingly,  most  loans  to  small  businesses  tend  to  be  small.  Microloans  –  defined 
$100,000 or smaller – make up 90 percent of all loans to small businesses. These loans tend 
to  be  labor  intensive  and  costly  to  underwrite  relative  to  the  returns  they  generate.  This 
combined with the higher risk associated with these loans present challenges to banks. 
Community  development  financial  institutions  (CDFIs)  can  help  fill  this  space.  CDFIs  are 
specialized  financial  institutions  that  target  their efforts to  areas  underserved  by  traditional 
financial  institutions.  They  provide  a  range  of  financial  products  including  capital  for 
investments to start-up or expanding businesses in low-income areas. Most CDFIs tend to be 
nonprofit organizations, but some are regulated institutions such as community development 
banks  and  credit  unions.  Examples  of  CDFIs  operating  in  the  Bronx  include  the  Bronx 
Overall  Economic  Development  Corporation,  the  Bethex  Federal  Credit  Union  and  Spring 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Bank.  However,  CDFIs  tend  to  make  loans  smaller  than  $50,000.  A  challenge,  then,  is 
bridging the gap between the maximum loan amount typically provided by a CDFI and the 
minimum loan amounts typically provided by a bank. Since the CDFIs have the relationships 
with the small businesses, partnerships between banks and CDFIs that increase the lending 
capacity  of  the  CDFIs  could  be  helpful.  Possible  avenues  to  achieving  this  include 
partnerships between CDFIs and banks, as well as assisting CDFIs to better access funding 
from the Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) system. 
I would like to touch on three additional issues that I think would assist small businesses to 
be successful: financial education, certification of community organizations that assist small 
businesses and greater transparency for small business lending. 
Establishing  a  thriving  small  business  takes more  than  a  good  idea  and  hard  work. While 
both of these are essential, there are many other factors that come into play. It is important 
that people starting businesses have access to financial information that will assist them in 
navigating  the  difficult  way  forward.  This  assistance  can  include  how  to  develop  a  sound 
business  plan,  how  to  enhance  their  credit  profile,  how  to  avoid  early  pitfalls  such  as 
obtaining financing with punitive interest rates and how to cultivate a banking relationship. 
These will all increase the likelihood that the small business will have access to the credit it 
needs over time to grow and thrive. CDFIs have been an important source of this financial 
education to small businesses, and these efforts should be supported and expanded. 
It  is  critical  that  small  businesses  also  know  that  the  organizations  they  work  with  are 
reputable and knowledgeable. Unfortunately, there are individuals who try to take advantage 
of owners of new businesses by providing them with poor advice or overcharging them for 
credit. Researching the backgrounds of these service providers and lenders is difficult and 
time intensive, leaving small business owners too often uncertain as to who to deal with. In 
some cases, this uncertainty can discourage a business owner from seeking assistance. 
I believe that we need a better system of certification for organizations that work with small 
businesses.  The  certification  will  assure  a  business  owner  that  the  organization  has  been 
properly  vetted  and  has  the  requisite  skills  to  assist  the  owner.  This  not  only  provides 
assurances to business owners, but saves them the time and resources required to do this 
due diligence on their own. 
Finally,  in  addition  to  certification,  it  would  be  helpful  to  have  consistent  standards  and 
transparency requirements for organizations that lend to small businesses. Such standards 
and requirements exist for lending to households, and I believe the same justification exists 
to extend these requirements to small businesses. As a result, small business owners would 
have  greater  confidence  that  they  fully  understand  the  terms  and  conditions  of  their  loan. 
This,  in  conjunction  with  the  access  to  more  financial  information  and  education,  will  help 
small business owners make better decisions about their use of credit. 
Conclusion 
In  summary,  economic  conditions  in  the  Bronx  are  improving  but  more  progress  is 
necessary. Community banks will play a key role in spurring this progress, so it is essential 
that they remain financially sound and engaged. The financial crisis provides many lessons 
for how banks can thrive even in turbulent economic conditions. The vitality of the Bronx and 
other  communities  depends  on  the  ability  of  entrepreneurs  to  establish  and  grow  new 
businesses. While access to credit is important, success depends on a wide range of factors, 
and we need to make sure new business owners have the help they need to prosper. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
