  Ashraf Mahmood Wathra: SAARCFINANCE – sharing experiences on 
macroeconomic policy issues among South Asian member countries 
Address  by  Mr  Ashraf  Mahmood  Wathra,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  and 
Chairman of SAARCFINANCE, at the 7th SAARC Finance Ministers’ Meeting, Kathmandu, 
20 August 2015. 
 Honorable Chairman, 
Honorable Ministers, 
His Excellency, SAARC Secretary-General, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Good Afternoon/Namaste/Namskar/Aaiban and Assalamualaikum. 
1. 
I feel honored and privileged to have been invited to this eminent gathering in the 
capacity  of  chairman  of  SAARCFINANCE  network.  I  am  thankful  for  providing  me  the 
opportunity to get your feedback on our activities and future direction. 
2. 
It was during the 10th SAARC Summit, held on 29th July 1998, that the Heads of 
States  of the  region  agreed  in  principle  to  establish  a  Network  of  Central  Bank Governors 
and Finance Secretaries of the region. The core objective was to have a forum for dialogue 
on  macroeconomic  policies  of  the  region  and  sharing  mutual  experiences  and  ideas. 
Accordingly,  the  SAARCFINANCE  was  established  on  9th  September  1998  as  a  regional 
network of the SAARC Central Bank Governors and Finance Secretaries, which, during the 
11th SAARC Summit, held in Kathmandu, Nepal in January 2002, got formal recognition as 
permanent body of the SAARC. 
3. 
More  specifically,  our  terms  of  reference  include:  promoting  cooperation  among 
central  banks  and  finance  ministries  in  the  member  countries  by  regular  exchanges  of 
information  and  staff  exchange  programmes,  working  towards  a  more  efficient  payment 
mechanism within the region, striving for higher monetary and exchange cooperation, forging 
closer ties on macroeconomic policies, and sharing of experiences and ideas. 
4. 
I  am  pleased  to  inform  your  Excellencies  that  over  the  years,  a  number  of  useful 
initiatives have been taken by the SAARCFINANCE to achieve the objectives envisaged in 
its  terms  of  reference.  The  details  of  the  activities,  following  various  initiatives,  have  been 
continuously shared with you through the SAARC Secretariat in the form of progress reports. 
Let  me 
Honorable Chairman, 
5. 
first  start  by  describing  our  work  mechanism.  Two  meetings  of 
SAARCFINANCE  Network take  place  annually: one  alongside the IMF/World  Bank  Annual 
Meetings,  while  the  other  one  is  held  within  the  SAARC  region.  Since  its  inception,  the 
SAARCFINANCE  has  held  thirty  meetings  of  the  Network.  For  smooth  functioning  of  this 
network, dedicated SAARCFINANCE Country Cell has been established in member central 
banks, where the work is supervised by a SAARCFINANCE Coordinator with support from 
an Alternate Coordinator. For effective coordination with Ministries of Finance of the region, 
one SAARCFINANCE focal point has also been appointed from each country. Further, the 
Network has a rotating Secretariat which shifts to the member central bank holding the Chair, 
rotating  annually  in  an  alphabetical  order.  During  the  29th  Group  Meeting  held  on 
9th October 2014, the SAARCFINANCE chair was shifted to State Bank of Pakistan. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Honorable Chairman, 
6. 
I will now proceed to a presentation of our activities. In doing so, I will take the liberty 
to  present  our  progress  of  the  past  few  years  since  it  has  been  a  while  that  the  SAARC 
Chairman has been invited to this forum, to be precise since 2013. 
7. 
As a part of its core objectives of information sharing and sharing of expertise, the 
Network holds regular staff exchange programmes. These programmes provide an excellent 
opportunity to the officials of the member central banks to learn from each other’s experience 
and expertise. Since 2013, the network has facilitated around 35 staff exchange and training 
programmes.  To  facilitate  information  sharing,  a  number  of  regular  and  non-regular 
publications  and  other  documents,  especially  on  policy  issues,  are  exchanged  among  the 
member institutions. Similarly, the Network arranges seminars, workshops and symposiums 
on regular basis. For example since 2013 ten seminars and three Governors’ Symposiums 
have been organized. The subjects of these programs cover varied topics. To name a few: 
monetary  policy  framework,  central  banking  operational  procedures,  banking  supervision, 
currency  management,  internal  audit,  and  human  resource  management.  Similarly,  the 
Network  has  initiated  a  scholarship  scheme  for  capacity  building  of  the  officials  of 
SAARCFINANCE  members.  This  is  a  relatively  newer  initiative  and  so  far  5  officials  have 
been awarded scholarships for PhD and Masters programmes. 
To further facilitate information sharing, every member central bank has created a 
8. 
web folder on their official websites. The Network has its own official website, which provides 
an  informed  platform  to  all  members  for  disseminating  important  information  contents. 
Furthermore, a SAARCFINANCE Portal has also been created which serves as a powerful 
tool  to  retain  institutional  memory  of  our  Network.  The  portal  enables  SAARCFINANCE 
central banks to share experiences and hold online discussions on issues of mutual interest. 
As you know this Portal was launched in Islamabad during our Group Meeting in June 2013. 
9. 
The  SAARCFINANCE  e-Newsletter  is  another  important  source  of  information 
sharing which embodies useful information about each member economy, its latest monetary 
policy  stance,  key  macroeconomic  indicators  and  summary  of  the  activities  taken  place 
under  the  aegis  of  SAARCFINANCE.  Recently,  we  have  published  17th  edition  of  the 
e-Newsletter. 
The frequent staff exchanges and increased level of information sharing have been greatly 
beneficial  in  fostering  close  relationships  and  building  expertise  and  human  capital  on  the 
practical side of the central banking field. 
Honourable Chairman, 
10. 
The  SARCFINANCE  network  has  also  marked  another  important  mile  stone  by 
highlighting the importance of economic research in the form of collaborative research study 
arrangement. This arrangement, as a fresh initiative, is expected to focus on areas having 
some regional significance and common economic interests. Thus far two topics have been 
selected under collaborative research study arrangements, which are: (a) Managing Capital 
and  Remittance  Flows  in  SAARC  Region  for  Safeguarding  Financial  Stability,  and 
(b) Promoting  Financial  Inclusion  in  the  SAARC  Region.  The  modalities  for  collaborative 
research studies have also been recently accorded approval. To facilitate the collaborative 
researchers, State Bank of Pakistan hosted the 1st meeting of researchers for collaborative 
study on Monday 17th of this month in Islamabad. We hope that the collaborative research 
work  would  not  only  help  strengthen  our  understanding  on  the  impact  and  intensity  of 
economic  and  financial  shocks  to  our  economies  but  would  also  open  up  new  areas  of 
cooperation  in  responding  collectively  and  cohesively  to  these  shocks  to  minimize  their 
adverse implications. 
11. 
To  facilitate  region-specific  research  activities,  the  SAARCFINANCE  has  initiated 
the  development  of  a  regional  statistical  database.  In  this  context,  the  core  dataset  has 
already  been  identified  based  on  the  availability  of  data  with  SAARC  central  banks.  The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  database will be created on Oracle platform, with easy search and accessibility. It will also be 
made  available  free  of  cost  to  the  general  public.  We  have  also  planned  to  house  the 
database on SAARCFINANCE  website  with links to websites of all member central banks. 
This  is  likely  to  provide  a  boost  to  research  in  the  field  of  economics  and  finance  in  the 
SAARC region. 
12. 
Let me now turn to our efforts on strengthening financial and economic cooperation 
in  the  region.  As  you  know,  the  Network  has  developed  a  framework  for  currency  SWAP 
facility. The main objective of this facility is to meet any balance of payments difficulty and 
short-term  liquidity  needs.  RBI  has  offered  the  facility  which  is  available  to  all  member 
countries  in  specific  conditions.  Under  the  facility,  the  requesting  member  countries  can 
make  withdrawals  in  US  dollar,  Euro  or  Indian Rupee  in  multiple  tranches.  So far,  Bhutan 
and  Sri  Lanka  have  availed  the  aforesaid  facility.  This  kind  of  agreement  also  helped 
promoting  economic  cooperation  between  member  countries,  besides  providing  them  a 
back-stop arrangement to meet their balance of payments difficulties and short-term liquidity 
needs arising from market turbulence. 
13. 
Now, turning to our objective on forging closer ties in macroeconomic policies, the 
progress has been slower. In my humble opinion, this I think is one area in which much more 
can be done given the nature of our common shocks, configuration of our economies and our 
cultural  ties. This  however,  will  require  inter  and  intra  agency  collaborations,  which  is  why 
this is so challenging. Nevertheless, let me highlight three ways in which we think we have 
made progress to meet this objective. 
14. 
First,  the  Governors’  symposium,  which  happens  on  the  sidelines  of  the  regional 
group  meeting,  has  been  playing  an  important  role  in  terms  of  discussing  and  comparing 
solutions  to  common  economic  issues  chosen  by  the  Governors.  For  example,  the  latest 
symposium  showed  the  stark  differences  on  our  approaches  to  microfinance  and  the 
regulations  of  this  sector.  Second,  it  is  becoming  a  tradition  to  complement  the  regional 
group  meetings  with  a  lecture  by  an  eminent  personality.  The  first  of  these  lectures  was 
organized  in  Islamabad’s  group  meeting  in  June  2013  and  delivered  by  Prof.  Ha-Joon 
Chang,  while  the  second  one  was  recently  organized  in  Dhaka  and  delivered  by  the 
Governor RBI, Raguram Rajan. This is an encourageable development since it helps policy-
makers  at  the  highest  level  to  debate  grand  issues  and  policy  designs.  Third,  the 
SAARCFINANCE  network  initiated  a  meeting  of  senior  economists  to  discuss  economic 
conjecture of member countries. The idea is to share and compare notes on economic policy 
experiences, albeit informally and at an executive level. The first of these meetings were held 
in Islamabad in June 2013, which could also be followed by member central banks. 
15. 
Although, these three steps represent ways in which important economic issues of 
common  interest  are  debated,  they  fall  short  of  economic  policy  coordination  within  the 
member countries. We hope that the new collaborative research programme will mature and 
also  help  policy  makers  to  start  discussing  and  evaluating  the  possibilities  of  coordinating 
policies on the basis of evidence-based outcomes. Concurrently, we can start broaching the 
idea of SAARCFINANCE as an economic alliance to meet the challenges of the future. 
Let me now turn my attention to the long term. To set a future direction and priorities 
16. 
for  SAARCFINANCE,  currently  we  are  in  the  process  of  developing  a  roadmap  for  the 
Network. In this context, we have identified five areas of regional cooperation and integration, 
which  include:  (i)  reducing  the  transaction  cost  of  cross-border  remittances  in  the  SAARC 
region; (ii) facilitating the cross-border trade in the region; (iii) capacity building programmes 
for our staff; (iv) the creation of SAARCFINANCE statistical database; and (v) undertaking of 
collaborative research studies. Out of the five areas, the first two are ambitious programs, the 
next one is about the capacity building of the officials of members, and the work on other two 
projects  is  already  going  on.  With  your  support,  we  believe  that  these  five  areas  of 
cooperation will initially form the roadmap for SAARCFINANCE and would help set a clear 
direction and priorities for our future cooperation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  17. 
All the above identified areas are important. However, I would like to highlight the 
role of central banks in facilitating the cross-border trade. I believe that the regional central 
banks have the ability to form cohesive policies towards gearing up cooperation in banking 
and finance with a view to facilitate cross border trade and investments. Similarly, we further 
intend  to  integrate  and  improve  our  payments  and  settlement  system.  Among  others,  the 
cooperation  on  this  specific  area  would  help  promote  bilateral  and  regional  trade  besides 
strengthening financial infrastructure in the region. 
18. 
Before  I  make  my  concluding  remarks,  I  would  like  to  record  one  proposal.  “The 
SAARC Secretary General or his representative is invited for participation in regional Group 
Meting only. It will be appropriate to invite SAARC Secretary General or his representative 
into SAARCFINANCE meetings to ensure effective liaison with all SAARC bodies”. Second is 
a request to Honourable Finance Minister of Maldives. For the last one a half years Maldives 
Monetary Authority has not been representing our meetings or events. In this context, I would 
request Honourable Finance Minister of Maldives to look into this issue and facilitate us with 
MMAs participation in our various meetings/events in future. 
Honourable Chairman, 
19. 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  the  SAARCFINANCE  Network  has  made 
considerable  progress  in  achieving  the  objectives  as  envisaged  in  its  terms  of  reference. 
However, this is merely the beginning of a long journey which requires us to accelerate our 
efforts to make this network more effective. We may also need to take more initiatives and 
identify  areas  where  we  can  further  deepen  our  cooperation.  Also,  the  future  role  of  the 
SAARCFINANCE will become more challenging in the wake of ever-growing competition and 
growing economic and financial integration in the SAARC region. In this context, the regional 
central banks would need to join hands with other SAARC bodies and enhance coordination 
with them, especially with SAARC Chamber of Commerce and Industry, as it is engaged in 
promoting cross border trade and investment flows. We would also need to play an active 
role  at  IGEG  on  financial  issues.  I  am  confident  that  our  collective  commitments,  level  of 
cooperation & information sharing, and efforts towards better shaping the future course of the 
SAARCFINANCE  would  be  instrumental  in  meeting  the  challenges  confronting  us  in  the 
fields of economy and finance. 
With this update, I thank you for giving me this opportunity and your continued support to the 
SAARCFINANCE Network. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
