   Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Emerging issues in the banking 
industry 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Opening Ceremony of the Colloquium of Judges and Magistrates on “Emerging Issues in the 
Banking Industry”, Mbarara, 13 August 2015. 
 My Lords, the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice 
My Lords, the Honourable Judges 
Your Worships, the Magistrates 
The Chairman and Members of the Uganda Bankers Association (UBA) 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to take part in this important gathering which brings 
together members of the Uganda Bankers’ Association and colleagues from the judiciary to 
discuss very pertinent issues on the banking and financial sector. 
I am very much delighted and convinced that this forum provides a unique opportunity for your 
Lordships and Worships together with the bankers to discuss and have a better understanding 
of emerging issues and risks in pursuit of enhancing the soundness of the financial sector. 
Ever since UBA came into being in 1981, it has continued to play an important role to articulate 
the interests of the banking industry in Uganda by reaching out to all the key stakeholders in 
society, including the government, the judiciary, the parliamentarians, the business community 
and the general public. This forum therefore, is in line with UBA’s strategic mission of improving 
knowledge on the banking sector risks and building consensus for addressing challenges and 
developing ideas for a better legislative environment and resolution of financial disputes which 
by nature are common in the banking industry. 
Over the last decade, the banking industry globally has witnessed a significant transformation 
especially from the technological front. These changes have immensely reshaped the manner 
and speed of financial services delivery as well as a menu of products and services offered by 
financial  services  providers  to  customers.  Uganda  like  most  other  countries  has  not  been 
spared by these developments owing to its interconnectedness to the broader financial system 
through the payment system and competitive pressures for business which has often spurred 
the  need to  innovate.  At  the  same time, the risk  profiles  of  business  have  also  profoundly 
changed and thus, while banks continue to harness the ensuing benefits from the innovations, 
they  must  find  ways  of  containing  the  array  of  risks  associated  with  the  developments  to 
safeguard the integrity of the banking sector. 
In this address, I will attempt to highlight some of the emerging issues and risks which need to 
be looked into; to ensure the stability of the financial sector. I will also briefly talk about the role 
of Bank of Uganda in the areas of regulation and financial sector development. 
• 
As  alluded  to  earlier,  innovations  as  well  as  the  entry  of  new  banks  and  regional 
economic integration drive have combined to spur competition in the financial services 
industry. Banks are continually embracing information technology to offer innovative 
financial  products. The  increasing  integration  of the  banking  sector  into  the  global 
financial  markets,  through  cross  border  banking  and  capital  flows,  has  created  or 
heightened exposures to these new sources of risk. The evolution of technology has 
made possible the issuance and innovation of numerous type of banking products 
including the VISA, MasterCard, online Banking, Mobile money, Internet Banking and 
e-commerce. All these forms of innovations facilitate modern banking and positively 
influence our ways of living in many fields. The rollout of IT supported products and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
        services in the banking industry however, come with a concern on “security” and new 
risks. Some of the common risks prevalent include cyber-related frauds which can 
arise from hacking of IT systems and/or manipulation of IT databases. 
Relatedly,  the  efficiency  gains  from  technology  have  changed  the  nature  of  the 
execution of financial and economic crimes as well as financing of terrorism providing 
a faster and diversified means by utilizing IT infrastructure. At present the need to 
combat Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism is increasingly changing the 
role and mandate of the Central Bank which is required to honour various Freeze 
Order requests by police and requests from International stakeholders like the US 
Embassy and local stakeholders like the Financial Intelligence Authority. Fortunately 
the BoU is represented in the Board of the Financial Intelligence Authority and has a 
close collaboration on addressing the common issues of concern. 
Inadequate  training  of  Mobile  Money  Agents  has  also  exposed  some  agents  to 
fraudsters  although  quantifying  the  actual  losses  is  not  easy  as  the  data  on  such 
frauds is not readily available at Bank of Uganda. 
Broadly, the nature of IT risks calls for unique skills for interrogations of IT systems to 
support  investigations  on  cyber-related  fraudulent  activities  in  a  bid  to  stemming 
crimes of IT nature. 
What  then  is  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  addressing  the  emerging  risks  in  the 
financial sector? The primary responsibility of the BoU is to initiate the drafting of the 
required  regulations  and  to  enforce  the  same  when  enacted.  Regulation  has  two 
objectives. The first objective is to protect the interests of depositors and this is done 
by imposing prudential requirements on banks, under the framework of the Financial 
Institutions Act (FIA), 2004. The second objective is to preserve financial stability as 
a means of preventing financial crises and this entails ensuring that banks conduct 
their  operations  in  a  manner  that  is  not  detrimental  to  the  stability  of  the  banking 
industry. 
In addition to the above, BoU has embarked on the process of introducing additional 
regulatory  measures  on  payment  systems  which  will  among  others  lead  to  proper 
regulation of mobile money operations. The advances in technology demand that BoU 
and other regulators world-wide continually re-examine their financial regulations in 
light of the emerging risks while at the same time not stifling innovations. Financial 
sector regulators therefore must always put the risks and “security” concerns as a key 
priority and align these concerns with standard setting to promote the advancement 
of banking services. 
I  must  also  emphasize  that  in  stemming  financial  sector  vices  and  risks,  members  of  the 
judiciary play a very important role especially in the timely resolution of disputes not only of 
cyber-related/IT nature but also disputes that arise from the traditional banking activities such 
as  those  that  arise  from  foreclosure  of  collateral  belonging  to  bank  customers  who  have 
defaulted on their loans which in the past have tended to be quite lengthy and a challenge to 
the  lending  institutions. We all know  that  losses  of  any  nature  including  those  arising from 
frauds negatively impact the capital of banks which can endanger the safety of depositors’ 
funds.  I  therefore  believe  that this  workshop  will  build  consensus  on  how  the  bankers  and 
members  of  the  judiciary  can  improve  the  timelines  of  resolution  of  financial  crimes  and 
disputes and generate invaluable ideas to foster the soundness of the banking industry. 
With those few remarks, I wish to declare this workshop officially opened. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
