  Kikuo Iwata: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Kikuo  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Okayama, 2 December 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech and on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in Okayama Prefecture. I would like to take this chance to 
express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s 
Okayama Branch. 
Today, I would like to have your views on the actual situation of the local economy as well as 
your candid opinions about the Bank’s policies and activities. 
Before exchanging views with you, I will briefly explain the recent economic developments at 
home and abroad, and then touch on some points regarding monetary policy. 
The current situation of Japan’s economy and its outlook 
I. 
Looking  at  Japan’s  economy,  exports  and  production  are  affected  by  the  slowdown  in 
emerging  economies,  particularly  China.  However,  with firms  having  seen  record  profits,  a 
virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  in  both  the  corporate  and  household  sectors  is  in 
place, and Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately. In the following, I would 
like to elaborate on this issue. 
Developments in exports and overseas economies 
A. 
Japan’s  exports  have  been  more  or  less  flat  recently  (Chart  1).  Breaking  these  down  by 
region,  exports  to  advanced  economies  such  as  the  United  States  and  Europe  have 
maintained their moderate increasing trend, but those to emerging economies have shown 
weaker  developments,  particularly  to  East  Asia.  The  background  to  this  is  that  the 
decelerated situation for the Chinese economy is continuing with downward pressure from 
excess capacity and inventory adjustments in the manufacturing sector, and that the effects 
of the Chinese economy have been spreading to other emerging and commodity-exporting 
economies through  trade. In this  situation,  Japan’s  production  also  has been  more  or  less 
flat. 
As  for  the  outlook  for  overseas  economies,  it  is  likely  that  the  effects  of  the  slowdown  in 
emerging  economies  will  remain  for  the  time  being,  but  that  moderate  growth,  mainly  in 
advanced economies, will continue, and this will positively affect emerging economies. The 
Chinese  economy  is  expected  to  generally  follow  a  stable  growth  path  with  a  variety  of 
economic  stimulus  measures  being  implemented.  As  shown  in  the  October  2015  World 
Economic Outlook (WEO) published by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), global growth 
for this year is projected to decline somewhat to 3.1 percent, but for 2016, it is projected to 
moderately accelerate on the whole and register 3.6 percent (Chart 2). 
In this situation, Japan’s exports and production are expected to remain more or less flat for 
the  time  being,  but  after  that  they  are  likely  to  increase  moderately.  Nevertheless,  taking 
account  of  the  decline  in  growth  expectations  for  and  excess  capacity  in  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies,  risks  for  the  time  being  seem  to  continue  to  skew  to  the 
downside, and this warrants close attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Developments in domestic private demand 
B. 
Despite  the  lackluster  developments  in  exports  and  production  I  have  outlined,  corporate 
profits are at record high levels (Chart 3). The improvement in corporate profits is partly due 
to  a  fall  in  commodity  prices  –  particularly  crude  oil  prices  –  and  to  the  rise  in  repatriated 
income from overseas business through dividends and interest, which has accelerated partly 
as a result of the correction of excessive appreciation of the yen. 
In addition, what can be pointed out as a characteristic of the recent economic recovery is 
the fact that the recovery of the nonmanufacturing sector has been marked on the back of 
the resilience in domestic demand. In the past economic recoveries, the general course of 
events  was  an  increase  in  exports  leading  to  a  rise  in  production  and  rises  in  corporate 
profits  and  business  fixed  investment  in  the  manufacturing  sector;  this  time,  however, 
different  developments  are  being  seen.  According  to  the  September  Tankan  (Short-Term 
Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), the diffusion index for business conditions in the 
nonmanufacturing  sector  improved  to  a  level  exceeding  that  seen  during  the  economic 
recovery  period  in  the  mid-2000s,  while  some  cautiousness  has  been  observed  in  the 
manufacturing sector. 
An  improvement  in  corporate  profits  is  producing  a  virtuous  cycle  that  is  spreading  to 
domestic private demand through the corporate and household sectors. First, the corporate 
sector is maintaining its positive fixed investment stance. This can be confirmed by the high 
year-on-year  rate  of  growth  in  fixed  investment  plans  for  all  enterprises  and  industries  for 
fiscal 2015; namely, 6.4 percent, as shown in the September Tankan. 
Turning to the household sector, the employment and income situation has been improving 
steadily. Labor market conditions have continued to tighten and the active job openings-to-
applicants ratio is at a high level last seen in 1992. The unemployment rate for October has 
declined to 3.1 percent, a low level last seen in 1995. 
Under  this  circumstance,  upward  pressure  is  being  exerted  on  wages.  Scheduled  cash 
earnings in the Monthly Labour Survey have been positive on a year-on-year basis for three 
consecutive quarters since the turn of the year, with base pay being raised for two years in a 
row (Chart 4). Private consumption has been resilient, as evidenced by a clear increase on a 
quarter-on-quarter  basis  for  the  July-September  quarter  against  the  background  of  steady 
improvement in the employment and income situation. 
That said, a virtuous cycle in both the corporate and household sectors has been maintained 
in Japan’s economy. The real GDP growth rate for the July-September quarter was slightly 
negative for a second consecutive quarter, but this is mainly due to the progress in inventory 
adjustments,  and  final  demand  as  a  whole  has  been  increasing.  Turing  to  the  outlook, 
Japan’s  economy  through  fiscal  2016  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its 
potential,  which  is  estimated  to  be  around  0.5  percent  or  lower  recently.  As  shown  in  the 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report) released at the end 
of October, the outlook in terms of the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts of the 
real GDP growth rate was 1.2 percent for fiscal 2015 and 1.4 percent for fiscal 2016. 
Monetary policy and price developments in Japan 
II. 
As  I  have  explained,  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its 
potential.  In  this  situation,  how  are  prices  expected  to  develop?  Next,  I  would  like  to  talk 
about price developments in Japan after touching on the Bank’s monetary policy. 
Change in policy regime 
A. 
The Bank is implementing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) that aims at 
converting people’s deflationary mindset, which has been formed firmly amid the prolonged 
period of deflation, to one that moderate inflation is to be expected. That is, it is preparing a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  foundation  on  which  people  can  act  on  the  assumption  that  prices  will  continue  to  rise 
moderately. 
QQE  consists  of  two  pillars.  The  first  is  a  clear  commitment  under  which  the  Bank  will 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in 
the consumer price index (CPI) at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two 
years. 
The second pillar is the Bank’s thorough communication of its measures and implementation 
of them to achieve the price stability target. These measures are to massively increase the 
“quantity” of the monetary base through the Bank’s large-scale asset purchases – mainly the 
purchase of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) – and to change the “quality” of its asset 
purchases, mainly through the purchase of long-term government bonds that entail relatively 
large risks (Chart 5). 
By pursuing QQE, the Bank aims at decreasing expected real interest rates through exerting 
downward pressure on nominal interest rates across a wide range of maturities and raising 
peoples’  inflation  expectations  toward  2  percent  (Chart  6).  The  decline  in  expected  real 
interest rates will lead to a rise in prices of risky assets such as equities and hence to an 
increase  in  private  consumption  through  the  wealth  effect.  In  addition,  with  the  excessive 
appreciation of the yen being corrected, real exports have increased, albeit moderately, and 
exporting companies’ earnings have improved, due partly to an improvement in profitability. 
In  this  situation,  the  number  of  foreign  visitors  to  Japan  has  also  increased  noticeably. 
Moreover, households and firms, which have devoted their efforts to increase their savings, 
are  expected  to  expand  housing  investment  or  business  fixed  investment  in  view  of  the 
decline  in  expected  real  interest  rates  and  the  improvement  in  their  income  and  financial 
conditions. 
As  illustrated  above,  QQE  aims  at  raising  the  observed  inflation  rate  toward  2  percent  by 
increasing aggregate demand through several transmission channels in which its effects start 
with  the  decline  in  expected real  interest rates brought  about  by  the  drastic  change  in  the 
policy regime. 
Developments in the underlying trend in inflation 
B. 
In the Bank’s current outlook for prices, the timing in which the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI (all items less fresh food) reaches around 2 percent is projected to be around the 
second half of fiscal 2016. Comparing the current projection to the previous one, the timing is 
likely to be delayed. That said, the delay is mainly due to the effects of the decline in crude 
oil prices, and the underlying trend in inflation itself can be judged to be improving steadily as 
the transmission mechanism of policy effects has worked as expected. Here, I would like to 
discuss  developments  in  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  from  the  following  three 
perspectives:  (1)  those  in  consumer  prices;  (2)  those  in  the  output  gap,  which  is  a  gap 
between aggregate demand and supply capacity of the economy as a whole; and (3) those in 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
1. 
Developments in consumer prices 
To begin with, let me talk about developments in consumer prices. The year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI for all items less fresh food has been about 0 percent recently. However, 
in the case where crude oil prices decline by about 50 percent in a short period, as they did 
for  some  months  starting  from  last  summer,  the  CPI  excluding  fresh  food  and  energy 
(hereafter, the CPI excluding energy) becomes a more important indicator in assessing the 
underlying trend in inflation. 
To verify this point, I would like to break down the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for 
all  items  less  fresh  food  (hereafter,  the  CPI  including  energy)  into  two  components:  the 
contribution of energy items and the contribution of the CPI excluding energy (Chart 7). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Until the introduction of QQE, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI including energy 
had  mostly  been  hovering  within  slightly  negative  territory,  with  a  positive  contribution  of 
energy items being offset by a negative contribution of the CPI excluding energy. This means 
that,  if  price  developments  had  been  assessed  on  the  basis  of  the  CPI  excluding  energy 
instead  of  the  CPI  including  energy,  they  should  have  been  judged  as  being  deeper  in 
deflation. 
By  contrast,  after  the  introduction  of  QQE,  the  negative  contribution  of  the  CPI  excluding 
energy  started  to  lessen.  Its  contribution  turned  positive  in  early  autumn  2013  and  moved 
further  into  positive  territory  until  around  April  2014  when  the  consumption  tax  rate  was 
raised. During the same period, with the positive contribution of energy items, the year-on-
year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  including  energy  –  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike – also continued to rise and reached 1.5 percent in April 2014. In other 
words,  annual  CPI  inflation  had  continued  to  rise  steadily  toward  2  percent  from  the 
introduction of QQE until around April 2014 when the consumption tax rate was raised. 
Thereafter, until early 2015, partly due to the effects of the consumption tax hike, the positive 
contribution  of  the  CPI  excluding  energy  –  and  also  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike – shrank. Moreover, since around the summer of 2014, a substantial 
decline  in  crude  oil  prices  has  become  a  factor  that  decreases  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the CPI. In light of these developments, the Bank decided at the end of October 
2014  to  expand  QQE  in  order  to  preempt  manifestation  of  a  risk  that  conversion  of  the 
deflationary  mindset  might  be  delayed  and  to  maintain  the  improving  momentum  of 
expectation formation. 
Looking at the developments after the expansion of QQE, the positive contribution in the CPI 
excluding  energy  stopped  decreasing  in  early  2015  and  then  resumed  an  uptrend.  The 
positive  contribution  has  been  about  1  percentage  point  recently,  thus marking  the  largest 
size since the introduction of QQE. During the same period, the year-on-year rate of change 
in the CPI including energy has declined, which can be attributed mainly to an increase in the 
negative contribution of energy items. 
Given these developments, it can be judged that the underlying trend in inflation, which was 
on the verge of returning to deflation due to the consumption tax hike, has come back since 
the turn of 2015 on a rising path toward 2 percent thanks to the effects of the expansion of 
QQE. 
2. 
Next, I would like to talk about developments in the output gap, which can be defined as a 
gap between the aggregate demand and supply capacity of Japan’s economy. In short, the 
output gap is likely to improve steadily against the backdrop of an expansion of demand such 
as business fixed investment and private consumption. 
With regard to business fixed investment, as I have explained, surveys including the Tankan 
suggest that firms’ fixed investment plans for fiscal 2015 have been at high levels. Although 
firms’ actual fixed investment has been somewhat weaker than planned so far, possibly in 
view of high uncertainty over prospects regarding the slowdown in emerging economies, for 
example, it is expected to take place firmly sometime soon. 
With regard to private consumption, the employment and income situation is the key. On this 
point, labor market conditions have continued to tighten, as I have mentioned, and a rise in 
wages has started to spread across industries and by size of firms. Looking ahead, reflecting 
historical high corporate profits and the tight labor market, wages are expected to gradually 
rise further, which will underpin resilience in private consumption. 
Therefore, increases in business fixed investment and private consumption are likely to lead 
to an improvement in the output gap and thereby push up prices moderately. Such a virtuous 
cycle is likely to become more evident going forward. 
Output gap 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
On this point, looking at the recent developments in fixed investment and wages in relation to 
corporate profits, it is true that these give the impression that the paces of increase in fixed 
investment  and  wages  were  still  relatively  slow  when  considering  that  firms  have  been 
making record profits (Chart 8). However, this situation has started to change as the output 
gap has continued to improve moderately and is expected to turn to excess demand. 
3. 
Lastly, I would like to talk about inflation expectations. Looking from a somewhat longer-term 
perspective at results of various surveys such as those conducted of firms and households, 
these expectations started to increase around the introduction of QQE (Chart 9). Although 
there  are  some  indicators  that  show  relatively  weak  developments  recently,  firms’  price-
setting  behavior  clearly  has  changed,  particularly  since  the  start  of  this  fiscal  year.  Firms’ 
price-hiking  behavior  has  become  widespread  and  sustained.  Looking  ahead,  as  the 
observed inflation rate rises toward 2 percent, which itself will push up inflation expectations, 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations are also likely to rise toward 2 percent. 
As I have explained, an examination of all three developments – namely, those in the CPI, 
the output gap, and inflation expectations – confirms that the underlying trend in inflation has 
been improving steadily toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. On this basis, 
the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI  including energy is projected to reach around 
2 percent around the second half of fiscal 2016, taking into account such developments as 
those in crude oil futures prices. 
Of  course,  in  reality,  there  are  various  uncertainties  in  the  global  economy.  The  most 
significant  risk  at  this  moment  is  that  a  further  slowdown  in  the  emerging  economies, 
particularly China, and commodity-exporting economies will exert negative effects on Japan’s 
economy, which will exert downward pressure to the underlying trend in inflation. As for the 
future monetary policy management, if the manifestation of such risk leads to a deterioration 
of the underlying trend in inflation, the Bank will make adjustments without hesitation. 
Concluding remarks 
In conclusion, let me touch on the economy of Okayama Prefecture. 
The prefecture is privileged not only for being a transport node that connects the Chugoku 
and Shikoku regions, but also for experiencing natural disasters less frequently than others; 
industries taking advantage of this geography have been underpinning the economy of the 
prefecture through the ages. 
Specifically, many factories of iron and steel products, motor vehicles, and chemical products 
are located in Okayama Prefecture, and Mizushima Coastal Industrial Area in particular, and 
about 30 percent of gross product in the prefecture is by manufacturers. 
Nonmanufacturers saw consecutive construction starts of large distribution centers covering 
the whole of the Chugoku and Shikoku regions making use of the highway network, and the 
floor area of warehouses has increased by slightly less than 20 percent in the last ten years. 
Initiatives to start up new businesses have been observed in sectors with growth potential; 
for example, in Maniwa City, which is located in the north of the prefecture, a biomass power 
station  –  using  timber  from  forest  thinning  for  fuel  –  co-funded  by  local  businesses  has 
started to operate in April this year. 
Moreover,  Okayama  Prefecture  is  endowed  with  tourist  attractions  such  as  Korakuen,  the 
Kurashiki  Bikan  historical  quarter,  and  the  Shizutani  School.  I  have  heard  that  these  are 
attracting  many  visitors  within  Japan  and  from  abroad.  Last  month,  the  first  Okayama 
marathon was held in Okayama City and many people from all over Japan have participated 
in it. In May next year, the Summit Education Minister’s Meeting will be held in Kurashiki City. 
Through  these  opportunities,  I  hope  the  fascination  with  Okayama  Prefecture  will  further 
expand within Japan and to abroad. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  in 
through 
this  region 
their  analysis  of 
I  believe  people  in  Okayama  Prefecture  have  already  been  tackling  new  challenges  while 
fully exploiting the inherited merits of geographical conditions and rich tourism resources. I 
would  like  to  encourage  the  staff  at  the  Okayama  Branch  to  contribute  to  these 
developments 
the  regional  economy  and 
dissemination of information. 
In closing, I wish you all the best for the further development of the regional economy. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      7 
      8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
