  Andreas Dombret: Moving together – one year of European banking 
supervision 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at the  ESE  Conference  2015 “Financial  supervision  in  Europe  –  on  the right 
track?”, Prague, 2 October 2015. 
 A courageous mission 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Ever  since  the  idea  of  an  integrated  Europe  first  arose,  political  convergence  has  been 
accompanied by scepticism and even by fears. How could nations and cultures with various 
languages, mentalities  and  histories  develop  a  common  understanding  of government  and 
administration?  Without  a  blueprint  solution,  Europeans  adopted  a  best-practice  approach 
that is nicely captured by a quote from Shakespeare: “Wisely and slow. They stumble that 
run fast.” 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  mission  of  a  unified  banking  supervision  network  must  have 
appeared almost illusionary. Nevertheless, on 4 November 2014 it became a reality, and the 
ECB was designated as its leading authority, thereby becoming directly responsible for what 
turned out to be 85% of banking balance sheets in the euro area. Such a transition naturally 
involves  acquiring  skills  and  expertise:  with  that  in  mind,  human  resources  equating  to 
roughly  1,100  full-time  equivalents  were  newly  appointed  by  the  ECB.  And  it  also  meant 
developing administration systems and procedures from scratch. 
Admittedly,  Europe  has  by  now  witnessed  quite  a  few  very  influential  developments  on  a 
European scale. But while the European Union developed over decades and the euro was 
implemented  as  a  common  currency  over  a  period  of  approximately  ten  years,  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism,  or  SSM  for  short,  became  a  fully  fledged  and  operational 
organisation after around only two years of preparations. 
Such a courageous mission could only be ratified under very specific circumstances. In fact, I 
believe that it was only realisable in the face of the financial and sovereign debt crises and 
the vulnerability of the common currency area that was revealed as a result. We experienced 
banks that were “too big to fail” and needed to be rescued. We also experienced banks that 
were caught in a vicious cycle together with their governments due to debt amalgamation. 
As  a  consequence,  national  supervisors  were  overburdened.  Good  rules  for  the  financial 
sector are not enough – they also need to be enforceable under bad circumstances. Rules 
are worth little if you do not ensure that banks abide by them. Therefore, one of the SSM’s 
primary  goals  was,  and  still  is,  to  promote  a  trusted  financial  regime  by  protecting  the 
common currency area from banks’ exploitative potential. 
In  addition,  the  SSM  was  designed  to  harmonise  supervision,  eliminate  home  biases, 
alleviate cross-border supervision and get an early and reliable overview of emerging risks – 
in short, to enhance the path towards a fully integrated financial sector in Europe. 
The  SSM  was  doomed  to  be  successful  because  it  had  to  be  a  key  servant  of  financial 
stability as soon as it came into being. It also attracted attention because it had potential to 
serve as a compass for Europe. Moving together – is it working? After one year of the SSM, 
it is about time for a review. 
Components of the SSM’s success 
2. 
One  year  after  its  establishment,  I  can  confirm  that  the  launch  of  the  SSM  has  been  a 
success.  But  its  success  goes  beyond  a  mere  change  of  supervisory  responsibilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  look  at  German  banks  –  we  witnessed  recapitalisation  even  before 
Harmonisation  and  quality  enhancement  got  underway  beforehand  with  a  comprehensive 
assessment that made sure that banks were well-capitalised from the outset. 
Take  a 
the 
comprehensive  assessment  was  carried  out  in  2014.  In  other  countries,  an  overall 
€ 25 billion  capital  shortfall  had  to  be  straightened  out  as  a  result  of  the  comprehensive 
assessment.  Corrections  to  banks’  assets  worth  €  48  billion  and  harmonisation  of  the 
definition  of  non-performing  loans  (leading  to  corrections  of  €  136  billion)  also  made  clear 
that the need for harmonisation was truly significant and that the new supervisory player was 
recognised as a serious authority from the beginning. 
Putting such “hard facts” to one side, we are also seeing the benefits of the new regime in 
our  daily  business.  There  are  123  joint  supervisory  teams  –  or  JSTs  for  short  –  for  those 
banks that are directly supervised by the ECB. Bundesbank supervisors are participating in 
22 JSTs for German banks as well as in 12 host JSTs for foreign banks. This multinational 
interaction noticeably helps preclude home bias. However, we cannot rule out the continued 
existence  of  some  preconceptions  because  they  may  be  unintentionally  masked  by  habits 
and  different  attitudes  towards  supervision.  But  a  cross-national  dialogue  is  probably  the 
most productive way to discover and discuss partial supervisory routines. 
Furthermore, a level playing field and cross-border supervision are facilitated within the SSM 
area. Of course, the European Single Rulebook and the European Banking Authority have 
their part to play in this development. But when it comes to the cross-border supervision of a 
banking group, institutional exchanges within JSTs have proved rewarding. In addition, the 
ECB has already harmonised its use of roughly 100 regulatory options and discretions that 
were meant for specific national situations but led to an inconsistent framework in the SSM 
area. 
Overall, banks are said to mark their new supervisory counterpart as tough but fair. In today’s 
difficult  financial  environment,  I  am  inclined  to  read  this  feedback  as  a  compliment  for  the 
SSM  as  a  whole  because  we  seem  to  manage  two  roles  at  once:  the role  of  a referee  to 
ensure fair play and a level playing field and the role of a diligent doctor to ensure that our 
patients remain sound and healthy – prescribing a bitter pill when necessary. 
European supervision – a continuing everyday challenge 
3. 
Improving processes and cultural learning take time. And there is no doubt that it will be an 
ongoing  challenge  to  ensure  steady  and  high  supervision  quality  that  reflects  both  banks’ 
individual risks and their changing environment. 
Let me emphasise a few challenges the SSM faces with direct relation to supervisory quality. 
My first example deals with our own impact on the sector’s diversity, which is reflected in the 
differentiation  between  120  significant  institutions  that  are  directly  supervised  by  the  ECB 
and about 3,500 less significant institutions that are supervised by national authorities. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  a  broad  information  base  is  vital  for  the  purpose  of  financial 
stability. Banks themselves ultimately profit from insights into financial cycles and threats to 
the  financial  sector.  But  I  fear  that  our  data  requests  require  resources  in  banks  that  are 
more  easily  provided  by  large  institutions.  We  should  assess  in  an  open-minded  manner 
whether the costs and benefits of our supervisory curiosity are always aligned with respect to 
many small banks. What is more, sector diversity also requires that factors other than size be 
taken  into  account:  these  include  business  models,  the  changing  regulatory  and  financial 
environment and even societal trends such as digitalisation. 
It should be in our interest to safeguard a level playing field, not only with respect to special 
national  treatment  but  also  with  respect  to  risk-adequate  supervision.  Protecting  variety  in 
banking is one way to enhance sector stability. Therefore, I appreciate efforts from the ECB 
to  widen  the  perspective  of  banking  supervision  beyond  the  level  and  quality  of  capital 
towards proportionality. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  There are other challenges that concern the supervisory quality and long-term functioning of 
the  SSM.  I  am  thinking  especially  of  our  most  valuable  resource,  namely  well-trained  and 
motivated staff. Therefore, I strongly support initiatives such as the ESE initiative that support 
cross-border learning and knowledge sharing. 
Staff  motivation  is  a  core  asset.  Anyone  working  for  the  SSM  should  be  able  to  make  a 
difference. That requires processes to be transparent and unbiased as to the result. We have 
to reconsider processes that are overly pre-structured, which will make the mechanism more 
productive  as  a  whole.  There  are  promising  examples  of  expert  groups  in  which  national 
supervisors share and develop their knowledge. 
Another  area  to  examine  should  be  decision-making  processes  themselves:  any  effective 
and timely involvement in a decision requires that it can make a difference. That should help 
staff of national supervisory authorities, in particular, feel like they are part of the SSM − the 
SSM  as  a  network  that  makes  accurate,  high-quality  decisions  and  delivers  best-practice 
supervision. 
There are still incidents of mismatched working cultures in our daily supervisory operations, 
one  example  being  on-site  inspections. We should  ensure that  there  is no  rivalry  between 
national dogmas but rather a cooperative search for proper solutions. Additionally, language 
is obviously an enduring challenge in a European context. The ECB promotes English as a 
working  language,  but  institutions  often  prefer  their  local  language  to  avoid  legal 
uncertainties. Language barriers will continue to accompany the SSM. 
Lastly,  allow  me  to  turn  to  a  fundamental  flaw  that  the  SSM  still  has  to  overcome  in  its 
construction.  Let  me  restate  one  of  the  initial  reasons  for  the  mission  of  a  transnational 
banking supervision network that I mentioned earlier: it should serve to decouple bank risks 
from nation state risks. This, however, should not be substituted for a coupling of bank risks 
and central bank risks. 
The ECB plays different roles in our monetary union: the role of a microprudential supervisor 
as well as that of a responsible authority for monetary policy. So the ECB works with banks 
as both a business partner and their supervisor. While there are certainly synergies between 
both tasks with respect to financial stability, unintended symbioses are possible as well – and 
I believe that they could become more dangerous. It is especially with respect to institutions 
that are likely to fail that I fear political incentives could go astray. In the long run, I therefore 
call for a strict line between supervisory powers and monetary decisions. 
Unifying national and European perspectives 
4. 
Where should the SSM go from here? It seems like a natural response to internal frictions to 
cultivate SSM processes and enhance centralisation. This might be interpreted as a blueprint 
to overcome frictions with national cultures. One is inclined to question the network character 
of European banking supervision at large: wouldn’t a single authority do a more efficient job? 
I  want  to  iterate  two  essential  arguments  against  this  reasoning.  Instead  of  a  steady  path 
towards  more  centralised  supervision,  I  am  arguing  for  a  balanced  mix  of  centralised 
stringency and national diversity. 
First – and well known to most in the business – good supervision requires us to be close to 
banks.  This  is  not  only  a  matter  of  physical  proximity.  Language,  business  environment, 
culture  and  many  other  accompanying  characteristics  of  the  banking  business  have  local 
roots. The generally slow process of European integration aside, we cannot expect regional 
diversity  to  ever  become  extinct.  While  the  ECB  has  indeed  done  a  remarkable  job  of 
steering  the  SSM  through  its  first  year,  this  does  not  imply  that  it  is  bound  to  solve  any 
organisational difficulty in a top-down manner. Instead, we should take advantage of bottom-
up engagement whenever it is feasible. 
Second, we should keep in mind the need for self-control. We have to assure our internal 
balance  of  powers.  Again,  this  is  not  meant  as  a  subtle  reach  for  national  privileges  but 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  instead  as  a  call  for  institutional  diversity.  This  is  not  to  be  confused  with  harmonised 
supervision,  which  remains  ever  paramount.  Importantly,  institutional  diversity  can  only  be 
maintained  if  national  supervisory  authorities  have  a  meaningful  voice  in  the  process. 
Diversity  cannot  be  maintained  by  itself.  It  needs  to  be  actively  promoted  via  the  SSM 
governance culture. 
Conclusion 
5. 
The  SSM  has  gained  a  reputation  as  a  tough  but  fair  supervisor.  I  have  argued  for  the 
preservation of its network character. In order to retain a power balance, we have to allow for 
multi-level governance. We should aim for an open-minded leadership that governs the SSM 
according to supreme aims. 
Let me reiterate three important aims and implications. 
• 
Risk-adequate  supervision  implies  that  we  should  allow  for  flexible  supervisory 
requirements when applicable. 
Efficient  processes  require  us  to  use  our  human  resources  in  areas  of  the  SSM 
where they will be most useful. 
Maintaining diversity and subsidiarity within the SSM network requires us to actively 
promote the involvement of national supervisory authorities. 
  European  integration  essentially  involves  learning  to  manage  diversity.  In  this  respect,  the 
ECB  has  proved  itself  to  be  a  prototype  for  self-awareness  and  openness.  Recent  SSM-
internal  analyses  of  strengths  and  weaknesses and  organisational  changes  show  that  it  is 
not resting on its laurels but rather aiming for long-term success. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
