   Veerathai Santiprabhob: Monetary policy and financial sector 
development policy of the Bank of Thailand 
Speech  by  Dr  Veerathai  Santiprabhob,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Thailand 
Focus 2015 “Opportunity Growth and Reform”, Bangkok, 2 December 2015. 
 Chairman of The Stock Exchange of Thailand, 
Secretary General of The Securities and Exchange Commission, 
President  of  The  Stock  Exchange  of  Thailand,  Chairman  of  Phatra  Securities,  and 
President of Asia Pacific Bank of America Merrill Lynch, 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
A very good morning to you all. 
I would like to thank The Stock Exchange of Thailand, Phatra Securities, and Bank of America 
Merrill Lynch for the invitation to join this year’s Thailand Focus event. I am much honored to 
be addressing this prestigious group of audience, and especially investor friends of Thailand 
from abroad. 
The title of my talk this morning is “Monetary Policy and Financial Sector Development 
Policy of the Bank of Thailand”. I would like to share with you the Bank of Thailand’s roles 
in supporting the Thai economy as we venture ahead in the volatile world. This year, there 
would be few among us who failed to notice turbulence in the financial markets worldwide. But 
what probably matters more is the shifting global economic forces that lie at the heart of such 
an incident. 
In the first part of my talk, I will explore volatility in the context of a “new normal” world where 
we observe, for instance, stagnant growth and low inflation. Then I will discuss the implications 
for Thailand, before moving on to policy navigation of the Bank of Thailand. 
Financial volatility has manifested itself throughout 2015. Let me briefly recap some of 
them: 
• 
Only a few months ago, the Chinese equity market recorded one-day steepest loss of 
8.5 per cent and trillions of dollars were wiped off from the global equity market within 
a day. The fluctuations in the Shanghai stock index perfectly exemplify the market 
volatility where from the beginning of this year the index rose by 60 per cent up to 
June, before collapsing to 10 per cent loss by August. 
There have also been sharp capital outflows from Emerging Markets, resulting in large 
Emerging  Market  currency  depreciations.  Indeed,  the  Institute  of  International 
Finance expects that capital flows to Emerging Markets will turn negative for the first 
time since 1988. 
On the commodity front, Brent Crude Oil price plunged below 50 dollars per barrel 
this year, having peaked at over 110 dollars just one year ago. 
  Against this backdrop, market participants have been increasingly concerned about investment 
and business implications. So what brought about heightened volatility in the global markets? 
I will attempt to answer by highlighting two key sources of volatility. 
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, unconventional monetary policies – most 
notably  successive  rounds  of  Quantitative  Easing  –  were  implemented  by  major 
advanced economies. This abundant global liquidity contributed largely to strong asset price 
gains and higher risk appetites. As major central banks pursued their policy of flooding the 
market with liquidity, risks had been compressed, intentionally or otherwise. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Recently though, despite ample global liquidity, investors have grown worried about 
the diverging paths of monetary policy among major central banks. That is, the Federal 
Reserve or the Fed is poised to begin its tightening phase while the European Central Bank, 
the  Bank  of  Japan,  and  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  are  likely  to  continue  their  ongoing 
monetary easing for a considerable period of time. The implications of diverging monetary 
policy stance for asset markets have weighed on the minds of investors around the world. As 
I shall elaborate, it is probably not the excess liquidity per se that generates turbulence and 
volatility, but prospects of the exit – or reversal – that does so. 
In the near future, global markets are bracing for the impacts from the Fed “lift-off”, 
leading to growing nervousness in the markets. Although the prospect of an interest rate 
increase by the Fed has been widely anticipated ever since the taper tantrum in 2013, the 
uncertainty over its timing and possible impacts has in part contributed to episodes of market 
turbulence this year. After the eventual lift-off – whenever that may be – the markets will turn 
their  attention  to  the  pace  of  monetary  tightening  –  or  rate  increases.  The  shift  in  market 
expectation over the pace will prompt volatility going forward. 
Hopefully I have not spoilt your morning by delving too deeply into volatility. But, let me stress 
this, monetary policy divergence will continue to be an underlying source of volatility 
in the global and regional financial markets. However, issues in financial markets are, by 
no means, disconnected from the real economy. Indeed, volatility arises from slow recovery, 
and timid growth outlook for the global economy, the so-called “new normal”. 
Looking ahead, the global economy is expected to grow only at a subdued pace as some 
major advanced economies are still grappling with the impacts of the global financial crisis and 
Emerging Market economies are faced with sluggish exports. Many economists have begun 
to refer to these conditions as a “new normal” for the global economy where global growth is 
weak, global merchandise trade shrinks and commodity prices remain low. 
An important factor behind this global dynamics may be attributed to China’s attempt 
to  rebalance  its  economy,  with  more  emphasis  on  domestic  consumption,  and  less  on 
investment and exports. While China is undergoing its economic transition, a slowdown in its 
growth rate is inevitable. The repercussions of China’s transition have been quite evident on 
the collapse of commodity prices, leaving many Emerging Market commodity exporters with 
current account deficits and massive sharp depreciations. 
Another crucial driver is the trend of “on-shoring” among major economies – leading to 
a structural change in the global supply chain – where countries like the US and China seek 
to  source  inputs  domestically,  rather  than  import  intermediate  goods  from  other  countries. 
Thus, even if global growth were to be robust, it is unlikely that Emerging Market export growth 
would recover quite as strongly. 
I would certainly be remiss if I failed to mention another potential risk in Emerging Markets 
which could have impact on the real economy; that is  a rapid  buildup  in  Emerging  Market 
corporate indebtedness. 
Ultra-loose global monetary policies have made it much easier for firms in Emerging 
Markets to raise funds – or borrow – especially from abroad. However, in the wake of 
tighter financial conditions, Emerging Market firms are facing greater difficulty to repay or roll 
over their debt. 
In summary, I have highlighted two key sources of volatility: first, continued excess liquidity 
amid diverging monetary policies, along with shifting market expectations about the future path 
of monetary policies; and second, the global economic transition to the “new normal” steady 
state. The process is ongoing, and will probably take some time – and it may not be smooth – 
before the new steady state is reached. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Ladies and gentlemen, 
Against the backdrop of such a volatile “new normal” world, I will now turn to the implications 
for Thailand. The impact will be realized on both our financial markets and the real economy. 
However, as I shall elaborate, the Thai economy has strong buffers that will make it relatively 
resilient to external shocks. 
Let me start by looking at implications for the financial markets and the exchange rate. 
In  line  with  the  trend  of  regional  currencies,  the  Baht’s  recent  movement  has  been 
largely  influenced  by  external  factors.  Any  eminent  signals  of  the  Fed’s  initial  hikes,  or 
worse-than-expected data coming out of China, would prompt capital outflows from Emerging 
Markets,  thereby  weighing  down  their  currency  values.  Significant  outflows  could  tighten 
financing conditions of domestic companies, in terms of both “cost of funds’ and “availability of 
funds”.  Such  interplay  of  several  risk  factors  is  a  challenge  for  business  managers  and 
investors alike. 
However,  international  investors,  like  many  of  you  here,  have  been  increasingly 
selective in their portfolio decision. They no longer treat Emerging Markets collectively as 
a single asset class, but have shown to differentiate between Emerging Markets. As such, 
even  though  Emerging  Markets  may  generally  move  in  the  same  direction,  the  actual 
adjustments across individual markets have been uneven. In this context, the degree of Thai 
Baht depreciation ranks within the middle of the regional movements – and our currency also 
closely tracks regional peers – while the level of volatility is moderate relative to peers. This 
owes much to Thailand’s sound external position which provides cushions from volatility in the 
global financial markets, shielding the economy from any potential undesirable. 
An economy with strong buffers could be likened to a car with good suspension, which 
could smoothly go through a bumpy road of global financial markets volatility. 
In fact, on the external stability front, Thailand performs well across several metrics. 
The current account surplus is expected to top 6 per cent of GDP this year, amounting to more 
than  26  billion  USD.  Public  debt  stays  rather  stable  at  around  43  per  cent  of  GDP.  Our 
international reserves stand at almost 3 times of short-term debt, among the highest in the 
region. The non-resident security holdings in our bond market is lower than 10 per cent, while 
those  in  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Thailand  account  for  around  30  per  cent  of  market 
capitalization. Such relatively low levels of non-resident participation, compared to our peers, 
suggest limited exposure to future capital flight.  
Corporate sector’s foreign debt also accounts for just 13 per cent of total corporate debt as of 
mid-2015.  Moreover,  most  external  debt  is  concentrated  among  large  corporations. 
These  large firms  tend to  manage their  exchange  rate  exposure  well,  by  utilizing  financial 
hedging instruments. Careful risk management practice among Thai corporates and financial 
institutions has made them much more resilient to volatile movements of the exchange rate. 
The Thai banking system is also resilient, with a high level of capital buffer and stable 
loan growth, despite some deterioration in loan quality.  Banks have closely monitored 
their customers, and have maintained a high level of loan loss provision as a buffer for bad 
loans. They are also well capitalized, with the capital adequacy ratio at 17.3 per cent and Tier-
1 ratio at 14.4 per cent, among the highest in Asia. This suggests that our banking system has 
sufficient capital to shoulder unexpected loss, and accommodate credit expansion. In addition, 
their profitability will help enhance their capital base over time. 
Last but not least, inflationary pressure is stable due to a substantial fall in oil price 
from  last  year.  Headline  inflation,  though  currently  in  negative  territory,  is  expected  to 
gradually  rise,  and  turn  positive  in  2016.  Deflationary  risks  remain  contained  as  demand 
continues to expand, and prices of most non-energy items remain stable or trend upwards. 
Such inflation trajectory is consistent with medium-term expectations of the public and the Bank 
of  Thailand’s  medium-term  inflation  target.  Overall,  the  economy  and  our  financial  system 
show a good sign of stability and resiliency. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
Let me now turn to implications for the real economy and begin by giving you some 
positive news, that is, the economy is likely to register stronger growth momentum next 
year. Tourism continues to show good prospects where the number of tourist arrivals is likely 
to exceed 30 million in 2016. Fiscal stimulus will continue to be a key growth driver. Public 
expenditure is expected to increase by more than 200 billion Baht from this year, providing 
support to the economic recovery, especially the construction sector. In the private sector, 
there are signs of investment expansion in construction, telecommunications, and alternative 
energy, among others. 
Although we may see export contraction in 2015, there are resilient spots in certain 
sectors. Exports to CLMV economies have experienced strong growth, and continue to show 
great potentials from which Thailand could capitalize. In fact, the share of exports to CLMV in 
our total exports is now on par with the share of our exports to the major trading partners such 
as the US, Europe, and Japan. Thailand’s exports to the US are also poised to become firmer 
as the US economy continues to see improvement in its recovery. Our exports of vehicle parts, 
electronic-appliance parts and electronics to the US have expanded in the past few months, 
and  are  likely  to  continue  their  growth  momentum  in  2016  in  line  with  the  US  economic 
recovery. 
Nevertheless, some structural limitations still weigh on long-term growth. The recovery 
of the export sector will continue to be impeded by a shift in the global trade structure. Some 
of  our  products  such  as  apparels  and  garments  have  seen  a  continuing  decline  in 
competitiveness, while some others are falling out of technological trend. 
Simply put, the Thai economy is like a car whose engine is in need of an overhaul. We 
need structural adjustments in growth drivers to enhance our competitiveness and sustainable 
economic  growth.  The  private  sector  needs  to  invest  in  new  production  technology,  and 
improve product quality in response to changes in global demand and consumer preferences. 
As  Mohamed  A.  El-Erian,  then  CEO  of  PIMCO,  once  said  “structural  challenges  require 
structural responses”.1 
In this context, we welcome many new initiatives by the government to stimulate public 
and  private  investment  and  upgrade  Thailand’s  value  chain.  With  the  introduction  of 
changes in the Board of Investment’s criteria for investment privileges, the government has 
geared  up  its  effort  in  promoting  high  value  added  industries.  It  also  announced  Special 
Economic Zones in order to facilitate the growing networks of production, trade, and services 
initially  with  our  neighboring  countries.  By  expediting  growth-enhancing  infrastructure 
development and increasing ease of doing businesses, the government also helps promote 
crowding-in of private investment. 
Fiscal reforms are also in the pipeline in order to boost efficiency of the public spending, 
revenue collection, and other public administration. Reforms of state enterprises will also 
be vital to upgrading the country’s growth potential as they manage strategic assets of the 
country, and account for a large share of public capital expenditure. 
All in all, our car needs an engine overhaul. The government’s recent initiatives form an 
important part to uplift the car’s engine. In the meantime, I can assure you that we have 
a good suspension system to get through a bumpy road of market volatility ahead.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
At this juncture – during which Thailand is going through multi-dimensional reforms – the Bank 
of Thailand will do our part to safeguard stability, support the economic recovery, and facilitate 
long-term structural reforms. 
                                                
1   El-Erian, Mohamed A. “Navigating the New Normal in Industrial Countries.” Per Jacobsson Foundation Lecture. 
10 Oct. 2010. Web. <https://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2010/101010.htm#P12_100>. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
There are three main elements of our policy navigation that I would like to share with you this 
morning. 
First,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  will  ensure  ample  liquidity  in  the  system  in  order  to 
accommodate the economic recovery. As policy normalization by the Fed is imminent, the 
risk of liquidity withdrawal from Emerging Markets increases. We anticipate limited impact on 
the overall Thai economy as markets have priced in the Fed’s initial hike. Besides, it is widely 
expected that the Fed fund rates would rise gradually from then on. 
As  for  now,  despite  the  slow  economic  growth  in  Thailand,  the  overall  credit  to  the 
private sector continues to expand at around 5 per cent. Furthermore, enterprises have 
issued a sizable amount of corporate bonds, leveraging on lower yields compared to last year. 
Commercial banks’ liquidity position is stable. All these are indications of favorable domestic 
financing conditions. Should a sudden reversal scenario occurs, the Bank of Thailand would 
make sure that liquidity will not become an impediment to economic recovery. 
The Bank of Thailand will also ensure that “cost of funds” is accommodative to the 
ongoing recovery. The two pre-emptive cuts in the policy interest rate earlier this year, in 
response to greater downside risks to growth, have eased domestic cost of funds. In addition, 
low inflationary pressure gives room for monetary policy to remain accommodative. This would 
ensure that the overall monetary conditions are conducive to the economic recovery. 
Nevertheless, we keep a cautious eye on risks to financial stability, especially under the 
prolonged low interest rate environment. Household debt, although it has stabilized, remains 
high in relation to GDP. We will continue to monitor and assess the impact of the low interest 
rate  on  the  search  for  yield  and  long-term  saving  behavior. We  are  also  vigilant  on  other 
pockets of risks which may have destabilizing effects on the economy, such as those in the 
real estate sector.  
Let me now turn to the Bank of Thailand’s plan to handle an increased volatility of foreign 
exchange, which is the second element of our policy navigation. 
As a matter of fact, a certain degree of foreign exchange flexibility is desirable for the 
economy  as  it  allows  foreign  exchange  to  act  as  a  shock  absorber  and  facilitates  real 
economic adjustments. With weaker outlook of growth across Emerging Market economies, 
and the expected Fed’s policy rate hike, many Emerging Market currencies, including the Thai 
Baht, have depreciated. In case of Thailand, with relatively strong external financial position 
and well-managed foreign exchange risk exposure by public and private sectors alike, the risks 
from substantial foreign exchange debt exposure are currently contained. In addition, as part 
of the Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan, the Bank of Thailand announced earlier this 
year the relaxation of capital flows measures in a bid to promote more balanced fund flows, 
and greater flexibility in the foreign exchange markets. 
As the global financial markets will continue to be volatile in the near term, the Bank of 
Thailand  thus  remains  focused  on  mitigating  short-term  excessive  exchange  rate 
volatility  to  cushion  any  impact  it  would  have  on  the  domestic  financial  conditions,  and 
consequently the real economy. 
In  the  longer  term,  however,  demand-management  macroeconomic  policy  –  be  it  fiscal  or 
monetary – cannot be used to address structural problems successfully. As such, the Bank of 
Thailand is also geared towards financial sector development in order to facilitate the country’s 
long-term structural reforms. Financial sector development is the third element of our policy 
navigation. 
The  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  Phase  III  will  aim  for  a  “competitive,  inclusive, 
connected,  and  sustainable”  financial  sector.  Our  vision  is  to  have  a  competitive  Thai 
financial sector which can support more diverse needs at a fair and undistorted price, promote 
regional trades and investments, while maintaining safety and soundness of the economy and 
the financial system. Today I hope to share with you some of the highlights and key milestones. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
Five years from now, I foresee that the Thai financial landscape will look different from 
today,  with  more  digital  banking  and  electronic  payment  transactions,  and  increased 
competition from nonbanks and foreign players. The landscape will also contain innovative 
fintech companies who provide alternative solutions to both service providers and users such 
as  data  analytics,  crowd  funding,  and  product  or  price  comparison  services.  Ultimately, 
competition will increase financial access, and lower transaction costs to the economy as a 
whole.  
The Bank of Thailand will focus on the development of infrastructures and standards, while 
ensuring that rules and regulations are clear and supportive of innovation and efficiency. The 
new Payment Systems Act will unify all relevant regulations currently specified under different 
laws and enforced by various different agencies. 
In addition, the Bank of Thailand will support the government’s initiatives to promote 
nation-wide electronic payment system, including, for instance, the development of “Any 
ID” payment infrastructure, and the promotion of debit card usage for payment and transfer of 
welfare benefits. 
On connectivity, the establishment of Qualified ASEAN Banks, or QABs, will allow Thai 
banks  to  expand  regionally,  while  welcoming  foreign  banks  in  the  region  to  conduct 
businesses in Thailand. Bilateral negotiations with several countries have been planned and I 
expect some arrangements to be made by the end of next year. The Bank of Thailand will 
collaborate  with  other  central  banks  in  the  region  on  the  promotion  of  local  currency 
settlements for trades and investments. The appointment of cross-currency dealers to act as 
clearing agents for the Baht and the Ringgit should be done by the first quarter of next year, 
while negotiations with other countries are ongoing. 
We are conscious of the rules and regulations which may hinder the development of 
regional  trades  and  investments,  and  we  are  working  carefully  to  remove  obstacles 
without compromising stability objective. 
The joint initiatives by the government and the Bank of Thailand regarding treasury centers 
have generated interest among large companies applying for a license. These treasury centers 
can purchase or sell foreign currencies and hedging instruments for companies within their 
groups,  thereby  aiding  in  foreign  exchange  and  liquidity  risk  management.  Multinational 
companies, as well as large Thai corporations with overseas branches, could similarly benefit 
from lower transaction costs and improved liquidity management. On top of the tax incentives 
offered by the Board of Investment, International Headquarters established in Thailand will be 
eligible to provide financial management services to their affiliated companies, once granted 
the treasury center license. 
Rules and regulations also need to keep up with innovations in order to ensure safety 
and reliability of the financial system, and to maintain confidence of the public. To this 
end, the Bank of Thailand has been given a full responsibility in the regulation and supervision 
of the Specialized Financial Institutions or the SFIs, which amount for around 22 per cent of 
Thai financial institutions’ assets. In performing such roles, the Bank of Thailand will apply the 
internationally accepted principles and standards taking into account the mission, mandate, 
and current conditions of each SFI. The ultimate goal is to ensure safety, sustainability and 
soundness of SFIs’ operations, so that they can perform their core duties for the long-term 
benefit of the Thai society. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is clear that the world is currently changing fast. The global economy has now entered 
the new normal environment. Indeed, we expect to experience greater volatility as the world is 
in transition to a new steady state. 
Looking ahead, we must not fear volatility, but be mindful of associated risks and ways 
to manage them. So far, with robust cushions, Thailand has fared well from external shocks 
compared to other Emerging Market economies. This does not mean we can be complacent. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Our country is in need of reforms to address long-term structural problems, similar to having a 
more powerful engine, enabling us to reach our destination faster. Fortunately, though, our 
economy  is  currently  equipped  with  strong  buffers,  similar  to  a  robust  suspension 
system in a car, smoothing our ride through bumpy roads. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me assure you that the Bank of Thailand will do our part to ensure a stable and 
resilient macroeconomic landscape. We will accommodate changes, especially those in the 
financial  system,  which  will  put  Thailand  on  a  stronger  footing  and  in  a  more  competitive 
position. I am confident that Thailand will ride forward with the much more powerful engine it 
deserves. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
