   Barry Whiteside: Fiji’s economic relationship with the People’s Republic 
of China 
Statement by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the 40th anniversary 
celebration of the establishment of diplomatic relationship between the People’s Republic of 
China and Fiji, Suva, 5 November 2015. 
 Salutations 
The Honourable Prime Minister, Voreqe Bainimarama; 
Your Excellency Zhang Ping, Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China; 
Honourable Ministers; 
Excellencies and Members of the Diplomatic Corps; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Introduction 
I  am  delighted  to  join  you  in  celebrating  this  auspicious  occasion  to  commemorate  the 
40th Anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the People’s Republic of 
China and the Republic of Fiji. I warmly congratulate both our countries on reaching this historic 
day which marks four decades of relationship that has flourished over the years. Today, China 
is an important development partner and a close ally and friend of Fiji. 
The state visit by His Excellency, President Xi Jinping in November last year, the first of its 
kind by  a  Chinese  President,  was  a  great  honour for  us  and reflects  the  commitment  and 
genuine friendship that China has with Fiji. 
China’s economy 
At  this  point  I  would  like  to  recognise  China’s  spectacular  economic  progress  and  its 
importance in the global economy. It is said that ‘when China sneezes, the whole world catches 
a cold’- implying that developments in China have an important impact on the rest of the world. 
China’s success as the world’s second largest super power reflects the country’s successful 
economic planning, its leadership and the sheer hard work of millions of Chinese, something 
we as a friend of China, are proud to associate ourselves with. 
China accounts for around 15 percent of global GDP and half of global growth. Fluctuations in 
Chinese economic sentiments cause movements in global markets for commodity prices, stock 
markets, exchange rates, trade and other key economic indicators. 
China is also a key trading partner for our own five major trading partner economies. All these 
countries have felt the negative effects of the recent Chinese slowdown. Australia’s mining 
boom plummeted when demand for its iron ore and other minerals flattened in China. New 
Zealand’s dairy and coal industries suffered when demand slowed in China. China is also the 
US’s largest creditor, holding the highest amount of US Treasury securities. For Japan and the 
Euro Zone, fluctuations in Chinese consumer demand have an impact on their external trade. 
So, developments in China have an important bearing on the Fijian economy both indirectly 
through our major trading partners, and directly through our own growing trade and investment 
relations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Trade 
In terms of our trade, Fiji holds a deficit with China that has grown exponentially from around 
$32 million in the year 2000 to approximately $490 million in 2014. Over this 15 year period, 
our  imports  from  China,  which  include  machinery  &  vehicles,  food  products,  clothing  & 
footwear,  iron  &  steel,  chemicals,  and  furniture,  have  risen  steadily  from  $34  million  to 
$624 million. 
Similarly, our exports to China, which include mostly raw materials – wood chips, fish, tuna, 
seaweed, mineral water and vegetable products, have also gained traction especially with the 
inclusion of Bauxite exports in 2012. Our export earnings have increased from a mere $1.3 
million to around $135 million over the last 15 years. 
While  we  recognise  the  immense  trade  opportunities  Fiji  has  with  China,  we  are  often 
constrained by the supply capacity of our industries to meet the large demand from China. 
Hence, our focus must be to target China’s higher-end niche markets for diverse products that 
include mushrooms, quality ginger and ginger products, seafood (including sea weed) and skin 
and beauty products. To this end, we are appreciative of the funding and technical assistance 
provided  by  the  Chinese  government  to  expand  our  export  potential  in  supplying  these 
favoured goods. 
Fijian mineral water is one product which could become more popular amongst the growing 
class of Chinese who have been abroad and are becoming more and more used to drinking 
premium bottled water. Fiji will need to focus on these niche areas and sell the pristine nature 
of our products to a perceptive and rapidly growing Chinese market. 
Tourism 
Ladies and gentlemen, we worry that a slowdown in China will have an indirect and negative 
impact on tourist arrivals from our major source markets of Australia and New Zealand. These 
two markets make up around 65 percent of our annual visitors. 
But China itself is now an important growth market for our tourism. On a global scale, the 
number of Chinese travellers has grown to over 100 million annually, a direct reflection of 
China’s increasing economic wealth and its rapidly growing middle class. 
Like the rest of the world, we must remain diligent in our efforts to entice China’s large group 
of  vacationers  to  our  shores. While  Fiji may  not  have  extensive  museums,  large  high  end 
shopping malls and exquisite boutiques that Chinese travellers fancy, we offer the Chinese 
tourist  a  unique  experience,  a tranquil  environment,  beautiful  sandy  beaches,  crystal  clear 
waters and the warmth of the Fijian people, in the only place “where happiness finds you”. 
Numbers and earnings from Chinese visitors to Fiji have grown tremendously over the last 
6 years. From just 4,000 in 2009, Chinese visitor numbers increased to 28,000 in 2014, a 
seven-fold  increase.  They  have  already  surpassed  30,000  this  year,  and  were  more  than 
47 percent higher than the corresponding first nine months of 2014. Similarly, annual tourism 
earnings from China have increased from $12 million to $45 million over the last 6 years from 
2009. 
With the aim of growing the Chinese tourist market in Fiji, the Government has embarked on 
specific initiatives including visa-free travel, a travel guidebook in Chinese and the acceptance 
by nearly half the ATMs in the country of Union Pay credit cards. Tourism Fiji also conducts 
outreach programs to promote Fiji as a travel destination and Rosie Holidays recently ventured 
into providing special chartered flights for tourists from Shanghai to Fiji. We understand this 
will continue in early 2016. 
Furthermore, the opening of a new Fijian Trade Commission in Shanghai in 2014 and the 
proposed Free Trade Agreement between Fiji and China, are expected to further boost trade 
and investment opportunities between the two countries. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Investment, loans & aid 
Ladies and gentlemen, China is also an important investment partner for Fiji, evident in the 
many development projects that have already been completed and others that are currently 
ongoing  in  the  country.  Some  of  these  include  the  Vodafone  arena,  the  US$158  million 
Nadarivatu  hydroelectric-power  project,  the  Navua  hospital  and  highway  road  projects  in 
Vanua Levu. Chinese companies have also bought stakes in Vatukoula Gold Mines Limited 
and  invested  heavily  in  our  primary  industries  for  bauxite  and  fishing.  China’s  financial 
assistance to Fiji made the country one of the largest recipients of China’s loans in the Pacific 
region. As of September this year total loans were approximately $521 million or around 38 
percent of our external debt. 
Conclusion 
Your Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen. 
Fiji recently celebrated 160 years of the Chinese community living in Fiji, marking the much 
longer relationship and presence that China has had with Fiji. Our local Chinese community 
has  played  a  substantial  role  in  Fiji’s  nation  building  and  contributed  significantly  to  the 
economy through agriculture, fishing, construction, health and retail business. More broadly, 
Fiji’s ‘Look North’ foreign policy has boosted diplomatic relations between our countries and 
Fiji  continues  to  benefit  through  China’s  support  for  the  much  needed  infrastructure 
development and foreign investment in the economy. 
Fiji’s growth momentum has been exceptionally strong by historical standards, at over four 
percent for the past three years. Our growth outlook is favourable and continues to be driven 
by the strong investment, including by domestic investors, and consumption activity. This has 
been supported by the resilience of our tourism and inward remittances which continue to grow 
strongly despite the slowing global economy. I am happy to say that our financial sector is 
sound and our external position remains stable with adequate reserves and a modest current 
account balance. Our forecasts on the Fijian economy are consistent with those of the IMF 
Article IV team which was here two weeks ago. 
Our macroeconomic stability and favourable economic outlook augurs well in our drive to find 
greater opportunities for growth with China, a country of remarkable transformation from which 
we can continue to learn. 
Ladies and gentlemen, today’s occasion reminds us that together we have achieved much and 
together we can achieve more for the betterment of our countries. 
Let me thank the Ambassador again for inviting me today and congratulate you for the great 
success in organizing this auspicious event. 
Vinaka Vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
