   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Of ironies and synergy 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the First ASEAN Corporate Governance Conference and 
Awards “Governance Transformation in ASEAN: Reform and Priorities”, Manila, 14 November 
2015. 
 Can self-interest lead to the greater good? Prior to Adam Smith1
  it was counter-intuitive to say, 
“Yes.” Human nature, in its narrowest sense, if you must, is anathema to the proposition that 
individuals naturally uphold the common good. But proceeding from Smith’s theory, we tap 
individuals’ natural inclination to pursue their own interests. We motivate them to see that good 
governance works to their benefit. Self-interest therefore is channelled to nationally desirable 
ends.  Another  “irony”  results  -  supervised  entities  are  now  competing  to  adopt  good 
governance principles! In doing so, there is cooperation with regulated entities. Competition 
toward cooperation. 
This  provokes  another thought:  Can  the regulator  partner  with  the  regulated? I  believe  so. 
When standards are merely imposed from the top-down, results can be unsustainable. To have 
sustainability, interests of the regulator and the regulated must converge. 
Can more granular measurement lead to unlimited possibilities? In the ASEAN Capital Markets 
Forum (ACMF), I believe the answer is “yes”. Since its initiation four years ago under the ACMF 
Implementation  Plan,  the  ASEAN  Corporate  Governance  Scorecard  (ACGS)  has  raised 
awareness  for  tangible  benefits  of  good  governance  practices  among  publicly  listed 
companies. The Scorecard has become increasingly more than a compliance metric or tick-
box. Rather, it is now a tool to achieve organizational alignment and focus.2 
OECD  studies  show  that  investors  have  greater  confidence  in  firms  whose  governance 
standards are measured and clearly understood, consequently allowing better access to equity 
and debt finance3, leading to reduced cost of capital4
, and thus translating to improved share 
value5. These are goals both regulators and the regulated desire. Since the initiative began in 
2011, regulators have championed good governance principles. It is for “your own good,” we 
say. And, we have not been off-the-mark in our pronouncement. 
Our advocacy has been heard. McKinsey has found that boards of directors of corporations 
are increasingly “more confident in their knowledge of the companies they serve and more 
strategic in their approach.” And we know that strategy formulation is the first step to good 
governance.6 Also, as shown in an ADB study7, PLCs have begun to voluntarily adopt best 
practices.  There  is  greater  appreciation  that  a  balanced  scorecard  can  generate  firm-level 
                                                
1   Paraphrasing an idea in Adam Smith’s The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759). 
2   “Robert  S.  Kaplan  and  David  P.  Norton,  The  Strategy  Focused  Organization:  How  a  Balanced  Scorecard 
Companies Thrive in the New Business Environment.”2001 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation, 
p. 8. 
3   http://www.oecd.org/daf/ca/corporategovernanceprinciples/43654500.pdf.The Tangible Benefits of Good 
Governance. Last accessed 11 November 2015. OECD. 
Ibid. 
Ibid. 
Improving  Board  Governance:  McKinsey  Global  Survey 
results.  August  2013.  Available  at 
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/strategy/improving_board_governance_mckinsey_global_survey_r
esults last accessed 12 November 2015. 
4  
5  
6  
7   Asian  Development  Bank,  ASEAN  Corporate  Governance  Scorecard,  Country  Reports  and  Assessments, 
2013–2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   governance  improvements8  and  attract  foreign  investments.  Ultimately,  these  enhance  the 
region’s visibility, integrity and “branding” as an asset class. 
The impact of good corporate governance is not just on the micro. It is also on the macro. 
There  is  evidence  that  improvements  in  corporate  governance  of  firms  positively  affect 
aggregate economic activities at the country, and in our case, regional levels. Studies show 
this  is  especially  so  when  firms  improve  transparency.  When  firms  are  better  governed, 
interests of the firm and of stakeholders are more closely aligned. This gives firms stronger 
incentives  to  achieve  high  productivity  and  efficiency,  thereby  raising  “economy-wide” 
productivity growth.9 Success inspires more success and good governance results in the whole 
being greater than the sum of its parts. 
In  terms  of  corporate  governance,  ASEAN  has  certainly  come  a  long  way  since  the  1997 
financial crisis. OECD reports that many key financial and corporate institutional reforms here 
have translated to “stronger regulation, better resourced regulators, new institutions and an 
increasingly involved shareholder base.” A key facet of this positive development is corporate 
governance reform.10 
Moreover, as the ACMF effort has reached its fourth year, we have a better understanding of 
corporate governance standards across the region. As regulators, we now have a common 
diagnostic tool to help us improve corporate governance standards. Each country in the region 
is expected to build on these standards to create their own corporate governance framework, 
which should clearly articulate expectations on (among others) the fitness and propriety of the 
board, checks and balances, and transparency. 
The fundamental principle is that the tone of good governance should be set and come from 
the top. It should remain the highest priority as it emphasizes the importance of having “fit and 
proper” standards for individual board members. These standards, we believe, should put as 
much weight on integrity, as on knowledge, expertise and competence. 
Fitness and propriety are also displayed in the exercise of independent and objective judgment. 
The “state” of independence is defined by parameters on term limits, a cap on the number of 
concurrent  independent  directorships  and  the  challenge  of  a  seemingly  limited  number  of 
qualified independent directors. Systems of checks and balances should likewise be deeply 
embedded across all levels in the company. 
Unquestionably, an environment that fosters transparency should be the new norm. A system 
for  cooperation  and  collaboration  among  government  bodies,  regulators,  and  supervisors 
should be in place to ensure reasonableness of disclosure requirements. We must display the 
will and capacity to implement standards and take enforcement actions, if needed. 
A business model that often draws discussion and one that is almost always associated with 
our region – is related party interest. While we recognize that such a corporate structure has 
inherent  risks,  we  must  also  be  mindful  that  synergies  can  lead  to  success  of  individual 
companies. It would therefore be beneficial to set higher oversight and control standards. This, 
to address conflict of interest concerns and propriety of related transactions. 
Our own efforts at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas with respect to our supervised entities follow 
the global thrust closely, while at the same time being mindful of emerging domestic industry 
concerns and unique situations in our legal and regulatory environments. However, regulation 
                                                
8   Chris Razook, Corporate Governance Challenges Facing Southeast Asia, The Ethical Boardroom, Spring 2015. 
In www.ifc.org last accessed 11 November 2015. 
9   Gianni De Nicolò, Luc Laeven, and Kenichi Ueda, Corporate Governance Quality: Trends and Real Effects IMF 
Working Paper Series WP/06/293. December 2006. 
10   OECD, Reform Priorities in Corporate Governance in Asia: Taking Corporate Governance to a Higher Level 
(2011), http://www.oecd.org/corporate/ca/49801431.pdf last accessed 11 November 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   alone is not enough. A culture that induces appropriate/proper behavior, even when nobody is 
watching, is needed. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the scope of governance must be broad. Our initiatives must not begin 
and end with PLCs only. The financial environment where PLCs operate is made up of many 
moving parts. Efforts must extend to financial market segments as well. In particular, we must 
promote orderly financial markets that feature real price discovery and enforce responsible 
market conduct. 
From the perspective of a central bank, we view good corporate governance as the foundation 
of safe and sound banking operations. It embodies principles of fairness, accountability and 
transparency.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  emphasizes  that  since  banks 
have an important financial intermediation role in the economy, the public and the market must 
be  highly  sensitive  to  any  difficulties  potentially  arising  from  any  corporate  governance 
shortcomings  in  banks.11  Clearly,  the  financial  industry  thrives  on  public  trust  to  sustain 
resiliency.  But  I  believe  these  principles  are  true  not  just  for  the  banking  sector  but  for  all 
commercial endeavors as well. 
We should also recognize that SMEs make significant contributions to regional growth. Thus, 
they should be included in our continuing transformation process. This transformation should 
also  not  leave  consumer  protection  behind.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  governance  must  be 
inclusive.  
For certain, we give credit to ACMF for identifying good corporate governance as a prerequisite 
for economic and financial integration. In doing so, ACMF strategically built a strong foundation 
for our single market of ten separate economies. Good corporate governance as a bedrock is 
essential for an economy whose combined GDP is expected to grow 4 times to US $10 trillion 
by 203012 and is projected to become the 4th largest in the world by 2050.13 With this forecast, 
we are therefore beginning strong with that trajectory in mind. 
Diversity in ASEAN is a good thing. It suggests availability of niche markets that can be tapped. 
Different  needs  can  be  explored  and  met.  Pockets  of  expertise  can  be  harnessed.14 Each 
nation has a comparative advantage that will benefit the others. Regardless of our differences, 
we should work together to continually make the Scorecard reflect internationally recognized 
good practices in a manner that remains relevant and applicable to ASEAN. This can be done 
through systematic collaboration, to ensure cohesion and promote synergy. As each nation is 
here represented, I am confident we are off to an auspicious and productive start. 
But can there be constancy amidst change? The answer, I would say, is “yes.” This year, the 
Philippine SEC celebrates its 79th Founding Anniversary. Its core functions endure, yet it also 
makes  history  by  launching  the  Philippine  Corporate  Governance  Blueprint.  In  crafting  the 
plan, I understand that the SEC convened a multi-sectoral consultative working group, which 
considered  past,  present  and  changing  requirements  of  corporate  governance,  while 
remaining sensitive to nuances of the domestic market. For this endeavor, we congratulate the 
Philippine SEC and its proactive and tireless Chairperson, my friend and colleague, Honorable 
Teresita Herbosa. We look forward to the Blueprint’s introduction. 
                                                
11   Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,Consultative  Document.  Principles  for  Enhancing  Corporate 
Governance. Published in October 2010. http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs176.htm last accessed 12 November 
2015. 
12   Institute of Corporate Directors. ASEAN CG Scorecard and Best Practices. 
13   “Understanding ASEAN: Seven things you need to know”. McKinsey&Company. May 2014. 
14   Amando  M.  Tetangco,  Jr.  Prospects  for  and  Developments  in  the  Philippine  Banking  System,  Philippine 
International Banking Convention 2015, 2 October 2015, Shangri-La Makati. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   My final thoughts for this morning. For sustainability of the corporate governance initiative, 
achieving synergy among seeming ironies is the challenge. Self-interest toward the greater 
good, Competition toward cooperation, Partnerships between regulators and the regulated, 
Unity in diversity, Consistency amidst change. 
In addressing these seeming ironies, balance is key. Balance in choosing a firm regulatory 
stance, while respecting and giving a wide berth to what motivates PLCs and individual firms. 
I believe we are on the right track. 
As we fulfill our mandate as the country’s central monetary authority, and as member of the 
Philippine Financial Sector Forum – comprised of financial regulators, we stand one with you 
in the vision to make ASEAN an “asset class” of its own. 
On behalf of the Monetary Board and the officers and staff of the BSP and the Financial Sector 
Forum, I congratulate the ACMF, and the fifty PLCs of the region, inaugural award recipients 
of the ASEAN Corporate Governance Award. For being exemplar in your way of governance, 
and being the elite first of many batches that will bring more investments and growth into our 
region, we warmly applaud you. 
As we say in the vernacular, maraming salamat and mabuhay po tayong lahat. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
