   R Gandhi: Payment revolution – preparing for participation 
Speech  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at the “National 
Payments Excellence Awards 2015”, organized by the National Payments Corporation of India 
(NPCi), Mumbai, 22 December 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Vipin Surelia is gratefully acknowledged. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
1. 
It was in the Reserve Bank’s Payment Systems Vision 2005–08 document, which I 
was fortunate enough to draft, it was indicated that the focus would be on setting up of a new 
institution for all retail payment systems and operationalizing a national settlement system. 
This new institution would be a limited company, owned and operated by banks and act as an 
umbrella organization for all retail clearing operations, both paper based and electronic. I am 
very glad that the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) established in 2009 footed 
the bill in perfect unison and has now emerged as the prime engine chugging ahead in the 
retail payment systems. NPCI is working closely with the banking community and payments 
technology  industry  at  large  and  is  at  the  forefront  of  digitizing  the  payments  while  also 
providing for interoperability. The industry has also been privy to the new initiatives taken by 
NPCI which are impacting the payments system positively. As it is, NPCI is completing six 
years now and in its six years existence, it has successfully launched six products viz., grid-
wise  operations  of  the  CTS,  Interoperability  on  NACH,  IMPS,  NFS  and  the  RuPay  card 
scheme. I am sure that NPCI has and will have much more successful rabbits under its hat. I 
understand NPCI is in an advanced stage of offering Touch & Go cards and is discussing the 
modalities for introducing interoperability for ETC Tags. My hearty congratulations to the Team 
NPCI headed by Shri A P Hota, a long-time friend. 
2. 
We  have  been  focusing  our  attention  on  developing  the  payment  systems  in  the 
country for the past thirty five years, starting from the computerization of clearing houses way 
back in early 1980s. Thanks to all these years’ efforts, today we have a vibrant, innovating, 
efficient and secured payment eco system in the country. The share of electronic payments is 
continuously on the increase, both in volume and value terms. Several payment channels viz., 
cards (including credit, debit and prepaid varieties), near field and cardless, electronic, internet 
and mobile based, are growing in big proportions. ATMs and POS machines have proliferated. 
3. 
However, the country is very big, spread over 3.288 million sq km area, with 1.2 billion 
citizens, and 650,000 plus villages. The growth recorded so far, though gratifying, is nowhere 
near our fellow emerging markets, leave alone developed west or east. Therefore, we need to 
be  pressing  ahead  with our  efforts  in  this  area. The  Reserve  Bank  is  working  on the  next 
Payment  Systems  Vision  document.  In  this  context,  it  is  also  imperative  that  market 
participants also continue to take serious interest in developing the payment systems. That will 
need quite a catalytic efforts from common interest groups. One of such efforts is to recognize 
performance and it is heartening to note that NPCI has constituted the “National Payments 
Excellence Awards” to identify and reward the member banks for their performance on the 
network. The awards are in several categories, separate for big players and not so big players. 
My hearty congratulations to the awardee banks and their staff. I am sure that other banks will 
redouble their efforts to win over these awards in the coming years. 
Emerging payment revolution 
4. 
According to a research report of Goldman Sachs, one of the three emerging trends 
in the financial world is the payment revolution. It says that the drivers that are changing the 
way we pay are the technology, the regulations, the demography and international factors. 
Innovations  in  network  technology,  cryptography  and  telecom  technology,  the  regulations 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
relating to Consumer protection, Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorist Funding, directions 
on transaction fees and interchange fees, the Financial inclusion initiatives, the B2C, C2C, 
B2B type of payments, the Cryptocurrencies and the tech-savvy-Gen-Next are all bringing forth 
that revolution. 
5. 
The  Payments  Landscape  in  India  is  also  changing  and  is  changing fast;  the key 
elements  are  the  regulatory  focus  on  creating  robust  payments  infrastructure,  technology 
enabling  solutions  to  be  available  in  millions  of  hand  held  devices,  the  number  literate 
populace, the evolving payments marketplace with new players and existing players riding the 
enhanced culture of innovation in the country to create solutions that are Make In India and 
Made for India. 
6. 
To reach out to all segments of the society, Interoperability is the key and a critical 
ingredient  to  evolving  larger  payment  ecosystems.  NPCI  today  provides  the  largest 
interoperable domestic network for multiple services and caters interoperability as the core 
service to the community. The retail payments in the next 3–5 years are likely to be driven 
essentially through Mobile payments. This is to ride on over 1 billion mobile connections in the 
country and the Financial Inclusion drive. 
7. 
thereof, we need to be taking certain strategic actions. These are as follows: 
In  order  to  participate  in  the  ensuing  Payment  Revolution  and  to  take  advantage 
a) 
Expanding the acceptance ecosystem: The proliferation of digital channels 
is evident mostly in the Tier I & Tier II centres of the country. In order to promote 
digital channels, it is incumbent on the ecosystem which includes the banks, 
Network partners and others. To ensure that there is adequate availability of 
digital  channels  and  enablers  such  as  Debit  Cards,  Internet  Banking 
registrations, etc. in Tier III to Tier VI centres as well. It is of critical importance 
that  the  population  in  over  6  lakh  villages  in  the  country  is  exposed  to  the 
alternate delivery channels. Some estimates indicate that to reach the average 
levels of BRIC countries, India will need 20 million POS terminals as against the 
current 1.2 million. This is a tall order. 
c) 
d) 
b)  Government initiatives: There have been attempts to move the government 
direct  benefit  transfers  onto  electronic  channels.  I  believe  that  with  over 
946 million Aadhaar numbers having been issued, Electronic benefit transfer is 
a clear strategy to promote efficient payment systems. 
Interoperability: Interoperability of the digital channels as I mentioned earlier 
is a key driver to promote digital channels. The digital channels by definition 
should be available anywhere & anytime. 
Simplicity and Standardization: End customers need to have simple ways of 
accessing the digital channels. This can be brought about through seamless 
processes driven by the ecosystem partners. And for this, standardization of the 
processes, right from registration to delivery and post delivery services is an 
imperative. 
Security: No Electronic payment mechanism can undermine the role of security 
and risk mitigation in promoting digital channels. There has to be continuous 
and concerted efforts to ensure that the digital channels are safe & secure. The 
confidence  of  customers  shall  be  a  key  to  deepening  the  usage  of  digital 
channels. 
e) 
8. 
With these steps, and in association with the key stakeholders like the Reserve Bank, 
the Government, the banks, the payment system participants and the catalysts like NPCI, the 
Reserve Bank is quite sanguine that India will reap the advantages of the Payment Revolution. 
9. 
I wish NPCI and payments community all the very best to shape the banking of future 
and future of banking. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      3 
    4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
