  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Pushing the island’s boundaries 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Institute  of  Corporate  Directors  (ICD)  Program  for 
Islands of Good Governance, Manila, 20 October 2015. 
 An  island  of  good  governance.  When  I  think  of  an  island,  isolation  first  comes  to  mind.  I 
imagine  the  island’s  exposure  and  triumph  over  harsh  elements.  After  all,  physical  islands 
are  themselves  products  of  struggle.  They  break  away  from  origins,  and  establish  new 
foundations. But an island can also be tranquil. A source of verdant prosperity. 
An  island’s  account  is  not  unlike  the  story  of  the  Bangko  Sentral.  When  the  BSP  was 
established  by  law  in  1993,  it  took  over  the  then  Central  Bank.  A  redefinition  was 
necessitated as the worldwide trend was for central banks to be independent and focused on 
price stability. 
As  the  country’s  sole  and  independent  monetary  authority,  the  BSP  is  similar  to  an  island 
indeed. It has weathered violent waters and storms. But it remains resilient and stable. And it 
has, as I will later on narrate, made a positive impact on its environs. 
Then there is good governance. Governance is a relational concept. To be good, and even to 
be  better,  is  the  objective.  Implied  is  a  positive  influential  authority  over  the  island’s 
inhabitants, over resources, over its supervised and regulated entities, and even beyond that. 
While the concept of “good governance” is a noun, its essence is dynamic. There is action 
toward a goal. 
The vision is a high quality of life for all Filipinos. 
All 5,321 “inhabitants,” if you would, officers and staff of “island BSP” from our Manila Office, 
Security Plant in Quezon City, three regional offices, and our nineteen branches nationwide, 
are  committed  and  united  in  THIS  objective.  We  are  guided  by  our  strategy  that  has  four 
themes:  Good  Governance,  Operational  Excellence,  Engaged  Stakeholders  and 
Organizational Readiness. 
We also know that an island cannot be insular. It must cooperate and collaborate. The BSP 
deeply values its stakeholders and partners, domestic and international. This July, the BSP 
convened  13  government  agencies  to  launch the  National  Strategy for Financial  Inclusion, 
with  the  goal  of  providing  a  platform  for  coordinating  work  to  build  an  inclusive  financial 
system. In a good governance archipelago, we benefit from an exchange of ideas, sharing of 
competencies, and strengthening of linkages. 
For most, the BSP’s functions are esoteric: controlling inflation, effective banking supervision, 
and  ensuring  a  safe  and  efficient  payments  and  settlements  system.  As  proof  of  their 
successful  accomplishment,  there  are  numbers  and  graphs.  There  are  also  awards  and 
international recognition. 
But  these  do  not  drive  the  island’s  narration.  While  we  are  proud  of  the  figures  and 
commendations, the real story lies in opportunities created and actual Filipino lives improved. 
When the BSP adopted the inflation targeting framework in 2002, it became more effective in 
upholding  a  low  and  stable  inflation  environment.  For  the  last  six  years,  it  has  met  the 
inflation  target.  Inflation  expectations  are  well-anchored.  Economic  growth  is  supported. 
Uncertainty  is  reduced.  On  a  micro-level,  informed  decisions  on  consumption,  investment, 
saving,  and  production  can  be  made.  Traders  may  hedge  against  risks  related  to  the 
fluctuating  cost  of  raw  materials  and  finished  goods.  Income  equality  is  promoted  as  the 
purchasing  power  of  the  poor  is  protected.  Because  of  the  country’s  strong  economic 
fundamentals, there is positive differentiation by global investors. Investments are sustained. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  is  essentially  market-determined.  Official  action  only 
Our  solid  fundamentals  create  buffers  against  uncertainties,  preserving  macroeconomic 
gains. 
Credit rating agencies1 and international financial institutions2 have recognized the country’s 
inflation performance. Growth projections are favorable. Last December, Moody’s raised its 
rating a notch above minimum investment grade. It cited the government’s efforts to sustain 
relatively  low  and  stable  inflation.  In  2013,  the  BSP  was  named  Best  Macroeconomic 
Regulator in the Asia Pacific Region by The Asian Banker. 
To thrive in a fluid and interconnected world, the BSP adopts a foreign exchange rate policy, 
which 
limits  excessive  price 
movements. 
To  achieve  financial  stability,  we  pursued  progressive  and  prudent  banking  reforms.  We 
aligned the regulatory framework to international standards, while maintaining sensitivity to 
domestic conditions. Among others, we adopted Basel 3 capital reforms. We set higher risk 
management  and  governance  standards  for  our  supervised  financial  institutions.  We 
institutionalized more effective examination and off-site monitoring processes. The industry’s 
risk exposures are better monitored through stress tests of banks’ balance sheets and stress 
test limits for real estate exposures. 
In 2014, The Asian Banker granted us the “Best Conduct of Business Regulator Award.” And 
we are happy to report that from 2012 to 2014, the Philippine banking system was the ONLY 
ONE with a POSITIVE outlook from Moody’s, from among the nearly 70 jurisdictions it rates. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Philippine  banking  system  is  strong.  Our  consolidated  capital 
adequacy ratio is Basel 3 compliant at 16.1 percent. This is well-above the BSP regulatory 
threshold  of  10.0  percent  and  international  minimum  of  8.0  percent.  As  of  second  quarter 
2015, total deposit liabilities stood at P6.8 trillion, 8.2 percent higher than last year’s level. It 
cannot  be  overemphasized  that  a  well-functioning  banking  system  supports  expansionary 
business activities and consumption spending. It is crucial to economic growth. 
At “island BSP” we practice and export good governance. We issued guidelines reminding 
board of directors of supervised financial institutions to exercise objective judgment and put 
strong  systems  of  checks  and  balances  in  place.  Areas  like  independent  director 
requirements,  membership  in  board  committees  and  specific  duties  and  responsibilities  of 
the board are covered. Supervised entities are motivated to see that good governance works 
to their own benefit. 
Never in the history of Philippine Central Banking has there been a greater interface with the 
Filipino  public.  The  BSP  is  eager  to  push  the  island’s  boundaries  until  they  reach  the 
peripheries through financial inclusion. The goal is to allow more people to save, to borrow 
for  productive  uses,  avail  of  investment  and  insurance  products,  and  send  and  receive 
payments securely and efficiently. For this purpose, the BSP adopts proportionate regulation. 
Innovation  and  creativity  of  the  private  sector  is  encouraged  as  heavy  handedness  is  not 
consistent with the goal of financial inclusion. 
Access  and  usage  are  key.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  before  the  year  2000  there  were  no 
microfinance  oriented  banks.  Now3,  there  are  173  banks  with  microfinance  operations 
serving  1.3  million  microentrepreneurs.  We  also  now  have  531  operating  micro-banking 
offices or MBOs reaching over 337 municipalities. Of these 337 municipalities, 64 have no 
bank except for an MBO. We have also leveraged on technology to increase financial access 
                                                
1  Moody’s, Standard and Poor’s and Fitch Ratings. 
2 
3  As of June 2015. 
International Monetary Fund, World Bank and Asian Development Bank. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and  usage.  We  expanded  the  virtual  reach  of  banks  through  the  e-money  framework, 
allowing greater cost-effective financial access touch points. 
The video featured the Credit Surety Fund. It provides an alternative to traditional collateral. 
Once  unbankable  MSMEs  can  now  access  bank  credit  facilities.  They  need  not  resort  to 
informal  sources  of  lending  at  unconscionable  interest  rates.  Jobs  are  created  and 
businesses  have  expanded.  Beneficiaries  report  an  improved  quality  of  life.  Some  even 
relayed that their children can now go to school. These are real results. We are also happy to 
report that the bill recognizing the CSF as a legal entity passed bicameral conference just 
last week in Congress. 
Through our PhilPass Remit, overseas Filipino workers can send money remittances to their 
families through the BSP’s real time gross settlement system. This enabled a fixed back-end 
processing  fee  of  Php  50  per  transaction.  The  resulting  significant  reduction  in  fees 
influenced other non-bank remittance companies to lower their own remittance fees. 
The  video  also  featured  our  Economic  and  Financial  Learning  Program.  The  EFLP  is 
important,  as  we  believe  that  a  well-informed  citizenry  in  economics  and  finance  can 
contribute  meaningfully  to  development,  and  can  benefit  more  from  the  opportunities  it 
brings. To date, the program has reached 79 out of the 81 provinces. We also have financial 
learning  campaigns  for  OFWs.  This  September,  we  sent  financial  education  materials  to 
embassies and consulates abroad to disseminate to OFWs. 
The video also mentioned our focus on consumer protection. In a recent diagnostic review, 
the World Bank described this focus as “impressive”. It noted the BSP’s regulations on Truth 
in  Lending,  credit  cards,  e-banking,  investment  products,  lending  practices,  confidentiality, 
data protection, product cross-selling and compliance systems. 
But what is the backstory behind these breakthrough results? Again, it began with a vision: to 
be  a  catalyst  for  a  globally  competitive  economy  and  financial  system  that  delivers  a  high 
quality  of  life  for  all  Filipinos.  We  recognized  the  need  for  strategic  direction  to  ensure 
effective  mandate  delivery.  Our  supporting  and  enabling  governance  mechanisms 
significantly contributed to present successes. They are essential too in sustaining them. 
We believe good governance is not just about complying with the law. Rather, it is a value 
adding  proposition.  It  makes  us  very  intentional  in  how  we  deliver  on  our  mandates.  We 
commit to the principles of integrity, accountability and transparency, ownership and voice, 
strategic  direction,  and  responsiveness.  We  believe  this  creates  trust  and  credibility.  We 
believe this whole-heartedly. 
For  the  opportunity  to  share  the  BSP’s  breakthrough  results,  we  thank  the  Institute  of 
Corporate Directors and the Institute for Solidarity Asia. On behalf of the Monetary Board and 
officers  and  staff  of  the  BSP,  we  thank  you  for  ensuring  productive  exchange  and 
interconnectivity  within  our  archipelago  of  good  governance  islands.  Indeed  this  is  an 
effective way whereby we can learn, improve, push the boundaries of our islands further and 
adapt to any change in the currents that surround us. It also enables us to together, enjoy the 
waters’ calm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
