   John Iannis Mourmouras: Some reflections on Greek and European 
capital markets 
Text version of a powerpoint presentation by Prof. John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor 
of the Bank of Greece, at a meeting with international investors and analysts, organised by 
Redburn Access, New York, 7 October 2015. 
 This is the text version of the powerpoint presentation used by the author for his meeting with international investors 
and analysts in New York (7 October 2015) organised by Redburn Access. 
I am delighted to be in New York. Today, I would like to share my thoughts and exchange 
views with you on Greek and European capital markets in these particularly volatile times. First 
of  all,  I  will  talk  about  the  third  MoU  in  Greece,  capital  controls  and  the  forthcoming  bank 
recapitalisation and, secondly, I will offer some reflections on current developments and future 
prospects of Greek and European capital markets, looking into the main drivers behind them. 
I. 
Greece 
Basic elements of the third MoU 
1. 
The key characteristics of the third MoU 
Following months of intense and rather overdue negotiations, the Greek authorities signed the 
third  economic  adjustment  programme,  worth  €86  billion  over  the  coming  three  years  
(2015–2018),  out  of  which  €54.1  billion  will  cover  debt  amortisation  and  interest  payments 
(€37.5  billion  in  amortisation  and  €16.6  billion  in  interest  payments),  €25  billion  will  be 
disbursed to cover the upcoming bank recapitalisation and resolution costs and the remaining 
amount will be used for arrears clearance. The Hellenic Parliament ratified a set of upfront 
fiscal measures (a total package of around €8 billion), which are for the most part (80%) based 
on  a  fair  balance  between  indirect  taxation  and  pension  cuts.  The  above  fiscal  measures 
adopted in the context of the third MoU are expected to offset the deviation of the 2015 fiscal 
outcome vis-à-vis the new primary balance targets of –0.25% of GDP in 2015, 0.5% in 2016, 
1.75% in 2017, and 3.5% in 2018 and beyond. 
In  addition,  Greece  has  to  implement  more  reforms,  inter  alia,  the  Hellenic  Statistical 
Authority’s full legal independence, reform of the Code of Civil Procedure, the transposition 
into Greek legislation of the EU’s Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive and the introduction 
of quasi-automatic spending cuts in case of deviations from the primary surplus target, as well 
as  labour  market  reforms  particularly  regarding  collective  dismissals,  industrial  action  and 
collective  bargaining,  and  liberalisation  of  a  series  of  product  markets  and  of  restricted 
professions such as solicitors, actuaries, bailiffs. 
Finally,  Greece  has  also  committed  to  push forward  the  ongoing  privatisation  process  and 
preserve  private  investor  interest  in  key  tenders.  The  privatisation  agenda  aims  at  annual 
proceeds (excluding bank shares) of €1.4 billion in 2015, €3.7 billion in 2016 and €1.3 billion 
in 2017. 
Debt relief 
A very important pending issue is debt relief. The creditors will make their decisions after the 
successful completion of the current MoU’s first review, scheduled towards the end of the year. 
Currently, the outstanding total amount of the Greek general government debt is €312.8 billion 
(or 175.4% of GDP). According to IMF projections, the debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to reach 
170% of GDP in 2022. In addition, Bank of Greece research suggests that since the imposition 
of capital controls Greece’s public debt increased further by 15.3% of GDP to 163% until 2024. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   In any event, the total debt service interest burden is 4% of GDP in the coming decade, about 
the same as that of Portugal. 
Chart 1: Debt dynamics (2011–2024) 
Source: Bank of Greece. 
 My guess – and this is only my guess – is that debt relief will move in one way or another along 
the lines of the November 2012 Eurogroup decisions (i.e. within the framework of “extend and 
pretend”). 
Two preconditions for a third-time lucky (?) MoU 
2. 
Greece  now  has  a  new  and  stable  coalition  government  with  a  pro-European  stance, 
committed to the euro project. However, for a successful and hopefully final MoU, leading to 
Greece’s return to international capital markets, a smooth political cycle at least in the medium 
term (three years) is what is now needed in Greece. 
Political stability 
a. 
The imperfections of Greece’s political system (cronyism, short-termism, prone to recurrent 
elections, etc.) are long-standing and well-known. A credible and lasting way out of this state 
of affairs in order to protect the country’s economy against so many and frequent government 
changes is through constitutional reform, which at least in special and extraordinary times like 
the one we are experiencing over the past few years, should safeguard a more stable electoral 
cycle. The government’s term in office in Greece should be uninterrupted in order to have more 
time  at  its  disposal  to  implement  difficult  but  imperative  policies.  By  way  of  indication,  the 
presidential election, especially given that the President performs more ceremonial and official 
duties, should not be used as a pretext to push for early elections and cut short a government’s 
term  in  office  (as  was  the  case  with  the  elections  in  January  2015,  followed  by  a  national 
referendum in July 2015). 
Last  month,  Mr.  Tsipras  was  emphatically  re-elected  as  Greece’s  Premier,  the  Syriza 
parliamentary group now consists of moderate MPs, the vast majority of opposition parties are 
also  in  support  of  European  compromise,  and  also  no  other  election  (regional,  local  or 
European)  is  expected  in  the foreseeable future.  All the  above  provide  reassurance  to  our 
lenders and the markets that Greece will finally stick to its bailout commitments. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Removal of capital controls 
b. 
The second precondition is lifting capital controls as soon as possible. Such a timely removal 
of capital controls goes through a successful bank recapitalisation, but could also be spurred 
by  the  reinstatement  of  the  waiver  affecting  marketable  debt  instruments  issued  or  fully 
guaranteed by the Hellenic Republic in order to reduce and finally put an end to the expensive 
emergency  liquidity  assistance  (ELA)  and  thus  enable  Greece’s  participation  in  the  ECB’s 
quantitative easing programme (QE). I will now give you my insights on how, when and which 
steps  can  be  taken  on  the  above  issues  in  order  to  effectively  and  quickly  return  to  the 
international capital markets. 
State of the economy after the imposition of capital controls 
It should be pointed out that the decision for the imposition of capital controls in Greece was 
taken on the basis of financial stability considerations due to potential huge deposit outflows 
after the July 5 referendum on the bailout conditions set by Greece’s creditors. 
Although initially European Commission forecasts suggested that Greece’s economic activity 
would be severely affected, real GDP growth increased in the second quarter of 2015 by 0.9% 
(1.6% on an annual basis). Preliminary data from the real sector suggest a negative impact of 
capital controls on the real economy and a sharp rise in uncertainty: 
• 
GDP is expected to contract significantly in the second half of the year with Bank of 
Greece estimating the annual real GDP growth at between –0.8% and –1.3%. 
Economic  confidence  declined  sharply  in  August  (75.2  from  81.3  in  July),  almost 
reaching  a  historical  low,  mainly  driven  by  a  considerable  decline  in  consumer 
confidence as a result of growing pessimism about the general economic situation 
and unemployment (over 27%). 
The stock of arrears (suppliers and tax refunds) increased to €5.7 billion, surpassing 
by almost €2.0 billion its December 2014 level. 
However, the worsening of GDP dynamics will be offset by tourist arrivals and receipts 
which are expected to reach record highs (+7% against 2014) and also the significant 
contraction of the trade deficit, as nominal goods imports fell by 32.0% (estimated at 
–25% in real terms) in July due to capital controls. 
Greek  banks  closed  for  three  weeks  under  the  legislative  act  of  28  June  2015 
providing for a bank holiday of short duration. Trading in the Athens stock exchange 
ceased on 29 June. On its reopening after 5 weeks, it recorded a decline of 16.23%, 
with banking shares plunging by more than 20%. 
Bank credit contracted at an annual rate of around –3% in July 2015. The rate of 
contraction  of  bank  credit  to  non-financial  corporations  deteriorated  in  July  and 
reached –1.1%, reversing the gradual slowdown observed since February 2014. 
The level of non-performing loans (NPLs) is likely to increase from the current 47%, 
as capital controls further erode the ability and willingness of borrowers to repay their 
loans. 
      Bank recapitalisation 
We are now facing a fourth round of recapitalisation to be carried out for the first time under 
the newly adopted Bank Resolution and Recovery Directive (BRRD). It is now imperative to 
recapitalise the Greek banks by the end of this year in order to avoid use of the BRRD’s bail-
in tool, which will enter into force on 1 January 2016. The BRRD will be implemented under 
the  precautionary  recapitalisation  tool  or  under  the  government  financial  stabilisation  tool 
(GFST  Articles  56–58  on  extraordinary  public  support)  depending  on  whether  the  private 
sector’s participation will be sufficient or not to cover the capital needs of Greek banks, as 
determined  by  the  ECB’s  comprehensive  assessment.  In  both  cases,  the  recapitalisation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   framework  will  be  aimed  at  preserving  the  private  nature  of  the  recapitalised  banks  and 
facilitating private sector involvement. Of course, no effort should be spared on all sides to 
avoid unnecessary dilution of existing investors’ equity. The equities of the capital increase as 
part of the second round of recapitalisation worth of €8.3 billion and covered only by private 
investors, have been diluted by 88%, but also equities of the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund 
(HFSF) have been diluted. Note also that all four systemic banks have a CET1 capital ratio 
well above the minimum requirement with an average CET1 capital ratio close to 12% (based 
on data reported at end-June 2015). 
In  addition,  it  is  envisaged  that  any  remaining  capital  requirements  under  the  adverse 
scenarios of the ECB’s stress tests will be covered by the HFSF. There is an ongoing debate 
on whether the HFSF will participate through the issuance of common shares or through the 
issuance  of  contingent  convertible  securities  (“CoCos”)  in  order  to  avoid  a  dilution  of 
shareholders’ equity in case of recapitalisation under a highly stressed scenario. What such a 
CoCo instrument would look like is under discussion, but it would have to meet all the relevant 
criteria to be a CET1 equity-equivalent (if and when the Common Equity Tier 1 ratio falls below 
8%, then CoCos will be converted into common shares). 
In short, there are three major pending issues as regards the planned recapitalisation of Greek 
banks: 
The level and treatment of non-performing loans (NPLs), which are the “Achilles heel” 
1. 
of the Greek banking system, as pointed out by the IMF. The impaired loan ratios for the banks’ 
Greek loan portfolios averaged 45% at end-June, while coverage of impaired loans in Greece 
averaged  50%.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  last  seven  years,  loan  provisions  have  increased 
fivefold from €8 billion to €41.2 billion. In the first quarter of 2015, impaired loan balances were 
broadly stable, but asset quality showed signs of deterioration in the second quarter. The stress 
tests  may  uncover  marked  increases  in  NPLs  over  the  stressed  horizon  due  to  the  rapid 
deterioration of economic conditions in Greece. The NPL ratio of Cypriot banks, after capital 
controls were put in place reached 45%. For our part, last week we appointed BlackRock as 
an independent advisor on NPLs, assigned with the main tasks of elaborating a report on NPL 
segmentation and tabling proposals on the management of NPLs. 
2. 
Another  important  issue  concerns  macroeconomic  forecasts  on  the  recession, 
deflation and unemployment under which a baseline and an adverse scenario will be used for 
the stress tests in order to identify potential bank capital shortfalls. As I mentioned earlier, Bank 
of Greece forecasts that the GDP rate will range between –0.8% and –1.3%, with an average 
of  –1%  by  end-2015,  deflation  will  stabilise  at  –0.5%  due  to  VAT  increases  and  the 
unemployment rate will stand at around 26–27%. 
3. 
There is also a strong intention among stakeholders to recapitalise and consolidate 
cooperative banks alongside bigger systemic banks and the same applies to one less systemic 
institution. 
Three more issues on rebuilding confidence and the economy’s potential 
C.  
1. 
As  President  Mario  Draghi  pointed  out  in  his  last  press  conference  in September, 
reinstating the waiver for Greek bonds will be on the ECB’s agenda, given that the country is 
in a programme for financial assistance and complies with it. We expect Greek banks to reduce 
their  ELA funding  worth  €84  billion  currently,  regain  access to the  ECB’s  normal financing 
operations.  Once  the  waiver  for  Greek  bonds  is  in  place,  Greek  banks’  available  eligible 
collateral will increase by around €15 billion, helping them to reduce their ELA dependence 
and find cheaper funding (through MROs, LTROs, interbank credit) and thus increasing their 
profitability.  Furthermore,  as  a  result  of  the  upcoming  bank  recapitalisation,  deposits  will 
hopefully return after the large outflows recorded since December 2014 (estimated up to now 
at around €40 billion). 
2. 
At the last ECB press conference, President Draghi hinted at the inclusion of Greek 
government  bonds  on  condition  that  the first review  of  the third  Greek financial  assistance 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   programme is successfully completed. Such a decision, as you understand, will help improve 
the outlook on the GGB market and subsequently corporate bonds and other financial markets 
drastically. The most natural corollary would be for Greece to be included in the ECB’s asset 
purchase programme (APP). This could happen towards the end of 2015 or in the first quarter 
of  2016.  In  terms  of  the  specifics  of  the  Greek  PSPP,  the  Eurosystem  could  purchase 
approximately  €3.5  billion  before  running  into  the  33%  issuer  limit.  Furthermore,  some 
additional  funding could  also  be  raised  if Greek  public  sector  non-financial  institution  bond 
issues were to be considered as eligible marketable debt instruments. Some could argue that 
the above amount is a mere pittance compared with the total Eurosystem’s purchased amount 
of €464 billion under the APP programme, with Greece’s participation being around €12 billion 
(PSPP = €9 billion, CBPP3 = €3 billion). Even in this respect, the signalling effect of Greece’s 
inclusion  in  the  APP  will  be  strong  enough  for  GGB  prices  to  recover  accompanied  by  a 
significant  fall  in  volatility,  as  the  overall  financial  environment  is  normalised  and  Greece 
ceases to  be the  outlier  in  the  euro  area.  It  is worth  simply  reminding the  sharp fall  in the 
government bond spreads of peripheral euro area countries (Italy, Spain) vis-à-vis the yields 
of core euro area country bonds, when the ECB announced the OMT programme and their 
convergence after the OMT final approval from the European Court of Justice. 
3. 
Last but not least, for a successful third and final MoU, namely one that will stabilise 
expectations and facilitate a sooner-than-later return to international capital markets, there is 
something that was missing from the first two MoUs and hopefully will be achieved this time 
around. As you know, there is a cumulative loss of 25% of Greece’s GDP as a result of the 
consolidation programmes and internal devaluation during the last five years. Capital formation 
has dropped by more than 60% in the last 7 years: from €20 billion in net investment in 2008 
to –13 billion today (2008: €53 billion gross investment, depreciation €33 billion. 2015: €19 
billion gross investment, depreciation €32 billion). So very few would disagree that the country 
now needs an investment shock. The question of course is where such a shock might come 
from, given that an adjustment programme is in place. Before going into more detail on this, 
let  me  say  that  there  are  technical  ways  to  incorporate  this  investment  dimension  in  an 
adjustment  programme  (see  my  article  in  the  Wall  Street  Journal  (2012),  adding  a  new 
dimension  to  the  two  standard  concepts  of  conditionality,  namely  fiscal  and  structural 
conditionality, that of investment conditionality). 
I will indicatively give you one idea (out of many more): there is a strong case today in Greece 
in  favour  of  a  drastic  cut  in  corporate  taxes.  Greek  companies  operate  in  an  adverse 
environment.  More  specifically,  apart  from  high  corporate  tax  rates,  domestic  firms  are 
burdened with high energy costs (30% above the European average) and high funding costs 
(lending  rates  that  are  up  to  four  percentage  points  higher  than  in  the  rest  of  the  EU). 
Furthermore, they are faced with intense tax competition from countries in the broader area of 
the  Balkans  (with  lower  corporate  tax  rates:  10%  in  Bulgaria,  12.5%  in  Cyprus,  16%  in 
Romania, 20% in Turkey against 29% in Greece). 
Current and upcoming developments in the Greek financial markets 
3. 
Upon completion of the current agreement and Greece beginning to fulfil its commitments, 
financing and liquidity constrains for the Greek state and Greek financial and non-financial 
institutions will ease and Greek assets are expected to recover. My view on the direction for 
the Athens Stock Exchange (ASE) and the Greek government bonds (GGBs) over the medium-
term is they will follow a clear upside trend not only thanks to the recently improved prospects 
of political stability, Greece’s QE eligibility prospects and the upcoming bank recapitalisation, 
but also due to the current very low market price levels. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Chart 2: Evolution of ASE Index 
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank of Greece. 
 Since mid-2013 and following two rounds of Greek bank recapitalisation, the Athens Stock 
Exchange  (ASE)  index  stood  at  1400  index  points,  recording  a  return  of  around  75%. 
Unfortunately, since August 2014, the Athens Stock Exchange has lost all its gains against the 
background  of  elections,  a  referendum,  capital  controls  and  with  the  prospect  of  a  third 
recapitalisation of Greek banks. 
As far as the Greek government bond market is concerned, undoubtedly, the news of a deal 
on  the  new  three-year  bailout  programme  on  14  August  led  to  a  sharp  rise  in  Greek 
government  bond  prices  (see  Chart  3).  Overall,  judging  by  the  upcoming  positive 
developments surrounding Greece’s QE eligibility and ruling out the risk of Greece leaving the 
euro area, GGBs should highly benefit. Finally, it is worth noting that the GGB market has been 
relatively immune to recent global risk concerns, as investors are more focused on the political 
normalisation which opens up brighter prospects for Greece’s future in the euro area. Looking 
at the volatility index (VIX) as a proxy for global risk, its recent spike to five-year highs failed to 
trigger any serious reaction in either GGBs or even other euro area periphery markets (see 
Chart 4). Moreover, investors, due to the capital outflows from the emerging markets and the 
recent Chinese equity turmoil could consider entering or adding to long positions in GGBs as 
an  investment  opportunity  as  euro  area  peripheral  credit  risks  are  subdued  in  a  QE 
environment, while at the same time additional policy response in the form of more QE remains 
at  the  disposal  of  European  policymakers  if  needed  (something  similar  happened  in  2014 
which then gave rise to an early successful first return of the Greek government to international 
bond markets – in April 2014 – through a tentative €3 billion five-year bond issue and three 
months  later,  through  another  €1.5  billion  three-year  bond  issue.  At  the  time,  a  single 
observation was made by the Chief Economic Advisor to the PM: as a result of Fed’s tapering, 
lots of liquidity was coming out of emerging economies into advanced economies, including 
the countries of the euro area periphery). 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Chart 3: GGBs yield curve after the July 2015 agreement 
Source: Bloomberg. 
Chart 4: Greek government bonds and volatility index (VIX) 
  As shown in the above chart, Greek government bonds have shown significant correlation with 
the Volatility Index (VIX) in October 2014, when deflationary fears grew stronger (although 
weakness in GGBs was also related to the then upcoming elections). A strong correlation was 
observed  after the  national  parliamentary  elections  in  January this  year and  again  in  June 
when the Greek referendum was announced and capital controls were imposed. The recent 
spike  in  the  VIX  to  five-year  highs  failed  to  trigger  any  serious  reaction  in  either  Greek 
government bonds or even other euro area periphery bonds. In my view, this illustrates that 
global risk sentiment has a limited pass-through to periphery bond markets at this stage. In 
GGBs, the  market  seems focused (rightly  in  my view)  on  the  political  normalisation that  is 
already under way, which opens up brighter prospects for Greece’s future in the euro area. 
European capital markets and the rise in volatility 
II. 
Four are the main drivers behind heightened uncertainty and excessive volatility in European 
capital markets in the months ahead: the upcoming US rate rise, the possible extension of the 
ECB’s  quantitative  easing  programme,  the  turmoil  in  Chinese  markets  together  with  EMEs 
capital outflows, and global geopolitical risks (Ukraine crisis escalation, Jihadi terrorist rise, 
etc.). As far as QE in the euro area is concerned, some voices in Frankfurt call for an increase 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   in the ECB’s QE from €60 billion monthly to €80 billion or more. While ECB’s policy has been 
accommodative, it has been much less accommodative than other central banks. A pace of 
€80 billion per month, it would take until the end of 2017 for the ECB’s QE to reach the same 
levels relative to GDP with the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England. Others claim that 
the QE period should be extended beyond September 2016, implying a second round of QE 
in Europe. ECB President Mario Draghi himself, when asked at the last press conference in 
Frankfurt said: “Accordingly, the Governing Council will closely monitor all relevant incoming 
information.  It  emphasises  its  willingness  and  ability  to  act,  if  warranted,  by  using  all  the 
instruments  available  within  its  mandate  and,  in  particular,  recalls  that  the  asset  purchase 
programme  provides  sufficient  flexibility  in  terms  of  adjusting  the  size,  composition  and 
duration of the programme”. 
The  effects  of  divergent  monetary  paths  (Fed  rate  hike1  vs.  Draghi’s  QE)  would  normally 
strengthen the value of the US dollar against the euro and would also contribute to a fall in the 
German  Bund  and  other  European  country  bond  yields  and  to  a  rise  in  euro  stocks.  The 
Chinese  market  turmoil2  together  with  capital  outflows  from  emerging  market  economies 
(EMEs) and the possible escalation of a currency war after the upcoming Fed rate hike might 
work  at  opposite  directions,  contributing  to  further  market  volatility  for  European  capital 
markets. The volatility index (VIX), which measures stock market volatility, surged to 40, its 
highest  level  since  2011,  while  the  rise  in  EMEs’  implied  equity  volatility  (VXEEM)  was  its 
highest on record (see Chart 5). It should be recalled that the 3-month correlation between 
EUR/USD and VIX has reached its highest level since 2009. 
Chart 5: Implied volatilities in financial markets 
 2  The  dashed  horizontal  lines  represent  averages  from  1/1/2012  to  31/12/2014.  3  Chicago  Board  Options 
Exchange-  Traded  Fund  Volatility  Index.  4  Implied  Volatility  of  at  the  money  options  on  commodity  futures  of 
Germany, Japan,  the  UK,  and  the  US;  weighted  average  based  on  GDP  and PPP  exchange  rates.  5 Implied 
volatility of at-the-money options on long-term bond futures of Germany, Japan, UK and U.S. 6 JP Morgan VXY 
Global Index. 
 
 
Source: Bank of International Settlements (BIS) Quarterly Review 2015. 
Note: The JP Morgan VXY Global Index measures volatility in a basket of G7 countries’ currencies. 
                                                 
1  For an analysis on this, see Appendix. 
2  For further insights on this, see Appendix. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 6: Widening interest rate differentials and FX 
  2  A decrease on an inverted scale indicates euro depreciation.  
Source: Bank of International Settlements (BIS) Quarterly Review 2015. 
 Although  the  timing  of  the  Fed’s  first  tightening  move  in  many  years  has  become  more 
uncertain, interest rate differentials between the US and many other countries are still wide, 
with important consequences for foreign exchange markets. In particular, except for a brief 
hiatus in the second quarter of 2015, the US dollar has been on an appreciating trend since 
mid-2014. The effect of interest rate differentials on the US dollar was particularly strong vis-
à-vis the euro: as the difference between US and core euro area interest rates began to widen 
again in the third quarter of 2015, the dollar resumed its strengthening path against the euro 
(see Chart 6). Towards the end of the period, as US short-term rates edged down, the euro 
recovered somewhat. In addition, foreign-exchange volatility now stands at its highest levels 
since 2011 (see Chart 7). 
Chart 7: JP Morgan Global FX Market Volatility Index 
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank of Greece. 
Note:  The  JP  Morgan  Global  FX  Volatility  Index  tracks  the  value  of  options  of  emerging  and 
developed market currencies against the US dollar: New Zealand dollar, Norwegian krone, Swedish 
krona, Japanese yen, the euro, British pound, and Canadian US dollar. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   As far as bond markets are concerned, a volatility spike was evident especially in German 
Bund markets in May and June. German government bonds are the key driver of European 
government  bonds,  since  they  serve  as  a  benchmark  for  a  host  of  other  government  and 
corporate securities and thus have a systemic (European and global) influence on borrowing, 
investing and saving behaviour and also have spillover effects on other markets: commodities, 
foreign exchange and equities. Bonds with very long maturities showed the highest intraday 
volatility, while bonds with shorter maturities were also affected, albeit to a lesser extent (see 
Chart 8). The “Bund tantrum”, as some have termed the spike in German bond volatility, can 
be  explained  mainly  by  the  deteriorated  market  liquidity.  Measures  of  market  liquidity, 
computed  using  firm  prices  for  immediately  executable  transactions,  corroborate  the 
assumption  that  strained  market  liquidity  conditions  are  at  least  partly  to  blame  for  the 
heightened  volatility.  The  cost  of  immediately  executable  transactions  in  the  Bund  market 
increased in the period around the Bund tantrum as the bid-ask spreads have doubled in the 
relative bid-ask spread, from 40 to roughly 80 basis points. Also, the market’s order book depth 
also showed signs of deterioration over this period, falling by more than a third over the six-
month period, from €25 million to roughly €16 million in ultra-long-term German bonds. 
Chart 8: Volatility and liquidity during the “Bund tantrum” 
 1 Realised volatility is calculated as the daily (maximum midpoint–minimum midpoint)/average price. Intraday 
data from the MTS Euro Benchmark Markets (MTS-EBM) for benchmark bonds only.2 Data from January 2011 
to June 2015, aggregated to a weekly average.4 Intra-daily data from the MTS-EBM for benchmark bonds only 
for January–June 2015. Both panels show daily averages.6 Depth is calculated as the (volume at bid + volume 
at ask)/2. 
 
Source: Bank of International Settlements (BIS) Quarterly Review 2015. 
 It is fair to say that although it might be too soon to see if the Chinese turmoil will have a severe 
impact  through  trade  and  financial  channels  on  the  European  and  global  economy,  the 
Chinese turmoil remains the main challenge in the months ahead. Exports to China represent 
around 10% of total euro area exports in value-added terms, meaning that a significant decline 
in Chinese domestic demand would dent export growth. Germany, for instance, has Europe’s 
strongest trade ties with China, but exports to that country make up only 6.6% of total German 
exports, according to the German economics ministry. For the time being, however, there is 
not much evidence of a slowdown in exports. Apart from a potential trade impact, further China-
induced turmoil on financial markets could lead to massive capital outflows from the Chinese 
financial markets to the European capital markets diminishing the positive effects of ECB’s 
quantitative  easing  programme.  In  the  short  run,  emerging  markets  remain  vulnerable  to 
further declines in commodity prices and sharp appreciation of the US dollar. This could further 
trigger a reversal of capital flows and disruptive asset price adjustments. Between June 2014 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   and  July  2015,  capital  outflows  from  emerging  markets  reached  $940  billion  (see  NN 
Investment  partners,  FT  19  August),  in  contrast  with  $2  trillion  inflows  to  these  markets 
between  2008  and  June  2014.  Such  outflows  would  impact  on  EMEs’  growth  rates,  thus 
lowering global demand. If the Chinese economy deteriorates further, lower demand will drive 
down  oil  prices  which  are  also  being  translated  into  lower  inflation  rates  for  non-energy 
components and feed into inflation expectations, leading to a worsening inflation outlook and 
making  the  ECB’s  inflation  target  more  difficult  to  reach.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  the  yuan 
depreciates further, this will add to deflationary pressures for the US and euro area, as China 
is the biggest import partner for both the US and the euro area. If, on the other hand, the yuan 
remains at its current levels, the disinflationary impact of cheaper Chinese exports will prove 
less than feared by some market participants, as an overall 2% depreciation partly offsets the 
real appreciation of the yuan over the past 12 months (more than 10%). 
More generally, in the current environment of short-term rates to near zero (or even negative) 
levels,  potential  adverse  shocks  or  policy  missteps  could  trigger  an  abrupt  rise  in  global 
volatility and market risk premia (which are now compressed) and a rapid erosion of policy 
confidence.  Shocks  could  originate  in  advanced  or  emerging  markets  and,  coupled  with 
unaddressed system vulnerabilities, could lead to a global asset market disruption, a sudden 
drying-up  of  market  liquidity  in  many  asset  classes  and  a  sharp  tightening  of  financial 
conditions with negative repercussions on financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   Appendix 
Here are some further thoughts on the first US rate hike and on the Chinese turmoil. 
Fed’s rate hike 
1. 
The most crucial question is: will the Federal Reserve (Fed) raise its rates this December or 
next year? My view is that it is not only a question of when, but perhaps more importantly a 
question of the trajectory of interest rates following the Fed’s rate hike, i.e. if the subsequent 
tightening will be shallow or steep. Of course, the exact timing is important, the last interest 
rate change was in late 2008, whereas the last hike was a decade ago (June 2006). However, 
unless you are a bond trader, the scale and length of the tightening cycle matter more. 
Here are some stylised facts from previous tightening cycles in the US (twelve cycles during 
the last 50 years): 
• 
the average tightening cycle duration is less than 2 years, although in the last twenty 
years the average duration is about one year; 
the average increase in the base interest rate is 3 percentage points; 
a recession follows about three years following the Fed’s decision to raises rates for 
the first time in years. 
 It is the path of interest rates after the first hike that matters most because this path determines 
how much support the economy will be getting from the Fed. So the big question this time 
around is whether rates will rise quickly or slowly in 2016. The answer is pretty straightforward: 
slowly. In the past, each Fed rate increase was soon followed by other central bank rate rises. 
This time, given divergent monetary paths (mainly the QE programmes in Europe and Japan), 
a US rate hike is expected to be followed by a US dollar appreciation, given that foreign capital 
will take advantage of more attractive yields driving the US currency higher and also given the 
US  dollar’s  role  as  a  safe  haven  currency.  This  will  further  tighten  policy  since  a  higher 
exchange rate will reduce the price of imports and hence inflation. Indeed, since early January, 
the US dollar appreciated against the euro by more than 7% (€/US $: from 1.20 to 1.12), while 
it appreciated against the yen by 4% (from 119 to 124) and the British pound by 3% (from 0.64 
to 0.66). The above reasoning suggests that the next US tightening cycle will be shorter and 
shallower than in the past. In other words, I tend to be more on the side of futures markets 
than of Fed officials as far as the prediction about the level of the base rate at the end of 2016 
is concerned. 
As shown in Chart 9, Fed officials think that a growing economy will allow the central bank to 
increase its target significantly over the following year or so and their median projection for 
end-2016  is  1.375%,  while  investor  expectations  derived  from  futures  market  prices  hover 
around just 0.75%. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 9: Forecasts for end-2016 Fed base rate 
   Of course, this first Fed rate rise in many years might have adverse effects on emerging market 
economies (EMEs) given the history of emerging market crises (1979–1982 in Latin America, 
1994–1995 in Asia) coinciding with the early stages of US monetary tightening cycles. This 
time, a premature Fed tightening move would not trigger an emerging market crisis (since it 
has  already  broken  out  in  China),  but  it  would  accentuate  the  crisis  through  spillovers  to 
advanced economies. The most vulnerable countries are those with large fiscal and current 
account deficits or, to put it differently, those lacking political and policy credibility. A tightening 
of the Fed’s policy is likely to lead to further capital outflows from EMEs as investors search 
for rising returns in the US, which in turn might imply a depreciation of EMEs’ currencies, a rise 
in their interest rates, economic slowdown, etc. 
The Chinese turmoil is the main challenge ahead 
2. 
One last word about China and the recent market turmoil: this latest episode may have the 
characteristics of a regime switch towards a permanent, lower output, driven by a structural 
real  estate  overhang,  chronic  industrial  overinvestment  (45%  of  GDP)  financed  by  a 
(collapsing) shadow banking system. 
Since mid-August, financial markets have been facing substantial volatility, following China’s 
decision to change the methodology for setting the central fixing rate of the yuan, which led to 
a 2% devaluation in China’s currency, its biggest daily move since 1994. The decision was 
probably prompted by weakening economic activity, a decline in exports (July figures indicated 
a  year-on-year  decline  by  more  than  8.5%),  deflationary  pressures  and  followed  the 
depreciation  of  the  yen  and  the  euro,  which  are  the  major  trading  currencies  for  China. 
Recently  released  data  on  China’s  PMI  (former  HSBC  PMI),  which  dropped  to  47.0  in 
September, its lowest level since 2009, and further deterioration in China’s activity indices (for 
instance, the crude steel output fell by 6.3% on a yearly basis in the first eight weeks of the 
third quarter) suggest  that  China’s  official growth  rate  of  7%  can  be  put  under question. If 
macro data continue to weaken, China is not likely to maintain its recent growth rate, but it will 
be stabilised at a lower level, its slowest rate since 1991. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
 Chart 10: Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index & Turnover 
   Sources: Bloomberg and Bank of Greece. 
As shown in Chart 10, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index has experienced a 
sharp correction by roughly 40% since its June 12 peak, after it had risen around 150% in one 
year. Its turnover still remains below the average of US $25.2 billion. In addition, the fears of a 
Chinese slowdown affected emerging economies (see Chart 11) and commodity producing 
countries. 
Chart 11: VIX and MISCI Emerging Markets Index 
VIX
MSCI Emerging markets index
MSCI
10.5.15
10.6.15
10.7.15
10.8.15
VIX
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
10.4.15
1100
1050
1000
950
900
850
800
750
700
 Sources: Bloomberg and Bank of Greece. 
Notes:  VIX=  Volatility  Index.  Composition:  Implied  Volatility  of  S&P  500  options,  MSCI:  Morgan 
Stanley  Capital  International.  Data  from  21  emerging  economies:  Brazil,  Chile,  China,  Colombia, 
Czech  Republic,  Egypt,  Hungary,  India,  Indonesia,  Korea,  Malaysia,  Mexico,  Morocco,  Peru, 
Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, and Turkey. 
The Chinese slowdown affected emerging economies as it led to a massive sell-off in their 
equity  markets  and  a  rise  in  volatility  which  spilled  over  to  other  international  markets. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Spillovers  were  evident  mainly  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  with  emerging  market 
currencies depreciating against the USD and safe-haven flows into the yen, Swiss franc and 
the euro. At the same time, high yield and emerging market bond yields widened significantly. 
Another important consequence was the impact of the Chinese equity crisis on commodity 
prices,  particularly  on  oil  (e.g.  WTI  Crude  Futures  lost  as  much  as  36%  over  the  last  two 
months),  which  immediately  triggered  expectations  of  global  disinflation  with  potential 
implications  for  future  central  bank  actions.  Nevertheless,  it  seems  premature  to  conclude 
whether this, or a further, yuan depreciation would feed into imported disinflation in the US, 
Europe and Japan. Contagion spread to advanced economies’ equity markets and, despite 
some gains in late August, the overall levels remain lower than two months ago. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
