   Bakarudin Ishak: Linking United Kingdom & Malaysia – opportunities 
and solutions in fundraising and investments 
Introductory  address  by  Mr  Bakarudin  Ishak,  Assistant  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Forum  “Linking  United  Kingdom  &  Malaysia: 
Opportunities  and  Solutions  in  Fundraising  and  Investments”,  organised  by  TheCityUK, 
London, 29 September 2015. 
 On behalf of the Malaysian delegation, I am pleased to be here today at this forum with the 
theme “Linking United Kingdom & Malaysia: Opportunities and Solutions in Fundraising and 
Investments”. It is a great opportunity to jointly organise this event with TheCityUK which we 
hope  will  further  enhance  Malaysia-UK  relationship  in  Islamic  finance  and  strengthen  the 
investment and financial ties between the two countries. 
Appreciation note 
Our utmost appreciation goes to TheCityUK for hosting this Forum and the warm hospitality 
extended to Malaysian delegates. 
We would also like to extend our appreciation to Trowers & Hamlins for holding this Forum at 
its  venue.  Trowers  &  Hamlins  is  Malaysia’s  first  foreign  law  firm  to  be  granted  a  Qualified 
Foreign Law Firm (QFLF) licence. This allows them to operate independently in Malaysia and 
advise on international legal issues including on Islamic finance matters. The entry of foreign 
legal  firms  will  create  a  symbiotic  environment  to  accelerate  the  Malaysian  legal  firms’ 
capabilities at the international front. 
We are also encouraged by the leadership shown by the Lord Mayor Alderman Alan Yarrow 
who is also President of TheCityUK’s Advisory Committee during his visit to Malaysia in May 
2015 to discuss ways to further strengthen the collaboration between our countries with Islamic 
finance as the intermediary, in particular in the areas of trade and investment. 
Malaysia-UK relationship 
The UK-Malaysia’s relationship stretched back many centuries. Our strong and close linkages 
in social, economic and finance span over a period of 200 years that have delivered great 
economic benefits and opportunities to both countries. 
In Islamic finance, our collaborative partnership formally began with the MoU between Bank 
Negara Malaysia and the UK Trade and Investment (UKTI) in 2009. The collaboration paves 
the way for both countries to strengthen international linkages in talent and expertise, cross 
border business and infrastructure support. 
Islamic finance: prospects & opportunities 
Islamic finance has increased its significant in the international financial landscape. As at third 
quarter of 2014, global banking asset has reached almost USD2 trillion whilst Islamic fund 
assets and takaful contributions amounted to USD76 billion and USD21 billion, respectively1. 
As at end June 2015, total sukuk or Islamic bond outstanding stood at USD313 billion with 
Malaysia making up 55% or USD172 billion of total market share2. 
                                                
1  Source: IFSB 3Q2014. 
2  Source: Bloomberg, Zawya. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The increased participation of non-Muslim jurisdictions also reflects the positive acceptance of 
Islamic finance among the global community. Sukuk has drawn strong interests as an attractive 
source of funding and a new asset class. 
UK, Hong Kong, Luxembourg and South Africa issued sovereign sukuk last year. With this 
leadership taken by the British Government, UK became the first non-Muslim country to issue 
sovereign sukuk of GBP200 million that attracted strong demand of more than 10 times. Hong 
Kong issued the second sovereign sukuk in 2015 following its successful inaugural issuance. 
The sovereign issuances are hoped to pave the way for corporate sukuk issuances particularly 
from these jurisdictions. 
Another landmark transaction is the syndicated Islamic financing facilities of GBP467 million 
for the Battersea Power Station Phase 3 project in London. 
The involvement of our Malaysian players in some of these global transactions has encouraged 
cross-border  business  transactions  and  enhanced  collaboration  with  players  in  other 
jurisdictions. 
Despite the above, sukuk recorded a lower amount of new issuances of USD40 billion during 
the first half of 2015 due to a slowdown in the current global financial markets and still-low oil 
prices. Malaysia remained the key jurisdiction for sukuk origination with issuances of USD19.8 
billion or 50% of total market share. 
Malaysia has evolved into a multicurrency sukuk issuance marketplace with issuances in US 
Dollar, Chinese Renminbi, Singapore Dollar and Japanese Yen. 
Our banks, Islamic fund management companies and professional service providers, some of 
whom  are  with  us  today,  have  global  capabilities  and  expertise  in  advising  and  managing 
cross-border financing and investments. 
The diverse range of institutional investors creates a strong demand for sukuk that efficiently 
channel funds and liquidity in the market. 
Tesco, a UK-based company, opted for sukuk issuance rather than bond under its conventional 
and Islamic MTN program due to the cost effectiveness of issuing the former. 
We welcome sukuk issuances by other foreign entities, leveraging on Malaysia’s expertise and 
framework. 
New development in Malaysia 
Malaysia has promulgated the new Islamic Financial Services Act or IFSA in 2013 to provide 
for a comprehensive regulation and supervision of Islamic financial sector in compliance with 
Shariah. 
Under IFSA, Islamic banks are required to segregate deposits that are principle guaranteed 
from  investment  accounts  that  are  non-principal  guaranteed.  This  allows  Islamic  banks  to 
develop a wider range of products to meet investor risk-return preferences where the return to 
the investor will be more directly linked with the performance of the deposit fund. The financing 
extend beyond debt-based to include equity-based financing. This effort will further promote 
economic growth by broadening the financial intermediary role of Islamic banks. 
Way forward 
The  Forum  today  marks  a  new  phase  in  our  relationship  as  the  industry  players  in  both 
countries  are  taking  the  lead  in  sharing  insights,  exchanging  ideas  and  taking  efforts  to 
encourage cross-border Islamic finance transactions. 
The UK-Malaysia unique niches create immense synergistic collaboration, leveraging on our 
respective strengths to accomplish mutually rewarding outcomes. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   We  are  committed  to  jointly  resolving  any  outstanding  issues,  if  any,  for  the  purpose  of 
advancing Islamic finance activities in both countries. 
We hope significant deals could be initiated following today’s event to facilitate cross-border 
flow of funds between both countries and regions, with the Malaysian delegation ready to share 
their experiences and expertise in this area. 
For  example,  Malaysian  players  can  partner  with  the  UK  players to  structure  a  syndicated 
Islamic financing facility or joint lead-arrange a sukuk issuance for any of the identified UK 
regeneration projects. 
Both London and Kuala Lumpur can succeed and prosper as leading global financial centres 
in Islamic finance. We are open to challenges and new ideas and look forward to working 
together with TheCityUK through a strengthened partnership to achieve these objectives in the 
years to come. A UK-Malaysia Working Group may provide that strategic platform to holding 
continuous dialogues for this purpose. 
With this, I wish the Forum an engaging and fruitful discussion. Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
