   Andrew Gracie: CCP resolution and the ending Too Big to Fail agenda 
Speech by Mr Andrew Gracie, Executive Director of Resolution of the Bank of England, at the 
21st Annual Risk USA Conference, New York City, 22 October 2015. 
 One of the goals of global reform since the financial crisis has been ending Too Big to Fail 
(TBTF).  This  is  the  resolution  agenda  –  aiming  to  ensure  that  in  the  event  that  a  global 
systemically  important  financial  institution  (G-SIFI)  fails  there  is  minimal  interruption  of  the 
activities  of  a  firm  that  are  critical  to  the  functioning  of  the  broader  financial  system.  And 
achieving that outcome without recourse to taxpayer bailouts, as public authorities were forced 
to during the crisis. 
Progress in developing this new paradigm for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) 
has been impressive. Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions1 
were agreed by G20 leaders around this time four years ago. Statutory regimes consistent with 
this  standard  are  now  in  place  in  the  US,  EU  and  Japan  –  in  fact  in  all  but  a  handful  of 
jurisdictions where G-SIBs are headquartered. Crisis Management Groups (CMGs) have been 
working on resolution plans for each of the G-SIBs. The authorities participating in the CMGs 
have committed at a senior level in a resolvability assessment process (RAP) to the resolution 
strategies emerging for each of the G-SIBs. These CMGs work towards identifying barriers to 
making resolution work and how these should be removed. Often these barriers are consistent 
across firms. Perhaps most notable is the requirement for loss absorbency – establishing a 
liability structure for G-SIBs that is consistent with bail-in, not bail-out. Again, there has been 
significant progress here. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) issued a consultation document2 
on  a  minimum  standard  for  Total  Loss  Absorbing  Capacity  (TLAC)  last  November  and  is 
committed to producing a final standard ahead of the G20 summit next month in Antalya. This 
will be a major step on the road to ending “Too Big to Fail.” 
Additionally, we need to pursue the same TBTF agenda for other types of G-SIFIs, in particular 
central counterparties (CCPs). I want to spend some time today talking to what – if anything – 
can be taken from the resolution of banks that is relevant for CCPs. 
Context for CCP resolution 
CCPs  form  a  key  part  of  the  global  financial  landscape.  They  have  become  ever  more 
important since the crisis. This will continue as mandatory central clearing is introduced around 
the world. 
Addressing the systemic risks associated with over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets is 
one of the reasons why G20 leaders introduced mandatory central clearing. People tell us that 
we have thus created in CCPs concentration risk and critical nodes. This is true in part, but we 
did  this  on  the  basis  that  in  CCPs  risks  could  be  better  recognised  and  identified,  better 
managed and reduced via better netting. Nonetheless, as many before me have commented3 
the  largest  CCPs  are  becoming  increasingly  systemic  and  interconnected  such  that  their 
critical services could not stop suddenly without risk of wider contagion. Thus, not only do we 
have  to  ensure  that  the  level  of  supervisory  intensity  matches  the  risks,  something  my 
                                                
1   http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/r_111104cc.pdf?page_moved=1  
2   http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/TLAC-Press-release.pdf  
3   Benoit Coeure, Central Counterparty Recovery and Resolution (Nov 2014); Paul Tucker, Are Clearing Houses 
the new Central Banks? (April 2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   supervisory colleagues are very focused on, we must also address the issue of what should 
happen if a CCP were to fail. 
This  is  already  widely  recognised.  So  too  is  the  need  for  an  international  solution  to  the 
questions  that  CCP  recovery  and  resolution  presents.  The  largest  CCPs  are  systemically 
relevant at a global level, important for financial stability in multiple jurisdictions due to the 
nature of their business and the composition of their members and users. They serve multiple 
markets, having dozens of clearing members from different countries and clearing products in 
multiple  currencies.  A  patch-work  of  approaches  to  recovery  and  resolution  would  risk 
regulatory arbitrage and competitive distortion and so, whilst the fiscal backstop against the 
unsuccessful resolution of a CCP is ultimately a national one, it is best that the answer on how 
to avoid this backstop ever being used is developed at a global level. 
Fortunately,  that  work  is  already  underway  and  CCP  recovery  and  resolution  forms  an 
important part of the Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) continuing agenda to end Too Big To 
Fail (TBTF). In October 2014 an Annex was added to the Key Attributes of Effective Resolution 
Regimes to cover their application to Financial Market Infrastructures (FMIs)4. More recently, 
the  FSB  published  its  2015  CCP  workplan5.  As  part  of  this,  a  group  on  financial  market 
infrastructure (fmi CBCM), equivalent to the Cross-Border Crisis Management Group (CBCM) 
that I chair for banks, has been established within the FSB to take forward international work 
on  CCP  resolution.  Authorities  in  a  number  of  jurisdictions  are  responding  to  the  need  for 
effective  resolution  arrangements for  CCPs,  with  legislative  proposals  expected  in  the  EU, 
Canada, Australia, Hong Kong and elsewhere to add to existing regimes, including in the US 
under Title II of Dodd Frank. In the UK, the Bank of England has formal responsibility for the 
resolution of UK-incorporated CCPs. To aid us in drawing up resolution plans for UK CCPs, 
we have established the first Crisis Management Group for a CCP. We hope and expect it to 
be the first of many. 
But work on CCP resolution needs to be seen in the broader context of financial reform: 
• 
The Committee on Payment and Market Infrastructures, along with the International 
Organisation of Securities Commissions (CPMI-IOSCO) is continuing its work on CCP 
resilience and recovery. Work is in train on stress testing, on loss allocation and on 
disclosure  requirements,  as  well  as  on  ensuring  consistent  application  of  the 
Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  (PFMIs)  which  set  regulatory 
expectations for CCPs at a global level. All of this is important not only in its own right, 
but also to provide the market – the users of CCPs – with the tools and incentives to 
monitor  resilience  and  drive  effective  risk  management  in  CCPs  themselves.  To 
encourage competition between CCPs on resilience, not cost. 
At  the  same  time,  the  first  line  of  defence  for  a  CCP  lies  in  the  resilience  of  its 
members. Ongoing work to raise the prudential standards for banks on capital and 
liquidity, among other areas, should greatly reduce the risk of CCPs having to deal 
with  a  failing  clearing  member.  And  the  progress  I  mentioned  before  on  G-SIB 
resolution should help to ensure that, where a firm does fail, its payment and delivery 
obligations to the CCP continue to be met. I should add as an aside that there is more 
still to be done internationally in terms of removing technical and other obstacles to 
maintaining  continuity  of  access  to  CCPs  and  other  FMIs  in  the  context  of  bank 
resolution. That continuity is not just essential to the bank in resolution but may also 
be critical for clients. If there is doubt about continued access to clearing services from 
a bank in resolution, clients may look to migrate rapidly to another provider. These 
                                                 
4  FSB, 
(October  2014)  Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes 
for  Financial 
Institutions 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/10/r_141015/?page_moved=1  
5   http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/Joint-CCP-Workplan-for-2015-For-Publication.pdf  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   issues around continuity and portability will be the subject of work within the FSB over 
the course of the coming year. 
Together, these initiatives to improve the resilience and recovery arrangements for CCPs and 
their members will help to reduce the probability of CCP default. But while improvements to 
resilience are necessary they may not by themselves be sufficient. No institution is “fail sfe”. 
Ultimately, we need to have a credible resolution approach for CCPs. 
If  we  do,  resolution  should  offer  a  continuing  benefit  in  helping  to  incentivise  recovery  by 
removing expectations that the taxpayer will be compelled to step in. By contrast, if we do not 
have  a  credible  regime  in  resolution,  we  run  the  risk  of  weakening  the  incentives  both  to 
manage a CCP prudently, as well as incentives for clearing members to contribute to a CCP’s 
recovery should it get into trouble. The benefits of resolution to market discipline and recovery 
are  common  to  all  financial  institutions.  But  that  is  not  the  only  insight  from  banks  that  is 
relevant to CCPs. 
Before going too far in talking up the similarities, I should note – although it should go without 
saying – that CCPs are very different from their bank clearing members in many important 
respects, including their business models, legal structures and balance sheets. CCP recovery 
and  resolution  therefore  poses  some  specific  issues,  some  of  which  I  will  touch  on  today. 
However, at base there are principles that are common to the resolution of any systemically 
important institution. 
Perhaps  the  most  obvious  similarity  between  the  resolution  of  banks  and  CCPs  is  in  the 
common objective: resolution should deliver continuity of critical economic functions without 
reliance on solvency support from taxpayers to achieve it. For that continuity to be achieved it 
is not enough that the financial losses of the institution are fully absorbed; the going-concern 
resources of the institution, or of any successor institution, must be restored to a sufficient level 
to command market confidence prior to any post-resolution restructuring or wind-down. 
In the case of banks, this means that when a bank suffers losses eroding its going concern 
capital  to the  point  where  triggers for  resolution are met,  (i)  it  enters  into  resolution;  (ii)  its 
creditors are bailed in to recapitalise the firm; and (iii) this bail-in replicates what would have 
happened in a court-based commercial restructuring or insolvency. In other words, losses are 
allocated according to the creditor hierarchy but without the value destruction created by the 
hard stop of insolvency. This ensures that the resolution provides continuity and meets the 
safeguard that creditors are not worse off than in insolvency. While these are the essential 
elements of a resolution, they are likely to play out differently in the context of a CCP. 
Loss absorbing capacity for CCP resolution 
Let me start by discussing the loss-absorbing capacity needed for CCP resolution. 
The use of a bail-in tool on a bank unlocks the loss absorbing capacity of the non-equity part 
of its balance sheet, the part that would otherwise only bear loss in insolvency or in a voluntary 
restructuring. Applying this concept of going and gone concern resources to CCPs is a less 
straightforward  task.  Unlike  a  bank,  a  CCP’s  own  loss  absorbing  resources  sit  both  on  its 
balance sheet as margin and default fund and off it in the form of contingent claims on its 
members. Consistent with the PFMIs, these arrangements are intended to be comprehensive 
at least insofar as they cover losses that could arise from clearing member default. That begs 
a question as to what additional loss absorbency the resolution of a CCP can currently unlock 
that recovery cannot unlock already. 
The question  of  loss  absorbency  is  one that the  FSB  is  looking  at.  Do we  need  additional 
resources  in  the  waterfall  beyond  existing  funded  and  unfunded  resources?  If  additional 
resources are required, should the initial margin held by a CCP be made available if it would 
have suffered losses in insolvency? Or should CCPs hold other resolution resources instead? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   I will not prejudge that debate here. However, I do think there is value in clarifying what is 
meant by the expression “TLAC for CCPs”. Total loss absorbing capacity is not simply short-
hand  for  subordinated  debt.  It  is  instead  a  qualitative  judgement  about  the  credibility  and 
feasibility of the different types of resources of a CCP to absorb loss and replenish its going 
concern requirements. CCPs have different liability structures from banks and therefore the 
assessment of the absorbency of these structures and the appropriateness of additional forms 
of LAC is more likely to be different from banks than it is to be the same. 
That assessment of LAC will need to consider the extent to which unfunded commitments from 
members  can  be  relied  upon  given  the  procyclicality  of  calling  for  them  in  stressed 
circumstances. It means assessing the credibility of allocating losses via cash calls or variation 
margin haircutting and the incentives that this generates in clearing members and clients to 
continue to clear through the CCP. And it also means looking not just at loss absorbency for 
clearing member default but also at the CCP’s capacity to absorb losses and recapitalise where 
a  loss  springs  from  operational  or  other  losses  not  covered  in  full  by  loss  allocation 
arrangements with its members. 
Point of entry to resolution 
One issue that is necessarily intertwined with the question of resources is the point of entry 
into resolution. As I have described, resolution is a financial reconstruction. For it to be effective 
it cannot be exercised only once the financial resources in a firm have already been exhausted. 
If  it  is  decided  that  the  resources  available  for  resolution  lie  principally  within  the  existing 
waterfall, that would further suggest that resolution authorities must have the ability to intervene 
and to take action before the end of the waterfall. But where does that boundary lie? 
The UK resolution regime sets the statutory definition for entry to resolution as being the point 
where the CCP is failing or likely to fail and there is no reasonable prospect of action being 
taken to restore it to viability. Integral to this test is the principle that this is a forward-looking 
judgement,  capable  of  being  exercised  flexibly  at  different  points  in  a  CCP’s  distress  and 
dependent on a multitude of factors that drive an eventual decision at the time. That can make 
it  difficult  to  pin  down  a  single  universal  trigger  point  but  it  is  possible  to  identify  some 
circumstances that could be indicative of this boundary being reached. 
Those  possible  scenarios  could  include  an  assessment  that  the  default  management 
procedures of the CCP have failed, or are likely to fail, to both absorb losses fully and replenish 
the CCP’s resources in a sufficiently timely manner to allow the CCP to continue to operate. 
That failure might arise through legal challenge hindering the default management process or 
from an assessment that if the losses were allowed to continue they would exceed caps on 
contributions and could not be credibly absorbed via other means. 
It  could  also  similarly  arise  from  a  determination  that  there  is  no  realistic  prospect  of  a 
successful auction to return to a matched book or that the CCP’s own rules to allocate losses 
or tear up contracts are either not yet available to it or will undermine financial stability or the 
objective of continuity through full tear-up and closure of the service. So – in line with the Key 
Attributes – it needs to be possible to place the CCP into resolution before its loss allocation 
rules are exhausted. 
These are all examples of entry into resolution caused by clearing member default. But non-
default losses could also bring a CCP down and it is certainly possible that a breach of a CCP’s 
regulatory requirements with no reasonable likelihood of replenishing its capital would present 
a trigger point for intervention. 
I  have  mentioned  the  incompatibility  of  full-tear  up  with  the  objective  of  continuity.  But  an 
intervention by a resolution authority cannot by itself guarantee a successful auction. To do 
so, may still require partial tear-up and forced allocation and these would seem to be necessary 
tools in any resolution toolkit for a CCP. How losses are then allocated upon tear-up again 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   goes to the question of the timing of intervention and whether the tear-up takes place before 
the resources available to a CCP have been exhausted or after it. 
Creditor safeguards and CCP resolution 
Intervention  by  a  resolution  authority,  especially  at  a  point  where  default  management 
procedures  have  yet  to  be  exhausted  is  action  that  cannot  be  taken  lightly.  Nor  can  the 
discretion of a resolution authority to deviate from the existing rules of the CCP be unbounded. 
Appropriate creditor safeguards are central to ensuring that an effective resolution regime does 
not unduly interfere with property rights or undermine its own value by introducing unnecessary 
uncertainty into a financial institution’s contractual relationships both in resolution and outside 
of it. 
Perhaps the most fundamental safeguard to creditors in resolution is that the actions of the 
resolution authority will not leave them worse off than if the authority had not intervened and 
the firm had instead entered a liquidation proceeding. For the purposes of determining this No 
Creditor Worse Off protection6, bank resolution takes an insolvency counterfactual; recognition 
that a failing bank that meets the conditions for resolution would in most likelihood lose its 
licence  at  that  point  if  not  resolved,  thereby  tipping  it  into  insolvency  (whether  cash-flow, 
balance-sheet or both) if it was not there already. That insolvency counterfactual requires an 
ex post assessment of the value of assets and liabilities of the firm. That is no easy task but 
one that can, and has been, credibly undertaken. 
For  CCPs  the  task  of  assessing  an  insolvency  counterfactual  is  likely  to  be  harder  still  – 
particularly if it must rely upon a forecast of how the rest of the waterfall would have unfolded, 
the behaviour of the CCP’s participants and the movements of the markets in the days that 
would have followed if resolution had not taken place. A liquidation counterfactual must also 
confront the argument that the CCP would have protected itself from insolvency through full 
tear-up. 
Given these valuation challenges, I suspect there will need to be careful further consideration 
given to the formulation and practical application of the NCWO safeguard; we must end up 
with  a  safeguard that  is  sufficiently  certain  and capable  of  estimation  in  advance that  both 
creditors and resolution authorities are able to make sensible decisions before, during and 
after resolution. 
With that, let me conclude by summing up some key points: 
• 
CCP resolution is both a necessary and inevitable part of the overall post-crisis reform 
agenda to end Too Big to Fail. As private, profit-making enterprises CCPs must be 
allowed to fail, but, given their systemic importance, many will need to be allowed to 
do so in a manner that maintains the continuity of their critical functions. 
Having a credible resolution regime for Clearing Members is a big step forward in 
helping to reduce the risk of clearing member default and from that the risk of CCP 
failure. 
But reliance on successful resolution of members does not negate the need for CCP 
resolution arrangements to be capable of responding to both default and non-default 
losses emerging from both systemic and idiosyncratic shocks. 
In thinking about the underlying objectives and needs of a CCP resolution regime, 
there are many similarities to bank resolution and these should not be forgotten, but 
clearly there are many differences too and we need to recognise that. 
                                                   
6   See Section 5 of the Key Attributes on Safeguards.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
     Effective resolution requires the ability to act promptly and before the point at which 
the chance of stabilising the CCP is lost. The resolution authority must have a variety 
of tools at its disposal to enable it to respond to the reason the CCP failed. It should 
be able to intervene in a timely and forward-looking way before the end of the waterfall 
– but incentives must be aligned and we want this to be set up in a way that promotes 
CCP resilience and makes recovery work. 
In order to continue a CCP’s critical services in resolution, there must be an ability 
both to cover the losses credibly in a failure scenario and to recapitalise the CCP’s 
going concern resources – i.e. its capital, margin and default fund. How we achieve 
this is something for FSB to address so that the shared interest in maintaining stability 
in the global financial system can be realised. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
