  Agus D W Martowardojo: The future of Asia’s finance – financing for 
development 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Agus D W Martowardojo, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Joint 
IMF-Bank Indonesia Conference “The Future of Asia’s Finance: Financing for Development”, 
Jakarta, 2 September 2015. 
 Honorable Managing Director Christine Lagarde, the co-host of this Conference; 
Honorable Minister Bambang Brodjonegoro, 
Honorable  Governors,  Deputy  Governors,  Ambassadors,  Representatives  from 
regional  and  multilateral  institutions,  business  community,  our  colleagues  from 
academics, distinguished panelists, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
• 
Good morning and warm welcome to all of you. 
1. 
It offers me great pleasures to welcome you to this Conference jointly co-hosted by 
Bank  Indonesia  and  the  IMF  with  the  topic  of  “The  Future  of  Asia’s  Finance: 
Financing for Development.” The topic is indeed crucial considering wide financial 
gaps  still  exist  in  the  region.  In  this  regard,  searching  for  an  optimum  financing 
would be challenging in the midst of current circumstances. 
Before  I  share  my  views  on  financing  issues,  allow  me  to  discuss  the  global 
economic development. Asia’s finance is now facing great challenges. In the near 
term,  we  may  still  confront  an  episode  of  heightened  capital  flows  volatilities  as 
consequences of unfavorable global economic condition. Sluggish global economic 
growth  continues  to  depress  production  and  outlook.  Strong  U.S.  dollar  following 
partial U.S. recovery and easing in Europe and Japan have tested some of Asia’s 
economic buffers. Weak commodity price has significantly hurt exports of some key 
regional  economies.  And  more  recently,  China’s  decision  to  rejuvenate  its 
moderating  growth  through  exchange  rate  policy  has  made  the  risk  of  external 
funding intensified. In fact, the increasing, yet again, global financial volatility, in a 
tune of 2013 global tantrum, is happening as we are sitting here, and it has led to a 
pull-back in capital flows from some emerging markets, including in Asia. 
While Asia has remained broadly resilient to the risks, and it has led global growth 
for the past thirty years, its role to support global economic recovery seems to be 
weakening  a  little  bit.  A  number  of  emerging  market  economies  in  the  region  are 
experiencing  a  declined  economic  growth  and 
financial 
vulnerability, mostly related to capital reversal. 
Asia definitely needs the right policy mix to secure growth and contain risks. Past 
experience  taught  us  the  importance  of  authorities  to  take  decisive  and  credible 
policy  actions  to  safeguard  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  “Stability  over 
growth”  policy  direction  following  May  2013  the  Federal  Reserve’s  move  is  an 
interesting example. Indeed, the subsequent moderated growth is considered very 
crucial for the economy to progress further, not only in the near term but also for a 
longer horizon. 
In  Indonesia’s  case,  in  response  to  current  situation,  Bank  Indonesia  has 
consistently implemented tight bias monetary policy since mid-2013. Some positive 
results  have  emerged. Although  Indonesia’s  economic  growth  is  slowing following 
the global economy slowdown, the growth was still recorded at a relatively high rate 
of  4.67%  in  the  second  quarter  of  2015.  The  fundamental  economy  of  Indonesia 
increased 
facing 
 2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 6. 
7. 
 
 
remains  sound  and  shows  some  improvements  as  indicated  by  improvement  of 
current account deficits, trade balance surplus in the last two quarters of 2015, and 
a managable inflation rate which is expected to fall within Bank Indonesia’s target of 
4±1% in 2015. 
Furthermore,  financial  system  stability  remained  solid,  underpinned  by  a  resilient 
banking  system  and  relatively  stable  financial  markets.  To  further  support  the 
macroeconomic  stability,  Bank 
for 
business sectors which have access to foreign debt to conduct hedging by applying 
hedging  ratio  rules  and  preserve  adequate 
liquidity  by 
implementing liquidity ratio rules. In addition, to accelerate the deepening of financial 
markets, Bank Indonesia has revised some measures relating to foreign exchange 
transactions  against  the  rupiah  and  net  foreign  exchange  position  of  commercial 
banks. 
Those  positive  achievements  gained  recognition  from  international  institution, 
among  others  Standard  and  Poor’s  (S  &  P)  that  has  revised  Indonesia’s  rating 
outlook from Stable to Positive. 
introduced  prudential  measure 
foreign  exchange 
Indonesia 
Distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen, 
8. 
that 
Initiative  (ABMI)  under  ASEAN+3  cooperation, 
Given  the  unfavorable  global  economic  development,  it  is  important  for  emerging 
market  economies  to  improve  domestic  demand  in  order  to  sustain  and  bolster 
economic  growth.  In  that  respect,  infrastructure  investment  will  help  to  unlock 
potential growth and preserve sustainable growth in the medium term. However, this 
effort should be accompanied by structural reforms to improve business climate and 
to strengthen institutional capacity. Thus, to set infrastructure investment priorities 
by  taking  into  account  country  specificities  and  lesson  learned  from  successful 
countries would be of important in doing the infrastructure investment. 
Infrastructure investment definitely requires long-term financing. The challenge has 
been  how  to  provide  sustainable  financing  in  the  midst  of  heightened  financial 
regulation,  weak  corporate  sector  spending,  limited  government  resources,  and 
lingering  global  uncertainty.  We  note 
there  are  regional  and  global 
arrangements initiated to deal with infrastructure financing, to name a few: the Asian 
Bond  Markets 
the  ASEAN 
Infrastructure  Fund  (AIF)  under  ASEAN  cooperation  together  with  ADB,  Global 
Infrastructure  Fund  (GIF)  under  the  G20  cooperation.  Further  in  national  level, 
government has also set aside the funding for infrastructure development. Would all 
initiatives be sufficient? 
Let us look into this question. How much does Asia need to finance its economy? 
ADB estimates that over USD1 trillion must be spent on infrastructure to maintain 
ASEAN’s current economic growth trajectory in a ten-year period. Furthermore, it is 
also estimated that during the same period, Asia will need to invest approximately 
USD8 
transport, 
telecommunications, water, and sanitation. In addition, the region will need to spend 
approximately USD300 billion on regional pipeline infrastructure projects, involving 
physical  construction  works  and  coordinated  policies  spanning  two  or  more  Asian 
countries as well as having a significant cross-border positive impact. 
Financially,  the  demand  for  cross-border  and  regional  infrastructure  funding  often 
competes  with  funding for  improved  national  infrastructure. The tremendous  need 
on  building  infrastructure  projects  has  resulted  a  large  financing  gap,  or  the 
difference  between  total  financial  requirements  and  the  likely  available  financing 
through direct public resources. 
in  overall  national 
infrastructures 
for  energy, 
trillion 
9. 
10. 
11. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
labor  resources,  higher  education 
 
 
On  that  note,  it  is  inevitably  we  need  to  redouble  the  effort  of  financing  for 
development. Allow me to name a few options. Private-Public Partnership (PPP) is 
an alternative solution to accelerate infrastructure development. While it potentially 
advances infrastructure investment, we should be mindful of its risk to fiscal position 
as PPP typically creates contingent for future liabilities. Good projects have to be 
selected  carefully.  Good  governance  and  strong  regulation  enforcement  are 
necessary. 
Furthermore,  financial  sector  should  definitely  play  an  active  role  in  financing  for 
development.  Strengthening  prudential  and  safeguarding  measures  should  also 
complement this role. With its sound macroeconomic policies, rising middle-income, 
high  saving,  abundant 
level,  and  rapid 
technological  adoption,  Asia  has  the  right  components  for  sustaining  growth  and 
attracting investment. 
I am also of the view that promoting capital market development and reducing heavy 
reliance of bank-based financial intermediation are both urgent and essential. Asia 
has  embarked  into this  area  by  furthering  its  integration  in  financial  sector. When 
ASEAN  Economic  Community  is  finally  established  at  the  end  of  this  year,  we 
should  start  thinking  beyond  2015,  and  among  ultimate  objectives  of  post-2015 
ASEAN  financial  integration  in  my  opinion  should  be  the  creation  of  the  best 
ecosystem of financing for development in the region. 
That said, central banks in Asia have challenging tasks, i.e., to balance the need to 
deepen the financial market and to ensure the financial stability. Deepening capital 
markets and fostering financial inclusion would expand investor base and providing 
alternative  financing.  Financial  inclusion  should  change  the  face  of  finance  to 
become  more  people-centered,  supporting  investors  with  more  outlets,  small  and 
medium  enterprises  with  more  funds  to  tap,  and  consumers  with  mortgages  and 
other credits to smooth consumption. However, we should remain cautious as more 
dynamic capital market may also invite risks related to commitment and composition 
of capital flows. Distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen, 
Now  allow  me  to  provide  you  with  a  glimpse  on  Indonesia.  The  current 
administration  has  put  great  attention  on  boosting  infrastructure  investment  to 
facilitate  stronger  and  sustainable  growth.  The  government  in  particular  places 
priority on strengthening of physical connectivity, primarily in marine connectivity as 
well as integration between marine and land connectivity such as railway and digital 
connectivity.  Improvement  in  these  nodes  will  profoundly  lower  the  logistical  cost, 
increasing competitiveness, and lead to cost efficiency across the nation. In the next 
five years, the government aims to build 5,000 km of railways, 2,600 km of roads, 49 
dams, 24 seaports and power plants with a capacity of 35,000 megawatts. 
On  the  financing  side,  the  government  has  committed  to  conduct  fuel  subsidy 
reform. The government’s decision to reduce fuel subsidy in 2014 created a fiscal 
space  of  approximately  US$19  billion  for  infrastructure  investment.  Furthermore, 
various  measures  have  been  undertaken  such  as  providing  fiscal  incentives  for 
investment  with  a  better-targeted  system,  providing  social  safety  net for  the  poor, 
continuing the financial deepening program to mobilize domestic savings for private 
and public investment financing, and increasing private sector involvement through 
enhancing  PPP  framework  and  establishing  PPP  Center.  Yet,  with  the  immense 
magnitude  of  financing  needed,  more  initiative  is  needed  to  materialize  our  plan 
comprehensively. 
Distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen, 
18. 
As a final note, I would emphasize that today’s Conference is very important as it 
will discuss the key opportunities for Asia’s development financing now and in the 
future.  It  is  also  a  good  avenue  for  authorities  and  private  sector  to  share  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 19. 
 
 
experience  and  exchange  their  views  for  breakthrough  in  creating  sustainable 
financing for development. Asia is now facing great challenges and we must work 
together  to  choose  the  right  path.  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  Conference  will 
contribute useful understanding and policy advice on this very crucial subject. 
Lastly,  allow  me  to  thanks  the  distinguished  panelists  and  guests  for  coming  to 
Jakarta and the organizing committee for arranging this conference. 
Thank you and I hope you will have a fruitful discussion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
