  Lesetja Kganyago: Overview of the South African economy 
Address  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
95th annual ordinary general meeting of shareholders, Pretoria, 31 July 2015. 
 The Bank has come through yet another difficult year, and the coming year looks no less 
challenging. At the global level, the past year has been dominated by the expectation of a 
sustained recovery in the United States and United Kingdom. Despite negative growth in the 
US  during  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  partly  due  to  adverse  weather  conditions,  recent 
positive  labour  market  trends  appear  to  have  remained  resilient,  and  there  are  increased 
signs that the recovery will be sustained. 
Although growth in the Eurozone remains relatively weak, it has emerged from a recession 
and there appear to be some positive responses to the significant monetary policy stimulus 
implemented by the European Central Bank since earlier this year. The past few weeks were 
dominated by renewed concerns about the sustainability of Greek debt and the possibility of 
Greece  leaving  the  eurozone.  The  near  term  risks  from  this  crisis  appear  to  have  been 
averted  for  now,  but  the  longer  term  sustainability  of  the  Greek  debt  burden  remains  a 
concern. Growth in Japan remains positive but very slow. 
The outlook for emerging markets deteriorated over the past year, with negative growth rates 
in both Brazil and Russia, and a slowdown in China, as the economy rebalanced away from 
domestic investment towards consumption. While there has been a general expectation that 
China would at worst experience a soft landing, i.e. growth of just under 7,0 per cent, recent 
developments including the bursting of the Chinese equity market bubble, and systemic risks 
to the financial markets and the property market, increase the downside risks to the outlook. 
The growth moderation has already contributed to the persistent decline in commodity prices 
that began in 2011, and accelerated in the past two months. The adverse effect on South 
Africa’s terms of trade was ameliorated somewhat by the sharp decline in international oil 
prices that started in the middle of last year. Although growth in African economies remains 
relatively robust, oil and other commodity producers face an increasingly difficult outlook. 
Uncertainty regarding the pace and timing of US policy interest rate normalisation continued 
to  dominate  global financial  markets  and the  pattern  of  global  capital flows.  The  changing 
outlook  regarding  domestic  US  growth,  labour  market  trends  and  inflation  caused  a  great 
deal  of  volatility  in  financial  markets.  Although  an  increase  in  the  policy  rate  is  expected 
sometime  this  year,  the  exact  timing  is  still  uncertain,  as  is  the  pace  and  timing  of  future 
increases. Monetary policy in the UK is also expected to be tightened later this year or early 
next  year.  By  contrast,  monetary  policy  in  Japan  and  the  eurozone  remains  highly 
accommodative, and is expected to remain so for some time. 
Changing expectations with respect to monetary policy stances in the advanced economies 
are likely to keep emerging-market currencies relatively volatile, as capital flows respond to 
these  developments.  The  rand  was  particularly  vulnerable  to  changes  in  risk  perceptions, 
having depreciated by about 10 per cent on a trade-weighted basis during the financial year 
under  review.  Since  April  2015  it  has  depreciated  by  a  further  4,5  per  cent.  However, 
domestic factors also contributed to this depreciating trend. These included the persistently 
wide  current-account  deficit  of  around  5  per  cent  of  GDP,  the  strained  labour  relations 
environment, and the weak growth outlook. 
The  past  financial  year  was  particularly  difficult  for  the  domestic  economy,  which  had  to 
contend with a protracted strike in the platinum sector followed by a strike by metal workers. 
The downward pressure on growth was exacerbated by the resumption of regular electricity 
load-shedding by Eskom, which is expected to continue for some time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The  outlook  for  the  economy  remains  subdued  following  a  growth  rate  of  1,5  per  cent  in 
2014. The Bank forecasts economic growth of 2,0 and 2,1 per cent in 2015 and 2016, rising 
to 2,6 per cent in 2017 when the electricity supply constraint is expected to ease to some 
extent. Growth in private-sector gross fixed capital formation remains weak but it improved 
somewhat in the second half of 2014 and the first quarter of 2015, following a contraction in 
the  first  half  last  year.  Household  consumption  expenditure  grew  by  less  than  2  per  cent 
amid low credit extension to households, weak employment growth and a sharp decline in 
consumer confidence. 
Headline inflation, which had exceeded the target for five consecutive months during 2014, 
returned to within the target range of 3 to 6 per cent in September and has remained within 
the range since then. In the wake of the international oil price decline, inflation reached a low 
of 3,9 per cent in February 2015 and has been increasing steadily since then, and measured 
4,7 per cent in June. The Bank expects inflation to temporarily breach the upper end of the 
target range during the first two quarters of 2016, with upside risks and pressures from the 
weaker exchange rate as well as food and electricity prices. Wage settlements in excess of 
inflation and productivity increases are expected to contribute to the persistence of inflation 
at  the  upper  end  of  the  range.  Core  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  within  the  target  but 
uncomfortably close to the upper end of the range. 
Monetary policy had to contend with the continued dilemma of trying to balance rising risks to 
the inflation outlook (driven to a large extent by supply-side shocks) and a weak economy. A 
tightening monetary policy cycle commenced in January 2014 with a 50 basis point increase, 
followed by a further 25 basis point increase in July 2014. This move  was prompted by a 
combination of rising inflation risks and the need to normalise the real policy rate, which had 
been negative for some time. The lower oil price also allowed for a pause in this cycle. The 
Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  emphasised  the  likely  moderate  nature  of  the 
cycle given the negative output gap, and that further moves would be highly data-dependent. 
In  its  most  recent  meeting  earlier  this  month,  the  MPC  decided  to  continue  on  its  path  of 
gradual  policy  rate  normalisation,  amid  continued  upside  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook. 
Consequently,  the  repurchase  rate  was  increased  by  25  basis  points  to  6,0  per  cent  per 
annum. The Bank remains committed to achieving its primary mandate of price stability but 
will continue to conduct policy in a manner that is sensitive to the fragile state of the domestic 
economy. 
Progress  towards  operationalising  the  financial  stability  mandate  of  the  Bank  continued  in 
line with the Twin Peaks Regulatory Model which expands the responsibility of the Bank for 
prudential regulation and supervision beyond banking, and locates the Prudential Authority 
within  the  Bank.  The  Financial  Sector  Regulation  Bill,  which  is  expected  to  be  tabled  in 
Parliament  during  2015,  assigns  to  the  Bank  the  responsibility  to  maintain,  promote  and 
enhance financial stability. The Bill gives effect to the policy framework for macroprudential 
regulation and supervision and further provides for interaction and coordination between the 
Prudential Authority within the Bank and other financial sector regulators. Once passed, the 
Bill is expected to have significant resource and personnel implications for the Bank. 
In the year under review, the Bank continued to develop its capacity to oversee and monitor 
the broader financial sector with the adoption of a macroprudential surveillance approach. 
At the microprudential level, the past year saw the first significant bank failure in South Africa 
in over a decade when African Bank Limited was placed under curatorship. In cooperation 
with  National  Treasury,  the  Bank  and  the  private  sector,  the  issue  was  resolved  and 
prevented systemic spillovers, which includes the application of bail-in provisions. This was 
in line with the Key attributes of effective resolution regimes of the Financial Stability Board, 
which South Africa has undertaken to adhere to as a G-20 member country. African Bank 
Limited  remains  under  curatorship  and,  once  it  is  restructured,  it  is  anticipated  that  the 
resulting “Good Bank” will be relisted in the foreseeable future. 
Let me now turn to the Annual Report. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The Bank remains committed to complying with best practice in terms of integrated reporting, 
insofar  as  it  is  practical  for  a  central  bank  to  do  so,  taking  into  account  the  overriding 
legislation  and  confidentiality  requirements.  The  2014/15  Annual  Report  reflects  a  holistic 
account of all relevant and material financial and non-financial information, which will enable 
stakeholders  to  evaluate  the  performance  and  impact  of  the  Bank’s  operations  and  the 
implementation of its mandate. We have again this year enhanced the look and feel of the 
printed annual report and produced an interactive and easy to navigate HTML version on the 
website. We hope that you have enjoyed reading the report. 
I am pleased to report that, having made losses in the previous five financial years, the Bank 
has  returned  to  profitability.  I  should  emphasise,  however,  that  the  Bank  does  not  have  a 
profit-maximising objective and that its operations are conducted in the broader interests of 
the country, in pursuit of its mandate and responsibilities. The Group recorded an after-tax 
profit of R0,63 billion compared with a loss of R1,3 billion in the previous financial year. This 
improvement in the financial position of the Bank was attributable mainly to unrealised profits 
due to declining global bond yields and the depreciation of the rand against major currencies, 
which increased the rand value of the interest earned from investing the country’s foreign-
exchange reserves. Operating cost increases were attributable mainly to the higher cost of 
producing  new  currency,  higher  staffing  costs,  as  well  as  the  change  in  the  actuarial 
assumptions related to post-retirement benefits. 
This year the shareholders’ Roadshow was held only in Pretoria on 14 July, as there were no 
timeous confirmations received from shareholders who wished to participate in the event at 
the Cape Town and Durban branches via a video conference facility. Unfortunately, we have 
found  that  the  interest  from  shareholders  in  attending  the  Roadshow  meetings  has 
diminished  over  time  and  accordingly  we  have  decided  that  we  will  no  longer  hold  the 
Roadshow  events  prior  to  the  AGM  each  year.  However,  I  encourage  shareholders  to 
communicate with the Bank via email or post when necessary and we will always respond to 
your enquiries and the Bank will continue to correspond with the shareholders where there 
are significant developments which would be relevant to them. In addition, the Bank holds 
Monetary Policy Forums twice annually in Pretoria and in various centres around the country 
and you are welcome to attend those meetings. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
