  Ravi Menon: Macroeconomic stability and financial stability – 
uncomfortable bedfellows? 
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 
39th Federal Reserve Bank of New York Central Banking Seminar, New York City, 8 October 
2015. 
 Mr  William  Dudley,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  ladies  and 
gentlemen. It is an honour to be here and I thank the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for 
the opportunity. 
The good ‘ole days 
Central banking has become interesting again. 
For a time, it was almost getting boring. 
• 
The  Great  Moderation,  beginning  in  the  mid-1980s  and  spanning  two  decades, 
marked the triumph of central banking over the menace of inflation. 
The  formula  was  simple:  an  independent  central  bank,  a  single  target  (price 
stability), and a single instrument (the interest rate). 
It  worked  brilliantly:  Many  economies  enjoyed  what  Mervyn  King  called  the  NICE 
equilibrium. 
N I C E – a “non-inflationary, consistently expansionary” economy. 
Of course, not all of it was due to enlightened central bankers. 
• 
The deregulation of industry, the liberalisation of trade, and the entry of China into 
the global economy augmented productive capacity and kept a lid on prices. 
But central bankers were wise not to muck it up and remembered to take away the 
punch bowl whenever the party got too wild. 
Monetary policy was unencumbered by financial stability considerations. 
• 
• 
Central banks no doubt cared about financial stability. 
Many  of  them  were  also  banking  supervisors.  They  saw  financial  stability  as  the 
preserve of prudential regulation and supervision. 
Those were the good ‘ole days. 
• 
Keep monetary policy focused on macroeconomic stability and regulatory policy on 
financial stability and all will be well. 
In short, consistency between instrument and objective: Tinbergen would have been 
proud. 
Financial stability: what we know, what we don’t 
The Global Financial Crisis of 2008 changed all that. 
• 
Its  devastation  and  virulence,  but  most  of  all,  its  suddenness,  shook  conventional 
macroeconomic thinking. 
HM Queen Elizabeth II asked: “Why did no one see it coming?” 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  That question illustrated vividly how little we knew about financial stability, let alone 
the  interactions  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  macroeconomy,  between 
monetary policy and financial stability. 
 But there are two things we did learn from the crisis about financial stability. 
First, macroeconomic stability does not guarantee financial stability. 
• 
Beneath  the  still  waters  of  macroeconomic  stability  during  the  2000s,  deadly 
whirlpools of financial imbalances were forming. 
The “Goldilocks” or “NICE” economy sharply reduced risk premiums, stoked a credit 
boom alongside speculative activities that ultimately undermined financial stability. 
  Second, effective regulation of individual institutions does not deliver stability of the financial 
system as a whole. 
• 
Risks may be reasonably well managed in individual institutions but the system as a 
whole could be pro-cyclical and hence more risky. 
The  interconnectedness  among  institutions  propagates  and  magnifies  shocks 
across the system. 
The stability of the parts does not equate the stability of the whole. 
• 
But  eight  years  after  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  as  the  latest  BIS  annual  report  points  out 
“macroeconomic stability and financial stability remain uncomfortable bedfellows.”1 
• 
The interactions between macroeconomic stability and financial stability are not well 
understood. 
Monetary policy and regulatory policy have tended to be conducted independently. 
• 
We  need  to  get  a  better  handle  on  financial  instability:  what  causes  it  and  how  can  it  be 
avoided? There are a few emerging propositions. 
First, credit cycles have strong implications for financial stability. 
• 
Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor describe financial crises as “credit booms gone 
wrong.”2 Both the level and growth of credit matter for financial stability. 
Claudio Borio and Piti Disyatat argue that both the amplitude and duration of credit 
cycles  exceed  those  of  business  cycles  due  to  what  they  call  “excess  financial 
elasticity.”3 Debt and financial imbalances build up over successive business cycles 
until they reach a breaking point. 
Frederic Mishkin points to how excessive credit can fuel asset price bubbles, whose 
eventual bursting can lead to damaging episodes of financial instability. 
  Second, monetary policy has an influence on the credit cycle and hence on financial stability. 
Claudio Borio and Zhu Haibin describe the “risk-taking channel” of monetary policy 
• 
whereby low interest rates boost asset and collateral values, which provides a larger 
                                                
1    BIS 85th Annual Report (2015) 
2    Schularick,  M  and  Taylor,  A  (2012),  “Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy,  Leverage  Cycles,  and 
Financial Crises, 1870–2008,” American Economic Review, 102(2): 1029–61. 
3   Borio, C and Disyatat, P (2011), “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Link or No Link?” BIS Working 
Papers, No. 346, Bank for International Settlements, May. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  incentive for both borrowers and lenders to take more risk. The consequent build-up 
in leverage leads to financial instability.4 
Jeremy Stein puts it succinctly: “monetary policy is fundamentally in the business of 
altering risk premiums”. 
  Third,  since  monetary  policy  affects  risk-taking  and  the  credit  cycle,  which  in  turn  affect 
financial stability, monetary policy should therefore take account of financial stability. 
• 
Jeremy  Stein  argues  that  since  economic  agents  will  find  ways  to  circumvent 
regulatory measures to control risk-taking, it is better to use monetary policy to “get 
in all of the cracks”. 
Conceptually, this amounts to augmenting the Taylor Rule with an additional term to 
capture deviations in financial variables from their equilibrium values. 
Monetary policy has a role in “leaning against the wind” of financial stability risks. 
• 
While the first two propositions are gaining credence and traction among policymakers, the 
third proposition is heavily contested. 
• 
The  fact  that  monetary  policy  has  an  impact  on  financial  stability  does  not 
necessarily mean that it should directly seek to achieve it. 
Monetary policy and financial stability: uncomfortable bedfellows? 
Let  me  offer  two  reasons  why  operationalising  a  financial  stability  role  for  monetary  policy 
may be difficult. 
Leaning against winds from opposite directions? 
First, conflicts could arise between the price stability and financial stability objectives. 
• 
Financial cycles are typically longer than business cycles, and the two cycles may 
diverge. 
The interest rate appropriate for price stability may not be consistent with financial 
stability. 
How  does  one  lean  at  the  same  time  against  two  winds  blowing  from  opposite 
directions? 
  One  reason  why  the  winds  might  blow  from  opposite  directions,  especially  for  emerging 
economies, is the role played by international liquidity and capital flows. 
• 
Philip Lane has detailed the strong inter-linkages between global liquidity conditions, 
international debt flows, and domestic credit conditions. 
Maurice  Obstfeld  argues  that  because  of  the  impact  of  financial  globalisation, 
monetary  policy  carries  a  big  burden  trying  to  achieve  both  financial  stability  and 
macroeconomic stability. 
 The experience of Emerging Asia during 2010–2013 is illustrative. 
• 
Asian  economies  were  broadly  in  full  employment  with  low  inflation  and  some 
downside risks to growth from the Eurozone crisis. 
                                                
4    Borio,  C  and  Zhu,  H  (2008),  “Capital  regulation,  risk-taking  and  monetary  policy:  a  missing  link  in  the 
transmission mechanism?” BIS Working Papers, No. 268, Bank for International Settlements, December. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   At the same time, the global search for yield in a zero interest rate environment led 
to strong capital flows into the region, inducing increases in credit and asset prices. 
The  business  cycle  and  financial  cycle  began  to  diverge:  raising  interest  rates  to 
quell financial imbalances could potentially put the real economy at risk. 
 Getting in all the cracks but not filling them 
A second reason why monetary policy may be ill-suited to address financial stability risks is 
that it is a blunt instrument. It may get into all of the cracks but some cracks may be just too 
big to fill. 
Financial  vulnerabilities  are  often  not  evenly  spread  across the  economy.  They  tend  to  be 
concentrated in specific sectors, such as in real estate. Monetary policy may be too blunt to 
address  such  specific risks  and  can cause  significant  collateral  damage  on  the rest  of the 
economy if it is calibrated to mitigate sector-specific risks. 
There is some empirical evidence that the cost-benefit trade-off in using monetary policy to 
lean against financial stability risks does not look promising. 
• 
Kenneth Kuttner and Illhyock Shim estimate that a 100 basis point increase in the 
short-term interest rate would reduce real housing price growth by only 1 percentage 
point in the following quarter. 
Lars Svensson, drawing from the Swedish experience, finds that the cost of leaning 
against financial stability risks is high – with inflation too low and unemployment too 
high.5  At  the  same  time,  the  effect  of  policy  rate  changes  on  household 
indebtedness is very small. 
The IMF estimates that hiking interest rates by 100 basis points for a year reduces 
the probability of financial crises by 0.04 to 0.3 percentage point at most. 
  Back to Tinbergen: an enhanced role for regulatory policy 
So, we are back to where we started: if monetary policy has at best a limited role, what do 
we do with financial stability? 
• 
As  Stefan  Ingves  put  it  recently:  “We  deal  with  inflation,  we  keep  an  eye  on  the 
exchange  rate,  we  do  our  best  to  reach  our  inflation  target.  But  that  means  that 
somebody else has to deal with the problem we have in our housing market.”6 
And  that  someone  else  could  well  be  regulatory  policy.  And  that  includes  both  the  old-
fashioned  microprudential  variety  as  well  as  the  “new  kid  on  the  block”  –  macroprudential 
policy. 
Old is gold: microprudential regulation 
The lesson of the Global Financial Crisis is not that microprudential policy was ineffective in 
achieving financial stability and therefore we need to look elsewhere. 
• 
The  more  pertinent  lesson  was  that  microprudential  regulation  –  and  might  I  add, 
supervision – was inadequate and had to be strengthened. 
                                                
5    Svensson,  L  (2014),  “Inflation  Targeting  and  ‘Leaning  against  the  Wind’,”  International  Journal  of  Central 
Banking, Vol. 10, No. 2, June. 
6   “Riksbank Stefan Ingves sees flaws in crisis-busting tools,” Financial Times, 13 September 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  And the microprudential framework has indeed been strengthened post-Crisis. The Basel III 
reforms will go quite some way to make banks more resilient and financial systems safer. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The quantity and quality of capital have been increased. 
There is for the first time, a global liquidity standard. 
There will soon be a direct cap on bank leverage. 
Systemically  important  banks  will  be  subject  to  higher  loss  absorbency  and  more 
intrusive supervision. 
Besides these reforms, I would add that traditional microprudential limits that apply “through 
the cycle” are just as important in helping to maintain financial stability. If volatility in the real 
estate sector has repeatedly been shown to contribute to financial imbalances and distress: 
• 
does  it  not  make  sense  to  put  limits  on  financial  institutions’  exposures  to  real 
estate? 
does it not make sense to require that loan-to-value ratios for property loans be less 
than 100%? 
does it not make sense to require the loan underwriting process to incorporate an 
assessment of the debt service ratio? 
  I do not know if the Global Financial Crisis could have been avoided if interest rates in the 
US had been higher in the preceding years as some have argued. 
• 
I do suspect though that if there had been prescribed loan-to-value ratios and debt-
service ratios, the sub-prime problem may not have grown to such proportions. 
But there are many others in this room who are better placed to judge that. 
 Old wine in new but bigger bottles: macroprudential regulation 
Even as we re-discover the virtues of microprudential policies, we realise they may not be 
sufficient in the face of overwhelming exuberance and risk-taking. 
• 
• 
This is where macroprudential policy comes in. 
Macroprudential policy can be more effective than monetary policy in “targeting the 
cracks” where specific vulnerabilities are concentrated. 
Macroprudential policy is related to but distinct from microprudential policy. 
• 
• 
Some have called macroprudential policy “old wine in new bottles”. Yes and no. 
Many of the tools are indeed the same: loan-to-value ratios, debt-to-income ratios, 
debt service ratios, and so on. 
But  there  is  a  difference.  When  these  limits  are  used  for  macroprudential  purposes,  the 
scope and calibration are much larger. For example: 
• 
A loan-to-value ratio of 80% for property loans, applied through the cycles, as we 
have in Singapore, is a microprudential tool. 
But when we tightened the loan-to-value ratio to as low as 20% for a third property 
loan, as we did a couple of years ago, it became a macroprudential tool. 
Macroprudential policy may well be old wine, but it is in much bigger bottles! 
 • 
Macroprudential policy can also come in several different bottles. 
• 
Instead  of  relying  on  a  single  tool  (e.g.  the  interest  rate  for  monetary  policy), 
macroprudential policy is often multi-pronged. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  For example, to cool Singapore’s property market, we imposed multiple measures to target 
different aspects of systemic risk. 
• 
Tighter  LTV  ratios  on  borrowers  with  multiple  housing  loans  served  to  moderate 
credit-fuelled investor demand. 
Caps  on  housing  loan  tenures  served  to  curtail  the  phenomenon  of  those  who 
stretched out their loans in order to meet the tighter LTV ratios. 
Transaction  taxes  in  the  form  of  stamp  duties  served  to  constrain  demand  from 
investors who did not take loans to buy properties 
a.  Stamp duties on sellers helped to deter speculators who resell their properties 
shortly after purchase. 
b.  Stamp duties on buyers helped to curb investor demand by raising the hurdle 
rate. 
Such  a  multi-dimensional  approach  required  close  co-ordination  among  the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  and  the  Ministry  of 
National Development. 
So, where does all this leave monetary policy? 
• 
To  the  extent  that  strengthened  microprudential  policies  coupled  with  the  newly 
developed macroprudential policies can adequately address the problem of financial 
stability, monetary policy is freed to focus on price stability. 
We are back in the Tinbergen world. 
Or are we? 
    Monetary and macroprudential policies: working hand-in-hand? 
If only our job were that simple. Macroprudential policies are still in the experimental stage: 
• 
• 
• 
Its transmission mechanisms are not well understood. 
Its collateral effects and potential distortions have not been studied in depth. 
And we do not know yet how to exit successfully from these policies. 
Can monetary policy contribute towards financial stability? 
And there is a further problem. Macroprudential policies may not be equally effective in all 
countries – which brings us back to the United States. 
• 
As Stanley Fischer put it recently: “The US macroprudential toolkit is not large and 
not yet battle tested.” 
There is a significant shadow banking sector in the US that extends credit but is not 
regulated like banks. 
This  will  blunt  the  effectiveness  of  any  macroprudential  tools  applied  to  regulated 
entities. 
  If macroprudential policy is not able to secure financial stability on its own, could monetary 
policy lend a helping hand? 
• 
As Stan Fischer goes on to say: “The limited macroprudential toolkit in the United 
States leads me to conclude that there may be times when adjustments in monetary 
policy should be discussed as a means to curb risks to financial stability.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  question  then  arises:  under  what  circumstances  should  monetary  policy  consider 
financial stability? 
• 
• 
One way to look at it could be as follows. 
If the market interest rate is clearly below reasonable estimates of the neutral rate, 
there  could  be  a  case  for  monetary  policy  to  step  in  on  both  price  stability  and 
financial stability objectives. 
Can regulatory policy help contribute towards macroeconomic stability? 
The focus of discussion to-date has been on whether and how monetary policy can be used 
alongside regulatory policy to address financial stability risks. 
• 
An interesting question is: can regulatory policy be used alongside monetary policy 
to help achieve macroeconomic stability? 
Macroprudential  tools  aimed  at  stabilising  asset  markets  could  have  positive  spillovers  in 
moderating inflation. 
• 
In fact, in Singapore, we employed macroprudential measures quite deliberately to 
help address inflation concerns as well, not just financial stability. 
During 2010–2012, Singapore’s inflation rate averaged about 4%, more than twice as high as 
our  historical  average.  About  half  of  this  inflation  was  attributable  to  rapidly  rising  housing 
costs and car prices. 
• 
Housing  costs,  represented  by  actual  rentals  and  imputed  rentals  on  owner-
occupied  housing,  makes  up  a  significant  share  of  Singapore’s  consumer  price 
index. 
Car prices, while making for a much smaller share of the CPI, rose by double digits 
as exuberant buyers auctioned for the fixed number of permits that the government 
issues for buying cars. 
Low  interest  rates  and  abundant  liquidity  –  reflecting  easy  monetary  conditions 
globally – helped to fuel strong demand for both houses and cars. 
  Monetary policy – in the form of an appreciating exchange rate – reduced imported inflation 
to close to zero but was not as effective in curbing price pressures in the two asset markets: 
houses and cars. 
• 
Financing  restrictions  –  in  the  form  of  LTVs  and  caps  on  loan  tenures  –  were 
imposed  on  housing  loans  and  car  loans  to  moderate  demand  and  reduce  price 
pressures. 
Over 2013–2014, inflation came down steadily as housing and car prices declined. 
• 
So,  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  can  potentially  be  complementary  to  help 
achieve both macroeconomic stability and financial stability. They can do this sometimes by 
acting in the same direction; sometimes in opposite directions. 
• 
Charles Bean7 gives a useful pedagogical exposition of how a restoration of price 
and financial stability could be achieved by a combination of instrument tightening 
and loosening, similar to employing an optimal mix of fiscal and monetary policies to 
influence the composition of aggregate demand. 
                                                
7    Bean,  C.  (2015),  Comment  on  Applying  an  Inflation-targeting  Lens  to  Macroprudential  Policy  Institutions, 
International Journal of Central Banking, Vol 11, Supplement 1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  But we need to deepen our understanding of when to use monetary policy and when 
to use macroprudential policy and when to combine the two, if at all. 
 Does tighter regulation weaken the efficacy of monetary policy? 
There is one other aspect of the interaction between monetary and regulatory policy that I 
would like to touch on. 
• 
Just  as  monetary  policy  that  is  set  to  achieve  macroeconomic  stability  can 
sometimes be inappropriate for financial stability, could there be a situation where 
regulatory policy weakens the transmission mechanism of monetary policy? 
Do regulatory policies – either the microprudential or macroprudential variety – have 
an impact on market liquidity or short-term interest rates? 
 The BIS recently convened a working group to assess the impact of microprudential policy 
on  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy.  The  report  concluded  that  it  was  difficult  to  draw  firm 
conclusions. But there were some interesting observations. 
• 
The  lending  activity  of  less  well-capitalised,  higher  risk-taking  or  less  liquid  banks 
appears more responsive to a tightening of monetary policy. 
This  would  seem  to  suggest  that  more  stringent  regulations  tend  to  weaken  the 
transmission of monetary impulses. 
And the transmission of policy rate changes to other interest rates and asset prices 
may be altered if debt markets become less liquid as a result of regulatory changes. 
  Conclusion 
Let me conclude by drawing together the main points. 
• 
Microprudential policies are critically important for financial stability and we must get 
them right. 
But  the  ability  of  microprudential  policies  to  achieve  financial  stability  may  be 
dampened by credit cycles that have their roots in broader macro forces. 
Monetary policy matters for financial stability because it affects the credit cycle. To 
what  extent  monetary  policy  should  therefore  take  account  of  financial  stability 
remains an unresolved matter. 
Macroprudential policy potentially offers a way out by targeting the macro sources of 
financial instability, leaving monetary policy to focus on price stability. 
But macroprudential policy is neither a panacea nor without cost or distortion. 
And we need to better understand the interactions of monetary, microprudential and 
macroprudential policies, and how they influence price and financial stability. 
Henry Kissinger once asked Zhou Enlai – the late Premier of China – what he thought of the 
implications of the French Revolution. Zhou replied, “It is too early to tell.” 
We are living in interesting times. 
• 
It  has  been  a  period  of  bold  experimentation  in  both  monetary  and  regulatory 
policies. 
It is too early to tell what the implications of these experiments are. 
We need much more research, experience, and the passage of time before we can 
draw firm conclusions on some of the issues that I have raised. 
In the meantime, let us pray for the wisdom to do the best we can. And be humble. 
      8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Thank you. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
