    
Luis M Linde: The Spanish economy – situation and outlook 
Speech by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the XIV Día de los Economistas 
2015,  organised  by  the  Colegio  de  Economistas  de  las  Islas  Baleares,  Las  Palmas, 
30 November 2015. 
 Let me first thank Mr Onofre Martorell, the dean-president of the Balearic Islands Association of Economists, and 
Mr D. Valentí Pich, the president of the General Board of Economists’ Associations, for their invitation to this event, 
and Professor Guillem López Casasnovas, too, for his kind words of introduction. 
I shall begin by talking about the international and European economic setting, moving on to 
the Spanish situation and our growth projections. I shall also briefly refer to developments in 
the external sector, in general, and to tourism, which is so important for our economy and, 
naturally, for the Balearic Islands, in particular. I shall conclude with some remarks on the 
Spanish banking system and the challenges the Spanish economy faces. 
International setting 
Recent  developments  in  the  international  environment  have  been  marked  by  greater 
uncertainty over global growth (due largely to the slowdown in the emerging economies), the 
fall in oil and commodities prices, and the increase in volatility on financial markets, linked to 
expectations about interest rate rises in United States and to the revision of global growth 
forecasts. 
In its latest report the International Monetary Fund lowered its estimate for world growth for 
2015 by 0.3 pp to 3.1%, with the developed and emerging economies expected to perform 
differently. 
The  pick-up  in  activity  continues  in  the  advanced  economies,  underpinned  by  favourable 
financing conditions and low commodities prices, while inflation is running at very low rates. 
In most of the emerging economies, activity continues to fall, owing not only to conjunctural 
reasons in the international environment, but also to more structural factors, such as lower 
productivity gains and demographic factors. Activity continued to slow in the emerging Asian 
economies,  while  in  Latin  America  it  is  stabilising  at  very  low  rates,  albeit  with  notable 
differences  from  country  to  country;  in  turn,  in  some  cases,  inflation  stands  above  the 
authorities’ targets, due partly to the depreciation of their currencies. 
Of particular significance for the world economy are the developments in China, which posted 
an annualised rate of GDP growth of 6.9% in the third quarter. That entails a slowdown, but 
one milder than anticipated. However, uncertainty over its medium-term growth rate persists 
bearing  in  mind  the  authorities’  intention  to  lead  the  Chinese  economy  towards  a  more 
sustainable and more domestic consumption-led model. 
The consequences of the slowdown on the world economy, mainly via the effect of the decline 
in commodities prices on exporting countries’ economies, are so far projected to be limited. 
The euro area 
The moderate recovery in activity continues in the euro area, underpinned by the expansion 
of private consumption, against a more uncertain external background for industrial production, 
exports and business investment. 
In the third quarter, GDP growth in the area was 0.3%, 0.1 pp down on the second quarter. 
The  buoyancy  of  private  consumption  and  the  somewhat  more  expansionary  behaviour  of 
investment were the main factors behind this performance. Growth projections for 2015 by the 
main international agencies stand at around 1.5%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
1 
    
The Spanish economy 
The expansion in the Spanish economy extended into the third quarter of 2015, with Spain 
notably one of the highest-growth economies in the euro area. 
On the latest National Accounts data, GDP grew in the third quarter of this year by 0.8% in 
quarter-on-quarter terms, with the year-on-year rate standing at 3.4%. This increase in activity 
appears to be underpinned by the strength of private domestic demand, while the contribution 
of the net external balance is estimated to be moderately negative, albeit against a backdrop 
of quickening quarter-on-quarter rates in both exports and imports. 
Household spending is notably buoyant, on the back of the favourable trend in employment, 
improved financing conditions, the expansion in real disposable income attributable to the fall 
in oil prices and the recent fiscal measures. 
Business activity is expected to have continued improving during the third quarter, driven by 
the  strength  of final  demand  and favourable financial  conditions. The business  investment 
indicators have also remained generally firm throughout 2015. 
Allow me now briefly to address employment, the external sector, growth projections and the 
factors of risk for our economy in 2016. And before drawing conclusions, I shall also refer to 
the strengths of our banking system and the challenges facing it. 
Employment 
The employment figures remain on a positive path. 
According to official labour force survey figures, numbers employed grew by 182,000 in the 
third quarter, placing the cumulative figure over the past 12 months at 545,000 people. This 
figure  entails  an  annual  growth  rate  of  3.1%.  Social  Security  registrations,  for  their  part, 
increased at a year-on-year rate of 3.2% in October, the same rate as the previous month, with 
registrations up 530,000 compared with the same month a year earlier. 
The unemployment rate in the third quarter stood at 21.2%, down 2.5 pp in the past 12 months. 
On our projections and those of the IMF, it is within our reach by the end of 2016 to bring the 
unemployment rate below 20% for the first time since 2010. These figures, though they attest 
to the improvement in the labour market, are still very high, abnormally so in the context of the 
euro area. They show the need to maintain a high rate of activity and to continue streamlining 
our labour market to prevent the combination of low activity and inadequate regulations, as so 
often occurred in the past, from driving job destruction. 
Balance of payments and tourism 
Our balance of payments performance in the past three years has been very favourable: from 
running a heavy deficit, with a negative current account balance up to 10% of GDP in 2007, 
we are now in a different position, with few, but brief precedents in Spanish economic history, 
marked by a current account surplus against a background of significant GDP growth and job 
creation. 
In  the first  nine months of  this  year  (the figures for  September  were  published  today), the 
Spanish economy’s net lending (i.e. the cumulative surplus on the current account balance 
and the capital account balance) stood at €13.2 billion, compared with a surplus of €5.8 billion 
in the same period of 2014; that is to say, it has more than doubled thanks to the reduction in 
net foreign interest payments. The widening of the surplus on capital account and the increase 
in the positive balance on goods and services, as a result of the improvement in the energy 
balance and, to a lesser extent, in the surplus on non-tourist services, were also a contributing 
factor. 
2 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
The  tourism  balance  has  contributed  positively  to  the  improvement  in  the  current  account 
balance. In the January-September period, the tourism surplus was €28.4 billion, a very similar 
figure to that recorded in the same period in 2014. 
According to surveys by the IET (Institute for Tourism Studies), the Balearic Islands was the 
second-ranked  Spanish  region  in  terms  of  incoming  international  tourists  and  of  their 
expenditure, with almost 10 million visitors from January to September 2015 and with receipts 
of around €10 billion. 
Forecasts 
Let me move on now to our growth forecasts. 
The latest Banco de España projections, released in September, place the increase in GDP at 
3.1% for 2015 as a whole, and at 2.7% for 2016, in line with those drawn up by the main 
international agencies and by private analysts. This growth is forecast to be underpinned by 
national demand, with moderately negative contributions by net external demand. 
Among the components of national demand, household consumption is expected to continue 
to be highly dynamic, supported by the favourable labour market performance and driven by 
the expansionary impact on disposable income of the fall in oil prices, the reduction in direct 
taxation and the refund of the “extra” December salary payment to public-sector employees. 
The  current  recovery  in  investment  in  construction  is  expected  to  run  further,  against  a 
backdrop of improved financing conditions, while business investment will continue to post 
high rates of increase, in line with the strength of final demand. 
As regards foreign trade, there will be modest increases in exports, in a setting in which the 
improvement on euro area markets and the achievement of further gains in competitiveness 
are expected to be partly offset by the slowdown in other foreign markets. Imports will remain 
notably buoyant, in line with the strength of final demand. 
This  dynamic  activity  will  provide  for  continuity  in  employment  creation,  to  which  the 
moderation  in  labour  costs  will  prove  conducive,  and,  as  I  stated  earlier,  it  will  allow  the 
unemployment rate to continue falling. 
Factors of risk 
The main risks for the Spanish economy from the external environment are associated with 
the  possibility  of  a  sharper-than-expected  decline  in  the  emerging  economies.  Within  the 
Monetary  Union,  headway  in  institutional  architecture  and  the  agreements  reached  with 
Greece have lessened financial tensions in the area. 
On the domestic front, the main risk is the possible influence of the uncertainty surrounding 
medium-term  economic  policy  developments  on  agents’  spending  decisions.  In  particular, 
these risks are associated with the possibility of a loss of confidence due to the exhaustion of 
or slippage in the reform process, or to the non-fulfilment of fiscal consolidation commitments, 
given that these have been the pillars upholding the adjustment of the Spanish economy, the 
pick-up  in  competitiveness  vis-à-vis  the  euro  area  members  as  a  whole  and,  in  short,  our 
economic recovery. 
The challenges to and strengths of the banking system 
Turning to the situation of our banking system, I would firstly like to highlight the efforts Spanish 
banks have made to improve their solvency. These have taken the form not only of enhanced 
capital ratios, regardless of the solvency ratio used, but also of an increase in the absolute 
volume of own funds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
3 
    
The  consolidated  profits  of  Spanish  banks  in  the  first  half  of  2015  also  contributed  to  this 
strength, amounting to €12.59 billion, 37% up on the previous year. 
The improvement in the consolidated result has also translated into a rise in profitability ratios, 
both  in  terms  of  assets  (ROA)  and  equity  (ROE).  However,  this  improvement  was  mainly 
underpinned by activity abroad, the weight of which in the total business of Spanish deposit 
institutions  increased  compared  to  domestic  business.  The  return  on  equity  (ROE)  has 
resumed positive levels, around 5%, though we are still some way off average historical levels 
and it should be noted they are below cost-of-capital estimates. 
In  a  setting  characterised  by  the  persistence  of  very  low  interest  rates,  one  of  the  main 
challenges banks face is to maintain adequate profitability levels, especially at a time when the 
dynamism of banking activity is still limited and the volume of non-performing loans (NPLs) 
and foreclosures remains high. But we should highlight here the adjustments banks have been 
making to the volume of NPLs and foreclosures, which have been declining continuously since 
early 2014. 
Final remarks 
The  Spanish  economy  is  overcoming  the  most  serious  crisis,  I  would  say,  without  fear  of 
exaggerating, of those it has experienced in recent decades since the 1959 Stabilisation Plan 
– almost 60 years ago – paved the way for strong development and for reforms that gave 
momentum to our integration into the international economy. 
This crisis has had very serious consequences: the loss of activity, of income and of wealth, 
the high levels of private debt, the increase over very few years and by more than 60 pp of 
GDP  in  public  debt,  and  the  highest  unemployment  levels  in  the  whole  of  the  EU.  These 
consequences are not behind us, and it will take some time yet to eradicate them. 
But our economy today is one of the most dynamic in the euro area and in the European Union 
as a whole. The forecasts available indicate that this strong growth, with a healthy balance of 
payments position and strong net employment creation, may continue in 2016, though there 
are external and domestic risks that might upset this prospect. 
We  must  build  on  the  reforms  undertaken  and  continue  redressing  the  accumulated 
imbalances, among which the high level of unemployment and high debt are unquestionably 
the most serious, without forgetting the need to push through and fulfil the fiscal consolidation 
commitments required within the European Union. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
