   Guy Debelle: The global code of conduct for the foreign exchange 
market 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the FX Week Europe conference, London, 25 November 2015. 
 Thank you for giving me the opportunity to talk to you tonight about two important pieces of 
work currently occurring in the foreign exchange market. First, I will summarise developments 
in FX benchmarks. Second, I will talk about the global code of conduct for the foreign exchange 
market. 
But before that, let me step back and ask why is the work going on? The reason, as many of 
you are painfully aware, is that the foreign exchange industry is suffering from a lack of trust in 
its functioning. This lack of trust is evident both between participants in the market, but at least 
as importantly, between the public and the market. 
Trust is the lynchpin of all financial market transactions. Without trust, markets do not function 
well.1 At an FX Week conference earlier this year,2 my colleague Simon Potter outlined the 
important role that the foreign exchange market plays in the global economy. We clearly need 
the market to be functioning as effectively and efficiently as possible. But for that to happen, 
we need to restore the trust in the foreign exchange market. 
FX benchmarks 
I will start by summarising the current state of play in FX benchmarks, reiterating remarks I 
made in Sydney last week.3 Roberto Schiavi has talked about this from a European perspective 
earlier today. 
From early 2013, concerns were increasingly raised about the integrity of FX benchmarks, 
particularly  around  the  potential  for  market  misconduct  in  the  trading  around  the  time  of 
benchmark fixings. Accordingly, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) formed a group co-chaired 
by Paul Fisher of the Bank of England and me to firstly analyse the structure of the FX market 
and the incentives that might promote inappropriate trading activity around a fix, and then come 
up with some potential remedies to address the problems we found. 
After talking to participants from all sides of the FX market around the world, in September 
2014, we proposed 15 recommendations to reform the FX benchmark process, which were 
endorsed  by  the  FSB.4  These  recommendations  were  in  four  main  areas:  benchmark 
methodology;  execution  of  benchmark  transactions;  market  conduct;  and  guidance  on 
reference rates produced by central banks. 
Earlier this year, at the request of the chair of the FSB, Mark Carney, I chaired a group that 
summarised the progress in implementing the 15 recommendations one year on, drawing on 
                                                
1  
I spoke at length of this issue of trust in financial markets more broadly a few years ago: “Credo et Fido: Credit 
and Trust”, Deakin University 2012 Richard Searby Oration, Melbourne, 25 September 2012. 
2   Potter, S. “Trends in Foreign Exchange Markets and the Challenges Ahead”, Remarks at the 2015 FX Week 
Conference, New York City. 
Available at <https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2015/pot150714>. 
3   “Benchmarks“, Bloomberg Summit, 18 November 2015. 
4   These  recommendations  were  contained 
in  a  report  published  by 
<http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/r_140930.pdf>. 
the  FSB 
that 
is  available  at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
information gathered by the foreign exchange committees (FXCs) and central banks in the 
major FX centres. We put out a progress report on FX benchmarks just over a month ago.5 
I will provide a quick summary of what has happened in this space over the past year and 
briefly highlight some areas where there is still more to be done. 
In terms of benchmark methodology, we made a number of recommendations concerning how 
WM calculate the London 4pm fix. In particular, we recommended widening the fixing window, 
and as a result, from February 15, WM widened their calculation window from one minute to 
five minutes. 
This widening of the window appears to be helping to achieve the intended outcomes and the 
progress report contains some data analysis to support this. It is early days yet, with only a few 
month-ends (where flows through the fixing window are generally the largest), but so far, it 
would appear, so good. If you are interested, I would recommend reading Section 3 of the 
report which compares the exchange rate dynamics before and after the change in the window 
for  a  number  of  currency  pairs.  It  is  likely  that  the  dynamics  will  continue  to  evolve  as 
participants adjust their execution strategies and it will be interesting to see how that goes. 
There are also a number of propositions in the market in terms of netting of fixing transactions 
which will also shape these dynamics going forward. 
The wider window has helped to highlight the risk transfer involved between the buy side firm 
initiating the transaction and the sell side firm executing it for them. This in turn was very helpful 
in  the  communication  of  another  of  our  recommendations,  which  garnered  quite  a  lot  of 
attention, namely that fixing transactions should be charged for. Previously, transactions were 
often executed for free, at least notionally. The “free” cost of the transaction probably increased 
the  incentive  for  manipulation  as  trading  desks  sought  to  generate  greater  profitability  to 
compensate for taking on this risk. 
The widening of the window in February served as a focal point for sell side firms to start 
charging for these services. Most sell side respondents to the FXCs’ surveys report that they 
are now charging for fixing transactions, particularly those linked to the London 4pm fixes and 
especially  the  most  liquid  currency  pairs. That  said,  some  respondents, who  tended  to  be 
smaller banks less active in the fix, reported they were still reviewing their pricing structure for 
benchmark orders. 
Moreover, while there had been good progress in terms of the London fix, there was much less 
progress for other fixes. However, the scope for benchmark manipulation is there for all fixes, 
not just the London 4pm fixes, and hence it is important to reiterate that the recommendations 
of our report are intended to apply to all FX benchmarks. 
So  how  are  fixes  being  charged  for?  A  mix  of  pricing  strategies  is  being  used.  Some  are 
applying a bid-offer spread, some a fixed fee, where the fee is based on an assessment of the 
risk transfer involved. Others are pursuing a strategy which could be called “rent my algo”, 
where a firm provides access for a fee to an algorithmic trading tool to directly execute their 
fixing transaction in the fixing window. 
This in turn, leads me to another of the recommendations of the report, namely that banks 
should establish separate processes for handling and executing their fixing orders from other 
orders. This recommendation was designed to address potential conflicts of interest arising 
from  managing  customer  flow.  A  sizeable  number  of  banks  have  implemented  this 
recommendation by shifting the execution of fixing orders from the spot voice FX trading desk 
to electronic trading desks that execute them with algorithms. 
                                                
5   The progress report is available at http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/FX-Benchmarks-
progress-report.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
As a result, the share of fixing orders executed by algorithm has increased substantially, as 
we document in the progress report. There is also considerably enhanced internal scrutiny 
from senior management around fixing transactions. Some firms have physically separated 
their fixing desk from other desks. This segregation of trading functions has involved some 
cost. Other participants regarded the cost of implementing this recommendation as being too 
high,  given  the  size  of  their  business,  and  have  not  implemented  it  to  date.  Others  have 
decided to cease offering this service directly, in some cases offering customers a portal to 
other fixing services instead. 
Again, I would like to emphasise that the intention of our recommendations was that it was to 
apply to all participants, with appropriate consideration to the size and structure of the market. 
In the case of smaller, less actively traded currencies, separation of business is clearly more 
complicated than for large actively traded currencies, but in these cases participants should 
still  be  able  to  demonstrate  to  their  customers  that  appropriate  processes  are  in  place,  in 
keeping  with  the  fundamental  motivation  of  the  recommendation  to  reduce  the  scope  for 
benchmark manipulation. 
In  terms  of  market  conduct,  we  made  a  number  of  recommendations  around  appropriate 
sharing  of  information,  including  around  trading  positions  (beyond  that  necessary  for  a 
transaction) and particularly customer information. As Roberto talked about earlier, these were 
picked up in a statement of Shared Global Principles that was published following the Global 
FXC  meeting  in  Tokyo  earlier  this  year.6  Many  market  participants  have  reflected  these 
principles in their internal policies and codes of conduct, as well as revised policies around 
benchmark execution consistent with our recommendations. 
FX code of conduct 
More  broadly  in  terms  of  improving  market  conduct,  in  May  this  year,  the  BIS  Governors 
commissioned  a  working  group  of  the  Markets  Committee  of  the  BIS  to  facilitate  the 
establishment  of  a  single  global  code  of  conduct  for  the  FX  market  and  to  come  up  with 
mechanisms to promote greater adherence to the code.7 
There are two important points I want to highlight: first, it’s a single code for the whole industry 
and second, it’s a global code. It’s intended to cover the whole gamut of the industry. This is 
not a code of conduct for the sell side. It is there for the sell side, the buy side, non-bank 
participants, the platforms; its breadth is both across the globe and across the whole structure 
of the industry. 
I am chairing this work, with Simon Potter of the New York Fed leading the work on developing 
the code and Chris Salmon of the Bank of England leading the adherence work. Our group 
comprises representatives of the central banks of all the major FX centres.8 To repeat, it is 
very much a global effort reflecting the global nature of the foreign exchange market. 
This work is also very much a public sector-private sector partnership. In that regard, we are 
being supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired by David Puth of CLS. 
The group contains people from all around the world on both the buy side, including corporates, 
and the sell side, along with trading platforms and non-bank participants, drawing from the 
various FXCs and beyond. Hence all parts of the market are being involved in the drafting of 
the code to make sure all perspectives are heard and appropriately reflected. 
                                                
6   These principles are available at: http://www.rba.gov.au/afxc/about-us/pdf/global-preamble.pdf. 
7   <http://www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm> 
8   <http://www.bis.org/about/factmktc/fxwg.htm> 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
The work in drafting the text of the code is well and truly underway. There are two aspects to 
this. First is harmonisation of the existing regional codes. There is a lot of good material in 
them and there is no point in reinventing the wheel there. 
The second part of the work addresses those aspects of the foreign exchange market not 
adequately covered in the existing codes. We need to fill those gaps; for instance, in providing 
more detail around various aspects of order-handling and execution. We are also addressing 
mark-up and last look. We are aiming to provide language around what it means to participate 
in the market as principal rather than agent. In these areas we intend to describe what is good 
practice as well as what is not good practice. 
While the content of these regional codes is pretty good, it is very evident that they were often 
ignored, wilfully or otherwise. Hence the critical need to come up with mechanisms to achieve 
greater attention and adherence to the global code. We will have more to say on this later as 
our work in this area proceeds. 
At this stage, it is worth reiterating a point I made at an FX Week Conference in Sydney earlier 
this year in the context of the FX benchmark work:9 “if these recommendations were not acted 
on,  authorities  could  conclude  that  a  regulatory  response  was  necessary  to  generate  the 
desired improvement in market structure and conduct.” Mark Carney made a similar point in 
his Mansion House speech in June,10 as did Simon Potter in July.11 I think the message should 
be pretty obvious. This process of establishing a global code of conduct for the FX market 
provides an opportunity for the industry to work with the public sector to improve the FX market 
and restore confidence in it, rather than having a (possibly sub-optimal) solution imposed on 
it. 
That said, an overall aim of the code is for it to be principles-based rather than rules-based. 
There are a number of reasons why we intending to proceed in this manner, but from my point 
of view, an important reason is that the more prescriptive it becomes the easier it is to get 
around. Rules are easier to arbitrage than principles. If it’s not expressly prohibited or explicitly 
discouraged, then it must be ok seems to be the historical experience. The more prescriptive 
and the more precise the code is, the less people will think about what they are doing. If it’s 
principles-based  and  less  prescriptive,  then  market  participants  will  have  to  think  about 
whether their actions are consistent with the principles of the code. 
The intention is to have this work of developing a single code to replace the various regional 
industry codes completed by May 2017, with a new framework for adherence completed at the 
same time. However, we intend to put out some parts of the global code, including drafts of 
material on order handling and execution, by May 2016. We recognise that there is a need for 
greater clarity around some of these issues sooner rather later. 
We will be providing this draft material to the various FXCs and other market participants for 
their input in the first quarter of next year. At the end of the process, for the code to be effective 
and for it to achieve what we want it to achieve, it will need to be accepted and endorsed by 
the FXCs and market participants more generally. That said, the process does not really end, 
because as the foreign exchange market continues to evolve, the code will need to evolve with 
it. 
                                                
9   “FX Benchmarks”, Address to the FX Week Australia Conference, Sydney, 12 February 2015. 
10   Carney, M, “Building real markets for the good of the people”, Mansion House speech, 10 June 2015. Available 
at <http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech821.pdf>. 
11   Potter, S. “Trends in Foreign Exchange Markets and the Challenges Ahead”, Remarks at the 2015 FX Week 
Conference, New  York City, 14 July 2015. Available at <https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches-
/2015/pot150714>. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Conclusion 
As market participants, regardless of which side of the market you are on, it is important that 
you  are  aware  of  the  changes  that  have  occurred,  and  are  still  underway,  in  the  foreign 
exchange market. 
If you are on the sell side, I am sure that you are well aware of these changes and hopefully, I 
have  provided  you  with  some  of  the  background  and  motivation  for  them.  In  terms  of 
benchmarks, there is a fuller articulation of this in the FSB benchmark report. 
If you are in the asset management business, you may not have paid so much attention to the 
details of the FX aspect of your business. But it is important that you also understand the 
context  for  the  changes  that  are  occurring.  Some  practices  and  services  that  you  were 
accustomed to in the past, or maybe were unaware of, may no longer be available, and you 
cannot expect your counterparty to provide them. 
The motivation for the changes to the foreign exchange benchmarks is to reduce the incentive 
and opportunity for improper behaviour by market participants around benchmark fixes. The 
implementation  of  the  recommendations  in  the  FSB  benchmark  report,  together  with  the 
enhanced scrutiny externally and within organisations on fixing transactions, appears to have 
moved the market in a favourable direction. 
As we develop the single code of conduct for the FX market, the intention is that the market 
will move further to a more favourable and desirable location and allow participants to have 
much greater confidence that the market is functioning appropriately. We need this to occur, 
as it very much in all our interests to have a well-functioning foreign exchange market. As 
Roberto said earlier, we central banks care as much about this as anyone. 
As it is in all our interests for trust to be restored to the FX market, I very much trust that you, 
as market participants, will work with us constructively in this important endeavour. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
