  Stephen S Poloz: Integrating financial stability into monetary policy 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the 2015 Institute of 
International Finance Annual Membership Meeting, Lima, 10 October 2015. 
 I would like to thank Don Coletti and Stephen Murchison for their help in preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
The experience of the global financial crisis and subsequent Great Recession has led policy-
makers  to  question  some  basic  assumptions.  Long-held  beliefs  about  monetary  policy  no 
longer apply in today’s global environment. Ten years ago, the idea that focusing on price 
stability could actually contribute to the buildup of dangerous imbalances was very much a 
minority view. Central bankers now understand that financial stability issues must somehow 
be integrated into the conduct of monetary policy. And both central bankers and leaders of 
financial institutions are working to understand the impact of the sweeping regulatory reform 
agenda that is being implemented. 
Around  the  world,  researchers  are  looking  at  the  issues  from  several  angles.  How  are 
financial  system  reforms  affecting  monetary  policy?  How  can  different  monetary  policy 
choices affect financial stability? Today, the idea that central bankers should pay little heed 
to  stability  issues  and  simply  “stick  to  our  knitting”  of  inflation  control,  a  position  once 
advocated by many, seems quaintly naïve. 
Through painful experience, we have been reminded that a well-functioning financial system 
is  critical  for  economic  activity  and  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  We  saw  the 
emergence  of  excessive  risk  taking,  aided  by  financial  engineering  and  shortcomings  of 
oversight, during an extended period of low and stable inflation and low volatility. The crisis 
showed us how financial imbalances in one sector of one economy could be amplified and 
propagated across the entire financial system, leading to the worst global downturn since the 
Great  Depression.  So  what  I  will  discuss  today  is  how  central  banks  integrate  financial 
stability  concerns  into  the  pursuit  of  our  goals  of  price  stability  and  macroeconomic 
stabilization. This exercise is fraught with risks and uncertainties and it is complicated by the 
fact that macroeconomic and financial stability objectives are not always consistent with each 
other.  Coping  with  this  becomes  a  problem  not  of  policy  optimization,  but  of  risk 
management. In  other  words,  we  put  aside  the  idea  of  engineering  the  perfect  policy  and 
focus  instead  on  the  more  realistic  goal  of  finding  an  appropriate  policy  setting,  given  the 
risks and uncertainties. 
Monetary policy and financial imbalances 
The  debate  about  using  monetary  policy  to  respond  to  financial  imbalances  has  evolved 
rapidly since the pre-crisis era. A decade or so ago, the discussion was essentially between 
those who argued that monetary authorities should lean against imbalances such as asset-
price bubbles and those who said that monetary policy should be reserved for cleaning up 
the mess after the bubble popped. 
Before the financial crisis, the Bank of Canada basically straddled the two camps. On the 
one  hand,  we  argued  that  it’s  very  difficult  to  identify  an  asset-price  bubble,  and  central 
bankers  have  no  comparative  advantage  in  making  this  determination.  Like  many,  we 
questioned the wisdom of using the blunt instrument of interest rates on a bubble that could 
be confined to one asset class. Indeed, if a bubble was particularly large and persistent, a 
central  bank  that  used  the  cure  of  higher  interest  rates  could  end  up  causing  the  very 
economic damage it was trying to prevent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Bank  recognized  that  price  stability  was  a  necessary,  but  not 
sufficient,  condition  for  financial  stability.  Given  our  keen  interest  in  a  well-functioning 
financial  system  and  our  macro  perspective,  we  worked  to  raise  awareness  of  stability 
threats.  Our  decision  to  begin  publishing  our  Financial  System  Review  (FSR)  in  2002 
showed  our  early  commitment  to  promoting financial  stability. We  used the  phrase “global 
imbalances” a lot in speeches leading up to the crisis. In other words, we weren’t content to 
just stand on the sidelines and wait to clean up messes. 
The  widespread  and  extremely  high  cost  of  the  Great  Recession  made  it  clear  just  how 
difficult the clean-up job can be. It has been roughly seven years since the crisis, and the 
damage done to the global economy has left many central banks still struggling with weak 
growth and inflation. 
However,  the  more  fundamental  lesson  we  learned  is  that  “lean  versus  clean”  is  a  false 
dichotomy. It’s far too simplistic to say that financial stability threats compel central banks to 
choose between leaning and cleaning. In a perfect world, we would have a macroeconomic 
model  sophisticated  enough  to  capture  the  emergence  and  resolution  of  financial 
imbalances, along with their related impacts on the real economy. With such a model, we 
would be able to incorporate financial stability threats into our reaction function, if not with 
absolute precision, then at least as well as we incorporate other economic variables. 
Unfortunately, we don’t live in that perfect world. A general-equilibrium model containing a 
grand synthesis of real and financial variables doesn’t exist and isn’t likely to. I don’t mean to 
downplay  the  importance  of  research  and  the  development  of  stylized  models,  which  are 
crucial in helping us understand aspects of the relationship between the real economy and 
financial  stability.  But  the  reality  is  that  central  banks  have  to  cope  with  tremendous 
uncertainty  regarding  financial  stability  issues,  and  this  is  layered  on  top  of  the  regular 
uncertainties of monetary policy concerning unobservable variables such as potential output. 
Given all of the uncertainty, it seems to me the proper response of the monetary authority is 
to acknowledge and accept all the things we don’t know, gauge the risks facing the economy 
as  best  we  can,  and manage  those risks  as  we  conduct  monetary  policy.  I’ll  describe  our 
risk-management framework in detail later on. But we still have the question of how policy-
makers should respond to financial imbalances, particularly those that are concentrated in a 
specific sector or asset class. 
The Bank of Canada’s view is that monetary policy should be the last line of defence against 
threats  to  financial  stability,  behind  the  joint  responsibility  of  borrowers  and  lenders, 
appropriate  regulatory  oversight  within  the  financial  sector,  and  sound  macroprudential 
policies. Let me say a little bit about each of these. 
Financial stability threats – lines of defence 
Borrowers and lenders are the first line of defence. They bear the ultimate responsibility for 
their own decisions at the individual and firm level. It is not the role of monetary policy to 
protect  individuals  from  making  bad  choices.  It  is  possible  that  the  sum  of  those  bad 
decisions could threaten financial stability or the economy as a whole, and so we monitor the 
situation as a matter of course. But there is no reason to assume that, in all circumstances, 
equilibrium will devolve into turmoil as borrowers and lenders inevitably sow the seeds of a 
financial crisis. Indeed, market discipline enhanced by appropriate transparency can be very 
helpful in this regard. 
That’s  not  to  say  policy-makers  have  no  role  in  enhancing  this  line  of  defence.  Financial 
education and efforts to improve financial literacy can help consumers better understand the 
important decisions they make. 
In  Canada,  we  have  seen  increasing  levels  of  household  debt  that  represent  a  key 
vulnerability for the financial system. The main driver behind this rise has been an increase in 
home-backed debt against a backdrop of rising house prices, particularly in two of Canada’s 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
largest  cities  – Toronto and  Vancouver.  Among other factors, this  was  due  to  low  interest 
rates  that  resulted  in  the  ratio  of  debt  service  to  income,  including  principal  repayment, 
remaining roughly unchanged since 2008. Given this, the increase in household debt levels 
is no surprise. Rather, this rational response by consumers to easy monetary policy is a sign 
that the transmission mechanism has been working. 
I’m not trying to diminish the threat posed by elevated household debt. We are continuing to 
watch this closely. The point is that there is more to the story than the debt-to-income ratio. 
Because  house  prices  have  generally  been  rising  faster  than  incomes,  we  have  seen 
increases  in  the  size  of  a  first-time  mortgage  that  a  new  borrower  might  take  out. 
Mathematically,  the  total  debt-to-income  ratio  rises  as  a  result.  But  it  doesn’t  necessarily 
mean an increase in the vulnerability of the economy or the financial system. 
The  second  line  of  defence  is  sound  regulatory  oversight  of  the  financial  sector.  This 
oversight has been significantly strengthened since the financial crisis. Basel III has made 
the  world  a  safer  place;  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  that.  But  even  before  the  crisis, 
Canada’s banking system was well served by its strong regulatory environment and prudent 
culture, which allowed our institutions to avoid the worst of the turmoil. 
Given  the  scale  of  the  damage  caused  by  the  financial  crisis,  it’s  not  surprising  that 
authorities devised a reform agenda of corresponding proportions. The G20 pledged to do 
everything necessary to address the weaknesses exposed by the crisis. 
With  Basel  III,  we  gave  ourselves  an  ambitious  task.  We  aimed  for  a  financial  reform 
package that would be implemented consistently across jurisdictions and would not impede 
the ability of financial institutions to innovate, intermediate and foster economic growth. The 
road to implementation hasn’t been as smooth as one would like. But that’s hardly surprising, 
given the political processes and trade-offs required to put the reforms in place and the many 
differences among the jurisdictions involved. 
What’s  important  now  is  that  we  finish  the  job.  Ensuring  the  safety  of  the  global  financial 
system is in all of our interests. We can’t be distracted and lose sight of this objective. For 
financial institutions, that means meeting both the letter and the spirit of the new capital and 
liquidity  regulations.  And  policy-makers  should  expect  institutions  to  respond  to  the  new 
regulatory regime. We are seeing competitive forces leading to innovation, in market-based 
finance, for example. To be clear, such innovation is a good thing. Even as we implement the 
new  rules,  we  need  to  be  cognizant  of  their  full  impact  and  ensure  that  we  don’t  stifle 
competition and innovation. 
That said, the scars of the financial crisis will not fade quickly, and we are determined not to 
let another such crisis occur. The proper implementation of the Basel rules will go a long way 
to preventing certain threats to financial stability from forming in the first place. It will also 
reduce  the  potential  consequences  of  those  threats  by  making  the  financial  system  much 
more resilient. 
Nonetheless, Basel III can’t prevent the formation of all financial imbalances, such as those 
in  housing  markets.  Elevated  house  prices  can  become  a  concern  for  central  bankers, 
particularly if they are associated with higher levels of household indebtedness and leverage. 
And  we  know  that  house  prices  can  deviate  in  a  meaningful  way  from  underlying 
fundamentals,  especially  if  expectations  of  price  gains  are  based  on simple  extrapolations 
and  become  disconnected  from  economic  fundamentals.  A  sudden  reversal  of  such 
misalignments  can  cause  significant  stress  in  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  as  a 
whole. 
That  is  where  the  third  line  of  defence  –  macroprudential  policy  –  comes  into  play. 
Macroprudential  policies  have  a  relatively  short  history,  and  there  isn’t  a  lot  of  empirical 
evidence  yet.  But  one  set  of  tools  that  has  been  used  more  frequently  and  studied  more 
extensively consists of those that deal with housing. The International Monetary Fund and 
several central banks – including the Bank of Canada – have looked at this area. They’ve 
found  that  some  macroprudential  policies,  such  as  limits  on  mortgage  loan-to-value  ratios 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
and increased capital weight on bank holdings of mortgages – can moderate the growth of 
credit and house prices as well as improve the average creditworthiness of borrowers. The 
impact of recent macroprudential tightening in Canada, which was aimed primarily at rules 
for insured mortgages, appears to support these findings. 
If  we  accept  that  properly  implemented  macroprudential  policies  can  help  to  effectively 
combat  financial  vulnerabilities  by  strengthening  resilience  in  the  financial  system  and 
reducing systemic risk, this supports the view that authorities should look to these policies 
first when imbalances arise, before turning to monetary policy. 
Across  the  advanced  economies,  there  is  a  wide  variety  of  governance  models  for 
macroprudential  policy-making.  In  many  cases,  the  mandate  is  centralized  –  sometimes 
within the central bank, as is the case at the Bank of England, or outside the central bank, as 
in  the  United  States.  Some  macroprudential  bodies  have  the  power  to  write  regulations; 
others are limited to monitoring and making recommendations. 
While their precise roles may differ, it’s crucial that central banks be involved, because we 
bring  a  unique,  system-wide  perspective  that  can  help  identify  and  assess  systemic 
vulnerabilities  and  risks.  Further,  our  interests  in  financial  stability  cut  across  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s functions – not only do we need a well-functioning financial system to transmit our 
monetary  policy,  but  we  also  have  oversight  of  systemically  important  financial  market 
infrastructures and, of course, we are the lender of last resort to the system. 
When  more  than  one  body  is  involved  in  macroprudential  policy,  there  needs  to  be  a 
mechanism to discuss and coordinate responses and to provide checks and balances within 
the  regulatory  system.  In  Canada,  the  Senior  Advisory  Committee  fulfills  this  role.  The 
committee is chaired by the Deputy Minister of Finance and includes the Bank of Canada, 
the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions,  the  Canada  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation and the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada. It is an informal forum where 
members  can  share  information  and  perspectives  on  their  own  policies  as  well  as  on  the 
overall regulatory environment. The committee’s strength lies in the way it allows members to 
understand the views of other members and to coordinate macroprudential policies, which is 
essential,  given  the  potential  side  effects  that  macroprudential  and  monetary  policies  can 
have on each other. 
The  last  line  of  defence  is  monetary  policy,  and  this  is  the  context  in  which  we  think  of 
leaning against imbalances. To be clear, I’m defining leaning as choosing a different path for 
interest  rates  than  would  be  optimal  for  the  inflation  target  in  order  to  mitigate  risks  to 
financial  stability.  This  could  mean,  for  example,  accepting  a  significant  delay  in  getting 
inflation back to target so as not to exacerbate financial vulnerabilities along the way. 
Understanding the links 
At this point, let me remind you of a complicating factor for policy-makers that I mentioned 
earlier – the fact that macroeconomic and financial objectives aren’t always consistent. It’s 
clear  that  financial  system  policies  –  including  global  frameworks  such  as  Basel  III  and 
country-specific macroprudential policies – can reduce the likelihood of financial imbalances 
and crises by reducing tail risks. However, it is also clear that these policies, and the state of 
the financial system in general, can also influence the effectiveness of monetary policy. So 
we need to deepen our understanding of the links and potential trade-offs between monetary 
and financial system policies. 
Let me explain. Sometimes the economic and financial cycles move in tandem. Consider a 
demand shock where excess demand and upward inflationary pressure lead the central bank 
to raise interest rates. Here, monetary policy can restrain both demand and credit growth. 
Now consider a different scenario, where a central bank is running easy monetary policy to 
try  to  encourage  borrowing  and  spending.  Over  time,  the  increased  borrowing  could 
potentially  lead  to  imbalances,  in  the  housing  market for  example.  In this  case,  you  could 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
have macroprudential policy tightening that’s working in the opposite direction of monetary 
policy. 
It’s therefore crucial to deepen our understanding of how the various transmission channels 
for monetary policy can  be affected by variables that could be targets for financial system 
policies. 
Central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  have  made  progress  in  developing  new 
economic  models  and  adapting  existing  ones  to  integrate  financial  system  variables  and 
stresses  as  we  conduct  monetary  policy.  We’ve  added  potential  sources  of  vulnerability, 
such  as  the  balance  sheets  of  households,  companies  and  banks,  to  our  macroeconomic 
models.  We  are  using  enhanced  frameworks,  fuelled  by  more  and  better  data,  to  help 
monitor  the  financial  system  and  make  more  informed  judgments  about  stability  risks  and 
how they might interact with each other. We have boosted the profile of our semi-annual FSR 
publication. 
We will continue to strive for a better understanding of the interactions between  monetary 
policy and financial stability, and I expect to see a large amount of groundbreaking research 
that will shed light on various aspects of this relationship. However, there is a fundamental 
problem – policy-makers need models that analyze a wide variety of variables and shocks in 
order to do their projections, but it is enormously difficult to capture bubble-related behaviour 
within  a  typical  general-equilibrium  model.  So  we  have  to  rely  on  our  regular  models  and 
supplement  them  with  stylized  models  that  give  us  insights  into  specific  financial  stability 
issues. These models show us a view of certain parts of the economic picture, but we will 
never have a single tool that can provide the complete picture by itself. 
Risk management in monetary policy 
So, given that we’re working with an incomplete picture of the economy, what is a central 
bank  to  do?  At  the  Bank  of  Canada  we  take  a  risk-management  approach  to  monetary 
policy. Let me explain what that means, and what it doesn’t mean. 
Since  the  early  1990s,  inflation  targeting  has  become  increasingly  popular  among  central 
banks,  and  Canada  was  an  early  adopter.  Under  our  current  agreement,  we  aim  to  keep 
inflation around a target of 2 per cent, and we usually try to accomplish this over six to eight 
quarters. 
Even in the absence of financial stability threats, the practice of monetary policy requires the 
central banker to deal with vast amounts of uncertainty. Think of the most important aspects 
of a macroeconomic model – the level and growth rate of potential output, the real neutral 
interest rate, and the transmission of terms-of-trade shocks. None of these can be observed; 
they  all  must  be  estimated.  The  assumptions  that  we  make  in  running  our  models  inject 
uncertainty throughout the policy-making process. And, since the crisis, we have also been 
confronted with the risk that our models have been distorted because of fundamental shifts in 
economic behaviour. 
Now, on top of all this uncertainty, we have to add the uncertainty represented by risks to 
financial stability, a concept that is difficult to quantify. Adding this whole other dimension of 
uncertainty complicates the practice of monetary policy by forcing us to weigh both sets of 
risks, the probabilities that they will be realized and the potential consequences of a policy 
error. 
So how do we manage the risks? At the Bank of Canada, we try to be realistic about the 
things  we  don’t  know  and  do  a  thorough  examination  of  the  related  risks.  Every  time  we 
come to a decision, there are a number of potential paths for policy that could be consistent 
with the inflation goal. In the process of formulating policy, we weigh these possibilities and 
focus on those that fall into a zone where the range of likely outcomes makes us reasonably 
certain that we’ll achieve the inflation target over an acceptable time frame and that financial 
stability risks will evolve in a constructive way. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
Still, we know there can be times when setting policy to achieve the inflation target within the 
usual  time frame  can  increase  the  level  of financial  stability  risk  to  an  unacceptable  level. 
This would take us out of the zone where the risks are essentially balanced. Because the 
flexibility in our framework allows it, we reserve the right to choose our policy tactics so that 
our actions don’t significantly worsen financial stability concerns by opting for a policy path 
that aims to return inflation to target over a longer time frame than normal. 
Risk management, then, does not mean that the central bank will adjust policy to try to lean 
against every emerging financial imbalance. Since we are an inflation- targeting central bank, 
our  policy  tool  must  always  be  directed  first  at  our  inflation  target.  Even  in  extreme 
conditions, when financial stability risks constrain monetary policy from achieving the inflation 
target  over  a  reasonable  time  frame,  a  central  bank  would  want  to  ensure  that  all 
macroprudential options were exhausted before trying to address those risks with monetary 
policy. 
Let me give a real-life example to illustrate how we put our risk-management approach into 
practice. Last year, before the oil price shock hit the Canadian economy, our policy was in 
the  zone  I  just  described,  with  inflation  on  course  to  return  to  target  in  a  reasonable  time 
frame  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  household  sector  looking  as  if  they  would  evolve 
constructively. 
The  oil  price  shock  changed  the  outlook  dramatically.  It  represented  a  potentially  sizable 
reduction  of  our  national  income  and  threatened  to  drive  inflation  below  target  for  an 
unacceptably long time. The expected sharp decline in economic activity and employment 
also represented a possible trigger for Canadian financial stability risks related to elevated 
household debt. Our monetary policy was knocked out of the zone, and the downside risk to 
future inflation was material. So, in January, we lowered our policy interest rate, and we did 
so again six months later as the impact of the shock became clearer. 
We knew that easing policy would have implications for financial stability. However, we also 
knew that those concerns had to remain subordinate to the primary mission of achieving our 
inflation target and getting our policy back in the zone where the risks are balanced. Our risk-
management  approach  implied  that,  in  the  absence  of  any  additional  macroprudential 
measures,  our  actions  would  affect  the  balance  of  risks  in  opposite  directions.  Lowering 
interest  rates  could  worsen  vulnerabilities  related  to  household  debt  at  the  margin,  but  it 
would also lessen the chances of the oil price shock triggering financial stability risks. In the 
current context, getting the economy back to full capacity with inflation on target is central to 
promoting financial stability over the longer term. 
Conclusion 
It’s time to conclude. The dramatic events of the financial crisis required a dramatic reaction. 
New  financial  sector  rules  are  being  implemented  to  make  the  global  economy  safer.  For 
financial  institutions,  this  is  a  long  and  difficult  path,  but  the  stakes  are  too  high  to 
contemplate leaving the job incomplete. Policy-makers are working hard to understand the 
impact  of  new  regulations  and  to  develop  effective  frameworks  and  best  practices  for 
implementing macroprudential policies. 
For  central  banks,  we  know  that  financial  stability  has  now  become  a  permanent 
preoccupation.  We  can’t  have  a  firm  grasp  on  the  economy  and  its  outlook  without  also 
having a good understanding of the links between financial stability and monetary policy. 
At  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  will  remain  committed  to  delivering  on  our  mandated  inflation 
goal. We will continue to strive toward improving our understanding of how monetary policy 
and financial stability influence each other. And we will continue to use the flexibility in our 
inflation  targeting  framework  as  needed  to  integrate  financial  stability  concerns  into  the 
conduct of monetary policy, while always keeping inflation control as our primary mission. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
