   Christian Noyer: Financial regulation-stability versus uniformity, a focus 
on non-bank actors 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board of 
Directors of the Bank for International Settlements and President of the ACPR (Autorité de 
contrôle prudentiel et de resolution/French Prudential Supervisory Authority), at the ACPR- 
Bank of France Conference “Financial regulation-stability versus uniformity, a focus on non 
banks actors”, Paris, 28 September 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  introduce  this  Conference  on  a  particularly  topical  issue: 
“Financial regulation-stability versus uniformity, a focus on non-banks actors”. The title of the 
conference invites all the participants to reflect on the puzzle policy makers are facing these 
days: 
– 
on the one hand preventing regulatory arbitrage and ensuring a consistent approach 
to financial regulation between sectors 
and on the other hand taking into account the idiosyncratic business models and risks 
of each actor or sector of the financial system. 
 To explore further this question, I would like first to thank Professor Jean Tirole, the 2014 Nobel 
Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences who will deliver the keynote address today. I am also 
honored  to  welcome  the  distinguished  speakers,  academics,  policy  makers,  industry 
representatives who agreed to share with us their views on how best to regulate non-banks 
actors. 
Other the past few years, the Banque de France has developed a close cooperation with Jean 
and his colleagues from the Toulouse School of economics. This partnership is taking various 
forms, among which, for instance, the organization of several joint conferences on liquidity or 
on the future of regulation or on public debt and which materialized as special issues of our 
Financial Stability Review. Jean has also developed his thinking about macroprudential policy 
and strategic interactions. This is at the heart of today’s conference. 
Non-banks actors are frequently referred to in the media as “shadow banks”. However, this 
does not mean that they are unregulated. Insurance companies, sometimes included in the 
definition of “shadow banking”, are tightly regulated in France and supervised by the ACPR 
while the AMF supervises asset managers. 
Regulating the shadow banking system has been and still is, as you know, a major objective 
for the G20 and the FSB since the 2008 financial crisis. The underlying objective was to prevent 
regulatory  arbitrage  and  risk  transfers  outside  the  banking  sector  at  a time  where  banking 
supervision has been considerably strengthened. 
Even though this objective is a very legitimate one as far financial stability is concerned, 
I would like to emphasize two ideas: 
(1)  The  first  idea  is  that  a  number  of  pitfalls  have  emerged  along  the  way.  Indeed, 
consistency should not be mistaken with uniformity of the rules. 
(2)  And  the  second  idea  is  that  a  “one  size  fits  all”  approach  of  shadow  banking 
regulation could lead to unintended adverse consequences. 
1. 
Let me develop the first point: The 2008 crisis illustrated that the so called « 
shadow  banking  sector  »  played  an  important  role  in  propagating  and 
amplifying financial instability throughout the financial system. Shedding some 
light on these entities and regulating them to prevent contagion and regulatory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
arbitrage has been therefore a key milestone of the G20 Financial regulation 
agenda ever since. The Banque de France has been involved in this policy work 
from the outset. 
A first part of the work consisted in defining what the “shadow banking sector” is about. It does 
embody a wide variety of institutions worldwide which accomplish credit intermediation along 
with  maturity  transformation  outside  of  the  “traditional”  banking  sector.  As  an  output,  it 
transforms illiquid assets into liquid ones. 
The  approach  of  shadow  banking  has  progressively  expanded  to  a  variety  of  actors  and 
activities: Money Markets Funds; Securitization, Repos and Securities Financing Transactions. 
The work dedicated to preventing the financial risks arising from the shadow banking system 
became intertwined with the work aiming at ending “too big to fail”. In the wake of the Globally 
Systemically Important Banks, the Financial Stability Board started working on identifying and 
defining a regulatory regime applicable to Globally Systemically Important Insurers (GSIIs), 
Non-Bank-Non Insurance SIFIs (NBNIs), Critical Market Infrastructures/CCPs. 
The focus of the work also shifted from monitoring/statistical reporting to rule making. Beyond 
the yearly shadow banking monitoring exercises, policy makers intended to make sure that no 
part of the financial system would be left unregulated and that a similar set of rules should 
apply  to  a  similar  set  of  risks.  For  the  sake  of  a  better  regulation  of  globally  systemically 
important  institutions,  some  progress  remains  possible  in  the  monitoring,  and the  need for 
relevant data in particular as regards the better understanding of inter-linkages among G-SII. 
Cross-sectorial consistency was seen as a key factor to prevent any opportunity for regulatory 
arbitrage and preserve appropriate level playing field. 
The Financial Stability Board following the G20 recommendation has launched an ambitious 
regulatory program which aims at better controlling risks which are related the shadow banking 
sector. Indeed, the US have recently adopted a regulatory framework for Money Market Funds 
(July  2014).  Other  reviews  are  still  ongoing,  I  am  thinking  of  the  assessment  of  risks  and 
systemicity of asset managers whose assets under management have experienced a major 
growth these last few years, or the rapid development of ETFs providing real time liquidity on 
their liability while their matching assets have a lower liquidity. 
In Europe, this global initiative translated into a number of regulatory initiatives such as the 
Securities Financing Transactions Regulation (repos and SFTRs) or the Regulation of Money 
Market  Funds. The final  objective  was  to  turn the  shadow  banking  sector  into  a  safer  and 
regulated “market-based financing”. 
2. 
Coming now to my second point: even though regulatory arbitrage is a risk, 
consistency  between  sectors  should  not  be  mistaken  with  uniformity  and  a 
“one size fits all” approach could lead to unintended adverse consequences. 
From a financial stability perspective, one can easily draw the conclusion that risks of bank’s 
runs and shadow banking entity’s runs are very similar and therefore should have a similar 
regulatory  treatment.  Yet,  the  timing  and  consequences  of  higher  lapses  in  insurance  are 
hardly comparable to the banks’ one. Moreover, the shadow banking sector is much more 
complex,  not  harmonized  and  hard  to  fully  capture,  even  after  the  massive  reduction  of 
activities  related  to  this  sector  which  followed  the  financial  crisis.  Indeed,  entities  such  as 
insurance companies, CCPs, asset managers and any other non-bank actors have their own 
business models and specificities. 
Therefore mirroring by duplicating the GSIBs approach to these non-bank actors may either 
lead to inadequate policy options (TLAC for CCPs, ill calibrated Higher Loss Absorbency (HLA) 
for GSIIS) or to fostering pro-cyclicality. In this latter case, all market players would take the 
same  positions,  on the same financial  instruments  at the same  time fostering  a  “one  way” 
market. This herd behavior can lead to detrimental consequences in terms of financial stability 
by amplifying an irrational market decision based upon no fundamentals, which could rapidly 
spread to the whole financial sphere. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In addition, none of these sectors is unregulated today in Europe (AIFM directive for alternative 
funds, UCITS directives for funds, Solvency 2 for insurance, EMIR for CCPs) and replicating 
some rules stemming from banking supervision to these entities would simply be irrelevant. 
More generally, it is up to the policy makers to act consistently and try to anticipate and mitigate 
any  possible  unintended  effects  of  their  policy  decisions.  For  instance  it  might  seem 
contradictory  to  encourage  central  clearing  of  derivatives  or  trading  on  organized  trading 
platform as a means to reduce systemic risks on the one hand, while on the other hand levying 
a Financial Transaction Tax on these operations if they are deemed safer. 
Policy makers should make sure their actions will not be a factor of market instability which 
could spread to the market and create another crisis. 
Conclusion 
As we can see, policy makers have still a lot of work on their plate as regards the design of an 
adequate regulatory framework for the “shadow banking sector” and for it to be sufficiently 
sound  to  be  providing  a  sustainable  “market  based financing”. The  Capital  Market  Union’s 
project  launched  by  the  European  Commission  is  aiming  at  achieving  to  achieve  a  sound 
regulatory framework. To this end, for instance, the European Commission with the help of the 
European Banking Association (EBA) has recently defined criteria for Simple, Transparent and 
Standardized  (STS)  securitization.  The  idea  is  both  to  regain  investors’  confidence  in 
securitization assets, which we must admit still suffers from the US subprime crisis, and to 
encourage banks to deleverage loans portfolio from their balance sheet to refinance the real 
economy. By encouraging this new type of securitization, the European Commission is mindful 
to avoid another subprime crisis. 
Indeed, rebalancing the financing mix of the EU economy as promoted in the CMU initiative is 
a valuable objective provided a rightly calibrated regulatory and risk framework is in place. 
These are some of the challenges to tackle in the years to come. And let me wish you a fruitful 
conference. I now leave the floor to Jean Tirole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
