   Luis M Linde: From restructuring to transformation 
Speech by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 6th Financial Meeting “From 
restructuring to transformation”, organized by Expansión/KPMG, Madrid, 20 October 2015. 
 Firstly, thank you very much for the invitation to open this 6th Financial Meeting organised by 
Expansión-KPMG.  This  meeting  is  now  a  classic  in  our  calendar  and  always  provides  the 
occasion for interesting reflections and discussions. 
One year on from the start-up of the Banking Union, the European financial system can be 
said to have been strengthened, though this clearly does not mean that it is not facing major 
challenges and problems. I would sum up the key features here in the following six points: 
1. 
First, following the balance sheet analysis and the stress tests of institutions subject 
to  ECB  supervision,  and  the  start-up  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  today 
there is more awareness of Europe’s banking system and of its greater reliability. 
Second,  solvency  levels  have  been  shored  up:  Europe’s  banking  system  is  now 
sounder. 
Third, in my opinion, is the greater transparency achieved regarding the situation of 
the major European banks. And this, together with the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
and  the  strengthening  of  solvency  levels,  has  helped  pave  the  way  for  banking 
mergers and consolidation, which were far less conceivable before the start-up of the 
Banking Union. 
Fourth,  alongside  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism,  the  Resolution  Board  and  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  are  also  being 
created and will likewise be pivotal to the construction of the Banking Union. 
Fifth, this progress has notably coincided  with very low interest rates, increasingly 
stringent regulatory requirements and strong competition, bringing pressure to bear 
on profitability. This may lead to attempts to achieve greater profitability at a higher 
risk, something that the supervisory authorities must monitor closely. 
Sixth, from the standpoint of banking system users and customers, in the last two 
years a decline in and the practical removal of financial market fragmentation has 
been achieved. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
For  Spain,  the  latest  data  indicate  that  the  deleveraging  of  households  and  non-financial 
corporations is continuing, albeit less intensely. At the same time, there is an increase in the 
number of firms witnessing how their credit volume is growing (currently more than 40% of 
non-financial corporations are increasing their borrowing). These firms generally have a better 
balance sheet position and a brighter economic outlook. 
The debt-to-GDP ratios of non-financial corporations and households alike have continued to 
ease and are clearly below the peaks of the previous cycle in 2010, thus bringing Spain’s ratio 
closer to the average euro area ratio. Although private-sector deleveraging in Spain may yet 
last for some time, it is reasonable to conclude that most of the adjustment has now been 
made. 
For the euro area as a whole, the gradual improvement in credit aggregates has continued in 
recent  months  with  an  increase,  albeit  moderate,  in  the  loans  extended  to  financial 
corporations and households. Across the euro area, the slight easing in lending standards for 
firms and households can be seen to have continued, with the exception of those for household 
mortgage  loans,  whose  standards  have  been  tightened  owing  to  the  regulatory  changes 
approved in several countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   In  any  event,  most  crucial  for  how  the  European  financial  and  banking  system  will  fare  in 
coming years will be the macroeconomic setting. Let me turn now to recent developments in 
and the outlook for the international and the Spanish economies. 
The international economy 
International financial and economic developments have been characterised in recent months 
by heightened uncertainty. The main factors in this connection are: doubts over the intensity 
of the adjustment of China’s economy, and its consequences for international trade and the 
global  economy;  the  future  timing  and  pace  of  US  monetary  policy  normalisation;  and  the 
course of oil prices. 
The global economy has continued to grow, although at lower rates. The projections in the 
IMF’s latest report put global growth at 3.1% in 2015, 0.3 pp lower than in 2014, and 0.2 pp 
lower than the July projection. Noteworthy is the change in the composition of global growth in 
response to the slowdown of the emerging economies compared with the greater resilience of 
the developed countries. 
The situation in the United States, where the economy is in a cyclically more advanced position 
and employment levels are close to their structural low, is conducive to the Federal Reserve 
normalising monetary policy. However, the absence of inflationary pressure, the downturn in 
and uncertainty over the global economy, and doubts about when interest rates will begin to 
rise all cast a shadow which has prompted very mixed expectations. 
As for developments in emerging economies, the slowdown in China, sharp adjustments to its 
share prices and the depreciation of its currency during the summer have heightened the risks 
of a steeper-than-expected fall in activity, with effects on the global economy through trade 
and  commodity  prices  and  via  indirect  contagion  effects  owing  to  higher  risk  aversion  in 
international financial markets. 
The  main  issue  regarding  the  Chinese  economy  is  not  whether  it  slows  by  a  fraction  of  a 
percentage  point  more  than  projected,  but  rather  the  external  consequences  of  such  a 
development. For example, a slowdown in growth to around 6% of GDP, compared with 7.3% 
in 2014, is no grave cause for concern. In principle, these figures, which largely reflect the 
change in China’s production model to an economy more geared towards consumption, can 
be managed by the authorities. The uncertainty lies in the difficulty of evaluating the external 
effects of such changes, and the fact that the differing forecasts of private and public agents 
are reflected in greater volatility in financial markets. 
Asian and Latin American emerging economies are particularly sensitive to changes in the 
international  arena.  In  Latin  America,  GDP  data  for  the  second  quarter  show  a  significant 
slowdown. The Brazilian economy, in particular, is worrying given its high budget deficit and 
significant current account shortfall (although the latter has begun to be corrected), along with 
inflation  that  needs  to  be  contained  and  corrected  as  soon  as  possible.  The  IMF  projects 
Brazilian GDP will fall by 3% this year and will fall further, albeit moderately, in 2016. 
I would like to indicate that the impact of the downturn in the emerging economies on Spanish 
banks,  even  for  those  with  significant  exposure  to  some  of  these  economies,  has  been 
moderate. The geographical diversification of their businesses and the adjustments made to 
their management have contributed to the stability of their balance sheets. 
Developments in the euro area 
As for economic developments in the euro area, growth in the second quarter was external 
demand-led, although internal demand continues clearly to support disposable income arising 
from  lax  monetary  policy,  the  neutral  fiscal  policy  stance,  low  energy  prices  and  the 
improvement in the labour market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In September, the ECB revised downwards its growth projections for the euro area to 1.4% in 
2015, 1.7% in 2016 and 1.8% in 2017. 
It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  approval  and  start-up  of  the  Third  Bailout  Programme  for 
Greece has mitigated the risks in the area, a source of uncertainty for the Spanish and other 
European economies. 
A characteristic of the current situation in the euro area is the trend towards disinflation. The 
ECB expects to end this year, 2015, with a positive – but very close to zero – inflation rate. 
The risk of deanchoring medium-term inflation expectations does not seem imminent, but even 
so, the tendency in recent months is once again somewhat worrying. 
The phenomenon of inflation-free growth we are experiencing is one of the most noteworthy 
features  of  global  economic  developments  in  recent  years,  and  a  subject  of  debate  and 
analysis  by  international  economic  organisations,  academics  and  experts.  The  course  of 
energy prices and globalisation are undoubtedly explanatory factors, but the phenomenon is 
admittedly one that poses many questions and, consequently, difficulties for economic policy. 
ECB measures 
For several years ECB monetary policy has striven to resolutely support economic recovery 
through standard and non-standard measures. 
After  exhausting  the  standard  measures,  in  September  2014  the  ECB  announced  its 
quantitative easing programme with two new components: the asset-backed securities (ABS) 
purchase programme and the covered bonds purchase programme. Subsequently, in January 
this year an agreement was reached to extend the programme to include public securities. 
As  at  30  September  2015,  the  assets  acquired  by  the  Eurosystem  under  the  expanded 
purchase  programme  amounted  to  slightly  more  than  €475 billion,  a  substantial  amount  of 
which (almost 72%) comprised government bonds. 
The  programme  has  helped  enhance  monetary  policy  transmission,  by  reducing  the 
fragmentation  of  European  financial  markets,  and  provided  for  lower  borrowing  costs  for 
households and firms. The depreciation of the euro has also contributed to easing financing 
conditions. 
At  its  meeting  on  3  September  2015,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  expressed  its 
readiness  and  ability,  if  required,  to  allow  for  more  accommodation  in  its  monetary  policy 
stance. To this end, it could – if considered necessary – use the flexibility already embedded 
in  the  purchase  programme  to  increase  its  size  and  extend  its  duration  or  modify  its 
composition. 
The Spanish economy 
To conclude, I would like to briefly discuss the Spanish economy and its outlook. 
During 2015 the Spanish economy has been in what we could call a “virtuous triangle”, by 
simultaneously  meeting  three  conditions:  robust  inflation-free  growth,  job  creation  and  an 
external surplus. In 2015 we are going to achieve GDP growth of more than 3%, a negative 
average annual inflation rate, a current account surplus of more than 1 pp of GDP, and growth 
in employment and social security registrations, prompting expectations of an unemployment 
rate of less than 20% of the labour force by end-2016. However, the degree of uncertainty in 
economic projections has widened notably in recent months and the risks of slippage have 
risen owing to the downturn in the outlook for global growth. 
However,  the  Spanish  economy  is  in  a  position  to  meet  these  challenges.  The  reforms 
implemented  to  date  promote  economic  recovery  and  contribute  to  increasing  Spain’s 
resilience in the face of exogenous shocks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   In any event, perseverance is necessary in correcting the imbalances that are a legacy of the 
crisis, in particular high unemployment and our sizeable international debit position. To this 
end,  it  is  essential  to  maintain  gains  in  competitiveness  and  contain  indebtedness.  Our 
rebalancing  efforts  were  against  an  adverse  backdrop,  as  a  result  of  the  severe  recession 
affecting  the  Spanish  economy  between  2009  and  the  first  half  of  2013.  We  have  not  to 
overstate our economic policy leeway, or jeopardise fiscal consolidation, which should remain 
a guiding principle. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
