  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Insights from the financial market in 2015, 
expectation and direction going forward 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Annual  Dinner  of  Persatuan  Pasaran  Kewangan 
Malaysia (PPKM), Kuala Lumpur, 13 November 2015. 
 This annual dinner is an important event for it presents an opportunity for us and the market 
to reflect upon all the challenges in the financial market, and draw lessons as we move into 
the new operating year. 
The  year  2015  has  been  a  very  interesting  year  for  all  of  us  here,  industry  players  and 
regulators  alike.  During  the  year,  we  witnessed  significant  capital  outflows  as  markets 
responded  to  the  global  economic  developments.  In  particular,  every  commentary  or  data 
release hinting at policy normalization in the US was met with gyrations in financial markets. 
Emerging  currencies,  felt  the  brunt  of  such  volatility,  especially  commodity  exporting 
countries  given  the  significant  decline  in  commodity  and  energy  prices  and  moderation  in 
growth for the China’s economy. For Malaysia, we saw ringgit weakened as much as 18%, 
while  in  the  bond  market,  we  saw  relative  stability  even  though  yields  went  up  by  30  to 
50 bps given by the negative sentiment in the domestic and global markets. 
Insights from the financial market in 2015 
In the midst of all the global economic uncertainty and financial market volatility, I would like 
to highlight some observations and comments. 
Our currency, the ringgit, has been subjected of market volatility throughout this episode of 
global economic uncertainty. While most emerging markets currencies depreciated following 
the reversal of capital flows, the extent of ringgit weakness has gone beyond fundamentals 
and rational thinking. While market liquidity remains sufficient, on certain days, FX spreads 
have widened to 100 pips in the interbank market, and led to spikes in the movements of the 
ringgit exchange rate. Market volatility has almost doubled from around 8% to 14–15%. 
I believe that the recent adverse market conditions with thin liquidity in the FX market have 
been  exacerbated  by  irrational  market  behavior  and  risk  aversion.  In  the  current  market 
environment, our own analysis has revealed that the higher interbank volume and the higher 
market  volatility  were  due  to  this  risk  aversion.  A  small  client’s  order  gets  passed  around 
among  interbank  players  like  a  “hot  potato”,  and  the  exchange  rates  move  each  time  it 
changes hand. These irrational behaviors have significant repercussions on the real sector of 
the  economy.  Banks,  fearing  rapid  movement  in  the  ringgit,  quoted  widen  spreads  to 
corporates and this gets amplified when corporates themselves get increasingly nervous and 
rush to fulfill their foreign currency requirements. As a result, trades in small volume can lead 
to a disproportionate impact on the exchange rate. This is in contrast to Malaysia’s strong 
economic fundamentals,  steady  and  sustained  growth,  high  level  of  international  reserves, 
low unemployment and a resilient and diversified financial system, etc. 
Given the strong data, this is not what and how a developed market should behave as there 
is ample FX market liquidity. 
If we look at the recent daily volume of FX trade, although lower than last year, it was still 
double the amount 5 years ago, between USD5-6 billion for the USD/MYR pair and between 
USD8-10 billion for all other currency pairs. What we need to do now is to remind ourselves 
and each other constantly that we need to put things in proper perspective. As a group, we 
constitute the market and individuals, we should behave responsibly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  On the other hand, despite the adverse market conditions, we noted that the Malaysian bond 
market  has  been  holding  up  quite  well  despite  lower  level  of  liquidity,  thanks  to  domestic 
institutional  players’  support.  Nevertheless,  we  also  realized  that  significant  foreign 
participation in our financial market can be both a boon and a bane for the industry. While 
high  foreign  participation  has  led  to  better  liquidity  and  lower  cost  as  what  we  have 
experienced in the past, it has also brought risks and vulnerabilities. The percentage of non-
resident  holdings  itself  has  evolved  into  a  risk  indicator,  regularly  quoted  by  market 
commentators,  where  48%  is  the  number  frequently  quoted  as  the  percentage  of  non-
resident government security holdings. There was also the argument that large holdings by 
non-residents might leads to sell offs during period uncertainty, thus causing financial market 
instability.  This  is  erroneous  and  misleading.  In  fact,  non-residents  only  hold  29%  of 
government  securities  which  should  include  the  Sukuk  or  MGII.  Furthermore,  most  of  the 
outflows by non-residents arise from the sale of short-term bonds associated with short-term 
views  while  investors  of  Malaysia’s  long-term  bonds  have  remained  steadfast  in  their 
investment  holdings. We  also  observe  since  October  2015  the  non-resident  portfolio flows 
has becomes positive. 
In 2015, as part of our effort to improve transparency, we have embarked on an initiative to 
gather statistics on the ultimate beneficiary owners of Malaysian bonds and sukuks to give 
the market a clearer picture on the types and behavior of investors in our market. Preliminary 
data  showed  that  of  the  total  non-resident  holders  of  Malaysian  debt  securities,  70–80% 
were  stable  long-term  investors  while  the  remaining minority  was  short-term  investors. We 
are  now  looking  at  measures  on  how  we  can  enhance  the  disclosure  requirements  of  our 
bond holdings to be even more transparent so that our financial market would be on par if not 
better than the best practices adopted by advanced markets. 
Over  the  years,  we  have  liberalized  the  foreign  exchange  administrative  rules  to  promote 
competitiveness  and  reduce  cost  of  doing  business,  attract  foreign  investors  and  create 
business opportunities for our local players. Ringgit bonds were allowed to be traded freely 
offshore,  with  some  restrictions  placed  on  ringgit  funding  and  FX  derivatives  markets  to 
contain speculation, with the aim to ensure financial stability. An unintended consequence of 
this liberalization was the emergence of offshore transactions relating to Ringgit such as NDF 
and NDIRS. BIS estimates that the average daily MYR forwards traded offshore is 4 times 
the  amount  onshore.  This  should  not  be  the  case  as  MYR  is  not  an  internationalized 
currency, and that all forwards should be backed by firm trade transactions. 
Given the sizeable volume and the opaque nature of such markets, I cannot help but ask: 
“What are we missing here? Who are the players in the ND markets? Are they hedging or 
speculating? “ 
Is it the lack of capacity of our local players to serve certain players? Or is it that the local 
regulatory and operating environment needs to be adjusted? These gaps should be identified 
and remedies formulated as the offshore market represents a loss of business opportunity for 
the onshore players. Fundamentally since the transactions are related to Ringgit, its activities 
should  be  captured  onshore  and  transacted  through  the  onshore  market  players.  Ringgit 
exchange rate should be determined by onshore players, reflecting the underlying demand 
and  supply  of  foreign  currencies  in  the  economy.  It  should  not  be  dictated  by  any  market 
other than Kuala Lumpur. 
Expectation and direction going forward 
As  2015  draws  to  a  close,  let  us  not  allow  the  increasing  challenges  to  stop  us  from 
advancing forward. Volatility is not likely to go away any time soon. It would be the norm. A 
new  normal.  Let  us  persevere,  learn  from  the  past  and  as  a  group  forge  ahead  into  the 
future. It is appropriate to have a retrospective here. 
First, given the unpredictable and dynamic nature of the financial market, there is urgency for 
us to keep our fingers on the pulse of the market and have access to real time information. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  There is much scope for cooperation between the central bank and industry players in this 
area. In addition to being familiar and observance of the rules and regulations of the financial 
market, we expect market participants to know the details of their clients’ transactions to aid 
us in understanding the nature of the market conditions. 
Everyone has an important role to play in maintaining the stability of the market and remain 
vigilant  on  all  financial  market  activities.  This  is  necessary  to  prevent  activities  that  could 
threaten financial stability and create unnecessary volatility, or incidents that could damage 
the integrity of our domestic financial market. 
Secondly,  while  I’m  on  the  topic  of  enhancement  of  market  stability  and  integrity,  I  should 
stress on the importance of upholding individual ethics and professional conduct. The market 
is made up of individuals including institutions. The glue that binds individuals and institutions 
that constitute the market is TRUST. A case in point, on rate rigging, several global banks 
paid hefty fines to regulatory authorities because of individuals rogue traders. Many dealers 
were  convicted  of  wrong  doings,  and  investors  are  still  taking  lawsuits  against  the  banks. 
TRUST  was  violated.  While  no  Malaysian  dealers  were  caught  red  handed  in  market 
misconduct,  we  should  not  be  complacent.  In  any  financial  market,  misconduct  is  often 
driven by greed and greed is something no system could be tempered proof. Greed creates 
mistrust.  And  mistrust  damages  confidence.  But  greed  can  be  mitigated.  This  can  be 
achieved by establishing a system of consequence management. It is certainly possible to 
limit or mitigate cases of greed if as a collective, we would not tolerate any case of wrong 
doing within our community. As a group, we should expect individuals to behave according to 
the  highest  professional  standards  and  held  accountable  for  their  actions.  On  this  aspect, 
PPKM had instituted a mechanism to prevent staff with questionable conduct from moving 
freely  between  banks  without  full  disclosure  of  his  or  her  professional  history.  It  is  in  the 
interest of the industry that PPKM continue the role as a gatekeeper in setting professional 
standard with a view to uphold the highest standard of professionalism and conduct among 
its members. 
And,  this  brings  me  to a  third  point,  we  need  to  enhance  market  participant’s  professional 
qualification, knowledge and skill set. Financial market is dynamic and evolving, and players 
need to keep abreast of both domestic and global developments. There are ample financial 
market courses and programmes offered here in Kuala Lumpur, however majority of these 
program are still at entry level courses. PPKM together with the Asian Institute of Chartered 
Bankers  will  cooperate  in  the  future  to  develop  a  series  of  high  quality,  advanced  level 
financial market forums and seminars, thus creating a platform to expand network, develop 
expertise  and  to  advance  the  Malaysian  financial  market  community  to  another  level  of 
professional and technical excellence. 
Fourth, technology has become a crucial enabler in the financial industry as it continues to 
provide  benefits  by  reducing  financial  transaction  cost  and  enhancing  trade  execution 
efficiency.  We  need  to  embrace  new  technology,  such  as  electronic  platform.  Technology 
also greatly facilitates market surveillance and transparency by offering real-time information. 
This is particularly critical in a fast moving market, where delay in information mean loss of 
opportunities for banks, and delay in taking action to stabilise market. The need for real-time 
information  in  a  fast  moving  market  is  urgent.  For  instance,  trades  that  are  still  being 
concluded through traditional voice broking and conversational dealing screens are already 
obsolete in developed markets. 
Technological advancement requires behavioral change 
As we move forward, financial market participants who rely on the traditional ways for dealing 
and  communicating,  they  must  relook  at  how  they  strategize  their  business  to  remain 
relevant in this era of rapid technological innovation. If we fail to change, the consequence is 
obvious, loss of business and demise of your business. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Fifth  is  the  trend  towards  further  regional  integration.  With  the  implementation  on  ASEAN 
Banking Integration Framework, regional markets will be more integrated. Domestic financial 
institutions must be ready and becomes an active player in the ASEAN economic integration 
process. On this issue BNM has started investing our international reserves in the regional 
financial markets, and increasingly a large portion of our reserve management business was 
being done with Malaysian financial institutions. With this mandate, we hope that Malaysian 
banks can play a greater role and expand their business by improving regional expertise and 
reach.  Central  to  this  is  capacity  building  as  more  regional  business  opportunities  will  be 
accessible once we have the capability to offer cross border financial products and services. 
In this regard, for strategic positioning and to ensure long-term competitiveness, Malaysian 
banks  operating  across  borders,  should  position  themselves  to  be  the  first  port  of  call  for 
foreign investors who are considering to do business in this region. 
In  line  with  the  objective  of  supporting  regional  integration,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has 
recently  signed  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MOU)  with  the  Bank  of  Thailand  to 
promote  the  use  of  Malaysian  ringgit  and  Thai  baht  by  the  private  sector  to  settle  cross-
border  trades  and  direct  investment.  The  cooperation  is  motivated  by  the  strong  trade 
relationship  between  the  two  countries.  We  expect  Malaysia-Thailand  trade  links  to  reach 
RM100 billion in 2015. 
While the US dollar is still the dominant trade settlement currency, the THB and MYR are 
second  and  third  most  used  currency  by  Malaysians  and  Thais  –  indicating  potential  for 
greater acceptance to settle trade in domestic currencies. 
The  framework  we  are  developing  with  the  Bank  of  Thailand  contains  key  features  which 
include the appointment of selected financial institutions in Malaysia and Thailand to facilitate 
local  currency  settlement.  These  financial  institutions  will  be  accorded  certain  foreign 
exchange administration flexibilities. If the initiative proves successful, we plan to expand the 
framework to other ASEAN trade partners as well. 
Conclusion 
As  we  keep  our  eyes  firmly  on  the  future,  a  humble  reflection  on  the  past  and  honestly 
looking at our short comings would certainly lead us to a brighter future. Financial markets 
should continue to play its intermediary role for the purpose of funding to the real economy, 
efficiently allocate capital where it is needed and assist economic agents to manage financial 
risks  associated  with  investments,  production  and  trade.  These  should  always  remain  our 
core objectives. 
I  also  wish  to  congratulate  PPKM  on  your  achievements  this  year  and  the  successful 
organisation of this event. May tonight’s dinner, themed “Friday Night Fever”, be a night of 
joy for all of us today. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
