  Carolyn Wilkins: Innovation, central-bank style 
Remarks  by  Ms  Carolyn  Wilkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the 
Rotman  School  of  Management  and  Munk  School  of  Global  Affairs,  Toronto,  Ontario, 
13 November 2015. 
 I’d  like  to  thank  Ron  Morrow,  Alexis  Corbett,  Jill  Vardy  and  Michael  Ehrmann  for  their  help  in  preparing  this 
speech. 
Introduction 
Everyone here knows that companies must innovate to thrive. You  may not know that the 
same is true for central banks, even if we’re the one kind of bank you wouldn’t imagine going 
out of business. 
Just  like  private  companies,  central  banks  are  often  focused  on  immediate  issues.  This  is 
hardly  surprising,  given  what  has  been  thrown  our  way  these  past  few  years:  a  financial 
crisis, the Great Recession and then the oil price shock. And a central bank exists in the first 
place to set a solid foundation for the economy and the financial system. 
In recent years, we’ve kept inflation low and stable. This has made it easier for people and 
companies  to  recover  from  the  downturn.  Working  with  other  authorities,  we  also  avoided 
major disruptions in our financial system. 
Given  this  track  record,  why  does  innovation  matter  to  the  Bank?  It  matters  because  the 
world is moving quickly: who would have imagined 20 years ago that interest rates would be 
below zero in a number of advanced economies? That Canadian-dollar assets would be held 
as foreign reserves? Or that there would be a Bitcoin ATM in your local pub? 
Confident as we are in how we do things now, the Bank keeps its eyes on the future. Failing 
to do so would be a mistake for our business and could have real negative consequences for 
the Canadian economy. 
So,  for  us,  innovation  isn’t  just  about  reacting  to  the  most  recent  crisis;  it’s  about  pushing 
ourselves so we’re ready for whatever the future holds. 
This is why I’m happy to be here this morning. The Rotman School of Management and the 
Munk School of Global Affairs are world-leading organizations. People here are passionate 
about innovation. 
Now, students here know that to stay ahead of the curve, you need a plan. We have a three-
year plan that we’re putting in place, and that’s what I want to discuss today.1  
I’ll start by talking about how our plan continues our tradition of innovating by questioning the 
answers. I’ll then go over some of the tough policy and research issues that we’ll have to 
tackle and that motivated us to create this plan.2 This will lead me to explain how we’ll get 
past the obstacles to new ideas by changing our corporate culture. Finally, I’m going to ask 
                                                 
1   Every three years, the Bank sets a strategic course for the medium term. Our current plan, which was adopted 
in  June,  is  outlined  in  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  2016–18  Medium-Term  Plan  and  can  be  found  at 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/central-banking-new-era-mtp-2016–18.pdf. 
2   Not surprisingly, the Bank’s  strategy  was  built by answering questions similar to those proposed  by former 
Rotman Dean Roger Martin in his book with A. G. Lafley, Playing to Win: What is the Bank hoping to achieve? 
What  areas  will  it  focus  on?  How  will  we  get  better  results  in  these  areas?  What  tools  do  we  need  to  get 
there? What does the Bank’s senior management need to do to support our strategy? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
you  –  and  all  the  people  who  care  about  what  the  Bank  does  –  to  get  involved  in  a 
constructive dialogue. 
Questioning the answers 
The  Bank  of  Canada  was  itself  an  innovation  when  it  was  created  during  the  Great 
Depression  to  support  the  economic  and  financial  well-being  of  Canadians.  Over  the  past 
80 years, the Bank has done exactly that by carrying out four main lines of business. 
You know about our monetary policy role, because you read about how we set interest rates 
to return the economy to its potential and meet our inflation target of 2 per cent. 
In our financial stability role, we monitor the health of the Canadian financial system and act 
as the lender of last resort. One example of this work is the extraordinary liquidity that we 
provided to the system during the 2008 crisis. 
We’re  also  the  federal  government’s  fiscal  agent,  which  means  that  we  manage  about 
$650 billion in federal debt and around $70 billion in foreign reserves. 
Finally, we’re responsible for the bank notes in your wallet. More work goes into them than 
might  be  evident:  developing  new  security 
features,  combating  counterfeiting  and 
researching new trends in electronic payments and digital currencies. 
Those responsibilities, combined with a balance sheet of nearly $100 billion, put the Bank at 
the heart of the Canadian financial system. 
Even though the Bank has had the same mandate for 80 years, we haven’t been afraid to 
change our paradigm when circumstances demanded it. 
The change in monetary policy is stark. 
Under the Bretton Woods system that prevailed after the Second World War, the U.S. dollar 
could be exchanged for gold at a rate of $35 per ounce, and other countries pegged their 
currencies  to  the  greenback.  In  1950,  Canada  was  a  bit  of  an  international  rebel  when  it 
became the first industrialized country to adopt a floating exchange rate. Canada returned to 
a  fixed  peg  in  the  1960s,  before  letting  the  dollar  float  for  good  in  1970.  Believe  it  or  not, 
letting markets determine the value of a currency was revolutionary at the time. 
That didn’t solve all our problems, to say the least. Inflation became rampant: for a stretch of 
more  than  20  years,  it  never  fell  below  2  per  cent  and  sometimes  exceeded  10  per  cent. 
Interest rates exploded: for a few months in the 1980s, homeowners paid more than 20 per 
cent on a 5-year mortgage. 
The  Bank  had  to  react.  Its  leaders  knew  this  and  researched  alternative  monetary  policy 
regimes. In central banking, just as in business, it can take a long time to bring an idea to 
market; it took about a decade to develop the inflation-targeting regime that we adopted in 
1991. 
Targeting  inflation  seems  like  an  obvious  choice  today,  now  that  it’s  been  replicated  in  all 
major advanced economies. When we started studying it, however, many economists would 
have  told  you  that  it  was  unworkable.  Not  afraid  to  innovate,  we  were  the  second  central 
bank in the world to set an inflation target, a few short months after New Zealand. It was a 
few years before the idea of targeting inflation was fully accepted by the Canadian public, 
and the Bank took a lot of heat for it. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
These  days,  most  central  bankers  see  inflation  targeting  as  a  success.  It  is  credited  with 
contributing to the “Great Moderation” – the 25 years or so before the financial crisis, when 
the performance of advanced economies was unusually good.3  
I wish I could say that was the end of the story. In reality, this success probably distracted 
central banks from confronting the hard questions about the buildup of financial risks that led 
to  the  global  crisis.4  It’s  a  stern  reminder  that  we  must  resist  confirmation  bias  and 
complacency.  If  the  Bank’s  history  teaches  anything,  it’s  that  we  must  always  be  ready  to 
consider questions that challenge our old answers. 
How do we do that? By giving innovative thinking a central place in our strategic plan and by 
creating a corporate culture that fosters different perspectives and challenges the status quo. 
As  former  Governor  David  Dodge  once  said  to  Bank  staff,  “we  can  have  clashes  of  ideas 
secure in the knowledge that there are no winners or losers … what we’re doing is exploring 
all aspects of an issue.”5  
Focusing on critical central bank issues 
Let  me  turn  to  what’s  in  our  plan.  The  Bank  of  Canada  remains  committed  to  inflation 
targeting and to the expert execution of all of its responsibilities. The Bank is also committed 
to exploring how best to contribute to the Canadian economy in a world that is going through 
fundamental structural change. 
It’s  in  this  context  that  the  Bank  is  seeking  to  advance  the  frontiers  along  all  its  business 
lines. Let me focus on monetary policy. The current inflation-targeting framework is working 
well, so the bar for change is high. But history tells us we can’t cling indefinitely to a particular 
way of doing business. 
One  important  challenge  for  central  banks  now  is  that  conventional  monetary  policy  is 
stretched to its limits in some countries, where policy interest rates are at, or below, zero. 
Because  of  this,  a  number  of  countries  are  using  innovative  monetary  policy  measures  to 
return inflation to target. Canada was fortunate to avoid the worst of the crisis, thanks to the 
relative strength of our economy, our prudently managed and resilient financial system, and 
well-anchored inflation expectations. Tiff Macklem, my predecessor and your dean, can take 
a lot of credit for that. 
It’s not surprising that we are focusing our research firepower on the monetary policy lessons 
from the crisis. 
The  first  lesson  is  that  we  have  to  be  innovative  with  the  instruments  we  have  in  our 
monetary policy toolbox. Structural changes have reduced the economy’s potential to grow 
without creating inflation, so the neutral rate of interest is lower than it was before the crisis.6 
That means that, if we continue to target a 2 per cent inflation rate, it’s more likely that policy 
interest rates will fall to zero than in the past. 
Remember, only a few years ago, many believed zero was where monetary policy was out of 
bullets. We now observe that some European countries have tested this limit. There, central 
banks  are  charging  commercial  banks  for  their  deposits,  and  governments  are  effectively 
getting  paid  to  borrow.  We  published  today  an  interesting  staff  paper  that  looks  at  the 
                                                 
3   L.  Benati  and  P.  Surico,  “VAR  Analysis  and  the  Great  Moderation,”  American  Economic  Review  99,  no.  4 
(2009):1636–52. 
4   O. Blanchard, G. Dell’Ariccia and P. Mauro, “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking 42, no. s1 (2010): 199–215. 
5   D.Dodge, “Town Hall Meeting,” Bank of Canada, 18 May 2004. 
6   For more context, see R. R. Mendes, “The Neutral Rate of Interest in Canada,” Discussion Paper No. 2014–5, 
Bank of Canada, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
experience of negative nominal interest rates in a number of countries, such as Denmark and 
Switzerland.7 It finds that the cost of securely storing cash is the main constraint on how low 
rates  can  go  in  these  countries.  It’s  too  early  to  tell  how  effective  negative  rates  are  at 
creating additional demand. However, it seems that, in the experience of these countries, the 
exchange rate channel might be particularly important. 
Our  staff,  along  with  many  other  central  bank  researchers  and  academics,  are  also 
assessing how effective other innovative monetary policy measures have been. Today, we 
are publishing other staff research papers that cover some of these issues. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  was  one  of  the  innovators  when  we  used  a  tool  called  forward 
guidance. That’s when central banks communicate their intentions on the path of the policy 
rate or other policy actions. The evidence suggests that forward guidance, when it is clearly 
communicated and credible, can be an effective policy tool.8 It probably works best when it’s 
reinforced by other policy actions. 
Other  innovative  tools  central  banks  have  experimented  with  to  ease  monetary  conditions 
are  different  kinds  of  asset-purchase  programs.  We  studied  the  experience  of  the  United 
States, Europe and other places, like Japan. These central banks designed their purchases 
based on the part of the market they most wanted to affect. To lower yields further out the 
curve,  they  purchased  longer-term  government  bonds.9  To  improve  credit  conditions  in 
specific areas, they bought distressed assets such as corporate bonds and mortgage-backed 
securities. Our research found that these purchases were successful in affecting yields.10  
Research in this area will continue, at the Bank and around the world, because the situation 
continues to unfold and it will take years to understand all the effects of these innovations. 
The  second  lesson  from  the  crisis  is  that  policy-makers  must  consider  the  risks  and 
vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system  when  setting  monetary  policy.  In  the  lead-up  to  the 
crisis, the world economy was bolstered by financial tailwinds that were poorly understood. In 
its aftermath, the global recovery is being held back by financial headwinds that we also don’t 
understand well. To address this blind spot, the Bank is making a big investment in economic 
modelling and research. 
Economists use theoretical and statistical models to forecast the future and study different 
policy scenarios. A good model allows us to isolate the cause-and-effect relationships at play 
in a complex system. Our workhorse models, such as the Terms-of-Trade Economic Model, 
do  a  good  job  of  assessing  the  impact  of  economic  shocks.11  But  they  can’t  handle  the 
behaviours and market disruptions that give rise to financial crises. So this is an area where 
we are pushing the frontiers. 
                                                 
7   H. Jackson, “The International Experience with Negative Policy Rates,” Staff Discussion Paper No. 2015–13, 
Bank of Canada, 2015. 
8   K.  Charbonneau  and  L.  Rennison,  “Forward  Guidance  at  the  Effective  Lower  Bound:  International 
Experience,” Staff Discussion Paper No. 2015–15, Bank of Canada, 2015. 
9   E.  Santor  and  L.  Suchanek,  “Unconventional  Monetary  Policies:  Evolving  Practices,  Their  Effects  and 
Potential  Costs,”  Bank  of  Canada  Review  (Spring  2013):  1–15.;  S.  Kozicki,  E.  Santor  and  L.  Suchanek, 
“Unconventional Monetary Policy: The International Experience with Central Bank Asset Purchases,” Bank of 
Canada Review (Spring 2011): 13–25. 
10   A. Reza, E. Santor, and L. Suchanek, “Quantitative Easing as a Policy Tool Under the Effective Lower Bound,” 
Staff Discussion Paper No. 2015–14, Bank of Canada, 2015. 
11   J. Dorich, M. K. Johnston, R. R. Mendes, S. Murchison and Y. Zhang, “ToTEM II: An Updated Version of the 
Bank of Canada’s Quarterly Projection Model,” Technical Report No. 100, Bank of Canada, 2013; O. Gervais, 
and M.-A. Gosselin, “Analyzing and Forecasting the Canadian Economy Through the LENS Model,” Technical 
Report  No.  102,  Bank  of  Canada,  2014;  S.  Alpanda,  G.  Cateau  and  C.  Meh,  “A  Policy  Model  to  Analyze 
Macroprudential Regulations and Monetary Policy,” Working Paper No. 2014–6, Bank of Canada, 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
It’s a big challenge to integrate the financial sector and its interactions with the economy in 
our models in a realistic way. It’s even more difficult when you consider the fact that finance 
is  being  transformed  by  technological  and  social  trends,  as  well  as  post-crisis  regulatory 
reforms. 
This effort will yield a big payoff to public policy. Our models will inform the discussion with 
our federal partners on the right mix of policies – monetary, fiscal or macroprudential – that 
authorities should use to handle a specific problem and support the economic and financial 
well-being of Canadians. We need to understand better under what circumstances it would 
be appropriate for the Bank to use monetary policy for financial stability purposes. 
Models  are  just  the  starting  point.  No  model  can  give  the  whole  picture.  That’s  why  we 
engage with the outside world to gather some of the missing pieces, here and abroad. This 
allows us to ask the right questions and apply our judgment. 
Considering alternative futures 
Innovation  doesn’t  stop  with  simply  adapting  our  theoretical  frameworks  and  gathering 
information  on  the  world  as  we  see  it  today.  We  must  also  challenge  our  thinking  by 
contemplating alternative futures. 
The international monetary system could look completely different 20 years from now. China 
is  increasingly  opening  its  financial  markets  and  liberalizing  capital  flows  with  the  rest  of 
world.  While  this  is  clearly  positive  for  the  global  economy  in  the  long  run,  this  is  a  huge 
change and the transition could be bumpy at times. That means we need to think about how 
the world financial system will evolve and what Canada’s place in it will be. Will the renminbi 
become a reserve currency? How would that affect the demand for other reserve currencies, 
including Canadian-dollar assets? 
Global and domestic payment systems – the backbone of the financial system – could also 
look completely different. Technology is advancing and new players like PayPal and Apple 
Pay are competing with the traditional ones. The Bank will help lay the groundwork for the 
next generation of Canada’s payment systems.12  
Then there are disruptive technologies, such as the distributed ledger that’s at the heart of 
Bitcoin,  or  peer-to-peer  lending  facilities  like  the  Lending  Club.  These  developments  are 
pushing more and more financial activity outside the traditional financial sector. The sharing 
economy is upending entire industries. Here, I’m thinking about things like peer-to-peer home 
rental services such as VRBO and mediated services such as Uber. 
These  types  of  trends  raise  questions  for  the  Bank.  Consider  a  cashless  society  where 
everyone  uses  e-money,  which  is monetary  value  stored electronically  and  not  linked  to  a 
bank  account.  If  this  money  were  denominated  in  Canadian  dollars,  who  should  issue  it? 
Who should earn the seigniorage?13 The central bank, as it does today, or the private sector? 
What  would  the  financial  system  look  like  in  each  case?  The  Bank  needs  to  consider  all 
these questions. Cash is a public good that many people still prefer, especially for smaller 
transactions.14  
As we think about alternative futures, we have to envision a world in which people mostly use 
e-money, perhaps even one that’s not denominated in a national currency, such as Bitcoin. 
                                                 
12   J. Chapman, J. Chiu, S. Jafri and H. Pérez Saiz, “Public Policy Objectives and the Next Generation of CPA 
Systems: An Analytical Framework,” Discussion Paper No. 2015–6, Bank of Canada, 2015. 
13   Seigniorage is the revenue earned from the issue of money. In 2014, the Bank of Canada’s seigniorage was 
about $1.3 billion. 
14   B. Fung, K. Huynh and G. Stuber, “The Use of Cash in Canada,” Bank of Canada Review (Spring 2015): 
45–56. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
This would create a new dynamic in the global monetary order, one in which central banks 
would struggle to implement monetary policy. And, central banks couldn’t act as lenders of 
last resort as they do for their own currencies. This means that households and businesses 
could suffer important losses if such an e-money were to crash. We need to anticipate this 
and manage the risks and benefits that could arise from the broader adoption of e-money. 
The  Bank  will  explore  these  and  many  other  trends  over  the  course  of  our  three-year 
corporate plan. To do this, we’re expanding the range of techniques we use for analysis. For 
example,  we’ve  begun  to  capitalize  on  “big  data”  to  do  things  that  aren’t  possible  with 
traditional  economic  statistics.  Prices  collected  from  retail  websites  can  be  used  to  study 
pricing behaviour. Social media used by people of all ages to express likes and dislikes may 
become a vital source of data to understand the perception and credibility of monetary policy. 
We’re also drawing on techniques from behavioural economics to study such things as how 
people form expectations. 
If we don’t start now to find new approaches to handle these and other alternative futures, we 
won’t be prepared for whatever comes our way. 
IT  specialists, 
involved  economists,  market  experts, 
Cultivating inquiry and informed risk taking 
Our  strategic  plan  focuses  on  new  ideas.  And  if  we  want  the  new  ideas  to  match  our 
ambitions, we need the right corporate culture. No matter how successful it is, any business 
faces  natural  obstacles  that  can  get  in  the  way  of  innovation.  That  is  why  we  are  being 
proactive to make sure they don’t get in our way. 
The first obstacle to innovation is homogeneous thinking. It’s human nature to have affinity 
with people who think the same way and use the same jargon. But the echo chamber you 
create is limiting. 
People at Rotman and Munk know you often have to look outside your own industry to find 
ways to improve. We certainly did this during the financial crisis with the creation of liquidity 
facilities,  which 
lawyers  and 
accountants. 
Scientists in our Currency Department also cast a wide net when they develop new security 
features  for  bank  notes.  A  few  years  ago,  they  turned  a  material  used  in  cancer  therapy 
research into a machine-readable security feature. We got a patent for this innovation. 
The  second  obstacle  to  innovation  is  that  people  generally  avoid  conflict.  Not  everyone 
enjoys  being  at  the  centre  of  debate  or  playing  devil’s  advocate.  Having  smart  and 
entrepreneurial people is critical to generate innovation, but it’s not sufficient; you must also 
have a culture that values inquiry and encourages people to speak freely. 
There is a lot of wisdom in the concept of integrative thinking proposed by former Rotman 
Dean Roger Martin: often, two ways of looking at a problem can offer insights. Leaders have 
to give the example. Good leaders have flexible minds and are open to being challenged. 
They take the time to listen. They look at all facets of a problem to come up with the best 
strategy. They don’t step on newly sprouted grass too early. 
So we’ve added innovation as a formal topic of discussion at our senior leadership meetings. 
We’ve  also  put  innovation  at  the  heart  of  our  leadership  expectations.  These  expectations 
are  being 
in  performance 
management, recruitment and other management practices. Practically speaking, this focus 
will translate into our managers spending more time with employees and on their employees’ 
ideas.  Leveraging  our  most  important  asset  –  our  people  –  will  spur  creative  ideas  and 
diversity of thought. 
We’re also implementing new practices to help staff assess the kinds of alternative futures I 
mentioned earlier. We’re developing an innovation lab for cross-functional groups to assess 
training  and  embedded 
leadership 
integrated 
into  our 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the implications of low-probability, high-impact economic scenarios. I expect this inquisitive 
“black hat” perspective will benefit our everyday operations as well.15  
The  last  obstacle  to  innovation  I’ll  mention  is  aversion  to  risk,  which  is  common  among 
central  bankers.  This  is  understandable,  given  our  responsibility  as  economic  stewards. 
There are no take-backs and writedowns in central banking. 
That  said,  we  can’t  escape  the  fact  that  innovation  entails  risks.  A  company  that  creates 
iPads and iPhones will occasionally produce a Newton. 
Mark Zuckerberg had it right when he said, “In a world that’s changing really quickly, the only 
strategy that is guaranteed to fail is not taking risks.”16  
We  have  to  find  a  way  to  embrace  risks  and  the  occasional  failure  that  comes  with  risk 
without jeopardizing our mission. 
This is why we’re fostering a culture of informed risk taking. To support it, we have a risk-
management framework that helps us anticipate, mitigate and manage the risks that could 
undermine  our  ability  to  fulfill  our  mandate.  It  also  gives  us  scope  to  do  groundbreaking 
research and improve our operations and business practices. 
Reputation figures prominently in our risk analysis. It deserves special attention because it is 
vital to the success of all of our work. Monetary policy is a good example of this, because it’s 
more  effective  when  people  believe  that  the  Bank  will  achieve  its  inflation  target.  Our 
credibility took years to build and we intend to preserve it. 
If we take appropriate risks, our actions will stand the test of time, even if they initially face 
criticism. The most important thing for the Bank is to do the right thing, not the most popular 
one. 
Seeking constructive dialogue 
To get to the right answers, we need to engage with people outside the Bank. If we don’t 
engage, we leave ourselves open to confirmation bias and tunnel vision. 
John Maynard Keynes wrote during the Depression that “It is astonishing what foolish things 
one can temporarily believe if one thinks too long alone, particularly in economics.”17 That’s 
truer now than ever. 
What I’ve learned since joining the Bank of Canada over 14 years ago is that we need to be 
deliberate  in  reaching  out  to  people  beyond  our  own  four  walls.  We  do  it  through 
consultations with the public and market participants. We also talk to about 100 firms every 
quarter as part of our Business Outlook Survey to get a sense of what entrepreneurs see on 
the ground. As part of our plan, we devised new ways to reach out. 
First, we’ve recently launched a program in which outstanding scholars will work with Bank 
researchers.18 We will benefit from this injection of outside leading-edge thinking. We’re also 
hosting  conferences  on  the  most  important  economic  and  financial  issues  facing  Canada. 
Earlier  this  year,  we  held  a  conference  on  disappointing  global  growth  rates.  And  we’re 
getting ready for others, on e-money and inflation targeting. 
                                                 
15   In Edward de Bono’s Thinking Systems approach, the black hat is one of six thinking modes and focuses on 
how things could go wrong. See E. de Bono, Six Thinking Hats, (New York: Back Bay Books, 1999). 
16   Tobak, S. “Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg – Insights For Entrepreneurs,” CBS MoneyWatch, 31 October 2011. 
17   J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, 1936. 
18   More 
information 
Program 
Scholar 
Visiting 
Bank’s 
found 
can 
the 
be 
on 
at 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/research/visiting-scholar-program. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
Second,  we’re  engaging  domestic  and  international  counterparts  more  than  ever.  It’s 
important that people outside the Bank understand what we’re working on when it’s still in the 
early stages, not when it’s all baked into policy. 
That’s  why,  this  week,  we’ve  expanded  the  range  of  work  we  post  on  our  website.  We’ve 
started  publishing  staff  research  papers  under  a  new  process  that’s  independent  of 
Governing Council. These papers are works-in-progress that will eventually be submitted to 
peer-reviewed journals. We’re also publishing staff analytical notes and discussion papers on 
timely and topical issues.19 That way, people can benefit from our analysis while it’s fresh. 
We expect that this kind of work, at times, will show results that are not fully aligned with the 
views of the Bank’s Governing Council. That’s okay. The innovation process demands that 
researchers have the intellectual space to explore ideas. 
Third,  it’s  not  all  about  us.  The  Bank’s  culture  emphasizes  sharing  our  knowledge.  Few 
people  know  that  we  provide  technical  assistance  to  other  central  banks.  Our  assistance 
spans the globe and runs the gamut of issues, from economic models to bank note quality 
inspection  to  business  continuity.  One  area  where  our  help  is  frequently  solicited  is  web 
design, because our website has been recognized as the best in central banking. 
Closer  to  home,  we’ve  introduced  new  programs  to  encourage  the  next  generation  of 
researchers, including the Graduate Student Paper Award20 and the Governor’s Challenge. 
The  Governor’s  Challenge  is  a  monetary  policy  competition  for  undergraduate  students  in 
economics that is going on right now. 
These efforts have a big payback. We learn from other central banks’ experiences and from 
the original ideas students have. 
Conclusion 
Let me wrap up. If there’s one idea I want to leave you with today, it’s this: when the world is 
moving around you, standing still is a risky strategy. 
At the Bank, we put innovative thinking at the centre of our strategic plan to make sure that 
we  can  navigate  what’s  ahead.  For  us,  innovation  comes  from  taking  a  hard  look  at  what 
we’re  doing  and  considering  alternatives.  Hubris  is  the  enemy  of  sound  policy.  Innovation 
comes from involving people, like you here today, in our quest to find the best answers. 
Our commitment to innovation extends to all parts of our business. It will give us the tools to 
support Canada’s economic and financial well-being for the next 80 years and beyond. 
 
                                                 
19   J. Muellbauer, P. St-Amant and D. Williams, “Credit Conditions and Consumption, House Prices and Debt: 
What  Makes  Canada  Different?”  Staff  Working  Paper  No.  2015–40,  Bank  of  Canada,  2015;  C.  Friedrich, 
K. Hess, R. Cunningham, “Monetary  Policy and Financial Stability: Cross-Country Evidence,” Staff Working 
Paper  No.  2015–41,  Bank  of  Canada,  2015;  B.  Feunou,  J.-S.  Fontaine,  J.  Kyeong  and  J.  Sierra  Jimenez, 
“Foreign Flows and their Effects on Government of Canada Yields,” Staff Analytical Note No. 2015–1, Bank of 
Canada, 2015. 
20   The  Bank  of  Canada  Graduate  Student  Paper  Award  is  conferred  annually  at  the  Canadian  Economics 
Association Conference. The purpose of this award is to promote high-quality research in the subject areas 
relevant  for  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  mandate.  See  http://www.bankofcanada.ca/research/research-paper-
awards. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
