  Guy Debelle: Some effects of the new liquidity regime 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the 28th Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, Sydney, 16 December 
2015. 
Thanks to George Gardner, Tai Lam, David Wakeling and Kelsey Wilkins. 
 Today I would like to discuss a few aspects of the liquidity regime that has been in operation 
in  Australia  for  almost  a  year  now,  namely  the  application  of  one  important  aspect  of  the 
Basel III standards, the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR). I will describe some of the features of 
the LCR regime that have emerged over the past year and some of the market developments 
that  have  taken  place  since  its  introduction.  I  will  also  summarise  some of  the  information 
that the Reserve Bank has gathered from a related development, the provision of detailed 
information  on  asset-backed  securities.  This  information  has  resulted  from  the  Bank’s 
stipulation that for an asset-backed security to be repo-eligible in the Bank’s operations, or to 
be  usable  collateral  for  the  Committed  Liquidity  Facility  (CLF),  an  issuer  needs  to  provide 
loan-level data and detailed information on the security. 
The  LCR  has  been  in  full  operation  in  Australia  from  the  beginning  of  this  year.  In  2013, 
banks  had  a  trial  run,  so  a  number  of  the  balance  sheet  and  other  changes  had  already 
started to take place. Hence, by the time we got to the beginning of this year, all banks were 
meeting their LCR requirement, generally with a reasonable buffer. To remind you, the LCR 
requires that banks hold enough high quality liquid assets (HQLA) to cover their projected net 
cash  outflows  (NCOs)  in  a  30-day  stress  scenario.  Banks  are  required  to  calculate  and 
maintain an LCR of at least 100 per cent every day. In other words, absent severe market 
disruption, the LCR is to be met all the time, not just at the end of a quarter (say). 
While  banks  undertake  extensive  modelling  to  project  their  cash  flows,  there  is  some 
inherent  unpredictability  and  lumpiness  in  these  flows,  including  around  large  deposits,  as 
well as some derivative  positions. As a result, all banks have decided to maintain a buffer 
above 100 per cent. To date, the average LCR for the industry has been around 120 per cent 
with some banks maintaining large buffers.1 
To  meet  the  LCR,  banks  have  made  changes  to  both  the  asset  and  liability  side  of  their 
balance  sheets.  On  the  liability  side,  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  there  has  been  little 
change in the aggregate shares of deposits and wholesale funding, but beneath the surface 
the changes have been much greater. 
• 
Liabilities  with  high  run-off  rates  under  the  LCR,  such  as  deposits  held  by  other 
financial  institutions,  have  been  repriced  to  reflect  the  fact  that  they  are  not 
particularly  attractive  forms  of  funding  for  a  bank.  The  competition  for  this  sort  of 
deposit  has  not  been  particularly  intense,  indeed  the  opposite  has  often  been  the 
case, where banks have been happy to see these less sticky forms of funding leave. 
In contrast, the competition for deposits with low run-off rates has been particularly 
intense. Such deposits include those where a customer has a number of different 
products with the same institution, meaning their deposit is assessed to be stickier. 
Banks have been willing to pay up for these more stable forms of funding which has 
seen their relative rate rise. 
                                                 
1  Banks are required to publicly report information on their LCR on a regular basis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     Term  deposits  are  now  actually  “term”  deposits  and  are,  for  the  most  part, 
unbreakable ahead of the maturity date (without at least one month’s notice). In the 
past,  such  deposits  were  often  broken  ahead  of  the  maturity  date  with  little  or  no 
penalty.  Similarly,  banks  have  made  the  pricing  of  notice-of-withdrawal  accounts 
more attractive to savers, where the investor is required to give the bank advance 
notice of their intent to withdraw their funds. 
Banks  have  sought  to  increase  the  average  maturity  of  their  wholesale  bond 
funding. The average maturity of outstanding wholesale bond funding has increased 
from 3 years to around 3½ years since 2011. 
There has been a marked decrease in the use of wholesale funding with a maturity 
of  less  than  30  days.  This  is  a  particularly  unattractive  source  of  funding  for  the 
banks, as they need to cover such funding with 100 per cent HQLA. Hence there is 
little incentive to offer a yield any higher than the yield on HQLA. This is evident in 
the  yield  on  one-month  bank  bills.  The  spread  between  the  one-month  bank  bill 
swap  rate  (BBSW)  and  OIS  declined  markedly  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  (as  I 
noted  on  an  earlier  occasion,  this  repricing  was  left  to  the  last  minute2)  and  has 
generally  been  low  and  stable  since.  At  the  one  month  maturity,  we  see  more 
activity in banks buying back bills that have rolled down to a residual maturity of one 
month than we do of new issuance. 
On  the  asset  side,  there  have  also  been  a  number  of  changes.  However,  unlike  on  the 
liability side, many of these changes took place well ahead of the LCR coming into force at 
the beginning of this year. We haven’t seen too many changes take place over the past year. 
The most notable change has been the increased holdings of HQLA by banks. To remind 
you,  securities  eligible  as  high  quality  liquid  assets  in  the  Australian  market  are 
Commonwealth  and  state  government  paper.  Because  of  the  relatively  small  pool  of 
government paper in Australia, the Reserve Bank provides, for a fee of 15 basis points per 
annum,  a  committed  liquidity  facility  (CLF)  to  address  the  shortfall  in  HQLA  that  can  be 
reasonably held by the banks.3 Assets which can be used to access this facility are assets 
which are eligible collateral in the Bank’s market operations, as well as selected securities 
which the RBA has exempted from certain aspects of its related party guidelines. 
Graph  1  shows  the  increased  holdings  by  banks  of  Commonwealth  and  state  paper.  The 
increased share since the end of 2012 is primarily a result of banks increasing their holdings 
in preparation for the LCR. Currently banks hold just over a quarter of the stock on issue. It is 
our assessment that if banks were to hold much more of the stock than this, liquidity in the 
market  would  run  the  risk  of  being  impaired.  While  it  is  impossible  to  be  too  exact  in 
determining where this (il)liquidity threshold is, we do not want to find out the hard way that 
we have set the required holdings too high and market functioning is impaired. 
                                                
2  Debelle  G  (2014),  “Liquidity”,  Address  to  the  27th  Australasian  Finance  and  Banking  Conference,  16 
December 2014. 
3  The 15 basis points is the annual fee. In the event, the CLF is drawn on a 25 basis point rate is charged. The 
all-in  cost  of  the  facility  also  needs  to  take  account  of  the  haircut  applied  to  collateral  used  for  the  CLF 
discussed below. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 1 
 Click to view larger 
 Within the overall share of government paper held by the banking system, the share held in 
state  government  paper  is  much  higher  than  it  is  in  the  Commonwealth’s  paper.  APRA 
maintains an ongoing discussion with banks about how they determine their asset allocation 
between the various forms of HQLA. 
Government  paper  comprises  around  40  per  cent  of  banks’  Australian  dollar  liquidity 
holdings.  The  CLF  largely  makes  up  the  remainder  of  banks’  available  Australian  dollar 
liquidity for LCR purposes (Graph 2). The size of a bank’s CLF is determined by APRA each 
year as the difference between the banks’ projected Australian dollar net cash outflows and 
the  amount  of  HQLA  that  they  can  reasonably  hold.  Hence  a  bank’s  annually  determined 
CLF will decline if either their projected net cash outflows decline and/or if the stock of HQLA 
increases. Over the course of 2015 both these developments have occurred. For 2015, the 
banking  system’s  Australian  dollar  liquidity  needs,  in  terms  of  their  projected  net  cash 
outflows plus an appropriate buffer to ensure the LCR remains comfortably above 100 per 
cent,  was  assessed  by  APRA  to  be  $450  billion,  while  we  projected  that  the  banks  could 
reasonably hold $175 billion of HQLA securities. For 2016, system liquidity needs have fallen 
to $440 billion, even as banks’ balance sheets have expanded. This is because banks have 
sought  to  reduce  their  net  cash  outflows  by  the  adjustments  to  their  liabilities  I  described 
earlier.  At  the  same  time,  based  on  Commonwealth  and  state  government  budgets,  we 
project  that  the  stock  of  HQLA  securities  that  the  banks  can  reasonably  hold  will  rise  by 
$20 billion by end 2016. As a result the size of the 2016 CLF will decline from $275 billion to 
$245 billion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Graph 2 
  Click to view larger 
 Graph  3  shows  the  composition  of  the  CLF  collateral  that the  banking system  holds.  Self-
securitised  assets  comprise  the  bulk  of  the  assets  held.  This  is  another  area  of  ongoing 
discussion  between  APRA  and  the  banks.  Other  assets  held  are  primarily  bank-issued 
paper. These assets are all held on the balance sheets of the relevant bank. They are not 
“pre-positioned” or held on the balance sheet of the Reserve Bank, as is sometimes the case 
in other jurisdictions. 
Graph 3 
Click to view larger 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Moreover,  the  assets  are  subject  to  a  haircut  in  terms  of  the  amount  of  liquidity  they  can 
potentially generate. For example, the haircut on a self-securitised mortgage-backed security 
is typically more than 20 per cent, depending on various features of the security. That is $100 
of such a security could potentially access no more than $80 of liquidity through the CLF. In 
contrast, $100 of an Australian government bond can be sold for $100 of cash. 
While such assets generally reside on the balance sheet of an individual bank, in stressed 
circumstances, when the CLF is activated, the assets will be repoed to the Reserve Bank. To 
manage this contingent risk, it is very important that we have detailed information about the 
quality of such assets and are also able to price them accurately to determine the amount of 
liquidity we would potentially provide against them. 
To enhance the information available to us, since the middle of 2015, mandatory reporting 
requirements  came  into  effect  for  asset-backed  securities  to  be  repo  eligible  with  the 
Reserve Bank and also to be eligible collateral for the CLF. 
The required information includes key transactional level data, detailed tranche information, 
and the relationships between trusts and service providers including who is providing various 
facilities such as a fixed to floating swap. At the loan level, required data for RMBS include: 
62  loan  fields  such  as  loan  balances,  interest  rates,  arrears  measures;  18  borrower  fields 
such as borrower income, employment type, whether they are an investor or owner-occupier, 
whether they are a first home-buyer; and 13 collateral fields (that is, detail on the collateral 
underpinning the mortgage) including postcode and property valuation. 
These  requirements  include  data  that  are  commonly  used  by  ratings  agencies  and  RMBS 
investors, but the data go beyond that to also include some useful information that has not 
been  commonly  compiled  before,  such  as  offset  balances  and  borrower  income  at 
origination.  This  allows  us,  along  with  other  investors  in  asset-backed  securities,  to 
undertake  a  richer  analysis  of  such  securities  and  more  accurately  assess  their  risk  and 
pricing than may have been possible before. In our case, it allows us to undertake our own 
risk assessment and not be dependent on rating agencies. 
In  addition  to  these  data  fields,  issuers  are  also  required  to  provide  a  working  cash  flow 
waterfall model of the security which can provide useful information about structural aspects 
of  ABS  in  some  cases  only  previously  obtainable  through  a  detailed  reading  of  legal 
documentation.  This  innovation  has  been  very  useful  in  standardising  information  across 
securities,  allowing  us  to  verify  structural  features  of  deals  and  provide  more  granular 
haircuts and pricing than was the case previously. 
These reporting requirements are standardised for all repo-eligible asset-backed securities, 
meaning that the same information is required for all securities. As a result, going forward, it 
will be easier to compare securities. We see this as being of great benefit to the industry as a 
whole,  as  does  the  industry  itself,  as  evidenced  by  the  support  of  the  Australian 
Securitisation Forum (ASF) through the whole process of introducing these new standards. 
The  repo-eligibility  requirements  also  direct  issuers  to  make  the  information  available  to 
investors  and  other  permitted  users,  not  just  to  the  Reserve  Bank.  By  and  large,  the 
information  provided  to  these  groups  is  the  same  as  that  provided  to  the  Reserve  Bank; 
however, there have been some fields where the information provided posed a potential risk 
to  privacy.  Hence  issuers  may  redact  some  particular  fields  and  provide  aggregated  de-
individualised data about these fields instead. 
Since  the  middle  of  this  year,  we  have  received  into  our  securitisation  system  around 
1 600 submissions,  covering  around  $400  billion  in  assets,  including  around  two  million 
individual  housing  loans.  The  information  is  updated  on  a  monthly  frequency  so  we  are 
gaining not only a much richer view of the ABS market at any point in time, but also a rich 
time  series. With this  very  large  panel  data  set  we  can  examine  how  the  market,  and  the 
underlying collateral, evolves through time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  With the caveat that the data reporting is still in its infancy, it’s already apparent that there are 
many potential benefits of the data. Let me illustrate some of the summary information that we 
can  glean  from  the  first few  months  of  reporting.  As  noted  earlier,  these  data  cover  around 
2 million housing loans of the total of the approximately 6 million such loans on issue currently. 
Graph 4 shows the loan to value ratio (LVR) at origination and currently. The largest share of 
loans had an LVR at origination of between 70 and 80 per cent. While that is still the case in 
terms of the current LVR, the share is noticeably lower. Similarly, there are almost no loans 
with an LVR greater than 90 per cent, even though around nearly 10 per cent had an LVR 
greater  than  90  at  origination.  That  said,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  securitised  loans 
tend  to  be  more  seasoned  than  non-securitised  loans  and  are  therefore  amortising  more 
quickly.  The  seasoning  (time  since  loan  origination)  of  the  securitised  loans  is  shown  in 
Graph 5. It shows that 95 per cent of the value of loans is more than one year old, and nearly 
75 per cent is more than three years old. 
Graph 4 
Click to view larger 
Graph 5 
Click to view larger 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  One issue which is of some interest currently is the extent of the repayment buffer that has 
been  built  up  by  borrowers.  This  is  shown  in  Graph  6  which  shows  that  two-thirds  of 
borrowing  is  covered  by  a  repayment  buffer  of  at  least  one  month’s  worth  of  required 
mortgage payments, and for half of this, that buffer is more than one year. As the time series 
on  this  loan feature  accumulates  it  has the  potential  to  be  useful  information for  monetary 
policy as well as financial stability considerations. Graph 7 shows the level of documentation 
for  loans  securitised  by  different  types  of  lender.  It  shows  that  the  major  banks  have  a 
minimal share of low doc loans in their pools, whereas for the non-bank issuers the share is 
considerably larger.4 
Graph 6 
Click to view larger 
Graph 7 
Click to view larger 
                                                
4  Though the latter have other features which provide increased credit support. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Finally, in terms of credit risks, Graph 8 shows arrears rates by states and shows that the 
current distribution of arrears are consistent with the variation in economic conditions across 
the states, though at the same time all arrears rates are relatively low. 
Graph 8 
Click to view larger 
  Of course, credit risk is not so much about the averages but the distributions. Having the loan 
level data enables an insight into the characteristics of the loans in the various tails of the 
distribution that warrant closer attention. It will also allow an assessment of the correlations 
between the various drivers of risk that may lead to credit deterioration. 
In sum, there is very rich potential in these data for many purposes for the RBA and other 
market participants. From our point of view, the data provide us with a great deal of insight 
into the contingent risk that might at some point reside on our balance sheet. But clearly, the 
data are also very useful for financial stability and monetary policy considerations too. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, as we approach one year of the full implementation of the LCR in Australia, it is 
worth  looking  at  some  of  the  changes  that  have  occurred.  There  has  been  repricing  of 
liabilities to reflect the differences in their treatment under the LCR. On the asset side, there 
have been increased holdings of government paper. The banking system’s contingent use of 
the CLF will decrease in 2016 from 2015 as banks have made adjustments to lower their net 
cash outflows, which increases their resiliency to funding shocks. This has occurred even as 
bank balance sheets have continued to expand. 
While  the  LCR  is  now  well  established  in  the  local  market,  the  net  stable  funding  ratio 
(NFSR) is yet to be implemented and APRA will be consulting on this next year. This is also 
likely to have an impact on the composition of bank balance sheets. 
The  enhanced  reporting  of  information  on  asset-backed  securities  that  commenced  in  the 
middle  of  the  year  is  providing  the  Bank  and  market  participants  with  a  wealth  of 
standardised information on this part of the market. It is allowing the Bank to enhance its risk 
assessment  of  its  contingent  liability  under  the  CLF,  by  providing  us  with  a  very  granular 
insight into the collateral that is held against the CLF. The data are beneficial not only for this 
reason  but  also  have  the  potential  to  inform  assessments  of financial  stability  and  provide 
insight into one important transmission channel of monetary policy. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
