  Malcolm Edey: The risk environment and the property sector 
Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  at  the  Australian  Property  Institute’s  Queensland  Property  Conference,  Gold 
Coast, 6 November 2015. 
 Thanks for the opportunity to speak to you today. 
This  being  a  conference  of  the  property  industry,  I  expect  you  will  want  to  hear  me  say 
something about the Australian property market. I will come to that a bit later in the speech. 
First,  though,  I  want  to  provide  some  context  for  that  by  talking  about  the  financial  and 
economic  environment  more  broadly.  In  doing  so,  I  will  be  making  some  longer  run 
observations as well as drawing on the analysis recently published by the Reserve Bank in 
our half-yearly Financial Stability Review. 
 The post crisis environment 
I want to begin by noting that the process of recovery from the global financial crisis (GFC) 
has  been  underway  for  some  years.  The  epicentre  of  the  crisis  is  usually  dated  to  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, and the general recovery that we have had 
since  then  began  about  six  months  later.  On  that  basis,  we  have  been  in  a  period  of 
aggregate global recovery now for about 6½ years. 
In broad outline, this has been a period marked by: 
• 
a return to approximately trend growth in world GDP, though with some variations 
around that; (Growth is currently a bit less than trend.) 
widespread, though somewhat variable, progress in balance sheet repair in banking 
institutions; and 
improved conditions in financial markets. 
• 
These  are  all  positive  developments,  and  they  represent  a  substantial  cumulative 
improvement since the height of the crisis. 
That said, there are a number of qualifications that should be made to the summary picture I 
have just given: 
• 
Growth around the world during this period has been uneven geographically. China 
and other emerging market economies have led the recovery for much of the period, 
the  US  has  achieved  fairly  steady  growth,  while  Europe  tended  to  lag.  (More 
recently Asian growth has softened while Europe has picked up somewhat.) 
Significant  labour  market  slack  remains  in  some  areas  of  the  global  economy, 
especially in parts of Europe. 
And  the  recovery  has  been  marked  by  periodic  bouts  of  nervousness  in  financial 
markets. 
  One  general  indicator  that  things  are  still  some  way  short  of  normal  is  the  level  of  global 
interest rates, which are still at exceptionally low levels to support growth. 
An  obvious  question  that  arises  from  all  of  this  is,  why  has  the  recovery  from  the  deep 
recession  of  2008  and  2009  been  as  protracted  as  it  has?  I  suggest  that  there  are  two 
important factors at work here. 
The  first  factor  is  that  the  GFC  period  involved  more  than  one  crisis.  It  began  in  the  US 
mortgage market in 2007 and spread through various channels of contagion to banks and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  financial  institutions  in  other  parts  of  the  world, especially  the  euro  area  and  the  UK. That 
was the initial crisis, triggered by poor asset quality and excessive leverage. 
But even as the US was recovering from that, a second crisis was developing in Europe. This 
was  a  crisis  of  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  the  euro  as  a  single  currency  area.  At 
different  times  a  number  of  the  weaker  economies  in  the  area  came  under  scrutiny  as  to 
whether they would be able to meet their obligations, and concerns were particularly focused 
on Greece in key periods. These episodes led to strains in financial markets and increases in 
risk pricing, and they weighed heavily on confidence and on the pace of recovery. With the 
euro  area  accounting  for  around  one  fifth  of  the  global  economy,  this  in  turn  acted  as  a 
significant drag on global growth. 
The second factor is that, other things equal, recoveries from financial crises typically take 
longer than those from other types of business cycle events. It takes time to repair balance 
sheets, to reduce excessive leverage and to unwind the asset market imbalances that might 
be left behind by a crisis; and it takes time to reverse the damage to trust and confidence. 
One important recent study1 found that the average duration of impact from financial crises 
across a range of countries over the past two centuries has been around four to five years. 
Since this current episode has been more severe than most, it is not surprising that its after-
effects have lasted even longer. 
An  exacerbating  factor,  too,  has  been  the  international  dimension.  When  a  financial  or  a 
banking crisis occurs in a single economy, or in a smallish group of countries, exchange rate 
depreciation is often part of the market response and part of the recovery mechanism. But 
there is obviously much less scope for that mechanism to work when a crisis affects large 
parts of the global economy simultaneously. 
Taken together I think these factors go a long way towards explaining the rather drawn-out 
nature  of  the  global  recovery  to  date  –  even  though,  as  I  said,  conditions  now  are  much 
better than they were a few years ago. 
Policymakers around the world have been responding to this situation on a number of fronts. 
Interest  rates  were  reduced  to  near  zero  (or  even  slightly  below  zero)  in  many  advanced 
economies to support recovery and assist in balance sheet repair, and they still remain at 
those  levels.  In  Europe,  significant  institutional  reforms  are  being  made  to  strengthen  the 
stability  of  the  euro  area;  these  are  aimed  at  getting  banking  and  crisis-management 
arrangements  across  the  area  to  function  in  a  more  unified  way  that  makes  them  more 
robust  to  shocks  in  the  future.  And  globally,  there  is  an  extensive  program  of  reform 
underway, for example in banking and securities regulation, to build resilience in our financial 
systems. Australia has been very much a part of that process. 
A  related  development  in  this  period  is  that  there  has  been  a  renewed  interest  in  more 
proactive  approaches  to  the  management  of  systemic  risk.  Partly  this  reflected  the  lesson 
from the GFC itself that financial crises are costly, and hence that there is a strong need for 
better  risk  management.  In  keeping  with  that,  institutional  arrangements  have  been 
strengthened  in  some  jurisdictions  to  support  more  proactive  risk  management  by 
supervisors, where that was found to be lacking. A related point is that, in a low interest rate 
environment, supervisors have seen a need to be particularly vigilant against a build-up of 
risk  in  interest  sensitive  sectors.  A  number  of  them  have  been  taking  measures  in  recent 
times to respond to developing risks, often focused on property lending. I will have more to 
say about that later. 
To summarise (and oversimplify) this picture somewhat, the after-effects of the GFC on the 
global economy have included: 
                                                
1  Reinhart  CM  and  K  Rogoff  (2009),  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly,  Princeton 
University Press, Princeton. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  an extended period of low interest rates 
“search for yield” behaviour by investors in some interest-sensitive sectors, and 
a strengthened focus on risk management by prudential supervisors. 
 Recent developments 
With  all  of  that  as  background,  I  want  to  turn  now  to  our  assessment  of  the  evolving  risk 
environment  over  the  past  six  months,  and  here  I  draw  on  some  key  messages  from  our 
recent Review. 
It is useful to take that subject in three parts: 
• 
• 
• 
the global risk environment; 
possible implications of that environment for Australia; and 
domestically generated sources of risk. 
The global risk environment 
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  much  of  the  attention  from  a  financial  stability  point  of  view 
over recent years has been on Europe. There has been a particular focus on Greece, and on 
potential spillovers from Greece to other parts of the euro area. Those concerns came to a 
head around the middle of this year. For the time being at least, they  seem to have been 
allayed by the new bailout package agreed at that time. Unlike the earlier phase of the Greek 
crisis in 2011 and 2012, market spillovers from this latest bout of uncertainty have been quite 
limited;  for  example,  risk  spreads  on  securities  across  other  parts  of  Europe  remained 
relatively low. This seems at least partly to reflect a greater degree of confidence in Europe-
wide  institutions.  The  European  authorities  have  taken  a  number  of  actions  to  reduce 
channels of contagion, including increased support from the ECB and ongoing progress in 
unifying the system of banking regulation. 
More generally in Europe, the condition of the financial sector has been improving over the 
recent  period  in  a  number  of  respects.  Non-performing  loans  of  European  banks  are  still 
high, but they have been falling for more than a year (Graph 1). Bank profitability has picked 
up and banks are now better capitalised. Stronger balance sheets have enabled banks in the 
euro area to make some gradual increases in their lending to businesses and households. 
Overall, while financial conditions in Europe are still some way from a return to normal, they 
are significantly improved from their position of a few years ago. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Graph 1 
 Click to view larger 
 While financial risks in Europe seem to have lessened recently, attention has shifted to China 
and other emerging market economies. China has been an important engine of growth in the 
post-crisis period. Nonetheless, our latest Review notes that financial stability risks in China 
have  been  building.  The  Chinese  economic  expansion  over  recent  years  has  been 
associated with increasing debt, strong asset price growth and apparent overinvestment in 
some sectors (Graph 2). If the nominal growth rate were to fall further from its high recent 
rates,  any  past  excesses  might  be  exposed  –  leverage  is  always  harder  to  manage  in  a 
slower  growth  environment.  These  risks  of  course  are  hard  to  assess.  The  Chinese 
authorities have many levers to support growth and financial stability, given the ongoing large 
role of the state in the economy, the heavily regulated financial system and the presence of 
capital account controls. The measured central government fiscal position is also very strong, 
though  the  overall  public  sector  position  is  less  so  given  the  build-up  in  debt  among  local 
governments and state-owned enterprises. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 2 
 Click to view larger 
 Outside China, country-specific risks seem to have increased in a number of other emerging 
market  economies  –  for  example  Brazil,  Russia  and  Turkey.  Among  the  various  factors 
contributing to that in recent times have been falling commodity prices, political instability and 
excessive  corporate  leverage.  Equity  prices  and  exchange  rates  in  these  economies  have 
fallen quite sharply. 
Taken  together  these  developments  have  contributed  to  a  pick-up  in  volatility  in  global 
financial  markets  over  the  past  six  months,  after  a  lengthy  period  when  volatility  and  risk 
pricing  were  unusually  low.  Even  so,  risk  pricing  in  most  markets  remains  well  below  the 
crisis-related peaks of a few years ago. 
Implications of the global risk environment for Australia 
At  this  point  it  is  useful  to  ask  how  these  international  sources  of  risk  might  affect  the 
Australian financial system. 
Direct exposures of Australian banking institutions to the risk factors I have been describing 
are quite limited (Table 1). Exposures to the euro area have been scaled back in the wake of 
the crisis and now represent only around 1 per cent of Australian banks’ consolidated global 
assets. Although exposures to the Asian region have been growing quite rapidly over recent 
years, they are still a relatively small share of consolidated assets – around 5 per cent. Many 
of  these  exposures  are  shorter-term  and  trade-related,  factors  which  should  lessen  credit 
and funding risks. That said, operational and legal risks could be relatively high, particularly 
given the rapid expansion of these activities in recent times.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Table 1 
Australian-owned Banks’ International Exposures  
Ultimate risk basis, June 2015  
Value  Share of international 
 $ billion 
New Zealand 
330 
Asia(a) 
183 
– China 
45 
United Kingdom  176 
United States 
140 
Europe 
58 
– Greece 
0 
Other 
59 
Total 
945 
exposures 
Per cent 
35 
19 
5 
19 
15 
6 
0 
6 
100 
Share of global 
consolidated assets 
Per cent 
9 
5 
1 
5 
4 
1 
0 
2 
24 
(a) Asia includes offshore centres Hong Kong and Singapore. 
Sources: APRA; RBA. 
As a more general observation, Australian banks have increased their resilience over recent 
years in a number of respects, responding both to market expectations and to regulatory and 
supervisory  actions.  Notably  they  have  raised  their  capital  ratios  and  shifted  their  funding 
structures to make them more resilient to financial market disruptions. Of course, none of this 
guarantees that Australian banks will be immune to international shocks in the future. But it 
suggests that  the  main effects from the risks I’ve  been  describing  are  likely  to  be  indirect, 
working through the impact of factors like commodity prices, trade flows, and confidence, on 
the broader economy.  
Domestically generated sources of risk 
That  brings  me  to  the  third  part  of  our  risk  assessment,  namely  domestically  generated 
sources of risk. Here our analysis has for some time focused on the buoyancy in parts of the 
property  market  and  the  leverage  associated  with  that.  Much  of  the  focus  has  been  on 
residential property, and I will start with that before turning to the commercial sector, where 
risks have also been growing.  
While the housing market has not been universally strong around the country, we have been 
seeing  significant  strength  in  the  Sydney  and  Melbourne  markets  in  recent  times,  with 
investors playing a large role. To summarise a few key facts:  
• 
Housing prices in Sydney have increased by 31 per cent over the past two years, 
and reached an annual rate of increase of almost 20 per cent earlier this year.  
Melbourne prices were up by 16 per cent over the year to September this year.  
The value of loan approvals to investors in New South Wales approximately doubled 
over the two years to mid-2015.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 6 
   As a result of these developments, the household debt ratio has started to edge up again 
from a level that was already high, at around 1½ times annual income (Graph 3).  
Graph 3  
Click to view larger 
 It is against this background that the Reserve Bank has highlighted the need for prudence, 
and  has  supported  APRA  and  ASIC  in  the  measures  that  they  have  taken  to  strengthen 
lending standards.  
As  a  general  proposition,  mortgage  lending  standards  in  the  post-crisis  period  have  been 
relatively  tight,  at  least  more  so  than  before  the  crisis.  Low-doc  loans  are  rare,  genuine 
savings are required to fund at least part of the deposit, and the application of interest rate 
buffers in serviceability  assessments has become common. Nonetheless, investigations by 
APRA and ASIC have shown that there was some slipping in lending standards and that they 
were  inadequate  in  some  important  respects  to  the  current  risk  environment.  Specifically, 
APRA  found  that,  in  some  instances,  lenders’  serviceability  assessments  were  based  on 
over-optimistic  judgments  about  the  reliability  of  borrowers’  incomes,  or  inadequate 
estimates of borrowers’ living expenses, or that they failed to take into account the possible 
effect  of  future  interest  rate  movements  on  a  borrower’s  existing  commitments.  ASIC’s 
review  of  interest-only  lending  practices  made  similar  findings,  and  also  noted  instances 
where  the  lender  did  not  make  reasonable  inquiries  as  to  whether  the  loan  product  was 
suitable to the borrowers’ circumstances.  
Further  to  those  findings,  as  a  result  of  the  additional  scrutiny  over  the  past  year  and 
substantial data revisions made by the banks, we now know that the level of investor activity 
in the housing market was in fact higher than previously thought.  
As you know, APRA announced a number of supervisory measures in December last year to 
strengthen mortgage lending standards. These measures included expectations that:  
• 
• 
banks should not be increasing their share of higher risk lending  
growth in investor lending should not be materially above 10 per cent  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  appropriate  interest  rate  floors  and  buffers  should  be  applied  in  serviceability 
assessments.  
 It will take time for the full impact of these measures, and of the more recently announced 
increases  in  bank  lending rates, to  become  apparent.  Nonetheless, the indications  to  date 
are that the supervisory measures are having a beneficial effect on lending standards and 
are assisting in restraining new investor finance. There is also some tentative evidence that 
sentiment may now be turning in the housing markets in the two largest cities. But it is much 
too early to be definitive about that. What we can say is that the risks in that sector are now 
being more prudently managed than they were a year or so ago.  
The second main area of risk focus domestically is in commercial property. Historically this 
has been a common source of financial instability both here and abroad. During the height of 
the  GFC,  Australian  banks  remained  in  comparatively  good  shape  but  they  did  suffer  a 
noticeable  deterioration  in  asset  performance,  with  the  aggregate  non-performance  rate 
rising  to  just  under  2  per  cent  of  loans.  A  significant  part  of  that  deterioration  was  in 
commercial property lending; impaired commercial property exposures accounted for around 
30 per cent of Australian banks’ non-performing domestic assets at that time.  
After the post-crisis downturn, the commercial property sector is again experiencing strong 
investor demand, and bank lending to the sector is increasing. However there are a number 
of  signs  of  increasing  risk.  Trends  in  commercial  property  prices  and  rents  have  been 
diverging over the past few years, with prices continuing to rise while rents have been flat to 
down  (Graph  4).  As  a  result,  yields  have  declined.  At  the  same  time,  vacancy  rates  have 
been increasing.  
Graph 4  
Click to view larger 
 As  in  the  housing  market,  conditions  have  not  been  uniform  across  the  country,  and  they 
have  been  noticeably  firmer  in  Sydney  and  Melbourne  than  in  other  centres.  But  in 
aggregate, the major categories of commercial property have all seen downward pressure on 
yields  over  recent  years.  Strong  demand  from  foreign  buyers  has  contributed  to  this, 
reflecting the global environment of low interest rates and “search for yield” (Graph 5). The 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  risks  appear  manageable  at  this  stage,  but  they  underscore  the  need  for  sound  lending 
practices and for appropriate prudence by investors.  
Graph 5  
Click to view larger 
 Concluding comments 
I  want  to  conclude  with  a  few  comments  about  the  financial  stability  role  of  the  Reserve 
Bank2.  
The Bank has a longstanding mandate for financial stability, affirmed for example as part of 
the Wallis reforms in 1998. In the post-Wallis world, this has not been primarily a regulatory 
function. The Bank does have regulatory powers in some areas relating to financial stability, 
notably  in  its  oversight  of  payments  systems  and  financial  market  infrastructures.  But  the 
financial  stability  function  goes  well  beyond  that  to  the  Reserve  Bank’s  wider  role  in  the 
financial system. It includes the Bank’s role as liquidity manager for the system and as the 
provider and operator of core payments infrastructure. It also includes coordination with other 
regulators. At a formal level, this is done through the Bank’s role in chairing the Council of 
Financial Regulators, but there are numerous less formal channels for coordination and for 
sharing information and analysis. These arrangements were reviewed and supported most 
recently in the Murray Inquiry.  
One  important  component  of  our  financial  stability  work  is  the  provision  of  timely  risk 
analysis, to help inform the policy debate and also to help inform the decisions of lenders and 
investors. I have given a summary of our most recent analysis today, and I hope you will find 
that helpful in informing your own investment decisions.  
With that, I thank you for your attention, and hope you have a successful conference.  
                                                
2  For a fuller discussion of this topic, see my earlier speech “The Financial Stability Role of Central Banks” May 
2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
