  
 
Gaston Reinesch: Beyond the horizon of the Luxembourg presidency – a 
central banker’s perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Gaston  Reinesch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  the 
National Bank of Poland’s Biannual EU Presidency Lecture, Warsaw, 27 October 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dear Marek, 
At the outset, I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to the National Bank of Poland and 
in particular to Governor Belka for inviting me to give the National Bank of Poland’s Biannual 
Presidency Lecture, which has already earned an excellent reputation and become a well-
established tradition. It allows to take stock of ongoing developments in the European Union 
(EU)  and  to  ponder  how  it  could  evolve  in  the  future.  I  am  very  pleased  to  be  given  the 
opportunity to address such a distinguished audience here in Warsaw today. 
I. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
His Royal Highness, the Grand-Duc of Luxembourg, during his state visit to Poland in May 
last year, introduced his speech on the occasion of the dinner offered by the President of the 
Republic of Poland by stating that he was touched by an invitation to Poland’s Public Radio 
to pay tribute to Radio Luxembourg, formerly called “Luxy” by the Polish people, and that he 
particularly appreciated the symbolism of this gesture. 
He stressed that existing ties between nations may not necessarily be material but very often 
had immaterial aspects. The fact that the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg became associated 
with values of liberty and a certain “joie de vivre” by the Polish people was for him a source 
of pride. 
Such reminiscence living in the memories and in the heart of people is priceless. 
The paths of our two countries did not often cross directly, but we certainly have something 
in  common,  notwithstanding  our  different  size  and  history.  To  some  extent,  we  share  a 
similar past in the sense that given our geographically strategic location, we too, in a more 
remote  past,  have  been  the  target  of  neighbouring  countries  that  had  expansionary 
ambitions.  But  our  two  countries  have  succeeded  in  overcoming  the  greatest  challenges, 
including historical tragedy. 
The  ties  between  Luxembourg  and  Poland  have  strengthened  over  time.  Today,  about 
5,000 Polish citizens contribute to Luxembourg’s multicultural landscape. I am also very glad 
to say that I recently appointed a Polish national who will soon join our legal department. The 
Central Bank of Luxembourg’s staff is representing 20 different citizenships and more than 
50% of its staff do not have Luxembourg citizenship. 
Poland is a large country, but above all, it is a great one. It is a proud country and rightly so. 
Last year was a year of commemoration and celebration of several important events. You 
commemorated  the  70th  anniversary  of  the  Warsaw  Uprising.  You  celebrated  the  15th 
anniversary  of  NATO  membership,  the  25th  anniversary  of  Polish  freedom  and  the 
emergence  of  a  fully  sovereign  Poland,  a  solid  parliamentary  democracy  and  a  dynamic 
social market economy, with an overall remarkable macroeconomic performance. 
Last but not least, and this brings me to our topic of today, last year you also celebrated the 
10th anniversary of Poland’s accession to the EU. The fact that the current President of the 
European  Council,  Donald  Tusk,  is  a  Polish  national  and  the  President  of  the  European 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Commission,  Jean-Claude  Juncker,  is  a  Luxembourg  national,  might  be  considered  a 
coincidence of European history. At any rate, it fills our two countries with a certain pride. 
Allow me at this point of my speech a brief digression to share with you a few memories of 
my last visit to Poland, which unfortunately dates back to as far as 2001. I accompanied the 
then Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker on a state visit. I have fond memories 
of that visit, not only of the ceremony at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and of the very 
interesting formal discussions, which included an important European component, but also of 
a delightful lunch hosted by a Polish peasant family at their farm house in Lublin Province. 
Lunch was followed by a no less emotional visit to a primary and middle school, during which 
pupils  who  welcomed  us  very  warmly  showed  a  particular  interest  in  the  EU  enlargement 
process  and  the  expected  accession  of  Poland  to  the  EU.  Throughout  our  stay,  we  were 
impressed by the courage and determination of the Polish people and by their eagerness to 
join the EU. 
If anything, this experience strengthened my conviction that one of the basic tenets of the 
European  construction  is  unity  in  diversity.  It  is  my  firm  belief  that  the  enhancement  and 
deepening of unity has to go hand in hand with a good understanding of every current and 
future  member  State’s  characteristics  and  specificities,  in  all  their  dimensions,  notably 
political, economic, and cultural. 
To  be  successful,  Europe  must  continue  to  be  perceived  by  its  citizens  as  an  enriching 
project, economically, socially and politically, a community of basic common values in which 
people can prosper in peace. Without a continued broad acceptance by European citizens of 
the  European  project,  the  necessary  future  steps  of  integration  will  prove  difficult,  if  not 
impossible. 
In this spirit and before I get to the core of my speech, allow me to say some words about 
Luxembourg.  After  all,  I  just  stressed  the  need  to  understand  our  respective  historic, 
economic and political backgrounds. 
Most of you know of Luxembourg as a financial centre, which emerged some fifty years ago. 
But I presume that most of you only have a vague idea of the economic development of the 
Grand-Duchy  of  Luxembourg  since  its  independence  in  1839  and  up  to  the  middle  of  the 
20th century. So allow me to take a longer historical perspective to give you a very succinct 
overview  of  its  economic  development  since  the  middle  of  the  19th  century,  an  economic 
development, which from the middle of the 20th century, was closely co-determined by the 
European integration process. 
Around  1850,  Luxembourg  was  one  of  the  poorest  regions  in  Europe,  an  unproductive 
agricultural economy. The Luxembourg economy then experienced a takeoff, which can be 
described  by  using,  on  the  one  hand,  the  traditional  economic  concepts  of  supply  and 
demand and, on the other hand, the concept of economic integration. 
On the supply side, it all started with the geological discovery of a  natural resource in the 
south of the country, namely iron ore. While the phosphorus content of the iron ore was too 
high  to  allow  for  the  production  of  quality  pig  iron,  this  problem  was  solved  by  the 
technological import of an innovation by a British engineer, the Thomas Gilchrist process, a 
perfect example of cross-border technical dissemination in the 19th century. 
As far as labour was concerned, labour supply was relatively elastic and this for two reasons. 
First,  there  was  immigration  of  both  a  qualified  labour  force,  such  as  engineers,  and  less 
qualified workers coming mainly, but not exclusively, from neighbouring countries. Second, 
domestic migration from the poor agricultural North to the South took place. Thus, farmers 
were leaving agricultural businesses to become predominantly, in the first instance, miners. 
Later on, through learning by doing and educational efforts, the average level of qualification 
of  Luxembourg  nationals  and  of  the  descendants  of  immigrants  increased.  Hence, 
Luxembourg nationals also gradually became engineers, accountants, managers etc. Let me 
also  mention  that  most  of  the  descendants  of  first  generation  immigrants  acquired 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Luxembourg nationality. This explains why so many Luxembourgers have for example Italian 
family names or even Polish ones, given the immigration of Polish citizens to Luxembourg, 
particularly in the interwar period. 
Furthermore, the scoriae, a fallout or byproduct of the Thomas Gilchrist process, provided an 
excellent fertilizer for the poor agricultural soil. Thus, the industrial steel revolution boosted 
productivity in the agricultural sector. The large industrial investments that were needed were 
financed with capital that mainly came from Belgium and Germany. 
There  was  also  an  institutional  or  sovereign  dimension  in  the  sense  that  a  law  voted  by 
Parliament conditioned the granting of concessions of iron ore exploitation to an obligation of 
on-site  transformation  of  iron  ore  to  a  final  product,  thus  laying  the  foundations  for  the 
development of a value added chain on Luxembourg territory. 
On the demand side, there was no significant demand in Luxembourg for the products of the 
steel industry, which, moreover, was characterized by economies of scale. However, at that 
time, Luxembourg was a member of the Zollverein, a German customs union. The Zollverein 
offered  a  large  free-trade  area  for  steel  made  in  Luxembourg  and  facilitated  the  supply  of 
coal, a key input to steel production. Without such economic integration, the steel industry 
would  not  have  been  at  the  origin  of  the  economic  upswing  and,  later  on,  the  engine  of 
growth  of  the  Luxembourg  economy,  and  this  for  more  than  a  century.  As  a  Luxembourg 
economist1 once said: “Just as Egypt is a gift of the Nile, Luxembourg is a gift of iron”. 
Some  fifty  years  ago,  in  the  1960s,  the  steel  industry,  directly  or  indirectly,  accounted  for 
nearly 50% of Luxembourg’s GDP; it was the most important employer and constituted the 
key  source  of  tax  revenue  for  the  Luxembourg  State.  But,  as  history  consistently  shows, 
there is no sustained growth without structural change and without shocks. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  1974  oil  shock,  the  steel  industry  throughout  Europe  suffered  a 
structural  crisis  of  unprecedented  magnitude.  Luxembourg,  depending  very  much  on  the 
exports of steel, was very seriously impacted. It was confronted with an economic crisis of 
national dimension with tremendous potential consequences in macroeconomic terms, and 
which could have entailed the country’s downfall. 
But, around that time, an exceptional and lucky historical coincidence occurred in a country 
that in the 1960s only had around half a dozen commercial banks, a number that was largely 
sufficient to cover the needs of the small domestic market. When the steel industry declined, 
Luxembourg experienced the birth and development of a financial centre, without there being 
any direct causal relationship between the decline of the steel production and the expansion 
of financial services. The initial development and the expansion of the financial sector had 
multiple causes and most of these were of an external origin. 
This said, let me take a step backwards to the period after World War I. After World War I, 
the  German  Zollverein  was  dissolved  and  Luxembourg  had  to  look  for  a  new  economic 
partnership.  In  a  referendum  organized  in  1919,  a  large  majority  of  the  Luxembourg 
population expressed a preference to enter into an economic union with France. However, 
such an interest was not reciprocal and Luxembourg finally turned to Belgium, which led to 
the establishment of the Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union. The economic union, mainly 
based  on  a  customs  union,  became  effective  in  1922.  It  included  elements  of  monetary 
cooperation, which led to the establishment of a monetary association between Belgium and 
Luxembourg  in  1935.  The  monetary  association  was  highly  asymmetric.  Luxembourg  was 
not granted a central bank and was not directly involved in monetary policy decisions. In a 
nutshell, it had no monetary sovereignty. 
                                                 
1   Carlo Hemmer. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
With the introduction of the euro, the monetary association was dissolved. As requested by 
the Maastricht Treaty, Luxembourg established a national central bank in June 1998, before 
the introduction of the euro. 
This very succinct overview shows that economic and political integration have throughout 
Luxembourg’s history been a key factor for the development of the Luxembourg economy, a 
very small open economy, which is export-led and partly import-driven. 
I  mentioned  the  Zollverein,  followed  by  the  creation  of  the  Belgo-Luxembourg  Economic 
Union2  and  monetary  association.  That  process  was  followed  by  European  integration, 
starting  with  the  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community  (ECSC),  and  followed  later  by  the 
creation  of  the  European  Economic  Union  and  the  European  Union.  The  symbiotic 
relationship with Europe has served the country well and the pro-European public opinion in 
Luxembourg  towards  Europe  has  remained  unscathed  despite  the  challenges  the  country, 
the  European  Union,  and,  more  specifically  and  recently,  the  euro  area  have  been  facing 
over the years, especially the global financial crisis that started unfolding some eight years 
ago. 
This brings me to the Luxembourg Presidency’s programme, which is ambitious and based 
on seven pillars: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
I hope you do not expect me to cover all these items. Besides, since an EU Presidency is a 
government-driven process, and since central banks are independent off political processes, 
I will try to confine my remarks to topics that are of a more direct interest to central banks. I 
will  also  seize  this  opportunity  to  share  a  few  personal  thoughts  on  how  the  EMU’s 
governance could be further improved over the years. 
These reflections will be structured in two parts. 
In the first part, I will briefly highlight the ongoing challenges for the single monetary policy, 
and touch upon the macroeconomic outlook for the euro area. 
I  will  then  take  stock  of  key  measures  that  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  European 
economic governance, and point out some possible improvements and avenues that could 
be  explored  to  further  enhance  the  EMU’s  framework  over  the  medium  term,  before 
concluding. 
Stimulating investment to boost growth and employment, 
Deepening the European Union’s social dimension, 
Managing migration, combining freedom, justice and security, 
Revitalising the single market by focusing on its digital dimension, 
Placing European competitiveness in a global and transparent framework, 
Promoting sustainable development, 
Strengthening the EU’s presence on the global stage. 
II. 
The global financial crisis and ongoing challenges from a monetary policy 
perspective 
The global financial crisis that started to unfold in 2007, by any historical standard, gave rise 
to  very  challenging  economic  and  financial  conditions.  Between  2007  and  2013,  facing 
elevated  pressures  in  several  financial  market  segments  as  well  as  contracting  economic 
activity, the ECB’s Governing Council adopted forceful and timely standard and non-standard 
measures.  Against  the  backdrop  of  the  wealth  of  the  Eurosystem  measures  taken  in 
                                                 
2   There also was the Benelux Union signed in 1949 between Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
response  to  the  financial  crisis,  I  will  focus  on  the  current  euro  area  challenges  from  a 
monetary policy perspective and the measures taken by the Eurosystem since 2014. 
An  overview  of  the  measures  taken  in  response  to  the  financial  crisis  covering,  among 
others,  liquidity  management  actions,  changes  to  the  collateral  framework,  supplementary 
longer-term refinancing operations, asset purchase programmes, and forward guidance, will 
be included as an annexe to the written version of this speech. 
Importantly, it is because of the forceful measures taken between 2007 and 2013 that the 
ECB’s  Governing  Council  consistently  provided  an  anchor  of  stability  and  confidence 
throughout the financial and sovereign debt crisis. 
As a matter of fact, despite the severe tensions during the financial and sovereign debt crisis 
and the resulting volatility in economic activity  and headline inflation3 inflation expectations 
remained firmly anchored at levels consistent with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Throughout 2014, however, additional contingencies materialized, with risks extending to a 
worsening  of  the  medium-term  outlook  for  inflation  and  a  loosening  in  the  anchoring  of 
inflation expectations. While standing at elevated levels above 2% in 2011 and 2012, annual 
HICP  inflation  declined  throughout  20134  and  –  in  a  context  of  already  low  inflationary 
pressures – continued its downward trend in 2014. 
Moreover,  survey  and  market-based  inflation  expectations  reacted  to  low  actual  inflation. 
While  the  impact  focused  on  short-term  inflation  expectations,  from  mid-2014  medium  to 
long-term inflation expectations also tended to decline. 
The risk of inflation remaining low for too long a period of time thus became a key concern. 
In  the  course  of  2014,  therefore,  the  Governing  Council  lowered  key  policy  interest  rates 
further and introduced a negative interest rate on the deposit facility in June 2014 (–0.1%, 
further lowered to –0.2% in September 2014). Since September 2014, the main refinancing 
rate stands at 0.05%. 
With key policy interest rates in the vicinity of a lower bound, the Governing Council adopted 
further  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  in  2014,  not  only  in  order  to  address 
impairments  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  but  also  with  a  view  to  initiating  a 
monetary  accommodation  beyond  what  could  be  achieved  through  reductions  in  policy 
interest  rates,  thereby  supporting  the  anchoring  of  medium  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations in line with the Governing Council’s price stability objective. 
In June 2014, the Governing Council announced a series of targeted longer-term refinancing 
operations (so-called “TLTROs”). TLTROs provide long-term funding over a period of up to 
4 years. The exact borrowing terms depend on the volume of a borrower’s lending to the real 
economy (relative to a benchmark that is specific to each credit institution). By combining low 
long-term refinancing rates and positive incentives to lend, TLTROs aim at enhancing loan 
supply and lowering lending rates. Unlike the longer-term refinancing operations introduced 
earlier  in  response  to  the  financial  crisis,  TLTROs  are  specifically  designed  to  provide 
incentives for lending to the real economy, one of the key factors holding back the recovery. 
                                                 
3   While annual HICP inflation stood at 3.3% in 2008, the annual rate of change in the HICP declined to 0.3% in 
2009. On a monthly basis, annual HICP inflation varied between –0.6% in July 2009 and 4.0% in June and 
July 2008. 
  Real  GDP  growth  dropped  from  3.2%  in  2006  to  –4.5%  in  2009.  While  the  euro  area  returned  to  positive 
growth in 2010 and 2011 (2.1% and 1.6%, respectively), the euro area economy contracted by 0.8% and 0.3% 
in 2012 and 2013, respectively.  
4   HICP inflation declined from 2.2% in December 2012 to 0.8% 12 months later. HICP inflation dropped – and 
remained since – below 1% in October 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
Then,  in  September  2014,  the  Governing  Council  announced  an  asset-backed  securities 
purchase programme (“ABSPP”) and a new covered bond purchase programme (“CBPP3”). 
The Governing Council stated that it expected these two asset purchase programmes to last 
for  at  least  two  years.  Both  programmes  are  tailored  to  the  financial  structure  of  the  euro 
area economy. The covered bond market represents a primary source of financing for euro 
area banks and the link to the underlying loans is fairly close. ABS interest rate spreads, too, 
are closely linked to the lending rates banks apply on the underlying loans. 
Therefore,  both  purchase  programmes  complement  the  TLTROs  in  strengthening  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  borrowing  conditions  of  the  non-financial  private 
sector in the euro area and in supporting credit conditions for businesses and households in 
the euro area. 
At  the  end  of  2014,  the  Governing  Council  communicated  its  intention  to  increase  the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet towards the level that existed at the beginning of 2012 in order 
to provide a sufficient degree of monetary stimulus to raise the inflation rate to levels below, 
but close to, 2%. 
Thus,  in  early  2015,  it  conducted  a  thorough  reassessment  of  the  outlook  for  price 
developments  and  of  the  monetary  stimulus  achieved.  Back  then,  it  concluded  that  the 
medium-term inflation outlook had weakened. While the monetary policy measures adopted 
since  June  2014  permitted  a  satisfactory  pass-through  of  the  liquidity  injected  to  private 
sector borrowing costs, the prevailing degree of monetary accommodation was not sufficient 
to adequately address heightened risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation. 
Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  expand  asset  purchases  to 
encompass euro-denominated investment grade securities issued by euro area governments 
as  well  as  agencies  and  European  institutions  (the  so-called  Public  Sector  Purchase 
Programme, “PSPP”). The combined monthly purchases of public and private sector assets 
under  all  three  pillars,  together  called  the  Expanded  Asset  Purchase  Programme  (i.e.  the 
ABSPP, the CBPP3 and the PSPP), amount to €60 billion. They are intended to run until the 
end of September 2016, or beyond if necessary, and, in any case, until we see a sustained 
adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with our aim of achieving inflation rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Given the various channels through which each of the monetary policy measures taken since 
June  2014  operate,  and  due  to  the  well-known  lags  of  monetary  transmission  and  the 
uncertainty with regard to the counterfactual, it is too early, at the current juncture, for a final 
assessment of the final impacts of these measures. 
There is, however, ample evidence that the monetary policy measures in place since June 
2014 have been conducive to an easing in borrowing conditions and have supported credit 
flows in the euro area. Since last year, interest rates for bank loans declined by much more 
than the concomitant reduction in policy rates.5 
In  the  October  2015  Bank  Lending  Survey,  euro  area  banks  reported  a  stronger  than 
expected net easing of credit standards on loans to businesses in the third quarter of 2015. 
Moreover,  net  demand  for  loans  to  businesses  and  for  housing  loans  strengthened. 
Regarding euro area banks’ access to retail and wholesale funding, the October 2015 Bank 
Lending Survey suggests improved access to funding for all main market instruments (retail 
deposit funding, however, deteriorated slightly). Banks continue to report that the additional 
liquidity generated by the expanded asset purchase programme is being used for lending. 
                                                 
5   Between May 2014 and August 2015, the composite cost-of-borrowing indicator for euro area non-financial 
corporations and households declined by 75 basis points and 67 basis points, respectively. Over the same 
period, policy interest rates declined by 20 basis points (main refinancing operations and deposit facility) and 
45 basis points (marginal lending facility). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Finally,  banks  report  that  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  has  had  a  net  easing 
impact on credit standards, in particular for loans to businesses. 
With  regard  now  to  inflation  and  growth,  the  September  2015  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections show a more mixed result. They indicate a continued, though somewhat weaker, 
recovery  and  a  slower  increase  in  inflation  rates  compared  with  earlier  projections.6  More 
recently, renewed downside risks have emerged to the outlook for growth and inflation. At 
the  same  time,  the  2015Q3  and  the  2015Q4  Surveys  of  professional  forecasters7  suggest 
that  the  2014/2015  package  of  measures  led  to  a  stabilisation  of  longer-term  inflation 
expectations. 
It is important to underline that these projections on inflation and on output are based on, and 
are  conditional  on,  a  full  implementation  of  the  Expanded  Asset  Purchase  Programme 
announced in January and on the full implementation of the credit easing measures decided 
in the course of 2014. This monetary policy stance is considered essential for a continued 
recovery  and  a  convergence  of  inflation  towards  our  price  stability  objective.  It  has  to  be 
stressed that these projections were also based on a set of technical assumptions (e.g. in 
relation to international factors, including exchange rates, oil price, and commodity prices). 
To the extent that these factors could change, and could possibly worsen, thereby entailing 
increased downside risks, the current monetary policy stance would have to be revisited. 
In light of the renewed risks that have emerged on the back of recent developments in global 
economic,  financial  and  currency  markets,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor 
very closely the risks to the outlook for price developments over the medium term. It is ready 
to use all the instruments available in its mandate to act, if so warranted. 
While  our  monetary  policy  measures  have  contributed  to  the  euro  area  recovery  and  to  a 
gradual  improvement  in  the  inflation  outlook  for  price  stability,  monetary  policy  is  not  a 
panacea and not the only game in town. 
Our measures should be supported by action in other policy domains to support economic 
recovery and to ensure debt sustainability. Let me mention two of them: structural reforms 
and fiscal policy. 
First, a continuation of structural reforms is necessary and they should be seen beyond the 
confines of national economies. They could, inter alia, increase the growth potential of the 
euro area and make it more resistant to shocks. In this context, one should keep in mind that 
already before the crisis the level of unemployment was too high and the growth of potential 
output too low. One of the most important economic challenges, next to a greater economic 
convergence, is an increase in potential growth with an increase in productivity; this should 
also be seen against the background of demographic challenges. I have elaborated on this 
point in a speech I recently gave at the EurofiFinancial Forum. 
Second,  while  having  to  stay  fully  compliant  with  the  EU  fiscal  rules  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact,  fiscal  policy  can  also  contribute  to  supporting  the  economic  recovery, 
particularly  through  growth-enhancing  public  investments,  material  and  immaterial,  which 
have  a  demand  and  a  supply  effect.  It  also  seems  that  in  some  countries,  including 
Luxembourg, there is scope for tax reforms that could both enhance efficiency and reduce 
inequality, while being revenue neutral. 
                                                 
6   The  September  2015  ECB  staff  (June  2015  Eurosystem)  macroeconomic  projections  foresee  annual  HICP 
inflation at 0.1% (0.3%) in 2015, 1.1% (1.5%) in 2016 and 1.7% (1.8%) in 2017. Compared with the June 2015 
BMPE, the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised down largely due to lower oil prices. The September 
2015  ECB  staff  (June  2015  Eurosystem)  macroeconomic  projections  foresee  real  GDP  growing  by  1.4% 
(1.5%) in 2015, by 1.7% (1.9%) in 2016 and by 1.8% (2.0%) in 2017. The slightly weaker outlook for activity 
than the June 2015 BMPE largely reflects a less favourable external environment.  
7   According  to  the  2015Q3  and  the  2015Q4  Surveys  of  professional  forecasters,  longer-term  inflation 
expectations stood at 1.9% (up from 1.8% according to the 2014Q4, 2015Q1 and 2015Q2 survey rounds). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
Furthermore, against the background of weak investment, the Investment Plan for Europe 
– also referred to as Juncker Plan –, is a welcome initiative and a priority of the Luxembourg 
Presidency. It aims to unlock additional investment of at least €315 billion over the next three 
years by addressing market gaps and by mobilising private capital. Beyond the immediate 
objective to boost investment, the Investment Plan for Europe strives to improve long-term 
competitiveness, human capital and physical infrastructure. 
Let me now come to the governance of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). 
EMU governance: progress achieved and room for further improvement 
III. 
The Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) involves the coordination of economic and fiscal 
policies, a single monetary policy and a single currency, the euro. While the single monetary 
policy  and  the  single  currency  were  established  with  the  inception  of  the  euro  (“monetary 
union”), the financial crisis revealed a clear need for a strengthening of the coordination of 
economic  and  fiscal  policies  (the  “economic  pillar”  of  the  union).  And,  indeed,  we  have 
witnessed  significant  progress,  notably  with  regard  to  the  Economic  and  Governance 
framework, the Banking Union, the strengthening of the macro-prudential framework, and the 
establishment of financial backstops. I will touch briefly on those domains. 
Economic and fiscal governance 
Following the financial and sovereign debt crisis, a number of important initiatives were taken 
with  a  view  to  avoiding  unsustainable  developments  in  individual  countries  that  were 
jeopardising  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  The  preventive 
and  corrective  arms  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  have  been  strengthened  and 
complemented  by,  among  others,  a  macroeconomic  monitoring  exercise  to  address 
macroeconomic  imbalances  (“Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure”)  before  they  could 
become systemic and spill over to other Member States. 
The new rules introduced by a set of legislative initiatives, known as “Six Pack” [effective in 
2011]  and  “Two  Pack”  [effective  in  2013]  and  the  Treaty  on  Stability,  Coordination  and 
Governance  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  with  its  Fiscal  Compact  [also  effective  in 
2013], undoubtedly brought about important changes to the Stability and Growth Pact like the 
operationalization  of  the  debt  rule,  a  stronger focus  on  expenditures, as  well  as automatic 
correction mechanisms that are to be monitored and assessed by national bodies that have 
to  be  independent.  At  the  same  time,  the  new  framework  allows  for  more  flexibility, 
depending in particular on a Member State’s underlying budgetary position over the medium 
term. 
The new rules aim to better prevent deviations from set budgetary objectives and to enforce 
potential  sanctions  more  effectively.  Under  the  current  framework,  surveillance  has  been 
extended to macroeconomic policies through the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure and 
can  even  be  strengthened  for  euro  area  Member  States  with  high  fiscal  deficits  or  public 
debt, or facing challenges pertaining to financial stability. Annual assessments are conducted 
in the context of the “European Semester”. 
However,  despite  the  substantial  progress  that  has  been  made  so  far,  there  is  room  for 
further improvement, both in terms of form and substance. 
First, the economic and fiscal governance framework has become very complex, to say the 
least.  Clarification  and  simplification  of 
risk  of 
misinterpretations and misperceptions. 
Second,  for  a  rule-based  framework  to  be  credible  it  is  imperative  to  apply  the  rules 
effectively.  Recent  reforms  endowed  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  with  some  degree  of 
framework  could 
lower 
that 
the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
flexibility.8  However,  when  interpreted  too  widely,  the  flexibility  of  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact could increase risks related to debt sustainability. 
The Banking Union 
The Banking Union, based on three pillars (i.e. the Single Supervisory  Mechanism (SSM), 
the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  and  the  single  Deposit  Guarantee  Scheme) 
constitutes  a  major  step  in  addressing  some  of  the  major  weaknesses  uncovered  by  the 
crisis. 
Since  4  November  2014,  the  ECB  is  at  the  helm  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM), which will help harmonize banking standards across the euro area and help reduce 
the fragmentation, along national lines, of the banking landscape. 
One  might  argue  that  the  Banking  Union  is  a  corroboration  of  Jean  Monnet’s  famous 
statement,  according  to  which  “Europe  will  be  forged  in  crisis  and  will  be  the  sum  of  the 
solutions adopted for those crises”.9 Indeed, after the financial crisis and, even more, after 
the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  there  was  an  acute  awareness  of  the 
incompleteness of the Economic and Monetary Union. All of a sudden, European integration 
received  a  boost,  this  time  with  the  inception  of  a  banking  union,  which  took  shape  very 
rapidly. The work on the single rulebook started as early as 2009, and, by the end of 2013, 
there  was  the  Capital  Requirement  Regulation  (CRR),  the  Capital  Requirement  Directive 
(CRD IV) and the founding act of the SSM regulation.10 
The establishment of the SSM, which has been a major undertaking, not only in terms of staff 
and resources, was well managed by the ECB. In full separation between monetary policy 
and banking supervision, it ensures independent banking supervision of the highest quality, 
without  interference  of  other,  non-prudential,  considerations.  Significant  progress  also  has 
been  achieved  with  regard  to  the  establishment  of  a  framework  for  the  resolution  and 
restructuring of banks, the second pillar of the Banking Union. 
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM),  established  by  way  of  an  EU  Regulation  that 
entered into force in August 2014, introduces a European framework to ensure the orderly 
resolution  of  banks  covered  by  the  SSM.  Within  this  framework,  a  resolution  procedure  is 
triggered by the ECB which, in its capacity as supervisor, expresses an opinion on a bank’s 
solvency. The Single Resolution Board, which will be fully operational as from 1st of January 
2016, is at the core of the SRM. It is responsible for preparing and implementing the effective 
resolution of insolvent banks, especially significant and cross-border banks, in cooperation 
with the national resolution authorities. 
The EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), adopted in May 2014, introduced 
a single rulebook for the resolution of banks. With the transposition of this directive into the 
national laws of the Member States, national authorities are endowed with the tools required 
to restructure or unwind banks in a timely and orderly manner, minimizing the costs of bank 
failures. Another fundamental measure introduced by the BRRD is the “bail-in” tool. In future 
resolutions and restructurings of banks, shareholders and creditors will have to contribute to 
the  absorption  of  losses  and  capital  recovery  of  the  failed  banks.  In  addition,  banks 
themselves will finance the national resolution funds introduced by the BRRD. From 2016, 
the Single Resolution Fund, which will be built up over a period of eight years, will replace 
these national funds in Member States participating in the SSM and the SRM. 
                                                 
8   See also the Communication “Making the best use of the flexibility within the existing rules of the Stability and 
Growth Pact” issued by the European Commission in January 2015. 
9   Jean Monnet (1976), Memories, Paris Fayard. 
10   Danièle  Nouy,  Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  SSM.  “The  banking  union,  one  year  on”,  Center  for 
European Reform, London, 21 October 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  
 
Further  progress  is  required  in  relation  to  the  third  pillar  of  the  Banking  Union,  a  single 
Deposit Guarantee Scheme. Admittedly, a new EU Directive on deposit guarantee schemes, 
which aims to address the current weaknesses by ensuring a uniform level of protection of 
depositors throughout the European Union and to eliminate market distortions, was adopted 
in  April  2014.  Nonetheless,  an  effective  crisis  management  framework  should  include  a 
credible single deposit guarantee scheme. In light of the pan-European solutions that have 
been adopted for the SSM and the SRM, it would be consistent to take a similar approach for 
the  third  pillar  of  the  Banking  Union.  As  announced  some  days  ago,  the  Commission  will 
make  a  legislative  proposal  on  the  first  steps  towards  a  common  European  Deposit 
Insurance Scheme by the end of this year. 
Strengthening of the macro-prudential framework 
While it is important to supervise individual institutions, it is equally important to safeguard 
the stability of financial systems as a whole by containing systemic risks. 
Back  in  2010,  the  European  Parliament  and  the  European  Council  agreed  on  the  EU 
regulations establishing the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which is responsible for 
the  macro-prudential  oversight  of  the  financial  system  within  the  European  Union.  Since 
then,  the  macro-prudential  framework  in  Europe  has  been  strengthened.  The  CRD  IV  and 
CRR, for instance, introduce macro-prudential instruments that can be applied by designated 
national macro-prudential authorities. In each Member State, National Central Banks play a 
key  role  in  macro-prudential  oversight.  In  this  regard,  but  also  more  generally,  their 
independence is key. 
The SSM Regulation requires that national authorities notify the ECB when applying macro-
prudential  measures  embedded  in  the  CRD  IV  and  CRR  and  take  into  consideration  the 
ECB’s  views  if  the  latter  objects  to  such  measures.  The  SSM  Regulation  also  allows  the 
ECB,  in  cooperation  with  the  national  authorities,  to  adopt,  if  deemed  necessary,  higher 
buffer requirements or take stricter measures than those adopted by the national authorities. 
Despite the progress already made, further advances in the macro-prudential framework are 
necessary. 
First, the macro-prudential framework embedded in the CRD IV and CRR applies to credit 
institutions  only,  leaving  aside  less-regulated  institutions.  While  the  optimal  degree  of 
regulation  imposed  on  less-regulated  entities  remains  the  subject  of  intense  discussions, 
more regulation is justified where such entities carry out activities that are close substitutes to 
banking  intermediation  (in  particular  institutions  lending  to  households).  Macro-prudential 
authorities  should  also  assess  exposures  that  exist  between  credit  institutions  and  less 
regulated credit institutions. 
Second, under the current framework, macro-prudential instruments not included in the CRD 
IV  and  the  CRR,  such  as  loan-to-value  and  loan-to-income  ratios,  remain  in  the  exclusive 
remit of national authorities. Discretionary power of national authorities can potentially lead to 
unequal  governance  structures  and/or  an  unequal  application  of  macro-prudential  rules  or 
instruments. 
Having said that, it has to be recognized that macro-prudential frameworks and policies are 
still in their infancy. The deeper nature of systemic instability remains to be fully understood. 
The development of tools to detect and assess risk is work in progress. It remains the subject 
of comprehensive research, both in central banks and academia. In order to deepen, inter 
alia,  our  understanding  of  macro-prudential  tools,  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg 
recently  signed  a  cooperation  agreement  with  the  Toulouse  School  of  Economics  (TSE), 
which  is  led  by  professor  Jean  Tirole  who  was  awarded  the  Nobel  prize  in  economics  in 
2014. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Financial backstops 
Finally,  let  me  briefly  mention  another  major  contribution  to  the  strengthening  of  the 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  following  the  financial  crisis,  namely  the  establishment  of 
financial backstops for the euro area. 
The European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) was introduced as a temporary mechanism 
in 2010. Two years later, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), a permanent mechanism 
that  may  funnel,  under  effective  strict  conditionality,  financial  assistance  to  euro  area 
Member  States  experiencing 
financing  difficulties  was  established  under  an 
intergovernmental  agreement.  The  EFSF  and  the  ESM,  which  together  have  a  combined 
lending  capacity  of  €700  billion  have,  so  far,  disbursed  about  €250  billion  of  financial 
assistance  to  five  Member  States.  In  December  2014,  the  ESM  Board  adopted  the  Direct 
Recapitalization  Instrument  (DRI),  which  provides  the  ESM  with  the  capacity  to  directly 
recapitalize banks in the euro area under certain conditions, thereby contributing to severing 
the link between banks and public finances. 
The way forward: a longer-term view 
IV. 
Let me now briefly highlight two areas that could be of overriding importance for the more 
longer-term future design and functioning of the European Union and the euro area, i.e. the 
capital markets union and the way towards a type of “fiscal union”. 
The Capital Markets Union 
The  Capital  Markets  Union  (CMU),  which  is  high  on  the  agenda  of  the  Luxembourg 
Presidency, is a major undertaking, a genuine European-wide project. 
The CMU is welcomed by the Eurosystem, which delivered its opinion several months ago. 
On  30  September  2015,  the  European  Commission  issued  its  Action  Plan  on  Building  a 
Capital Markets Union.11 It aims to put in place the building blocks of a well regulated and 
fully functioning CMU in the EU by 2019. While the details of the design of the CMU remain 
to  be  defined,  given  the  complexity  of  the  undertaking  and  the  potentially  far-reaching 
implications, a thorough stock-taking of the issues at stake should be followed by prioritized 
and targeted outcomes. 
The  CMU  is  intended  to  deepen  the  integration of  capital  markets in  the  European  Union. 
Deeper integration would foster the efficiency of capital markets by providing businesses with 
access  to  a  wide  range  of  sources  of  capital  from  all  over  the  European  Union  and  by 
offering  investors  and  savers  additional  investment  opportunities,  thereby  enhancing 
economic growth and job creation. 
In this context, let me recall that the Eurosystem is particularly supportive of measures aimed 
at reviving securitization. It welcomed the Draft EU Regulation introducing criteria for simpler, 
more  transparent  and  standardized  Asset  Backed  Securities  (ABS),  which  allows  such 
securities to be acceptable as collateral and to be purchased by the Eurosystem. 
Financing through the markets and financing through banks should not be seen as a trade-
off, but as substitutes. Banks will remain key players in capital markets, and will continue to 
play  a  major  role  in  credit  intermediation  through  their  role  in  funding  and  provision  of 
information, especially to SME’s. Europe needs a network of strong and efficient retail banks 
offering good service in a competitive context. Europe also needs strong players in financial 
markets,  not  in  the  sense  of  national  champions,  but  in  the  sense  of  genuine  European 
financial actors. 
                                                 
11   Building a Capital Markets Union – Eurosystem contribution to the European Commission’s Green Paper. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  
 
To  bring  about  its  expected  benefits,  the  CMU  should  foster  and  result  in  a  high  level  of 
financial  integration  in  capital  markets  across  the  European  Union,  based  on  an  adequate 
legal and regulatory framework. This framework should be cast wider in order to cover also 
less regulated and more opaque activities, such as shadow banking. 
CMU could imply, inter alia, more ambitious steps towards a greater convergence of: 
– 
– 
– 
Bankruptcy laws, 
Company laws, and 
Taxation  of  financial  products,  including  reflections  on  how  to  reduce  or  even 
eliminate  the  current  taxation  bias  in  favour  of  debt  financing  and  against  equity. 
Although  there  are  complaints  about  the  over-reliance  on  debt  and  the  fact  that 
leveraging is too high, debt is favoured over equity through taxation. It seems to me 
that there is some inconsistency here. 
Towards a type of “Fiscal Union” 
Imperfect labour mobility as well as price and wage rigidities within the euro area do not fulfil 
the conditions of an optimal currency area. Against this background, Heads of Governments 
established facilities aimed at increasing economic and social convergence via (limited) fiscal 
transfers.  Some  progress  has  also  been  made  in  the  field  of  tax  harmonisation  and  tax 
transparency; other initiatives are under preparation. 
Absent the determination among policy makers to share sovereignty in the fiscal domain, the 
economic  and  fiscal  governance  of  EMU  aimed  to  foster  a  high  degree  of  coordination 
between national economic policies. Notwithstanding the various efforts undertaken since the 
financial crisis, over the long-term, economic and fiscal governance in the euro area could 
benefit from being strengthened more fundamentally. 
The Five Presidents’ Report, for instance, concludes that “all mature Monetary Unions have 
put in place a common macroeconomic stabilisation function to better deal with shocks that 
cannot be managed at the national level alone”. 
This  Report  provides  a  comprehensive  study  of  the  key  elements  of  such  a  potential 
common macroeconomic stabilisation function for the euro area, including – among others – 
a  (sufficiently  large)  central  fiscal  capacity,  an  EMU  Treasury,  the  issuance  of  bonds 
guaranteed  by  all  euro  area  Member  States  and  a  system  of  transfers  (with  gradually 
increasing  coverage)  conditional  on  fiscal  discipline  and  reform  processes  owned  by  the 
beneficiaries.  Such  a  move  towards  a  type  of  “fiscal  union”  would  certainly  raise  complex 
economic  and  legal  questions  and  would  have  far-reaching  implications.  Accordingly,  the 
exact design of an effective fiscal stabilisation mechanism for the euro area will and should 
continue  to  be  the  subject  of  extensive,  yet  inspiring,  analysis  and  of  constructive 
discussions.  Such  a  reform  process  requires  the  acceptance  of  citizens  and  must  be 
appropriated by national actors. Reforms without citizens’ acceptance and without ownership 
cannot succeed. Participatory processes and good communication are key. It would also be 
an illusion to think that more solidarity, notably through more transfers, could be agreed upon 
without strengthened institutionalized discipline, inter alia in the fiscal field, as well as without 
any additional structural reforms.12 
 
                                                  
12   I elaborated on the latter point in my opening remarks at the October 2015 Eurofi conference in Luxembourg. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me conclude. 
From the day the six founding members of the ECSC decided to establish a common market 
for  coal  and  steel  to  the  day  eleven  countries  adopted  a  single  currency,  nearly  50  years 
went by. Starting with selective sectoral integration, Europe gradually moved to an economic 
and  monetary  integration,  a  truly  inspiring  achievement.  Meanwhile,  the  euro  has  become 
the currency of almost 340 million people residing in 19 European countries. 
Concerning the adoption by Poland of the euro, the future will tell us when Poland will join 
the euro area. Let me only add on a very personal note that when that happens, I will not be 
discontent. 
The global financial crisis has shown the imperative need to bring EMU to the next level by 
making it more resilient, more integrated and more inclusive. The crisis revealed the inherent 
weaknesses  of  EU’s  economic  governance,  both  in  terms  of  crisis  prevention  and  crisis 
management, and significantly accelerated the necessary reform process. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  European  institutional  architecture  will  need  to  be  enhanced 
further.  My  conviction  is  that  Europe  needs  more,  not  less,  integration,  more,  not  less, 
solidarity and more, not less, mutually shared discipline. We should always keep in mind that 
the  European  project  emanated  after  World  War  II.  It  is  a  project  of  trust  and  peace,  and 
peace  should  never  be  taken  for  granted,  as  exemplified  by  recurrent  geopolitical 
turbulences, including close to our borders, and resurgent nationalism. 
However,  enhanced  solidarity  and  sharing  of  sovereignty  will  only  be  possible  if  Member 
States that decided to become part of a community of shared destiny show rigor and abide 
by the rules they established and will have to establish in the future. 
The  current  dramatic  refugee  and  immigrant  crisis,  which  is  also  a  humanitarian  one, 
furthermore highlights the need not only for short term coordination action but also the need 
for a longer term institutional response. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
 Annexe 
 The recent financial crisis unfolded in three main episodes: 
1. 
Increased delinquency and foreclosure rates for US sub-prime mortgages in 
the second half of 2007 led to acute pressures and elevated volatility in short-term 
funding  markets.  The  Eurosystem  swiftly  reacted  by  conducting  supplementary 
longer-term refinancing operations, taking joint action with the Federal Reserve by 
offering  US  dollar  funding  to  Eurosystem  counterparties  and  by  “frontloading”  the 
liquidity provision to the banking sector within reserve maintenance periods. 
Following the collapse of the US financial institution Lehman Brothers in mid-
September  2008  financial  tensions  intensified  considerably  across  all  money 
market  segments  and  maturities  and  increasingly  spread  to  the  real  economy 
throughout the world. In a coordinated move, the ECB and six other major central 
banks  announced  reductions  in  their  policy  interest  rates  in  October  2008.13  In 
addition,  with  a  view  to  ensure  the  continued  ability  of  banks  to  refinance 
themselves and to support credit flows above and beyond what could be achieved 
through  reductions  in  key  interest  rates,  the  Eurosystem  took  further  liquidity 
management measures. The measures were tailored to the financial structure of the 
euro area economy and the specific circumstances of the crisis. They focused on a 
significantly increased liquidity provision to euro area banks as they are the primary 
source of financing for the real economy in the euro area. In particular, a fixed rate 
tender  procedure  with  full  allotment  was  adopted  for  main  refinancing  operations 
and  longer-term  refinancing  operations.  In  addition,  the  Eurosystem  conducted 
supplementary  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (maturities  of  six  months  and 
1 year)  with  a  view  to  enhance  the  provision  of  longer-term  refinancing  and 
temporarily widened the set of eligible collateral accepted in refinancing operations. 
As part of its “enhanced credit support”, in 2009, the Eurosystem also launched a 
programme of outright purchases, for an amount of €60 billion, in the covered bond 
market,  a  very  important  market  in  Europe  and  a  primary  source  of  financing  for 
banks. 
As  a  result  of  these  enhanced  credit  support  measures  –  in  combination  with  the 
Governing Council’s considerable reduction in key policy rates14 – banks generally 
continued  to  have  broad  access  to  euro  liquidity  and  money  market  interest  rates 
declined  significantly.  With  financial  market  conditions  having  improved  in  the 
course of 2009 and early 2010, the Governing Council gradually scaled back some 
of  the  non-standard  measures  while  continuing  to  provide  liquidity  support  to  the 
banking system at very favourable conditions with a view to facilitate the provision of 
credit. 
Another episode of the crisis started to unfold in May 2010 when market concerns 
about the sustainability of public finances in some euro area countries grew in 
view  of  rapidly  rising  government  debt-to-GDP  ratios  and  increasing  contingent 
these  euro  area  countries  became  severely 
liabilities.  Bond  markets 
dysfunctional.  Given 
the 
the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy,  there  was  a  risk  of  serious  impairments  in  the 
in 
importance  of  government  bond  markets 
for 
2. 
3. 
4. 
                                                 
13   On October 8, 2008, the Governing Council decided to lower all three policy interest rates by 50 basis points 
(minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations lowered to 3.75%; interest rate on the deposit facility 
rate lowered to 2.75%; interest rate on the marginal lending facility lowered to 4.75%). 
14   In the context of subdued inflationary pressures and a severe downturn in the euro area economy, between 
October 2008 and May 2009, the Governing Council lowered the main refinancing rate from 4.25% to 1%. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 5. 
6. 
7. 
to 
introduced  comprehensive  measures 
 
 
ability of banks to provide credit to the real economy. Against this background, in 
May  2010,  the  Governing  Council  launched  the  Securities  Markets  Programme 
(SMP)15 with the aim to ensure depth and liquidity in dysfunctional market segments 
and  to  safeguard  the  proper  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism.  Since  the  aim  of  the  programme  was  not  to  inject  additional  liquidity 
into the banking system, until June 2014, SMP interventions were fully sterilised. 
Having temporarily improved after the announcement of the SMP (and following the 
commitments taken by some euro area governments to ensure the sustainability of 
public  finances),  conditions  in  several  financial  market  segments  in  the  euro  area 
deteriorated significantly in the second half of 2011. The Governing Council swiftly 
took  bold  measures  encompassing  two  longer  term  refinancing  operations  (with  a 
maturity of up to 3 years), US dollar liquidity providing operations and liquidity swap 
operations (coordinated action with other central banks). The two 3-year longer-term 
refinancing operations announced conducted in December 2011 and February 2012 
led to a considerable increase in excess liquidity, thereby contributing to a significant 
easing  of  financing  strains.  In  addition,  the  Governing  Council  announced  a  new 
covered bond purchase programme, for an intended nominal amount of €40 billion 
(November  2011),  co-announced  coordinated  central  bank  action  to  enhance  the 
capacity to provide liquidity support to the global financial system (November 2011) 
and 
increase  collateral  availability 
(December 2011). 
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  continued  to  have  an  adverse  impact  on  economic 
confidence  and  financing  conditions  in  2012,  also  reflecting  a  perceived  lack  of 
determination of governments to tackle the root causes. In mid-2012, funding stress 
in the banking sector was aggravated by a severe malfunctioning in some euro area 
sovereign bond markets, partly related to unfounded fears of reversibility of the euro. 
Very  high  risk  premia  in  some  government  bonds  and  financial  fragmentation 
hindered  the  effective  working  of  monetary  policy.  With  a  view  to  safeguard 
monetary policy transmission, the singleness of monetary policy and integrity of the 
euro  area,  in  August/September  2012,  the  Governing  Council  announced  the 
concept of outright monetary transactions in secondary sovereign bond markets in 
accordance with the monetary policy mandate (“OMTs”). OMTs are subject to strict 
effective  conditionality  attached  to  an  appropriate  EFSF/ESM  programme  as  a 
necessary  condition.  While  OMTs  are  not  subject  to  ex-ante  quantitative  limits, 
liquidity  injected  through  OMTs  will  be  fully  sterilised.  While  OMTs  have  not  been 
activated  to  date,  their  mere  announcement  contributed  to  addressing  risk  premia 
related  to  self-fulfilling  expectations  of  highly  disruptive  scenarios.  While  OMTs 
themselves  cannot  remove  the  root  causes  of  severe  impairments,  strict  effective 
conditionality  ensures  that  root  causes  are  tackled  (a  mechanism  much  stronger 
than in the case of the SMP which was terminated in September 2012). 
While  financial  fragmentation  moderated  in  2013,  inflationary  pressures  receded. 
The annual rate of inflation declined from 2.7%/2.5% in 2011/2012 to 1.3% in 2013, 
on  average.  With  a  view  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  context  of  low  underlying 
price pressures and to foster the economic recovery, the Governing Council lowered 
policy rates further (from 1.5% in July 2011 to 0.25% in November 2013). In the first 
half  of  2013,  also  reflecting  spillovers  from  developments  outside  the  euro  area, 
both  the  level  and  the  volatility  of  euro  money  market  interest  rates  increased, 
thereby  reducing  the  monetary  accommodation  introduced  by  the  Governing 
                                                 
15   In addition, the Governing Council reintroduced some of the non-standard measures phased out earlier (e.g. 
reactivation  of  temporary  liquidity  swap  lines  with  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  a  new  six-month 
refinancing operation). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
  
 
Council.  In  order  to  anchor  market  expectations  of  future  policy  rates  more  firmly 
around a path warranted by its assessment of the outlook for price stability over the 
medium  term,  in  July  2013,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  provide  forward 
guidance. The Governing Council stated that it expected the key ECB interest rates 
to remain at their prevailing or lower levels for an extended period of time. 
Importantly, despite the severe tensions during the financial and sovereign debt crisis and 
the  observed  volatility  in  economic  activity  and  headline  inflation,  inflation  expectations 
remained firmly anchored at levels consistent with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
