  William C Dudley: The US economic outlook and monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Economic  Club  of  New  York,  New  York  City, 
12 November 2015. 
 Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
It is a pleasure to have an opportunity to speak here at the Economic Club of New York. As 
the  current  chair  of  the  Club,  I’m  admittedly  biased,  but  this  is  a  great  venue  to  have  the 
opportunity to share my thoughts about the U.S. economic outlook and the implications for 
monetary policy. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily 
those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.  
Before I start, I want to be clear about one specific issue I will not address today – that is, 
whether or not I expect the monetary policy normalization process to commence at the next 
FOMC  meeting  in  December.  Let  me  just  say  that  my  view  will  depend  on  how  incoming 
data, broadly defined, influences my assessment of the prospects for further improvement in 
the U.S. labor market and my confidence that inflation will return to the FOMC’s 2 percent 
objective over the medium term. 
With that caveat out of the way, how do I assess the U.S. economic outlook? On balance, I 
believe we have been making progress toward our goals, recognizing that a few issues still 
cloud the outlook. Most noteworthy is the fact that inflation continues to run well below our 
2 percent objective. 
With respect to the economic growth outlook, the softness in third-quarter real GDP – which 
according  to  its  initial  estimate  rose  at  only  a  1.5  percent  annualized  pace  –  and  the 
weakness of the manufacturing sector have raised concerns that the U.S. economy may be 
losing some forward momentum. Sharp reductions in oil and gas drilling activity and a loss of 
international  competitiveness  associated  with  the  dollar’s  appreciation  over  the  past  year 
have restrained factory output. Judging from historical experience, the impact of the dollar’s 
recent  strength  has  the  potential  to  be  protracted,  so  that  the  trade  sector  probably  will 
continue to be a drag on growth in 2016. Thus, the manufacturing sector is likely to continue 
to lag behind the rest of economy. 
But  these  negatives  need  to  be  set  against  the  many  positive  aspects  of  the  economic 
outlook.  In  particular,  domestic  demand  continues  to  grow  at  a  solid  pace  as  increases  in 
consumer  spending,  housing  and  business  fixed  investment  all  contributed  to  the  third 
quarter’s 2.9 percent annualized gain in real domestic final sales. A large decline in the pace 
of  inventory  accumulation  was  the  main  reason  why  real  GDP  growth  faltered  in  the  third 
quarter. Because the contribution to growth from inventory investment can be quite volatile 
on a quarter-to-quarter basis, the growth in real final sales probably provides a better sense 
of the state of economic activity than does the GDP figure. 
Moreover, when one digs deeper, the fundamentals supporting domestic demand look quite 
sturdy. For example, consumer spending has been well-supported by real income gains and 
rising  household  net  worth.  Household  balance  sheets  do  not  appear  over-extended.  The 
household  debt  service  burden  is  low,  the  household  saving  rate  is  not  low  relative  to 
household net worth, and household credit growth has been slow. 
Housing  fundamentals  are  solid  as  well.  Decent  payroll  gains  have  supported  household 
formation over the past year and mortgage rates remain low. Housing prices are rising and 
the  constraint  on  growth  in  residential  investment  now  appears  to  be  more  on  the  supply 
side,  as  building  contractors  struggle  to  mobilize  the  resources  needed  to  construct  more 
homes. The National Association of Home Builders’ index rose in October to the highest level 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  since  late  2005.  While  the  housing  indicators  will  likely  continue  to  be  volatile  on  a 
month-to-month basis, I expect the gradual improvement in the housing sector to continue. 
Also, the international outlook appears less problematic than it did just a few months ago. 
Although  substantial  questions  remain  about  the  Chinese  growth  outlook  and  the 
consequences of lower commodity prices for major commodity-exporting countries, we have 
seen two important positive developments. First, the Chinese transition to a more balanced 
growth  path  appears  to  be  underway  –  with  stronger  consumption  and  less  emphasis  on 
investment.  And  the  Chinese  authorities  have  a  range  of  tools  available  to  support  their 
economy during this transition. 
Second,  despite  the  intense  strain  placed  on  many  emerging  market  economies  by  the 
substantial  deterioration  in  recent  years  in  their  terms  of  trade,  this  stress  does  not  yet 
appear to have led to the type of financial system breakage that might lead to widespread 
contagion and large capital flow reversals. In fact, in recent weeks, emerging market equity 
markets have recovered substantial ground and many countries’ currencies have stabilized. 
It is also important that the forward momentum in the jobs market persists. The August and 
September employment reports raised some concerns that the U.S. labor market might be 
faltering.  Those  concerns  should  be  at  least  partially  put  to  rest  given  the  strength  of  the 
October  employment  report,  recognizing  that  the  employment  news  can  be  volatile  on  a 
month-to-month  basis.  Most  noteworthy  to  me  are  the  strong  payroll  employment  gains  in 
October  and  the  solid  0.3  percent  rise  in  aggregate  hours  worked.  Over  the  past  three 
months,  payroll  gains  have  averaged  187,000  per  month,  not  much  below  the  average 
payroll growth of 213,000 per month during the first half of 2015. 
We are now much closer to our goal of maximum sustainable employment than at the start of 
the year. The civilian unemployment rate is 5 percent, not much above the level generally 
viewed as consistent with full employment. For example, in the September FOMC Summary 
of  Economic  Projections,  the  median  estimate  of  the  longer-run  unemployment  rate  was 
4.9 percent.  And,  broader  measures  of  unemployment―such  as  indicators  that  include 
people that are working part-time for economic reasons and discouraged workers who have 
left the labor market but still want a job – have also shown substantial improvement over the 
past year. 
Discerning the degree of slack remaining in the labor market becomes more difficult as the 
margin of unused and underused labor resources shrinks. My own assessment is that some 
margin  still  remains.  I  reach  that  conclusion  for  two  reasons.  First,  broader  measures  of 
unemployment are still high relative to where you would expect them to be given a 5 percent 
civilian  unemployment  rate.  Part-time  workers  and  discouraged  workers  remain  a  potential 
source  of  additional  labor,  and  the  labor  market  participation  rate  seems  low  even  when 
adjusting for demographic factors. If the normal historical relationship between the broader 
U6 measure of unemployment – which includes  part-time workers that want a full-time job 
and  discouraged  workers  –  and  the  narrower  U3  measure  of  unemployment  –  which 
excludes these workers – were to reassert itself, this would imply about an additional ¼ to 
½ percentage point of labor market slack in my assessment. 
Second, we have still not seen compelling evidence that a tightening labor market is leading 
to more rapid labor compensation gains. Although average hourly earnings rose more quickly 
in October―pushing the year-over-year pace up to 2.5 percent – this indicator can be volatile 
on a month-to-month basis, and it has not been borne out by some other important measures 
of  labor  compensation.  For  example,  over  the  past  year,  the  Employment  Cost  Index  for 
private sector worker compensation has risen 1.9 percent, remaining within the narrow range 
of  recent  years.  This  is  important  because  my  assessment  of  what  constitutes  maximum 
sustainable or full employment depends in large part on how a tighter labor market translates 
into  compensation  gains.  At  the  same  time,  one  needs  to  be  cautious  about  interpreting 
compensation trends in the current environment. It is possible that factors such as very low 
headline  inflation  and  weak  productivity  growth  are  holding  down  what  workers  receive  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inflation  expectations  measure 
compensation. Therefore, because of such factors, compensation growth may not provide a 
reliable signal about whether we are approaching full employment. 
To  sum  up  on  the  growth  side,  the  economy  looks  to  be  in  decent  shape  and  is  likely  to 
continue  to  grow  at  a  slightly  above-trend  pace.  Spare  labor  resources  are  shrinking.  But 
there still is some risk that the growth pace could slow as the trade sector acts as a drag on 
aggregate economic activity. 
On  the  inflation  side  of  the  ledger,  I  have  greater  concerns  because  we  continue  to  fall 
substantially  short  of  our  inflation  objective  of  2  percent  for  the  personal  consumption 
expenditures (PCE) deflator. Over the past year, the PCE deflator has risen only 0.2 percent 
– held down by lower import prices and falling energy prices – and the core PCE deflator, 
which excludes the more volatile food and energy components, has risen 1.3 percent. 
There is also some evidence that suggests that inflation expectations are under downward 
pressure. In particular, some survey measures of long-term inflation expectations are at the 
low  end  of  the  ranges  that  have  prevailed  in  recent  years.  For  example,  the  University  of 
Michigan  median  measure  of  inflation  expectations  at  a  five-to-ten  year  horizon  fell  last 
month to 2.5 percent, the lowest level since September 2002. Similarly, the New York Fed’s 
three-year  median 
from  our  Survey  of  Consumer 
Expectations is currently at 2.8 percent, down from 3 percent a year ago. The good news, 
however, is that these declines are very modest in magnitude. Thus, I would still judge that 
inflation expectations remain well-anchored based upon these survey measures. 
Similarly,  measures  of  inflation  compensation  based  on  the  interest  rate  spread  between 
nominal  Treasury  securities  and  Treasury  Inflation  Protected  Securities  (TIPS)  have  fallen 
sharply  over  the  past  year.  For  example,  the  Board  of  Governors’  5-year,  5-year  forward 
measure  –  in  other  words,  what  inflation  compensation  would  be  for  the  period  five-to-ten 
years from now – currently stands at around 1.8 percent, down about 40 basis points from a 
year ago. 
However, I put even less weight on this development than on the survey evidence for two 
reasons. First, the decline in these forward inflation compensation measures has been highly 
correlated  with  the  fall  in  oil  prices  –  a  pattern  that  is  hard  to  explain.  Second,  a  careful 
analysis of the factors behind the decline in inflation compensation suggests that changes in 
liquidity risk premia and what investors are willing to pay for inflation protection account for 
most of the decline, rather than the decline reflecting a change in inflation expectations. Still, 
we need to continue to monitor inflation compensation closely, while recognizing that sorting 
out the allocation of the decline in inflation compensation across the three factors – liquidity 
risk premia, the price for inflation protection and inflation expectations – is admittedly difficult. 
And  also,  the  conclusions  reached  in  such  models  are  sensitive  to  these  models’ 
assumptions and structures. 
Regardless  of  how  much  signal  one  takes  from  these  recent  data,  a  decline  in  inflation 
expectations  below  levels  consistent  with  our  2  percent  inflation  objective  would  be 
problematic  because  inflation  expectations  are  an  important  influence  on  actual  inflation. 
Businesses, for example, make decisions about the size of annual wage increases based, in 
part, on their expectations of future inflation. And, households base their spending decisions, 
in part, on how fast they expect their incomes to rise, and inflation expectations play a role in 
that process. Lower inflation expectations also raise the level of real interest rates, all else 
equal, which can undercut the power of monetary policy to support economic activity. This is 
particularly relevant at the zero lower bound for interest rates. 
If the economy continues to grow at an above-trend pace, then I think worries about inflation 
remaining  too  low  should  begin  to  recede.  After  all,  headline  inflation  on  a  year-over-year 
basis is likely to rise early next year as much of the past year’s decline in energy prices falls 
out of the year-over-year inflation rate calculations. Also, some of the factors holding down 
headline and core inflation are likely to be transitory. Energy prices will not go down forever 
and,  as  the  dollar  stabilizes,  import  prices  will  likely  stop  falling.  In  addition,  despite  these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  factors that are weighing on core inflation, the recent trend of core inflation has been very 
steady,  with  the  12-month  change  in  the  core  PCE  deflator  in  a  tight  range  of  1.2  to 
1.7 percent since the beginning of 2013. This suggests that core inflation should rise once 
these  transitory  factors  dissipate.  Finally,  I  take  some  signal  from  the  fact  that  the  spread 
between the core services inflation rate and core goods inflation rate is wider than normal. 
Core  services  likely  better  reflect  the  underlying  trend,  while  core  goods  prices  are  more 
sensitive to external factors such as the drop in commodity prices and import prices. 
So what does this imply for monetary policy and the likely timing and pace of interest rate 
normalization? As you may be able to infer from my earlier remarks, I think it is quite possible 
that  the  conditions  the  Committee  has  established  to  begin  to  normalize  monetary  policy 
could soon be satisfied. In particular, I will be evaluating the incoming information to see if it 
confirms my expectation that growth will be sufficient to further tighten the U.S. labor market. 
After lift-off commences, I expect that the pace of tightening will be quite gradual. In part, that 
is  because  monetary  policy  is  not  as  stimulative  as  the  low  level  of  the federal funds rate 
might suggest. There is strong evidence that the short-term neutral real interest rate – let’s 
call that r* – is currently quite low, certainly below the level that historically has applied on a 
longer-term basis.1  
A wide range of models suggest that the short-run real r* is currently around 0 percent, far 
below its historical longer-run level that is estimated to be about 2 percent.2 This benchmark 
“neutral” rate needs to be compared to the actual real federal funds rate. If we measure the 
latter  by  subtracting  the  core  PCE  inflation  rate  from  the  nominal  federal  funds  rate,  the 
actual  real  federal  funds  rate  is  slightly  below  –1  percent.  Thus,  current  short-term  real 
interest  rates  are  not  far  below  their  neutral  counterparts,  suggesting  that  the  current 
monetary policy stance is not exceptionally stimulative. 
The notion that r* is currently very low is also evident by more casual empiricism. Simply ask 
the following question: If r* were close to its long-run historical value of 2 percent, would we 
expect to see the economy growing at only slightly above its potential growth rate? The fact 
that the economy is growing quite slowly despite a low federal funds rate and a very large 
Federal Reserve balance sheet suggests that monetary policy currently is not providing that 
much stimulus to the economy. In other words, the gap between r* and the federal funds rate 
is relatively narrow. 
Why is r* depressed and how is it likely to evolve over time? In my view, several short-term 
factors are restraining r*. First, the short-run r* is low because the foreign exchange value of 
the dollar has risen, reflecting both the fact that foreign economies are growing slowly and as 
well as an expectation that the monetary policies of the U.S. and other major economies will 
continue to diverge for some time. If foreign demand picks up and the dollar weakens, then r* 
would  likely  rise  over  time  as  the  persistent  drag  from  the  trade  sector  lessens.  Second, 
short-run  r*  is  low  because  of  the  hangover  of  the  financial  crisis.  For  example,  mortgage 
credit  availability  for  households  with  low  FICO  scores  is  still  very  limited  compared  to 
pre-housing  boom  standards.  This  is  constraining  their  ability  to  purchase  housing,  which 
holds back the pace of residential investment. Also, because the searing experience of the 
                                                
1  This is also a reason to not rely on mechanical monetary policy rules that assume that short-run r* is constant 
over time. The widely-cited Taylor rule, for example, typically utilizes an r* of 2 percent. For my thoughts on 
the…  shortcomings  of  using  monetary  policy  rules  versus  an  approach  that  considers  a  broader  range  of 
factors, see Panel Remarks at the Brookings Institute, October 15, 2015. 
2  The  Laubach-Williams  model  constructed  to  estimate  the  short-run  level  of  r*  estimates  that  r*  is  currently 
about  –0.1  percent.  Dynamic  Stochastic  General  Equilibrium  (DSGE)  models,  which  take  a  very  different 
approach to estimating r*, typically generate similar results. For example, the New York Fed’s DSGE model 
currently  puts  the  short-run  r*  at  between  –0.1  and  0.1  percent.  See  Marco  Del  Negro,  Marc  Giannoni, 
Matthew  Cocci,  Sara  Shahanaghi,  and  Micah  Smith,  Why  Are  Interest  Rates  So  Low?,  Liberty  Street 
Economics, May 20, 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Great Recession has likely caused households and businesses to be more cautious in terms 
of their saving and investment decisions, this has also pulled down the short-run value of r*. 
Some  of  these  factors  should  fade  over  time,  gradually  pushing  up  short-run  r*  toward  its 
long-run value. 
At the same time, there are some longer-term factors that are likely to keep r* below its long-
run historical average far into the future. In particular, potential real GDP growth in the U.S. 
appears  to  have  declined  in  recent  years  –  held  down  by  slower  productivity  growth  and 
demographic factors that are causing the workforce to grow more slowly. This is the main 
reason why I have cut my estimate of the longer-run federal funds rate in recent years. And 
I’m  not  alone.  In  the  FOMC’s  September  Summary  of  Economic  Projections,  the  median 
projection for the long-run federal funds rate was 3 ½ percent, 50 basis points below the level 
of two years earlier. 
My  discussion  about  short-run  r*  and  long-run  r*  has  implications  for  how  I  think  about 
monetary policy. The likelihood that we face a situation where the short-run r* is depressed, 
the economy is growing only slightly at an above-trend pace and inflation is too low relative 
to our objectives, suggests that we need to think carefully whether the time is right to begin to 
normalize  monetary  policy.  Additionally,  the  likelihood  that  long-run  r*  is  lower  than  it  has 
been  historically,  suggests  that  after  lift-off  the upward  trajectory  of  the  short-term  rates  is 
likely to be quite shallow. 
Another factor that weighs on the timing and pace of normalization is risk management. What 
are the relative costs of going too early versus too late? As I see it, there are risks on both 
sides, and I think this explains why reasonable people can differ as to the appropriate path 
for the policy rate. Consider the two main risks of normalizing too quickly. First, we could just 
be too optimistic about our growth and inflation forecasts. Second, we could be right about 
our  forecasts,  but  the  rise  in  short-term  rates  could  provoke  an  outsized  tightening  of 
financial conditions that might cause the economy’s forward momentum to slow more than 
we  anticipate.  In  either  case,  the  economy  would  not  be  growing  fast  enough  to  put 
increased pressure on resources. In such circumstances, underlying inflation might not rise 
and  inflation  expectations  could  become  unanchored  to  the  downside.  Consequently,  not 
only might the FOMC be forced to reverse course and ease monetary policy, but the efficacy 
of  additional  stimulus  measures  could  be  attenuated  by  the  fall  in  inflation  expectations. 
Avoiding a Japan-like experience in which inflation expectations have become unanchored to 
the downside should be an important consideration in the conduct of monetary policy. 
On the other side, there are several risks of delaying the start of lift-off and normalizing more 
slowly. The first one is that the unemployment rate could fall to an unsustainably low level 
that is not consistent with our long-run price stability objectives. Monetary policy works with 
long and variable lags, so overheating is a risk. If overheating did occur, the FOMC might 
need to tighten monetary policy more aggressively in order to keep inflation from significantly 
overshooting  its  2  percent  objective.  In  such  circumstances,  the  risk  of  a  recession  would 
probably climb significantly. In the past, it has been very difficult for the Federal Reserve to 
engineer a soft landing for the economy when it had to tighten policy aggressively in order to 
keep  inflation  in  check.  Historically,  once  the  unemployment  rate  rises  above  a  small 
threshold  of  0.3  to  0.4  percentage  points,  the  next  stop  has  always  been  a  full-blown 
recession.  I  very  much  would  want  to  avoid  such  an  outcome.  A  long-lived  economic 
expansion is always desirable, but especially so in the aftermath of the financial crisis and 
Great Recession. 
The second risk of delaying lift-off and normalizing more slowly is that the low level of the 
federal funds rate may be distorting financial markets and increasing financial stability risks. I 
don’t think this has yet occurred to any significant degree, but it is a real risk that we should 
continue to monitor closely. 
I see the risks right now of moving too quickly versus moving too slowly as nearly balanced. 
The weight that one puts on each undoubtedly influences one’s views on when the time will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  be right to begin to normalize monetary policy and the appropriate short-term rate trajectory 
thereafter. 
Finally,  in  conclusion,  a  few  words  about  the  importance  of financial  conditions  in  thinking 
about the future path of short-term interest rates. Monetary policy does not work directly on 
the  economy,  but  instead  works  through  its  effect  on  financial  conditions.  By  financial 
conditions, I mean all those financial factors that weigh on spending, saving and borrowing 
decisions. Financial conditions include the level  of the stock prices, the level of short- and 
long-term interest rates, the size of credit spreads, the foreign exchange value of the dollar 
and factors that weigh on the availability of credit. If the linkage between financial conditions 
and  the  short-term  interest  rate  controlled  by  the  Federal  Reserve  were  stable  and 
predictable, then there would be no need to also monitor financial conditions. But the linkage 
is not stable and predictable. Sometimes financial conditions loosen or tighten in response to 
economic developments independent of our monetary policy decisions.  At other times, the 
response of financial conditions can be much larger or smaller than anticipated for a given 
change in interest rates. 
Several examples will help me make these points. During 2004 to 2007, the FOMC raised 
the federal funds rate target 17 meetings in a row, lifting the federal funds to 5.25 percent 
from 1.0 percent. Yet, during this period, financial conditions eased, as evidenced by the fact 
that the stock market rose, bond yields fell and credit availability – especially to housing – 
eased substantially. In hindsight, perhaps monetary policy should have been tightened more 
aggressively. In contrast, during the Fall of 2008, financial conditions tightened substantially 
even as the FOMC was cutting short-term rates. Again, in hindsight, perhaps monetary policy 
should have been eased more aggressively. 
How  financial  conditions  evolve  and  how  markets  respond  to  our  actions  are  important  in 
influencing  the  economic  outlook,  and  we  need  to  take  that  into  consideration  in  our 
monetary  policy  decision-making.  When  we  begin  to  normalize  monetary  policy,  will  we 
provoke another “taper tantrum,” or will market participants be relaxed as was the case when 
we actually tapered the rate of our asset purchases in 2014? If financial conditions were to 
tighten more than expected when we began to normalize monetary policy, then I suspect we 
would go more slowly. In contrast, if financial conditions did not respond at all, or eased, then 
I suspect we would go more quickly, all else equal. 
Also, I don’t think there is a particular set of financial conditions that we should target. After 
all, the linkage between financial conditions and the economy is variable and the economic 
outlook is influenced by much more than financial conditions. Thus, I have no target in mind 
for the U.S. equity market or other indicators of financial conditions. But I do care about how 
financial conditions evolve when the changes are sufficiently large or persistent enough so 
they are likely to influence the economic outlook. In that case, financial conditions need to be 
taken into consideration in the design and conduct of monetary policy. 
It has been a pleasure to speak here today. I hope my comments have made it clear that the 
monetary  policy  decision-making  process  is  difficult  when  the  margins  of  excess  capacity 
narrow, but inflation remains below our objectives. The world is highly complex and there is 
much we don’t know about how the economy will evolve in the future. As a Fed policymaker, 
I strive to be clear in my communications. But I can’t tell you today precisely what I’d favor 
doing  in  the  future,  because  that  future  remains  uncertain.  Thank  you  very  much  for  your 
kind attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
