   Nadine Baudot-Trajtenberg: Brief overview of the changing landscape of 
the financial market in Israel 
Remarks  by  Dr  Nadine Baudot-Trajtenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of the  Bank  of Israel,  at  the 
institutional investors conference, Eilat, 2 December 2015. 
 It is my pleasure to be here at the annual conference of the largest institutional investors in 
Israel. Today I’d like to give a brief overview of the changing landscape of the financial market 
in Israel, and particularly to highlight how recent legislation is expected to affect it. 
Particularly I’d like to discuss three central issues that are always present in any discussion of 
financial  intermediation:  the  size  of  the  system,  its  competitiveness  and  its  stability  and 
credibility. 
No one quite knows what the optimal size of the financial sector is for any country. What we 
do know is that if it is very large it is prone to crisis, and the past decade has seen a number 
of  examples  of  overgrown  financial  markets  that  suddenly  and  often  quite  unexpectedly 
deflated rather violently and disastrously for the local economy. 
If  the  sector  is  too  small,  it  will  stunt  economic  activity  and  will  not  play  its  central  role  of 
channeling savings to borrowers (both to investors and to consumers) in a way that sustains 
economic growth. In addition it will weaken monetary policy, as it is the main avenue for the 
transmission mechanism to work itself and impact on economic activity. 
The second issue, and one which is at the forefront of public discourse in Israel, is the structure 
of  the  market,  or  how  competitive  the  financial  sector  is.  What  we  typically  mean  by 
competitiveness is not necessarily how concentrated that sector is, but rather whether the 3 
essential characteristics of a competitive market are present: 
To what extent is the supply appropriate  – or in other words, is access to its services too 
restricted? 
Is the pricing adequate – or in other words, do consumers get the best price for the service, 
the highest interest rate for savers and the lowest interest rate for borrowers of all kinds? 
Is the sector dynamic in that it constantly innovates new and better services for its clients? 
A market that is characterized by often complex products, not easily understood or compared 
by the consumers of those products, as well as by asymmetric information between the seller 
and the buyer, is a market that is unlikely to reach the “competitive market equilibrium” as 
delivered by the invisible hand. 
Last but not least, stability is an issue that is intrinsically attached to financial markets, and not 
to other markets where the fall and rise of companies are part of the normal course of business, 
because there is something about the nature of financial services that make them particularly 
fragile:  the  seductive  appeal  of  leverage.  Anyone  who  has  tasted  it  can  be  excessively 
charmed by it, and when things turn sour the impact on the rest of the economy can be large 
and long lasting – as we have seen again recently in so many countries, including developed 
countries that had presumably well developed and regulated markets. 
The size of the financial sector relative to the economy in Israelis close to the OECD average. 
A few countries such as Switzerland, Ireland and the UK have become financial hubs and are 
exporting various financial services to other countries. In the case of Switzerland, the services 
exports are mostly asset management, Ireland’s are mostly back office services, and in the UK 
it is mostly financial intermediation. The value added of financial intermediation in Israel was 
5.1% of GDP in 2013, slightly less than the 5.4% average in OECD countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Total assets of the banking sector in Israel a share of GDP stood at 127% in 2014, well below 
the OECD median (243%) and average (247%). In fact, the total assets of the banking sector 
as a share of GDP has been contracting for the past decade from its peak of 147% in 2002. 
At the same time, the assets that you, the institutional investors, manage have grown over the 
same period from 67% of GDP in 2002 to 117% in 2014. 
We may not know whether the financial sector is of optimal size, but these figures show that 
Israel appears to be pretty much where one would expect it to be, neither very large nor very 
small – a reassuring figure overall. 
Turning now to the trickier and thornier issue of the sector’s competitiveness, we do not have 
all the indicators needed to make a perfect assessment of the situation, but we do note that 
the concentration in the banking sector is substantially higher than that of developed countries. 
Perhaps even more striking is the area of consumer loans, which is entirely dominated by the 
banks, and in particularly by the large banks in Israel. This was always the case, but as banks 
have  receded  from  granting  credit  to  large  corporations,  they  have  increased  credit  to 
consumers. 
Indeed during the past decade, retail credit, including mortgages, has grown much faster than 
any other type of credit. 
Over the same period, institutional investors have broadened the allocation of their assets, 
particularly with respect to investments abroad which have grown from 8% to 19% of their 
assets between 2005 and 2015. However, they have so far not taken much part in the retail 
credit market, either in mortgages or in consumer credit. The truth is that it is not typical for 
large asset managers in developed countries to enter the retail lending market. 
Institutional investors in Israel have entered the corporate debt market during the past decade, 
despite the fact that this sector shrunk as a share of GDP during that period. 
So  we  know  that  retail  lending  has  been  growing,  but  it  is  dominated  by  the  banks,  while 
corporate  lending  has  not  been  growing  as  a  share  of  GDP  and  has  been  the  subject  of 
competition between institutional investors and banks. 
What about small businesses? First, the importance of small businesses in the Israeli economy 
is similar to that in the other OECD countries, in fact a bit larger, constituting 42% of business 
sector GDP – a significant part of the economy that could be a source of economic growth. 
The banks increased the volume of lending to small and medium businesses from 36% of 
banks’ business sector credit to 44% between 2011 and 2014. An international comparison is 
difficult because the distribution is very wide. 
What about pricing? Well, the smaller the business, the higher the interest rate it pays. Does 
this reflect the risk involved or market power? 
What is clear is that profitability over the past 4 years has been much higher in the household 
and small business sector than for other types of credit. Even if we take into account that these 
years are upcycle years, and profitability is likely to be affected negatively in a downcycle, 
there are good reasons to believe that the higher pricing is in part due to market power. 
Recent  legislation  and  regulatory  changes  will  tackle  this  problem  and  should  bring  the 
institutional investors, to that the small business and household credit market as well. 
The establishment of a credit registry tackles the problem of asymmetric information, while the 
legislation  enabling  securitization  will  allow  institutional  investors  to  enter  the  retail  market 
indirectly – as it is done in many other places in the world – by connecting institutional capital 
with the banks’ ability to grant credit, which will lead to an expanded supply of credit and lower 
financing costs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
