   Eddie Yue: Internationalisation of the renminbi – trends and 
developments 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Eddie  Yue,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the 5th Hong Kong - London RMB Forum, Seminar on RMB Business, Hong Kong, 
11 December 2015. 
 Katharine [Braddick], Peter [Alexander], distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to be hosting the 5th Hong Kong – London Renminbi (RMB) Forum. 
May I extend a very warm welcome to all of you attending this Seminar which forms part of the 
Forum, especially our guests travelling from London. This annual congregation is a reflection 
of the importance we place in the long-established RMB business co-operation between Hong 
Kong and London. 
And, the Seminar could not have come at a better time. Just 10 days ago, the International 
Monetary  Fund  announced  its  decision  to  include  the  RMB  in  its  Special  Drawing  Rights 
basket.  Naturally,  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  welcomes  the  announcement  as  it 
represents  a  milestone  in  the  development  of  the  RMB.  The  IMF’s  decision  reaffirms  the 
Chinese currency’s status as a freely usable currency, and enhances the representativeness 
of the SDR basket. Indeed, based on market projections, the RMB’s inclusion in the basket 
could bring up to US$1 trillion worth of investments in RMB assets by central banks, sovereign 
wealth funds, supranational organisations, large pension funds and institutional investors over 
the  next  five  years.  More  importantly,  I  believe,  the  IMF’s  decision  will  promote  further 
confidence in using the RMB for international trade and financial transactions, giving more 
impetus to RMB’s internationalisation process. 
The IMF’s  decision  therefore represents  a key milestone  in  the  RMB’s  internationalisation. 
Significant progress has also made in other areas in the cross-border use of the RMB over the 
past year. And, I see three important trends emerging: 
Key trends on RMB internationalisation 
First is the continuing liberalisation of the capital accounts with major breakthroughs in new 
policy  headroom  granted  by  the  Mainland  authorities.  The  Shanghai-Hong  Kong  Stock 
Connect  has  been  in  place  and  operating  smoothly  since  November  2014,  allowing 
international investors access to the A-shares listed in Shanghai through the stock exchange 
in Hong Kong, and vice versa. The Mainland-Hong Kong Mutual Recognition of Funds scheme 
was implemented in July this year, allowing Mainland and Hong Kong funds to be distributed 
in each other’s markets through a streamlined approval process. Eligible funds currently going 
through that approval process are expected to be launched in the market shortly. Since June, 
offshore banks have also been allowed to conduct repos in the onshore interbank bond market, 
while  since  July,  foreign  central  banks,  sovereign  wealth  funds  and  supranational 
organisations  have  been  allowed  access  to  the  onshore  interbank  bond  market  without 
investment quotas and to conduct a much wider range of transactions. They were also granted 
access to the Chinese foreign exchange market in September. These have been key steps in 
liberating the capital accounts. 
And there will be more to come. We look forward to the launch of the Shenzhen-Hong Kong 
Stock Connect, and looking further ahead, the Mainland authorities have announced plans to 
consider implementing the Qualified Domestic Individual Investors scheme (QDII2) on a trial 
basis. It’s certainly true that individuals on the Mainland have shown a great deal of interest in 
diversifying  their  investment  holdings.  This  is  an  area  where  we  see  Hong  Kong  having  a 
strong competitive advantage, with our strategic location, our expertise in private banking and 
wealth management business, coupled with our strong client networks on the Mainland. To 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   capitalise on these emerging opportunities, we have been liaising closely with the Mainland 
authorities on QDII2.The second trend is that not only is Chinese capital “going out”, Chinese 
companies are also increasingly "going out". Outward direct investments (ODI) by China to the 
rest of the world amounted to RMB758.5 billion in 2014, a 63% rise over the past five years. 
And, it’s interesting to note that 16% of these flows are settled in RMB, up from a mere 3.7% 
in 2011. 
This “going out” trend has been continuing for some time, but has been given fresh impetus by 
the greater desire of Chinese enterprises to diversify into other non-RMB asset classes. New 
policy measures by the Mainland authorities, notably the ‘Belt and Road’ initiative, has also 
played a key role. According to the Ministry of Commerce, Chinese enterprises have already 
invested a total of US$13.2 billion in 49 countries along the “Belt and Road” in the first ten 
months of this year. The commencement of operations of the Asian Infrastructure Investment 
Bank is expected to bring about more Chinese capital and companies “going out” over time. 
Hong Kong’s deep and mature financial markets will be an ideal place for corporates to raise 
funds  for  infrastructure  projects  and  manage  investments  for  their  ‘Belt  and  Road’ 
developments. The capital investment projects are also expected to create new opportunities 
for the use of RMB in trade and investment activities, giving rise to new opportunities for RMB 
settlement, financing and asset management in the region. 
To ride on these opportunities, Hong Kong has been actively pursuing measures to develop 
into  a  hub  for  corporate  treasury  centres  (CTCs)  as  Chinese  corporates  and  multinational 
companies expand their footprints and increasingly demand centralised treasury management. 
The HKMA has been working closely with the Government to develop a concessionary tax 
regime  to  provide  a  more  market-friendly  environment  for  these  companies  to  set  up  their 
CTCs  in  Hong  Kong,  and  the  relevant  amendment  bill  was  introduced  into  the  Legislative 
Council last week. 
The third trend is that market developments, both in terms of turnover and product range, have 
picked up momentum in the past year. There is a rapidly growing list of products provided by 
our banks in Hong Kong to meet their clients’ liquidity, hedging and other business needs in 
RMB. At the end of April, the daily turnover of RMB foreign exchange transactions in Hong 
Kong had reached US$93 billion equivalent, more than eight times greater than five years ago. 
The average daily turnover of Hong Kong’s RMB Real Time Gross Settlement system also 
exceeded RMB1 trillion recently. Going forward, we should see more products denominated 
in RMB. This is an area where market participants can play their part and why we also think 
seminars like this are important in bringing together ideas and looking at solutions. 
Building market infrastructure 
The  HKMA  has  played  a  major  role  in  promoting  market  development,  with  our  strategy 
focusing on strengthening market infrastructure to support offshore RMB business. 
Indeed, liquidity is the linchpin in growing this offshore business and the HKMA has in place a 
RMB400  billion  currency  swap  agreement  with  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  which  can  be 
activated  when  market  conditions  warrant.  In  addition,  we  have  made  available  an  RMB 
liquidity facility to banks which is currently offering intraday repos of up to RMB10 billion, as 
well as overnight funds on T+0 basis and one-day and one-week funds settled on T+1 basis. 
We have also appointed seven banks as Primary Liquidity Providers (PLPs) and provided each 
with a bilateral repo facility of up to RMB2 billion. These facilities have helped banks to better 
manage  their  RMB  liquidity  and  played  a  significant  role  in  offshore  market  development. 
These  facilities  will  be  reviewed  from  time  to  time  with  the  aim  of  providing  better  liquidity 
support to the offshore RMB market. 
Hong Kong has also developed a highly efficient RMB clearing and settlement system. As I 
mentioned,  its  average daily  turnover  exceeded  RMB1  trillion  recently.  We  will  continue  to 
enhance the service capabilities of our RMB clearing and settlement system to keep pace with 
business growth. Our system will complement the recently launched Cross-border Interbank 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Payment System (CIPS) by the Mainland authorities, making RMB business transactions even 
more convenient. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, China’s 13th Five-Year Plan for 2016–2020 has reaffirmed its commitment to 
opening wider to the world, accelerating the opening up of the capital market and developing 
RMB  as  a  convertible  and  freely  usable  currency.  Financial  centres  like  Hong  Kong  and 
London, with their robust and mature markets, can play a major role in facilitating further usage 
of the RMB internationally. In this context, the Hong Kong – London RMB Forum is an essential 
element in sharing our experiences and learning from each other, particularly in the areas of 
market and product developments. 
I wish you all a fruitful seminar. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
