  DeLisle Worrell: The Barbados IBFS sector and the efficiency of 
international commerce 
Lecture by Dr DeLisle  Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Carleton 
University, Ottawa, 17 September 2015. 
 Small  international  business  and  financial  services  (IBFS)  centres  like  Liechtenstein, 
Guernsey,  the  Caymans  and  Barbados  –  to  take  a  random  selection  –  have  an  enduring 
place in international commerce, because they serve to make the international system more 
efficient.  Through  the  services  that  international  companies  locate  in  these  centres, 
companies are able to offer products and services to the global market more cost effectively 
than  they  would  otherwise  be  able  to  do.  It  is  because  of  this  economic  reason  that  the 
foremost  centres  have  proven  so 
repeated  waves  of 
misrepresentation. The truth, as I will show in this presentation, is that international firms that 
use subsidiaries in IBFS centres to locate appropriate aspects of their global operations, are 
more competitive than those that do not. 
The sources of IBFS competitiveness vary by country, and include the expertise available in 
the  centre,  its  global  interconnectedness,  the  local  penetration  of  information  and 
communications  technology  (ICT),  the  quality  of  life  available  in  the  centre,  the  quality  of 
infrastructure, and many others. Importantly, most centres will offer local expertise that is on 
par  with  London,  New  York  and  Singapore,  at  significantly  lower  costs  than  would  be  the 
case  for  the  large  global  financial  centres.  In  this  essay  we  cite  evidence  of  Barbados’ 
competitive standing in international financial markets. 
resilient, 
face  of 
the 
in 
How IBFS centres contribute to global efficiency 
The main factors which make international firms that use well regulated, well networked IBFS 
centres more efficient than the competition include: 
• 
Such centres may reduce market frictions and information costs to the international 
firms whose subsidiaries they host; 
They  are  able  to  offer  internationally  comparable  skills  at  lower  wages  and  other 
costs; and 
They offer a corporate tax regime which provides for lower taxes on value added in 
the export of goods and services. 
  Because  of  these  factors  the  IBFS  centre  is  able  to  offer  benefits  to  producers  and 
consumers  of  IBFS  goods  and  services,  while  at  the  same  time  providing  an  economic 
benefit to the host country. The investing company is able to produce the services located in 
the  IBFS  centre  for  sale  in  third  countries  at  significantly  lower  cost,  with  no  sacrifice  in 
quality. The third country receiving the finance, product and/or service is able to access the 
output at a more attractive price. The benefit to the IBFS centre is the wages, fees, taxes and 
other value added in the centre. 
There are only a handful of studies which have attempted empirical verification of the extent 
of efficiency gains due to the use of IBFS centres. Naitram (2014) quantifies the impact of 
17 small  centres,  using  data  from  the  IMF’s  Coordinated  Portfolio  Investment  Survey.  His 
findings  were  that  small  IBFS  centres  that  offer  a  wide  range  of  services  transmit  finance 
efficiently from investors to productive end users, largely by reducing market frictions. 
A study by Hejazi (2015) speaks to efficiency gains for Canadian companies from using IBFS 
centres as conduits to the global economy. He draws inferences from the complementarity 
between Canadian outward investment, since Canada became a net exporter of FDI in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  mid-1990s, and the growth of Canadian exports. He finds that the complementarity between 
FDI  and  exports  is  stronger  when  the  Barbados  IBFS  centre  is  used  as  a  conduit  for 
investment abroad than it is otherwise. 
The  study  by  Worrell  and  Lowe  (2013)  reports  that  Caribbean  IBFS  centres  benefit  their 
economies through their contributions to GDP, government revenues and employment. The 
sector is especially important as a source of tertiary level jobs in a labour force with levels of 
educational  achievement  that  are  superior  to  most  emerging  market  and  developing 
economies (EMDEs). 
Barbados’ competitive strengths 
Each  year  the  World  Economic  Forum  issues  a  Global  Competitiveness  Report  on  the 
overall score of almost 150 countries, including Barbados. In the 2014–15 report Barbados’ 
competitive strengths included: 
• 
Health  services:  life  expectancy  is  high,  and  there  are  no  major  communicable 
diseases present; 
Education is of high quality, enrolment is high and most teachers are trained; 
There is a good infrastructure of roads, port, airport, and the reliability and coverage 
of electricity is high; 
The relatively high use of the internet, and the availability of the latest technologies; 
The  low  level  of  organised  crime,  judicial  independence,  the  legal  framework,  the 
reliability of Police services, the ethical behaviour of firms, the strength of auditing 
and reporting systems; 
The soundness of banks and the quality of financial regulation; 
In the labour market, the capacity to attract talent, the high proportion of women in 
the workforce, and cooperation in labour-employee relationships; 
The intensity of local competition, the quality of local suppliers; and 
The number of patents relative to the size of the country, and partnerships between 
UWI and industry. 
    Barbados  has  additional  competitive  strengths,  beyond  those  mentioned  in  the  Global 
Competitiveness  Report.  Important  for  attracting  investment  is  the  fact  that  English  is  the 
native language. Barbados’ cultural and historical ties with North America have undoubtedly 
been  a  factor  in  making  that  region  the  main  source  of  investment  in  the  Barbadian  IBFS 
sector.  The  Barbadian  climate  is  excellent  and  the  society  offers  cultural  variety  and 
convenience that makes for a high quality of life. 
An important source of competitiveness for Barbados is the fact that the country maintains a 
sound, comprehensive and up-to-date regulatory framework for all IBFS activity. Joint teams 
from  the  World  Bank  and  IMF  confirmed  the  soundness  of  overall  regulation  in  the  most 
recent  Financial  System  Stability  Assessment  (2013).  Peer  reviews  are  underway  for 
Barbados under the Global Forum for the exchange of tax information, and under the aegis 
of  the  Caribbean  Financial  Action  Task  Force  on  money  laundering.  This  regulatory 
framework  is  a  competitive  strength  for  Barbados,  in  an  international  market  where  it  has 
become vital for companies and financial institutions to protect their good name. 
Barbados is proactive in international fora, including the Steering Group of the Global Forum, 
the  Regional  Consultative  Group for  the  Americas  of the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the 
Working Group on Financial Issues of the CFATF. 
Another  competitive  aspect  in  which  Barbados  has  an  edge  is  the  country’s  large  and 
growing network of Double Taxation Agreements (DTAs) and Bilateral Investment Treaties 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  (BITs). The list of countries with  whom Barbados has DTAs and BITs is given in Tables 1 
and 2. 
Table 1: Double Taxation Agreements (DTAs) 
Double Taxation Agreements in Force 
DTAs Awaiting Ratification 
•  Ghana 
•  Italy 
•  Portugal 
•  Rwanda 
•  UAE 
Iceland, 2012 
•  Austria, 2007 
•  Bahrain, 2013 
•  Botswana, 2005; protocol, 2015 
•  Canada, 1980; protocol, 2013 
•  Caricom, 1995 
•  China, 2000; protocol, 2010 
•  Cuba, 2000 
•  Czech Republic, 2012 
•  Finland, 1989; protocol 2012 
• 
•  Luxembourg, 2011 
•  Malta, 2002; protocol, 2014 
•  Mauritius, 2005 
•  Netherlands, 2007 
•  Norway, 1990; protocol, 2012 
•  Panama, 2011 
•  Qatar, 2013 
•  San Marino, 2013 
•  Singapore, 2014 
•  Spain, 2011 
•  Sweden, 1991; protocol, 2012 
•  Switzerland, 1963 
•  UK, revised 2012 
•  USA, 1984; protocols 1991, 2004 
•  Venezuela, 2001  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Table 2: Bilateral Investment Treaties 
BITs in Force  
BITs Awaiting Ratification 
•  Benelux countries 
•  Ghana 
•  Canada, 1997 
•  China, 1999 
•  Cuba, 1998 
•  Germany, 2002 
• 
•  Mauritius, 2005 
•  Switzerland, 1995 
•  UK, 1993 
•  Venezuela, 1995 
Italy, 1997 
Activities in the Barbados IBFS sector 
The  legal  framework  for  IBFS  activities  in  Barbados  may  be  described  under  four  heads. 
First  there  are  international  business  companies  (IBCs)  involved  in  a  wide  range  of 
commercial and funding activities, which are exempt from capital controls. These companies 
are not permitted to offer services to Barbadian residents. 
Financial institutions which fall into this category receive a separate license, which requires 
them  to  be  supervised  either  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados  or  the  Barbados  Financial 
Services Authority, in accordance with the relevant international supervisory norms. 
Some  firms  find  it  preferable  to  register  as  domestic  companies,  even  though  they  offer 
services only to non-residents. In such cases the company may benefit from a preferential 
domestic  corporation  tax,  which  offers  rebates  based  on  the  percentage  of  exports  in  the 
firm’s output. The firm then may qualify for exemption of revenues earned in Barbados under 
an appropriate DTA. 
The fourth element in the legal framework is a special “carve out” from the Barbados DTA for 
Canadian insurance companies which qualify. These so-called exempt insurance companies 
gain relief under guidelines specific to the activity. 
The future 
Barbados is a competitive, high quality provider of IBFSs. International companies are able 
to  increase  their  competitive  offerings  on  the  global  market  by  judicious  use  of  Barbados’ 
IBFS  centre.  The  economic  logic  that  is  driven  by  competitive  forces  is  what  drives 
expectations of continuing growth of IBFS services in Barbados and elsewhere. 
September 17, 2015 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
