   
Fritz Zurbrügg: A new premise for Swiss National Bank monetary policy? 
Speech by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the KOF Forecast Conference, Zurich, 1 October 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  your  invitation  to  the  KOF  Forecast  Conference.  Economic 
forecasts play an important role in investment and consumer decisions. They are also a central 
parameter in the economic decision-making process of public institutions. At the same time, 
we  know  that  economic  forecasts  are  associated  with  considerable  uncertainty.  Even 
comprehensive  models  only  represent  a  very  simplified  presentation  of  a  complex  reality. 
Assumptions based on the forecasts can quickly be overtaken by events. In this regard, 2015 
is a very special year for the forecasting institutions in Switzerland. The decision by the Swiss 
National Bank (SNB) of 15 January to discontinue the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 to 
the euro and to lower the interest rate on sight deposit accounts at the SNB to –0.75% rendered 
important assumptions of the existing forecast obsolete. After the decision, the Swiss franc 
appreciated  sharply.  At  the  same  time,  interest  rates  in  the  money  and  capital  markets 
continued to fall and are now predominantly in negative territory. 
Some  market  analysts  have  asked  themselves  whether  this  situation  has  brought  about  a 
fundamental change of premise or creates an entirely new set of parameters for the Swiss 
economy and the SNB’s monetary policy. Even if the extent of the slowdown in growth was 
assessed differently by the different forecasting institutions, there can be no doubt about it: 
The  SNB’s  decision  has  had 
the  Swiss  economy. 
Notwithstanding this, I will argue in my remarks that – while the current situation is unique – 
with regard to both the Swiss franc exchange rate and the interest rate environment – it is not 
fundamentally new. I will therefore focus first on the magnitude of the Swiss franc strength. 
Afterwards,  I  will  examine  the  importance  of  the  negative  interest  rate  in  the  current 
environment. Finally, in the last part of my speech, I will discuss the impact of low interest rates 
on financial stability. 
far-reaching  consequences 
for 
Consequences of the strong Swiss franc 
Let  me  start  by  looking  at  the  exchange  rate.  Since  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum 
exchange  rate,  the  Swiss  franc  has  appreciated  considerably,  and  many  industries  and 
companies have been – and continue to be – affected. The export industry, in particular, is 
suffering. However, companies exposed to competition from abroad, retail businesses close 
to the border, the tourism industry and domestic suppliers of exporters are also facing major 
challenges.  While  the  current  situation  is  difficult,  a  strong  Swiss  franc  does  not  in  itself 
fundamentally change the parameters for Switzerland. Switzerland’s economic and political 
stability and the structural current account surplus has created considerable demand for our 
currency in the past, too. Moreover, uncertainties or crises have often cemented the Swiss 
franc’s safe haven status, resulting in additional cyclical appreciation. 
The  favourable  position  of  our  economy  by  international  standards  shows  that  a  strong 
currency can have a positive overall impact in the long term. Companies are under constant 
pressure to cut costs and innovate and this strengthens the economy’s adaptability, flexibility 
and productivity. Quality improvements and specialisation ensure that foreign customers have 
few  comparable  alternatives  to  many  Swiss  export  products.  Companies  therefore  have  a 
certain pricing power. At the same time, the strong Swiss franc helps to further integrate the 
Swiss economy into the global value chain. Here, too, the negative impact for Swiss suppliers 
contrasts with positive long-term effects. A SECO study shows that greater integration in the 
global value chain – thanks to the associated natural hedging – helps to alleviate the negative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   
effect of an appreciation on profit margins.1 Many companies are therefore able to absorb the 
effects not only by adopting internal cost-cutting measures, but also via lower import prices. 
Overall,  then,  we  may  assert  that  specialising  in  high-quality  products  and  services  which 
exhibit  high  value  added  and  cannot  be  easily  substituted,  on  the  one  hand,  and  natural 
hedging on the other hand, make the Swiss economy more resilient to appreciation shocks. 
My comments so far may appear overly positive. This is why it is important to me to make three 
reservations. First, using the trade-weighted real exchange rate, chart 1 shows that the Swiss 
economy has already had to live with exchange rate fluctuations in the past. However, the 
appreciation since 2007 is of an entirely different quality and even the appreciation shocks of 
the 1970s and 1990s pale in comparison. In particular, it must be borne in mind that the speed 
of appreciation was particularly high this time around. It is much more difficult to digest a rapid 
appreciation since it leaves companies with less time to initiate the process of adaptation. Even 
companies that would normally be in a position to absorb an appreciation and maintain their 
competitiveness are coming under pressure. 
Second, it must be emphasised that, on average, the export volume of Swiss products has 
reacted comparatively little to exchange rate movements. The qualification on average is an 
important one. In fact, the dependence on exchange rate movements of the two largest sectors 
in  terms  of  export  share  (chemicals,  including  pharmaceutical  products,  and  precision 
instruments  and  watches)  is  distinctly  below  average.  Thus,  these  sectors’  share  of  total 
exports has gone up over time. By contrast, the adjustments some companies and industries 
have made to the strong franc have been – and still are – so far-reaching that they are having 
to completely rethink their future in Switzerland. 
Third, I am aware that it is easy for an outside observer to talk about the advantages of a strong 
currency. At the same time, the SNB’s various direct contacts with companies allow us to gain 
concrete insights into current problems. During the last six months, my colleagues from the 
Governing  Board  and  I  have  held  frequent  meetings  with  representatives  of  the  business 
community; these discussions were very heated. It is therefore clear to me that adjustments to 
a strong currency do not happen just like that. On the contrary. Adjustment processes as a 
result of appreciation shocks are always very painful. Underlying these processes is a great 
willingness  to  take  risks  on  the  part  of  companies  and  investors,  and  a  high  level  of 
commitment and flexibility from employees. 
In addition, our eight delegates for regional economic relations are constantly in touch with 
companies from different industries throughout Switzerland. The results of the special survey 
on the effects of Swiss franc appreciation conducted in the last two quarters show that a large 
portion  (70%)  of  the  companies  surveyed  are  being  negatively  affected  by  Swiss  franc 
appreciation. Many companies’ margins have come under pressure. However, the surveys 
also illustrate how quickly – and differently – companies have reacted to the challenges. The 
fact  that  our  most  current  survey  suggests  a  slightly  improved  economic  outlook  is 
encouraging. 
Economic developments abroad are even more crucial for Swiss exports than the exchange 
rate. The importance of global economic trends for our country can be clearly seen in chart 2. 
It  shows  that  downturns  in  world  trade  and  dips  in  growth  in  Switzerland  occur  almost 
concurrently. But the characteristics of demand from abroad differ in important ways. Internal 
SNB studies have shown that short-term changes in demand from neighbouring countries have 
an  especially  strong  effect  on  exports;  in  the  case  of  demand  from  emerging  economies, 
                                                 
1   D. Fauceglia, A. Lassmann, A. Shingal and M. Wermelinger, Backward Participation in Global Value Chains 
and Exchange Rate Driven Adjustment of Swiss Exports, study on behalf of the State Secretariat for Economic 
Affairs SECO, 2015. A study by the World Bank has revealed that exchange rate elasticity of industries has 
decreased worldwide. Closer global integration of the value chain was also cited as the main reason for this 
development  (S.  Ahmed,  M.  Appendino  and  M.  Ruta,  Depreciations  without  Exports?  World  Bank  Policy 
Research Paper, 2015). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   
however, long-term developments play a more significant role than they do in the advanced 
economies. This is why, in recent years, the export industry has increasingly orientated itself 
towards these emerging economies, where growth has also been considerably stronger. The 
greater  importance  of  these  regions  was  particularly  beneficial  during  the  financial  crisis 
because demand from emerging economies fell much less, and recovered more quickly, than 
demand from the traditional export markets of Europe and the US. 
What support can the Swiss economy currently expect from global demand? In the monetary 
policy  assessment  two  weeks  ago,  the  SNB  stated  that  the  US  and  the  UK  saw  robust 
economic development in the first half of the year. The muted recovery in Europe continued 
as  well,  due  partly  to  the  favourable  exchange  rate  situation.  By  contrast,  the  emerging 
economies presented a mixed picture. Some countries registered a decline in growth, and 
uncertainty regarding economic developments in China has increased. Consequently, growth 
was  not  broad-based  internationally,  which  was  also  reflected  in  the  lack  of  momentum  in 
global trade (cf. chart 2). 
We  nevertheless  expect  the  moderate  pace  of  global  economic  recovery  to  continue. 
Expansionary monetary policy and low commodity prices are supporting economic activity in 
the  advanced  economies.  This  is  a  positive  development  for  the  outlook  in  Switzerland.  If 
global  economic  growth  continues  at  the  same  moderate  pace,  this  will  help  mitigate  the 
negative effects of the strong Swiss franc. Export activity should thus become a growth driver 
again. Domestic demand will also support the economy. For these reasons, we anticipate that 
economic  conditions  will  improve  somewhat  in  the  second  half  of  the  year.  However, 
uncertainty remains high. For 2015 we expect real gross domestic product (GDP) to grow by 
just under 1%. 
The difference is in the differential 
Let  us  now  turn  to  the  interest  rate  environment.  Did  our  decision  of  15  January  cause  a 
fundamental  shift  in  parameters  in  this  area?  No.  I  am,  of  course,  aware  that,  since  the 
introduction  of  negative  interest  on  banks’  and  other  financial  market  participants’  sight 
deposits at the SNB, many money and capital market interest rates start with a minus sign 
rather than a plus. For instance, yields on Confederation bonds with terms of up to ten years 
are currently negative. So, mathematically speaking, the parameters have indeed shifted. 
But what is important for the Swiss franc, and thus for the Swiss economy, is not domestic 
interest rates in an absolute sense, but relatively speaking – i.e. the differential between Swiss 
and foreign interest rates. Historically, Swiss nominal interest rates have tended to co-move 
with those in other countries, albeit usually at lower levels, especially when compared to the 
euro area. The comparatively low interest rates in Switzerland are, first, the result of low and 
stable inflation. Second, they provide incentives for capital outflows, which are the counterpart 
of the traditional current account surplus. Since the financial crisis, interest rates have dipped 
towards the zero lower bound in many advanced economies, so that this classic rate differential 
has virtually disappeared. In order to re-establish a clear differential, the SNB has lowered its 
reference interest rate into negative territory, exerting downward pressure on the entire Swiss 
interest  rate  curve.  As  chart  3  shows,  using  yields  from  Swiss  and  German  five-year 
government  bonds,  since  then  the  interest  rate  differential  to  other  countries  has  widened 
again.  Similar  developments  can  also  be  observed  for  all  other  bond  maturities. Thus,  the 
situation as regards the interest rate differential has not changed since 15 January; rather, it 
has partly normalised thanks to the negative interest rate. 
So the introduction of negative interest achieved an important objective. Lower interest rates 
make Swiss franc investments less attractive compared to foreign investments. Of course, the 
interest rate differential is not the only factor behind the demand for Swiss francs. For this 
reason, it is not always easy to determine when, and how strongly, it will influence the Swiss 
franc exchange rate. However, if all other factors remain the same, there is less demand for 
investments in Switzerland – and thus for Swiss francs – when Swiss interest rates decline. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   
But I am also aware that negative interest rates do not constitute business as usual. In addition 
to the interest rate differential, nominal interest rates will themselves also return to normal. For 
this to happen, economic conditions abroad will need to improve to the point that interest rates 
in Switzerland can rise without causing the Swiss franc to strengthen further. This is currently 
not the case. At the most recent monetary policy assessment, we decided to leave the target 
range for the three-month Libor unchanged at between −1.25% and –0.25%. The interest rate 
on sight deposits at the SNB remains at –0.75%. Despite a slight depreciation, the franc is 
currently still significantly overvalued. We are convinced that negative interest rates and the 
SNB’s  willingness  to  intervene  as  required  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  will  make 
investments in Swiss francs less attractive; both of these factors serve to weaken the Swiss 
franc. The provisional inflation forecast in chart 4 is also based on a depreciation, along with a 
Libor rate of –0.75%. The chart shows that, over the short term, inflation will be lower than 
forecast in June, owing to the lower oil price. However, it will return to positive territory in the 
medium term. 
Negative interest and financial stability 
So  the  negative  interest  rate  is  currently  essential  to  ensure  appropriate  monetary  policy 
conditions for the Swiss economy. But we also know that low interest rates, and in particular a 
prolonged period of low rates, pose a risk to financial stability. Experience in many countries 
has  shown  that  such  conditions  provide  fertile  ground  for  imbalances  to  develop  in  credit 
markets and asset prices.2 Indeed, under normal circumstances, lower money market interest 
rates lead via transmission channels to lower credit and mortgage rates. In Switzerland, the 
focus is on the mortgage and real estate markets, as around 85% of private domestic loans 
are  in  the  mortgage  segment.  Chart  5  shows  that,  despite  negative  money  market  rates, 
mortgage rates have not fallen; they have even risen slightly. Movements in mortgage market 
rates seem to have become decoupled from SNB monetary policy. How can this development 
be explained? 
It  is  true  that  a  lowering  of  interest  rates  into  negative  territory  differs  from  a  conventional 
interest rate cut in terms of its transmission to mortgage rates.3 This is because interest on 
deposits and savings make up a considerable portion of banks’ refinancing costs. Whereas, in 
a positive interest rate environment, banks would not hesitate to pass on falling money market 
rates to holders of deposit and savings accounts, when rates are negative, they are reluctant 
to do so. This reluctance can partly be explained by the fact that retail bank customers regard 
cash holdings as an attractive alternative to bank deposits, and could withdraw their deposits 
if interest rates turn negative, thereby depriving the banks of an important refinancing source. 
Thus, uncertainty over the collective behaviour of bank customers could be seen as a factor 
dissuading banks from passing on negative interest rates. As a result, banks’ liability margins 
– the difference between the interest on a maturity-matched alternative funding source and the 
interest on deposits – have dipped into negative territory.4 This is clearly illustrated in chart 6. 
Banks have responded to the pressure on liability margins by raising mortgage rates (i.e. by 
increasing the asset margin). 
In principle, the slight rise in mortgage rates is good news from a financial stability standpoint. 
So  can  negative  interest  rates  even  be  regarded  as  a  tool  to  combat  imbalances  on  the 
                                                 
2   Cf., for instance, O. Jordà, M.HP. Schularick & A.M. Taylor, Betting the House, NBER Working Paper 20771, 
2014, M.D. Bordo & J. Landon-Lane, Does Expansionary Monetary Policy Cause Asset Price Booms; Some 
Historical and Empirical Evidence, NBER Working Paper 19585, 2013, or L. Gambacorta, The Risks of Low 
Interest Rates, Ensayos Sobre Política Económica, 29, 64: 14-31, 2011. 
3   The same applies to all bank loans. 
4   The  bank’s  total  margin  is  made  up  of  three  components:  asset  margin,  liability  margin  and  transformation 
margin, minus any hedging costs (so-called structural contribution). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   
mortgage and real estate markets? In my opinion, the answer is no, since, in a longer-term 
perspective, mortgage rates are still at very low levels. And imbalances on the mortgage and 
real  estate  markets  remain  high.  Chart  7a  illustrates  this  using  the  relationship  between 
developments in real estate prices and rents, while chart 7b does the same using the ratio of 
outstanding mortgages to GDP. In addition, despite a slight rise in mortgage rates, there are a 
number of other channels through which the prevailing low interest rate environment could 
further increase the risks to financial stability. I would now like to look at three of these risks in 
greater detail. 
Risks to financial stability 
First, in the real estate market, there is an increasing focus on movements in the prices of 
residential investment property. Both private and institutional investors, such as pension funds 
and insurance companies, can boost the demand for real estate investments even further, 
either through the search for yield, or because of a lack of other investment opportunities. 
Yields on real estate investments continue to be well above those on alternative investments, 
as shown in chart 8a, which compares yields on ten-year Confederation bonds with those on 
investments in residential real estate.5 This yield difference could cause demand to stay high 
for the near future, thereby pushing prices up even further. Although the borrowing component 
in  investment  property  financing  tends  to  be  lower  than  in  owner-occupied  real  estate, 
domestically focused banks are exposed to this segment. One-third of new mortgages are 
issued for residential investment property, yet the affordability risk for such property owned by 
private individuals is roughly as high as for owner-occupied real estate. Moreover, a correction 
in this segment can affect other real estate market segments, via changes in market confidence 
and  expectations  (spillover  effects).  So  we  need  to  keep  a  close  watch  on  the  residential 
investment property segment. 
A second risk arises due to falling liability margins in an environment of low interest rates. To 
offset these, a bank essentially has two options – apart from increasing its lending interest rate. 
Both options are associated with higher interest rate risk, which in turn increases the risks to 
financial stability. First, it can grant a higher proportion of long-term loans at higher interest 
rates,  as  they  generate  higher  interest  revenue  than  short-term  loans.  However,  this  also 
increases the so-called maturity mismatch.6 The greater the maturity mismatch, the higher the 
interest rate risk, and thus the potential economic losses for the bank in the event of a sudden 
interest rate rise. This is because the larger the maturity mismatch, the quicker the rise in 
refinancing  costs  compared  to  long-term  fixed  interest  income  when  interest  rates  go  up. 
Second,  a  bank  which  has  hitherto  hedged  against  interest  rate  risk  might  be  tempted  to 
dispense with such hedging, and the associated costs. Chart 8b shows that interest rate risk 
has indeed risen in periods of low interest rates or, as happened between 2009 and 2014, has 
remained at high levels. At the current margin, we are seeing first signs that risk has once 
again increased slightly since the introduction of negative interest. 
A third potential risk to financial stability arises from the fact that, in the prevailing interest rate 
environment, non-banks such as insurance companies and pension funds in search of yield 
also  find  the  prospect  of  granting  mortgage  loans  attractive.  Even  though  currently  only  a 
relatively small portion of mortgages is granted by non-banks, it is doubtful whether the banks 
will  be  able  to  maintain  the  current  elevated  asset  margin  on  new  mortgage  loans  in  a 
prolonged period of negative interest rates. The increased competition as a result of non-bank 
                                                 
5   Yields on real estate investments are often compared with those on Confederation bonds. The different levels 
of risk on these asset classes do justify a certain risk premium or yield spread, but that spread is currently very 
high. We can thus assume that there is a significant spread, even after the different levels of risk are taken into 
account. 
6   The term maturity mismatch describes an imbalance between the usually longer repricing maturity on the assets 
side (e.g. for mortgage loans) and the shorter repricing maturity on the liabilities side. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
   
participation could reduce banks’ scope for raising mortgage rates. From a financial stability 
perspective, the resulting squeeze on profits could ultimately lead to banks having insufficient 
reserves with which to increase or maintain their capital levels. This reduces the resilience of 
the banking system and increases the risks to financial stability. 
In  sum,  I  can  say  that  particular  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  financial  stability  in  an 
environment of persistently low interest rates, especially when combined with negative interest 
rates. Therefore, the slightly slower momentum currently being observed on the mortgage and 
real estate markets is welcome, but we should nevertheless remain alert. 
Conclusion 
In a number of respects, the current situation is unusual for Switzerland and its economy. The 
significant overvaluation of the Swiss franc and the very low, or even negative, interest rates 
pose a major challenge for economic agents and authorities – in particular the SNB. Yet, as I 
have explained, our monetary policy has not changed fundamentally. As a small economy that 
is  strongly  interconnected  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  Switzerland  is  heavily  dependent  on 
economic  developments  abroad,  and  will  remain  so.  These  developments  can  explain  the 
current strength of the Swiss franc, but they are also part of what has driven the exceptionally 
low interest rates in Switzerland. 
Neither  the  strong  currency  nor  low  interest  rates  are  new  phenomena.  Rather,  they  are 
traditional characteristics of the Swiss economy, which have had a positive effect on living 
standards  in  the  past.  But  the  weak  recovery  of  the  global  economy  and  persistently  high 
uncertainty since the 2008 financial crisis have meant that these characteristics have become 
much more pronounced. The Swiss economy is accustomed to dealing with difficult exchange 
rate conditions, and has demonstrated its versatility time and time again. However, the Swiss 
franc is particularly overvalued at the moment. The SNB’s current monetary policy reflects this 
challenging  environment.  The  negative  interest  rate  on  sight  deposits,  together  with  the 
willingness to intervene on the foreign exchange market as necessary, make it less attractive 
to hold Swiss francs and thereby support a further weakening of the currency. At the same 
time,  the  SNB  continues  to  monitor  carefully  the  effects  of  low  interest  rates  on  financial 
stability. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Charts 
Chart 1 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 2 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 Chart 3 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 4 
 8 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Chart 5 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9
 Charts 7a und 7b 
 
 
 
 
 
Charts 8a und 8b 
 10 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches
