  Ignazio Visco: The Bank of Italy’s analysis of household finances 
Concluding remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the conference 
“The  Bank  of  Italy’s  Analysis  of  Household  Finances  –  Fifty  years  of  The  Survey  on 
Household Income and Wealth and the Financial Accounts”, Rome, 4 December 2015. 
 Andrea Brandolini contributed widely to these remarks with perceptive suggestions and insights. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  close  this  conference  celebrating  50  years  of  the  Bank  of  Italy’s 
Survey on Household Income and Wealth (SHIW) – and 51 of Financial Accounts. Over half 
a century, both the micro-data of the former and the aggregate estimates of the latter have 
provided  essential  information  for  the  economic  and  statistical  analyses  carried  out  at  the 
Bank of Italy, informing and influencing its policy-making process. There is also a personal 
note, however. Throughout my long professional life at the Bank, I often relied on these data. 
I  hope  that  you  will  forgive  me  if,  in  these  concluding  remarks,  I  shall  indulge  in  some 
personal memories. 
individual  households.  These  budget  data  stimulated  studies  on 
Prologue: the survey forerunners 
Household  budgets  have  long  attracted  the  attention  of  social  scientists.  Since  the 
mid-19th century  many  researchers  have  gathered  detailed  information  on  expenses  and 
revenues  of 
the 
consumption behaviour of families of farmers, manual workers and clerks, and contributed to 
the  detection  of  empirical  regularities  such  as  Engel’s  law.  Italian  economists  and 
statisticians played a crucial role in formalising these results. In his classical article on “The 
Early History of Empirical Studies of Consumer Behavior”, George Stigler refers to Rodolfo 
Benini and Corrado Gini as the authors of the first modern statistical demand studies, and to 
Gustavo Del Vecchio as the first to estimate, in 1912, a (food) consumption function. Using 
budget  data  for  a  number  of  countries,  Del  Vecchio  calculated  an  income  elasticity 
comprised between 0.4 and 0.8, with an average of about 0.6.1 The paper presented to this 
conference  by  Neri,  Rondinelli  and  Scoccianti  implies  an  income  elasticity  of  about  0.66, 
although for total expenditure rather than for food alone.2 A surprising regularity, a century 
later! 
However useful to study consumer behaviour, individual budgets cannot tell us much about 
the  distribution  of  income  or  expenditure.  In  June  1947,  the  Italian  Minister  of  the  Budget 
Luigi Einaudi – who  was still formally the Governor of the Bank of Italy, before being later 
elected  President  of  the  Italian  Republic  –  advocated  at  a  meeting  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  the  need  to  produce  a  report  on  “the  standard  of  living  of  Italian  citizens,  their 
incomes, the social categories into which they are divided”. Thereafter, Einaudi, Del Vecchio, 
then  serving  as  the  Treasury  Minister,  and  Giuseppe  Pella,  the  Finance  Minister, 
commissioned a sample survey on household incomes with the purpose of providing a sound 
basis for economic policies. The survey was conducted by Istituto Doxa, a private agency for 
                                                
1  G.J. Stigler, “The Early History of Empirical Studies of Consumer Behavior”, Journal of Political Economy 62, 
1954, 95–113; G. Del Vecchio, “Relazioni fra entrata e consumo”, Giornale degli economisti 54 (n.s.), 1912, 
111–142, 228–254, 389–439. Del Vecchio did not use Italian data, because individual budgets were relatively 
scarcer  for  Italy  than  for  France  or  Germany.  However,  Giovanni  Vecchi  has  recently  dug  out  as  many  as 
11,500  individual  budgets  for  the  period  1855–1911,  plus  another  9,500  for  the  years  until  1965. 
See S. Chianese e G. Vecchi, “Bilanci di famiglia”, in G. Vecchi, In ricchezza e in povertà. Il benessere degli 
italiani dall’Unità a oggi, Bologna, Il Mulino, 2011, 355–389. 
2  A. Neri, C. Rondinelli and F. Scoccianti, “The marginal propensity to consume out of a tax rebate: the case of 
Italy”, Bank of Italy, mimeo, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  analysis  of  public  opinion  founded  and  directed  by  Pierpaolo  Luzzatto  Fegiz.3  It  cost 
16 million lire, approximately 400,000 euros at today’s prices. 
A  second  (smaller)  survey  was  conducted  and  published  by  Doxa  in  1951.  By  digging 
through the Bank of Italy’s archives, it was recently found out that this survey was not only 
eventually paid for in full by the Bank, but was also designed with the help of economists in 
its Research Department. Its Director, and the Bank’s Governor 25 years later, Paolo Baffi, 
set in a letter to Luzzatto Fegiz that the main purpose of the survey  was “ascertaining the 
prevalent  opinions  on  the  allocation  of  a  given  income  rise…  between  consumption  and 
saving, after distinguishing the former into current expenses and durable goods and the latter 
into  direct  investment  (real  estates  and  businesses),  financial  assets  and  other  savings”.4 
For some unknown reason the Bank’s primary role in this survey was not publicised, but it 
testifies to the involvement of the Bank of Italy in the first attempts to measure the income 
and the consumption behaviour of Italian households. 
This  involvement  is  remarkable  as  it  reveals  the  early  support  of  the  Bank  for  the  use  of 
representative  probability  sampling.  Official  sample  surveys  were  still  in  their  infancy:  they 
had become accepted by statistical agencies in the United States only in the 1940s with the 
start of the Current Population Survey.5 The Bank’s position is even more significant when 
seen against the background of an environment which was not necessarily favourable to this 
statistical tool.6 
The  readiness  to  engage  in  these  new  statistical  techniques  is  an  example  of  the  Bank’s 
attitude towards paying attention to and taking advantage of developments at the frontier of 
research. The Survey has continued to be a source of innovation. This has happened, for 
instance, as regards the dissemination of its results: first, in the 1980s, with the release of 
anonymised micro-data to academic researchers; then, with the participation since the 1990s 
in the Luxembourg Income Study, an international cooperative project for the assembly and 
standardisation of income data at a household level. 
The integration of use and production of statistical data 
The Bank’s involvement in the (second) Doxa survey is also noteworthy since it shows that 
the  statistical  collection  was  conceived  as  closely  connected  with  the  needs  of  economic 
analysis  from  the  outset.  This  is  not  to  be  taken  for  granted.  Still  in  1985,  Zvi  Griliches 
observed  that  “while  economists  have  increased  their  use  of  surveys  in  recent  years  and 
have  even  begun  designing  and  commissioning  special  purpose  surveys  of  their  own,  in 
general, the data collection and thus the responsibility for the quality of the collected material 
is still largely delegated to census bureaus, survey research centers, and similar institutions, 
and is divorced from the direct supervision and responsibility of the analyzing team”.7 The 
history of the Bank of Italy’s SHIW is not one of “divorce” between producers and users but 
                                                
3  The  citation  from  Einaudi’s  speech  and  the  subsequent  information  are  drawn  from  P.  Luzzatto  Fegiz,  “La 
distribuzione del reddito nazionale”, Giornale degli economisti e Annali di economia 9 (n.s.), 1950, 341–354. 
4  A.  Baffigi,  A.  Brandolini,  L.  Cannari,  G.  D’Alessio,  “L’indagine  sui  bilanci  delle  famiglie  italiane.  Metodi, 
confronti, qualità dei dati”, Bank of Italy, mimeo, 2015. 
5  See C.F. Citro, “From multiple modes for surveys to multiple data sources for estimates”, Survey Methodology 
40, 2014, 137–161. 
6  See  A.  Baffigi,  “All’origine dell’indagine sui bilanci  delle  famiglie  della  Banca  d’Italia”,  Bank  of  Italy,  mimeo, 
2015. On the usefulness, but also on several limitations attributed to the use of the “representative method”, 
an  influential  opinion  was  that  expressed  by  Corrado  Gini  in  an  article co-authored  with Luigi  Galvani.  See 
C. Gini and L. Galvani, “Di una applicazione del metodo rappresentativo all’ultimo censimento italiano della 
popolazione (1° dicembre 1921)”, Annali di Statistica, series 6, 4, 1929, 1–107. 
7  Z.  Griliches,  “Data  and  Econometricians–The  Uneasy  Alliance”,  American  Economic  Review  Papers  and 
Proceedings 75, 1985, 196–200. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  rather of intense, if at times thorny, dialogue. In the early 1990s, I remember Governor Carlo 
Azeglio Ciampi’s reluctance to accept my proposal to create a Statistical Division within the 
Research Department on the grounds that the Bank’s economists were those who knew best 
which  statistics  were  needed,  and  therefore  were  also  best  suited,  as  potential  users,  to 
being involved in their production. 
A good example of the need for dialogue between data producers and economic analysts is 
credit rationing. In order to estimate the extent to which households have no access to credit, 
we require a complex set of interrelated questions, first asking respondents whether they had 
thought  about  applying  for  a  loan,  then  whether  they  actually  made  the  application,  and 
finally whether they got it. Credit-rationed borrowers are the households which were denied a 
loan,  or  not  granted  the  entire  amount  requested.  On  the  basis  of  a  long  time  series  that 
starts in 1989, credit conditions are confirmed to have eased in Italy in 2014 from the peak 
reached in 2012, although we are not yet back to the pre-crisis situation. The rich formulation 
of  the  questionnaire  also  allows  for  the  monitoring  of  a  broader  concept  of  borrowing 
constraints,  which  considers  what  we  once  called  in  an  article  on  borrowing  constraints 
“discouraged borrowers”, that is the households which refrain from asking for a loan because 
they  anticipate  that  their  application  will  be  turned  down.8  Likewise,  the  assessment  of 
financial vulnerability and over-indebtedness relies on detailed information and analysis that 
combine data on income, debt service payments and liabilities. This is shown by the papers 
by  D’Alessio  and  Iezzi,  and  Bartiloro,  Michelangeli  and  Rampazzi  discussed  in  this 
conference,9  as  well  as  by  the  regular  use  of  the  SHIW  data  in  the  regular  analysis  of 
macroeconomic developments and financial stability.10 
The  anticipations  of  economic  agents,  whether  consumers  or  businessmen,  play  a  central 
role  in  the  decisions  they  make,  but  their  measurement  is  far  from  straightforward.11 
Unsurprisingly, household expectations have been a recurrent topic in the Survey. As shown 
by  Alfonso  Rosolia,  households  were  asked  already  in  the  first  Surveys  in  the  mid-1960s 
whether they anticipated an income increase or reduction a year ahead, and how they would 
allocate any income gain between saving and various consumption items. The eagerness of 
the  Bank’s  researchers  turned  this  question  into  a  far  more  sophisticated  exercise  in  the 
Survey for 1989, when respondents were confronted with a full probabilistic format about the 
prospects  of  their  labour  or  pension  earnings  in  the  next  year  that  has  now  become,  in  a 
simplified formulation, part of the core section of the questionnaire. 
The attention to household expectations is important to shed light on consumer behaviour. 
For  instance,  in  the  early  1990s  it  was  used  to  quantify  the  impact  of  subjective  earnings 
uncertainty on precautionary saving.12 The paper presented by Olympia Bover finds that the 
subjective  expectations  on  house  prices  matter  for  predicting  the  spending  behaviour  of 
                                                
8  L. Maccan, N. Rossi and I. Visco, “Saving and borrowing constraints”, in A. Ando, L. Guiso and I. Visco (eds), 
Saving  and  the  Accumulation  of  Wealth.  Essays  on  Italian  Household  and  Government  Saving  Behavior,  
273–304, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1994. 
9  G. D’Alessio and S. Iezzi, “Over-indebtedness in Italy: how widespread and persistent is it?”, Bank of Italy, 
mimeo,  2015, and  L.  Bartiloro,  V.  Michelangeli  and  C.  Rampazzi  “The  vulnerability  of  indebted  households 
during the crisis: some evidence from the euro area”, Bank of Italy, mimeo, 2015. 
10  See, for instance, the Financial Stability Report or research documents such as that by S. Magri and R. Pico, 
“The household credit market after five years of crisis and recession: evidence from the survey on household 
income and wealth”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers) 241, 2014. 
11  I  extensively  discussed  the  problems  in  measuring  inflation  expectations  in  my  Ph.D.  dissertation,  later 
published as Price Expectations in Rising Inflation, Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1984. 
12  L. Guiso, T. Jappelli and D. Terlizzese, “Earnings uncertainty and precautionary saving”, in A. Ando, L. Guiso 
and  I.  Visco  (eds),  Saving  and  the  Accumulation  of  Wealth.  Essays  on  Italian  Household  and  Government 
Saving Behavior, 214–245, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1994. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Spanish  households.13  Yet  we  should  not  overlook the  difficulties  that  respondents face  in 
answering  probabilistic  questions.  In  the  Survey  for  1989,  57  per  cent  of  households 
anticipated  a  rise  in  income,  by  6.5  per  cent  on  average,  but  as  many  as  one  out  of  five 
households  did  not  answer.  In  the  last  wave  of  the  Survey  the  proportion  of  households 
which  failed  to  provide  an  answer  fell  to  below  5  per  cent,  but the  overwhelming  majority, 
83 per cent, predicted no income change one year ahead. This might be reasonable given 
the  recent  income  dynamics,  but  may  also  signal  their  difficulty  to  account  for  uncertain 
outcomes. 
There  is  a  need  for  further  research,  but  experimenting  on  measuring  expectations  is  a 
worthy  exercise.  It  has  undoubtedly  enhanced  the  Survey’s  reputation.  Indeed,  Charles 
Manski  included  it  among  the  few  “major  platforms  for  methodological  exploration  and 
substantive research” on the use of probabilistic formats to elicit expectations.14 Manski also 
mentioned  only  one  survey  of  firms  using  probabilistic  questioning  to  elicit  business 
expectations: the Italian Survey of Investment in Manufacturing. This has also been carried 
out  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  since  the  mid-1980s  and  is  a  good  example  of  cross-fertilisation 
among different research areas. 
is  not 
Micro-data as a necessary complement to macro-data 
the  only 
Eliciting  expectations  or  measuring  complex  economic  concepts 
accomplishment of the SHIW. Its main contribution has been to allow us to account for the 
heterogeneity  of  household  characteristics  and  behaviour  in  the  analysis  of  the  Italian 
economy. 
When  it  started  in  the  mid-1960s,  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  Survey  provided  virtually  the  first 
detailed information on the budgets of Italian households since the Doxa survey of 1948. Its 
information proved extremely valuable. Drawing again from my own personal experience, I 
remember  using  the  Survey  data  in  the  mid-1970s  to  calculate  the  dispersion  of  earnings 
among  income  earners,  and  its  decomposition  into  the  within-  and  between-sector 
components,  possibly  one  of  the  first  “official”  applications  of  the  exact  inequality 
decomposition  proposed  by  Henry  Theil.15  For  a  few  years,  these  calculations  were 
published in the chapter on the labour market of the Bank’s Annual Report, integrating the 
aggregate information on productivity and wage dynamics, and the SHIW main results are 
still regularly published in the Annual Report. 
The availability of a relatively long span of estimates on the distributions of earnings, income 
and, for a shorter period, wealth in Italy has allowed for the documentation of the decline of 
income inequality among Italian households until the mid-1980s and its subsequent increase. 
The  extent  of  the  rise  in  the  last  decades  is  smaller  than  that  observed  in  many  other 
advanced  countries  –  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  mostly  in  the  1980s, 
Sweden  and  Finland  in  the  1990s  –  but  the  level  of  income  concentration  in  Italy  is  still 
relatively high when compared at an international level.16 These inequality series have been 
widely  used  by  external  researchers,  and  are  included  in  many  international  compilations 
                                                
13  O.  Bover,  “New  results  on  household  subjective  probabilities  of  future  house  prices”,  Banco  de  España, 
mimeo, 2015. 
14  C.F. Manski, “Measuring Expectations”, Econometrica 72, 2004, 1329–1376; the citation is at pp. 1341–2.  
15  H. Theil, Economics and Information Theory, Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1967. 
16  See A. Brandolini and T.M. Smeeding, “Income Inequality in Richer and OECD Countries”, in W. Salverda, 
B. Nolan and T. M. Smeeding (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Economic Inequality, 71–100, Oxford, Oxford 
University Press, 2009. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  used for research  in  social  sciences,  assembled  at  the World  Bank, the  UNU-WIDER,  the 
OECD or by academic researchers.17 
My  first  approach  to  the  Survey  had  occurred  even  earlier,  when  Francesco  Frasca,  Ezio 
Tarantelli, Carlo Tresoldi and I used its data for 1971–73 to provide additional microeconomic 
evidence on the consumption function.18 As we had no access to micro-data at the time, our 
assessment  was  based  on  comparing  cell  mean  values  from  cross  tabulations  of  the kind 
shown in this conference by Alfonso Rosolia. Yet these “granular” data were crucial to study, 
however crudely, demographic and life-cycle effects, something which was not possible with 
the aggregate time series. In particular, we could not find, for Italy, the dissaving at old ages 
observed for other countries, and attributed this result to the system of social security and the 
family  structure  prevailing  in  the  country.  The  Survey’s  micro-data  have  later  become  a 
precious source to investigate consumption and saving. An important example of this strand 
of  research  is  the  volume  Saving  and  the  Accumulation  of  Wealth.  Essays  on  Italian 
Household  and  Government  Saving  Behavior,  edited  in  1994  with  Albert  Ando  and  Luigi 
Guiso  from  a  conference  held  in  January  1992.  It  includes  contributions  from  quite  a  few 
participants in this conference. 
Reconciling micro and macro 
During its long life, the SHIW has undergone several changes aimed at improving its quality. 
Some  of  them  have  created  discontinuities,  which  have  to  be  taken  carefully  into 
consideration  when  using results from  different waves  to  construct  time  series. In  order  to 
overcome some of the definition problems, the historical archive now allows researchers to 
access  micro-data  from  different  waves  in  a  common  format.  Today’s  celebration  has 
provided the opportunity to release an entirely revised historical archive as well as to upload 
selected time series on the Bank’s website. 
A  major  overhaul  of  the  Survey  took  place  in  1986–87,  following  a  conference  held  in 
Perugia in February 1985. Albert Ando, a close personal friend of many of us and for many 
years an invaluable consultant of the Bank, played a crucial role in that restructuring. Albert 
made two important points. First, he argued that it was necessary to increase the size of the 
sample, possibly reducing its frequency to offset the cost increase, in order to capture the 
behaviour of small demographic groups (he had in mind distinguishing an old person living 
alone from an old person living with a younger person). Second, he stressed the inability of 
the Survey to measure financial assets and liabilities, implicitly suggesting that some serious 
effort was necessary to cover these variables satisfactorily – although he admitted to having 
no special insight into how to do so, because this inability appeared to be a “peculiarly Italian 
problem”.19 
Both  Albert’s  suggestions  were  implemented:  the  sample  size  was  doubled  to  around 
8,000 units in 1986, and since 1987 the Survey has been carried out every two years and 
contains  detailed  questions  on  all  wealth  holdings. Information  has considerably  improved, 
                                                
17  See  Deininger  and  Squire’s Measuring  Income  Inequality Database  (http://go.worldbank.org/UVPO9KSJJ0), 
Milanovic’s  All  the  Ginis  Dataset  (http://go.worldbank.org/9VCQW66LA0),  the  World  Income  Inequality 
Database  (https://www.wider.unu.edu/project/wiid-world-income-inequality-database),  the  Social  and Welfare 
Statistics  Database  (http://stats.oecd.org/BrandedView.aspx?oecd_bv_id=socwel-data-en&doi=data-00654-
en),  Atkinson  and  Morelli’s  Chartbook  of  Economic 
(http://www.chartbookofeconomicine 
quality.com/). 
Inequality 
18  F. Frasca, E. Tarantelli, C. Tresoldi and I. Visco, “La funzione del consumo. Analisi su serie trimestrali e su 
dati cross-section”,  in  Banca d’Italia,  Modello econometrico  dell’economia  italiana  (2ª  ed.),  “La funzione  del 
consumo in Italia (stesura provvisoria)”, 32–102, Roma, 1979. 
19  A.  Ando,  “Le  indagini  campionarie  sui  bilanci  familiari:  l’esperienza  estera”,  in  Banca  d’Italia,  Le  indagini 
campionarie  sui  bilanci  delle  famiglie  italiane:  Perugia,  8–9  febbraio  1985,  Numero  speciale  dei  Contributi 
all’analisi economica, 139–149, Roma. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  but not all measurement problems have been sorted out, as observed by Gambacorta and 
Neri.20 In particular, as is well known, the measurement of financial assets still fall short of 
the  corresponding  aggregate  in  the  financial  accounts:  a  serious  problem  of  consistency 
between micro and macro evidence.21 
The financial accounts are also one of the Bank’s statistical products. After the Second World 
War,  Paolo  Baffi  strongly  encouraged  the  collection  of  aggregate  statistics  on  assets  and 
liabilities of the institutional sectors, and in 1949 the Bank’s Annual Report published a table 
of flows, called the “national monetary balance sheet”, broken down into public and private 
sectors.  This  accounting  scheme  was  the  embryo  of  the  financial  accounts  that  first 
appeared in the Annual Report for 1964, thanks to the work of Franco Cotula and others.22 
Financial accounts have been published regularly by the Bank ever since. 
The completion of financial accounts was an important accomplishment, but it still fell short of 
producing  a  fully  integrated  set  of  sectoral  balance  sheets.  Over  time,  the  Bank  has 
frequently engaged in the estimation of the value of real assets, with a particular focus on 
households.  I  contributed  to  this  effort  in  a  paper  with  Carlo  Tresoldi,  where  we  used  the 
Survey data to compute the value of dwellings.23 This exercise was occasionally repeated, 
for instance in an Appendix to the volume Saving and the Accumulation of Wealth prepared 
by  Pino  Marotta,  Patrizia  Pagliano  and  Nicola  Rossi,24  until  2007  when  the  Bank  first 
published the Supplement to the Statistical Bulletin on “Household Wealth in Italy”. With the 
recent publication by Istat, the Italian statistical office, of the stock of non-financial assets by 
institutional  sector,  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  estimate  for  the  first  time  the  full  balance 
sheets for the Italian economy. 
Producing Italy’s  integrated  wealth  accounts  is a  challenge  that  Istat  and  the  Bank  cannot 
avoid facing. It is not the only one. I already mentioned the consistency issues for the micro 
and macro evidence for wealth, but similar problems arise for income. Moreover, flows and 
stocks need to be reconciled, both at the micro and macro level. Extending the scope of the 
data we collect definitely enriches our information set, but also calls for a much greater effort 
to reconcile the indications that diverse sources may provide. 
Not only flows: the importance of household wealth 
This  long-standing  concern  for  household  wealth  does  not  stem  from  mere  academic 
curiosity. At the opening of the final conference of the Luxembourg Wealth Study held here in 
Rome in July 2007 at a time when we had not yet any hint of the incoming global financial 
crisis,25 I observed that “I still have the definite impression that in the last fifteen years there 
has been a substantial rise in wealth-to-income ratios in the developed countries. This has 
been especially the case for housing wealth. According to the Survey of Consumer Finances, 
                                                
20  R. Gambacorta and A. Neri, “Wealth and its returns: economic inequality in Italy, 1995–2014”, Bank of Italy, 
mimeo, 2015. 
21  R.  Bonci,  G.  Marchese  and  A.  Neri,  “Financial  wealth  in  Italy's  financial  accounts  and  survey  of  household 
income and wealth”, in Financial Accounts: History, Methods, the Case of Italy and International Comparisons, 
Banca d’Italia, Roma, 2008.   
22  See  R.  De  Bonis  and  A.  Gigliobianco,  “The  origins  of  financial  accounts  in  the  United  States  and  Italy: 
Copeland,  Baffi  and  the  institutions”,  in  R.  De  Bonis  and  A.F.  Pozzolo  (eds),  The  Financial  Systems  of 
Industrial Countries. Evidence from Financial Accounts, Berlin, Springer, 2012. 
23  C. Tresoldi and I. Visco, “Un tentativo di stima della ricchezza delle famiglie (1963–1973)”, Rivista di diritto 
finanziario e scienza delle finanze 34, 1975, 516–524. 
24  See G. Marotta, P. Pagliano and N. Rossi, “Income and Saving in Italy: a Reconstruction”, Banca d’Italia, Temi 
di discussione 169, for details. 
25  I. Visco, “The Luxembourg Wealth Study: Enhancing Comparative Research on Household Finance”, 2007, 
https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/interventi-direttorio/int-dir-2007/visco_050707.pdf?language_id=1. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the ratio of real assets to household disposable income in the United States rose from 3.7 in 
1992 to 4.8 in 2004; in Italy, according to the SHIW, from 5.3 in 1993 to 6.4 in 2004. This is 
clearly  a  pattern  shared  by  many  other  countries.  On  the  other  hand,  net  financial  assets 
show a much more moderate trend. Overall, there seems to be little question that over this 
long period wealth has increased at higher rates, for many countries much higher rates, than 
household disposable income”. 
The work by Thomas Piketty has shown that these trends began even earlier, in the 1970s,26 
although the global financial crises may have somewhat modified them. In the United States 
the ratio of real assets to household disposable income fell back to 4.2 in 2013, although in 
Italy  it  still  stood  at  6.6  in  2014.  The  increase  in  wealth  may  reflect  the  accumulation  of 
personal savings or changes in asset values. But saving rates do not seem to show marked 
increases; if anything, in some countries they have been on a declining trend. So, much of 
the substantial rise in wealth-to-income ratios was due to asset prices. This raises several 
questions,  that  matter  from  analytical  as  well  as  policy  perspectives.  Why  have  we  been 
observing such a long-term trend in asset prices? What is it that made for such a significant 
change  in  the  prices  of  real,  and  perhaps  to  a  lesser  extent,  financial  assets  relative  to 
consumer goods and services? The financialisation of economies, the growing role of stock 
exchanges,  the  privatisation  of  State-owned  firms,  the  expansion  of  household  insurance 
technical reserves (due to the crisis of public pension schemes) can go some way towards 
explaining the rise in the ratio of financial wealth to GDP.27 
In  particular,  there  may  be  merit  in  considering  the  changes  in  shelter  costs  for  owner-
occupied  housing  as  part  of  general  consumer  price  changes.  In  this  case,  one  should 
conclude  that  the  prices  of  housing  services  went  up  substantially  compared  to  other 
consumer goods and services. Yet, in part housing expenditure is clearly of a capital-good 
nature.  One  should  also  conclude  that  house  owners  were  able  to  extract  substantial  rent 
from  their  accumulated  real  estate.28  As  I  observed  in  the  July  2007  conference  of  the 
Luxembourg Wealth  Study,  “in  the  first  case  we  have  an  issue  of  relevance  for  monetary 
stability,  in  the second for financial  stability,  especially  as  house  prices have  been  moving 
faster  in  relatively  short  periods  of  time  and  the  larger  house  values  have  been  used  as 
collateral in financial deals”. 
Conclusions: lessons from the past and challenges for the future 
These remarks on the Bank of Italy’s SHIW and the financial accounts are drawn from my 
own  memories,  but  I  hope  to  have  also  illustrated  some  important  lessons  that  we  can  all 
draw from the experience at the Bank. Let me briefly recapitulate them here: 
1. 
Undertaking  research  means  being  receptive  to  innovation  and  to  exploring  new 
statistical and analytical techniques; 
The production and use of statistical data must be seen as fully integrated activities; 
Micro-data are a necessary complement to macro-data: they are both essential to 
forming a comprehensive view of the functioning of the economy for policy-making 
purposes; 
2. 
3. 
                                                
26  T. Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 2014. 
27  R. De Bonis, D. Fano and T. Sbano, “Household aggregate wealth in the main OECD countries from 1980 to 
2011: what do the data tell us?”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers) 160, 
2013. 
28  Using Survey data, it is possible to show that capital gains on housing have a positive effect on consumption 
for homeowners, but a negative one for renters. See L. Guiso, M. Paiella and I. Visco, “Do capital gains affect 
consumption?  Estimates  of  wealth  effects  from  Italian  households’  behavior”,  in  L.R.  Klein  (ed.),  Long-run 
growth and short-run stabilization: essays in memory of Albert Ando, 46–82, Cheltenham, Elgar, 2006. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  4. 
The joint consideration of micro and macro evidence for the same phenomena, and 
of related stocks and flows, raises important issues of consistency, an old problem 
made  more  evident  today  by  the  richness  of  available  statistics;  indeed,  the 
micro/macro and stocks/flows reconciliation are a challenge for all statistical bodies; 
And, obviously, there is a need to pay attention to both stocks and flows. 
5. 
These observations hold for economic and statistical research at the Bank in general. They 
are  evidence  of  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  long-standing  effort  to  stimulate  cross-fertilisation  and 
dialogue  among  different  research  areas,  avoiding  what  is  sometimes  called  the  “silos 
culture”.  I  believe  that  this  attitude,  which  is  not  necessarily  shared  elsewhere,  is  very 
important and should be preserved. 
The  scientific  community  is  now  wondering  about  the  future  of  household  surveys.  Bruce 
Meyer,  Wallace  Mok  and  James  Sullivan  have  recently  noted  that  “large  and  nationally 
representative surveys are arguably among the most important innovations in social science 
research  of  the  last  century”,  but  have  extensively  dealt  with  the  problems  plaguing 
household  surveys  and  weakening  their  capacity  to  describe  economic  and  social 
phenomena.29 There are new powerful statistical methods that can be used to improve them, 
such as the integration with administrative archives and web surveys to reach a more mobile 
and digital population. There are new rich and only partly explored sources of information, 
the “Big Data” residing on the internet. As has been mentioned by Federico Signorini in his 
opening remarks, Bank researchers are also exploring these new territories, confirming our 
attitude towards innovation. Yet, I think that the SHIW, possibly transformed, will be with us 
for many more years to come. 
To conclude, I wish to thank the many people who have made it possible for our Survey to 
reach  its  venerable  age:  the  economists  and  the  statisticians  in  the  Bank  of  Italy,  the 
interviewers and the staff of the agencies that have conducted the Survey in the field, the 
many academics and external users that have used it for their research and have helped us 
to improve it. Our deepest gratitude obviously goes to the 154,000 thousand households that 
have voluntarily accepted to be interrogated, some of them many times, on the difficult and 
confidential issues investigated by the Bank of Italy’s Survey. 
 
                                                
29  B.D. Meyer, W.K.C. Mok and J.X. Sullivan, “Household Surveys in Crisis”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 
29, 2015, 199–226. See also C.F. Citro, “From multiple modes”, op. cit. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
