   Jens Weidmann: How to address the euro area’s economic challenges? 
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman 
of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  25th  European 
Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 20 November 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak to you. As I stand before you today, it’s hard to believe 
that a whole year has already gone by. I don’t think that there is any event I’ve attended more 
regularly – with the exception of the Bundesbank’s presentation of its annual accounts. 
At last year’s event, I suggested that contemporary banking and medieval banking have as 
much in common as a Ferrari and a donkey cart. 
What holds true for a subsystem of the economy certainly must hold for the economy at large. 
In terms of complexity and sophistication, today’s economy and its medieval counterpart are 
worlds apart. 
This, however, raises an obvious question. If the euro-area economy really is a sleek sports 
car, why has its performance been decidedly less than dynamic? Is the engine sputtering? 
Have the tyres lost pressure? Does the body produce drag? 
The answer to these questions is: all of the above. The euro area’s growth engine is not firing 
on  all  cylinders.  The  euro  area’s  tyres  have  lost  pressure  –  that  is,  Europe’s  banks  have 
reduced their leverage. And although the lowering in the form of fiscal consolidation has been 
crucial to prevent the euro area from careening off the road, at the same time, the reduced 
ground  clearance makes  it  harder  to  cushion  bumps  –  meaning  that  it may  become  more 
difficult to respond fiscally to negative economic developments in the euro area. 
To counter all this, monetary policy in the euro area has put the pedal to the metal. It has 
lowered  interest  rates  into  negative  territory,  and  it  has  embarked  on  large-scale  asset 
purchases for most sovereign bonds. 
But while monetary policy has certainly provided a boost, growth is generally considered to be 
only moderate. 
So,  what  is  needed  to  return  to  cruise  speed?  Can  we  overhaul  the  engine  for  better 
performance? Does it make sense to top up the tyres with air? Should we try to eliminate the 
fiscal downforce? Or should monetary policy try to push the needle even closer towards the 
rev limiter? 
In the next 20 minutes, I will explore these options in turn, starting with the engine overhaul, 
that is, with structural reforms. 
EMU’s growth engine 
2. 
The  European  Commission  estimated  in  20131  that  the  euro-area  medium-term  growth 
prospects – in other words, the growth rate in the next ten years without any additional reforms 
– is only 1%. These figures would hardly earn you a place in the heart of a young Top Trumps 
enthusiast. 
                                                
1   European Commission (2013), “The euro area’s growth prospects over the coming decade”, Quarterly Report 
on the Euro Area 12(4). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
What’s more, one might argue that a lot of potential in terms of structural reform has already 
been unlocked, especially in the countries worst hit by the crisis. 
And indeed, much has been done to correct the macroeconomic imbalances that are at the 
root of the struggle the euro area is facing. The divergence between prices and wages on the 
one  hand  and  productivity  on  the  other  was  the  driving  factor  behind  the  current  account 
deficits. These deficits had to be financed externally and gave rise to the precarious levels of 
public and private debt. 
Prior to the crisis, current account deficits in Spain stood at 9½%, in Portugal at 12% and in 
Greece at a remarkable 14½%. When markets refused to continue financing the deficits at 
longer-term bearable interest rates, the gap had to be closed. The financial support provided 
under  the  rescue  mechanisms  and  our  common  monetary  policy  have  smoothed  the 
adjustments – without these measures, the adjustments would have been far more abrupt. 
Still,  adjustment  had  to  happen,  and  the  reforms  undertaken  so  far  have  facilitated  these 
adjustments. Wage negotiations, for example, have been decentralised and wage indexation 
has been abolished or reduced – Spain is a case in point. This makes it possible for wages to 
take the specific situation of each firm into account and to make firms more flexible in their 
response to economic shocks. As a consequence, unit labour costs have gone down by 18% 
in Ireland, 5% in Spain, 4% in Greece, and 1½% in Portugal. 
Prices and wages have been brought more into line with productivity. This will allow all crisis 
countries except Greece and Cyprus to switch external deficits into surpluses in 2015. As a 
result of the ongoing restoration of competitiveness, the euro area has now been placed on a 
sounder footing. 
But while competitiveness is necessary for growth, it is in itself not enough. Ultimately, growth 
hinges on productivity. This is where we now have to redouble our efforts. Not doing so would 
mean “taking the pain but missing out on the gain”, as Benoît Cœuré has aptly put it. The 
structural  reforms  that  are  now  needed  are  the  ones  that  unleash  innovation  and  propel 
productivity. 
We also need them now because these are the reforms that can credibly raise expectations of 
a higher income in the future. And if income is expected to be higher tomorrow, investments 
will be made today. Reforms that increase supply will thus support demand as well. 
The willingness to invest depends on capacity utilisation, which is recovering gradually in the 
euro area, the level of funding costs, which is low due to the ultra-loose monetary policy, and 
predominantly  on  expectations about future  growth. Without  profitable  investment  projects, 
lowering funding cost will not go very far in stimulating the economy. 
Hence,  the  key  question  is:  what  actions  are  required  to  brighten  the  euro  area’s  growth 
prospects?  Structural  reforms  are  mostly  grouped  into  product  market  and  labour  market 
reform. In both areas, there are still many gains to be reaped. Progress in these areas would 
strengthen productivity by making it easier to shift production factors to areas of higher yield. 
And by the same token, it would improve countries’ ability to adjust to unforeseen economic 
events and structural shifts like digitalisation in the future. 
2.1 Product market reform 
To paraphrase Tolstoy: when it comes to productivity, every unhappy country is unhappy in its 
own way. There is therefore no “one size fits all” approach best suited to increase productivity 
everywhere. Some countries need a greater focus on product market reforms, while others 
need additional efforts regarding labour market reforms or cleaning up bank balance sheets. 
And countries like Greece are also in urgent need of administrative reforms. 
Nevertheless, I will try to make some suggestions. My list is by no means exhaustive, but 
perhaps it can serve as food for thought in the discussion to follow. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Let me start with product market reform. A bigger market makes it more attractive for any 
potential entrant to compete in it. And more intense competition spurs innovation. In the long 
run, innovation as a result of increased competition is the main reason why market integration 
raises welfare.2, 3 
But  for  newcomers  to  be  able  to  challenge  incumbents,  they  must  not  trip  over  red  tape. 
Unfortunately, bureaucratic barriers to setting up a business are still high in many European 
countries – not least in Germany, which ranks 107th in the World Bank’s Doing Business report 
in  this  regard  –  interestingly,  a  rank  it  shares  with  Antigua  and  Barbuda.  This  implies  a 
considerable distance to the frontier of best practice. In New Zealand, for example, establishing 
an enterprise only takes a single official contact. 
How large is the impact of barriers to entry on the overall economy? Research suggests it is 
quite  large  indeed.  Raising  entry  costs  from  very  low  levels  such  as  those  observed  in 
Denmark, for example, to moderate levels like those in Spain might reduce per capita GDP 
and total factor productivity by up to 10%.4 
And the small differences in the administrative cost of entry between Europe and the US seem 
to explain 10 to 20% of Europe’s lag vis-à-vis the US with regard to total factor productivity and 
the capital-output ratio – even though such quantitative estimates always have to be taken with 
a pinch of salt.5  
2.2 Labour markets and productivity 
Barriers to market entry can exert a powerful drag on productivity. But there are other factors 
in play as well. On average, bigger firms tend to be more productive and are better placed to 
compete  in  export  markets.  Unfortunately,  the  growth  of  small,  innovative  companies  is 
hindered in some European countries by a plethora of regulations that kick in at a certain size 
threshold. 
In  France,  for  instance,  many  regulations  become  binding  when  a  firm  reaches  a  size  of 
50 employees. This causes some firms which would otherwise expand to stay below that level. 
Research6 suggests that this distortion might lead to a loss of 4–5% of French GDP. 
Size-contingent regulations exist also in other countries especially in Portugal or Italy. What 
these regulations all have in common is that they deter firms from expanding. In other words, 
they are a drag on growth. 
By the same token, tearing down the still existing barriers to a common services market and a 
common  digital  market  in  Europe  holds  the  promise  of  doubling  the  gains  achieved  by 
integrating goods markets.7, 8 
                                                
2   Badinger, H (2005), “Growth Effects of Economic Integration: Evidence from the EU Member States”, Review 
of World Economics 141, 50–78. 
3   Boltho, A and Eichengreen, B (2008), “The Economic Impact of European Integration”, CEPR Discussion Paper 
No 6820. 
4   Barseghyan,  L  (2008),  “Entry  Costs  and  Cross-Country  Differences  in  Productivity  and  Output”,  Journal  of 
Economic Growth, 13(2):145–167. 
5   Poschke, M (2010), “The Regulation of Entry and Aggregate Productivity”, Economic Journal, Royal Economic 
Society, vol 120(549), pages 1175–1200, December. 
6   Garicano, L, Lelarge C and Van Reenen, J (2013), “Firm Size Distortions and the Productivity Distribution: 
Evidence from France”, CEPR Discussion Paper 9495.De Bruijn, R, Kox, H and Lejour, A (2008), “Economic 
benefits of an Integrated. 
7   “European Market for Services”, Journal of Policy Modeling 30, 301–319. 
8   Copenhagen Economics (2010), The Economic Impact of a European Digital Single Market, Final Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
In Germany, for example, this could imply an additional 400,000 jobs over the period 2015 to 
2020. 
But reforms at the European level alone will not suffice to master Germany’s looming challenge 
– its demography. To counter the dampening effects of the demographic development, we 
have  to  boost  employment  by  increasing  labour  force  participation,  by  allowing  for  labour 
market-oriented immigration, and by improving the integration of long-term unemployed. 
The immigration of refugees can also provide opportunities for growth in Germany over the 
medium term. To seize these opportunities, however, requires decisive policy action – among 
other things, mainly efforts to ensure labour market integration. That means language courses, 
improving school education, and vocational training. 
But  we  should  be  realistic  and  not  create  undue  expectations.  Experience  suggests  that 
integrating refugees into the labour market will take time. In the end, immigration can alleviate 
our demographic challenge, but it cannot solve it completely. 
Bank leverage 
3. 
As we have seen, the euro-area growth engine can still be tweaked in quite a few ways. But 
what about reducing rolling resistance by reflating the tyres, for example by turning back the 
clock on regulatory reforms to allow for more leverage? 
Regulation is a Goldilocks issue. It appears that there is – like the tyre pressure – such a thing 
as an optimal degree of regulation. Regulation below that level, as in the pre-crisis era, greatly 
increases vulnerability, without doing much in terms of sustainable growth. If regulation goes 
too far, however, viable firms might not get the funding they need. 
I would argue that the deleveraging process that has taken place so far in the euro area has 
largely remained within the safety zone. 
Sufficient  capital  buffers  are  crucial  –  and  for  large  international  banks  they  will  have  to 
increase further with the recently adopted requirements for bail-in-capital (TLAC) – but so is 
regulatory certainty, which is why I am in favour of bringing Basel III into full effect next year 
rather  than  conveying  the  impression  that  regulators  are  already  working  on  a  possible 
Basel IV. 
Equity is costly, which is why exceedingly high capital requirements might unduly curtail bank 
lending. But equity is costly partly because of the preferential tax treatment of debt, which is 
why I am in favour of doing away with it. 
Furthermore, the recent credit developments do not suggest that the new capital requirements 
constrict lending on a lasting basis. Since last autumn, lending to non-financial corporations 
has  recovered  perceptibly  in  the  euro  area.  And  Bundesbank  research9  suggests  that  the 
factors that hamper credit developments for example in Spain and Italy, such as the private 
sector’s attempts to reduce its debt overhang and the high levels of non-performing loans in 
banks’ balance sheets, have abated markedly. 
Of course, this recovery is also partly due to monetary policy measures like the TLTROs, which 
specifically target credit provision. 
Fiscal policy 
4. 
If increasing the air pressure of the tyres beyond that optimal level would be a dangerous 
proposition, what about eschewing fiscal consolidation? Is this a viable option for providing a 
boost? To anticipate the answer: no, it is not. 
                                                
9   Bundesbank Monthly Report, September 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
A number of euro-area countries have consolidated their budgets since the outbreak of the 
sovereign debt crisis. Critics such as Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz have charged that this 
consolidation has caused more harm than good, as spending cuts and tax increases served 
to dampen already weakened aggregate demand even further. 
Consequently, they are calling for a loosening of the euro-area fiscal stance. But for many 
countries without fiscal space, that is simply not an option if we do not want to return to the 
days of 2011 and 2012, when doubts about the sustainability of fiscal policy led to very high 
interest rates in some euro-area countries. This leaves the countries with fiscal space to raise 
spending, Germany among them. 
However, the periphery’s share of German imports is very low, which suggests that spillovers 
would remain modest – all the more as the import content of public expenditure is especially 
small. 
What is more, incurring additional debt in one member state to stimulate demand in another is 
a level of fiscal coordination beyond what is provided for in the current institutional framework 
of the monetary union. 
To put it bluntly: this request by some countries would not be consistent with the insistence of 
the same member states to decide nationally on their budgets – which even goes so far as to 
reject the mutually agreed obligation stemming from the Stability and Growth Pact. 
As debt totals more than €2 trillion and demographic challenges will continue to loom large, 
Germany should use the opportunity of low interest rates to reduce the debt burden. In that 
light, pursuing slight budget surpluses makes perfect sense. This holds also because safety 
margins vis-à-vis deficit ceilings help to buffer unexpected fiscal shocks as we see now, for 
instance, with the migration inflow. 
Germany’s future challenges, however, make some changes in fiscal policy advisable. Where 
Germany’s growth potential is concerned, there is consensus that higher public investment 
does have a role to play. 
The  size  of  the  investment  gap,  however,  is  probably  more  difficult  to  gauge.  National 
definitions of public investment differ, which is just one reason why a European average is a 
flawed benchmark. In the end, it is important that all investment measures are judged on a 
case-by-case basis, as we have seen in the past that not all public investment measures were 
money well spent. 
And we should focus on shifting priorities in public expenditures. In Germany, for instance, 
there is no need for a debt-financed fiscal stimulus, as the economy already shows a high level 
of capacity utilisation. But there is a need for a structural shift of government expenditures from 
consumption  to  investment  in  infrastructure  and  education.  Reforming  the  financial 
arrangements among the federal level, the states, and the municipality level could encourage 
that shift. 
Monetary policy 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
While  monetary  policymakers  obviously  care  about  real  economic  developments,  the 
recommended speed they try to maintain is a nominal variable: inflation. 
And there’s no denying that the clock shows we are currently running below target. 
The question is this. How should the Eurosystem act in this situation? Inflation rates in the euro 
area have been significantly below our definition of price stability for some time now, that is, a 
level of below but close to 2%. And it is expected that inflation will return only slowly to that 
level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
An excessively prolonged period of low inflation is clearly not without consequence. It could 
place a strain on the sustainability of private and public debt in some countries and complicate 
the economic adjustment process for countries which have lost competitiveness. 
And if interest rates are near the lower bound, lower  inflation might translate into a tighter 
monetary policy stance than warranted, in particular if longer-term inflation expectations are 
affected. 
But that is not the end of the story. What also matters is the nature of the inflation shock. At 
the moment, the sharp fall in energy prices is what is mainly driving the low rates. This drop 
has pushed down headline inflation by about one percentage point. Correspondingly, the core 
inflation  rate  stands  at  1%  and  should  gradually  increase  towards  our  definition  of  price 
stability, which is – let me remind you – a medium-term concept. 
Crucially, the decline in oil prices is more of an economic stimulus for the euro area than a 
harbinger of deflation. 
Lower oil prices reduce energy bills for both households and firms. That frees up financial 
resources  which  can  then  be  put  to  use  elsewhere  –  for  consumption,  investment  or  for 
reducing the debt overhang. All of this is good for the economies of the euro-area countries. 
At the same time, it seems that the downward risks stemming from international developments 
have increased somewhat. And uncertainty has risen more generally, as massive migration 
flows will also leave their mark on the economy. But while the quantitative effects of migration 
are hard to estimate precisely, it is safe to say that their impact on GDP will be rather stimulative 
over the projection horizon. 
All things combined, I see no reason to talk down the economic outlook and paint a gloomy 
picture. Rather – and despite all this uncertainty – our forecasts were not far off the mark. 
In the end, we should also not forget that the monetary policy measures already taken still 
need time to fully feed into the economy. 
And we need to be aware that the longer we stay in ultra-loose monetary policy mode, the less 
effective this policy will become and the more the attendant risks and side-effects will come 
into  play  –  take the  exuberance  in  some financial  markets  and  the  problems faced  by  life 
insurers as examples. And we should not ignore the risk that fiscal policy could get used to the 
very low interest rates – leading to a situation in which consolidation efforts peter out and where 
monetary policy might come under pressure from governments to continue accommodation 
even if monetary tightening were called for. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
While  growth  has  recovered  somewhat  from  the  fallout  of  the  crisis,  it  is  still  less  than 
impressive. But the way to higher growth does not lead through cosmetic changes and quick 
fixes. We will only get there if we tear down the still existing barriers to product, services, digital, 
and labour markets and include those who are currently sitting on the economic sidelines. And 
even then, we might not completely reach the speed of pre-crisis years, as those were driven 
by unsustainable growth in leverage. 
If the euro area is to be converted back into a sleek sports car that turns heads in the street, a 
lot of engineers still have a lot of work cut out for them. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
