  Gent Sejko: Do crises change economic fundamentals in SEE 
Speech by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Conference “Do crises 
change  economic  fundamentals  in  SEE?”,  hosted  by  the  Bank  of  Albania,  organised  in 
cooperation with the South East European Studies at Oxford, Tirana, 30 October 2015. 
 Your Excellency Prime Minister, 
Dear Governor Hamza and senior central bank representatives, 
Your excellencies ambassadors, 
Dear guests, friends and colleagues, 
I am delighted to welcome you to the annual conference of the Bank of Albania organised in 
cooperation with the South East Europe Studies at Oxford. It is a pleasure to see that this 
cooperation brings together old and new partners. 
This has been a tough year full of challenges for the Albanian economy, consequently for the 
work  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  The  full  recovery  of  economic  growth  and  its  further 
improvement in the future are and remain one of the top priorities of our work for the year. 
The prolonged crisis has impelled us and homologous institutions across the world to review 
many of the economic axioms, which we had taken for granted for a long time. 
It is not by accident that the main topic of the conference focuses on the causality and 
solutions for long-term problems we are facing during this period. 
Over the five year period, the Albanian economy has been growing in positive territory, yet, 
below its potential. This is a global phenomenon in the post-crisis period, extending across 
the entire South East Europe, which have experienced even lower growth rates. 
I  hope  that  during  this  conference  we  will  have  the  opportunity  to  analyse  in  depth  the 
reasons  behind  this  situation,  sources  that  feed  it  and  the  difficulties  it  imposes  on  the 
business model and financial intermediation. Furthermore, it would be useful to discuss on 
the options available to policymakers and the way out of this situation, which, I believe, is a 
temporary situation rather than a long-term economic equilibrium. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  actively  using  two  main  instruments, the monetary policy 
and macro-prudential one, to give its contribution for a swift and systematic closure of the 
negative  output  gap  in  Albania.  The  Bank  has  continued  to  implement  an  accommodative 
monetary policy lowering the key interest rate to the historic 2% level. 
Notwithstanding the scepticism that has accompanied this process, the lowering of the key 
interest rate is reflected in a wide range of interest rates in the financial market, including 
those  on  loans  and  government  securities.  The  fact  the  economy  continues  to  grow 
below  its  potential,  does  not  necessarily  reflect  the  absence  of  an  effective  transmission 
channel for the monetary policy. We are more and more convinced that, above all, we have a 
weak aggregate demand, which is not generating the much needed stimuli for the recovery 
of the economic activity. 
Recent  data,  however,  render  us  more  optimistic.  The  real  sector  is  showing  signs  of 
constant recovery, corroborated by some positive developments in the external economy. I 
would  like  to  underline  that  a  clearer  prospect  of  the  political  and  economic  situation  in 
Greece will have a positive impact over the upcoming period. The Bank of Albania has been 
continuously monitoring the developments in our Southern neighbour, aware of the various 
risks  that  could  spill  over  in  the  Albanian  economy.  But,  thanks  to  the  precise  and  duly 
interventions, especially in the banking sector, these risks never materialised. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The constant easing of the monetary policy seems to be reflected especially in investment 
indicators, with the domestic and foreign ones showing significant improvement over 
the first half of the year. On our side, we are happy that these investments were not only 
due  to  public  sector  interventions.  There  was  also  a  substantial  component  by  the  private 
sector.  This  makes  us  believe  that  well-studied  projects  by  the  investors,  coupled  with  an 
increasingly  sound  and pro-investment  business  climate,  will  serve  as  main  drivers for the 
economy towards not only higher but also more sustainable growth in the near future. 
the  best  contemporary  practices,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has 
In  accordance  with 
endeavoured  to  enhance  the  transparency  in  its  communication  with  the  public,  not 
only  about  the  actual  decisions  but  also  about  our  forecasts.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has 
constantly  conveyed  to  the  economic  agents  the  idea  that  the  monetary  policy  will  remain 
accommodative and will sustain the revitalisation of the economy. As a result, we hope that 
the  forward  guidance  on  the  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  be 
adequately understood by all market agents and the public. 
Banks and entrepreneurs should use this opportunity to boost their activity resting assured 
that the central bank will continue to sustain and support their activity. 
In addition to the monetary policy easing, the Bank of Albania has paid special attention to 
the  reform  in  the  financial  sector  and  the  prudent  supervision  of  the  banking  sector.  The 
Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Ms.  Yellen,  in  a 
statement not long ago leaves no doubt about the necessity of reforms in the financial sector, 
I quote “... a sine qua non for sustained economic recovery following a financial crisis 
is a thoroughgoing repair of the financial system.” 
From  the  perspective,  in  cooperation  with  the  Parliament,  government  and  other  public 
regulatory entities we have undertaken a series of legislative and regulatory initiatives, aimed 
at creating incentives for the recovery and assurance in lending. 
Thanks to the reforms we have undertaken during this year, we have started to reap the first 
positive results as regards the situation of the non-performing loans. 
As  a  result,  the  ratio  of  the  non-performing  loans  fell  for  the  first  time  after  almost 
seven years of continuous rise. The write off of loss loans, as I have explained in previous 
statements, was the finalisation of joint inter-institutional efforts. During this process, we have 
been assisted and overseen also by important international financial institutions such as the 
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. 
Beyond  the  non-performing  loans  issue,  the  banking  system  continued  to  be  well 
capitalised, liquid and financially sound.  The issue  of  non-performing  loans  will  require 
some more time to resolve, but this should not keep us from the recovery of the credit activity 
at  home.  For  as  long  the  positive  performance  of  the  other  above-mentioned  indicators 
continues, the banking sector has room and the potential to credit convincing projects and 
investments. In my judgement, it is important to administer with courage and persistence the 
prevalent  perception  that  non-performing  loan  have  forced  banks  to  adopt  a  very 
conservative approach to lending. 
To  permanently  address  this  problem,  additional  measures  have  been  taken  and  will  be 
taken  in  the  future.  I  would  like  to  briefly  focus  on  the  latest  initiative  in  this  regard:  a 
coordinated plan between the Bank of Albania, Government of Albania, Association of 
Banks, and International Monetary Fund, consisting in two main pillars: 
The  first  pillar  relates  to  the  drafting  and  completing  the  legislation  that  regulates  lending 
from the moment of concluding a contract until the final repayment, including disputes among 
the parties. These changes aim at making more precise in legal terms all procedures related 
to banking activity, bailiff services, borrowers and other relevant state institutions. 
The second pillar is related to the regulatory framework of the activity of the banking system, 
therefore, related to the day to day activity of the Bank of Albania and the banking system. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We  have  identified  the  regulations  that  will  be  subject  to  amendments.  In  addition  to  the 
objective  for  creating  higher  flexibility  in  relation  to  certain  aspects  of  the  activity  in  the 
treatment  of  the  credit  portfolio,  we  will  aim  at  adopting  a  new  concept:  the  “background 
check (biografi)” of the client in relation to bank borrowing. We believe that this new element 
will help banks assess the borrowing potential of each client. 
In spite of what I said above, it is a fact that, recently, lending in the national currency has 
seen  positive  growth  over  the  months.  This  phenomenon,  among  others,  has  been 
accompanied with a positive side effect at a higher speed and intensity in the pass through 
mechanism of the monetary policy in the economy. 
Dear guests, 
As  I  pointed  out,  at  the  beginning,  economic  activity  at  home  remains  in  a  positive 
trajectory, but it has not yet reached the level we wish it were. Research at the Bank 
continues  to  confirm  that  the  Albanian  economy  has  unutilised  potential  and  that  the 
closing of the gap remains the main challenge for policymakers. Interventions through 
both  the  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  elements  insofar  have  not  succeeded  to 
definitively close the gap. I listed these facts intentionally as the conference of this year is 
called  “Do  crisis  change  economic  fundamentals?”  These  interventions  are  main  actions 
central banks are allowed by the legislation, and recommended by the most modern theory. 
If these interventions fail to introduce a long-term positive equilibrium for the economy, then a 
question arises naturally: what else should be done? 
The  answer  is  in  the  phrase  “structural  reforms”.  While  the  phrase  may  have  often  been 
speculated,  the  truth  firmly  confirms:  only  the  willingness  to  project  and  undertake 
courageous and visionary reforms is the golden key to success”. 
This fact was strongly emphasised in the final statement of the Ministers of Finance and 
central bank Governors of 24 most developed nations, (Financial Committee of the IMF) 
in  the  annual  meeting  of  the  IMF  organised  earlier  this  month  in  Lima,  Peru.  A  secure 
sustainable 
long-term  growth  requires  timely-implemented  and  well-sequenced 
structural  reforms  which  remain  critical  to  raise  productivity,  potential  output,  and 
living  standards;  they  should  bolster  confidence  in  the  economy  and  reduce  social 
inequality. 
Concluding, I would like to underline the support of the Bank of Albania for a series of 
reforms  undertaken  recently  as  part  of  the  medium-term  agreement  between  the 
Government of Albania, Bank of Albania and the International Monetary Fund. 
Similarly to the rest of South East Europe, Albania needs a new path, in which investors will 
be able to see again profit opportunities. It is vital for all of us, for the region to detach itself 
as fast as possible from the perception as an irrelevant geographical areas, fragmented, with 
insignificant  human,  financial  and  economic  potentials. We  should  do  anything  it  takes,  at 
any cost, to restore once again the trend and vitality this region showed before the crisis. 
Thank You! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
