  Mugur Isărescu: The future of central banking 
Address  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  during  the 
plenary  session  “The  future  of  central  banking”,  8th  World  Policy  Conference,  Montreux, 
20 November 2015. 
 Parts of this address have been presented by Governor Mugur Isărescu during the plenary 
session “The future of central banking”, which also featured as speakers: 
• 
• 
Jean-Claude Trichet – former President of the European Central Bank 
Jacob Frenkel – Chairman of JPMorgan Chase International, former Governor of the 
Bank of Israel 
Marek Belka – President of the National Bank of Poland 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honour to address the audience during this symposium on the future of central 
banking, although I must confess from the very beginning that the topic itself is not easy to 
tackle. We all know that economists seldom reach a consensus when analysing the past. It is 
all  the  more  difficult  for  them  to  agree  on  the  future,  especially  when  we  refer  to  central 
bankers, who are known to be among the most cautious economists... 
Personally, I think I have enough reasons to be wary of any predictions of what is in store for 
us,  particularly  over  the  medium  and  long  term.  I  started  my  career  as an  economist  in  a 
research institute back in August 1971, when the Bretton Woods System was just collapsing. 
In  1990,  shortly  after  the  fall  of  communism,  I  became  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of 
Romania, having to put into practice the transition from a monobank-type system to a two-tier 
system,  while  the  country’s  economy  was  going  through  major  changes  from  the  ruinous 
central planning to a market economy. As a matter of fact, in retrospect, I can say that my 
entire  career  has  spanned  several  decades  marked  by  truly  ground-breaking  policy  and 
paradigm shifts. Some of the recent ones, such as quantitative easing and close to zero or 
even negative monetary policy rates, would have been inconceivable even a few years (not 
decades) before they occurred! 
The experience acquired through the years, both as a researcher and as governor, makes 
me reluctant to engage in speculations on the future of central banking in 10 or 20 years’ 
time,  particularly  at  the  current  juncture  when  the  global  economy  is  in  a  state  of  flux. 
Nevertheless, there are a few old and new things about central banking which I believe will 
continue to be relevant in the future. 
I would start by pointing out that, in the extremely complex post-crisis economic and financial 
environment,  the  mission  of  a  central  bank  cannot  be  simple.  There  are  so  many 
transformations  going  on  right  now,  after  the  global  crisis  not  only  invalidated  certain 
elements of mainstream economics, but also changed the order of priorities on policymakers’ 
agenda. 
Still, I do not believe the crisis has shattered the consensus on what central banks should be 
pursuing  –  central  banking  has  always  been  about  the  preservation  of,  to  quote  Charles 
Goodhart, “the three aspects of stability”, namely price stability, (external) currency stability 
and  financial  stability.  Nor  has  the  crisis  brought  about  the  sudden  realisation  that  these 
aspects of stability do in fact condition each other – central bankers, maybe even more so 
emerging-market central bankers, have long been keenly aware that failure to ensure one 
kind  of  stability  is  bound  to jeopardise  the  achievement  of  the others. What the  crisis  has 
indeed challenged is the widespread conviction that meeting one particular stability criterion, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
while necessary in order to achieve the others, is also a sufficient condition to do so – after 
all, maintaining price stability, while valuable in itself, has proved insufficient to ward off major 
financial  or  macroeconomic  instability.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Andrew  Crockett  claimed  ever 
since 2003 that the “peace dividend” yielded by the successful war against inflation had not 
lived up to expectations and therefore the battlefront against financial instability should not be 
overlooked. 
Nevertheless, it is widely accepted that price stability should remain the overriding objective 
of a central bank and I do not see this approach changing in the future, at least in Europe. It 
is  expected,  however,  that  central  banks  will  make  more  explicit  their  concern  for  all  the 
“three aspects of stability” in their policy decisions, realising that price stability and financial 
stability  are  much more  intertwined  than  we  used  to  think.  I  believe  this  development  has 
farther-reaching consequences when it comes to the future of central banking. I can easily 
imagine,  some  years  down  the  road,  a  more  “normal”  world  in  which  unconventional 
monetary  policy  tools  are  a  thing  of  the  past,  since  their  relevance  is  ultimately 
circumstantial, but I cannot imagine a future where the explicit concern for financial stability 
and the macroprudential policy are not central banking fixtures. 
To  be frank,  the  NBR  has  never  had  the  luxury  of  being  concerned  exclusively  with  price 
stability and interest rate setting in the belief that financial stability and exchange rate stability 
will follow. In a world with freely moving capital, the idea of being able to manage aggregate 
demand  exclusively  via  interest  rates  would  have  been  an  illusion:  the  interest  rate  hikes 
required to manage aggregate demand and anchor expectations would have entailed further 
capital  inflows  and  an  unsustainable  nominal  appreciation,  thus  boosting  foreign  currency 
lending and creating vulnerabilities on the financial stability front. 
That is why, when introducing inflation targeting in 2005, the NBR opted for the “light” version 
of  the  strategy,  which  meant  retaining  the  managed  float  feature  of  the  exchange  rate 
regime.  The  actual  form  inflation  targeting  took  in  Romania  thus  matched  the  “managed-
floating plus” concept introduced by Goldstein in 2002, considered the most suitable choice 
for an emerging-market economy involved  in the global capital market, as it combines the 
managed float part, allowing for FX market interventions in order to smooth out excessive 
volatility,  with  an  inflation  targeting  monetary  policy  strategy  and  an  active  pursuit  of 
measures to limit the degree of currency mismatches in the economy. 
What are the challenges of adding explicit concern about financial stability to the standard 
objective of price stability? Should monetary policy lean against the wind sooner and possibly 
harder than it would normally? Even though now, with the benefit of hindsight, one could say 
that higher interest rates in the run-up to the crisis may have alleviated some of the issues 
that led to it, I believe that it is best to let monetary policy focus on price stability and deal 
with  the  objective  of  financial  stability  via  dedicated  macroprudential  policy  instruments  – 
doing otherwise is likely to severely complicate communication with the public, complicating 
expectations  management  and  ultimately  undermining  monetary  policy  credibility  and 
effectiveness. 
It is indeed of critical importance to make sure that the tasks entrusted to the central bank 
are feasible. Not as clear-cut or simple as before the global crisis, but feasible! Otherwise, if 
the monetary authorities are overburdened with possibly conflicting goals, the major risk is to 
render them inefficient and unable to deliver a single one of their objectives. 
Before the crisis, when talking about the policy mix anyone would think of the coordination 
between monetary and fiscal policies. Afterwards, when financial instability has undermined 
macroeconomic stability, despite low and stable inflation, it became obvious that additional 
tools  are  needed  in  complementing  monetary  policy  in  countercyclical  management.  As 
macro-prudential tools emerged as the most important candidates, it makes sense to assign 
the objective of financial stability to the central bank, if the central bank is given control of the 
supervisory and regulatory instrument. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In  the  recent  period  some  economists  have  asserted  that  central  banks  tend  to  fuel 
speculative  bubbles  by  keeping  monetary  policy  rates  too  low.  This  behaviour  can  create 
incentives for banks to overleverage or reduce efforts in screening borrowers, or can lead 
other economic agents to seek more risks in order to yield higher returns. The effects are 
likely to be worse if monetary policy is too accommodative for too long during expansions. 
This led to the conclusion that other instruments, which can directly affect leverage or risk 
taking, are required. 
Because  the  cost  of  cleaning  up  after  an  asset-price  bubble  burst  can  be  very  high,  as 
proved by the recent financial crisis, early interventions by the central bank might be needed 
when a severe bubble is identified. In this context, macro-prudential instruments are the best 
option, without excluding de plano the recourse to monetary policy instruments. 
Given the fact that the policy rate is an inadequate tool to deal with overleverage, excessive 
risk  taking,  or  apparent  deviations  of  asset  prices  from  fundamentals,  there  are  other 
instruments at the policymaker’s disposal: countercyclical regulatory tools. Thus, if leverage 
appears  excessive,  regulatory  capital  ratios  can  be  increased;  if  liquidity  appears  too  low, 
regulatory liquidity ratios can be introduced and, if needed, increased; to dampen housing 
prices,  loan-to-value  ratios  can  be  decreased;  to  limit  stock  price  increases,  margin 
requirements can be increased. 
As I said earlier, the NBR has always had to juggle the “three aspects of stability” and that 
called  for  the  deployment  of  alternative  instruments,  such  as  the  full  use  of  the  reserve 
requirement  ratios  and  recourse  to  administrative  measures.  Reserve  requirement  ratios 
were increased up to 20 and 40 percent for lei- and forex-denominated liabilities respectively, 
and the list of administrative measures included: enforcing a maximum loan-to-value ratio, 
introducing debt service ceilings relative to households’ monthly disposable income, setting 
limits  on  banks’ 
forex  exposure  vis-à-vis  unhedged  borrowers,  using  differentiated 
coefficients  in  stress  tests  (higher  for  exposures  to  EUR  than  lei,  with  even  stricter 
coefficients for CHF- and USD-denominated credit). 
Even though at the time our modus operandi was seen as deviating from the orthodoxy of 
central banking, during the global crisis or in its aftermath, macroprudential instruments are 
now part of the mainstream and forex interventions re-entered the arsenal of many central 
banks, including some of those using a free floating regime before the crisis. 
If the importance of macro-prudential instruments was revealed by the global crisis and the 
forex interventions of central banks went back in fashion during the same period, there is a 
fact well known from the conventional economic wisdom, but highlighted once again by the 
crisis: the countercyclical stance of both monetary and fiscal policies is essential for ensuring 
a smooth trajectory of the economy. We all saw how unsustainable public finances and high 
levels  of  debt  have  impeded  the  effectiveness of  a  stability-oriented monetary  policy.  This 
was also the case of Romania, where the fiscal impulse was positive during the period of 
rapid growth before the financial crisis, contributing to the overheating of the economy and 
fuelling  the  imbalances  accumulated  in  the  economy.  Moreover,  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the 
fiscal policy during the pre-crisis period exhausted the fiscal space needed to stimulate the 
economy  in  recession,  leading  to  the  need  to  reduce  the  budget  deficit  during  the  crisis 
(primarily due to financing constraints) and to perpetuating the pro-cyclicality of fiscal policy. 
As stated by Fritz Zurbrügg (2012), successful monetary policy is predicated on healthy fiscal 
policy,  and  vice  versa,  and  to  achieve  stability  and  prosperity  in  the  long  term,  fiscal  and 
monetary policies must both focus on sustainability. 
In the past, the high fiscal deficit has resulted in the fiscal dominance of monetary policy with 
its  inevitable  monetisation  of  the  government  debt,  but  nowadays  most  central  banks  no 
longer directly finance government expenditure. Today, this kind of dominance is manifested 
through the inability or unwillingness of fiscal authorities to control long-run expenditure/GDP 
ratio. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The recent period has outlined a different form of dominance: financial dominance, defined 
as the inability or unwillingness of the financial sector to absorb its losses. The presence of 
financial  dominance  constrains  the  manoeuvre  room  of  both  fiscal  and  monetary  policies, 
due to the fact that fiscal authorities and/or central banks have to bail-out the financial sector. 
As pointed out by Benoît Cœuré (2015), for monetary policy, the problem stems mostly from 
inadequate  supervision,  at  both  micro-level  (if  supervisors  show  too  much  forbearance  to 
under-capitalised  banks,  they  can  end  up  effectively  shifting  the  burden  onto  monetary 
policy) and at macro-level (if supervisory policies allow banks to grow too rapidly, and then 
deleverage too slowly, it can also push the central bank into doing more), which can turn out 
in the ineffectiveness of monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
Let  me  say  a  few  words  about  the  issues  of  central  bank  independence  in  the  context  of 
required  cooperation  with  the  government  in  the  post-crisis  world.  As  we  all  know, from  a 
historical  perspective  the  prevalence  of  central  bank  independence  is  a  relatively  new 
institutional  development,  seen  as  a  solution  to  the  problem  of  time  inconsistency  of 
monetary policy and the stagflation of the ’70s. Is the post-crisis reality likely to dissolve the 
consensus  about  central  bank  independence?  After  all,  the  danger  of  inflation  is  hardly  a 
pressing concern nowadays (but rather the lack of it) and the pursuit of financial stability is 
ultimately a shared responsibility, since it implies close cooperation with the government and 
other authorities and may ultimately involve recourse to public funding. 
I  share  Stanley  Fisher’s  view  that  it  would  be  a  costly  mistake  to  give  up  central  bank 
independence. That would mean “the benefits of having a central bank that can take a longer 
term and apolitical view of what is good for the economy and take actions in support of that 
view  will  be  lost”.  If  a  long-term  perspective  and  a  shield  against  political  pressure  are 
required for achieving price stability, these may be even more important if explicit concern for 
financial stability is added. And frankly, I do not see the need for close cooperation with the 
government as something that implies abandoning central bank independence, but rather as 
a pre-requisite – which has always been there – for promoting effective policies. Irrespective 
of how well-designed the policies of the central bank may be, they cannot substitute for a 
consistent macroeconomic policy mix, and in the absence of this consistency they are likely 
to achieve at best sub-optimal outcomes. 
Having said that, I think there are a few questions worth asking – I must confess I do not 
have the answers, but I believe that the future of central banking hinges upon them. 
• 
Would it be necessary to promote a certain tactical flexibility in the conduct of 
monetary policy, so that central banks might carry out adjustments in terms of 
objectives as well, not only instrument-wise? Such an approach would diminish 
the  predictability  of  monetary  policy,  but  would  allow,  when  need  be,  for  financial 
stability considerations to prevail over the inflation objective. 
Is the reassessment of the desirable level of inflation suitable? How low is too 
low?  The  same  as  for  capital  inflows,  we  can  ask  ourselves  in  the  case  of  price 
stability as well: how much of a good thing is too much? 
Will the policy instruments which have been resorted to in the context of the 
global crisis become an integral part of the new conventional framework? If 
macroprudential  tools  are  here  to  stay,  the  future  of  non-conventional  monetary 
policy  instruments  is  less  certain.  Will  the  central  banks  keep  using  these 
instruments or will they abandon them at some point in time? I fully share the belief 
of  the  Governor  of  Banco  de  España  Luis  Linde  (2013)  that  monetary  policy  – 
conventional or not – cannot solve the ultimate causes behind the loss in investors’ 
confidence or the tensions in financial or banking markets; in fact, its main role is to 
provide time to adopt the necessary measures to reform and/or adjust. 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   How much room for trade-off among different goals is available? I believe that 
we should try to learn as much as possible from the past mistakes. And I refer here 
not only to the recent past! The lessons of the last 7 years, while important, should 
not  make  us  forget  the  lessons  of  the  last  50  years,  among  which,  to  name  but 
three, are the following: 
– 
Accommodating other objectives should not put in danger price stability on the 
medium-run; 
Inflation expectations cannot be ignored; 
The  independence  of  central  banks  is  connected  with  their  performance  in 
delivering price stability. 
 Irrespective of how we see now the future of our profession and institutions, it is apparent 
that  the  central  bankers  cannot  afford  to  live  in  an  ivory  tower.  They  have  to  stay  open-
minded and to keep close contact with the shifting economic and financial reality in order to 
be able to articulate and implement efficient policies. And if you still want me to foretell the 
future, I will end my speech by making a prophecy: what a central bank can or cannot do will 
remain a topic of heated debate for many decades. 
References 
Cœuré, B., “Independence and Interdependence in a Monetary Union”, Lamfalussy Lecture 
Conference organised by Magyar Nemzeti Bank in Budapest, 2 February, 2015. 
Crockett, A., “International Standard Setting in Financial Supervision”, Lecture at the Cass 
Business School, City University, London, February 5, 2003. 
Goodhart, C., “The Changing Role of Central Banks”, BIS Working Papers No 326, 2010. 
Goldstein, M., “Managed Floating Plus and the Great Currency Regime Debate”, Institute for 
International Economics Policy Analyses in International Economics, No. 66, 2002. 
Linde, Luis M., “The Changing Role of Central Banks”, the 4th Future of Banking Summit, 
organised by Economist Conferences, Paris, 26 February, 2013. 
Zurbrügg,  F.,  “Fiscal  and  Monetary  Policy  –  Interdependence  and  Possible  Sources  of 
Tension”, the University of Lucerne, Lucerne, 21 November, 2012. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
