  François Villeroy de Galhau: Supervision of business practices 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and 
Chairman  of  the  Autorité  de  contrôle  prudentiel  et  de  resolution  (ACPR),  at  the  ACPR 
conference “Supervision of business practices”, Paris, 20 November 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to welcome you today to this new conference organised by the Autorité de 
contrôle  prudentiel  et  de  résolution  and  would  like  to  thank  you  all  for  coming.  This  is  an 
opportunity for me to tell you for the first time how important I find this type of event, where 
the  Authority  that  I  chair  explains  its  actions  and  the  principles  that  guide  it.  It  is  also  an 
opportunity  for  us  all  to  listen  to  the  parties  concerned,  on  a  topic  that  brings  us  together 
today – that of the supervision of business practices – on which I would like to put forward 
three ideas: 
(I) 
First,  our  supervision  of  business  practices  is  important  for  the  current 
mobilisation of the nation. 
Second,  our  supervision  of  business  practices  is  important  for  financial 
stability. 
Lastly, our supervision of business practices must increasingly take account 
of developments in technology and changes in Europe. 
(II) 
(III) 
Our supervision of business practices is important for the current mobilisation of the 
nation. 
Many lessons can be learned from the dramatic events of Friday 13 November in Paris and 
its suburbs, which requires of us a total mobilisation. Faced with these barbaric acts, I wish to 
recall the determination of the Banque de France – and of the financial sector – to participate 
in the fight against terrorism, by attacking its financing.  
Many  of  you  will  attend  this  afternoon  the  presentations,  introduced  by  Mr  Delas,  Vice-
Chairman  of  the  ACPR,  on  anti-money  laundering  and  counter-terrorist  financing  in  the 
insurance sector. As you know, the ACPR College, together with Tracfin, adopted just last 
week new guidelines in this area, applicable to both banks and insurance firms. I am in no 
doubt that the financial sector will be fully involved in their implementation; we will ensure this 
together with the professionals. 
I would also like to recall today our determination to fully participate in the mobilisation of the 
nation,  by  contributing  more  broadly  to  economic  and  social  cohesion,  through  greater 
banking  and  financial  inclusion.  The  protection  of  consumers  –  and  in  particular  the  most 
vulnerable ones – is one of the components of this. Financial education and the fight against 
overindebtedness  are  also  priorities  to  which  the  Banque  de  France  actively  contributes. 
Terrorism, alas, also feeds off exclusion in its different forms. 
II/ Second, our supervision of business practices is also important for financial 
stability. 
Since its creation in 2010, the ACPR has been responsible for safeguarding financial stability 
and ensuring consumer protection. This is a major innovation, a robust step, in the wake of 
the  2008  crisis  and  the  loss  of  confidence  of  customers  in  their  financial  sector  in  many 
advanced economies, sometimes due to deceptive business practices. Restoring confidence 
is  of  course  in  the  interest  of  all  those  present  in  this  room.  This  means,  for  us,  ensuring 
compliance with existing laws and regulations, as well as with the best practices observed or 
recommended by the ACPR. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Naturally, this consumer protection task is not designed to enforce these different rules in a 
blanket fashion. Rather, it must be done in accordance with the principles underlying these 
regulations and fully understanding the reality of these business practices. 
To sum it up in one sentence, these principles aim to balance relations between clients and 
professionals.  This  rebalancing  is  mainly  achieved  by  taking  account  of  the  information 
asymmetry that can exist between these players. This may include rules that are specific to 
vulnerable  clients,  to  a  category  of  complex  products,  to  the  obligation  to  consider  the 
interest  of  customers  when  the  product  is  designed  or  in  the  organisation  of  product 
distribution. 
The reality of business practices, however, is difficult to sum up in a few  words. This is 
where  the  work  of  ACPR  staff  comes  into  play;  in  the  supervision  as  well  as  analysis  of 
different data and through contact with both professionals and consumers. Collecting data on 
business practices is a prerequisite for the ACPR to guide its supervisory duties. Against this 
backdrop,  the  ACPR  redesigned  its  questionnaire  on  business  practices  and  consumer 
protection.  It  can  now  understand  current  market  practices,  as  well  as  trends  in  products, 
services and practices. 
I will now talk about ACPR inspections. They are firstly intended to ensure compliance with 
the  applicable  rules  and  to  make  sure  that  errors  are  corrected  before  they  have 
consequences  for  customers.  In  the  worst  cases,  such  errors  lead  to  sanctions.  This 
approach  is  necessary  to  punish  violations  and  useful  to  increase  awareness  in  the 
profession. 
ACPR inspections are not however limited to dealing with bad practices on a case-by-case 
basis. They also identify more general problems that call for changes in market practices or 
even in regulations. Several examples will be discussed this morning to illustrate the lessons 
learned from such inspections. For instance, ACPR staff examined distribution channels in 
which there are a number of intermediaries between the customer and the producer (bank or 
more  often  insurer).  The  questions  that  we  are  asking  today  are  simple.  But  they  are 
important  for  the  sector  as  a  whole.  Do  all  intermediaries  provide  value  added  to  the 
customer? How can we guarantee the customer a reliable and efficient chain, irrespective of 
its organisation? 
To  enhance  practices,  the  ACPR  also  has  a  flexible  legal  tool,  the  recommendation.  I 
believe  that  this  instrument  is  useful  for  prevention.  Recommendations  are  intended  to 
change  or  guide  the  behaviour  of  professionals.  It  helps  them  to  identify  and  actually 
integrate what is expected of them in terms of consumer protection. 
Generally, the area of business practices is one in which it is quite conceivable that some 
best practices can be defined by the players themselves. To do this, dialogue is required as 
well as commitments that are binding enough to be enforced. The AERAS Agreementwhich 
aims to facilitate access to credit for people with serious health problems, is a good example 
and  I  would  like  to  thank  Mr  Emmanuel  Constans,  Chairman  of  the  AERAS  Mediation 
Committee  and  member  of  the  ACPR  College  for  having  agreed  to  present  today  the 
changes in this Agreement. 
III/ Lastly, our supervision of business practices must increasingly take account of 
developments in technology and in changes in Europe. 
I believe that it is important, not only for the ACPR but also for the market, to anticipate these 
changes wherever possible. 
European  legislation  that  is  recent  or  in  the  process  of  being  adopted  calls  for  the 
standardisation  of  customer  information.  This  is  the  case  for  the  Packaged  Retail  and 
Insurance-Based Investment Products (PRIIPs), the Directive on Credit Agreements Relating 
to Residential immovable Property (CARRP), and the Insurance Distribution Directive (IDD). 
Also,  under  the  aegis  of  the  AMF,  with  which  we  share  a  joint  unit  that  is  efficient  at 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  supervising  business  practices,  there  is  the  Markets  in  Financial  Instruments  Directive 
(MiFID). 
European legislation recasts the obligations of product distributors to include in particular the 
concept  of  independent  advice  in  the  sectoral  directives.  It  also  makes  changes  to  the 
obligations  of  product  manufacturers  by  imposing  a  product  design  process  that  takes 
account of the interests and characteristics of the targeted customers. Lastly, extensive work 
on  the  delicate  subject of  the  compensation  of sales  staff  and  other  employees  should  be 
completed in the coming months. 
As  regards  the  latest  and  not  least  substantial  European  developments  in  the  area  of 
business  practices,  the  aim  of  the  drive  to  standardise  rules  in  the  framework  of  a  cross-
sectoral  approach  is  simplification. This  drive  should  be  extended.  An  obvious  case  is  the 
Key  Information  Document  of  the  PRIIPS  Regulation.  It  will  allow  customers  to  easily 
compare  two  investment  products,  irrespective  of  whether  they  are  classified  as  bank 
products, insurance products or financial instruments. But I could also cite examples of work 
in  the  area  of  “product  governance”,  conflicts  of  interest  or  compensation,  which  bring 
regulations from the three sectors closer into line. 
I will finish by discussing changes stemming from new technologies. We are all aware that 
they  change  business  practices  by  affecting  consumption  patterns  and  customer  relations. 
The contractual nature of the banking and insurance industries means that relationships are 
rich and often long-standing. Such relationships are based on the consent of both parties to 
the contract and execution on the basis of trust. Today, over and above agreement on the 
price  and  on  the  object,  which  forms  the  basis  for  a  sales  contract,  the  possible  use  and 
security of customer data is increasingly relevant. 
The development of new technologies and the appearance of new tools, aimed at making the 
“customer  experience”  more  fluid  or  attractive,  must  also  take  into  account  the  cardinal 
principle of consumer protection. This is also a necessary condition for new sustainable and 
robust economic models to emerge. 
These areas are currently the main focus of the national and European authorities and the 
ACPR stands ready to play a full role, drawing on its experience and the dialogue it engages 
in with the stakeholders.  
Let  me  now  hand  the  floor  to  Patrick  Montagner  and  to  the  ACPR  staff  to  elaborate  on  a 
number  of  these  aspects  and  I  wish  you  an  excellent  conference.  Thank  you  for  your 
attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
