  Ignazio Visco: European Union – progress or regress? 
Dinner speech by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 50th Anniversary 
Conference of the Istituto Affari Internazionali, Rome, 13 November 2015. 
 I  first  wish  to  thank  the  Istituto  Affari  Internazionali  for  inviting  me  this  evening.  And  I 
congratulate the Institute founded by Altiero Spinelli for its activity, research and contributions 
over the last fifty years. Best wishes for a future as rich and productive. 
Assessing the  recent  and  prospective  evolution  of  the  European  Union  is  an  issue  far  too 
vast to be addressed in detail in a short speech. My remarks will therefore focus on what I 
see  as  key  elements  concerning  what  was  neglected  before  the  crisis,  the  changes 
introduced  over  the recent  difficult  years,  what  further  advancement  is needed,  and, to  be 
somewhat provocative, some risks of a regress instead. 
On the way to the crisis 
Today the discussion on reforming the governance of the EU and the euro area centres on 
the need to complete the EMU and make it stronger, on how to get to “a deep and genuine 
economic  and  monetary  union”.1  The  need  to  move  towards  political  union  is  widely  and 
hotly  debated.  But  for  a  long  period  this  issue  was  underrated  and  neglected.  I  recall  the 
discussions  that  took  place  in  the  late  1990s  in  OECD  Committees,  and  the  analysis  put 
forward  in  monographs  and  surveys.  The  1999  OECD  report  on  EMU,  for  instance,  noted 
that  “long  lasting  monetary  unions  among  major  sovereign  nations  have  never  been 
observed before, without strong political integration”, but then focused on different issues. Its 
discussion delved into the costs and benefits of a monetary union, the role  of the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact,  institutions  and  processes  for  macroeconomic  policy  co-ordination, 
exchange rate targets, labour market and wage flexibility, labour mobility, and product market 
reforms.2  
Interestingly,  the  same  report  underscored  the  potential  advantages  of  a  single  monetary 
policy  –  not  a  single  fiscal  policy  –  in  managing  asymmetric  shocks.  It  argued  that  such 
shocks “are more easily absorbed in a monetary union where monetary policy should adopt 
the stance most appropriate for the area as a whole than under the previous arrangements, 
which were at times shaped by domestic German policy considerations”. Also in subsequent 
analyses, the words “state” or “political” were more often missing than not. The attention was 
instead on such issues as fiscal consolidation, ageing populations, financial fragmentation, 
incomplete capital market integration, monetary policy communication, decentralized banking 
supervision,  under-utilisation  of  human  capital,  insufficient  structural  reforms,  all  of  which 
were diligently analysed with foreseeing discussions. 
Yet awareness of the need for what today is termed a common “fiscal capacity” had been 
present  well  before  the  signing  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  A  report  on  fiscal  union  (the 
MacDougall Report) was published already in 1977 on behalf of the European Commission, 
and a mention concerning the economic desirability of a transfer of fiscal sovereignty to the 
European level is present even in the 1970 Werner Report. Later on, the technical papers 
                                                
1   European Commission, A Blueprint for a Deep and Genuine Economic and Monetary Union – Launching a 
European Debate, COM(2012) 777 final/2, Bruxelles, 2012. 
2   OECD, EMU Facts, Challenges and Policies, Paris, 1999. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  accompanying the 1989 Delors Report and subsequent work by the Commission discussed 
the topic in depth.3  
The discussion was well alive also in academia. Economists have discussed the costs and 
benefits  of  membership  of  a  monetary  union  since  the  seminal  contribution  on  optimal 
currency areas by Robert Mundell in 1961.4 Peter Kenen was the first to point out in 1969 
that a shared fiscal policy could reduce the costs of being a member of a monetary union. He 
argued that the operation of area-wide automatic fiscal stabilizers would allow re-establishing 
equilibrium while limiting the necessary reduction (increase) in domestic prices and wages in 
countries affected by an adverse (positive) asymmetric demand shock.5 
The introduction of the euro was a fundamental step in European history, a political event 
that certified the progress made on the road to integration, a profound economic and social 
change.  It  was  only  a  step,  however,  and  not  the  end  of  the  road.  Tommaso  Padoa-
Schioppa, who contributed so much to the achievement of monetary union, was well aware 
of this. On May 3, 1998, when Europe was completing the last steps before the adoption of 
the  single  currency,  he  wrote  in  a  column  for  “Corriere  della  Sera”:  “The  Union  has  full 
competence  for  microeconomic  policy  (…),  but  its  capability  for  macroeconomic  policy  is, 
with  the  exception  of  the  monetary  field,  embryonic  and  unbalanced:  it  can  avoid  harm 
(excessive deficits) but it cannot do good (a proper fiscal policy). (…) It is thus right not only 
to  applaud  yesterday’s  step  but  also  to  underline  its  unfinished  nature,  the  risks  and  the 
rashness.”6  
At  the  beginning  of  the  euro,  Tommaso  spoke  clearly  of  the  perils  and  weaknesses  of  a 
“currency  without  a  State”.  With  the  global  financial  crisis  and  more  specifically  with  the 
sovereign debt crisis the importance of the unification process has become crystal clear, but, 
in the words of Padoa-Schioppa, “there is more bitterness than satisfaction in witnessing a 
prophecy come true. […] It is clear that we needed more of a European State, not less of a 
European currency: without the euro, Europe would now be living a catastrophe. One reason 
for the lack of credibility of national politics is that it keeps on giving people the illusion that 
national powers are capable of tackling issues (energy, climate, finance, security, migration, 
primary goods) which are not national, but continental and global.”7 
In  the  absence  of  political  union,  the  economic  governance  of  the  area  was  based  on  a 
fragile alliance between  market forces and rules of conduct. Market forces were to ensure 
the economic convergence of the member countries and the definition and implementation of 
the  necessary  structural  reforms  at  national  level.  Rules  of  conduct  were  expected  to 
guarantee prudent budgetary policies. But economic convergence was slow and difficult; in 
some  cases  the  gaps  actually  widened.  In  many  economies  the  delays  and  obstacles  to 
adjusting  to  the  large-scale  global  changes  weakened  competitiveness  and  the  ability  to 
grow. Mitigated by the improvement in funding conditions after the introduction of the euro, 
market pressures alone were not sufficient to drive the necessary reform efforts. Moreover, 
the rules for the public finances defined in the European sphere were seldom respected and 
sovereign risks were basically not priced by the markets: until the outbreak of the crisis the 
spreads between government bond yields within the euro area were close to zero. 
                                                
3   European Commission, “Stable Money, Sound Finances. Community Public Finances in the perspective of the 
EMU”, European Economy, 53, 1993. European Commission, The Economics of Community Public Finance, 
European Economy – Report and Studies, 5, 1993. 
4   R.A. Mundell, “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas”, American Economic Review, 51, 1961,  pp. 657–65. 
5   P.B. Kenen, “The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic View”, in R.A. Mundell and A.K. Swoboda 
(eds.), Monetary Problems in the International Economy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1969. 
6  T. Padoa-Schioppa, “Il passo più lungo”,  Corriere della Sera, May 3, 1998. 
7   T. Padoa-Schioppa, Interview with la Repubblica, August 6, 2008.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Perhaps  the  convergence  process  had  been  displaced,  firstly,  by  the  acceleration  of  the 
enlargement  of the  EU  and  increased  participation  in  the  Eurosystem  and,  secondly,  by  a 
clear (though according to some, irrelevant) predominance of intergovernmental agreements 
over the so-called community method. 
The response to the crisis 
In  this  framework,  after  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  very  severe  global  recession  in 
2008–09,  the  full  revelation  of  the  conditions  of  Greek  public  finances  produced  tensions, 
which  then  spread  to  the  economically  weaker  euro-area  countries,  characterized  by 
excessive  public  or  private  debt,  a  foreign  trade  deficit,  poor  competitiveness,  and  low 
economic  growth.  Tensions  grew  with  the  bursting  of  the  property  bubble  and  the 
consequent disruption of banking in Ireland. With the announcement of the involvement of 
private  investors  in  restructuring  Greek  debt  in  the  summer  of  2011,  financial  markets 
suddenly  became  aware  of the  implications  of  the  ban  on  interventions  to rescue  member 
states  under  the  Treaty  on  European  Union.  There  followed  a  very  serious  crisis  of 
confidence in the ability of the single currency to survive, with negative consequences for the 
real economies of individual countries and for the area as a whole.  
The list of potential causes of the crisis is rather crowded. Fiscal imbalances, labour market 
rigidities  and  competitiveness  deficits,  insufficient  innovation  and  productivity  growth, 
excessive bank lending from core to periphery countries, all these have been good cause of 
lags, disturbances and vulnerabilities. But I believe that the sovereign debt crisis should be 
interpreted first and foremost as a major lack of trust in the future of the EMU, the euro and 
possibly the EU. The severity of the sovereign debt crisis, which at some point threatened 
the  very  existence  of  the  single  currency,  owes  in  part  to  the  incompleteness  of  the  EMU 
project,  which  dramatically  exposed  the  reversibility  of  even  the  major  progress  towards 
European financial integration made with the introduction of the euro.  
The rise in yield spreads between government bonds in the euro area  was determined by 
two factors, one national and one European, linked respectively to the weaknesses of some 
countries’ economies and public finances (sustainability risk), and to the incompleteness of 
European  construction  and  the  attendant  fears  of  a  break-up  of  the  monetary  union 
(redenomination risk). Europe’s response to the sovereign debt crisis has consequently been 
two-pronged: on the one hand, individual countries have pledged to adopt prudent budgetary 
policies and structural reforms to support competiveness; on the other, a far-reaching reform 
of EU economic governance has been undertaken.    
The definition and implementation of this response was not smooth, let alone optimal. But the 
constraints  were  significant  ─  first  and  foremost,  the  lack  of  trust  among  member  states, 
partly  justified  by  the  episodes  which  ignited  the  crisis  (fiscal  misreporting  and  failures  in 
financial supervision). Moreover, there was a lot of ground to be covered in a very short term. 
Europe  had  no  tools  with  which  to  manage  a  sovereign  crisis  and  the  legal  basis  for 
providing  financial  support  to  countries  in  distress  had  to  be  defined.  International  treaties 
needed to be drafted and ratified, also to strengthen peer oversight on national fiscal policies 
and structural reforms. Further integration of financial markets was necessary to increase the 
resilience of the area to asymmetric shocks: the banking union and the on-going project of 
the  capital  market  union  are  both  far  reaching  reforms,  affecting  in  depth  the  institutional 
fabric of member countries.   
The  ECB  Governing  Council,  by  providing  a  series  of  conventional  and  unconventional 
monetary  policy  measures  to  fulfil  its  price  stability  mandate,  ensured  accommodative 
financial  conditions  that  mitigated  the  fall  in  aggregate  demand  and  helped  to  “buy”  the 
considerable time needed to implement this strategy, while countering market uncertainties 
that could undermine its implementation. The European strategy to respond to the crisis has 
brought overall a stabilization of financial conditions and an easing of tensions in sovereign 
debt  markets,  even  if  we  are  still  in  deep  and  at  times  unknown  waters.  But,  obviously, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  monetary  policy  cannot  guarantee  strong  and  lasting  growth  on  its  own,  it  cannot  be  a 
substitute  for  the  needed  reforms,  it  can  only  provide  favourable  conditions  to  speed  the 
process up and absorb its short-term costs. A successful effort requires, once again, action 
at both the national and the European level.  
Lacking a common fiscal capacity, demand in the euro area must draw support from a more 
convinced  use  of  the  available  fiscal  space.  In  particular,  this  implies  a  substantial,  and 
symmetric,  respect  of  the  requirements  of  both  the  Excessive  Deficit  Procedure  and  the 
Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure. In the case of national budgets, the  existing flexibility 
should be reasonably used within the limits of European fiscal rules. At the same time the 
creation of new income, new demand, and new jobs must be supported by measures and 
reforms  designed,  as  of  now,  to  raise  productivity  and  enhance  growth  potential.  These 
reforms should take into account the structural challenges that characterise our “new world”, 
including  demographic  developments,  the  new  wave  of  technological  progress,  climate 
change. A marked expansion in activities that require expertise and new skills is ahead, but 
at the same time it is possible that the scope for employment in the sectors most susceptible 
to automation and to the growth of the digital economy will shrink, even considerably. 
The way forward 
The Five Presidents’ Report published in June 20158 sets out a roadmap for completing the 
EMU and, specifically, to increase its resilience to local shocks. It calls for contemporaneous 
progresses along four dimensions: ensuring that each economy has the structural features to 
prosper  within  the  Monetary  union  (economic  union),  limiting  risks  to financial  stability  and 
increasing  risk-sharing  within  the  private  sector  (financial  union),  ensuring  both  fiscal 
sustainability and fiscal stabilization (fiscal union), and providing democratic foundations for 
all the above (political union).  
The Report makes proposals to be adopted in two stages and a recent Communication by 
the  European  Commission  takes  forward  key  elements  of  the  first  stage.  On  economic 
governance,  such  elements  include  the  introduction  of  national  “Competitiveness  Boards” 
(mirroring  the  creation  of  national  Fiscal  Councils  introduced  by  the  six-pack  for  fiscal 
surveillance)  and  of  an  advisory  “European  Fiscal  Board”  (providing  an  independent 
evaluation  of  the  implementation  of  the  EU  fiscal  framework).  In  addition,  steps  towards 
financial  union  are  also  considered  (notably  through  a  European  Deposit  Insurance 
Scheme),  as  well  as  a  more  unified  representation  of  the  euro  area  in  international 
organizations.  
For  the  long  term,  the  Report  calls  for the  creation  of  a fiscal  stabilization  function for  the 
euro-area,  complementing  national 
to  cushion  severe  negative  shocks. 
Participation  in  this  shock-absorption  mechanism  would  be  conditional  on  compliance  with 
common standards in economic convergence. 
Unsurprisingly, the Report is far from being uncontroversial, most notably in the fiscal area. 
According to  some,  the weaknesses  are  such  that  the  Report  risks  to  be  another  “missed 
opportunity”.9 One can doubt the benefits of introducing further layers of “technocratic” control 
in an already complex framework, often criticized for lack of democratic accountability. In the 
medium  term,  and  at  least  until  the  creation  of  a  common  fiscal  stabilization  function,  the 
shock absorption capacity of euro-area countries remains dangerously limited (especially for 
those countries with limited fiscal space). In the longer term, since access to the common 
fiscal  capacity  would  be  conditional  on  significant  and  sustained  economic  convergence, 
instruments 
                                                
8   Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union, prepared by Jean-Claude Juncker, in close cooperation 
with Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi, and Martin Shultz. 
9  F. Saccomanni, “The Report of the Five Presidents: A Missed Opportunity”, Documenti IAI, 15|14, July 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  there is a risk of introducing a new source of tensions among different Member States within 
the euro area. 
Regardless of its individual proposals, in my view the key questions to ask about the Report 
are two: Are we going in the right direction? And, are these efforts sufficient? I believe that, 
however  arduous  it  might  prove,  it  is  worth  proceeding  along  the  roadmap  set  out  in  the 
Report. But it might not be sufficient. I believe that more progress on the side of  the political 
union should not come sequentially, at the very end of the process, but important elements 
should be considered right away. In other terms, more action at the economic and financial 
level  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  parallel  action  also  at  the  institutional  and  intrinsically 
political level: for example, on the legal side (from company and bankruptcy laws, to more 
basic rights and principles); on solidarity and welfare; on defence and security; on the timing 
of elections, and so on. There is also a case for reversing the de facto predominance of the 
intergovernmental approach on the so-called community method, even if we must be aware 
of the risks of this being dominated by an excessively administrative and bureaucratic policy-
making. 
I often joke that, for a sense of shared purposes to be built-up in the euro area and to fully 
remove  uncertainty  in  the  eyes  of  interested  external  partners  and  observers,  perhaps  it 
would have been better to have a “single army” before adopting a “single currency”…. Jokes 
apart, and aware that issues such as this have been very much debated over the last sixty 
years or so, I believe that those taken in the last few years on monetary policy and banking 
supervision are critical steps ahead towards a stronger union. Financial fragmentation along 
national lines, which came to represent a hallmark of the euro area crisis, has been reversed 
by  the  European  response  to  the  crisis;  financial  integration  is  now  back  to  a  level 
comparable to pre-sovereign debt crisis levels, although some fragmentation still remains.  
However,  the  recent  opposition  to  a  common  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  is 
unwelcome news if not outright regress. Some claim that for European integration to proceed 
more collective responsibility needs to be necessarily accompanied by a parallel transfer of 
sovereignty.  One  may  reply  that  this  transfer  of  sovereignty  has  already  taken  place  for 
monetary policy and banking supervision, without the corresponding introduction of common 
macroeconomic stabilization mechanisms or common deposit insurance.  
What  is  certain,  most  of  the  actions  needed  to  strengthen  EMU  calls  for  trust.  A 
confrontational  approach  would  be  detrimental.  Much  can  be  done  at  the  level  of  the 
European Institutions – Parliament, Council, Commission – to make them better  instruments 
of a genuine Union, rather than a collection of states. Each country must continue to build on 
the  progress  made  so  far,  before  or  during  the  crisis,  in  macroeconomic  and  structural 
adjustment. All must show some understanding for their peers and play their part in renewing 
a shared sense of purpose and trust. We have to realize that Europe’s strength lies in the 
fact that we are united.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
