   Barry Whiteside: Microfinance in Fiji 
Introductory remarks by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the 2015 
National Microfinance Awards, Suva, 13 November 2015. 
 Salutations 
The Honourable Faiyaz Koya, Minister for Industry, Trade and Tourism, 
Members of the Board of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, 
Our valued sponsors of the 2015 Microfinance Awards, 
National Financial Inclusion Taskforce and Working Group Members, 
All our Microfinance Entrepreneurs who are with us tonight, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good evening and welcome to the National Microfinance Annual Awards, our special evening 
to celebrate and recognise the best from this important sector of our economy. 
Introductory Comments 
Today has been a long day for some of us who came together this morning to strategise on a 
way forward for financial inclusion in Fiji and it has been a pleasure to note the support we 
have received from all stakeholders. 
This evening we will witness some inspirational examples of microfinance entrepreneurship. 
The National Microfinance Awards is an important event in the Reserve Bank of Fiji calendar, 
as it recognises our micro entrepreneurs’ economic empowerment through income generating 
activities. 
Microfinance is a sector that has a lot of potential for creating new jobs and boosting economic 
activity and, in turn, contributing to economic growth in the country. It involves among other 
things, extending loans, some of them as low as fifty dollars, so that people can start their own 
small businesses and generate income for their families. 
Microfinance, when done well, has the ability to empower people. When our most vulnerable 
are empowered with financial support to take care of their family, they can pay for the basic 
needs of food, water and shelter, health care services, a good education for their children and 
enjoy a better living standard. When this happens, there is of course less pressure on the 
State, but it also surely must bring a sense of pride to our people. 
I mentioned that it is important that microfinance needs to be done well. It is not just about 
giving out small loans and leaving the recipients to get on with whatever it is they are doing. It 
is about also providing the necessary support structures and skills development so that the 
people are able to sustain their businesses. Often these people are the very ones that need 
the most help. So we need to hold them by the hand for a while and give them encouragement 
and proper mentoring. Some financial institutions have being doing this well and I applaud 
them for that. Clearly, you can see the results here tonight with the many stories of success. 
However this is only the tip of the iceberg and we can do much more. It is something that we 
must continue to work into our wider financial literacy and inclusion goals and I was excited by 
many of the outcomes from our deliberations earlier today. As I mentioned this morning, it is 
my  hope  that  our  schools’  FinEd  program  can  go  a  step  further  and  encourage  an 
entrepreneurial spirit in our children. Most of my generation and my children’s generation came 
out of school or university with the sole aim of finding a job and working for someone else. I 
would love to see my grandchildren, the next generation, leaving school with an alternative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   mindset  and  that  is  the  ability  and  desire  (if  they  so  wish)  to  establish  their  own  small 
businesses. 
We don’t need to look far in Fiji to see how a small or even micro business can blossom through 
hard  work  over  the  years  to  become  large  successful  companies  employing  many  of  our 
citizens. Pure Fiji Limited is a classic case of such a business. I recall Gaetane Austin years 
ago telling me that they started from her kitchen in Beach Road, Laucala Bay, and look where 
the company is now: Pure Fiji is not only a household name in Fiji, but also an internationally 
renowned brand. I therefore see it as our responsibility to nurture this sector and help it grow. 
Government Support 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it has been extremely encouraging to note the growing support by 
Government  for  our  MSME  sector.  Several  years  ago  the  State  set  aside  funds  with  the 
Reserve Bank to establish a credit guarantee scheme covering loans by financial institutions 
to eligible small and medium businesses. Interest charged on these loans must not exceed 10 
percent per annum. To date more than 1,040 loans valued at just over $62 million have been 
registered under the scheme. I am pleased to say that there have been only two calls on the 
guarantee in the last 3 years. 
This  year  Government  also  initiated  a  Micro  and  Small  Business  Grant  Facility  to  provide 
financial and capital assistance to not only existing businesses but also to those wanting to 
start  a  business.  The  intention  is  to  help  micro-businesses  with  seed  capital  or  additional 
capital to grow and succeed. Since the set-up of the facility, we understand that more than 
2,100 micro-entrepreneurs have benefited, with grants up to a maximum of $1,000 each. This 
is a huge show of support for the MSME sector which must be applauded. Clearly it is important 
that the level of backup as I indicated earlier must be managed well. 
Sponsorship 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to our sponsors for this 
evening’s Microfinance Awards: the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme; ANZ Bank; Life 
Insurance Corporation of India; Westpac Banking Corporation; Bank South Pacific; Bank of 
Baroda; and, HFC Bank. Thank you for your continuous support and partnership in helping us 
recognise and appreciate our up and coming Fijian businesses. 
Awards 
This year we have introduced one new award category, the Young Entrepreneur of the year. 
The Microfinance Awards categories are now: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The winners for the Individual, Partnership and Young Micro-entrepreneur categories will each 
receive  a  cash  prize  of $5,000  while  the  three  runners  up  will  receive  $3,000, $2,000  and 
$1,000 respectively. 
The Institution category winners will receive trophies and we also have some merit Awards. 
Individual Micro-entrepreneur; 
Partnership Micro-entrepreneurs; 
Young Micro-entrepreneur; and 
Microfinance Service Provider. 
Process 
This year we have received a total of twenty-nine entries, predominantly from Viti Levu and a 
few from Kadavu, Labasa, Lau and Gau. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Assessments for the Individual, Partnership and Youth categories were based on business 
growth,  use  of  local  resources  and  creativity,  adequate  book-keeping,  sustainability  and 
compliance with Government regulations. 
The assessment for the Institution Category focused on outreach, delivery channels and use 
of innovative technology and client protection. 
Congratulatory comments 
Ladies and Gentlemen, all finalists for the 3rd National Microfinance Awards were selected by 
a panel of 3 judges representing the Pacific Financial Inclusion Program, the National Centre 
for Small and Medium Enterprise Development and the Reserve Bank. 
I would like to congratulate all the winners of tonight’s awards and trust that you will seize this 
opportunity and use the additional financial windfall to further grow your businesses. For those 
who did not quite make the top award in your category, I urge you to continue to strive hard. I 
have found that nothing comes easy in life. We must work for it. 
I certainly wish all of you the very best over the coming years. 
Introduction of Chief Guest 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now my privilege and honour to introduce our chief guest this 
evening, the Honourable Faiyaz Koya, our Minister for Industry, Trade and Tourism. 
Amongst his ministerial portfolio, Honourable Koya is also responsible for micro, small and 
medium enterprise development. We know that he has taken an extremely keen interest in this 
role and we wish him the very best as we all try to grow our MSME sector. 
Minister, we are delighted that you could join us tonight. Ladies and Gentlemen please join me 
in welcoming the Honourable Faiyaz Koya to address us! 
Vinaka. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
