  Øystein Olsen: How central banks influence interest rates 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Centre  for  Monetary  Economics  (CME)  /  BI  Norwegian  Business  School,  Oslo,  1  October 
2015. 
 Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. 
Accompanying charts can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
Introduction 
A number of items appear on my calendar every year. Today’s speech is one of them. Three 
years ago, the speech was entitled “Monetary policy in turbulent times”. The theme was how 
central banks worldwide were adopting new approaches to the conduct of monetary policy. 
Chart: International yield curves 
Three  years  later,  this  theme  has  not  lost  its  relevance.  The  list  of  countries  that  have 
adopted  quantitative  easing  has  grown  longer.  Policy  rates  in  some  countries  have  fallen 
below the zero lower bound, and we have seen examples of negative yields on bonds. This 
has challenged a long-held belief – that the lower bound for nominal rates is zero. 
The measures have a common goal, which is to bring down market interest rates and keep 
them  there  until  a  firm  economic  recovery  is  achieved.  By  influencing  interest  rates  on 
financial  contracts  of  varying  duration  and  risk,  monetary  policy  seeks  to  stabilise  inflation 
and stimulate output and employment. 
In this speech, I will take a closer look at how policy rates affect money and financial markets 
and the impact of the unconventional measures implemented. 
Even though interest rates have been low for a long time, activity  in advanced economies 
has been slow to recover, reflecting global developments and economic shocks in the wake 
of the financial crisis. 
Low  policy  rates  and  quantitative  easing  in  other  countries  have  also  influenced  the 
Norwegian bond market. Yields on Norwegian long-term government bonds have fallen to a 
very low  level, primarily driven by policy rate setting in other countries and global financial 
markets  rather  than  economic  conditions  in  Norway.  And  even  though  the  recent  cuts  in 
Norges Bank’s key policy rate have followed in the wake of the fall in oil prices, the current 
low level is a result of low interest rates abroad. 
The policy rate is the central bank’s most important monetary policy instrument. Before we 
turn to global developments, I will therefore briefly describe how the policy rate influences the 
shortest end of the curve, with a particular focus on the Norwegian context. 
From policy rates to short-term market rates 
Banks’ deposits with the central bank are often referred to as reserves and are banks’ most 
liquid assets. Central banks set the terms for banks’ loans from and deposits with the central 
bank  and  control  the  size  of  banks’  reserves.  The  objective  of  liquidity  management  is  to 
keep short-term money market rates close to the key policy rate. 
Chart: Norges Bank interest rates 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In  Norway,  banks’  reserves  are  managed  using  a  quota  system.  Deposits  up  to a  specific 
quota  are  remunerated  at  the  key  policy  rate,  which  is  Norges  Bank’s  sight  deposit  rate. 
Deposits that exceed the quota are remunerated at a rate below the key policy rate, referred 
to as the reserve rate.1  
Banks that borrow overnight from Norges Bank pay the overnight lending (D-loan) rate. 
As shown in the chart, the reserve rate and the overnight lending rate are set respectively at 
1 percentage point below and 1 percentage point above the key policy rate.2  
Interbank  transactions  take  place  throughout  the  day.  The  transactions  are  settled  via  the 
banks’ accounts with the central bank. Banks with deposits above the quota at the end of the 
day normally lend reserves overnight to banks with a negative balance in Norges Bank or to 
banks that have deposits below the quota. 
Chart: Norges Bank interest rates and market rate 
The  interest  rate  on  these  transactions,  called  the  overnight  interbank  rate  (NOWA  in 
Norway), is normally very close to the key policy rate. 
The interest rate corridor around the key policy rate is intended to promote reserve trading 
between banks and not between banks and the central bank. This contributes to an active 
interbank market and an efficient money market. 
In order to keep the overnight interbank rate close to the key policy rate, Norges Bank aims 
to keep banks’ total reserves below the sum of the quotas that can be remunerated at the 
key policy rate.3 While Norges Bank seeks to maintain the sum of the reserves in the banking 
system around NOK 35 billion, the sum of banks’ quotas is NOK 45 billion, so that banks as 
a whole can always deposit the reserves outstanding in the banking system at the key policy 
rate. 
Should the volume of reserves exceed the sum of banks’ quotas, some banks would have to 
hold reserves at the reserve rate. That would push down the overnight interbank rate towards 
the reserve rate. But for that to occur, Norges Bank would have to stop withdrawing surplus 
liquidity  through  market  operations.  There  are  no  plans  to  make  such  a  change  to  our 
liquidity policy. 
The  reserve  rate  in  Norway  is  now  at  a  negative  0.25  percent.  But  this  will  not  lead  to 
negative money market rates. With normal liquidity management, which ensures that there 
are no excess reserves in the system, the key policy rate – not the reserve rate – determines 
                                                
1  Similar quota systems are in use in Denmark, Switzerland and New Zealand. For a more general discussion of 
liquidity  management  systems,  see  Syrstad,  O.  (2011):  “Systemer  for  likviditetsstyring:  Oppbygging  og 
egenskaper”  [Liquidity  management  systems:  design  and  features],  Norges  Bank  Staff  Memo  5/2011 
(Norwegian only). Banks’ feedback on the current liquidity management system, introduced in October 2011, 
is  discussed  in  Norges  Bank  Papers  4/2014:  “Banks’  assessment  of  Norges  Bank’s  liquidity  management 
system”. 
2  Normally, the reserve rate acts as a floor and the overnight lending rate as a ceiling for the overnight interbank 
rate, as banks will not normally lend reserves at an interest rate that is lower than the rate they receive from 
the central bank or borrow reserves at an interest rate that is higher than the rate they have to pay the central 
bank. There may be a stigma attached to using this lending facility. When this stigma cost is high, the market 
rate may exceed Norges Bank’s overnight lending rate. If one or more banks do not have access to the central 
bank’s deposit facility, the market rate may fall below the reserve rate. 
3  Competition  among  banks  keeps  the  overnight  interbank  rate  close  to  the  key  policy  rate.  A  bank  holding 
reserves in excess of its quota towards the end of the day can avoid having to deposit these excess reserves 
at the reserve rate by lending in the interbank market to a bank with room on its quota. This bank will be able 
to  deposit  the  borrowed  reserves  at  the  key  policy  rate  and  earn  an  interest  rate  margin  as  long  as  the 
borrowing rate is lower than the key policy rate. Competition among banks with room on their quotas pushes 
up borrowing rates and pushes down interest rate margins. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  level  of  short-term  money  market  rates.  This  also  applies  when  the  reserve  rate  is 
negative.4  
Negative interest rates 
As I mentioned earlier, it has long been assumed that interest rates had to be positive. That 
barrier has now been broken by a number of central banks. They now operate a policy of 
negative rates with a view to bringing short-term market rates below zero. Two approaches 
are being used to achieve this. 
Chart: Sveriges Riksbank interest rates 
Sweden has chosen the first approach. The policy rate itself is a negative 0.35 percent. This 
is  combined  with  normal  liquidity  management  without  excess  reserves  in  the  banking 
system. As a result, the shortest money market rates are also negative.5  
The  central  banks  in  the  euro  area,  Switzerland  and  Denmark  have  chosen  a  different 
approach. Policy rates are zero or marginally positive, while the reserve rate is negative. At 
the  same  time,  there  are  substantial  excess  reserves  in  the  banking  system.  The  reserve 
rate is a negative 0.75 percent in Switzerland and Denmark and a negative 0.2 percent in the 
euro area.6  
Maintaining large excess reserves is a deliberate policy. These central banks have supplied 
liquidity to the market and intentionally used the excess reserves to push down the overnight 
interbank rate towards the reserve rate. The central banks of Denmark and Switzerland have 
achieved this by purchasing foreign currency to counteract an appreciation of the exchange 
rate. By also permitting short-term money market rates to become negative, they have made 
the domestic currency less attractive. 
Chart: ECB interest rates and liquidity in the banking system 
In the euro area, excess reserves are a result of the measures implemented in the wake of 
the  financial  crisis  and  the  European  government  debt  crisis.  The  European  Central  Bank 
(ECB) operates a liquidity management system using the policy rate and two interest rates 
that correspond to Norges Bank’s reserve rate and overnight lending (D-loan) rate (shown in 
the chart as the deposit rate and the lending rate). Until autumn 2008, the ECB ensured that 
no excess reserves remained in the banking system. Liquidity management was normal and 
the overnight interbank rate, EONIA, was close to the policy rate.7  
                                                
4  Bernhardsen,  T.  and  K.  Lund  (2015):  “Negative  interest  rates:  Central  bank  reserves  and  liquidity 
management”, Norges Bank Economic Commentaries 2/2015. 
5  Sveriges  Riksbank uses a corridor system (with no reserve requirements) to manage banks’ reserves. The 
interest rate corridor is normally +/- 0.75 percentage point. The policy rate in Sweden, the repo rate, is the 
interest rate on the Riksbank’s weekly market operations. In addition, the Riksbank conducts daily fine-tuning 
operations,  normally  at  the  repo  rate  +/-  0.1  percentage  point.  The  Riksbank  manages  the  reserves  in  the 
system to keep them “approximately in balance”, i.e. virtually all reserves are withdrawn in the weekly repo 
transactions  or  in  the  daily  fine-tuning  operations.  Only  very  marginal  amounts  are  remunerated  at  a  rate 
corresponding  to  Norges  Bank’s  reserve  rate.  For  details  on  liquidity  management  in  Sweden,  see  “The 
Riksbank’s operational framework for the implementation of monetary policy – a review”, Riksbank Studies, 
March 2014, Sveriges Riksbank. 
In  Denmark  and  Switzerland,  the  interest  rate  on  banks’  marginal  deposit  facility  at  the  central  bank 
corresponds to our reserve rate. For details on the liquidity management system in Denmark, see Jørgensen, 
A. and Lars Risbjerg (2012): “Negative interest rates”, Monetary Review, 3rd Quarter 2012, Part 1, Danmarks 
Nationalbank. 
6 
7  The policy rate in the euro area is the refinancing rate, which is the minimum bid rate in the ECB’s weekly 
market operations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Excess reserves have increased substantially since the ECB started to provide banks with 
long-term loans and implemented quantitative easing. This is illustrated by the grey area in 
the chart. As a result, the overnight interbank rate has remained below the policy rate and 
just above the reserve rate, as shown in the chart. 
Negative rates have their limitations 
In the euro area and Sweden, the aim of unconventional monetary policy has been to bring 
inflation up towards the inflation target. Negative rates – in combination with asset purchases 
–  are  intended  to  boost  activity  and  prevent  low  inflation  from  becoming  entrenched.  The 
effects can be transmitted via both lower bank interest rates and a weaker exchange rate. 
In other words, negative money market rates operate through the usual channels. But even 
though the zero lower bound is not absolute, the effect of further cuts will diminish as rates 
approach or fall below zero. 
The  most  important  limitation  on  how  far  down  it  makes  sense  to  go  is  related  to  the 
existence  of  an  alternative  to  bank  deposits,  i.e.  cash.  Negative  bank  deposit  rates  can 
always be avoided by holding cash instead. The disadvantage is that cash is more expensive 
to manage than electronic deposit money. Transport, storage and security all involve costs. 
For  a  bank  participating  in  the  settlement  system,  where  large  amounts  are  reinvested  at 
frequent intervals across accounts and across banks, the costs involved in switching to cash 
will be considerable. Central bank deposit rates can therefore be below zero. How far below, 
is an open question. 
For many retail customers, exchanging bank deposits for cash will be fairly inexpensive. A 
safe  deposit  box  can  be  rented  for  less  than  €50  a  year.  If  bank  customers  choose  to 
withdraw their deposits and hold cash, banks will lose an important part of their funding. This 
is  probably  an  important  reason  why  banks  in  countries  with  negative  policy  rates  are 
reluctant to set negative deposit rates, particularly for households. 
If  banks  hold  back  on  deposit  rates,  lending  rates  can  only  fall  to  a  limited  extent  before 
banks’ earnings are reduced. A lower policy rate will probably have a less-than-normal effect 
on lending rates, weakening the impact of monetary policy via the demand channel. 
The  policy  rate  in  the  UK  has  been  0.5  percent  for  some  time.  In  the  Bank  of  England’s 
assessment,  a  further  reduction  would  not  serve  any  useful  purpose.8  Nor  has  the  ECB 
found  it  appropriate  to  reduce  the  policy  rate  further,  but  is  prepared  to  expand  its  asset 
purchase programme if necessary.9  
Central banks also influence long-term interest rates 
For monetary policy to work, it must have an effect on more than short-term money market 
rates. The interest rates that influence inflation and employment are those facing enterprises 
and households. 
In economies with well-functioning money and credit markets, a reduction in the policy rate 
will relatively quickly push down market rates. In recent years, there have been cases where 
this did not happen. The most serious situation that has arisen occurred after the Lehman 
Brothers  collapse.  The  resulting  uncertainty  led  to  very  high  risk  premiums.  Despite 
substantial policy rate cuts, market rates remained high. 
                                                
8  Bank of England (2013): Note on Negative Interest Rates for Treasury Committee. 
9  Cœuré, Benoît (2015), Member of the Executive Board of the ECB: “How binding is the zero lower bound?” 
(speech given on 18 May 2015), European Central Bank. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  response,  a  number  of  central  banks,  particularly  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  ECB, 
intervened  directly  in  those  money  and  credit  market  segments  that  had  been  hardest  hit. 
The Federal Reserve purchased mortgage-backed securities owned by banks, for example, 
which improved banks’ funding conditions and facilitated their credit provision to the broad 
economy. In Norway, the swap arrangement had a similar effect. 
In  the  years  following  the  financial  crisis,  a  number  of  central  banks  have  adopted  new 
measures. The margin for further reductions in the key policy rate has gradually diminished. 
Any further attempts to stimulate the economy have had to involve lower long-term interest 
rates. 
Central  banks  have  sought  to  achieve  this  in  two  ways:  first  via  communication.  Central 
banks have clearly stated that policy rates will be kept low for a long time. In some cases, 
signals have been linked to specific targets that must be reached before a rise in the policy 
rate will be considered. The purpose is to provide forward guidance to the market concerning 
future interest rate developments. For Norges Bank, publishing an interest rate path is a form 
of forward guidance. 
Second,  central  banks  have  implemented  purchases  of  government  bonds  and  other 
securities  on  a  massive  scale.  This  has  further  driven  down  long-term  interest  rates.  This 
measure is known as quantitative easing, or balance sheet policy, which the Bank of Japan 
attempted  to  use  as  long  as  15  years  ago.  Following  the  financial  crisis,  it  was  quickly 
adopted by the central banks in the UK and the US. The ECB and Sveriges Riksbank have 
subsequently followed suit. 
Chart: Central bank reserves 
The use of unconventional instruments has vastly inflated central bank balance sheets. On 
the asset side, central banks have increased their holdings of government bonds and bonds 
issued by private enterprises and institutions. These holdings are matched on the liabilities 
side by increased deposits from private banks in the form of central bank reserves. 
The  stock  of  central  bank reserves  in  the  US  and  UK  is  now  five  times  larger  than  it  was 
before  the  financial  crisis.  In  the  euro  area,  reserves  have  doubled  in  size.  These  figures 
provide a good illustration of the extent of the measures implemented. 
Such  large  increases  in  central  bank  reserves  may  evoke  associations  with  historical 
examples  of  extensive  government  money  printing.  But  this  comparison  only  goes  so  far. 
Historically,  money  has  usually  been  printed  to  finance  government  budget  deficits.  The 
increased  money  supply  then  had  a  direct  effect  on  the  economy  through  purchases  of 
goods and services. The result has often been high and uncontrolled inflation. 
Quantitative  easing  is  different.  In  the  same  way  as  traditional  monetary  policy,  the  way 
quantitative easing is able to influence the wider economy is through lower interest rates and 
higher  securities  prices.  The  transmission  mechanism  of  quantitative  easing  to  the  real 
economy operates through several channels. 
First,  the  central  banks’  purchases  have  supported  their  communication  concerning  future 
policy  rates. When  central  banks  purchase  long-term  government  bonds,  this  is  in  itself  a 
signal that policy rates will be kept low for a long time. This also pushes down interest rates 
on other securities. 
Chart: Long-term yields and term premiums 
In addition, the central banks’ purchases have pushed up prices for government bonds and 
pushed  down  yields.  Term  premiums  on  government  bonds  have  fallen.  While  10-year 
government bond yields in the US and UK are now at around 2 percent, German yields are 
as low as less than 1 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Chart: Credit premiums and equity prices 
 Another  important  transmission  channel  into  the  economy  is  the  portfolio  rebalancing 
channel. Investors selling government bonds are left with a more liquid portfolio, which they 
then seek to invest in other financial assets. Prices for a number of securities have risen, and 
yields  on  bonds  issued by  banks  and  other  enterprises  have fallen.  Premiums  on  covered 
bonds, for example, have fallen back to the very low levels prevailing in the pre-crisis period. 
A  fourth  transmission  channel  operates  via  global  financial  markets.  Cross-border  capital 
movements as a result of portfolio rebalancing have generated exchange rate fluctuations. 
Unconventional monetary policy can contribute to a depreciation of the domestic currency, 
providing a positive extra effect of the policy in the short term. However, the effect diminishes 
when a number of countries implement quantitative easing and policy rate cuts in parallel. 
Exchange  rate  movements  may  then  quickly  reverse.  Increased  volatility  creates  an 
environment of uncertainty. 
Capital inflows and a stronger exchange rate have at the same time created challenges in 
other countries, not least in some emerging economies.10, 11 
We can conclude that, all in all, the aim of quantitative easing has been achieved to a certain 
extent. Yields have fallen and securities prices have risen. But using strong medicine over a 
prolonged  period  also  has  side-effects.  Returns  on  low-risk  securities  have  been  pushed 
down  to  a  very  low  level.  Investors  facing  a  required  nominal  rate  of  return  may  have 
invested in higher-risk projects than they would otherwise have chosen. 
As growth prospects improve and monetary policy normalises in the US and Europe, capital 
flows may be reversed. This may result in increased volatility and  wide  swings in financial 
asset prices. When and how central banks will be able to return to more normal monetary 
policy is thus an open question. 
Effects on the real economy 
Chart: Nominal and real interest rates 
Internationally,  monetary  policy  has  moved  into  unknown  territory,  employing  instruments 
that have rarely been used before. The theoretical framework is being developed as we gain 
experience  of  using  these  instruments.  The  need  for  deleveraging  is  restricting  household 
and  company  spending  behaviour,  adding  to  uncertainty  about  the  effect  of  the  new 
monetary policy measures on inflation and employment. At the same time as the post-crisis 
deleveraging  may  have  weakened  the  effect  of  policy  rate  cuts,  advanced  economies  are 
facing structural changes that influence the long-term growth picture. It is likely that the level 
of interest rates that would have a neutral effect on the economy has fallen. 
The global economy has never before, in recent history, been through such a long period of 
interest rates as low as they are now. The interest rate level worldwide was already falling 
long  before  the  financial  crisis  erupted.  Behind  the  decline  is  a  downward  trend  in  real 
interest rates that can be attributed to a number of structural developments. Lowering policy 
rates is a response to these developments. 
For several decades towards the end of the twentieth century, growth in the labour force and 
higher  levels  of  education  boosted  economic  growth.  Growth  was  accompanied  by  high 
returns and considerably higher real interest rates than observed in recent years. 
                                                
10  Carstens, A. (2015): “Challenges for emerging economies in the face of unconventional policies in advanced 
economies” (speech given on 20 April 2015), Bank of Mexico. 
11  Rajan, R. (2015): “Going Bust for Growth” (speech given 19 May 2015), Bank of India. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Growth  impulses  have  gradually  become  weaker.  Productivity  growth  has  declined.  The 
labour  force  is  growing  more  slowly  in  many  countries.  At  the  same  time,  other  structural 
changes  are  providing  the  motivation  to  save  more:  population  aging  and  rising  income 
inequality.  In  sum,  these  factors  have  contributed  to  lower  real  interest  rates,  even  when 
economies have been in balance. 
Following  the  financial  crisis,  interest  rates  have  fallen  even  further.  Economies  had  been 
completely  thrown  off  balance.  Nor  was  there  much  help  to  be  obtained  from  other  policy 
areas. The role of central banks has been to counteract an even deeper and more prolonged 
downturn. This is the challenge to which monetary policy has responded. 
Chart: Investment and consumption 
But  there  have  been  strong  headwinds.  We  have  had  an  illustration  of  the  claim  that 
downturns following financial crises are deeper and more persistent than other downturns.12 
As  a  result,  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  has  been  weaker  than  otherwise.  Enterprises, 
households and governments made use of ample capital and low interest rates in the pre-
crisis years to debt finance consumption and investment. When the downturn occurred, there 
was a need for considerable deleveraging, while weak growth prospects have dampened the 
willingness  to  invest.  In  many  countries,  the  downturn  was  further  amplified  as  banking 
systems  with  low  resilience  had  to  deal  with  large  loan  losses.  The  uncertainty  that  arose 
during the financial crisis has persisted for a long time, dampening the willingness to take on 
financial risk, and the willingness to save has increased. 
Chart: GDP 
The pace of global growth is expected to pick up gradually in the coming years. In the US 
and the UK, the first two countries to introduce quantitative easing, the recovery is on a firm 
footing.  Unemployment  has  come  down.  Increased  economic  activity  has  contributed  to  a 
substantial reduction in government deficits. In the euro area, the recovery continues to be 
fragile. A large portion of the workforce is unemployed and production equipment stands idle. 
However, growth is gradually picking up. 
It is difficult to judge to what extent the recovery abroad can be attributed to the monetary 
policy  that  has  been  conducted.  There  is,  however,  little  doubt  that  it  has  had  a  positive 
effect. Lower interest rates have given firms and households access to cheaper funding. It 
has also eased the interest burden for heavily indebted borrowers and contributed to growth 
in disposable income. In addition, the value of households’ financial wealth has increased. 
This may also have provided a basis for higher demand. 
Studies  conducted  so  far  also  suggest  that  the  unconventional  measures  have  had  an 
effect.13  A  study  by  the  Federal  Reserve  suggests  that the  Fed’s  asset  purchase  program 
has  reduced  unemployment  by  1¼  percentage  points  and  increased  inflation  by  ½ 
percentage point.14 The Bank of England estimates that the Bank’s purchases of government 
                                                
12  Jordà,  O.,  M.  Schularick  and A.  M.  Taylor  (2013):  “When Credit  Bites  Back”, Journal  of  Money,  Credit and 
Banking (45), 3–28. 
13  IMF (2013): “Global impact and challenges of unconventional monetary policies”. IMF Policy Paper, October 
2013. 
14  Engen,  E.  M.,  T.  T.  Laubach  and  D.  Reifschneider  (2015):  “The  macroeconomic  effects  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  unconventional  monetary  policies”,  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series,  Federal  Reserve 
Board, Washington D.C. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  bonds from 2011 to 2012 boosted GDP by just over ½ percent. The effect on inflation was 
also found to be positive.15  
Chart: Money market rates 
Nevertheless, in view of how far monetary policy has been stretched, growth abroad has not 
been  overwhelming. The  expected  rise  in  policy  rates  has  been  repeatedly  pushed  further 
out in time. 
Traditional advanced economies are facing deep structural challenges related to low growth 
that must be addressed by other measures. Monetary policy easing and low interest rates do 
not  result  in  permanently  higher  growth.  The  causal  relationship  goes  in  the  opposite 
direction: prospects for prolonged low growth result in a long period of low interest rates. 
Ripple effects on the Norwegian economy 
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.  The 
operational target is annual consumer price inflation of close to 2.5% over time. The inflation 
target  provides  a  nominal  anchor  for  the  economy.  When  inflation  expectations  are  firmly 
anchored,  monetary  policy  can  serve  as  the  first  line  of  defence  when  the  economy  turns 
down. 
The key policy rate is set with a view to stabilising developments in the Norwegian economy. 
At  the  same  time,  the  interest  rate  level  abroad  influences  the  policy  rate  in  Norway, 
particularly  through  the  exchange  rate.  Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  forecasts  have  been 
adjusted  as  expectations  regarding  policy  rates  abroad  have  fallen.  The  alternative  could 
have been an excessive appreciation of the krone and the risk of excessively low inflation. 
The interest rate level in Norway was therefore low even before oil prices began to fall last 
summer. 
It  is  not  only  through  low  policy  rates  Norway’s  economy  is  influenced  by  monetary  policy 
abroad.  In  a  number  of  areas,  we  import  the  effects  other  central  banks  are  seeking  to 
achieve through quantitative easing. 
Chart: Yields on 10-year government bonds 
One  example  is  the  government  bond  market.  For  investors  seeking  safe  investments, 
Norwegian  government  bonds  have  been  one  of  several  alternatives.  Norwegian  10-year 
government bond yields are now quoted at around 1½ percent. 
Other  investors  have  turned  to  the  Norwegian  equity  market.  Equity  prices  on  Oslo  Børs 
have tracked the rise in equity prices abroad. Even when oil prices – and oil equities – began 
to fall, the rest of Oslo Børs continued to rise. 
The  commercial  property  market  is  another  example  of  foreign  capital  finding  its  way  to 
Norway in search of higher returns. The required rate of return on attractive office premises 
has  fallen  in  pace  with  long-term  yields,  and  prices  have  risen  considerably.  At  the  same 
time,  rental  prices  in  a  number  of  locations  are  showing  a  downward  trend.  Large  foreign 
capital inflows have probably contributed to the fall in the required rate of return. 
Like  their  counterparts  in  other  countries,  Norwegian  bond-issuing  enterprises  and  banks 
have over time been able to obtain cheaper funding. Lower risk premiums on covered bonds, 
for  example,  have  reduced  banks’  residential  mortgage funding  costs. A  low  policy  rate  in 
                                                
15  Churm,  R.,  M.  Joyce,  G.  Kapetianos  and  K.  Theodoridis  (2015):  “Unconventional  monetary  policy  and  the 
macroeconomy:  the  impact  of  the  United  Kingdom’s  QE2  and  Funding  for  lending  Scheme”.  Staff Working 
Paper No. 542, Bank of England. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  combination with low risk premiums has resulted in low residential mortgage financing costs 
for households. Household debt has grown far faster than income. 
Low  interest  rates  may  increase  the  risk  that  debt  and  asset  prices  rise  to  levels  that  are 
unsustainable  over  time.  Such  financial  imbalances  could  trigger  or  amplify  an  economic 
downturn. More resilient banks reduce this risk. Requirements with regard to banks’ equity 
capital and funding structures have been strengthened and the countercyclical capital buffer 
has  been  implemented.  In  addition,  the  requirements  for  prudent  residential  mortgage 
lending practices have entered into force. Norges Bank’s policy rate setting takes account of 
the risk of a build-up of financial imbalances. The aim is to avoid an abrupt downturn in the 
economy and higher unemployment at a later stage. 
Over  the  past  year,  there  has  been  a  negative  turnaround  in the  Norwegian  economy.  Oil 
prices have decreased by more than 50 percent in a year. The fall in oil prices has amplified 
an expected decline in activity in the oil sector, and the Norwegian economy is experiencing 
a  period  of  restructuring.  No  more  than  in  other  countries  can  monetary  policy  in  Norway 
assume  primary  responsibility  for  delivering  structural  changes  in  the  economy.  However, 
monetary policy can dampen the impact on output and employment in a transitional period. 
Chart: Labour costs relative to trading partners 
The  policy  rate  has  been  cut  and  the  interest  rate  differential  between  Norway  and  other 
countries  reduced.  Lower  interest  rates  stimulate  consumption  and  investment.  The  krone 
has depreciated markedly and has recently been at historically low levels. The depreciation 
of the krone is contributing to underpinning inflation and dampening the effects of lower oil 
prices  on  output  and  employment.  Even  though  the  cost  level  in  Norway  is  still  high 
compared  with  other  countries,  a  weaker  krone  is  strengthening  the  competitiveness  of 
Norwegian  firms  exposed  to  international  competition.  At  the  same  time,  wage  growth  in 
Norway has moderated, and there are prospects that real wage growth in 2015 will be at its 
lowest in 20 years. 
Norway is therefore in a sound position to tackle the restructuring facing the economy. 
Conclusion 
The monetary policy instrument employed by Norges Bank is the key policy rate. With a well-
functioning  money  and  credit  market,  changes  in  the  key  policy  rate  will  normally  be 
transmitted to short-term and long-term rates. 
In recent years, a number of our trading partners have employed unconventional instruments 
to  achieve  a  sufficiently  expansionary  monetary  policy.  This  is  not  under  consideration  in 
Norway.  We  still  have  room  for  manoeuvre  in  economic  policy.  Based  on  our  current 
assessment of the outlook for the Norwegian economy, there is little likelihood of a negative 
key policy rate in Norway. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
