   Cyril Roux: Working with the Single Supervisory Mechanism regime 
Address  by  Mr  Cyril  Roux,  Deputy  Governor  (Financial  Regulation)  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland, at the Banking and Payments Federation Ireland (BPFI Banking) Conference, Dublin, 
27 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is my pleasure to take part in today’s BPFI conference on the Banking Union and speak after 
Ignazio Angeloni, my fellow member at the ECB Supervisory Board, and before Elke König, 
the Chair of the Single Resolution Board. 
I would like to offer a second insight into the workings of the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
(SSM) from the perspective of the national head of financial regulation in one of the Eurozone 
countries. 
The SSM is an unprecedented experiment. For the first time, prudential banking supervision is 
conducted at supra-national level. The financial crisis has been a catalyst for the decision to 
do  so,  but  it  is  no  surprise  that  the  European  Union  Treaty  had  already  provided  for  the 
possibility to conduct banking supervision at the same level as the conduct of monetary policy, 
well before the financial crisis of the past decade. 
Indeed, I would agree that banking supervision is best conducted by the institution which is the 
lender  of  last  resort.  The  provision  of  emergency  liquidity  assistance,  which  is  sometimes 
necessary, is dependent upon the medium term prospect of solvency. A conversation between 
separate arms of a central bank on these issues, adjudicated by a single body, appears to me 
a happy medium between necessary separation of duties and useful proximity of knowledge 
and effective decision making. 
That being said, only time will test the governance and effectiveness of the SSM. Monetary 
economists would be familiar with the debate around optimal currency areas, and the history 
of international currency unions. The large and diverse Eurozone is the first real-life case study 
of an international banking supervisory area. In the course of this speech I will underline some 
of  the  strengths  and  challenges  of  supra-national  supervision,  based  on  the  first  year  of 
operation of the SSM. 
The SSM in operation 
As you know, the SSM is both a legal framework and a supervisory approach embedded in an 
operational architecture. 
The  legal  framework  is  made  of  the  SSM  Regulation  and  the  SSM  Framework  regulation. 
These regulations designate the ECB as the competent authority for supervising Eurozone 
banks against their prudential requirements. The largest banking groups of the Eurozone, and 
the top three in any country, the so called Significant Institutions – or SIs-, are supervised 
directly by the ECB; all the other ones, named Less Significant Institutions – or LSIs – are 
supervised by the national competent authority – in Ireland, this is the Central Bank . 
For  the  LSIs,  the  decision-making  authority,  except  for  acquiring  transactions,  and  all 
supervisory staff have stayed within the Central Bank, so the changes may not be manifest, 
although  the  ECB mandates the  approach  and methodology for  supervision  and  exercises 
oversight. 
For every significant institution, on the other hand, decision-making has shifted to Frankfurt 
and the daily supervision has been attributed to an international team headed in Frankfurt but 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   mostly made of local supervisors – this team is what we call in our lingo the joint supervisory 
team or JST. The functioning of the SSM is thus based on the co-operation between the 19 
national competent authorities, including the Central Bank of Ireland, and the ECB. In practical 
terms,  the  establishment  of  these  Joint  Supervisory  Teams  means  that  SIs  will  now  have 
worked  for  a  year  with  their  Frankfurt-based  JST  Coordinators,  along  with  some  Frankfurt 
based supervisors. 
Notwithstanding this, the vast majority of JST members continue to be those based in Dublin, 
who  have  likely  been  in  your  supervisory  team  before  the  SSM,  and  who  you  continue  to 
interact with throughout the year. In addition, a number of Central Bank Inspection and Analysis 
staff  support  the  JSTs  through  dedicated  on-site  activity,  cross-sectoral  and  specialised 
expertise. All in all, the vast majority of the supervisory work is and will continue be conducted 
in Dublin for the Irish SIs. 
Banking supervision can thus benefit from the varied perspectives and judgment brought by 
an  international  team  of  supervisors,  and  the  strength  brought  by  the  critical  mass  of 
knowledge of combined national competent authorities and the ECB. On the other hand, the 
functioning of the JSTs faces the combined management challenges of international public 
institutions,  matrix  structures,  and  the  tensions  brought  by  the  transfer  of  powers  and 
responsibilities. Familiar in other contexts, these management challenges are specific to the 
conduct of supervision at a new supra-national level. Delivering consistent, timely and effective 
supervision,  including  the  issuance  and  follow-up  of  remediation  programs,  is  proving 
challenging for issues that go beyond capital requirements. So too is keeping staff motivated 
throughout this complex network of national authorities and the ECB. It is a credit to the SSM 
that it acknowledges these teething problems and is determined to address them. 
Notwithstanding  these  hurdles,  there  have  been  numerous  speeches  to  mark  the  first 
anniversary of the SSM which have recognized its many achievements. These successes have 
been well documented and Ignazio Angeloni has reminded us of them. Let me add to this 
chorus that one of the critical success factors of the SSM has been the ECB’s success in 
attracting high quality staff. Many of them are experienced banking supervisors coming straight 
from the national banking authorities, including the Central Bank of Ireland. They have been 
attracted by the exciting challenge of working abroad, in helping establish the SSM, and the 
much better financial terms and employment conditions offered to them. A second wave of 
supervisors is expected to leave the Central Bank and other national competent authorities 
next year, as the ECB will be increasing its SSM headcount by 25%. Combined with the familiar 
constraint of FEMPI, this will bring further stresses to the bench strength of banking supervision 
in the Central Bank, and to the challenge of replenishing once more our ranks. 
National Competent Authority 
From an National Authority perspective, the establishment of the SSM for banking supervision 
has led to a thorough change in how supervisors within the Central Bank work. There is the 
complex multi-location JST relationship to manage with an even greater emphasis on analysis, 
“constrained judgment”, quantitative assessments (including of risk and control frameworks) 
and, a particularly large change for the Central Bank, a move to formalised end-to-end on-site 
inspections. 
The approach to supervision developed by the ECB, with our input and influence, gives the 
Central  Bank,  and  banking  supervision,  the  opportunity  to  build  on  the  significant 
developments  and  achievements  that  have  already  taken  place  in  the  post-crisis  and 
Programme years. These include the roll-out of risk-based supervision, the development of 
leading stress testing approaches and data analytics. This has been combined with instilling 
an assertive culture amongst our supervisors, as well as using our powers under a credible 
threat of enforcement. These hard-earned achievements contributed to the delivery of large 
tracts of the financial sector reform programme but also mean that Irish banking supervision 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   staff  are  well-placed  to  demonstrate  tier-one  supervisory  capabilities  and  to  operate  with 
excellence in the SSM. 
With this in mind, Banking Supervision in the Central Bank has been restructured last year with 
three Divisions: namely: Supervision, Analysis and Inspections in order to: 
1. 
Create a very clear distinction between off-site supervision, on-site inspections, and 
specialist expertise; 
Establish strong relationships, organisational workflows and seniority of engagement 
between the Central Bank and the ECB. 
2. 
In working within the SSM, the Central Bank has sought to impact and influence the nature, 
approach  and  outcome  of  supervision  to  ensure  that  we  have  safe  banks  and  increased 
financial  stability  at  home  and  abroad.  We  have  done  this  by  helping  extensively  in  the 
formative  stages  of the SSM;  guiding the  development  of  the  Comprehensive  Assessment 
methodology;  facilitating  the  development  of  the  SSM’s  supervisory  IT  system  though  the 
provision of PRISM to the ECB; supporting significant numbers of secondees to the ECB ; and 
providing leadership on those areas where we have well-founded expertise. An example of 
this  is  Sharon  Donnery’s  –  the  Central  Bank’s  Director  of  Credit  Institutions  Supervision  – 
appointment as chair of the SSM High Level Group on Non-Performing Loans. Ireland has 
learned the hard way to deal with the problem of NPLs and we can offer our insights in leading 
this work, and in our membership of numerous other working groups. 
The Supervisory Board 
The governance of the SSM rests on its Governing Council and its Supervisory Board. Both 
are comprised of six ECB members and 19 national members. For the Supervisory Board, the 
national member is the deputy governor in charge of banking supervision or his equivalent in 
each of the 19 Eurozone countries. 
The Supervisory Board is the highest body of the ECB where, in practice, substantial debates 
take  place  on  supervisory  decisions.  Proposals are  brought  to  the  Board  by  the JSTs  and 
debated with a view to issue draft decisions. The Governing Council, as a rule, adopts these 
decisions, although it can object to any; this exceptional circumstance would then trigger the 
convening of a Mediation panel. This has not happened so far. 
The composition of the Supervisory Board brings unique strengths and challenges to its task. 
All  its  members  are  senior  and  experienced  supervisors  or  central  bankers  or  both.  The 
aggregate  wealth  of  knowledge  and  experience  of  the  Board  is  formidable,  and  further 
supported by the staff of the ECB and the national competent authorities. I can say, as Ireland’s 
member of the Supervisory Board, that all decisions are approached with rigour and integrity 
and that the Board brings thorough challenge to supervisory proposals tabled to its meeting. 
However, it is fair to say that the Central Bank would not accept from a regulated entity to have 
such a numerous Board, and it proves indeed unwieldy at times. Furthermore, the best national 
supervisory boards have a mix of supervisors, magistrates and members with a long banking 
industry experience. Although the members of the Supervisory Board of the ECB have a variety 
of skills, including in business management, law, accounting and risk, and although the six 
members  chosen  by  the  ECB  have  been  carefully  chosen  to  bring  as  much  diversity  as 
possible,  the  institutional  set-up  leaves  the  Supervisory  Board  with  less  first-hand  banking 
experience than perhaps desirable. 
The Supervisory Board plays an extraordinary central role in the SSM because all supervisory 
decisions requiring approval under the prudential legislation for all significant institutions must 
be approved by it and subsequently by the Governing Council. The SSM is hampered by the 
EU Treaty which limits decision making authority at the ECB to the Governing Council and the 
Executive  Board.  Ireland  has  learned  from  the  previous  modus  operandi  of  its  Financial 
Regulator the pitfalls of overly centralised decision-making and of a two tier decision making 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   body.  As  a  result,  supervision  in  the  Central  Bank  has  been  highly  devolved  since  the 
beginning of the decade, and very few decisions are deemed so important that they need to 
be taken by a Director or the Deputy Governor. In a stark contrast, the SSM has operated since 
day one at the extreme end of centralisation. Not a single decision, even the most routine and 
least  consequential  one,  has  been  delegated.  Electronic  mailboxes  of  Supervisory  Board 
members and Governors are clogged with a daily shower of insignificant written procedures, 
and unproblematic fitness and probity applications can take months to be processed. Legal 
impediments  need to  be  lifted  to  make  delegation  possible  and  bureaucracy  reduced. The 
governance and decision making structure are yet to be truly tested as admittedly the SSM 
has yet to face its first open crisis. 
Issues of substance 
Let me move now to some issues of substance. It remains the case that many banking systems 
in the Eurozone, including Ireland’s, are largely nationally focused. Allied to this are the deeply 
different business models, legal environment, ways of banking, and economic outlooks and as 
a  result  the  SSM  has  to  strike  a  balance  between  consistency  and  taking  due  account  of 
national realities. 
As Ignazio Angeloni has reminded us, the ECB has launched a consultation on the ‘Options & 
National  Discretions’  in  an  attempt  to  facilitate  the  application  of  the  Capital  Requirement 
Directive and Regulation across the Eurozone. This is an important initiative consistent with 
the SSM mandate, but it is clear that certain national discrepancies will continue to apply, if 
only because they are beyond the reach of this consultation. For instance, the European text 
recognises  as  CET1  instruments  deferred  tax  credits  and  in some  instances the  shares of 
cooperatives  banks  held  by  their  clients,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  these  shares  are 
repayable when the clients terminate their banking arrangements. Competitive differences will 
thus continue to apply within the Eurozone, and even more within the EU. That is, however, 
primarily an issue for co-legislators, and competitions authorities, rather than the mandate of 
the prudential supervisor. 
Ignazio Angeloni has also delineated how the SSM has been conducting the first round of the 
common  Supervisory  Review  and  Evaluation  Process  (SREP)  in  2015,  with  a  view  to 
determine the so-called pillar 2 capital requirements. The SREP decisions will be finalised in 
the coming weeks but it has already been publicly said that the Pillar2 capital requirements 
envisaged for the SSM significant institutions in 2016 are slightly higher than in 2015. Pillar 2 
capital is held to account for those risks not fully captured in the standard Pillar 1 requirement, 
such as concentrations of exposures, and must be held at all times, just like pillar 1. So I will 
add my voice to Ignazio Angeloni’s and acknowledge that the amount of both pillar one and 
pillar  two  capital  requirements  are  material  for  investors  in  securities  issued  by  credit 
institutions.  The  prudential  supervisor  is  right  in  willing  to  preserve  a  space  for  a  private 
dialogue  and  engagement  with  the  banks  on  the  way  it  assesses  them,  and  the  detailed 
appraisal of their risk profiles need not be disclosed. But the sum of all capital requirements of 
a bank, including macroprudential buffers, can hardly be held secret to those who own it or to 
those who are asked to provide it credit. 
A final issue of substance that I wish to address is that of enforcement. It is the Central Bank’s 
strongly  held  view  that  enforcement  is  critical  to  supervision,  including  to  prudential 
supervision.  Here  also,  the  unfortunate  experience  of  the  Irish  Financial  Regulator  of  the 
previous decade has convinced us that the credible use of enforcement must be deployed to 
be an effective supervisor. The SSM so far has not yet concluded nor managed to significantly 
progress enforcement cases and in some cases found legal difficulties in national competent 
authorities bringing to a close their own cases. Even though the SSM supervisory powers only 
extend to taking sanctions against banks, whereas local supervisors can take actions against 
individuals, breaches of the prudential regulation must be enforceable in practice and the SSM 
has to find its feet as an enforcer as it enters its second year of operation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Beyond the SSM 
The SSM has very broad remit but not an exclusive one. The Central Bank’s position as the 
national macro-prudential authority, national resolution authority, institution in charge of anti-
money laundering in the financial sector and the national consumer protection authority for 
financial institutions places us at the centre of many regulations that apply to banks prudentially 
regulated by the SSM. In all these guises, the Central Bank’s role remains to safeguard stability 
and protect consumers. We bring all these perspectives when debating prudential decisions 
within the SSM. 
Furthermore, the creation and imminent commencement of the Single Resolution Board (SRB) 
and the second pillar of Banking Union will add a new dimension to the supervision of banks. 
As Resolution authorities will go to the banks and draw up their resolution plans, they will need 
to  undertake  both  desk-based  and  on-site  work  similar  to  that  of  the  SSM.  The  European 
legislators have chosen to give to Resolution authorities, as well as the supervisory authorities, 
the ability to determine that banks are failing or likely to fail. This overlap of responsibility will 
also mean that Resolution authorities will need to be able to know banks well enough to make 
that  determination,  through  work  of  their  own  and  sharing  of  information  with  supervisory 
authorities, including the SSM. I trust Elke König, Chair of the SRB, will in a moment delineate 
how she sees this operating in practice. 
Conclusion 
I will conclude by looking to the future and the challenges ahead. We recognise that banks 
face continued headwind on profitability, the on-going drag of non-performing loans, new and 
emerging risks such as cyber threats and the implementation and full application of regulatory 
reform from Basel III and the second pillar of Banking Union, the Single Resolution Mechanism. 
The cumulative impact on banks’ balance sheets of the Minimum Required Eligible Liabilities 
allied to the increased capital and liquidity requirements arising from the Capital Requirements 
Directive is yet to be felt. Business model viability and sustainable profitability assessments 
will drive much of the supervisory engagement in the coming period as well as the operational 
risk issues such as IT and cyber risk. The SSM is also conscious of the potential impact of 
International Financial Reporting Standard (IFRS) 9 and will seek to engage with the banks on 
these issues in 2016. 
Working well within the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism 
is critical to conducting efficiently this programme of work. I hope I have given some insight 
into  this  new  regime,  some  of  the  successes  and  some  of  the  issues  that  will  need  to  be 
resolved in the coming years in the pursuit of harmonised supervision reflective of national 
circumstances. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
