   Ben Broadbent: The Monetary Policy Committee’s forecasts and the 
yield curve – predictions versus promises 
Speech by Mr Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at Reuters, London, 18 November 2015. 
 I would like to thank Clare Macallan for research assistance and I am grateful for helpful comments from other 
colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other 
members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Good morning!  
The previous Governor of the Bank, Mervyn King, once referred to what he called the “rich 
seam” of MPC communication. Rich or not, it’s certainly a wide seam: MPC members each 
give several speeches a year; we publish minutes of every meeting, now supplemented with a 
Monetary  Policy  Summary;  every  quarter  we  publish  a  50-page  Inflation  Report  that 
summarises  the  MPC’s  collective  view  of  the  economic  outlook  and  includes  our  latest 
forecasts; every Report is followed by a session in front of parliament’s Treasury Committee.  
Yet, from all this, the outside world seems increasingly interested in only one particular nugget: 
the MPC’s central inflation forecast two years ahead. This forecast is derived assuming that 
interest rates follow the path priced into financial markets. Comparing the two, commentators 
often make very precise inferences from the MPC’s projections about future policy.  
When it’s above the 2% target, our two-year forecast is said to indicate that interest rates will 
rise faster than the market expects; a sub-2% forecast is said to mean the opposite. Recently, 
given the intense focus on the prospective date of the next rate change, this simple inference 
has been refined even further: as long as the forecast is close to 2%, this must mean the MPC 
is “endorsing” not just the general shape of the market path of interest rates but the particular 
“lift-off” point it seems to imply.  
Broad inferences of this sort may well be reasonable. But you shouldn’t push them too far. This 
morning I want to explain why.  
The most important problem is that, even if a particular path of interest rates results uniquely 
in only one central inflation forecast, given all our other assumptions, the opposite does not 
hold true: you can get to the same two-year forecast with lots of other paths as well. That’s 
because changes in interest rates have at least some impact on inflation strictly within the two-
year horizon. And although the MPC’s primary focus is obviously the rate of inflation, it has 
other objectives too. Recognising these, the “planning horizon” for returning inflation to target 
can vary according to the various trade-offs involved. After significant cost shocks, for example, 
it wouldn’t make sense to return inflation very rapidly to target, given the volatility in output, 
and in interest rates themselves, that can induce.  
Second, the forecast depends not only on future interest rates but lots of other conditioning 
assumptions as well, any of which can shift from one quarter to the next. So even to the extent 
you can infer anything from the forecast about the MPC’s view of the yield curve, this too can 
only ever be a highly conditional inference. Perhaps that’s why the two-year inflation is not 
actually a very good predictor of changes in interest rates (as we shall see). Empirically, what 
matters more is the subsequent evolution of the economy.  
Another  difficulty  is  that  the  yield  curve  may  not  actually  be  giving  us  a  pure  read  on  the 
market’s interest-rate expectations to begin with. It’s long been recognised that forward yields, 
even on “risk-free” instruments like government bonds, can be affected by shifts in risk or term 
premia. The MPC’s forecasts are conditioned on the yield curve as it is, not what we believe 
the  market’s  true  expectation  to  be.  So,  in  and  of  itself,  this  doesn’t  invalidate  the  sort  of 
inferences we’re talking about. But it’s certainly a complicating factor. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Flexible inflation targeting   
Let me expand on the first point with the help of some simple simulations, performed using the 
Bank’s COMPASS model of the economy.  
They all kick off with the same unwelcome economic conditions, presumably caused by some 
prior, off-stage shock to costs: inflation is 2% points above the target, output’s 1% point below 
potential and official interest rates are at (what is assumed to be) their “neutral” rate, which is 
assumed not to change.  
All three simulations also have inflation back at target two years later. But each involves a very 
different means of getting there.  
In  the  first,  the  policymaker  –  call  it  Committee  A  –  hikes  Bank  rate  immediately  and 
aggressively, by 2% points. This rapidly pushes the economy into recession, making the output 
gap even larger. But it does at least succeed in bringing inflation back to target pretty promptly, 
well within the two-year point. Indeed, inflation then falls somewhat below target thereafter, 
and interest rates fall back sharply, to a level below where they started. Perhaps “A” stands for 
“austere”, or (hyper) “activist”.  
Committee B – “balanced”, maybe? – is a little gentler in its approach. Recognising that a 
significant existing output gap will do some of the work in reducing inflation it raises rates only 
a touch. Inflation therefore takes longer to come back to target. But it just about gets there by 
the two-year point and, in the interim, the real side of the economy suffers less and interest 
rates are less volatile.    
Finally, just for effect, I’ve added a Comedy MPC (Committee C). This lot are a bit more random 
and one can’t say their slightly drunken path for policy does much for the stability of anything 
in the economy, whether inflation, output or (most obviously) interest rates themselves. But it’s 
still sufficient to return inflation to target after two years.  
How is this possible? Fundamentally, it’s because monetary policy begins to affect inflation not 
just at but strictly within two years. The peak impact may take some time to build, in this model, 
and it also persists for some time beyond two years. But as long as policy has any effect at all 
on inflation before the two-year point, there’s an infinite variety of interest-rate paths that can 
prospectively get you to any given rate at that date. We could invent policies for Committees 
Xerxes, Yaphet and Zog and still not be done.  
 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 1: Some policy simulations 
  Source: Bank calculations. 
  
This raises a legitimate question. If you can do something about it before then, and all you care 
about are deviations of inflation from the target – which in our remit “applies at all times” – why 
not try and eliminate them as soon as possible, like our monotheistic friends on Committee A? 
Shouldn’t the policy horizon simply be the shortest time delay between changes in interest 
rates and their impact on consumer prices?  
Well  one  problem  is  that  one can’t  be entirely  sure  about  what that  delay  is.  As  a famous 
economist once said, monetary policy seems to operate with “long and variable” lags.  
More  significantly,  the  MPC  isn’t  concerned  solely  with  inflation.  It  is  also  asked  to  avoid 
“undesirable volatility in output”. And occasionally – in particular following shocks to costs or 
supply – there are trade-offs between the two. These can lengthen the optimal time over which 
to bring inflation back to target.   
I think  this  had real relevance  at  the time I  joined the  MPC,  in mid-2011.  At  that  time, the 
economy looked a bit like the starting point of these simulations. After a tepid recovery there 
was still plenty of spare capacity in the economy. Companies said they were operating well 
below capacity; unemployment was still high. But thanks to a series of cost shocks, including 
the big depreciation of sterling’s exchange rate 2-3 years earlier, inflation was nonetheless well 
above target.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   In response, the MPC might have behaved like Committee A, ramming up interest rates to get 
inflation back to 2% as quickly as possible. But that would almost certainly have pushed the 
economy back into recession. Instead it took a more balanced approach. As I tried to explain 
in  a  speech  I gave  later  that  year, the  MPC  had  arguably  tolerated the  (then)  high  rate of 
inflation for longer than it might have done because the real side of the economy was so weak.  
It signalled this choice more explicitly in early 2013. Following a further depreciation in the 
currency,  rises  in  administered  prices  and  the  prospect  of  continued  weak  growth  in 
productivity,  inflation  was  thought  “likely  to  remain  above  target  for  much  of  the  forecast 
period”.  But  “attempting  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target  sooner…would  risk  derailing  the 
recovery”  and  it  was  therefore  “judged  appropriate  to  look  through  the  temporary,  albeit 
protracted, period of above-target inflation”.  
I don’t think this was so exceptional. There is no inflation-targeting monetary authority that 
behaves so rigidly as to attempt to offset all shorter-term shocks to inflation, no matter the 
effects on the variability of interest rates and output. As the economist Lars Svensson puts it, 
“in practice, inflation targeting is always ‘flexible’, because all inflation-targeting central banks 
not only aim at stabilizing inflation but also put some weight on stabilizing the real economy”.  
In  the  UK,  this  regard  for  the  occasional  trade-offs  faced  by  monetary  policy,  and  their 
implication for the planning horizon, was formally enshrined in the MPC’s remit in March 2013. 
The Committee is now required to “promote understanding of the trade-offs inherent in setting 
policy and… [to communicate] the horizon over which it is appropriate to return inflation to the 
target”. This description of the appropriate horizon is now a regular part of our communication, 
notably in the newly introduced Monetary Policy Summary that introduces both the Inflation 
Report and the Minutes of our meetings.  
What of the current situation? The economy has also faced significant cost shocks in the past 
couple  of  years,  this  time  in  a  negative  direction.  Commodity  prices  have  fallen  sharply, 
sterling’s  exchange  rate  has  risen.  The  combined  impact  has  been  enough  to  push  CPI 
inflation down to zero.  
We don’t face the same trade-offs as during the 2009-12 period, as output now looks much 
closer to potential. Equally, there is a good argument for “looking through” some of the effects 
of these cost shocks. Faced with the same situation, Committee A would probably choose to 
loosen policy now in order to get inflation back to target as rapidly as possible. But, with the 
output gap projected to narrow further anyway, and because the effects of lower commodity 
and import prices are likely to fade over time, it would probably then face the prospect of having 
to re-tighten policy thereafter, as inflation threatened to move above the target.  
There was a very slight flavour of this in the MPC’s latest projections. The Committee has said 
it wants to get inflation back to target in “around two years and [keep] it there in the absence 
of further shocks”. Given all the other underlying assumptions in the forecast, the yield curve 
we faced at the time broadly does the first part of that job. But the central forecast rises a touch 
above target at two years and then drifts a little higher. For what it’s worth, and if only at the 
margin, that yield curve was thought likely to over-achieve.  
Stuff happens: Forecasts are not promises 
Let  me  summarise  these  points:  the  MPC  doesn’t  have  a  concern  only  for  inflation  and, 
depending on the circumstances, it will face trade-offs with other objectives. This means the 
horizon over which it’s appropriate to return inflation to target can vary, and that the horizon 
will  generally  be  beyond  the  earliest  date  at  which  policy  can  affect  inflation.  There  are 
therefore many interest-rate paths that can prospectively achieve a particular rate of inflation 
two years ahead and one shouldn’t expect the central forecast at that date to be a failsafe 
indicator of future changes in interest rates.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 2 Inflation forecasts explain a small 
proportion of subsequent average vote 
  vote 
inflation 
interest-rate 
forecast  against 
on 
And it isn’t. Chart 2 plots the MPC’s central 
the 
two-year 
average 
the 
Committee over the following three months. 
There’s  a  moderate  correlation  –  on 
average,  a  higher  inflation  forecast  is 
followed  by  votes  for  tighter  rather  than 
looser  policy,  conversely  when  it’s  below 
target. 
It’s hardly a tight relationship, however. The 
degree of fit – the proportion of the policy 
variation  explained  by  the  most  recent 
inflation forecast – is only 8%, even less if 
you exclude the figure for 2008Q4 (the dot 
in the bottom left-hand corner). 
Source: Bank of England and Bank calculations. 
 What seems to have mattered much more is what actually happens to the economy. Chart 3 
plots the same average vote against a contemporaneous survey measure of economic growth. 
The  fit  is  much  better,  particularly  in  data  prior  to  2008.  Chart  4  then  plots  any  residual 
correlation between forecasts and subsequent votes, controlling for the economic data. There 
is none.   
Admittedly, it’s become harder to uncover simple reduced form relationships, such as the one 
in Chart 3, since the financial crisis. For much of that period interest rates have been pressed 
up against the effective lower bound: there hasn’t been any variation to work with. In addition, 
the pre-crisis relationship in Chart 3 exists because the MPC was generally confident about 
the stability of the underlying rate of supply growth; that hasn’t been the case in recent years1.  
Comparing Chart 2 and 3 is in any case slightly unfair as it measures forecasts at one date 
against data on growth, which are released slightly later, over the following three months. But 
it does at least bear out an important point about our inflation forecasts, not to say all forecasts: 
while  they  do  carry  some  information  about  the  future,  they  are  ultimately  superseded  by 
events.  
This is a point that I – and countless other central bankers – have made before, of course. 
However, it does seem to bear repeating. Too often, it seems to me, what we communicate 
about the path of future policy, whether that’s direct or something backed out from forecasts, 
is treated as something close to an unconditional promise. But it can’t be. That’s because it’s 
the job of policy to respond to things that are unpredictable, in order to offset their effects, as 
best  we  can.  So  even  if  it’s  the  MPC  that  sets  interest  rates,  in  some  narrow  sense,  it’s 
ultimately the economy that determines them. And our forecasts are intended not as some 
reliable guide of a particular policy path, but to help people understand how we see the nature 
and distribution of economic risks over the future. 
 
                                                 
1  Broadbent (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Chart 3 Policy decisions better correlated 
with economic growth 
Chart 4 Controlling for growth, IR 
forecasts uninformative about policy  
Source: ONS, CBI, Markit Economics, Bank calculations. 
 
Source: ONS, CBI, Markit Economics, Bank calculations. 
   The “excess” volatility of bond yields 
One way to think about the unpredictability of the future is to look at financial markets. Prices 
of financial assets are in many ways the embodiment of forecasts: they depend critically on 
how people think the future will evolve. So every time the price of an asset changes, someone’s 
forecast has gone wrong, or at least has had to be revised2. And as you know, asset prices 
change a lot!  
In fact, if anything, as the economist Robert Shiller observed many years ago3, they appear to 
move  too  much.  Equity  prices  are  more  volatile  than  seems  justified  by  the  variability  of 
corporate earnings, as least over the sample period he considered; bond yields look to be 
more variable than reasonable forecasts of future short-term interest rates. Economists have 
therefore presumed that asset markets are prone to “time-varying risk premia”.  
In the case of bond markets, these would take the form of variations in the so-called “term 
premium” – by definition the gap between yields and expected future short rates. And although 
the term premium has generally been positive – on average, longer-term bonds have yielded 
more than rolling over a sequence of short-term bills – it could also be negative at times. For 
example, if investors worry about growing (if small) risks of some very bad economic outcome, 
that would tend to depress the yield on safe assets to levels below the expected future short 
rate. People are prepared to pay over the odds to insure against such tail risks4.  
Unfortunately, it’s hard to distinguish these risk-induced movements in bond yields from those 
in the true expected path of future interest rates. But there are some pieces of evidence that, 
to me, are at least suggestive of such effects. 
                                                
2  Strictly speaking, I should limit this equivalence to unpredictable changes in asset prices. But that covers most 
of them.    
3  The  reference  is  Shiller  (1979);  see  also  Mankiw  and  Summers  (1984)  and  Campbell  (1995).  In  fact,  the 
observation that bond yields fail to behave in accordance with the simple “expectations hypothesis” goes back 
much further, to Macaulay (1938).  
4  Gabaix (2012). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   First, forward interest rates in the UK are very sensitive to news from the US, puzzlingly so. 
Chart 5 I’ve used before. It plots average responses of sterling yields, at two and ten-year 
maturities, to various bits of economic news. What’s most striking are the significant reactions 
to surprises in US payrolls releases. The UK is a relatively open economy, prone to shocks 
from elsewhere. As the largest economy in the world, the US is bound to exert an influence on 
our economy and the appropriate level of domestic interest rates. But it’s hard to imagine that 
one learns more about inflationary pressure in this country from changes in US employment 
than from those in the UK itself. What seems more likely is that that US employment releases 
have effects on risk appetite, and this then leads to a high degree of co-movement – relative 
to that in pure forecasts – between forward interest rates in the two currencies.  
Table 1, which gives the results of simple regressions of changes in UK interest rates on their 
US counterparts, suggests this might be a more general phenomenon. It shows that forward 
yields are much more closely correlated across the two markets than spot interest rates. This 
doesn’t disprove the expectations hypothesis. If, for example, country-specific shocks tended 
to die out pretty quickly, but common, global shocks were more persistent, you might expect 
to find this pattern. But that difference would have to be pretty stark to generate results of this 
sort. And there is evidence (much more careful and thorough than I’ve presented here5) that 
forward yields in different countries are, in fact, more volatile and  more tightly correlated than 
the simple expectations hypothesis would suggest.     
 
Chart 5 UK forward rates sensitive to 
US payrolls release  
 
Chart 6 Market yields more sensitive than 
actual rate forecasts to shifts in risk 
premia 
Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations; sample 2003-
13.  
 
Source: Bank of England and Datastream. 
                                                 
5  Sutton (1997)  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Table 1:  
  UK-US forward yields better correlated than spot rates 
Changes in yields: UK on US Coefficient* R- squared
3-months
1 year
1 year 3 year forward
 
Source:  Bank  of  England  and  Bank  calculations;  Note:  All  coefficients  are 
significant at 1%. 
0.37
0.41
0.54
0.12
0.13
0.35
Second, swings in measures of risk aversion are more closely correlated with market yields 
than with actual forecasts of future interest rates. There are, of course, good reasons why 
changes  in  perceived  risks  should  affect  both.  Greater  risk  aversion  can  raise  the  cost  of 
capital, reduce domestic investment and activity, and lower any reasonable expectation of the 
policy rate. (An effect of this sort was clearly at work in the last Inflation Report forecast: weaker 
equity  prices  led  the  Committee  to  revise  down  its  forecast  of  domestic  investment,  partly 
offsetting the effect of a shallower yield curve on the projection for GDP growth.)  
But the impact of such swings seems to be larger on market yields than on actual forecasts of 
interest rates. The red line in Chart 6 plots the gap, in months, between the date of the first UK 
rate  rise  implied  by  the  sterling  yield  curve  and  that  expected  by  professional  forecasters. 
When the line goes up, markets are pushing out this “lift-off” date further than analysts. And 
you can see this tends to happen when risky assets do poorly (the blue line is an estimate of 
the  risk  premium).  Conversely,  the  gap  narrows  when  risk  appetite  improves.  This  pattern 
suggests that market interest rates might be influenced by more than the expected path of 
interest rates6. 
To be clear, the MPC produces its forecasts on the yield curve as it is, not what it believes the 
market’s true expectation of future interest rates to be. So the fact that the two might differ 
does  not,  in  and  of  itself,  invalidate  the  sort  of  inferences  we’ve  been  talking  about.  But  it 
should, at the least, make one a little careful about describing the yield curve as “the market’s 
expectation of future interest rates”. It also means that, if an inflation forecast conditioned on 
the yield curve ends up away from target, that doesn’t necessarily mean we “disagree with the 
market”. It could just be that yields are being affected by something other than the market’s 
true expectation.    
Conclusion 
Let me wrap up, summarising the main points. The MPC’s headline forecasts are based on 
the assumption that interest rates follow the path priced into financial markets. That may or 
may not be the same thing as the true outside expectation of future rates. At times, the yield 
curve can move around for other reasons as well.  
Nevertheless, many commentators then use the forecasts – in particular the central prediction 
of inflation two years ahead – to infer things about the likely path of interest rates over the 
future.  Recently, there has been a particular focus on backing out implications for the date of 
the first rise in official interest rates.  
                                                
6  Unlike professional forecasters, markets gets to update their opinions every minute of every day, and for most 
of the time are therefore at an advantage over analysts. But Chart 6 plots data only on days on which the 
analysts publish their projections, so the comparison is that much fairer. Nor, for what it’s worth, is there any 
evidence that we can find that markets predict actual interest rates any better than analysts.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   That’s fine as far as it goes. If the central projection’s a long way from target, that can tell you 
something about the MPC’s view of the suitability of the yield curve – given, at least, all the 
other assumptions in its forecasts. In May 2009, after the first slug of QE, the Inflation Report 
forecast was well below target. This suggested that, unless the economy improved much faster 
than it expected, the Committee believed that monetary conditions would need to be looser 
than implied by the yield curve at the time.   
As things turned out, that’s exactly what happened. But there are limits to how far this kind of 
reasoning should be taken. One particular problem, when it comes to the so-called “lift-off” 
date for interest rates, is that the yield curve is currently very flat. As a result, even relatively 
moderate changes in forward rates, prompted by unexceptional news about the economy, can 
result in big shifts in the date at which the yield curve first reaches some particular level. But 
that doesn’t mean the MPC’s views about future policy have moved so dramatically. If nothing 
else, this demonstrates the problem with focusing too obsessively on that particular date.  
More generally, the MPC’s inflation forecast is a far from perfect indicator of interest rates. It 
involves lots of conditioning assumptions, not just forward interest rates, and any of these can 
change. Our understanding of the economy evolves over time and the economy itself is always 
subject to unforeseeable shocks. Empirically, the behaviour of the economy matters more for 
interest rates than prior forecasts.  
In addition, the MPC isn’t solely concerned with inflation anyway, still less its most likely rate 
at a fixed point in the future. That means that the target horizon for inflation is generally longer 
than the earliest point at which policy can affect it – there is therefore no single, unique path of 
interest rates that will do the job.  It also means that the horizon itself can vary.  
I will therefore conclude with something of an apology. For those in the audience wanting me 
to give a direct and unequivocal promise as to when Bank Rate will change, you will, I’m afraid, 
be disappointed. I can’t. But you should look on the bright side. If there is any value in listening 
to people like me, it is to help you with what is the best way to try and predict future interest 
rates - to forecast the economy yourselves (which is probably more interesting). After all, if the 
future were perfectly predictable we wouldn’t have to bother trying. 
References 
Broadbent Ben, 2014, “Unemployment and the conduct of monetary policy in the UK”, Speech 
given at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 38th Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming.  
Campbell John, 1995, “Some lessons from the yield curve”, Journal of Economic Perspective, 
Vol. 9, No. 3. 
Eguren-Martin F. and N. McLaren, 2015, “How much do UK market interest rates respond to 
macroeconomic data news?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin.  
Gabaix Xavier 2012, “Variable rare disasters: an exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in 
macro-finance”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 127, Issue 2, Pp. 645–700. 
Joyce M. and A. Meldrum, 2008, “Market expectations of future Bank rate”, Bank of England 
Quarterly Bulletin. 
Macaulay Frederick,  1938,  “Some Theoretical Problems  Suggested  by  the  Movements of 
Interest  Rates,  Bond  Yields,  and  Stock  Prices  in  the  United  States  Since  1856”,  National 
Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 33. 
Mankiw  G.,  and  L.  Summers,  1984,  “Do  long-term  interest  rates  overreact  to  short-term 
interest rates?”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 
Shiller Robert, 1979, “The volatility of long-term interest rates and expectations models of the 
term structure”, The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 87, No. 6, pp 1190–1219.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   
Sutton  Gregory,  1997,  “Is  there  excess  comovement  of  bond  of  bond  yields  between 
countries”, Bank for International Settlements, Working Paper No. 44. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
