   Lesetja Kganyago: Issues confronting monetary policymakers in South 
Africa 
Address  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
Thomson Reuters Economist of the Year Awards JSE Limited, Sandton,11 August 2015. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen, and thank you for the opportunity to deliver the keynote 
address at this prestigious awards ceremony. 
This competition is about forecasting a number of economic variables. Predicting the future is 
difficult  at  the  best  of  times,  and  with  the  economic  environment  becoming  increasingly 
turbulent,  forecasting  is  becoming  that  much  more  difficult.  It  is  also  a  challenging  time  for 
policymakers;  in  the  face  of  heightened  uncertainty,  our  decisions  become  more  data-
dependent than usual. This makes it more difficult for analysts to forecast policy moves. We 
interact with market participants and other interested parties on a regular basis to help them 
understand  our  thinking  on  various  issues.In  the  recent  past,  a  number  of  questions  have 
repeatedly come up, and in my address to you today, I will focus on three of these interrelated 
questions.  First,  how  should  monetary  policy  respond  to  changes  in  the  exchange  rate, 
particularly when driven by terms-of-trade shocks? Second, given the importance of US policy 
normalisation in our communication, does this mean that the Bank follows global interest rates 
in making policy decisions? And finally, how does the Bank think about inflation expectations? 
Responding to exchange-rate shocks 
Since  the  beginning  of  2014,  when  the  Bank  started  the  tightening  cycle,  the  rand  has 
depreciated by about 18 per cent against the US dollar and by about 6 per cent on a trade-
weighted basis. For some time, we have been indicating that the rand exchange rate is one of 
the main upside risks to the inflation outlook. However, this does not mean that we target the 
rand  in  any  way:  the  rand  is  but  one  of  a  number  of  determinants  of  inflation  acting 
simultaneously, sometimes in different directions and with varying intensities. Monetary policy 
actions do not attempt to influence the exchange rate but rather focus on the overall inflation 
outlook.  A  complicating  issue  recently  has  been  the  fact  that  the  traditional  pass-through 
relationship from the exchange rate appears to be lower than during previous episodes of rand 
weakness. Time will tell whether or not this is a cyclical phenomenon which may be reversed 
at some stage, or whether it is of a more structural nature. 
A  number  of  factors  have  impacted  on  the  rand,  and  I  will  highlight  three  broad  categories. 
First, some domestic developments have impacted negatively on growth and risk perceptions. 
These include the protracted strikes in the mining and manufacturing sectors last year as well 
as the deteriorating growth prospects, aggravated by electricity load-shedding. These factors 
have contributed to the widening of the current account of the balance of payments. 
Second is the prospect of US policy normalisation and its implications for the pattern of global 
capital flows. Expectations about the timing of the first move have kept changing as conflicting 
data  regarding  the  strength  of  the  US  economic  recovery  emerged.  Good  news  for  the  US 
economy  proved  to  be  bad  news  for  emerging-  market  currencies,  and  vice  versa.  That  the 
Fed  will  tighten  is  not  a  debate.  The  question  is  one  of  timing.  One  would  expect  that  the 
markets would have discounted this to some extent, but uncertainty still remains regarding the 
starting date as well as the speed and extent of the cycle. The continuing changes to the so-
called ‘Fed dots’, which reflect the expectations of interest-rate changes of individual members 
of the Federal Open Market Committee (or the FOMC), indicate just how uncertain this process 
is. 
The  third  broad  category  to  have  affected  the  rand  is  the  ongoing  precipitous  decline  in 
commodity prices. Commodity prices have been on a persistent downward trend since 2011, 
reflecting  a  deterioration  in  South  Africa’s  terms  of  trade  and  contributing  to  a  persistent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   current-account  deficit.  This  deterioration  was  reversed  briefly  with  the  decline  in  the 
international oil price in the second half of 2014. However, in the past two to three months, we 
have seen a further sharp decline in commodity prices in international markets. For example, 
since the beginning of May, platinum prices have declined by about 17 per cent, iron-ore prices 
by 5 per cent (and about 20 per cent since January), gold prices by 8 per cent, and copper 
prices by 15 per cent. Clearly, these developments, if sustained, pose a downside risk to South 
Africa’s growth outlook, apart from their impact on the current account and the exchange rate. 
Offsetting  this  to  some  extent  is  the  fact  that  international  oil  prices  have  also  moderated 
significantly over the period, having declined from the recent highs of around US$65 per barrel 
in May to the current levels of around US$50 per barrel. 
I should point out, however, that South Africa is not alone in this respect. While a number of 
idiosyncratic shocks have impacted on the rand, the currencies of other commodity producers 
have  also  been  affected,  in  some  cases  more  so  than  the  rand.  Since  the  beginning  of  the 
year, for example, during which time the rand has depreciated by about 9 per cent against the 
dollar, the rand remains more or less unchanged against the Australian dollar and the Russian 
ruble, but has appreciated by about 8 per cent against the New Zealand dollar, by about 17 per 
cent  against the  Brazilian  real,  by  about  2  per  cent  against  the  Chilean  peso,  and  by  about  
3 per cent against the Canadian dollar (although there was generally a good deal of volatility 
between  these  two  periods).  Monetary  policy  reactions  have  differed;  over  this  period, 
monetary policy has been tightened in Brazil, unchanged in Chile, and loosened in Australia, 
Canada, and New Zealand. 
The question is how monetary policy should react to different categories of shocks. Textbooks 
distinguish between portfolio shocks and terms-of-trade shocks (apart from standard domestic-
demand shocks). The challenges posed to the rand by the US policy uncertainty clearly fall into 
the category of portfolio shocks. Here, literature tells us that policymakers should respond to 
these shocks by tightening monetary policy. In an inflation-targeting framework, the tightening 
would depend on the extent to which the weaker exchange rate was expected to impact on 
inflation  rather  than  acting  to  protect  the  exchange  rate  per  se.  The  role  of  inflation 
expectations (and monetary policy credibility) would be central to this. 
Reaction to a terms-of-trade shock is less straightforward, as it would also depend on whether 
it was a decline in an export price (for example the gold or platinum price), which would in itself 
have  less  impact  on  domestic  prices,  or  whether  it  was  an  increase  in  import  prices  (for 
example oil prices), which do impact more on domestic inflation. In general, a terms-of-trade 
deterioration driven by a decline in export prices implies a decline in domestic incomes which 
can  be  disinflationary.  A  fall  in  export  prices  may  be  accompanied  by  currency  depreciation 
which moderates the impact of the decline in export prices on demand and inflation. A policy 
response  would  need  to  try  and  ‘see  through’  the  first-round  effects  of  the  change  in  the 
exchange rate. However, again, much depends on the extent to which inflation expectations 
are well anchored. 
Where countries have inflation under control, a response to depreciation and negative terms-
of-trade  shocks  can  be  more  supportive  to  economic  activity.  Other  commodity  producers  – 
like  Australia,  Canada,  Chile,  and  New  Zealand  –  have  low  levels  of  inflation  and  minimal 
upside risks to inflation. However, the Australian response could be assisted to a significant 
degree  by  the  fact  that  the  Prices  and  Incomes  Accord  between  government  and  the  trade 
unions, implemented during 1983 and 1996, had broken the back of inflation, and that inflation 
expectations  were  well  anchored  at  that  time.  This  is  policy  capital  that  Australia  has  and  it 
could stand them in good stead this time around too. By contrast, the risks to South Africa’s 
inflation are on the upside, inflation is uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target range, 
and inflation expectations are at elevated levels. 
Textbooks may be clear, but reality is a bit more complicated. It is very difficult to disentangle 
the  impact  of  the  various  types  of  shocks  when  they  are  happening  simultaneously,  as  is 
currently the case in South Africa; it is also difficult to know whether these shocks are once-off 
or likely to persist for some time. It is easy enough to ‘look through’ a once-off shock, but when 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   the  shock  is  of  a  protracted  or  continuous  nature,  it  is  a  lot  more  difficult  to  manage. 
Furthermore, it is not straightforward assessing the extent to which inflation expectations are 
anchored, an issue that I will return to in a while. 
Global interest rates and domestic monetary policy 
A  related  question  is:  does  the  fact  that  we  are  concerned  about  the  impact  of  Fed 
normalisation mean that we simply follow global interest rates in conducting monetary policy? 
The  simple  answer  is:  no.  For  a  start,  it  is  difficult  to  talk  about  a  global  interest  rate  when 
interest rates in the US and the UK are expected to increase in the near future but those in the 
eurozone and Japan are expected to remain close to the zero bound for a much longer period. 
With respect to the US rate, the correlation between US and South African long bond yields is 
much  stronger  than  at  the  short  end.  Our  decisions  on  short-term  interest-rate  changes  are 
focused  primarily  on  the  domestic  inflation  outlook  which  can  include  the  extent  to  which 
expected changes in US rates are assessed to impact on the overall inflation outlook through 
the exchange-rate channel. 
In this respect, there are conflicting views in the market about the way in which we should react 
to a change in the US interest rate: pre-emptively or reactively? On the one hand, we are told 
that by acting reactively and delaying the adjustment, we will have to act more aggressively 
later, ultimately leading to a much higher rate. Implicit in this argument is that inflation would be 
higher than if we had acted pre-emptively. On the other hand, critics of our recent rate increase 
argue that by moving pre- emptively we will be starting from a higher repo-rate level when the 
Fed action begins, which will affect short-term growth. 
To some extent, we have tried to chart a middle road between these two views. Our primary 
mandate  is  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic 
growth. This implies assessing the impact of our policies on inflation, output, and employment 
under  current  conditions.  For  this  reason,  our  monetary  policy  tightening  cycle  has  been 
moderate, and this approach remains our base case – although it is, of course, highly data-
dependent.  We  have  not  observed  a  knee-jerk  reaction  to  every  adverse  move  in  inflation, 
particularly among pressures driven by supply-side shocks. But at the same time, completely 
ignoring the risk of second-round effects could entrench inflation expectations at higher levels 
and could require stronger action later, with consequences for output. 
Monetary policy and inflation expectations 
The issue of inflation expectations has cropped up a number of times this morning. Inflation 
expectations are potentially an important determinant of actual inflation outcomes: to the extent 
that  price-setters  set  prices  on  a  forward-looking  basis,  they  will  have  some  notion  in  their 
minds as to what future inflation is likely to be. Similarly, wage negotiations generally revolve 
around expected inflation outcomes. In fact, an objective of an inflation-targeting framework is 
to anchor longer-term inflation expectations within the target range, and this will not only help 
to  maintain  inflation  within  the  target,  but  will  also  make  expectations  resilient  to  temporary 
shocks to the inflation outlook. This requires monetary policy credibility, which means not only 
transparency  and  clear  communication,  but  also  demonstrated  commitment 
to  act 
appropriately to keep inflation under control. 
All this seems relatively straightforward. However, there are a number of complicated issues 
and  questions  which  make  the  interpretation  of  measured  or  implied  inflation  expectations 
extremely difficult, particularly for policy purposes. First, in reality, it does not necessarily follow 
that inflation expectations are always correct or that they will be self-fulfilling. Related to this: 
what do we do when inflation expectations diverge from our own forecasts, which already have 
inflation  expectations  incorporated  into  them?  This  relates  to  a  second  issue:  whose 
expectations should we give most weight to, particularly when there is a divergence between 
the expectations of different categories of respondents? Do we simply look at those of price-
setters? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Third, it is sometimes the case that inflation expectations are formed not on a forward-looking 
basis  but  rather  on  the  basis  of  backward-looking  or  adaptive  expectations.  Under  such 
circumstances, published expectations may not be useful predictors of future inflation. It also 
comes  as  no  surprise  that  when  inflation  outcomes  have  been  relatively  stable,  inflation 
expectations  are  also  stable.  Under  such  conditions,  unless  we  know  how  expectations  are 
formed,  we  cannot  be  certain  if  stable  expectations  are  indicative  of  well-anchored  forward-
looking expectations or if they are simply telling us what has happened in the past. 
Fourth: what is the appropriate time horizon for assessing expectations? As Adam Posen has 
pointed  out,  anchored  expectations  do  not  necessarily  mean  unchanging  expectations,  and 
short-term inflation expectations should be expected to vary over the business cycles and in 
the face of shocks to the economy. For this reason, more attention should be given to longer-
term  expectations.  If  monetary  policy  does  have  credibility,  longer-term  expectations  should 
not be impacted by shocks that affect short-term expectations. 
The  Bank  uses  a  number  of  sources  for  trying  to  assess  expectations.  The  broadest  is  the 
inflation expectations survey conducted by the Bureau for Economic Research, or BER, on a 
quarterly  basis.  It  surveys  analysts,  business  people,  and  trade  unionists,  asking  what  their 
inflation  expectations  are  for  the  current  year  and  for  the  next  two  years.  Since  mid-2011, 
respondents  have  also  been  asked  to  give  their  expectations  of  inflation  in  five  years’  time. 
Household expectations are also polled, but only for the current year. In addition, there are the 
surveys  that  poll  financial  market  analysts  on  a  monthly  basis,  including  the  Reuters 
econometer  survey  and  the  Bloomberg  survey.  The  break-even  inflation  rates,  derived  on  a 
high-frequency  basis  from  the  inflation-linked  bond  market,  give  us  some  indication  of  the 
views of bond market participants. 
We  generally  assume  that  the  expectations  of  the  economic  analysts  are  the  most  forward-
looking  of  the  three  groups  surveyed  by  the  BER.  Economic  analysts  tend  to  rely  on 
forecasting models similar to our own, and it is not surprising that their forecasts are often quite 
similar  to  those  of  the  Bank.  But  although  their  forecasts  are  useful  for  us  to  benchmark 
against, analysts are generally not price-setters in the economy. The same would apply to the 
break-even inflation rates, which often diverge quite significantly from those of the analysts. (I 
should  point  out  that  we  often  get  confusing  or  conflicting  information  when  distinguishing 
between the expectations implicit in the 5-, 10-, and 20-year bonds.) 
Over the past few years, average inflation expectations, as shown in the BER surveys, have 
been relatively stable but deteriorated slightly in the latest survey. Average expectations have 
been close to or, at times, slightly above the upper end of the target range, although there is 
generally  a  variation  between  the  different  groups.  The  expectations  of  both  business  and 
labour  are  often  above  those  of  the  analysts,  although  over  time  there  has  been  some 
convergence  between  the  three  groupings.  Research  by  the  Bank  suggests  that  the 
expectations of business and labour respondents tend to be more adaptive. So trying to make 
sense of the different expectations is often quite difficult, and they cannot always be taken at 
face value. 
Furthermore, for reasons mentioned earlier, the Bank focuses less on near-term expectations 
than on longer-term expectations. It should not come as a surprise if shocks to the economy 
(for  example  oil  price  shocks)  cause  near-term  expectations  to  change.  But focusing  on  the 
longer term can also be a challenge as the signals are not always clear. For example, in the 
most recent BER survey, short-term expectations deteriorated; over the two-to-three-year time 
horizon  inflation  expectations  improved,  on  average;  but  over  a  five-year  horizon  they 
deteriorated. A two-year horizon is consistent with the lag between a change in the policy rate 
and its full impact on inflation (our models show an 18-month distributed lag for the full effects 
of an interest-rate change to be felt). Since 2012, the average five-year inflation expectation 
measured each quarter has varied in the narrow range of 5,8 per cent and 6,2 per cent, with 
the  latest  reading  at  6,0  per  cent  following  two  consecutive  months  at  5,8  per  cent.  This  is 
concerning as it is uncomfortably close to or at the upper end of the inflation target range. At 
this  stage,  we  still  do  not  have  a  clear  view  of  how  inflation  expectations  are  formed, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   particularly over longer-term horizons. We would like to think that inflation expectations are well 
anchored because of the credibility of the Bank, but we also recognise that these could be a 
reflection  of  past  inflation.  The  persistence  introduced  by  the  wage-bargaining  process  and 
relatively  low  levels  of  competition  in  parts  of  the  product  markets  means  that  inflation 
expectations  matter  and  can  be  self-reinforcing.  We  will  therefore  continue  to  monitor  the 
various measures, mindful of these caveats, and focus on the longer-term trends. 
Final thoughts 
In conclusion, I have tried to convey a sense of how the Bank thinks about some of the issues 
confronting  monetary  policymakers.  Unfortunately,  models  and 
textbook  prescriptions 
generally work more smoothly than what we have to deal with in the real world. In reality, we 
deal  with  imperfect  information  and  uncertainty  regarding  inflation  expectations  formation, 
apart from having to cope with an increasingly uncertain future. The global economy is entering 
unchartered  waters,  with  the  prospect  of  normalisation  in  the  US  and  a  slowdown  in  China 
impacting  on  commodity  prices.  The  truth  is  that  South  Africa,  along  with  other  emerging-
market  economies,  is  likely  to  face  an  increasingly  turbulent  time  ahead.  While  theoretical 
models can help to guide us, we cannot react in a mechanical way and ultimately have to rely, 
to a certain degree, on subjective judgment. 
I wish all the finalists the best of luck and heartiest congratulations to the winner. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
