Vítor Constâncio: Macroprudential policy in Europe – ensuring financial 
stability in a banking union 
Keynote speech by Mr  Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at 
the Financial Stability Conference, Berlin, 28 October 2015. 
 Summary 
When  the  business  cycle  and  the  financial  cycles  are  disconnected,  monetary  policy  must 
remain anchored to its goal of ensuring price stability in the markets of goods and services. It 
cannot address instability in asset markets or broader financial stability risks. This is the task 
of macroprudential policy. Its objective is to contain systemic risk in the financial system. The 
role of macroprudential policy is all the more relevant in a monetary union, where economic 
and financial conditions may significantly differ across member states. With its granular and 
targeted instruments, macroprudential policy provides the most appropriate tool for staving 
off  financial  stability  risks  in  the  specific  areas  where  they  arise,  being  it  at  the  level  of  a 
country, a sector or a financial institution. An effective conduct of macroprudential policy can 
therefore help monetary policy to remain focussed on fulfilling its price stability mandate. 
The last two years have shown that macroprudential policy in Europe is already active. The 
implemented  national  macroprudential  policies  since  the  start  of  the  CRR/CRD  IV  are 
especially  focussed  on  structurally  strengthening  the  banking  system.  In  addition,  the 
adoption of borrower-based instruments, such as loan-to-value (LTV), loan-to-income (LTI) 
or  debt  service-to-income  (DSTI)  by  national  authorities  indicates  that  they  are  useful 
instruments in the European environment to curtail excessive credit and house price growth 
by acting directly on borrower’s conditions. 
Going  forward, we  need  to complete  the macroprudential  toolkit  in  the hands  of  European 
authorities to enhance consistency and policy co-ordination and to enable them to address 
financial  stability  risks  emerging  outside  the  banking  system.  This  will  be  a  key  step  to 
accompany further European market integration and the creation of a true Capital Markets 
Union. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
For more than two years now annual euro area HICP inflation has been below 2%, and for 
some time significantly so. Together with subdued economic growth, the low inflation rates 
reflect a continued sluggish recovery in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. Numerous 
reasons  can  be  considered  as  root  causes  for  this  dismal  performance.  Next  to  recent 
declines in oil prices, the combination of low inflation and low growth essentially points to a 
lack of demand holding back the recovery. 
There  are  several  reasons  why  excessively  low  inflation  generates  relevant  risks  for  the 
economy. First, with monetary policy rates at their lower bound, lower inflation rates imply 
higher real interest rates; in particular the real interest rate may end up above the equilibrium 
value needed to match savings and investment at the full employment level. Second, very 
low inflation may lead to an un-anchoring of inflation expectations. This would imply second-
round effects on price and wage setting protracting the subdued price developments into the 
future. Third, low  inflation increases the debt burden of borrowers, obstructing the needed 
balance  sheet  adjustment  of  highly  indebted  households,  firms  and  governments.  Fourth, 
should  a  generalised  deflation  pressure  prevail,  nominal  rigidities  in  the  economy,  and 
particularly in labour markets, could inhibit the needed relative price adjustments. Finally, all 
empirical  studies  show  that  there  is  a  positive  measurement  bias  in  the  measurement  of 
price  developments,  which  implies  that  a  zero  inflation  rate  would  mask  actually  declining 
prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  
 
For all these reasons the ECB has decided a quantitative objective with an inflation rate for 
the euro area of below but close to 2%. This objective guarantees an appropriate buffer to 
counter  the  above-mentioned  drawbacks  of  very  low  inflation  or  even  deflationary 
tendencies.1 
In  order  to  bring  inflation  rates  closer  to  the  stated  objective  of  price  stability  over  the 
medium-term,  and  in  order  to  support  the  aggregate  recovery  our  monetary  policy  is 
continuing  its  accommodative  stance.  Our  main  policy  rates  will  stay  low  for  a  prolonged 
period  of  time,  in  line  with  our forward  guidance  and  the  asset  purchase  programmes  will 
keep  our  balance  sheet  expanding  until  we  see  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of 
inflation.  Moreover,  in  the  past  months,  downside  risks  to  the  global  economy  have 
increased, due notably to the increasing weakness in emerging markets. As indicated at last 
week’s Governing Council meeting, the ECB is closely monitoring these developments and 
stands ready to act with all available instruments to deliver on its mandate. 
How does this situation, and in particular the monetary policy stance, relate to the situation in 
financial  markets  and  the  risks  to  financial  stability?  Are  we  creating,  as  some  observers 
claim,  the  conditions  for  new  instability  going  forward?  And,  should  our  monetary  policy 
stance change route to counter those risks? 
To answer these questions let me start by underlining that the ECB action is the necessary 
response to very serious macroeconomic shocks and challenges to our economy. If these 
are left unaddressed they bear the risk in further disruptive developments – ultimately also 
bringing  instability  in  financial  markets.  Our  policy  has  been  key  to  greatly  improve  credit 
conditions for households and firms over the past two years. Evidence also clearly indicates 
that  the  recovery  in  domestic  demand  is  becoming  more  broadly  based.  By  creating  the 
conditions  for  price  stability  and  a  sustained  recovery,  the  ECB  is  also  providing  a 
fundamental contribution to financial stability. 
More  generally,  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  divert  monetary  policy  from  its  objective  of 
maintaining price stability to more directly address asset price misalignments and financial 
stability risks. The business cycle and the financial cycle are not necessarily synchronised. 
The  financial  cycle  tends  to  have  larger  amplitude  and  lower  frequency  than  the  normal 
business  cycle.  This  implies  that  long  periods  of  “disconnect”  between  the  two  cycles  can 
materialise.2 
In the past, the separation between the two was not considered likely. In particular, it was 
thought  that  price  stability  in  the  market  of  goods  and  services  would  be  sufficient  to 
guarantee financial stability in the market for assets. The present situation, and the period of 
the  so-called  Great  Moderation  ahead  of  the  crisis,  should  be  sufficient  to  dispel  such 
traditional concepts. Before the crisis, while inflation was low and stable, significant financial 
imbalances  were  building  up  as  the  relatively  deregulated  financial  system  engineered  a 
credit boom and a highly risky leverage situation. Likewise, at present, the very low inflation 
and subdued growth environment is accompanied by some froth in financial asset markets 
resulting from “search for yield” in an environment of low interest rates. 
This  “disconnect”  between  the  financial  and  the  business  cycle  creates  a  dilemma  to 
traditional  macro-economic  policy  and  especially  to  monetary  policy.  The  main  remit  of 
monetary policy refers to the relevant variables of the business cycle: inflation in the market 
of  goods  and  services  and  the  level  of  real  economic  activity.  Real  economic  activity  is 
                                                
1   See “The ECB’s monetary policy strategy”, press release 8 May 2003, including O. Issing (eds.), “Background 
Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy”, November 2003. 
2   See Drehmann M., C. Borio and K. Tsatsaronis (2012), “Characterising the financial cycle: don’t lose sight of 
the  medium  term!”  BIS  Working  Paper  No.  380.  Hiebert,  P.,  Y.  S.  Schüler  and  T.  A.  Peltonen  (2015), 
“Characterising  the  financial  cycle:  a  multivariate  and  time-varying  approach”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series 
No. 1846. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
directly considered by central banks with a dual mandate, like the U.S. Fed. It is considered 
indirectly  by  central  banks  with  a  hierarchical  mandate,  like  the  one  of  the  ECB.  More 
generally,  though,  no  central  bank  has  objectives  explicitly  referred  to  asset  prices  in  its 
mandate. 
There  are  different reasons  why  monetary  policy  cannot,  and  should  not,  be  used  to  deal 
with  financial  instability  in  asset  markets.  One  relates  to  the  fact  that  the  monetary  policy 
objective may require an expansionary stance when asset markets would require restrictive 
measures,  reflecting  different  positions  in  the  business  and  financial  cycle.3  A  second 
argument questions whether monetary policy, through its main policy instrument – the short 
term  interest  rates  –  can  effectively  target  asset  market  prices.4  Finally,  monetary  policy 
affects all sectors simultaneously and is therefore a too blunt or even an ineffective tool to 
cope with specific imbalances in the financial sector. 
All  these  reasons  imply  that  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  complemented  by  an  additional 
policy, with a differentiated set of instruments, in order to ensure financial stability. This is the 
remit of macroprudential policy. Indeed, after the crisis, there has been a trend to attribute an 
explicit goal of financial stability to central banks. In order to fulfil this objective, central banks 
have to be entrusted with a new set of granular tools of a macroprudential nature that can be 
applied to the financial system as a whole. 
Macroprudential  policy  has  two  main  objectives:  enhancing  the  resilience  of  financial 
institutions and the whole financial system and, second, smoothening the financial cycle as 
captured  by  the  fluctuations  in  credit,  leverage  and  asset  prices  which  may  else  lead  to 
boom-bust  episodes.  The  instruments  available  for  macroprudential  policy  include  most  of 
the micro-supervision instruments related to capital and liquidity requirements when applied 
to counter systemic risks related. But they extend also to other categories, like limits to loan-
to-value  ratios  in  housing  credit,  counter-cyclical  capital  buffers,  global  leverage  ratios,  or 
haircuts and margin requirements in securities’ transactions or clearing activities. 
Macroprudential policy  is essential in any economy to complement monetary policy as the 
business  and  financial  cycles  are  not  synchronised.  This  is  all  the  more  important  in  a 
monetary union, where economic and financial conditions across member states can differ 
significantly.  With  more  granular  and  targeted  instruments,  macroprudential  policy  can 
address financial stability risks in the specific areas where they arise, being it at the level of a 
country, a sector or a financial institution. In a nutshell, macroprudential policy can unburden 
monetary policy to fulfil its price stability mandate. 
In  Europe,  the  macroprudential  policy  framework  is  in  place  since  the  adoption  of  the 
CRR/CRDIV legislative package. With the start of the SSM in November last year, the ECB 
received macroprudential powers, which it shares with national authorities in the euro area. 
The  toolkit  is  centered  on  the  banking  system  and  includes  capital-  and  liquidity-based 
measures. Some of the instruments, notably the countercyclical capital buffer, can be used to 
contain  the  pro-cyclicality  inherent  in  financial  developments  at  the  root  of  the  damaging 
boom and bust episodes we have experienced in the past. 
The current macroprudential assessment and action in the euro area 
While  monetary  policy  needs  to  continue  its  course  to fulfil  its  price  stability  mandate  and 
sustain the recovery, it is key for macroprudential policy to assess the consequences that the 
                                                
3   As Mervyn King once stated, it would be highly controversial if a restrictive central bank policy adopted for 
reasons  of  asset  market  risks  would  create  “mini-recessions”  in  real  activity  and  unemployment,  when  the 
level of inflation would be compliant with the defined and publicly-known target. 
4   See  D.  Kohn  (2006),  “Monetary  policy  and  asset  prices”  speech  at  a  European  Central  Bank  Colloquium, 
16 March 2006, http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20060316a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
globally low interest rate environment and ample liquidity may have for financial stability. The 
goal of our current monetary policy stance is to incentivise economic risk taking, in the form 
of better financing conditions for households and firms. We are, of course, very much aware 
that side effects are also possible, in particular in the form of excessive asset valuations or 
excessive  risk-taking  by  market  operators.  For  example,  the  ECB’s  asset  purchase 
programme directly affects the price of purchased bonds and the portfolio rebalancing effects 
indirectly  influence  also  many  other  asset  markets,  such  as  investment  grade  bonds, 
equities, real estate or foreign assets. 
We are following these developments very closely, notably in relation to risks posed by asset 
valuations and the search for yield phenomenon. Our assessment at present is that there is 
no sign of a general asset market overvaluation in the euro area. 
Euro area equity prices are still recovering from the summer turmoil. Prior to that, they had 
been fairly valued with a price-earnings ratio well below the values seen in the US. In the 
corporate bond markets, the increase in credit risk premia observed in the past few months 
has eased overvaluation concerns somewhat, with corporate spreads moving closer to their 
long-run  averages.  When  examining  excess  bond  premia,  standard  valuation  models  for 
euro  area  non-financial  corporations  point  to  fairly  valued,  or  even  slightly  under-priced, 
corporate  bond market valuations.  Term  premia  in  sovereign  bond  markets  are  somewhat 
stretched, but this is a direct and desired consequence of the monetary policy action. As for 
the real estate market, the situation is quite differentiated across member states. There are 
growing  signs  that  the  recovery  in  property  prices  is  becoming  more  broad-based  across 
countries.  In  general,  there  is  no  evidence  of  generalised  overvaluations,  although  some 
local developments warrant close monitoring. 
This  situation  in  euro  area  asset  markets  couples  with  a  still  subdued  credit  cycle.  While 
credit to the real economy is certainly recovering, all countries experience cyclical real credit 
growth rates below their long-term average. Estimates of the credit-to-GDP gap, a measure 
of  the  deviation  of  credit  from  its  longer  run  norm  are  negative  for  nearly  all  euro  area 
countries  and  are  below  10%  in  most  euro  area  countries.  In  other  words,  we  are  still far 
away  from  a  situation  of  excessive  credit  growth  and  asset  price  misalignments  –  very 
different from a credit-driven asset price boom, which has preceded many financial crises of 
the past. 
The  implication  of  this  state  of  affairs  is  that  at  the  moment,  we  do  not  see  a  need  to 
implement  broadly  based  area-wide  countercyclical  macroprudential  policies,  such  as  the 
countercyclical capital buffers. This is not to say, however, that selective measures to tackle 
risks emerging in specific parts of the financial system should not be taken. 
Indeed, dozens of actions in the macroprudential field have already been taken by euro area 
countries, to increase the resilience of the banking system and to prevent the emergence of 
possible imbalances, in particular in the real estate sector. 
Within  the  first  category  –  to  raise  resilience  –  macroprudential  action  has  especially 
contributed  to  strengthening  bank  capital  positions.  Capital  ratios  of  significant  banking 
groups  have  already  markedly  increased  from  a  median  common  equity  Tier  1  (CET1) 
capital ratio of 7% in 2008 to 12.8% at the end of 2014. This strengthening has been spurred 
by  the  preparations  for  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  conduct  of  the  Asset 
Quality Review last year. 
In addition, a number of macroprudential authorities in the euro area have activated three 
types of capital buffers: the buffer for global systemically important institutions (G-SIIs), the 
one for other systemically important institutions (O-SIIs) and the systemic risk buffer (SRB). 
Such buffers are intended to address the problems stemming from too-big-to-fail institutions, 
large, concentrated and interconnected banking sectors, as well as specific structural risks 
deriving for instance from exposures to areas affected by geopolitical tensions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
As for the G-SII buffers, seven globally systemic banks from four euro area countries have 
been identified.5  National authorities have overall also identified thirteen other systemically 
important  banks  building  on  the  EBA  guidelines.6  These  are  five  for  Slovakia,  four  for  the 
Netherlands  and  four  for  Finland.  Other  countries  will  announce  their  global  and  other 
systemically important banks soon and capital buffers will gradually be phased in. In addition, 
Estonia  and  the  Netherlands  have  already  adopted  systemic  risk  buffers  to  counter  those 
risks emerging from groups of banks with similar business models. 
These  three  capital  buffers  address  risks  linked  to  the  structural  features  of  the  banking 
system. They raise resilience and are applied in a static way. Countercyclical capital buffers 
and dynamic loan provisioning, instead, can address cyclical features by increasing capital 
requirements when systemic risks build up.7 Until now, no SSM country has adopted positive 
countercyclical capital buffers given the prevailing subdued position in the credit cycle. But 
should  stronger  credit  growth  imply  excessive  risk-taking,  the  cyclical  buffers  are  fully 
implementable in all SSM countries starting in 2016 to mitigate the upturn of a credit-driven 
financial cycle. 
In the second category, covering measures to address potential imbalances in the real estate 
sector, there have also been a number of initiatives. As mentioned, valuation metrics suggest 
that  prices  are  generally  still  in  line  with  fundamentals.  Estimates  for  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole show that residential property prices are slightly below the average valuations of the 
last 20 years; commercial real estate prices, instead, display some signs of overvaluation. 
But dispersion is substantial around these average estimates. 
Given the indirect transmission of capital-based measures to lending conditions, authorities 
are relying on borrower-based instruments, such as loan-to-value (LTV), loan-to-income (LTI) 
or debt service-to-income (DSTI) to address risk-taking and overvaluation more specifically. 
Such  instruments  act  more  directly  on  borrower’s  conditions  to  curtail  excessive  credit 
growth.8 Eight SSM countries have already adopted these instruments, especially to counter 
potential risks of low interest rates for the real estate market. What is more, in order to exploit 
complementarities  between  three  individual  borrower-based  measures,  the  authorities  in 
Estonia and Lithuania have implemented jointly explicit limits on loan-to-value ratios, income-
based ratios and loan maturity. 
The initial evidence indicates that these policies can be highly effective. For example in the 
case of Ireland, where at the beginning of 2015 the Central Bank introduced a loan-to-value 
                                                
5   The EU G-SII identification follows the methodology of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 
“The G-SIB assessment methodology – score calculation”, November 2014. It is expected that the full list of 
G-SII notifications to the ECB will be consistent with the one identified by the FSB. The having designated the 
global  systemically  important  institutions  are  France  (BNP  Paribas,  Groupe  BPCE,  Crédit  Agricole  Group, 
Société Générale), Germany (Deutsche Bank), Italy (UniCredit), and the Netherlands (ING Bank). 
6   “Guidelines On the criteria to determine the conditions of application of Article 131(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU 
(CRD) in relation to the assessment of other systemically important institutions (O-SIIs)”, European Banking 
Authority, 16 December 2014. 
7   With the benefit of hindsight, the experience with dynamic provisioning in Spain indicates that increases in 
capital buffers building up capital buffers before a crisis is superior in terms of maintaining real activity and 
avoiding  risk-shifting  t  as  found  by  Jiménez,  G.,  S.  Ongena,  J.-L.  Peydró  and  J.  Saurina  “Macroprudential 
Policy,  Countercyclical  Bank  Capital  Buffers  and  Credit  Supply:  Evidence  from  the  Spanish  Dynamic 
Provisioning Experiments,” Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming). 
8   Kuttner, K. and I. Shim, (2013), “Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a 
Panel of 57 Economies,” NBER WP 19723, conclude that changes in the maximum debt-service-to-income 
had  the  largest  and  most  robust  effects  on  housing  credit  growth  and  that  frictions  targeting  specific 
characteristics of loans have larger effects on credit growth than those oriented towards bank capital. Similar 
conclusions have been made by Crowe, C. W., D. Igan, G. Dell’Ariccia, and P. Rabanal (2011), “How to Deal 
with  Real  Estate  Booms”,  IMF  Staff  Discussion  Note  11/02  and  Cerutti,  E.,  S.  Claessens,  and  L.  Laeven 
(2015), “The Use and Effectiveness of Macroprudential Policies: New Evidence”, IMF Working Paper 15/61. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
limit of 80% on principal dwelling houses and a limit on loan-to-income of 3.5 times relative to 
gross  income,  house  prices  have  been  decelerating  from  very  high  rates.9  In  Belgium,  a 
slowdown in house price growth has also been observed after the introduction of add-ons in 
risk weights for mortgage lending. 
It  is  important that  appropriate  tools  are  available  for  authorities to  contain  the  build-up of 
potential  imbalances  in  real  estate  markets.  In  this  respect,  we  very  much  welcome  the 
recommendation  by  the  German  Financial  Stability  Committee  in  June  to  create  minimum 
standards  for  residential  real-estate  loans  such  as  minimum  capital  requirements  and 
minimum debt repayment rates by the end of March 2016. At the same time, we concur with 
the Committee’s assessment that there are no signs to use them at the current stage. Still, 
we encourage further work on the legislation for loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios to 
be included it in the macroprudential toolkit.10 
Other  countries  have  also  prepared  prudential  measures,  especially  to  strengthen  the 
regulatory toolkit in a low interest rate environment. These measures are strongly driven by 
systemic  risk  considerations.  For  example,  authorities  in  Ireland,  Lithuania,  Slovakia  and 
Germany  are  now  recommending  interest  rate  sensitivity  tests  for  newly  contracted 
mortgages in order to raise the resilience of mortgage borrowing to interest rate risk. The low 
interest rate environment has led some countries to recommend caps on bank deposit rates 
or  caps  on  guaranteed  benefit  schemes  of  insurance  contracts.  These  are  important  to 
safeguard the resilience of the financial sector. The National Bank in Belgium also expects 
that  pay-outs  to  bank  and  insurance  shareholders  are  limited  when  deemed  necessary  to 
enhance their solvency position and to sustain their long-term resilience. 
These examples show that macroprudential considerations lead to policy decisions through a 
broad range of instruments and with varying legal powers ranging from moral suasion over 
recommendations to provisions with clear sanctions. 
It is of course too early to fully assess these experiences. Macroprudential policy in the euro 
area  is  still  in  its  infancy  and  we  need  to  fully  understand the  effects  and  the  interactions 
among the different instruments. Substantial analytical and empirical work is needed to place 
the macroprudential authorities into a position to use the available instruments in the most 
effective  way.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  macroprudential  policies  are  already 
contributing  to  creating  a  safer  financial  environment  in  the  euro  area.  Going  forward, 
macroprudential policy can represent a key building block for high and sustainable economic 
growth in the euro area. In order to reap all benefits of an effective macroprudential policy, 
however, the macroprudential policy framework needs to be completed. 
Completing the macroprudential toolkit 
There are at least two important directions to follow to complete the macroprudential toolkit. 
First, we need to further enhance the European authorities’ ability to intervene in a timely and 
efficient manner with macroprudential action. This entails, first of all, to strengthen the co-
ordination  role  of  central  authorities  to  ensure full  consistency  and  to  account for  possible 
spillover effects of macroprudential policies. It also requires expanding the toolkit at the EU 
level.  Some  instruments  that  are  available  for  national  macroprudential  authorities  are  not 
present in the CRR/CRD IV and are thus not part of the ECB macroprudential toolkit. They 
are  primarily  borrower-based  measures,  such  as  caps  on  LTV,  LTI  or  DSTI,  which  have 
however proven to be rather effective, and should be included as in the revised CRR/CRDIV. 
                                                
9   For details on the implemented measures see Press release by the Central Bank of Ireland, 27 January 2015 
“Central Bank announces new regulations on residential mortgage lending”. 
10   See  “Recommendation  of  30  June  2015  on  new  instruments  for  regulating  loans  for  the  construction  or 
purchase of residential real estate” by the German Financial Stability Committee. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Specific  limits  on  exposures  to  shadow  banks  should  be  considered  and  the  scope  of 
sectoral risk weights (currently available for real estate and intra financial sector exposures) 
could  be  extended  to  other  exposure  classes,  so  that  macroprudential  authorities  can 
address risks emerging in specific sectors in a targeted manner. Furthermore, a time-varying 
dimension for both the leverage ratio (LR) and the net stable funding ratio (NSFR) – that will 
become  part  of  the  toolkit  as  soon  as  introduced  –  could  be  considered.  Finally,  it  is 
necessary to simplify the current cumbersome notification and approval procedures in order 
to allow macroprudential authorities to act in a flexible and timely manner. 
Another issue relates to the need to expand our macroprudential toolkit beyond the banking 
sector to also cover risks among non-banks and the financial markets as a whole. 
In  recent  years,  financial  activity  and  the  financing  of  the  economy  has  been  increasingly 
shifting to financial institutions beyond banks. For example, the investment fund sector has 
been growing strongly, both because of surging inflows and rising asset prices. As of the first 
quarter of this year, investment funds in the euro area are providing €1.3 trillion in credit to 
financial firms, €1 trillion to governments, and more than €300 billion to non-financial firms in 
the euro area. They also invested in equities and other non-financial assets, including real 
estate, both within the euro area and outside. The non-euro area assets make up about 40% 
of  investment  funds  balance  sheets.  In  short,  investment  funds  have  an  increasingly 
important role in funding the euro area domestic economy and for channelling investments 
abroad. 
I see great benefits in broadening the funding base of the European economy, where market-
based financing complements the traditional banking system. Market-based financing can be 
seen  as  a  spare-tire  which  helps  satisfy  demands  for  financing  of  the  real  economy, 
especially in times of sizeable deleveraging pressures in the banking sector. Moreover, by 
spreading  financial  risk  outside  the  banking  sector  and  on  a  larger  number  of  market 
participants, such development may also be seen as reinforcing the overall resilience of the 
financial  sector.  The  Capital  Markets  Union  initiative  in  the  EU  will  help  promote  these 
valuable functions of market-based financing. 
However,  such  a  process  also  entails  a  transference  of  risk  from  more  regulated  to  less 
regulated  institutions  and  activities.  Indeed,  part  of  the  shifting  of  activities  outside  the 
banking sector is likely stemming from a reaction to the regulatory action on banks. To avoid 
that  the  increase  in  market-based  financing  becomes  a  serious  source  of  systemic  risk, 
macroprudential regulation also needs to apply to the non-banking sector. 
The need for macroprudential regulation of certain financial market activities becomes clear if 
we consider that banks and non-banks are closely tied through market-based intermediation 
activities.  These  include  a  broad  array  of  services  related  to  securitisation  transactions, 
securities financing transactions, repos, collateral management and derivatives – allowing for 
risk transformation and exchange via swaps and other instruments.11 These activities can be 
conducted  by  regulated  banks  or  by  other  less  regulated  institutions,  but  most  of  these 
activities escape the monetary statistics and the flow-of-funds accounts – they can, therefore, 
hardly  be  monitored,  which  is  why  they  are  called  shadow  banking  activities.  But  risks  of 
regulatory  arbitrage  are  sizeable,  as  many  of  the  activities  can  be  conducted  by  different 
types of institutions subject to diverse regulatory regimes. Additionally, the more effective we 
are in using macroprudential tools for banks, the more likely activities spill over into the less 
regulated sector. 
                                                
11   These instruments represent an important share of financial assets. According to estimates by the European 
Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA)  aggregate  European  ABCP,  ABS,  repo,  securities  lending  and 
MMFS is totalling more than EUR 8tn, which represents 19% of bank liabilities. The largest part thereof is the 
repo market with an estimated size of EUR 6tn. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
Past  experience  has  indeed  shown  that  financial  conditions  can  easily  spill-over  from  one 
part of the financial system to the other. To give an example, before the global crisis, the 
markets for money-like claims were boosted by the emergence of very sizeable cash pools 
as these could possibly not find safety in banks’ insured deposits. According to the academic 
literature, collateral markets, such as repo and derivative margins, played a decisive role in 
these developments,12 where the role of bankruptcy privileges is noted as a key feature of 
the  secured  funding  model.13  Such  markets  can  be  of  concern  from  a  macroprudential 
perspective, especially if they are contributing to the financial cycle or if they create additional 
risks. Recent analytical studies – largely based on empirical studies on US markets –suggest 
that repo and securities lending markets were indeed inherently procyclical and may have 
amplified liquidity problems during the global financial crisis. 
Macroprudential regulation must therefore not stop at the boundary of banks, as it would risk 
that exuberant financial conditions or potential distress easily spill over from one market to 
the other. Instead, macroprudential policy should have a complete toolkit available to adjust 
prudential  requirements  in  a  countercyclical  manner  across  a  broad  range  of  financing 
activities. 
In  this  respect,  the  macroprudential  framework  needs  to  evolve  in  three  key  aspects  to 
effectively reach beyond the banking sector. 
First, we need to close remaining data gaps and to broaden the information-base of financial 
market  activities. Without  detailed  information,  macroprudential  policy  cannot  be  enforced. 
One  of  the  challenges  faced  is  to  consolidate  and  aggregate  data  from  various  sources. 
Furthermore,  opacity  remains  a  concern for  statistics  on  aggregate  liquidity  or  leverage  of 
investment  funds.  An  aspect  of  particular  concern  refers  to  the  measurement  of  synthetic 
leverage  build-up  mostly  with  over-the-counter-derivatives,  data  which  are  not  collected 
systematically or in a harmonised fashion. 
Second,  we  need  to  develop  tools  targeting  liquidity  in  non-bank  financial  institutions  and 
ensure  that  leverage  remains  within  acceptable  limits.  Asset-liability  structures  vary 
substantially  across  non-bank  institutions,  so  a  one-size-fits-all  approach  is  clearly  not 
appropriate.  Take  the  example  of  open-ended  investment  funds,  in  which  case  equity  is 
redeemable at short notice, creating the possibility of disturbing liquidity pressures. If we are 
to  deploy  macroprudential  tools  effectively  beyond  the  banking  sector,  the  competent 
supervisors  need  a  clearer  picture  of  the  resilience  of  individual  institutions  and  the  entire 
financial system. To assess resilience, guided stress-tests at institutional and system level 
need to be developed, in line with recommendations by the FSB.14 
Third, we need to tailor specific rules and tools for financing activities at the juncture between 
banking  and  non-bank  financial  intermediation.  To  dampen  procyclicality  in  securities 
financing and derivatives markets, macroprudential authorities should be given the power to 
change  haircuts  at  transaction  level  in  a  time-varying  manner.  At  the  same  time,  Central 
Counterparties need to have their own margining policies in place, that adequately address 
the risks stemming from specific trading behaviours and counterparty risk in times of stress.15 
                                                
12   Poszar,  Z.,  “Shadow  Banking:  The  Money  View”,  OFR  Working  Papers  No.  14–04,  Office  of  Financial 
Research, 2 July 2014. Claessens, S., Z. Pozsar,; L. Ratnovski, and M. Singh, “Shadow Banking: Economics 
and Policy”, IMF Staff Discussion Notes No. 12/12. 
13   Perotti, E., “The roots of shadow banking”; CEPR Policy Insight, No. 69. 
14   Meeting 
London 
September 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/2015/09/meeting-of-the-financial-stability-board-in-london-on-25-
september/. 
Financial 
Stability 
Board 
the 
25 
on 
of 
in 
2015: 
15   An  example  of  research  analysing  the  implications  of  risks  in  times  of  stress  is  Menkveld,  A.J.  (2015) 
“Crowded Trades: An Overlooked Systemic Risk for Central Clearing Counterparties”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
For  all 
the  EU 
macroprudential  framework,  recently  announced  by  the  Commission,  will  provide  the 
opportunity for a significant enhancement of the regulatory context.16 
the  above-mentioned  aspects 
I  am  confident  that 
the  review  of 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. 
A  complete  and  well-functioning  macroprudential  policy  framework  is  essential  for  future 
integration  in  Europe.  It  can  complement  the  action  of  the  single  monetary  policy  and 
contribute  to  high  and  sustainable  economic  growth  in  the  monetary  union.  Recent 
experience  shows  that  macroprudential  policy  in  the  euro  area  is  already  active.  Going 
forward, we need to complete the toolkit in the hands of European authorities to enhance 
coordination, reduce spill-overs and to prepare for the Capital Markets Union. 
Macroprudential policies are crucial to cope with systemic risk and endogenous cycles in the 
financial sector. They are particularly important in the euro area at the current juncture, as 
the  global  environment  of  low  interest  rates  and  the  rise  in  shadow  banking  activities 
exposes the financial sector to increased risks. 
Macroprudential and monetary policy rely on separate tools and aim at achieving different 
objectives. Yet, they need to be co-ordinated, which is a non-trivial task given that financial 
and  business  cycles  can  be  de-synchronised.  For  these  reasons,  as  I  have  already 
highlighted, appropriate macroprudential policy instruments must be at the disposal of central 
banks. If effective macroprudential measures are not made available, advanced economies 
will be more vulnerable to financial crises that could be avoided or mitigated if only we would 
heed to the lessons of recent history. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
                                                
16   Jonathan Hill: “Capital Markets Union: an Action Plan to boost business funding and investment financing”, 30 
September 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
