   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Financial education initiatives in Malaysia 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia),  at  the  Launch  of  Financial  LATeracy  in  conjunction  with  opening  of  Special 
Exhibition on Financial Literacy, Kuala Lumpur, 28 September 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Financial education has never been more important than in today’s environment. Participating 
effectively  in  the  financial  system  can  improve  the  economic  well  being  of  individuals  and 
businesses. Financial education is therefore key so that members of our society will benefit 
from the financial system and from the new technologies that are transforming our financial 
landscape. It will help consumers to better understand the risks involved in managing their 
finances and will facilitate better financial decision making. Building a generation with financial 
competence therefore needs to start from an early age. This has been the motivation of Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  in  the  development  of  the  Pocket  Money  Book  or  Buku  Wang  Saku  for 
schools that was first launched in 1999. We are very honoured to have progressed this project 
in  collaboration  with  Datuk  Lat  whose  illustrations  have  made  the  complex  subject  of 
fundamental issues in finance appealing to school children. 
The universal appeal of Datuk Lat’s distinctive caricatures which are featured in the Pocket 
Money Book or Buku Wang Saku, have attracted students, teachers and parents to use it as 
a  tool  to  nurture  good  savings  habits  and  to  encourage  responsible  money  management 
among school children. His works have over the years touched on many aspects of money 
management as seen from the context of ordinary Malaysians, leaving us with memorable and 
lasting impressions not only on prudent financial behaviour, but on Malaysian life and society. 
Important lessons about savings, conserving and avoiding wastage are powerfully conveyed 
through the remarkably creative and entertaining visuals that we have all come to know and 
love. True to form, Datuk Lat’s creations are unparalleled in their ability to capture the hearts 
of Malaysians and through them, we are both educated and entertained. It is our honour to 
commemorate his works for such an important cause. Since 1999, 15 million copies of Buku 
Wang  Saku  have  been  circulated  to  more  than  10,000  schools  nationwide  to  be  used  in 
promoting good financial management habits which can make a profound difference in their 
future financial well-being. 
Indeed, being equipped with the knowledge, skills and tools to make sound financial decisions 
has never been more important in a generation where our young people have more money to 
spend, are presented with a wider spectrum of financial offerings and are exposed to greater 
temptations to take on debt. Financial education is therefore a vital life skill; one that must be 
developed from an early age. It was with this motivation that the Bank initiated a number of 
efforts  to  enhance  the  financial  competence  of  Malaysians  through  a  nationwide  savings 
campaign that was launched in 1996. This involved several key financial education initiatives 
for students and households in Malaysia, including the School Adoption Programme that was 
supported  by  the  Ministry  of  Education  and  the  financial  industry.  More  recently,  it  has 
progressed to the integration of financial education into the school curriculum. This has been 
made possible through the successful collaboration between Bank Negara Malaysia and the 
Ministry of Education. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The compilation of caricatures in Financial LATeracy is organised according to specific money 
management themes while the exhibition allows visitors to experience and appreciate the fine 
works  of  Datuk  Lat  while  highlighting  key  money  management  messages.  The  timeless 
caricatures showcased in Financial LATeracy also embodies the true essence of a multicultural 
Malaysia, depicting the diversity of our people, cultures and traditions. Of significance is the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   influence that his works have had in promoting social harmony and benevolent values that 
bring  the  diverse  people  of  Malaysia  together.  Most  Malaysians  have  grown  up  with  his 
drawings. His works have touched on so many aspects of the lives of Malaysians, providing 
us with powerful insights into the social and political scenes of this country. The power of story 
telling by Datuk Lat transcends beyond the drawing of cartoons. He is among the artists who 
have been observers that are the most honest and critical of developments in our society. 
Through their sensitivity and expression, we are reminded of the things that we often take for 
granted, and sometimes highlighting how we fall short from attaining our fullest potential as a 
nation. Datuk Lat is one of such artists. A number of Datuk Lat’s artworks adorn Bank Negara 
Malaysia’s premises since the 1980s, reflecting the challenges we face as a central bank in 
ensuring a sound and robust financial system, in a light-hearted manner. This publication of 
the  Financial  LATeracybook  aims  to  preserve  these  works  for  the  benefit  of  our  future 
generation. Financial LATeracy is also a way for the Bank to express its heartfelt gratitude and 
appreciation to Datuk Lat for his continuing support of our financial education initiatives. Today, 
Financial LATeracy pays a tribute to Datuk Lat’s enduring legacy in this important endeavour. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The Financial LATeracy exhibition is taking place during a time when more than 200 global 
policy makers and practitioners in the area of financial education from all parts of the world are 
gathering here in Sasana Kijang to participate in the meetings of the International Network on 
Financial Education and in the High Level Global Symposium, a network under the OECD, to 
explore new paths and ideas in advancing financial literacy. I am certain that the works of 
Datuk Lat will continue to inspire not only Malaysians but many others from foreign shores in 
this  important  cause  through  his  unique  brand  of  humour  and  poignant  reflections  of  our 
society. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
