   Peter Praet: Interview in Handelsblatt 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in  Handelsblatt,  conducted  by  Mr  Jan  Mallien  and  Mr  Daniel  Schäfer  and  published  on 
10 December 2015. 
 Mr Praet, rather than the next big flood of money that was expected from the European 
Central Bank (ECB), there was only a very small expansion of the existing stimulus. Did 
you have to back down? Does the majority of the ECB’s Governing Council no longer 
support your and Mario Draghi’s policy? 
Quite the opposite: we had a very strong majority! By way of explanation: the relevant working 
groups provide the Executive Board with an analysis of the different measures and the Board 
discusses a monetary policy package, which I then put forward to the Governing Council. What 
was agreed last week is exactly in line with what I proposed to the Council on Thursday, taking 
into account what was discussed in the committees. 
You had already met the other members of the ECB’s Governing Council for dinner on 
Wednesday though. Did you encounter so much resistance then that you scaled back 
your proposals before Thursday’s meeting? 
The dinner always takes place, but these issues are not discussed during the meal. It is true 
that at first I was not sure how the proposals would be received. But in the end, the discussion 
was not very controversial. Not everyone was in favour of my proposals, but it is not the case 
that we said “we want this”, and then got less. That is just not true. 
If you didn’t want to achieve anything more, why did you create such high expectations 
beforehand? 
We had already talked about reviewing our measures when the Governing Council met in Malta 
in October. The markets already reacted to this back then, which was understandable. The 
problem  was  that  the  markets’  expectations  grew  ever  bigger  in  the  meantime  and  were 
persisting,  even  though  the  most  recent  economic  data  had  been  encouraging.  One  big 
problem was that, during the quiet period... 
...i.e. the days directly before the Governing Council meeting, when members of the 
Council are not allowed to talk about monetary policy... 
...during this period, the markets exaggerated the situation again. But we could not respond to 
it because we are obliged to remain silent. 
What do you mean by “exaggerated”? 
That  there  was  speculation  about  a  package  of  measures  that  had  never  been  up  for 
discussion. 
But prior to the start of the quiet period you and Mario Draghi gave pretty hard-hitting 
speeches which made the markets feel euphoric. Why didn’t you quickly try to correct 
expectations? 
You shouldn’t push expectations management too far. If expectations get out of control, we, 
as the central bank, will try to correct it. But that simply cannot be done during the quiet period. 
What are the consequences of this communications debacle? 
We don’t communicate in order to please the markets, but to fulfil our mandate. 
Investors seem to have taken a different view. 
To begin with, the market expected a reduction in the deposit rate, an increase in the amount 
of monthly bond purchases and an extension of the bond-buying programme. But what was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
not  anticipated  at  all  was  the  reinvestment  of  maturing  bonds  or  the  expansion  of  the 
programme to include regional bonds. The reinvestment of maturing bonds is an important 
decision  because  it  ensures  enough  liquidity  is  available  for  as  long  as  is  necessary. The 
expansion to include regional bonds is also important because the markets were concerned 
that,  in  some  instances  in  the  foreseeable  future,  there  might  not  be  enough  bonds  to 
purchase. 
But is that enough to get inflation moving back towards 2%? 
Firstly, when it comes to our inflation objective, I’m really determined. I’m a hardliner on this 
point. And we as the ECB are ensuring that the necessary degree of monetary policy easing 
will  be  maintained  in  order  to  achieve  the  goal.  But  there  are  two  big  uncertainties: 
developments in the emerging countries and the effects of the interest rate turnaround in the 
US. As regards the emerging countries, we have arrived at the third phase of the great financial 
crisis. It started in the US, continued in the euro area and now it has reached the emerging 
economies. It’ll take a long time to overcome. I would not be so concerned about this if the 
position of the euro area were more robust, but unfortunately it is still very fragile. 
And what risks do you see in the US? 
We don’t comment on the monetary policy of other central banks. But the markets still don’t 
know what the effects of the imminent turnaround in US monetary policy will be on long-term 
interest rates and global bond markets. It obviously brings uncertainty. 
Are you ready, if need be, to do more, and what would be your preferred instruments? 
We have clearly said that we are ready to do more, if this became necessary. The precise 
choice  of  instruments  cannot  be  determined  long  in  advance;  it  is  based  on  the  specific 
circumstances. The asset purchase programme is sufficiently flexible for its size, composition 
and duration to be adapted if necessary. 
You  have  been  pumping  in  money  since  March  with  large-scale  purchases  of 
government  bonds.  Nevertheless,  inflation  in  November  only  stood  at  around  0.1%. 
Doesn’t that prove that your policy isn’t working? 
No, it’s working very well. In fact we were pleased to see how strongly our monetary policy has 
improved credit conditions. The impact on inflation however seems to be taking longer. Some 
would say that greater patience is called for. We have already pushed back several times our 
expectations of when the inflation rate will reach just under 2%. If we keep pushing them back, 
credibility will be put at risk. 
Is this view shared by other members of the Governing Council? 
Almost everyone on the ECB’s Governing Council thinks that the measures are working. But 
that doesn’t mean that everyone finds them good. There are two schools of thought among the 
critics on the Council. Some say they’re unnecessary because the economic situation isn’t that 
bad at all. For instance, they don’t regard the development in inflation expectations as being 
so dramatic. Others say that, because of the special nature of a currency union, such asset 
purchases should only be used if we are in a deflationary situation. This point can be discussed 
at length. A large majority of the Council members, which includes me, think that if you deal 
with  that  only  in  the  extreme  circumstances  of  deflation  then  it’s  too  late.  It  can  only  be 
corrected, the thinking goes, with great difficulty and requires much more effort. 
But doesn’t the ultra-loose monetary policy reduce the pressure on policymakers to 
undertake reforms? 
I am of course concerned about the rather hesitant pace of economic policy reform. Many 
politicians are afraid of alarming the voters. That’s why they drag out reforms. Monetary policy 
cannot solve the problems. But we cannot be inactive either, simply because the other side 
does not deliver. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
You have often used market-based inflation expectations to argue for monetary easing. 
Are markets still a useful source of information for monetary policy? 
I never take only one indicator. And we don’t conduct monetary policy on the basis of market 
prices. That is only one part of the information we look at. Even when there’s no news, the 
markets are still subject to a lot of volatility anyway. 
A  number  of  German  politicians  have  recently  voiced  strong  criticism  of  a  secret 
agreement on the purchase of securities by the national central banks. Some of those 
banks have purchased on a large scale, others not. Why is there this difference? 
There’s no secret agreement. When the currency union was founded governments decided to 
transfer functions and tasks that are necessary for monetary policy to the Eurosystem and to 
leave other tasks as the responsibility of the national central banks. They invest, for instance, 
to cover the pensions of their employees or to build up capital and reserves. Some central 
banks also manage the investment portfolios of other central banks outside the euro area and 
invest this money so that it stays in circulation. It’s vital that the Governing Council of the ECB 
is in full control of the size of the Eurosystem balance sheet, and that is the case. 
If that’s the case, why not do it publicly? 
Personally, I see no problem in being more transparent on this matter. But the decision has to 
be taken by the Governing Council. 
Could the ECB force the national central banks to do that? 
As I said, the national central banks fulfil some of their tasks under their own responsibility and 
at their own risk, as provided for in the European treaties. 
But aren’t these purchases monetary financing? 
No, the ECB’s Governing Council limits the overall amount and has the necessary information. 
There is no such thing as “money printing by national central banks” outside of the Eurosystem 
framework. In any case, the Governing Council ensures that no Eurosystem operations infringe 
the prohibition of monetary financing. 
Mr Praet, you were born in Germany and grew up here. Do you understand why the 
ECB’s policy is being so severely criticised here? 
The situation in Germany is different from elsewhere in Europe. There has been no credit cycle 
here. But in Germany it’s often forgotten that we would have faced a catastrophic situation if 
we  had  not  acted.  The  European  environment  is  very  difficult.  We  have  institutional 
weaknesses in the euro area which have to be addressed and eliminated. Until this happens, 
the work we have as a central bank will be more difficult than is the case in other currency 
areas. There is no proper resolution system for banks, and nothing in the event a state runs 
into difficulties. It’s not about us favouring one country over another. It is simply about making 
the best of a difficult situation. What we have done is right. It’s the best we could do, and it has 
been working. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
