  William C Dudley: Is the active use of macroprudential tools 
institutionally realistic? 
Panel remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  “Macroprudential  Monetary  Policy”,  59th  Economic 
Conference  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  Boston,  Massachusetts,  3  October 
2015. 
 It is a pleasure to be here today and to have the opportunity to talk about the potential use of 
macroprudential tools in the United States. 
Before  I  respond  to  Adam  Posen,  I’d  like  to  make  a  few  general  comments  on 
macroprudential tools. I am interested in such tools both as a U.S. policymaker and in my 
role as chair of the Committee on the Global Financial System of the Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS), a body that has done considerable work in this area in recent years. What 
I  have  to  say  today  represents  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System.1 
The  use  of  macroprudential  tools  has  gotten  considerable  attention  for  several  reasons. 
Some  countries  have  implemented  macroprudential  measures  with  respect  to  the  housing 
market that may have limited the extent of home price appreciation and made their financial 
systems  more  resilient  when  the  boom  unwound.  Other  countries  have  implemented 
countercyclical  capital  requirements  that  have  made  their  banking  systems  more  resilient. 
Thus, the hope is that U.S. policymakers can learn from these international experiences and 
incorporate effective macroprudential tools into our toolkit that could be used to limit financial 
stability risks. 
Support for using macroprudential tools in the United States has also been bolstered by our 
experience  during  the  financial  crisis.  The  U.S. housing  boom  and  subsequent  bust might 
have been less severe had a set of macroprudential measures been in place at the time to 
limit the degree of leverage and speculative activity in the housing sector. The housing boom 
was  fueled  by  optimistic  expectations  for  house  price  appreciation,  combined  with  lax 
underwriting  standards  embodied  in  such  practices  as  no-doc  mortgages  and  widespread 
speculative activity by investors. I remember, for example, the website, Condoflip.com, which 
says it all in terms of the degree of speculative fervor that was evident at the time. 
If  underwriting  practices  had  been  held to  high standards  (e.g.,  strict mortgage service-to-
income ratio limits had been honored) and speculative activity had been constrained (e.g., by 
lower loan-to-value ceilings for investors with multiple mortgage liens outstanding), this might 
have limited the size of the boom and subsequent bust. 
My own view is that while the use of macroprudential tools holds promise, we are a long way 
from being able to successfully use such tools in the United States. There are two major sets 
of difficulties. First, unlike monetary policy and microprudential regulation, there is not a well-
defined framework for identifying emerging imbalances and applying macroprudential tools in 
response.  A  recent  tabletop  exercise  conducted  by  a  number  of  Federal  Reserve  Bank 
presidents, which I will discuss a bit later, indicates some of the difficulties here. 
A workshop held by the Committee on the Global Financial System earlier this year in Hong 
Kong  also  noted  this  difficulty.  Appropriate  calibration  of  macroprudential  tools  is  difficult 
because of the lack of data and information about how the transmission process works―that 
is, what impact the tool will have on the targeted sector. Even assessing the impact ex post 
                                                
1   Tobias Adrian, Meg McConnell and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
is challenging because it is difficult to predict how the macroeconomy and financial system 
would have evolved if the macroprudential tool had not been in place. 
Second, in the U.S., even if such a framework existed, there would still be a problem in terms 
of timely implementation. The U.S. regulatory structure is fragmented, so that in most cases, 
no single regulator is able to implement macroprudential tools in a comprehensive manner. 
As a result, imposing macroprudential tools in the United States would almost certainly leave 
significant gaps in coverage. Such coverage gaps would likely lead to distortions within the 
financial  sector,  as  the  tool  would  have  differential  impacts  across  financial  intermediaries 
inside  versus  outside  a  particular regulatory  boundary.  Also,  activity  would  migrate toward 
those areas outside the scope of the macroprudential tools that had been implemented. 
It is important to note the regulatory mandates of the numerous federal and state regulatory 
authorities differ considerably. Some simply may not view financial stability as an important 
part  of  their  mandate.  As  a  result,  I  suspect  it  would  be  difficult  to  get  all  the  relevant 
regulators on board in a timely way to implement macroprudential tools successfully. 
In  principle,  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  (FSOC)  might  be  well  placed  to 
coordinate a response across different regulatory jurisdictions. But, I believe this is likely to 
prove difficult to do in practice. Each of the regulatory agencies guards its own authority and 
prerogatives,  and  may  not  always  be  responsive  to  pressure  from  other  regulators  or  the 
U.S. Treasury. 
There  is  also  the  problem  of  responding  to  an  emerging  financial  stability  risk  in  a  timely 
manner.  First,  the  emerging  problem  needs  to  be  identified.  Then  alternative  policy 
responses need to be analyzed and debated. And, there is an understandable bias to start 
small  and  to  escalate  only  as  needed  given  the  lack  of  understanding  about  how  big  an 
impact a particular tool may have on the economy. So, even if the FSOC could be effective in 
developing a consensus among the regulators, I wonder whether it could do this in a timely 
way. The housing boom in the U.S. that culminated in the financial crisis began in 2002 and 
2003. By the time that it was broadly identified as an issue in 2005 and 2006, it might have 
been too late to do much to temper its effects, even with a sound macroprudential response 
by the regulatory community. 
In the remainder of my time, I will discuss two topics in more detail. First, I will discuss briefly 
what  we  learned  at  tabletop  exercise  with  a  number  of  Federal  Reserve  Bank  presidents 
concerning the potential use of macroprudential tools in response to sectoral imbalances. I 
think  the  tabletop  exercise  underscores  the  difficulty  of  using  macroprudential  tools  in 
practice in the United States. Second, I will discuss the issue that Adam Posen has raised – 
whether we should focus on the use of rules that are hardwired into the financial system ex 
ante or instead favor using macroprudential tools in a more discretionary, ex post basis, once 
particular problems have been identified. 
In the tabletop exercise, the five Federal Reserve Bank presidents who are members of the 
Subcommittee on Financial Stability of the Conference of Presidents discussed the best way 
to respond to a scenario in which the commercial real estate market was overheating.2 The 
scenario was much more detailed than that, but the commercial real estate sector was the 
major  problem  with  respect  to  financial  stability.  The  stated  goal  of  the  exercise  was  to 
reduce  the  risk  posed  by  the  commercial  real  estate  boom  to  financial  stability  and,  by 
extension,  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  ability  to  achieve  its  macroeconomic  objectives  of 
maximum sustainable employment and price stability. 
Prudential tools under consideration included: 
                                                
2   See Macroprudential Policy: Case Study from a Tabletop Exercise, Tobias Adrian, Patrick de Foutnouvelle, 
Emily Yang, and Andrei Zlate, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 742, September 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    Capital  requirement  tools,  including  changes  in  leverage  ratio  requirements, 
imposition  of  a  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  and  higher  differential  capital 
requirements for commercial real estate exposures; 
Liquidity tools, such as changes in the liquidity coverage ratio and net stable funding 
ratio; 
Credit-based tools, such as limits on loan to value ratios; 
Supervisory guidance; and 
Stress testing. 
• 
• 
• 
Monetary policy was also considered as a tool – either as a complement or as a substitute. 
It  was  noteworthy  that  in  the  discussion  there  was  no  agreement  as  to  what  instruments 
should be emphasized and the ordering in which they should be used relative to monetary 
policy.  Among  the  available  macroprudential  tools,  stress  testing,  raising  margins  on  repo 
funding, and supervisory guidance garnered greater support compared to capital, liquidity, or 
credit-based tools. 
In general, the exercise identified several issues with respect to the use of macroprudential 
tools.  One  issue  was  the  perceived  difficulty  of  coordinating  among  different  regulators. 
Another  was  the  fact  that  many  of  the  tools  have  implementation  lags.  The  challenge  of 
timely  implementation  steered  some  members  back  to  using  monetary  policy,  or  toward 
those macroprudential tools – such as stress tests – that might be able to be implemented 
more quickly. The exercise underscored that much more development work in the area of 
macroprudential regulation is needed. 
Let me now turn to the issue of ex ante, hardwired macroprudential standards that Adam has 
discussed. In general, I see some advantages with having rules that are hardwired in place 
so  that  adjustment  of  the  parameters  of  the  tool  –  say,  limits  on  the  loan-to-value  ratio  – 
happen automatically in response to sectoral developments. 
Automatic  rules  that  are  always  in  place  have  several  advantages  over  discretionary 
measures  that  are  implemented,  ex  post,  only  after  some  potential  source  of  financial 
stability  risk  has  been  identified.  First,  they  are  transparent  and  will  work  more  quickly. 
Second, they avoid some of the problems associated with announcing that a new measure is 
going  to  be  put  in  place.  When  implementing  a  new  measure  there  will  always  be  some 
reluctance  to  overcome  in  terms  of  deciding  whether  it  is  necessary.  Also,  there  may  be 
political opposition to imposing a new measure. For example, during the housing boom, limits 
on  subprime  lending  would  undoubtedly  have  provoked  the  objection  that  the  regulators’ 
actions would limit home ownership for low-and moderate-income families. 
Imposing automatic, countercyclical standards also has this difficulty to some degree. But I 
think  it  is  much  less  severe  because  at  the  time  such  standards  are  put  in  place,  they 
generally will not be binding and it will be unclear whether they will necessarily become either 
more stringent or more binding in the future. In other words, the rule’s potential impact will be 
highly speculative and uncertain at the time of implementation. This may lessen the political 
opposition to putting such a rule in place. 
In the same vein, automatic rules that are imposed ex ante might also be less risky in terms 
of potential unintended consequences. When new rules are implemented it is always hard to 
gauge  what  the  impact  will  be  because  imposition  of  the  rule  not  only  changes  the 
economics of borrowing and investing in a particular sector, but also changes expectations 
about what might happen in the future. When the rule is viewed as likely to be binding in the 
future – this seems more likely in the case of the ex post measures – it will be very hard to 
judge how economic agents will respond to a new measure. 
In this regard, I think back to the Carter administration and the imposition of credit controls to 
restrain  inflation  in  1980.  Even  though  the  credit  controls  were  not  expected  to  bind  right 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
away,  the  economy  began  to  contract  almost  immediately  as  households  and  businesses 
rapidly adjusted their behavior to preserve some credit capacity. The response was a much 
more  powerful  downturn  in  economic  activity  than  had  been  anticipated,  which  forced  the 
Carter administration to scrap the credit controls because they worked too well in restraining 
economic activity. 
So I see some potential advantages of hardwired rules. But, I think this advantage needs to 
be set against the practical difficulty of figuring out what rules would need to be in place now 
to deal with all the potential financial stability excesses that could occur in the future. That 
seems a very difficult task to work out in my opinion. It implies that such rules would need to 
be  designed  to  treat  broad  issues,  such  as  increases  in  financial  system  leverage  or 
aggregate  credit  growth,  rather  than  more  limited  sectoral  issues.  This  may  work  well  in 
some circumstances in which the financial excess is occurring broadly, but might not be very 
effective when the problem, while extreme, may be more narrowly based. 
Historical experience suggests that past bubbles in the United States that have threatened 
financial stability have taken many different forms and affected many different sectors of the 
economy. Often, the bubbles have occurred in response to some important innovation in the 
economy  or  the  development  of  instruments  that  facilitated  real  estate  lending  to  lower-
quality  borrowers.  Examples  of  these  include  the  development  of  the  internet  in  the 
technology stock boom of the late 1990s, and subprime lending and mortgage securitization 
innovations prior to the financial crisis. These innovations, in turn, sparked changes in belief 
systems that turned out to be false – such as, the rise in home prices reinforced the view that 
housing is an excellent investment and that national home prices can never decline. When 
the assumption that widely supports a boom is revealed as false, the consequence is often a 
sharp reversal in behavior and prices as the boom deflates quickly. I think it is very hard to 
anticipate these episodes and put rules in place that would limit such excesses. 
My  concern  is  that  we  could  over-engineer  the  financial  system,  building  in  complexity  in 
response to potential risks that might, or might not, manifest themselves in the future. The 
complexity might not gain us much in terms of greater financial stability, either because the 
problem  that  ultimately  manifested  itself  was  different  than  we  planned  for,  or  because 
people found a way around the constraint that we had imposed on the system. 
There  are  also  the  challenges  of  appropriate  calibration  and  timing.  How  much  restraint 
should  the  rule  exert  as  home  prices  rise  or  aggregate  credit  growth  picks  up?  Without 
historical  experience  and  with  an  underdeveloped  macroprudential  framework,  getting  the 
calibration right is a difficult issue at this point. Also, how quickly should the tool be unwound 
once it has done its work? The tool needs to work in a countercyclical way, but turning points 
are difficult to anticipate and which makes it challenging to get the leads and lags right. 
We have a very complex financial system in the United States. I think we need to do much 
more  work 
framework  before  we  start 
contemplating  putting  a  number  of  countercyclical  measures  in  place.  Such  a  framework 
needs to take into consideration how it interacts with other policies, such as microprudential 
policies – to ensure the safety and soundness of individual institutions and monetary policy – 
designed  to  help  ensure  a  stable  macroeconomy.  When  are  these  policies  substitutes? 
When  are  they  complements?  How  will  they  interact?  How  will  the  governance  work  in 
coordinating across these three realms? 
In the meantime, while we work to sort all this out, we should take considerable solace from 
the fact that we have made the financial system more resilient to shocks. We may not be 
able to anticipate the next area of excess. But with higher capital and liquidity requirements 
and  the  use  of  stress  tests  to  assess  emerging vulnerabilities,  I  think  we  are  much  better 
placed than we have been in the past. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
in  developing  a  coherent  macroprudential 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
