   Peter Praet: Interview with Bloomberg 
Interview by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
with Bloomberg, conducted by Mr Alessandro Speciale, Mr Jeff Black and Mr Jonathan Ferro, 
and published on 17 November 2015. 
 How can we estimate the impact of the tragic events in Paris? 
I would like first of all to express our profound sympathy for the victims. It’s something that 
concerns everybody. Now when we talk about the possible impact on the economy, in general, 
we have to take a holistic view. It’s not so much the economy as the geopolitical environment 
that is impacted by these events. The impact remains to be seen, beyond the tragic events of 
last week. The main issue is the economic context of such events, which is a rather difficult 
one, we cannot deny that. 
It’s  difficult  because  the  euro  area  is  still  going  through  the  aftermath  of  a  balance  sheet 
recession which started in 2008. As of today, the GDP of the euro area has still not recovered 
the  level  it  had  in  2008.  That’s  one  thing,  and  the  second  thing  is  the  management  of 
immigration in Europe which creates some strains at the political level in different countries. 
How is the next round of staff economic forecasts shaping up? 
It’s too early to tell, of course, because the teams are working on it. But let me say that when 
we look at the flow of information so far, the economy is still in a cyclical recovery. Incoming 
data have been supportive to our base scenario. But we are also very well aware that downside 
risks are present and even that they may have increased in light of the weekend’s events. 
On the inflation side, the return to close-to-two-percent is at risk of being pushed backwards 
again. I know that today we just had the final data for October for inflation, we had 1.1 for the 
core inflation and 0.1 for headline inflation. But we remain in an environment of weak price 
pressures in the medium term. That has not really changed. We will have to see what the new 
projections show. 
Hard data have been a little bit less encouraging. We see Q3, which was more or less in line 
with what we were expecting, but on the low side of estimates. We also had, from the German 
side, slightly less positive news on the real economy. It’s not sufficient to say that the base 
scenario has changed, but I would say that the downside risks haven’t decreased, probably 
rather, unfortunately, increased a little bit. 
One important thing about the projections is that they are based on financial conditions, and 
financial conditions incorporate also expectations about policy actions – not only in Europe but 
also  everywhere.  Financial  conditions  have  not  worsened  since  the  last  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council, but that’s also partly due to expectations of policy reactions. 
Can you explain the ECB’s assessment of how inflation is developing? 
Looking at incoming data, I would say that data are more or less in line with our expectations. 
But this has to be seen in a context where we had repeatedly overestimated future inflation 
rates. In the last years, we have repeatedly lengthened the horizon over which we would get 
back close to 2 percent. 
Mechanically updated projections suggest that the risk is present that we may again have to 
extend this horizon. And even if it’s slightly, it’s a repetition of a past pattern. 
And then you go into the question of credibility of monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   If you observe for example, that the price people are ready to pay for protection against inflation 
is  zero,  or  very  low,  that’s  not  necessarily  a  good  signal,  as  it  suggests  that  they  are  not 
convinced there’ll be inflation. And that could be related to scepticism about the ability of the 
central bank to influence inflation even five years ahead – which would be quite serious. You 
cannot just reject that. 
Markets might be signalling that there could be some second round effects related to the fall 
in oil prices. Inflation expectations would then be hit at some point. 
Finally they could also reflect a very pessimistic view on the future, and that’s the more secular 
stagnation scenario where the falls of oil prices would be more the reflection of deep structural 
problems in the global economy. That’s the most pessimistic view. I don’t take that view, I think 
it’s extreme. Indeed, after our communication at the last Governing Council meeting in Malta, 
you have seen that inflation expectations, five-years-five-years, have recovered – which is not 
the case for oil prices. 
It’s not a “normal” recession followed by a “normal” recovery. We have a cyclical recovery, but 
recently we have additional downside risks to our scenario unfortunately. 
Is there a point at which the ECB’s assessment of risks to the economy starts to 
actually erode confidence? 
We say clearly that we have a cyclical recovery, which is moderate. The investment cycle is 
quite weak still. We know the recovery is fragile. There are a number of geopolitical issues that 
weigh  on  confidence  in  general.  This  fragility  is  a  fact  of  the  environment.  I  think  what  is 
different about the recovery is that this is the aftermath of what some have called a balance-
sheet recession, and that starts to be better understood now. It’s a stock adjustment, there are 
legacy  problems  which  our  societies  have  big  difficulties  in  addressing. You  have  still  in  a 
number  of countries  non-performing  loans  weighing  on the  balance  sheets  of  a  number of 
financial institutions. We also see that insufficient changes in the way that European institutions 
function have been weighing on the recovery. 
What do we still need in terms of European reform? 
We have gone a big part of the way with the banking union, but there the last miles are very 
important. For example, we do not have a system where the private sector will share risks 
across borders, where capital and liquidity are fungible in pan-European financial institutions. 
A common deposit insurance would help, but it’s important to allow a European bank to be 
able to operate in the euro area as a single entity. Not all banks would be able to do that, but 
we need to have a timetable where we say, four or five years from now the banks that qualify 
in terms of quality and quantity of capital will get a European license. You need to put a very 
serious, technical, timetable for that, and announce it. That would create a new environment 
for banking. 
Is there a challenge to the ECB’s credibility because of the change of stance on the 
effective lower bound of rates? 
The story of the lower bound is a very simple one. For all non- standard measures there is not 
much historical experience, there was very little academic literature until recently. Many central 
banks thought the zero lower bound is zero, and when we initially decided to go for –0.1, we 
were  not  fully  sure  of  the  total  impact  on  financial  conditions  in  general  and  especially  on 
banking. The negative deposit rate, like most non-standard measures – the forward guidance 
of July 2013, the LTROs starting in 2011, the TLTRO and the APP – delivered more than we 
expected  in  terms  of  their  impact  on  financial  conditions.  What  surprised  us  more  on  the 
negative side was the slow transmission of easier financial conditions on current and future 
inflation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   So what have you learned so far? 
Our own experience with a negative deposit rate was more favourable than we initially thought. 
We then went to minus 0.20. Since then we also have the experience of smaller countries 
which cut the rates to even more negative levels. We also reopened the discussion on the zero 
lower bound. There is no decision which has been taken but it is true that, given the experience 
that we have seen, we thought in the Governing Council that there was the case to re-discuss 
the lower bound. 
Have you looked at what other central banks have done? 
Yes but one needs to be very careful when looking at the experience of other countries. Each 
central bank works in a different environment, what you see in a small open economy is not 
necessarily applicable in a larger zone. 
Could the euro area tolerate minus 0.75 percent, like, for example Switzerland? 
In terms of level, I wouldn’t have any judgement in terms of ‘they can do it so we can do it’, 
that would be too simplistic. You have to look at the specificities of each one. 
What’s your thinking on how to avoid the so-called ‘Cliff Effect’ if QE were to come to 
a sudden end? 
We are very well aware of that. I think at some point we will have to clarify, what happens after 
September 2016 and what happens with what comes to maturity. Quite a lot of securities come 
into maturity into the early years after September ‘16, this is something the Governing Council 
at some point will have to decide and communicate. 
Some people say the ECB is dominated by the financial sector. 
I  strongly  disagree  with  that,  it’s  more  the  opposite.  Since  we  implemented  our  Forward 
Guidance we have been signalling more of our reaction function. When we talk about our ability 
and willingness to act under a number of conditions, of course markets incorporate that. 
What’s your view on the need for further monetary policy action now? 
There  will  be  different  views  as  usual  in  the  Governing  Council,  there  will  be  a  very  good 
dialogue on the economic assessment. You cannot prejudge at this time the decision on what 
combination of measures to take or not to take. The staff has also been tasked to look at the 
impact of all measures on financial conditions, on the economy and on inflation. 
The Governing Council will discuss whether there is a case for further action in the context of 
heightened uncertainty. This is a key issue. 
What would be the impact on the banking system of an even-more negative deposit 
rate? 
What  we  have  seen  is  that  there  is  a  pressure  on  banks‘  unit  margins,  but  that’s  been 
compensated by volume effects – as there is more activity in the banking sector thanks to the 
support of monetary policy to the recovery. Nominal GDP has been better and NPLs have 
started to go down, and as a result banks have been able to reduce provisions. Globally you 
would see that the net effect of those measures so far has been positive on bank profitability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Inflation has repeatedly undershot your forecasts… 
It is key for a central bank to keep inflation expectations anchored, especially in a period of 
slack in the economy. And we have some signals that these inflation expectations are still 
fragile. 
Is that still the case? 
I think it’s still the case. Long-term inflation expectations remain fragile. I never said they are 
de-anchored, I don’t think they are, but there are risks and this is why  we are considering 
further action. A possible de-anchoring of inflation expectations together with a lot of slack is a 
dangerous cocktail. 
A lot of the latest wave of commodity price declines is demand related. At some point in the 
recent past you had a supply side issue, which is a windfall for consumers, but now a significant 
part is also coming from weak global conditions. Global growth this year will be the weakest 
since 2009. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
