  Ignazio Visco: Global monetary system – our currency, your problem? 
Remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Monetary Policy Panel 
“Global  Monetary  System  –  Our  Currency,  Your  Problem?”,  UBS  European  Conference, 
London, 11 November 2015. 
 1. 
Since  the  outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis  price  stability  in  major  advanced 
economies has been at risk. Central banks fought this risk with both conventional 
and  unconventional  measures, 
its 
macroeconomic  implications.  More  recently  the ECB  adopted,  and then  extended, 
an  asset  purchase  programme.1  Today,  I  will  discuss  the  effectiveness  of  this 
monetary measure and some concerns that have been raised regarding its possible 
unintended  consequences.  I  will  conclude  with  some  thoughts  on  the  current 
challenges for monetary policy in the euro area. 
instability  and 
countering 
financial 
Excessively low inflation and the risks of de-anchoring of inflation expectations 
2. 
In the euro area downward risks for price stability increased sharply in the second 
half  of  2014,  as  inflation  kept falling, growth  lost  traction  and monetary  and  credit 
dynamics  remained  weak.  Inflation  reached  historically  low  levels  also  in  the 
countries  that  had  not  been  directly  affected  by  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  In 
December 2014, no country of the euro area recorded an inflation rate above 1 per 
cent;  in  12  countries  out  of  18  consumer  price  dynamics  were  negative.  These 
developments reflected not only the collapse of oil prices, but also the weakness of 
aggregate demand.2 
Inflation  expectations  were  progressively  affected  by  the  persistent  decrease  in 
actual  inflation.  Indeed,  in  the  second  part  of  2014  even  long-term  inflation 
expectations, which previously had hovered around the definition of price stability, 
begun  to  decline  substantially.  The  5-year  forward,  5-years  ahead  inflation  swap 
rate  fell  to  slightly  below  1.5  per  cent  at  the  beginning  of  this  year,  from  around 
2.2 per cent in early 2014. The Consensus Economics survey and the ECB’s survey 
of  professional  forecasters  also  signalled  falling  medium-  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations in the course of 2014. 
The  risk  of  expectations  de-anchoring  from  the  definition  of  price  stability  was 
material. Since mid-2014 negative tail events affecting short-term expectations have 
been increasingly channelled into long-term ones, igniting both downward revisions 
of  expectations  and  an  increase  in  uncertainty.3  These  developments  were 
particularly worrying as the formation of expectations is not a linear process: large 
changes can materialise in a discontinuous manner. 
3. 
4. 
                                                
1 
I have recently advanced my views on the motivations for such a programme, and some related concerns, 
also in I. Visco, “Eurozone challenges and risks”, Central Banking, 26, 1, 2015. 
2  A. Conti, S. Neri and A. Nobili, “Why is inflation so low in the euro area?”, Banca d’Italia, Temi di discussione 
(Working Papers), 1019, 2015. 
3  S.  Cecchetti,  F.  Natoli  and  L.  Sigalotti,  “Tail  comovement  in  option-implied  inflation  expectations  as  an 
indicator  of  anchoring”,  Banca  d’Italia,  Temi  di  discussione  (Working  Papers),  1025,  2015;  F.  Busetti, 
G. Ferrero, A. Gerali and A. Locarno, “Deflationary shocks and de-anchoring of inflation expectations”, Banca 
d’Italia, Questioni di economia e finanza (Occasional Papers), 252, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 5. 
 The high levels of public and private debt are also a source of concern due to the 
risk of activation of “debt-deflation mechanisms”.4 Even the fact that the decrease in 
prices was partly associated with a favourable supply shock – the fall in oil prices − 
was no cause for relief. When interest rates are at the zero lower bound and credit 
constraints are binding the response of the economy to any given shock is modified 
and there is no “good” deflation:5 in such circumstances the fall in the general price 
level  induced  by  the  supply  shock  increases  the  real  interest  rate,  which  in  turn 
depresses aggregate demand and raises the real cost of servicing debt. The result 
could  be  a  contraction  in  aggregate  demand,  despite  the  more  favourable  supply 
conditions, with further downward effects on prices.6 
The expanded asset purchase programme of the ECB 
6. 
Against  a  backdrop  of  increased  downward  risks  to  inflation,  in  early  2015  the 
shared assessment within the Governing Council was that the measures adopted up 
until that time − including the programmes of purchases of covered bonds and ABS, 
and  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  −  had  not  resulted  in  the 
desired amount of monetary stimulus. Although they helped to significantly reduce 
the cost of borrowing for the private sector, the total amount of liquidity injected into 
the  economy  was  less  than  initially  expected.  In  late  2014  the  size  of  the 
Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  was  around  €2.2  trillion,  about  €1 trillion  (or  30  per 
cent) below the peak reached in June 2012. During the same period, the balance 
sheets of the Federal Reserve and of the Bank of England had expanded by around 
60 and 10 per cent, respectively. 
A  forceful  and  unprecedented  monetary  policy  response 
therefore  became 
warranted: it was  important to preserve the credibility of our actions and underpin 
expectations. At the beginning of 2015 the Governing Council decided to extend its 
programme of asset purchases to public sector securities. Under this new expanded 
asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  the  Eurosystem  is  making  monthly  purchases 
amounting  to  €60  billion.  As  explicitly  stated,  the  programme  is  scheduled  to 
continue  at  least  until  the  end  of  September  2016,  and  in  any  event  until  we  will 
observe  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  consistent  with  a  return to 
price stability. 
The choice of this particular measure was driven by the consideration that outright 
asset  purchases  allow  a  more  direct  control  of  the  size  of  the  increase  in  our 
balance sheet, and hence of the monetary stimulus itself. The decision to purchase 
government securities reflected the need to focus on assets available in quantities 
sufficient  to  ensure  an  adequate  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  and  whose 
returns are able to influence the conditions of the real economy. 
The APP is a new programme for the euro area, but it is not a revolution in monetary 
policy making in general. Central banks around the world have relied on large-scale 
asset  purchase  programmes  to  further  stimulate  the  economy  and  fulfil  their 
mandates after hitting the zero lower bound. Such measures were taken, as we all 
know, by the Bank of Japan, the first time in 2001, and by the Federal Reserve and 
the Bank of England, following the global financial crisis in 2008. It seems to me that 
7. 
8. 
9. 
I. Fisher, “The debt-deflation theory of great depressions”, Econometrica, 1, 4, 1933. 
                                                
4 
5  M. Casiraghi and G. Ferrero, “Is deflation good or bad? Just mind the inflation gap”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni 
di economia e finanza (Occasional Papers), 268, 2015; C. Borio, M. Erdem, A. Filardo and B. Hofmann, “The 
costs of deflations: a historical perspective”, BIS Quarterly Review, March 2015. 
6  S. Neri and A. Notarpietro, “Inflation, debt and the zero lower bound”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di economia e 
finanza (Occasional Papers), 242, 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
 these  policies  would  have  been  certainly  regarded  as  “conventional”  in  the  1960s 
and  1970s  given  the  emphasis  on  changes  in  the  composition  of  private  sector 
balance  sheets  both  in  actual  policy-making  and  in  academic  works  on  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.7  What  is  more  “conventional”  for  a 
central bank than creating base money? 
Asset  purchases  boost  economic  activity  and  raise  inflation  through  several 
channels:  they  reduce  yields  on  public  sector  securities,  with  effects  on  other 
segments of the financial market and on credit conditions for households and firms; 
they increase the value of assets and hence private sector spending capacity; they 
cause  a  depreciation  of  the  currency,  which  impacts  on  imported  inflation  and 
exports; and they improve inflation expectations and public confidence. 
Positive  effects  on  the  government  bond  market  emerged  as  soon  as  the 
preparation of the programme was announced in early November 2014. Since then, 
though with some reversal of the initial impact during the spring, the yields on ten-
year German and Italian government securities have fallen by about 25 and 80 basis 
points  respectively.  The  stimulus  has  spread  to  market  segments  not  directly 
affected  by  the  asset  purchases.  The  euro  has  depreciated  by  more  than  12  per 
cent against the dollar and by around 8 per cent in nominal effective terms. 
Credit  conditions  have  also  been  gradually  improving  since  the  announcement  of 
the APP: rates on new loans to firms and to households for house purchase have 
gone down by around 30 basis points on average in the euro area; larger reductions 
were  generally  recorded  in  the  countries  hit  by  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Positive 
effects  can  also  be  seen  in  lending  volumes.  After  three  years  of  contraction,  the 
annual  growth  rate  of  credit  to  the  non-financial  private  sector  turned  positive  in 
April; it stood at 0.7 per cent in September. 
The ultimate metric to gauge the effectiveness of the APP is the normalisation of the 
inflation rate around its medium term target. It is too early to provide an assessment, 
given the lags of transmission of monetary policy, but the general improvements in 
financial conditions, the main channel through which the programme is expected to 
work, indicate that so far it has been successful. Overall, the APP has helped push 
the intended monetary policy accommodation through the intermediation chain and 
reach  households  and firms. This  is  expected  to  support  economic  activity  and  to 
produce a sustained adjustment of inflation rates towards levels consistent with the 
definition of price stability.8 For Italy, our analysis shows that for 2015–16 the APP 
can  be  expected  to  make  a  significant  contribution  to  the  growth  of  output  and 
prices,  of  more  than  1  percentage  point  in  both  cases.9  The  effects  of  the 
programme  on  euro-area  output  growth  and  inflation  might  be  somewhat  smaller, 
but are of approximately the same order of magnitude. 
What about possible unintended consequences? 
14. 
Notwithstanding  the  overall  positive  assessment  of  the  effects  of  the  APP  so  far, 
remarks that stepping into this new domain may have unintended consequences on 
asset prices, on the return on savings and on currencies must be addressed. 
                                                
7  C.  Borio  and  P.  Dysiatat,  “Unconventional  monetary  policy:  an  appraisal”,  The  Manchester  School,  78,  s1, 
2010. 
8  ECB, “The transmission of the ECB’s recent non-standard monetary policy measures”, Economic Bulletin, 7, 
2015.  
9  P. Cova and G. Ferrero, “The Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes for monetary policy”, Banca d’Italia, 
Questioni di economia e finanza (Occasional Papers), 270, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
 First,  as  with  any  other  important  policy  action,  the  risks  concerning  asset  prices 
were  carefully  considered  when  evaluating  the  balance  of  benefits  and  possible 
costs  of  the  APP.  To  date,  there  have  been  no  signs  that  our  purchases  are 
provoking generalised imbalances. Financial assets and property prices in the area 
as a whole do not appear under speculative pressures, investors’ risk propensity is 
still  low,  and  credit  growth,  while  recovering,  remains  weak.  Moreover,  while  the 
possibility of some undesired effects cannot be ruled out, the risks would have been 
far greater had we not launched the programme. Indeed, the greatest threat to the 
euro area’s financial stability comes from the prospect of low inflation and economic 
stagnation. 
When discussing financial imbalances I believe that it is important to bear in mind the 
distinction between what monetary policy can and should do, and what is, instead, the 
domain of macro-prudential policy.10 In the euro area, monetary policy has the primary 
objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium-term.  Macro-prudential 
measures should instead be used to limit the accumulation of systemic risks and to 
smooth the financial cycle in particular sectors or jurisdictions. Should any threat to 
financial stability materialise, specific macro-prudential measures can be implemented 
by national authorities to deal with local risks, as has recently been done in a number 
of countries, without the need to alter the monetary stance. 
Furthermore, when assessing the risks related to the APP, we should not forget that 
the increase in risk-taking associated with portfolio rebalancing is one of the channels 
of transmission of the programme. Obviously, indicators of overheating should always 
be monitored and particular attention should be paid to credit developments in order 
to timely identify any possible build-up of broad-based imbalances. 
A second worry concerning the consequences of the asset purchase programme is 
that, by reducing interest rates, it is “expropriating the savers”. In my view this claim 
is based on a very partial understanding of the role of monetary policy and, more in 
general, of the secular factors that are currently affecting the global economy. 
In order to assess this concern, it is important to understand the causes of low interest 
rates.  Their  current  level  in  the  euro  area,  as  well  as  in  most  other  advanced 
countries, is not a bizarre choice of the central banks; rather, it reflects the degree of 
slack in the economy, low inflation and the gradual process of recovery from one of 
the  deepest  crises  over  the  past  hundred  years.  An  insufficiently  accommodative 
monetary  stance  in  this  environment  would  only  give  a  false  perception  of  higher 
returns on savings since it is only in the relatively short term that monetary policy can 
influence real returns. A longer horizon is relevant, however, for the vast majority of 
savers.  A  more  restrictive  monetary  policy  in  times  of  economic  weakness  and  low 
inflation would even be harmful to savers as it would exert a negative impact on the 
economy and, in turn, on its capacity to achieve higher real returns.11 
That  said,  the  potential  repercussions  for  specific  sectors  of  the  financial  system 
should  certainly  not  be  ignored.  Concerning  banks,  while  in  the  short-term  low 
interest  rates  might  exert  a  negative  impact  on  profitability,  this  effect  will  be 
progressively  more  than  compensated  by  the  medium-term  positive  impact  of  the 
monetary stimulus. In some countries, the low interest rates could cause problems 
for  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies,  whose  liabilities  allow  for  defined 
benefits  or  guaranteed  minimum  returns.  These  companies  should  limit  risks  by 
seeking a better match between the yields and duration of balance sheet assets and 
                                                
10  I. Visco, “The challenges for central banks”, Central Banking, 25, 1, 2014. 
11  U.  Bindseil,  C.  Domnick  and  J.  Zeuner,  “Critique  of  accommodating  central  bank  policies  and  the 
‘expropriation of the saver’: A review”, ECB, Occasional Paper Series, 161, 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21. 
 liabilities,  improving  operating  results  through  portfolio  diversification,  increasing 
technical  reserves  and,  where  necessary,  adjusting  their  obligations  to  policy 
holders to the new market scenario. 
A third criticism of asset purchases is that they might be used as an instrument to 
obtain  competitive  advantages  over  other  countries  and,  in  turn,  give  rise  to 
“currency  wars”,  with  obvious  detrimental  effects  for  the  global  economy.  These 
worries  are  misplaced.  The  measures  currently  implemented  in  the  euro  area, 
including the APP, are intended to bring inflation back in line with the definition of 
price stability. They exert their impact on the economy through different channels: 
the foreign  exchange rate  is  only  one  of  them;  it  is  not  by  any  means  a  target of 
monetary policy; it reflects differences in the cyclical positions of countries. 
Recent developments and the challenges for monetary policy 
22. 
The persistent slowdown of emerging economies − which has also recently reflected 
the difficult path of adjustment in China from high levels of investment and debt – 
has put further downward pressure on commodity prices and increased downward 
risks for the world economy. Economic activity has continued to expand in the main 
advanced countries although at a somewhat slower pace. 
While  in  the  euro  area  recovery  proceeds,  downside  risks  have  increased.  More 
importantly, in an environment characterised by a prolonged period of low inflation 
and with additional downward pressures already in the pipeline − as signalled by the 
subdued  dynamics  of  producer  price  inflation  −  the  risks  of  a  further  decline  in 
inflation expectations and of their de-anchoring from the definition of price stability 
remain non-negligible. 
At  our  last  meeting  in  Malta  we  stressed  that  the  strength  and  persistence  of  the 
factors that are currently slowing the return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 
2  per  cent  in  the  medium  term  require  attention  and  thorough  analysis.  In  this 
context, the ECB Governing Council will re-examine the degree of monetary policy 
accommodation  at  the  December  monetary  policy  meeting,  when  the  new 
Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections will be available. 
The appropriate degree of monetary accommodation has to be maintained to fulfil 
our  mandate.  This  may  imply,  as  it  has  been  stated,  a  change  in  the  size, 
composition and duration of the APP. The possibility to once again lower the interest 
rate on the deposit facility will also be assessed. So far the introduction of negative 
interest  rates  in  the  area  has  been  smooth;  other  countries  seem  not  to  have 
experienced difficulties in lowering rates further into negative territory. 
Let  me  conclude  with  the  obvious  remark  that  monetary  policy  cannot  guarantee 
strong and lasting growth on its own. Lacking a common fiscal capacity, demand in 
the euro area must draw support from a reasonable use of existing flexibility within 
the limits of European fiscal rules. At the same time the creation of new income, new 
demand, and new jobs must be supported by measures and reforms designed, as of 
now, to raise productivity and enhance growth potential. These reforms should take 
into  account  the  structural  challenges  that  characterise  our  “new  world”,  including 
demographic  developments,  the  new  wave  of  technological  progress,  climate 
change.  A  marked  expansion  in  activities  that  require  expertise  and  new  skills  is 
ahead,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  possible  that  the  scope  for  employment  in  the 
sectors most susceptible to automation and to the growth of the digital economy will 
shrink,  even  considerably.  Monetary  policy  cannot  be  a  substitute  for  the  needed 
reforms,  it  can  only  provide  favourable  conditions  to  speed  the  process  up  and 
absorb its short-term costs. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
