  Sabine Lautenschläger: Looking ahead – closing remarks at the ECB 
Forum on Banking Supervision 
Closing  remarks  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  SSM  Banking  Supervision  Forum,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
4 November 2015. 
 Let  me  close  this  conference  by  making  a  few  remarks  on  the  political  climate  in  which 
regulators and supervisors are working and which the previous panel discussed. And while 
today is certainly a day for celebration, I also want to mention one major challenge the SSM 
is facing in the years to come. 
In my view, we should fairly swiftly bring to a close the global reform agenda. After nearly a 
decade of regulatory reforms the public, the media and policy-makers are weary. Regulatory 
fatigue  is  spreading;  the  pendulum  is  swinging  back  from  widespread  pressures  for 
regulation to a preference for lighter banking regulation and supervision. We therefore have 
to carefully channel what is left of the original momentum. 
I join  those  calling for  an  end to the  development  phase and a turn to the implementation 
phase  of  regulatory  reforms.  In  this  context,  it  will  be  key  that  we  not  only  implement  the 
many  new  rules  and  standards  diligently;  it  is  even  more  important  to  actually  use  newly 
acquired supervisory instruments in a consistent and risk-oriented manner. We cannot allow 
the fatigue we are experiencing to lead to supervisory forbearance. 
Turning now to the SSM, I would like to mention one challenge I am very concerned about. 
Although many  projects such  as the  work  on  harmonising  options  and  national  discretions 
are  making  good  progress  in  reducing  divergence,  the  SSM  on  its  own  is  not  sufficient  to 
address the remaining fragmentation in the euro area banking system. The flexibility given to 
Member  States  when  implementing  directives  might  result  in  a  worst-case  scenario 
consisting of 19 different national banking acts varying from a word-by-word transposition of 
European  norms  to  national  gold-plating.  Don’t  misunderstand  me:  the  transposition  of 
directives into national law is the prerogative of national lawmakers. But as many directives 
define  key  supervisory  powers,  it  is  of  utmost  importance  to  agree  on  common  key 
supervisory  instruments  that  are  available  to  the  SSM.  Let  me  just  provide  one  example. 
Diverging  national  implementations  of  the  BRRD  result  in  noticeable  differences  across 
countries. The ECB has to be sure that the distinct national requirements are met before it 
issues,  for  example,  a  “failing  or  likely  to  fail”  verdict.  For  a  “single”  supervisor  this  is  a 
far-from-ideal situation. 
These few words of caution have all the more weight and relevance as we have had a very 
successful first year of European supervision. The setting-up of the SSM has taken banking 
supervision in the euro area to a new level – not just institutionally but also in the goals we 
set for ourselves and the supervised banks. My heartfelt wish is that we continue to aim for 
those goals. 
Let me close by extending a big thank you on behalf of the Executive Board of the ECB to all 
the panellists, speakers and organisers of the conference, who have contributed so much to 
the success of the SSM’s first anniversary. 
Ladies and gentlemen, colleagues, I thank you for your interest in our first ECB Forum on 
Banking  Supervision.  I  hope  that  you  all  enjoyed  the  remarkable  series  of  deep  and 
thoughtful discussions on this first anniversary. I wish you all a safe trip home. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
