  Javier Guzmán Calafell: Global economic governance – recent progress 
and remaining challenges 
Remarks  by  Mr  Javier  Guzmán  Calafell,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the 
panel on “Shift in Global Financial Governance and China’s Financial Reform”, organized by 
the  Shanghai  Development  Research  Foundation  (SDRF),  the  Reinventing  Bretton Woods 
Committee  (RBWC),  the  PBC  School  of  Finance,  Tsinghua  University  (PBCSF),  the 
Shanghai  Advanced  Institute  of  Finance  (SAIF),  and  the  Triffin  International  Foundation, 
Shanghai, 31 October 2015. 
The views expressed in this document are strictly personal. 
 Let me start by thanking the organizers for the kind invitation to participate in this important 
Conference. 
A number of formal and informal organizations have been created over the course of more 
than  eight  decades,  and  particularly  since  the  Great  Depression,  to  provide  strategic 
direction  and  a  solid  basis  for  collective  action  to  face  emerging  challenges  and  achieve 
sustained  economic  growth  at  a  global  scale.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the 
World Bank, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the General Agreement on Tariffs 
and  Trade  and  its  successor  the  World  Trade  Organization  (WTO),  as  well  as  informal 
country groupings such as the G7 first and the G20 later on, have been at the center of this 
global economic governance framework. 
Although this model has been fundamental to prevent a reemergence of hazards observed in 
some  years  –  like  those  that  erupted  in  the  interwar  period  –  and  to  foster  economic 
development worldwide, the need for a major overhaul of the global economic governance 
framework has become increasingly evident. 
Three fundamental changes to the world economic landscape are worth highlighting in this 
respect. 
• 
The  role  of  Emerging  Market  Economies  (EMEs)  in  the  global  economic  and 
financial system has become far more important. The share of these economies in 
world  GDP  has  increased  substantially  over  the  course  of  the  last  decades,  as  it 
rose from slightly over 36 per cent in 1980 to an estimated figure of almost 60 per 
cent in 2015.1 Emerging Asia and, in particular, China are prominent examples in 
this  regard,  not  only  because  of  the  sheer  size  that  their  growth  dynamics  have 
allowed their economies to reach, but also because of the impact this has had on 
the  economic  well‐being  of  their  population.  For  instance,  the  ratio  of  GDP  per 
capita  (PPP‐adjusted)  in  the  United  States  to  that  in  Emerging  Asia  and  China, 
increased from around 22 and 41 in 1980, respectively, to levels around 5 currently.2 
Economic and financial globalization has been one of the main characteristics of the 
world economy in recent years. This has been the source of many benefits, but it 
has also been accompanied by new challenges. In particular, as the global financial 
crisis (GFC) has clearly shown, the growing interdependence that has resulted from 
globalization  means  the  economic  problems  of  one  country  can  be  rapidly 
transmitted to others. In this context, policy options that are apparently reasonable 
  1  Shares based on PPP‐adjusted figures for GDP. 
2  Figures  provided  by,  or  calculated  with  data  from,  International  Monetary  Fund  (2015):  World  Economic 
Outlook  Database,  October.  See  also  Mohan,  Rakesh  and  Muneesh  Kapur  (2015):  “Emerging  Powers  and 
Global Governance: Whither the IMF?”, IMF Working Paper No. WP/15/219, October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   at the national level are not necessarily so when adopting a global vision. Therefore, 
a  highly  globalized  world  presents  the  typical  prisoner’s  dilemma,  where  a  non‐
cooperative approach leads to poorer results for all the parties involved as opposed 
to  one  based  on  cooperation.  In  other  words,  the  nature  of  today’s  challenges 
underscores  the  need  for  a  framework  of  global  governance  with  a  much  higher 
level of cooperation and, consequently, a level playing field. 
The  GFC  brought  to  the  forefront  many  of  the  limitations  of  the  governance 
framework  in  place.  To  start  with,  it  showed  that  contrary  to  the  then  prevailing 
views, advanced economies (AEs) are at least as vulnerable to crises as EMEs. It 
also made clear that no effective mechanisms were in place to ensure consistency 
between the economic policies in the main advanced countries and global economic 
and  financial  stability.  Naturally,  this  gave  rise  to  serious  concerns  about  the 
legitimacy  of  the  existing  global  economic  governance  arrangements.  To  put  it  in 
Jean‐Claude Trichet’s words, “…the industrialized countries have proven particularly 
clumsy  in  their  handling  of  global  finance  before  the  crisis  at  a  time  when  their 
responsibility  in  global  governance  was  obviously  overwhelming.  There  was 
therefore no reason to confirm their exclusive prime responsibility”.3 
  The GFC sparked an effort of cooperation of the international community, unprecedented in 
terms  of  its  complexity  and  reach,  which  allowed  to  prevent  the  collapse  of  the  global 
financial system. In addition, as a result of the crisis, major steps were taken to adjust the 
global economic governance structure. 
In particular, EMEs were given a more prominent role in the global decision‐ making process: 
Following the GFC the G‐20, integrated by the main advanced and emerging market 
the  G‐20,  emerged  as  one  of  the  key  international  settings  for  the  discussion  of 
economies,  became  the  prime  forum  for  international  economic  cooperation. 
Similarly,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  whose  membership  includes  that  of 
global financial issues. 
The  GFC  accelerated  efforts  of  IMF  reform  required  to  give  EMEs  a  participation 
and representation within this institution that better reflects their importance in the 
global  economy.  In  particular,  in  2010  a  100  percent  increase  in  total  quota 
resources  was  agreed,  with  the  full  amount  devoted  to  selective  or  ad  hoc 
adjustments to increase the quota shares of a group of dynamic emerging market 
economies. 
Changes  within  the  BIS  in  the  aftermath  of  the  GFC  also  allowed  greater  EME 
participation in global monetary and financial issues. For instance, in January 2010 
the responsibility for providing guidance and setting work priorities to some of the 
BIS main bodies (the Committee on the Global Financial System, the Committee on 
Payment and Settlement Systems and the Markets Committee), which had been in 
the hands of G‐10 central bank governors for decades, was transferred to the Global 
Economy Meeting (GEM), consisting of governors from 30 BIS shareholding central 
banks in major advanced and emerging market economies.4 
 These  efforts  towards  greater  EME  participation  in  global  governance,  though  historically 
important, are still subject to a number of question marks. On the one hand, they are still far 
from sufficient to be consistent with the enlarged relevance of this group in world economic 
Relations, New York, 26 April. 
 3  See  Trichet, Jean‐Claude  (2010):  “Global  Governance  Today”,  Keynote  Address  at  the Council  on  Foreign 
4  Governors  from  another  15  central  banks  attend  the  GEM  as  observers.  See  Bank  for  International 
Settlements (2010): “80th Annual Report”, Basel, 28 June; and Bank for International Settlements (2015): “A 
Brief History of the Basel Committee”, October. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and financial affairs. In addition, as risks for the world economy became less severe and a 
collapse of the global financial system was avoided, the momentum for an overhaul of global 
governance fostered by the outbreak of the GFC lost steam. 
The 2010 agreement on IMF reform provides a clear example of existing constraints on the 
overhaul of global economic governance, even after the most recent efforts. The measures 
embraced included fundamentally a doubling of quota resources under the 14th IMF General 
Review, and an increase in quota shares of EMEs from 39.5 to 42.3 per cent, both measures 
to take effect by October 2012; completion of the 15th General Review of Quotas by January 
2014;  and  a  reduction  of  advanced  European  countries’  representation  at  the  Executive 
Board and the elimination of appointed Executive Directors, to be implemented in late 2012. 
This  agreement  was  considered  by  IMF  management  as  “…the  most  fundamental 
governance overhaul in the Fund’s history, and the biggest ever shift in influence in favor of 
emerging  market  and  developing  countries  to  recognize  their  growing  role  in  the  global 
economy”.5 And yet, the proposed increase in quota shares of EMEs is still well below the 
figure  that  would  be  consistent  with  their  near  60  per  cent  stake  in  the  world  economy. 
Furthermore, the reform, approved by the IMF’s Board of Governors in December 2010, is 
still  to  be  implemented,  since  the  required  endorsement  by  U.  S.  Congress  on  the  most 
important  measures  has  not  thus  far  been  possible.  As  a  result,  the  envisaged  more 
prominent role for EMEs in Fund governance has not materialized and, notwithstanding the 
huge expansion of world economic and financial transactions over the last years, the Fund 
has not seen a general quota increase since 1999. In addition, work on the 15th quota review 
has  been  delayed,  and  is  unlikely  to  be  completed  by  the  deadline  set  under  the  Fund´s 
Articles of Agreement (December 15, 2015). Thus, contrary to the quota‐based nature of the 
Fund, its financing has relied disproportionally on borrowed resources. It is also important to 
note that the 2010 IMF reform disregarded a modification of the criteria for the designation of 
the Fund’s Managing Director, a position that traditionally has been reserved for European 
nationals. The implications of this overall situation for the efficiency, credibility and legitimacy 
of the Fund are evident. 
Growing  frustration  of  a  number  of  EMEs  with  the  current  framework  for  global  economic 
governance,  has  coincided  with  a  proliferation  of  alternative  schemes  for  international 
cooperation under the form of bilateral arrangements, regional financial agreements and new 
multilateral financial institutions. It is difficult not to establish at least some degree of causality 
between both trends. 
The  emergence  of  new  sources  of  international  finance,  be  it  at  the  bilateral,  regional  or 
multilateral level, is a welcome development. Global needs of financing for crisis prevention 
and  resolution,  and  development,  are  huge  and  not  covered  by  existing  arrangements. 
However,  it  is  also  important  to  take  into  consideration  that  to  the  extent  that  those  new 
alternative  sources  of  financing  respond  to  dissatisfaction  with  current  global  governance, 
they may end up implying a wider dispersion of global decision making or, to put it differently, 
the advent of a parallel governance framework. Should this be the case, the challenges for 
creating  adequate  channels  for  coordination  and  communication,  and  more  generally  for 
proper cooperation among the different institutions involved, would become much greater. 
Will  the  recent  economic  difficulties  in  EMEs  affect  in  any  significant  way  the  current 
situation? This is very unlikely. Notwithstanding the complexities of the problems they face, 
as a result of a combination of factors EMEs will most probably continue to show higher rates 
of growth than AEs. In fact, according to the latest IMF projections, the share of world GDP 
                                                
5 
“IMF  Executive  Board  Approves  Major  Overhaul  of  Quotas  and  Governance”,  Press  Release  No.  10/418, 
November 5, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  accounted  for  by  EMEs  will  adhere  to  an  upward  trend  in  coming  years,  with  the  OECD 
reaching similar conclusions for a much longer forecast horizon.6 
It is therefore evident that as the center of gravity of the world economy continues to move 
towards  EMEs,  a  corresponding  adjustment  of  global  economic  governance  will  inevitably 
take  place.  As  a  result,  we  are  basically  left  with  two  alternatives.  One,  to  promote  and 
embrace  an  orderly,  guided  change  towards  a  better,  more  inclusive  and  representative 
global  governance  framework,  and  the  other,  to  keep  stalling  the  much‐needed  reform 
process,  with  the  risk  that  even  higher  levels  of  dissatisfaction  of  EMEs  result  in  the 
emergence of additional alternative financing schemes, and a more complex framework for 
global economic governance. 
Allow  me  to  make  a  last  reflection.  The  predominance  of  national  considerations  over  the 
global interest has for long been an obstacle for effective global economic governance. As 
some have noted, global governance in essence depends on the ability of sovereigns to find 
consensual  solutions  to  common  challenges  and  on  their  willingness  to  stick  to  their 
agreements.7 This problem is present even in cases where a political commitment with the 
common interest appears to be stronger, as illustrated by the difficulties that have emerged 
on the road to create the institutional infrastructure required for the adequate functioning of 
the  European  Monetary  Union.  In  my  view,  the  reluctance  of  individual  nations  to  subject 
decisions to global rather than local needs, is closely linked to an inadequate understanding 
by the authorities, and the public in general, of the implications of interdependence among 
countries for national prosperity in a globalized world. Clearly, we also need a much better 
grasp of the global implications of domestic economic policy decisions, especially in the case 
of the largest economies. 
Are  there  reasons  for  optimism  looking  forward?  Even  if  limited  in  scope  and  depth,  the 
recent  reform  of  the  global  economic  governance  structure  was  simply  unthinkable  a  few 
years ago. It took the worst global crisis since the Great Depression to create consensus for 
the approval, although not yet implementation, of this reform. I hope that this time around it 
will be a good dose of wisdom, leadership and political effort, rather than the eruption of a 
new crisis, that will allow us to move to the required track. 
                                                
6  See International Monetary Fund (2015): World Economic Outlook Database, October; and Organisation for 
Economic  Co‐operation  and  Development  (2014):  Long‐Term  Baseline  Projections  of  the  OECD  Economic 
7  See  Asmussen,  Jörg  (2013):  “The  future  if  global  economic  governance”,  speech  at  the  Hertie  School  of 
Outlook No. 95, May. 
Governance, Berlin, 22 February. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
