   Simon M Potter: Money markets and monetary policy implementation 
Dinner address by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for the Bank of England-Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York  Conference  on  Money  Markets  and  Monetary  Policy  Implementation,  London, 
16 November 2015. 
 I would like to thank Deborah Leonard and Antoine Martin for their excellent assistance in the preparation of these 
remarks  and  colleagues  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  global  central  bank  community  for  their  insightful 
comments and suggestions. 
Introduction 
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to give the address at tonight’s dinner. I would like to 
start  by  thanking  the  Bank  of  England  for  hosting  this  conference  on  money  markets  and 
monetary policy implementation. It’s hard to think of a better place to discuss these topics than 
just  steps  away  from  the  historic  Lombard  Street,  described  in  Bagehot’s  classic  book  on 
money markets.1 I also want to thank all of you for actively participating in today’s discussions. 
One  thing  I  particularly  enjoyed  about  the  event  was  the  interaction  among  market 
practitioners, central bankers, and researchers. I think the diversity of perspectives that these 
groups bring contributes to a fruitful dialogue that can help lead to more informed choices and 
decisions. I will come back to this point. But before I go on, let me remind you that the views I 
express are my own and may not reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
or the Federal Reserve System. 
The  topic  of  this  conference  may  not  appear  particularly  glamorous.  It  is  natural  to  view 
monetary policy implementation as a technical and humble exercise next to the flashiness of 
policy formulation, which has policymakers determining the appropriate level of interest rates. 
However,  for  those  of  us  charged  with  carrying  out  policymakers’  decisions,  there  is  keen 
interest in the mechanics. We have the task of designing and executing operations that ensure 
that  policymakers’  instructions  are  implemented  effectively  and  efficiently,  so  that  their 
intentions can affect inflation and the real economy. But while monetary policy implementation 
is just a means to an end, there is no obvious single “right” way to do it, and every central 
bank’s  operating framework  reflects  history,  unique  institutional  constraints  and the market 
environment, which may change over time. 
So even though the topic of today’s conference may seem to lack glamour, it is significant, 
particularly  now,  since  monetary  policy  implementation  and  the  market  landscape  have 
undergone profound changes in recent years. Many advanced economy central banks have 
adopted a number of new tools to implement monetary policy or used traditional tools in new 
ways  or  in  unprecedented  size,  in  part  because  economic  conditions  have  necessitated 
historically low interest rates that have bumped up against the zero bound for almost seven 
years. One result is that the balance sheets of central banks in many advanced countries are 
now much larger than the amount of currency in circulation, which raises new questions and, 
perhaps, challenges.2 
                                                
1   Walter Bagehot, Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market (London: Henry S. King, 1873). While 
Bagehot is often remembered for his advice regarding lender-of-last-resort policy, most of his book provides a 
careful study of money markets, which is our current focus. 
2   Central banks that maintain large foreign exchange reserves may also have balance sheets that far exceed 
currency in circulation. This is more typical in emerging markets, where domestic currency money markets tend 
to be less mature. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   We have also seen important changes in money markets, which we can define as wholesale 
markets for low-risk, highly liquid, short-term IOUs – including central bank liabilities, which are 
among the highest quality assets traded in these markets. For centuries, money markets have 
played a central role in financial intermediation. These are the markets in which central banks 
traditionally operate and from which the monetary policy impulse is transmitted. Although their 
role hasn’t fundamentally changed, modern money markets look quite different today than they 
did  during  Bagehot’s  time  and  even  just  ten  years  ago.  The  pace  of  change  has  been 
remarkable  following  the  financial  crisis,  mainly  because  of  exceptional  monetary  policy 
measures and new regulations. Changes in market structure and regulation have implications 
for monetary policy implementation, and today’s discussion provided some interesting insights 
on these topics. 
This combination of changes in money markets and new policy tools, as well as observations 
on  how  central  banks’  operating  frameworks  did  or  didn’t  work  during  the  financial  crisis, 
suggests that those of us responsible for monetary policy operations should be researching 
and analyzing how monetary policy will be implemented in the years to come. What are the 
lessons from the crisis and the long period spent at the zero bound and how do these lessons 
change our views regarding monetary policy implementation? These are questions that many 
central  banks  are  currently  facing,  particularly  in  advanced  economies.  They  are  certainly 
relevant for us at the Federal Reserve as we begin our own efforts to think about a long-run 
framework for monetary policy implementation.3 
In my remarks tonight, I would like to give you my views on the significant issues, and the 
questions I believe deserve further study. I also want to emphasize how important it is for those 
of us charged with monetary policy implementation to seek broad engagement on these issues, 
particularly in our effort to better understand how our money markets function and how best to 
implement monetary policy in these markets. 
Motivation and background 
Why should we think hard about issues related to monetary policy implementation? After all, 
central banks could always go back to the frameworks they used before the crisis. In the case 
of the Federal Reserve, the pre-crisis framework worked well at targeting the federal funds rate 
and we have high confidence that a similar system could work again in the future. But can we 
do better?4 In light of recent experience and changes, are there more effective, transparent, or 
flexible implementation frameworks that would give policymakers capacity to better steer the 
economy in the direction they need to satisfy their mandate? 
Recent experience suggests that the Federal Reserve’s new tools – interest on reserves and 
term  deposits5  –  as  well  as  its  application  of  old  tools  towards  new  purposes  –  fixed-rate 
reverse repos and large-scale outright security purchases – can be very helpful, but we can 
probably  still  learn  more  about  how  best to  employ  them. We can  benefit  collectively from 
studying the impact of differences in the implementation of similar tools across central banks.6 
                                                
3   An extended effort to evaluate potential long-run monetary policy implementation frameworks was announced 
in the July 2015 FOMC meeting minutes. 
4   For example, some have suggested that the Federal Reserve could target a repo rate, rather than the federal 
funds rate (see Bernanke, or Gagnon and Sack). Targeting a repo rate could have some benefits, but may entail 
a number of complications, so more work would be necessary to evaluate the potential consequences of such 
a change. 
5   Although the Federal Reserve only recently introduced these instruments, versions of interest on reserves and 
term deposits are standard components of some other central banks’ implementation toolkits. 
6   For example, there is much to learn from the experience of the central banks that have implemented negative 
rates recently. It is important to note that, with the exception of the Swiss National Bank, the implementation of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   For  example,  “quantitative  easing,”  known  shorthand  as  QE,  originates  with  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s (BoJ) efforts to stimulate inflation in the early 2000s at the zero bound. In this effort, 
they targeted the money base and conducted temporary operations and short-term securities 
purchases  to  accomplish  that  liability-driven  operating  objective.  Because  the  maturity 
structure of the BoJ’s assets remained relatively short, the bank was able to run down the size 
of its balance sheet to a more normal level relatively rapidly when it came time to do so and 
then raise rates using standard implementation tools. In contrast, in the United States and 
other  countries,  including  Japan,  QE  is  now  associated  with  targets  for  longer-term  asset 
purchases and extending portfolio duration, to put downward pressure on long-term interest 
rates. Policy normalization will need to proceed in a different way than it did in Japan in the 
mid-2000s if most of the additional assets, and the reserve balance liabilities created as a 
byproduct of their acquisition, remain on the central bank’s balance sheet until they mature in 
the far future. In this case, waiting for the passive runoff of the additional assets alone may not 
be a viable interest rate implementation strategy. Depending on the details of the operating 
framework and money market structure, other tools might be needed – at least for some time 
– to control overnight interest rates above the zero bound while the size of the balance sheet 
remains elevated. What we learn about these tools through the period of normalization could 
prove useful when we think about our long-run framework. 
Central bankers around the world have been innovative in developing tools to address recent 
challenges and to prepare to normalize their operations, and overall, the set of implementation 
options at our disposal may be much broader than we thought before the crisis. So let’s fully 
explore  the  operational  issues  underlying  these  options.  A  deeper  understanding  will  help 
inform the choices policymakers need to make in order to meet their goals. 
Now seems like a particularly good time to start such an effort, for several reasons. First, we 
need  to  digest  the  lessons  from  the  recent  crisis  with  respect  to  monetary  policy 
implementation and money market functioning, and it is best to do so while the experience is 
still  fresh  in  our  minds.  Second,  while  the  Federal  Reserve  has  great  confidence  that  our 
normalization framework will be effective at allowing us to raise money market interest rates 
when the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) determines it is appropriate, we expect to 
learn  a  lot  about  how  money  markets react  to that framework  as  we  move  away  from the 
current very low interest rates with a large amount of reserves in the banking system. We can 
then incorporate knowledge gained during our post-liftoff experience into our thinking. 
We  have  the  benefit  of  not  starting  from  scratch  in  this  effort.  There  already  exists  a  rich 
academic  literature  on  monetary  policy  implementation  frameworks,  and  we  saw  some 
relevant examples this morning. This literature dates at least back to the late 1960s, when Bill 
Poole developed a model that is still being used today.7 Recent developments have revealed 
that our money markets are not frictionless, and current research incorporates this reality of 
market segmentation. Some of the papers we have seen today try to contend with the effects 
 negative  rates  did  not  require  any  changes  in  these  central  bank’s  respective  frameworks  for  policy 
implementation, although some legal and operational work was required. 
7   William  Poole,  “Commercial  Bank  Reserve  Management  in  a  Stochastic  Model:  Implications  for  Monetary 
Policy,” Journal of Finance 23, no. 5 (1968): 769–91. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   of new regulation,8 or try to model impediments to trade in the form of preferred habitat frictions9 
or search frictions.10 These new models provide fresh insights and can also be useful for us in 
communicating with academics and market experts. These improvements are notable because 
they represent a significant departure from views that were espoused a few decades ago.11 
Much research before the crisis put too much faith in market efficiency and spent too little time 
exploring the detailed plumbing of the financial system.
12 Empirical work can also contribute to 
our  thinking  about  monetary  policy  implementation.  What  more  can  we  learn  about  the 
relationship between different money markets, such as the spreads between various secured 
and unsecured rates?13 How much should we care about volatility in money markets and how 
does that volatility affect the monetary policy outcome? We saw some interesting work on the 
topic today.14  
In the United States, we also have the benefit of internal work, now public, that we undertook 
previously.  The  Federal  Reserve  had  started  to  examine  ways  to  improve  its  policy 
implementation framework before the crisis. Analytical work between 2006 and 2008 provides 
a solid foundation from which to build. As you may recall, in 2006 Congress granted the Federal 
Reserve the authority to pay interest on reserve balances held by depository institutions, and 
this  authority  was  originally  set  to  become  effective  in  2011.15 We  went  to  work  to  try  to 
understand how best to employ this new tool. The focus of that work was on operating regimes 
to  target  the  fed  funds  rate.  Basically,  it  considered  several  variants  of  corridor  and  floor 
systems.  The  financial  crisis  interrupted  this  work,  and  it  was  not  completed  as  had  been 
intended. 
The lessons from the crisis suggest that the implementation framework needs to be considered 
more broadly. For example, in the 2008 work, we did not think about the zero bound very much. 
                                                
8   See Christopher Jackson and Joseph Noss, “A Heterogeneous Agent Model for Assessing the Effects of Capital 
Regulation on the Interbank Money Market under a Corridor System,” Bank of England Working Papers, no. 
548, September 2015, as well as Morten L. Bech and Todd Keister, “Liquidity Regulation and the Implementation 
of Monetary Policy,” BIS Working Papers, no. 432, October 2013. See also Bank for International Settlements 
Committee on the Global Financial System and Markets Committee, “Regulatory Change and Monetary Policy,” 
CGFS Papers, no. 54, May 2015. 
9   See  Jim  Clouse,  Jane  Ihrig,  Elizabeth  Klee,  and  Han  Chen,  “The  Federal  Reserve’s  Tools  for  Policy 
Normalization in a Preferred Habitat Model of Financial Markets,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System Finance and Economics Discussion Series, no. 2014–83, October 2014. 
10   See Ben Lester and Roc Armenter, “Excess Reserves and Monetary Policy Normalization,” Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia working paper no. 15–35, August 2015. 
11   For example, Marvin Goodfriend and Robert G. King argued in 1988 that “today’s financial markets provide a 
highly efficient means of allocating credit privately. On the basis of such considerations, we find that it is difficult 
to  make  a  case  for  central  bank  lending  and  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  activities  that  support  it.”  See 
“Financial Deregulation, Monetary Policy, and Central Banking,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic 
Review, May-June 1988. 
12   For example, the work prepared by Federal Reserve staff in 2008 to assess possible use of the authority to pay 
interest  on  reserves  (IOR)  did  not  deal  with  the  fact  that  some  institutions  cannot  earn  IOR,  so  it  did  not 
contemplate  that  this  rate  may  not  serve  as  a  firm  floor;  see  http://www.federalreserve.gov/foia/files/ 
20080411.IoR.FOMC.Options.paper.public.pdf.  More  recent  work  explicitly  considers  frictions  that  limit  the 
effectiveness of IOR to serve as a floor and explores other tools that can support money market interest rates. 
See, for example, Antoine Martin, James McAndrews, Ali Palida, and David Skeie, “Federal Reserve Tools for 
Managing Rates and Reserves,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 642, September 2013. 
13   In the case of the United States, more research on the relationship between the Eurodollar rate, the federal 
funds rate, and the repo rate could provide insights on the functioning of our money markets. 
14   See Matthew Osborne, “Monetary Policy and Volatility in the Sterling Money Market,” paper presented at the 
Bank  of  England-Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  conference,  “Money  Markets  and  Monetary  Policy 
Implementation,” November 16–17, 2015. 
15   The implementation date was accelerated to October 2008 during the financial crisis to enhance the Federal 
Reserve’s ability to control short-term interest rates. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Yet we have now been at or near zero for nearly seven years, and many other countries are 
in a similar situation. So we need to incorporate these new dimensions, and the lessons from 
the experience of other central banks, in our analysis. Another thing that was not taken into 
account enough in the 2008 work was the complexity of U.S. dollar money markets, both on- 
and offshore. In particular, we did not anticipate that frictions in our money markets would limit 
the arbitrage that would keep market rates in line with the rate of interest we pay on excess 
reserves by such an extent, leaving many money market interest rates well below the rate of 
interest paid on excess reserves (IOER), contrary to what theory would suggest. Meanwhile, 
we learned a lot about the behavior of money market participants during the crisis, and we 
continue to observe how money market trading dynamics are evolving in response to changes 
in the market environment.16 
The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet is much larger than we would have ever anticipated 
before 2008. To give you an idea, prior to the crisis, a few tens of billions of excess reserve 
balances was considered a large supply for a floor system.17 Today, the Federal Reserve, in 
addition to currency and capital, has around $3 trillion of liabilities outstanding, most of which 
are in the form of excess reserves held in the banking system. We have also seen changes in 
markets since the crisis and expanded the set of our counterparties for certain operations in 
ways that were not contemplated in our prior work. These developments have implications for 
determining the appropriate level of reserves in a future framework. 
Looking ahead 
As Ulrich Bindseil noted in his excellent book, even if one thinks that implementation details 
aren’t ultimately very important to the transmission of monetary policy, they may well have 
implications for important aspects of the financial markets, such as the cost effectiveness of 
banks’ liquidity management, bank business and funding models, and financial stability.18 So 
these considerations should influence the type of questions we ask ourselves when it comes 
to improving the operating frameworks of central banks. We should, of course, consider the 
traditional parts of an operating framework, for example, possible interest rate targets and the 
mechanisms used to achieve the target. But recent experience strongly suggests that we need 
to  consider  options  beyond  just  a  classic  interest  rate  targeting  regime  that’s  based  on  a 
scarcity of reserve balances. We will need to think about the composition and structure of our 
balance sheet on both the asset and liability sides.19 This consideration will be important should 
large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) become a more standard tool for central banks, which 
could happen if lower levels of equilibrium real rates imply an increasing frequency of very low 
overnight rates. Further, some analysts have argued that there might be a role for balance 
                                                
16   To support the implementation of monetary policy and the analysis of money market conditions, the Federal 
Reserve began collecting transaction-level data on federal funds, Eurodollars, and certificates of deposits from 
a large set of domestic banks and agencies of foreign banks operating in the United States on April 1, 2014. In 
February 2015, the New York Fed announced plans to begin using the new data to calculate the daily federal 
funds effective rate and to begin publishing an overnight bank funding rate based on transactions in both federal 
funds 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/opolicy/operating_policy 
_150202.html  and  http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2015/04/the-fr-2420-data-collection-a-new-
base-for-the-fed-funds-rate.html. 
and  Eurodollar  markets.  See 
17   A staff memo from 2008 suggested that in a floor system the level of excess reserves “might be on the order of 
$35 billion but could be larger on some days.” For context, at the time, a number like $150 billion would have 
been held up as an extremely large level of excess reserves, well beyond anything we might have seriously 
considered  as 
rates.  See 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/foia/files/20080411.IoR.FOMC.Options.paper.public.pdf. 
reserves  needed 
implement  a 
floor  on 
level  of 
the 
to 
18   Ulrich Bindseil, Monetary Policy Operations and the Financial System (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014). 
19   Central  bank  assets  include  securities  held  outright  or  under  repurchase  agreements,  as  well  as  credit 
extensions  and  foreign  currency-denominated  assets.  Central  bank  liabilities  include  currency,  reserve 
balances, term deposits held by depository institutions, and reverse repos. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   sheet  policies  away  from  very  low  interest  rates  in  supporting  the  macroeconomic  and 
macroprudential objectives of central banks.20 
That said, a large central bank balance sheet relative to currency in circulation raises a number 
of  questions  about  the  monetary  authority’s  footprint  in  money  markets,  which  some 
policymakers say presents potential risks to central bank independence.21 A large footprint may 
also increase the central bank’s role in money markets in ways that are difficult to anticipate 
and  that  may  prove  to  be  undesirable.22  One  simple  principle  for  monetary  policy 
implementation regimes is to avoid structures where central bank intermediation crowds out 
activity that private participants can do more effectively and efficiently. Applying this principle 
is not simple, since expectations of central bank interventions affect private incentives and can 
produce changes in the structure of markets.23 So central banks need to be mindful of potential 
unintended consequences of their implementation regimes. This prudence is well captured in 
the FOMC’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, released in September 2014, which 
note that, in the long run, the Fed’s balance sheet should be no larger than necessary for the 
effective  and  efficient  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and  should  consist  primarily  of 
Treasury securities.24  
We also need to make sure that the impulse of monetary policy is transmitted effectively to the 
real economy. Given the growing importance of nonbanks in many money markets, especially 
in the U.S. dollar markets, we should think about the counterparties with whom we interact. 
Would  expanding  the  types  of  counterparties  that  we  do  business  with  increase  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy?  What  are  the  costs  and  benefits  of  interacting  with 
counterparties beyond our traditional set? 
Any long-run monetary policy implementation framework should be assessed relative to goals. 
That assessment may be informed by recent experience. For example, a framework should 
allow us to achieve an appropriate degree of control over short-term rates, both in normal times 
and during periods of financial distress. It should also be as robust as possible to potential 
structural  changes  in  the  financial  system.  The  framework  should  enhance  our  ability  to 
achieve macroeconomic objectives at very low or even negative interest rates. Further, it might 
be important to consider the framework’s ability to address liquidity strains in money markets 
and to support overall financial stability. 
Other  concerns  could  include  the  burdens  and  deadweight  losses  associated  with  reserve 
requirements,  the  implications  of  the  framework  for  the  efficiency  and  resilience  of  money 
markets and government securities markets, and the framework’s ability to help support the 
efficiency and resilience of payment systems. 
                                                
20   For example, a large supply of “money-like” assets provided by the official sector could crowd out some short-
term  private  sector  liabilities,  reducing  the  amount  of  maturity  transformation  in  the  financial  system  and 
improving financial stability. See, for example, Mark Carlson, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Fabio Natalucci, William R. 
Nelson, Marcelo Ochoa, Jeremy Stein, and Skander Van den Heuvel, “The Demand for Short-Term, Safe Assets 
and Financial Stability: Some Evidence and Implications for Central Bank Policies,” Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series, no. 2014–102, November 2014. 
21   Maintaining  a  large  balance  sheet  in  normal  times  may  be  perceived  as  a  “slack”  variable  that  invites 
policymakers to use it for non-monetary policy objectives. See, for example, https://www.philadelphiafed.org/ 
publications/speeches/plosser/2010/09–24–10_swiss-national-bank. 
22   For  a  discussion  of  footprint  considerations  in  the  design  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  overnight  reverse  repo 
operations,  see  Joshua  Frost,  Lorie  Logan,  Antoine  Martin,  Patrick  McCabe,  Fabio  Natalucci,  and  Julie 
Remache,  “Overnight  RRP  Operations  as  a  Monetary  Policy  Tool:  Some  Design  Considerations,”  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 712, February 2015. 
23   For example, a money market mutual fund could choose to restrict its investments only to overnight reverse 
repurchase agreements provided by the Federal Reserve if it believed these instruments would continue to be 
supplied in the far future. 
24   See http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Conclusion 
I want to conclude by saying a few more words about the value of engaging broadly with the 
public, with market participants, with researchers both in central banks and in academia, and 
with our global central bank counterparts. The issues we will have to tackle are important and 
complex,  and  there  is  much  to  gain  from  different  points  of  view.  Market  participants  can 
provide a deeper understanding of financial market dynamics and shed necessary light on the 
impact  and  limitations  of  monetary  policy  on  a  practical  dimension.  As  we  saw  today, 
researchers  can  provide  empirical  analysis  as  well  as  models  that  help us  think  about  the 
impact and effectiveness of different tools or policies. Whether they work in central banks or 
academia, they provide a perspective that we need to take into account when thinking about 
our long-run framework. And, of course, we can learn from our peers in policymaking and on 
markets desks at other central banks. We may have tried things that worked very well, or did 
not work so well, and comparative experience can be extremely valuable. Forums like this, 
which  bring  together  a  range  of  experts  from  different  areas,  can  help  advance  our 
understanding of the important issues we will have to face. 
So, I hope to see more of this type of engagement going forward. We have a unique opportunity 
to think very broadly about the issues that will confront us in the foreseeable future. We should 
seek diverse perspectives and be open to new ideas and perspective. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
