  François Groepe: Lessons to be learnt from progressive economies  
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
18th Southern African Internal Audit Conference, hosted by the Institute of Internal Auditors 
South Africa, Johannesburg, 18 August 2015. 
Chairperson, ladies and gentlemen. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  the  18th  Southern  African  Internal  Audit 
Conference, hosted by the Institute of Internal Auditors, South Africa. 
In  my  address  this  morning,  I  will  spend  some  time  discussing  the  lessons  learnt  from 
progressive  economies  and  applying  them  to  South  Africa.  Economies,  and  the  factors 
affecting them, have generated much interest in our attempts to deepen our understanding of 
the most appropriate and efficient ways of organising the economy in an effort to optimise the 
allocation  of  scarce  resources.  At  the  outset,  it  must,  however,  be  emphasised  that  the 
management  and  allocation  of  resources  within  an  economic  system  does  not  happen  in 
isolation or in some abstract manner. Factors such as culture, values, education, technology, 
social  and  other  institutions,  political  structures  and  legal  systems  all  provide  content  and 
context and set the backdrop and parameters in which the different economies function. In 
this  regard,  Douglas  North  writes,  “It  is  the  admixture  of  formal  rules,  informal  norms  and 
enforcement characteristics that shape economic performance… And economies that adopt 
the formal rules of another economy will have very different performance characteristics than 
the first economy because of different informal norms and enforcement”.1 
There are clearly different schools of economic thought, with their own analytical frameworks, 
which  in  turn  has  a  bearing  on  both  the  analyses  of  economic  imbalances  and  the  policy 
prescripts to remedy them. Despite certain reservations raised by some economist it can be 
argued that the United States (US) economy has made huge strides during the 20th century 
in  growing  to  become  the  world’s  largest  economy  and  arguably  one  of  the  world’s  more 
successful economies. One of the outcomes of this achievement was the establishment of a 
large middle class population following the Second World War. 
Despite  this  strong  economic  performance,  inequality  has  widened  more  recently.  The 
average income of the top 1 per cent of the population in the US had increased by more than 
250 per cent during the preceding two decades, while the income of most other Americans 
had stagnated. This may have contributed to President Obama pronouncing that, “growing 
inequality  is  the  defining  issue  of  our time”.  He  declared  that  it  was  a tipping  point for  the 
middle class in the US and all those aspiring to gain access into the middle class. 
For an economy or any society to thrive one would need to acknowledge and redress both 
economic  and  political  inequality.  Measures  of  economic  equality  include,  among  other 
things, growth in gross domestic product per capita and a reduction in unemployment. The 
World Bank defined sustainable economic development as a situation under which extreme 
poverty is reduced to such an extent that the number of people making a living on less than 
US$1,25  per  day  will  eventually  be  lowered  to  less  than  3  per  cent  of  the  total  global 
population  by  2030.  Furthermore,  prosperity  should  be  promoted  by  improving  the  living 
standards of the bottom 40 per cent of the population in all countries. The latest World Bank 
Report indicates that growth in per capita income has taken place during the past decade, 
more  specifically  in  the  African  region.  Progress  made  is  apparent  in  the  world’s  middle 
                                                
1 
 North, D.C (1993) “Economic performance through time” Prize lecture in Economic Sciences in memory of 
Alfred Nobel, December 9, 1993. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  class, which is showing steady growth. According to Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD) estimates, five billion people would have moved into the middle 
class,  with  about  two-thirds  residing  in  Asia, followed  by  the  Middle  East,  Africa  and  Latin 
America.  The  shift  towards  the  middle  class  is  therefore  expected  to  occur  mostly  in 
emerging markets, which supports the objective of inclusive growth. 
The South African Institute of Race Relations estimates that the South African middle class 
realistically constitutes around 10 per cent of the total population. Efforts to expand and grow 
this number may, however, come under strain unless the South African growth trajectory can 
be lifted to the 5 per cent target set in the National Development Plan. 
To judge the progressiveness of countries, from which lessons can be learnt, it is prudent to 
construct  a  continuum,  from  non-progressive  countries  on  the  one  side  to  progressive 
countries on the other. Consistent with such an approach, the IMF expressed an opinion on 
the status of economies that could be used to place them on such a continuum, while also 
indicating what is required for these countries to become progressive. 
It is worth noting that countries such as Canada and Singapore were rated as countries with 
solid  growth,  whilst  Mexico  has  been  acknowledged  for  undertaking  significant  structural 
reforms.  Bolivia,  interestingly  has  seen  per  capita  income  tripling  over  the  past  couple  of 
years  whilst  Namibia  has  grown  strongly.  Poland  is  demonstrating  that  its  macroeconomic 
policies are proving to be highly conducive towards growth, followed by New Zealand at the 
progressive  side  of  this  continuum.  These  countries  are  displaying  good  governance 
structures and the prudent management of national resources. 
The following principles generally contribute towards establishing a progressive economy:  
• 
Economic growth is essential, but it must be sustainable and inclusive, resulting in 
good-quality  jobs  and  improve  the  living  standards  of  the  citizens  of  the  country. 
Growth without this prerequisite will fall short of creating a prosperous society and 
will not be sustainable in the long run. 
High-income countries generally face challenges in terms of rising inequality due to 
technological  progress,  which  has  increased  the  wage  dispersion  in  favour  of 
higher-skilled  workers.  To  address  these  matters,  concerted  efforts  should  be 
introduced  to  promote  increased  investments  in  human  capital.  Flexibility  in  the 
labour markets can contribute towards an enhance absorption of labour combined 
with  appropriate  social  support  systems.  The  environment  should  also  receive 
attention to guard against environmental degradation. 
Developing  economies  face  challenges  to  realise  inclusive  growth  and  should 
pursue policies that allow for the absorption of lower skilled labour. This can be done 
by investing in skills training that aligns the abilities of workers with the requirements 
of  the  labour  market.  Adequate  social  protection  systems  should  also  be  put  in 
place.  In  South  Africa,  despite  the  transformation  of  the  economy  during  the  past 
two decades, there are still too many citizens struggling to make ends meet and who 
are reliant of the social grant system. 
Drawing on the latest round of Article IV consultations by the IMF, various good practices by 
progressive  countries  are  referenced  within  their  reports.  Without  referring  to  specific 
countries, the following general guidelines can be considered as good practice towards the 
development of a progressive economy: 
• 
Raising labour productivity and increasing labour force participation would improve 
longer-term economic prospects by boosting potential growth. 
Increased  access  to  financing  for  start-ups  and  the  reduction  of  administrative 
barriers  for  new  businesses  could  assist  in  expanding  an  economy’s  production 
frontier. 
   2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     Maintaining a flexible exchange rate is essential, both as a buffer against external 
shocks and to facilitate adjustment towards domestic sources of growth to reduce 
external imbalances. Furthermore, it is considered as advantageous to implement a 
broad-based  set  of  policy  actions  when  required,  rather  than  incremental  actions 
when confidence levels need to be shifted to a higher level. 
Pursuing structural reforms in a country should never be considered a trivial matter, 
as  it  can  be  a  very  challenging  undertaking  to  balance  the  interests  of  different 
groups.  It  should,  therefore,  be  approached  in  a  circumspect  manner.  Fiscal 
sustainability should always be a key consideration in any undertaking towards the 
creation  of  a  progressive  economy.  Governments  should  always  address 
weaknesses  in  public  infrastructure,  including  through  new  institutions,  to  enable 
better  planning  and  coordination  at  the  local  level.  Competition,  in  especially  the 
services  sector,  should  be  encouraged  as  this  will  increase  the  overall  level  of 
productivity in an economy. 
Another prerequisite for a thriving economy is the establishment and maintenance of 
good industrial relations within the labour market towards an equitable distribution of 
income between the various constituencies. Quality education and training through 
apprenticeship  programmes,  as  well  as 
immigration  policies  aimed  at 
accommodating scarce skills, have the tendency to alleviate skills mismatches in a 
country.  Reduced  regulatory  burdens  and  increased  competition  through  trade 
liberalisation  assist  in  the  reduction  of  the  wage-productivity  gap  by  lowering  the 
cost  of  living,  and  contributing  to  enhanced  productivity.  A  dedicated  focus  on 
research  and  development  has  proven  beneficial  to  the  advances  made  by 
progressive economies. The pursuance of regional free-trade arrangements is also 
helpful  to  harness  the  benefits  of  the  dynamism  of  an  adjacent  region,  when 
applicable.  Government  procurement  practices  should  ideally  be  characterised  by 
simplified  bidding  procedures,  high  levels  of  transparency,  and  standardised 
contracts  that  reduce  costs  with  a  focus  on  value  for  money.  Performance-based 
budgeting practices generally also improve the impact of government programmes. 
Experience  in  progressive  economies  has  shown  that  a  predictable  legal  framework  is 
paramount  to  broad-based  and  inclusive  growth,  as  it  raises  confidence  in  practices  and 
processes and most importantly creates a strong degree of legal certainty. Comprehensive 
and regular evaluations of programmes being implemented should be undertaken to ensure 
the efficiency of execution. If found that the implementation procedures of such programmes 
need to be revised, or that implementation should be abandoned in totality, the necessary 
institutional leeway should be available to effect such changes. 
A  sound  financial  system  supported  by  comprehensive  macro-economic  and  micro-
prudential policy measures, and well capitalised banks with solid liquidity buffers, contribute 
materially  to  sustainable  growth  within  an  economy.  Moreover,  authorities  should  strive 
towards the strengthening of their macro-prudential toolkits to better adhere to their financial 
stability mandates. 
Some of the global regulatory reforms undertaken is aimed to ensure an even greater degree 
of  transparency  and  include  efforts  to  reduce  potential  conflicts  of  interest  and  the  risks 
associated  with  moral  hazard.  Executive  compensation  remains  firmly  on  the  agenda,  not 
only because of equality considerations, but because in certain instances it may give rise to 
excessive risk taking. An argument that the high levels of executive compensation is justified 
due  to  the  value  created  for  shareholders  must  also  be  closely  examined  against  the 
exogenous factors, such as the liquidity overhang caused by the unconventional monetary 
policies pursued by many of the advanced economies. 
Creating an enabling environment for small- and medium-sized enterprises, which are major 
sources of employment, should be part of any policy transformation attempt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Academic research generally concludes that political freedom, strong institutions and quality 
regulation  are  significant  contributors  to  economic  growth.  Effective,  fair  and  accountable 
governments  boost  public  confidence,  raising  the  level  of  satisfaction  among  citizens. 
Likewise, citizens’ access to public officials to voice their concerns is correlated with a higher 
state of well-being. 
It  is  worth  noting  the  most  recent  findings  by  the  Institute  for  Management  Development 
responsible for the publication of the World Competitiveness Yearbook. The 2015 Yearbook 
indicates that SA occupies position 53 in terms of its competitiveness within a group of 61 
countries surveyed. The Yearbook ranks a mix of 61 industrialised and emerging economies 
in  terms  of  ability  to  create  and  foster  an  environment  sustaining  competitive  enterprises. 
Country  data  are  evaluated  based  on  specific  criteria,  categorised  in  terms  of  four 
competitiveness  factors,  namely  government  efficiency,  business  efficiency,  economic 
performance and infrastructure. 
South Africa’s economic performance has improved by seven places to position 49 in 2015, 
following an improvement in international trade and attaining the lowest cost-of-living index 
that topped the world rankings. Government efficiency though is indicated to have dropped to 
position  40  in  2015,  after  having  been  at  position  32  two  years  earlier.  This  is  mainly 
attributable  to  the  poor  performance  of  public  finance,  a  weak  institutional  framework  and 
business  legislation. The  performance  of  businesses’  efficiency  also  deteriorated further  in 
2015, as a result of a decline in productivity and efficiency, a further deterioration in labour 
market conditions, deteriorating management practices, and poor attitudes and values in the 
business  sector.  The  ranking  of  technological  infrastructure,  health  and  environment 
infrastructure  also  deteriorated.  The  report  states  that  business  efficiency  requires  high 
productivity in order to thrive and, in the absence of that, it is difficult for an economy to be 
competitive. According to the report, it has been empirically proven that business efficiency 
and productivity have been the main drivers of the competitiveness gains in the US, with that 
country remaining the most competitive economy in 2015. 
In  dealing  with  our  own  challenges  regarding  competitiveness,  it  is  important  that  we 
continue  to  pursue  fair  access  to  markets  and  more  balanced  global  trade.  Furthermore, 
although protectionism appears to be an attractive policy response against a backdrop of low 
growth  and  a  structural  current  account  deficit,  it  should  be  approached  with  a  degree  of 
circumspection as an important lesson to be taken from economic history is that the period 
that followed the Great Depression was marked by an outbreak of protectionist trade policies. 
These policies led to a sharp contraction in global trade in the 1930’s, beyond the economic 
collapse  itself,  and  a  lacklustre rebound  in trade  despite the  eventual  worldwide  economic 
recovery.2  It  is  also  worth  acknowledging that  trade  protectionism  often fails  to  adequately 
address the underlying challenges of competitiveness, or the lack thereof, within an economy 
and it may even lead to a decline in the degree of competiveness as its could lead to higher 
input  costs  and  hence  contribute  to  price  inflation.  Lastly,  it  is  unlikely  to  restore  external 
balance if external demand is weak. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has developed sustainable growth indicators which 
focus on policy, democracy, and governance as the drivers of growth. The policy component 
encapsulates economic policies, while the governance component relates to accountability. 
This approach by the IMF enables a link between economic growth and the role of the South 
African  Reserve  Bank  (the  Bank)  and  bodies,  such  as  the  Institute  of  Internal  Auditors,  in 
fulfilling their respective mandates. 
The contribution by the Bank enhances institutional capacity in the economy as it serves the 
South  African  society  through  maintaining  price  and  financial  stability  in  the  interest  of 
                                                
2 
 Eichengreen, B and Irving, D.A (2009) “The slide to protectionism in the Great Depression: Who succumbed 
and why?” NBER Working Paper No. 15142. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  balanced and sustainable growth. In the policy sphere, it conducts monetary policy to contain 
price inflation. In doing this, the Bank assists in maintaining and improving competitiveness, 
protecting the purchasing power of the currency and, thus the living standards of all South 
Africans.  Furthermore,  this  provides  a  favourable  environment  for  employment  creation 
through  balanced  growth.  In  addition,  the  Bank  also  has  the  mandate  to  oversee  and 
maintain financial stability which is a distinct and separate policy objective from price stability. 
We can feel very proud that South Africa was ranked first out of 144 countries ranked in the 
Global Competitive Index Report for our Strength of our Auditing Standards and Reporting, 
second  for  Accountability  and  third  for  the  efficacy  of  our  corporate  boards.  This  is 
meaningful  as  the  internal  and  external  auditing  profession  forms  an  integral  part  of  the 
international  and  domestic  institutional  capacity.  These  professions  contribute  to  both  the 
moral and legal frameworks that maintain and uphold ethics and standards, while forming an 
important line of defence in upholding good governance in both the public and private sector. 
The  auditing  profession  contributes  to  a  credible  and  thriving  business  environment,  while 
acting  as  the  custodians  of  international  standards  for  professional  conduct.  Lastly,  the 
comfort  that  investors  get  from  the  auditing  professions,  promotes  investment  and  thus 
ultimately economic growth and therefor makes a difference to people’s standards of living 
and hence their quality of life. 
I wish to conclude my talk this morning, by quoting former President, Nelson Mandela, when 
he said “There is no passion to be found playing small - in settling for a life that is less than 
the one you are capable of living”. I hope we all would continuously strive towards a life that 
is nothing less than the one we are capable of. More importantly, I hope that we would all 
take hands and work tirelessly to create a future for our country that is reflective, not only of 
the rich endowments we enjoy as a country, but a future that is reflective of our true and full 
potential as a nation. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
