  Ronald Waas: “Implementation of Use of BI-RTGS System in Money 
Settlements for Transactions in the Capital Market” 
Speech  by  Mr  Ronald  Waas,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  an  event  entitled 
“Dissemination  of  Mandatory  Use  of  Rupiah  within  the  Republic  of  Indonesia”,  Bank 
Indonesia, Jakarta, 15 June 2015. 
 Heads of banks in Indonesia; 
Chairs or representatives of banking associations or organizations in Indonesia; 
Heads of Departments of Bank Indonesia; 
Ladies and gentlemen. 
Distinguished: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Good Morning and May God Bless Us All 
1. 
To begin our event this morning, I would like to invite all of us to praise God the 
Almighty  for  giving  us  the  opportunity  to  meet  in  this  favorable  occasion  titled 
“Dissemination of Mandatory Use of Rupiah within the Republic of Indonesia”. 
Today,  we  invite  you  to  have  a  discussion  to  establish  the  same  perception  and 
improve our understanding on banking, as well as disseminate and educate on the 
implementation  of  mandatory  use  of  Rupiah  within  the  Republic  of  Indonesia. We 
are aware that the enforcement of the regulation on Mandatory Use of Rupiah within 
the Republic of Indonesia (BI Regulation No. 17/3/PBI/2015 dated 31 March 2015 
and  BI  Circular  No.  17/11/DKSP/2015  dated  1  June  2015)  is  of  significant 
importance  for  today’s  attendees  and  the  community.  The  reason  is  the  use  of 
Rupiah  closely  relates  to  economic  activities  in  general,  primarily  payment 
transactions in Indonesia. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
3. 
I  consider  the  awareness  of  mandatory  use  of  Rupiah  within  the  Republic  of 
Indonesia  is  based  on  three  significant  main  dimensions  and  determines  our 
identity as a nation. 
First, legal dimension. This is not a new regulation enforced by Bank Indonesia. 
Since  2011,  we  already  have  a  Currency  Law,  regulating  Rupiah  as  one  of  the 
symbols  of  state  sovereignty  which  must  be  respected  and  honored  by  all 
Indonesian  people.  The  establishment  of  Bank  Indonesia  regulation  related 
thereon  is  expected  to  promote  strengthening  and  purifying  payment  transactions 
within the Republic of Indonesia by the use of Rupiah. 
Various  other  regulations  have  been  established,  such  as  Law  on  the  Flow  of 
Foreign Exchange, Law on Special Economic Zones, Presidential Regulation on the 
Blueprint of National Logistics System Development, Regulation of Minister of Trade 
on Inclusion of Prices and Tariffs of Goods and Services, and many other relevant 
regulations on rupiah, all of which provide a very strong foundation for the use of 
Rupiah in the country. 
Such regulations, directly or indirectly, confirm the mandatory use of Rupiah in any 
payment transactions conducted within the Republic of Indonesia, either in cash or 
non-cash. 
Second,  nationhood  dimension.  Many  parties  see  and  believe  that  the  main 
purpose  for  Bank  Indonesia  to  implement  mandatory  use  of  Rupiah  is  solely  to 
2. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
 support  the  stability  of  Rupiah  exchange  rate.  It  is  not  wrong,  but  other  than 
economic  aspect,  one  more  basic  and  fundamental  reason  is  to  uphold  the 
sovereignty of the Republic of Indonesia. 
I  would  like  to  use  an  analogy  to  explain  the  nationhood  dimension  delivered  by 
President  Jokowi  in  his  inauguration  speech  as  the  President  of  the  Republic  of 
Indonesia.  He  said  “we  have  been  ignoring  the  sea.”  Indonesia  must  honor  its 
own civilization, by returning to the position of Indonesia as a maritime country. 
In relation to enforcing Rupiah, I would not wish that within the next 5 or 10 years or 
even longer, our president will say “we have been ignoring Rupiah.” 
It seems an irony because honestly, it is apparent that the tendency to use dollar 
has  become  increasingly  dominant  and  a  daily  practice  in  certain  economic 
activities. 
We  easily  find  that  dollar  is  frequently  used,  starting  from  quotations,  individual 
(customer)  payment  transactions,  such  as  purchases  of  electronic  devices  and 
apartments, until non-cash payment transactions in a large amount. 
One of the noteworthy historical records serving as a lesson for us is the release of 
Sipadan and Ligitan Islands from the Republic of Indonesia. One of the global 
considerations in releasing Sipadan Island is lack of economic transactions and 
activities using Rupiah therein. 
Third,  economic/business  aspect.  Foreign  currency  transactions  within  the 
country  become  one  of  the  factors  resulting  in  increasing  foreign  currency 
demand.  Such  high  foreign  currency  demand  in  economic  transactions  will  make 
our  economy  vulnerable  to  economic  fluctuations.  The  trust  of  Indonesian  people 
and the international world in Rupiah will strengthen national economic resilience in 
general, thereby resulting in the rising dignity of Rupiah, both within and outside the 
country. 
In the excessive net demand for foreign currency within the country, such use of 
foreign  currency  will 
the  pressure  against  Rupiah  exchange  rate 
depreciation. It will potentially disrupt Rupiah stability and add to the complexity of 
monetary and exchange rate policies. 
Bank  Indonesia  as  the  central  bank  realizes  that  the  use  of  Rupiah  as  a  lawful 
means of payment in any payment transactions is a very fundamental element and 
serves as a pillar of successful and robust national economy. In the long run, the 
mandatory use of Rupiah may also prevent the increasingly spreading dollarization 
in our economy, which in turn will support a more sound economic structure. 
increase 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
16. 
Bank  Indonesia  realizes  that  enforcement  of  mandatory  use  of  Rupiah  will  not  be 
easy.  Therefore,  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  government  will  cooperate  with  the  law 
enforcement and state institutions and also collaborate with the private sector. 
In  this  regard,  we  have  also  cooperated  and  agreed  with  the  Indonesian  Airline 
Ticketing  Association  (ASTINDO)  and  the  Indonesian  Hotel  and  Restaurant 
Association  (PHRI) to  uphold  the  mandatory  use  of  Rupiah  within  the  Republic  of 
Indonesia in any transactions related to the business fields of the two associations. 
We  also  consider  that  law  enforcement  efforts  must  be  balanced  with  an  intense 
dissemination and education to the community. Such community awareness is the 
first line of defence we  must consistently embed to the whole community. Only in 
that way will Rupiah become ”host” in its own country. 
17. 
18. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Ladies and gentlemen, 
19. 
We  expect  that  the  series  of  dissemination  on  mandatory  use  of  Rupiah  will 
strengthen our commitment to realize the sovereignty of Rupiah within the Republic 
of Indonesia and support to achieve stability of Rupiah exchange rate. 
To  conclude,  may  God  will  always  accompany,  guide,  and  facilitate  our  steps 
towards a better future. Thank you. 
20. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
