  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Corriere della Sera 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Corriere della Sera, conducted by Mr Danilo Taino on 27 January 2015. 
 In the last few days you have said that Tsipras must “continue to pay”. 
I  said  that  there’s  dual  responsibility.  Greece  must  continue  to  abide  by  the  rules  of  the 
game:  we  are  a  community  of  purpose.  On  the  other  hand,  Europe  has  to  accept  the 
democratic change in Athens, even if it is based on policies that are different from the ones 
before. 
No renegotiation of Athen’s debt, then. Not even an extension of maturities? 
Greece’s  debt  is  made  up  of  various  components.  As  regards  the  government  bonds 
purchased by the ECB as part of the Securities Markets Programme launched in 2010, we 
cannot grant even an extension of maturities: it would be like granting a loan to the country 
and  that  is  prohibited  by  the  treaties.  As  regards  loans  given  to  Athens  by  European 
countries, that’s not for us to decide. 
You’re indifferent? 
No, I’m saying that any decision that is made must have a goal, namely for the reforms in 
Greece to continue. There will probably be different reforms from the ones expected, given 
that  there’s  now  a  new  government.  But  we  have  to  be  consistent:  the  country  still  needs 
reforms. 
Tspiras says that the troika is now finished in Greece. And the European Court of 
Justice has also put a question mark over the legitimacy of the ECB’s participation in 
it. 
For now, that is an opinion of the Advocate General, not a ruling of the Court. And therefore it 
is too early to be drawing conclusions. And it is also too early to establish what will happen in 
Greece in this respect. 
Was the ECB’s decision to start QE, a week ago, correct and timely in your opinion? 
It was the right decision, also in terms of timing – in the sense that it allowed us to prepare 
the operation from a technical point of view. We could not simply import the United States’ or 
United  Kingdom’s  experience.  We  needed  to  design  our  asset  purchases  based  on  our 
needs, which was also a useful process for gaining the approval of as many governors as 
possible. 
But in economic terms? 
Good timing in this regard, too. There are signs of economic growth returning and the price 
of oil has fallen, as has the exchange rate of the euro. And now monetary policy is sufficiently 
expansionary. All of the lights are green: 2015 could see significant growth and our surveys 
show that banks are passing on the reduction in interest rates to their customers more than 
they did in the past. Monetary policy is even more effective when it is not leaning against the 
wind. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Even without national reforms? 
Here at the ECB, we are absolutely convinced that whatever we do, it will not have as strong 
an  impact  if  it  is  not  accompanied  by  reforms.  Asset  purchases  are  not  an  excuse  not  to 
implement reforms. The effectiveness of the purchases depends on these reforms. That said, 
the programme was designed to work and it is big enough to work. 
Even though the amount of risk-sharing is very small – 20% – with the rest staying 
with the national central banks? 
This is fully consistent with a single monetary policy because all decisions will be taken by 
the Governing Council. Moreover, it has to be said that the fact that we have greatly limited 
the  level  of  risk-sharing  reflects  the  philosophy  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty:  a  centralised 
monetary policy with national fiscal responsibility. We have acknowledged the fact that the 
euro area is not a fiscal union. There are those who say we could have taken the first step in 
this direction. But this is a political decision which is for the governments to make, not us. 
At what point will QE stop? 
We will make purchases from early March until at least September 2016, i.e. 19 months, and 
shall continue until there is a sustained improvement in medium-term inflation. When it will 
end  is  therefore  not  an  urgent  issue,  it  will  be  assessed  based  on  a  range  of  indicators, 
including inflation expectations. 
Could it end before September 2016? 
It will end only once we get a strong sense that inflation is converging towards 2%. 
In Germany, it is a widely held belief that last Thursday, the ECB changed its monetary 
policy paradigm, that it is no longer the orthodoxy of the Bundesbank, as promised at 
the time the euro was created. 
The German audience should acknowledge that it is not a question of a different monetary 
paradigm. We need to deliver on our primary mandate, which is price stability in the medium 
term. This is a strategy which we inherited from the Bundesbank. Only the instruments are 
new. This could not have been foreseen in 1992, but in the Treaty it is nevertheless clear that 
the ECB can conduct monetary policy by means of asset purchases. 
And yet the Germans are still concerned. 
They  are  rightly  concerned  about  the  possible  side  effects  of  QE:  the  creation  of  asset 
bubbles  and  reduced  incentives  for  countries  to  initiate  reforms  and  reduce  their  debt. 
However,  the  response  cannot  be  to  ask  the  central  bank  to  internalise  these  unwanted 
consequences. We have a narrow mandate. Instead, we need strong prudential policies and, 
in terms of fiscal policy, the strict application of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
But was it necessary to humiliate the Bundesbank? 
No such thing occurred. There was unanimity in the Governing Council that asset purchases 
are  a  legitimate  monetary  policy  instrument.  And  then  we  discussed  when  to  use  it  and 
whether the situation was bad enough to decide to use it. We will really try hard to explain 
that what we are doing is in the interest of the euro area, Germany included. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In your book, you talk about the isolation of the central banks. Do you feel that 
strongly at the moment? 
Central  banks  are  independent,  but  they  are  not  isolated.  In  Europe,  however,  we  need  a 
coherent  approach  across  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  and  structural  reform  policy,  as 
emphasised by President Draghi at the Jackson Hole conference (at the end of August [ed.]). 
The understandable instinct of the governments is to respond to their voters. This is never 
easy  and  it  becomes  even  more  difficult  in  an  environment  of  low  growth  and  high 
unemployment. But our plea to the governments is to always remember Europe’s common 
interest,  because  the  actions  of  one  affect  all  the  others.  That  is  why  they  must  be 
coordinated. 
Do you feel more mature, at the ECB, after last Thursday? 
This is not about being mature, but about providing the right answers to a new situation, as 
the ECB has always done throughout the crisis. Now, with asset purchases, we are like the 
other central banks, but with an instrument that is adapted to our specific environment, i.e. an 
environment which does not foresee a common fiscal policy. We are conducting QE in our 
own way. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
